




OF GODS
ALL-SVFFICIENCY.

GENESIS 17. 1.
When Abraham was ninetie yeares olde and nine,
the Lord appeared vnto Abraham, and sayd vnto
him, I am GOD All-sufficient, walke before me,
and be thou vpright, or perfect.

BEcause, in the performance
of all the Duties
of Sanctification, Sinceritie
is all in all, therefore
I haue chosen this Text,
that you may not be deceived.
It is true; many
things are very excellent,
if they be right: There is no question but the Diamond
is very precious, if it be a true Diamond,
but if it be false, it is nothing worth; If you take a
precious Balme, you make no question of the
thing, and of the excellency of it in generall, all
the question is, whether it be right or no, And so

in the graces of Gods spirit, especially, seeing they
concerne our salvation; It much concernes vs, to
know whether they be right or counterfeit; and
therefore you see the condition, that God requires
here of Abraham, is, that he be vpright, and
perfect, without hypocrisie; (so the word signifieth)
walke before me without hypocrisie. Now we
haue rather chosen this Text than another, because
sets forth the ground of all sinceritie, and
perfect walking with God, which is, even this apprehension
well setled in the heart, that God is Allsufficient:
for this is the Lords precept, Walke before
me, and be thou perfect, or vpright, or sincere,
let it not be in hypocrisie: and this is the motiue
that he vs^th to perswade him to it, I am All-sufficient,
as if he should say, if there were any defect
in me, if thou didst neede or couldest desire any
thing that were not to be had in me, and thou
mightest haue it elsewhere, perhaps thy heart
might be imperfect in walking towards me, thou
mightest then step out from me to take in advantages
elsewhere; but seeing I am All-sufficient,
since I haue enough in me to fulfill all thy desires,
since I am every way an adaequate obiect, that if
thou lookest about, and considerest all that thy
soule can wish for, thou maiest haue it in me, why
then shouldest thou not consecrate thy selfe to me
alone? Why then shouldest thou be vneven in thy
wayes, serving me sometimes, by fits, and sometimes
the creature? for there is nothing in the
creature, but thou maiest finde it in me, I am Allsufficient.
I am All-sufficient, therefore walke before
me, and be perfect.
Yet these words containe somewhat more,
which you may see by that which followes, I will
make my Covenant betweene me and thee, and I will
multiplie thee exceedingly. The ground of all our
sinceritie is the Covenant, that is betweene God and
vs. Now these words doe the most briefly, that I
finde, of any in the Scriptures, expresse the Covenant
betweene God and vs on both sides, for they
are but the summe of the Covenant, which in other
places of Scripture is explicated, and set forth
more at large; so that the opening of the Covenant
on both sides, is the ground of all the sinceritie,
of all that obedience that we yeeld to God: And
therefore, I say, you shall not onely haue occasion
from this Text, to examine the graces of Gods spirit
in you, and the actions that flow from them,
whether they be sincere or perfect, but likewise we
will shew you the ground of this sincerity whence
it ariseth; and how it is wrought in every mans
heart. And thus these words containe the Covenant,
sayth the Lord to Abraham, I will be thy
God. On the other side; thou shalt be mine. Now
he shewes what a kinde of God he* will be to
him, I will be All-sufficient to thee; which consists
in two things,Gen. 15. 1. If you compare this with Gen. 15. 1.
I will be thy Buckler to preserue thee from all evill:
And againe, I will be thy exceeding great reward:
that is, I will not onely be a shield, but I will be
a Sunne to thee; I will both preserue thee from all
evill, and I will fill thee with all good things, I will
^omp^^ss^ thee about with mercy and loving kindnesse:
so that thou shal^ finde, that I will be an exceeding

great reward. So God expresseth himselfe to Abraham.
And this is the Covenant on Gods part.
Now that which is required on Abrahams part,
is, that he be the Lords, as the Lord is his, for so you
see in the words following. The question onely
is, in what manner Abraham shall be the Lords;
how that shall be declared? Sayth he, It is not an
emptie relation, but thou must shew that thou art
mine by walking before me. And yet it must not be
any kinde of walking before the Lord, but it must
be a perfect walking before him; Walke before me, and
be perfect, and therefore it is added, I will make
my Covenant, that is, this is the Covenant, of which
Circumcision was but a Signe, for it was instituted
presently, as we see in the words following.
There are three especiall poynts that we will
gather out of the words.
The first is from the connexion, and we will
begin with that, because it is a preparation to the
other two: In that the Lord vseth this as an argument
to Abraham, I am All-sufficient, therefore
walke before me, and be thou perfect; We may obserue
this; that
The cause of all departure from God,Doct. 1. of all vnevennesse
in our wayes towards God,Doubting of Gods All-sufficience, the cause of departure from God. is from
hence, that we doe not thinke God to be All-sufficient.
As on the other side, the cause of all our sinceritie
and perfectnesse, ariseth hence, that we doe apprehend
him to be All-sufficient. This you see evidently

ariseth from the words; for thence is the
force of the Argument, I am All-sufficient, therefore
walke before me, and be perfect. My Beloved,
it is evident, that the cause of every mans keeping
off from God, the cause of his vnevennesse after
he is come in to him, is from hence, that men
thinke not God, to be All-sufficient; for if a man
had enough in the Lord, he would never goe out
from him; but because he wants something, he
desires something that is not in him, or he feares
something, that he thinkes he cannot keepe off
from him: hence it comes to passe that he steppes
out from God, he goeth out of the wayes of his
Co^mandements. And therefore I say, the cause of
every mans departure from God, the cause of his
keeping off from God, or of his vnevennesse in the
wayes of God, is from hence, that he thinkes not
God to be All-sufficient; and this you shall see in
three sorts of men.
First, there is a generation of men, that liue as 
without God in the world, and that looke not towards
God at all, that make conscience of nothing;
and what is the reason of that? but because they
thinke, they haue sufficient of their owne, and
therefore they walke in their owne wayes, and stand
vpon their owne bottom, and they loue thernselues,
and serue themselues altogether; and apply
not themselues to the Lord at all: and therefore
whensoever any man is brought vnto God, the
worke is, to take him off from his owne bottom,
to shew him his owne insufficiency in himselfe,
and the emptinesse of himselfe, and of every creature,

and the All-sufficiency that is in God, and
vpon this ground, he comes in to him. As you
know,Luke 15. the Prodigall Sonne, when he saw that he
could not subsist longer, but he must perish, if he
stayed where he was; and saw againe, if he
went home to his Fathers house, there was meate
enough: this was that that moved him to go home:
this course the Lord takes with all whom he
brings home to him;Act. 16. as we see in the Iaylor:
and in those Act. 2.Act 2. They were pricked in their
hearts; and in Paul, when the light shined about
him, and he was stricken from his horse, Act. 9.Act. 9.
It was all but to shew them their vanitie, to take
them off from their owne bottoms, to shew them
their owne insufficiency, and then he discovered
that All-sufficiency that was in himselfe; for no
man will change but for the better, he will not
deny himselfe, and leaue what he hath, till something
that is better be propounded vnto him:
So, I say, the cause why men come not in is, because
they haue an opinion of sufficiency in themselues,
and in the creature, and they apprehend
not an All-sufficiency in God: that is, an All-sufficiency
to be in him alone.
 A second fort of men are such as doe come in,
and performe many things, and bring forth some
fruit, and become professors of the feare of God,
and yet they doe it not throughly, But by halues;
the cause of this is likewise from hence, that
they doe not apprehend God to be All-sufficient;
for it they did, they would be perfect with him;Math. 13.
as we see the Second and Third Ground (for that

Parable doth but shew you the kindes of Professors)
they were all such as professed the feare of the
Lord, that are there spoken of, for we see, they
brought forth fruit, They received the Word with
Ioy. What was the reason the second Ground was
not perfect with the Lord? Because they thought
him not to be a Buckler strong enough to beare
off all evills, to beare off all persecution. What
was the reason the Third Ground did it not? Because
they thought there was something in riches,
in pleasures, in divers lusts, that they could
not haue in the Lord, so they departed from him:
Onely the Fourth Ground kept close, because they
did apprehend all to be in the Lord that they desired,
they did apprehend him to be strong enough
to deliver them from all the things they feared.
The third sort of men are such as are regenerate,
which yet are subiect to many slips and falls,
to many turnings aside: And the cause of all this
is, that they apprehend not God to be All-sufficient.
As, for example, what was the reason that
Abraham when he went downe into Egypt (being
driven thither by reason of Famine) saved himselfe
with a lye, saying that Sarah was his Sister,
and not his wife, but because he thought God was
not able to keepe him and defend him? If he had
thought him to haue beene All-sufficient, he
would not haue done it. What was the reason
that Moses, when God sent him on a message into
Egypt, was so backward to performe it; but
because he thought that the Lord was not All-sufficient
^ For he hath two reasons why he would

not goe; One was, he wanted speech, he wanted
abilitie and gifts; He was of a stammering tongue;
And the other was, those were aliue, that (he
thought) sought his life: If he had thought that
God was able to haue beene with his tongue, to
haue stregthned him, and to haue improved his
gifts, and to haue inabled him to that service: if
he had thought, likewise, that he had beene able
to haue defended him from those That sought his
life, he would never haue disobeyed the Commandement
of God, and beene backward to
performe it as he was.
And so likewise Rebeccah; What was the reason
shee vsed that wyle and shift, that inordinate
meanes to bring a good thing to passe, to obtaine
the blessing, when Iacob and shee joyned in lying
to Isaack, but because they thought God was
not Sufficient to performe that Promise? for the
blessing belonged to Iacob, and no doubt but
he should haue had it in due time. And so it is
in all the faults of the Saints; which are hence, because
they apprehend not God to be all-sufficient;
even as it was in the first sinne of Adam, and the
Angels; What was the reason that Adam fell from
God at the first? It was because he desired something
that he thought he could not finde in the
Lord, he desired to know good and evill, which
he thought he should not haue in the Lord, he
thought the Lord had kept it from him, and therefore
he stepped out from the Lord, to eate that Apple,
vsing that as a meanes to obtaine his desire.
And this, indeed, was the cause of his falling away.

So likewise the cause of the falling of the
Angells. 1 Tim. 3. 6.1 Tim. 3. 6. the Apostle saith there, that a
Minister was not to be a young Sc^oller, least he
be puffed vp, and fall into the condemnation of the
Divell, that is, least he be puffed vp, and fall into
the same sinne, for which the Divell was condemned,
that is, to be puffed vp, that is, to haue
the desires inlarged beyond the bou^ds which God
had set them, to desire more then they should
haue, to be exalted aboue measure, that measure,
that God had appointed them, that is, they desired
more, they looked after more, they thought there
was not an All-sufficiency in God for them: This
was the sinne of the Angels that fell. And as it
was the cause of their first fall, so it is the cause of
all the sinnes that haue beene committed since.
And the reasons of it in briefe are these:
First it ariseth from the desire of happines that 
is implanted in every mans nature.From mans desire of happines. Happines, you
know, is a compound which consists of all good
things, so that none must be wanting; there is no
good thing but it must be an ingredient into it.
Now the nature of man is made by God to desire
happines, every man naturally desires happines,
and may desire it, if there be any scantnes in this,
if there be any evill that lies vpon him, that is not
removed, or if there be any good that he desires
and wants, that he doth not enioy; (I say) his
heart cannot rest, for he desires happines; therefore
if he finde not an All-sufficiency in God, so that
nothing be wanting, that his heart can desire or
looke after, it is impossible he should cleaue close

vnto him, but he will be readie to step out from
him.
 Secondly, this will appeare from the nature
of sinne:From the nature of sinne. the definition that the Schoole-men giue
of sinne, (which we may receiue) is this, that it is
the conversion of a man from God to the Creature,
from the immutable God to the mutable creature:
In every sinne there is such a turning of the
soule from God to the Creature. Now, it is certaine,
if a man did finde an All-sufficiency in God,
he would never turne from him, nor seeke to the
Creature; even as the Bee, if it did finde honey enough
in one flower, would not hasten to another,
but because it doth not, it goes from flower
to flower: And so is the nature of man (as Salomon
expresseth it, saying, that) He hastened to out ward
things; that is, when he fell vpon one, he found not
enough in it, he made hast to another and to another;
so the nature of man, if it did finde sweetnesse,
and comfort, and contentment enough in
God, it would not turne from him to the creature;
but because, in his sence, the obiect is too narrow,
there is some what he would haue more, he
looks over the Pale, as it were, he seeth something
that he desireth, and that causeth him to step out,
whereas if he had enough at home, if he had enough
in the Lord, he would not goe out from
him, to turne inordinately to the Creature vpon
any occasion.
 Thirdly, this will appeare likewise from the nature
of sinceritie,From the nature of sinceritic. and perfect walking with God,
for to walke perfectly with God, is nothing but this,

when a man chooseth God, so that he cleaues to
him alone, whereas doublenes of minde stands
in this, when a man is distracted betweene God
and some other obiect; I say, betweene God and
riches, betweene God and credit, betweene God
and pleasure, and is sometime applying himselfe
to one, and sometime to another, and so he goes
a double way. So that when a man hath two principall
objects, and two principall ends, vpon which
his eye is set, when he hath two inward principles
within, that are the cause of his motion, this way
and that way, such a man is a double minded man;
he is a single hearted man that chooseth God alone,
and though he walke imperfectly with him,
yet he chooseth him. Now if a man apprehend
Gods All-sufficiency, he will choose him alone, if
he doe not, it is impossible he should choose him
alone, but he will joyne somewhat else with him;
for if he thinke there is but a partiall sufficiency in
God, and that there is some sufficiency in any creature
besides, it must needs be that he must haue an
eve vpon both; and then his waies will be vneven,
then his way is vnstable; and, therefore, I say, the
cause of that instability, to which men are subiect,
is, because they doe not apprehend God to be All-sufficient,
for you must know this by the way, that
there is a double instabilitie (that word is vsed in
I am. 1. 8.Iam. 1. 8. A double minded man is vnstable in all his
wayes) One is an instabilitie between two objects,
which makes vp all the sufficiency that he desires,
so that there is part of that sufficiency in one, and
part of it in another. The second is an instabilitie

in following one object that he hath chosen.
Indeede, the second instabilitie all the Saints are
subject vnto, all regenerate men are vnstable thus
in all their wayes, they cannot sticke fast to God,
and walke perfectly with him. But herein is their
sinceritie, they choose him, they pitch vpon him.
Now the ground of it is, they apprehend him
to be All-sufficient; though this apprehension be
not alwayes kept strong, it is not alway liuely,
and actiue in their minds, their perswasion is not
alway full and present, and therefore they are readie
to step out. So the latter instabilitie befalles
the Saints, the former befalles hypocrites, and
both the one and the other instabilitie still proceede
from hence, that we apprehend not God to
be All-sufficient. Holy men haue that apprehension
in the maine, but not in a constant tenour at
all times; Hypocrites haue it not so much as in
the maine.
 Fourthly. This truth will likewise appeare from
the nature of faith:From the nature offaith. that which makes a man righteous,
that which sanctifies a man throughout is
faith: That which is the cause of all vnrighteousnesse
in vs is vnbeliefe, for it causeth a man to depart
from the Lord:Heb. 3. 12. as Heb. 3. 12. Take heede least
there be in any of you an evill heart of vnbeliefe to depart
from the living God. In this sence faith is sayd
to be accounted for righteousnesse. Abraham beleeved
God. Gen. 15.Gen. 15. God indeed made the same
proposition that he doth here, for substance, he
tells him what he would doe for him, and, sayth
the Text, Abraham beleeved God, and it was accounted

to him for righteousnesse. Now, It was accounted
to him for righteousnesse, chiefly, in this sence,
as it is interpreted Rom. 4.Rom. 4. that his very taking of
the promise, and his accepting of the Covenant, in
that he did receiue that which God gaue, that put
him within the Covenant, and therefore the Lord
reckoned him a righteous man, even for that very
acceptation, and beleeving. But that is not all:
but likewise he accounted faith to him for righteousnesse,
because faith doth sanctifie, and make a
man righteous: and therefore Beloved (by the way)
wonder not at this, that we put so much vpon
faith; for let a man beleeue, that God is All-sufficient,
which is the Covenant, for iustifying faith
is but a beleeving of that part of the Covenant,
and inabling a man to keepe the other part, which
is required; and, I say, it makes a man righteous:
for when a man beleeues that God is All-sufficient,
it will cause a man to giue vp himself to the Lord.
Againe, when he beleeues the Lord to be all in all
things to him, it inableth him to be all in all
things to the Lord againe, that is, to be holy to the
Lord in all manner of conversation. It knits his
heart vnto the Lord. It sanctifieth a man throughout,
it makes him peculiar to the Lord, i^ makes him
wholly to him. This is the nature of faith. (Now
marke it) faith could not thus sanctifie, if it did
not beleeue Gods All-sufficiency. Againe, vnbeliefe
could not cause out falling or departing from
God, if it were not hence, that we fayle in beleeving
some promise of his, or some threatnings,
we thinke there is not an All-sufficiencie in God:

you know his promises containe all good things,
if we cleaue vnto him, and his threatnings all evill
things, if we depart from him. If this were fully
beleeved, our hearts would keepe neare to him:
as farre as it is not beleeved, so farre we step out.
Now I say hence faith purifieth the heart: It sanctifieth,
is the cause of all righteous^esse that is
wrought by vs: and vnbeliefe is the cause of all
vnrighteousnesse that is wrought by vs. Hence
we gather then, that the perswasion of Gods All-sufficiency
keepes a mans heart perfect with God:
and as farre as you come short of this perswasion,
so farre you are ready to depart from him.
And all the ground of it is, because that which
drawes vs from the Lord, is either vaine feares,
or vaine hopes. Those are the two eares as it
were, by which Sathan takes euery man, whereby
the drawes him away, out of the wayes of the
Lords Commandements. Now if a man did beleeue
that God were All-sufficient, he would be
subiect to none of these false feares, if he did apprehend
him to be a Buckler, that could keepe
him from all ill. Againe, on the other side, if the
did beleeue God to be an exceeding great reward,
that is, so great a reward that there can be nothing
wanting in him, that there is a length, and
breadth, and depth, and height, in that reward; that
his heart hath latitude enough to walke in, he
can dosire nothing out of it: this would free a
man from all vaine hopes, so that the apprehension
of it would keepe his heart perfect Contratiwise,
as farre as you faile in either, so farre you are

subiect to those two, either false feares, or vaine
and sinfull hopes: and that is the cause of our vneven
and vnaequall walking with God, that we are
not vpright and perfect.
Hence you may see both the nature of sinne,Vse 1.
and the cause of all sinne; for it is profitable for vs
Beloved, (nothing more profitable than) to finde
out the cause of sinne. It is a Rule that Physitians
haue, that a disease, when it is throughly knowne,
(that is, when the cause of it is fully knowne) it is
halfe cured; so it is in the disease of the soule, to
know the very roote and rise, from whence it proceeds,
or commeth, to know the principle from
whonco it ariseth, it is a great helpe to vs to prevent
it, to heale it. But, I say, this will both shew
the nature of sinne, and the cause of sinne in vs.
First, it shewes the nature of sinne, how evill a
thing it is, yea worse, than, for the most part, we
apprehend it to be; for, if there be no sinne committed,
but it comes from hence, that you apprehend
not God to be All-sufficient, then there is Idoldtrie
(in a manner) committed in every sinne,
that is, you take from God and adde another God
to him, if you thinke him not to be All-sufficient;
whatsoever you seeke to, and youne with him, you
make it God as well as he; If it be credite, if it be
honour, if it be pleasures, if it be riches, yea whatsoever
it is, I say, there is a bitter roote of Idolatrie
in the commission of every sinne, that makes it
out of measure sinfull. This we may consider by
the way, but this I purpose not to stand on; the
thing that I would chiefly presse, is to finde out

the cause of sinne, the cause of that hollownesse,
and that imperfectnesse, and insinceritie that is in
the hearts of men towards God, which, I say, ariseth
from hence, that they apprehend not God to
be All-sufficient; for this (for the most part) is the
case of men, if they did not apprehend some sufficiencie
in him, they would not seeke him at all;
againe, if they did apprehend him to be All-sufficient,
they would serue him perfectly: but this
middle apprehension in men, that they thinke
there is a sufficiencie in the Lord, but not an All-sufficiencie;
this is the cause why the hearts of
men are hollow towards the Lord. Even as when
a man lookes towards a great man, that is a man
ofsome power, able to doe him hurt, and that
hath some abilitie to doe him good: this makes
him to feare, it makes him carefull to please him,
and to abstaine from what may offend him: yet,
because he thinkes he is not perfect with him,
that his heart is but hollow towards him, he doth
it not fully. So it is in our walking before God. Because
we apprehend him not to be All-sufficient,
therefore it is that our hearts are not perfect with
him.Instances. We shall best shew you this in instances;
for example; What is the reason, that a man is
discouraged in seeking to God,Seeking to God in difficult cases. in praying to God,
in depending vpon God in any great case of difficultie,
where there is more then ordinarie difficultie,
there is more to be suffred, there is more
to be done, what is the reason of it? because we
apprehend him not to be All-sufficient. You know
the turning of men away from God, commonly it

ariseth from this, they meete with some rub, some
crosses, some barre, Some Lyon in the way, which
they are not able to grapple with, it is too strong
for them: and then they turne out of the way;
the reason, I say, of all sinne and departure from
the Lord, is, because we doe not apprehend him
to be All-sufficient: for if we did, why should not
a man in an easie case, turne from him as well as
in the most difficult? As, for example; David followed
the Lord long, yet when Saul grew exceeding
strong, and he very weake, then he stepped
aside, and sayd in his heart, I shall perish one day,
and so he goes out of Gods wayes, and flyeth to Achis,
to the Philistines: This was from hence, that
he did not apprehend the Lord to be All-sufficient
and Almightie, for the word signifieth both.
And so likewise Moses,Num. 11. Numb. 11. what was the
reason that he started aside, that he did not beleeue
as at other times? When God sayd to him,
that he would giue them flesh for a moneth together;
what sayth Moses againe? Shall six hundred
thousand men be fed with flesh, shall all the Beeues
and Sheepe be slaine, or shall all the fish in the Sea be
gathered together? He could not beleeue the Lord:
here was a difficultie, that Moses was not able to
reach, that there should be so many fed with flesh,
and that in the wildernes, and that for a moneth
together: he thought it impossible to be done,
that all the fish in the Sea should be gathered together,
and all little enough to serue such a turne.
Now marke the Lords answer there, is the Lords
hand shortened? You may know by the medicine,

what the disease was. Moses (sayth he) thou thinkest
I am not able to doe it, thou thinkest my hand
is shortened that I cannot doe it. And the like
was when he came to draw water out of the rocke:
you shall see, Moses there stucke: for the case was
a case of difficulty. If it had beene out of the earth,
where there had beene probabilitie, it had not
beene so much: but Moses makes two arguments
against it, (you know how great the sinne was for
the which he lost going into the Land of Canaan,
I say, he makes these two arguments against
it.)
First, sayth he, the people are rebels, and will
the Lord giue them water, that haue carried themselues
in such a manner? that was one thing that
caused his infidelitie at that time.
Another was; What? shall I give you water out of
the rocke? As if he should say. That is a difficult
thing. So that put these two together, out of the
rocke, and vnto rebels, there his fayth fayled, for it
was difficult: and whence came this? because he
thought the Lord was not All-sufficient. And so,
likewise, Martha, and Marie, when they came to
Christ for Lazarus, when he was dead, they were
out of hope: the reason was, because there was a
difficultie now more than before; so that, I say, the
co^mon cause of our turning aside from the Lord,
is, because we meete with some difficulties which
our faith is not able to grapple with, and it ariseth
from hence, that we forget this, that the Lord saith
to Abraham, I am God All-mightie, or All-sufficient.
I am able to doe whatsoever I will.
Besides this: what is the cause that men seeke 
after vaine-glory,Seeking praise with men. that they are subiect to enuie?
(the spirit that is in vs is subiect to envie) for everyman
envieth another, because he desireth vaineglory
too much to himselfe: this ariseth from
hence, that he reckoneth not God to be All-sufficient.
That is. If we did reckon it enough to haue
praise with God, if we thought that his knowledge
of our vprightnesse were sufficient, though no
man in the world knew it besides, we would be
content with that honour that we haue, which he
hath allotted to vs within our owne compasse,
but, because we thinke him not to be All-sufficient,
we would haue somthing, likewise, from the creature,
we would haue honour, loue, and respect
from men; which sinne ariseth hence, that we apprehend
not him to be All-sufficient; so doth that,
likewise, which is contrary to it, (for sinnes of the
same nature and they arise both fro^ the same grou^d)
when men are so sencible of shame, and reproach,
and disgrace, and disparagement, doth it not arise
hence, that we reckon mans day too much,
and Gods day too little? We apprehend not God
enough in his greatnesse; as the Apostle saith, I
reckon not to be iudged by mans day. As if he should
say. It is but a day, it is but a time that man hath
to judge: there is another day, the Lords day, that
great day. If a man did apprehend that which is
in God, if he did see his All-sufficiency, he would
not regard to be judged by mans day, as long as
he were not judged by the Lord: he would not care
what his fellow-prisoners thought of him, as

long as the Iudge, and the Law cleared him.
 And so likewise, what is the reason of the vneven
wayes of men,Indirect courses taken to bring enterprises to passc. which they take to bring
their enterprises to passe? is it not hence, that
they apprehend not God to be All-sufficient? David,
when he was in a strait, when the Kingdome,
you know, was promised him, and many opportunities
he had to haue gotten it, if he would haue
vsed evill meanes, when sometimes the Lord put
Saul into his hands, yet would not touch him,
but committed it to the Lord, for he thought him
to be almightie, able to bring it to passe, as also he
did bring it to passe.
And so likewise, Daniell; there might haue
beene meanes vsed for him to haue escaped; you
know how he was in danger, when he refused to
eate of the Kings meate, he was in danger againe,
when they obtained of the King, that is any man did
make any request to any God or man, but the King for
30. dayes, he should be put to death: yet he trusted
in God, he thought him to be All-sufficient, able to
keepe him, and therefore he stepped not out of
his way. And so Paul, when he saw that Festus
thought to haue had money give him, yet doubtles,
in those circumstances, he thought it not lawfull
to doe it, and therefore he trusted in God; though
no doubt, he might haue made friends, to haue gathered
the money: It is likely Festus thought there
was a probailitie for it, because he hoped for it,
but Paul would not doe it, because he thought the
Lord was able to deliver him. But on the other
side, Ieroboam when he had a businesse to doe, you

know what course he tooke, he joynes them together,
he addes to Religion, he corrupts it, that he
might keepe his Kingdome. And so Saul. (But I
need not giue you Instances) I say, the cause of
all indirect waies we take to bring our enterprises
to passe, it comes from hence, that we trust not in
God, we thinke him not to be All-sufficient, not
able to doe it, except we helpe him with wyles,
and tricks, and devises of our owne: What is the
reason of that lying and dissembling, that is vsed
likwise, for the same purpose? Is it not from
hence, that men apprehend not God to be All-sufficient?
Peter,
when he denied Christ, was it not
from feare? And from whence was that feare, but
because he reckoned not God, to be a Buckler
strong enough, and sure enough? And so Sarah,
when shee denied, that shee laughed, sayth the
Text, for shee was afraid, and therefore shee sayd,
no, I did not laugh, when shee did, and was charged
for doing of it. I might giue you many other
Instances, but I shall not need. Goe through
all varieties of sinnes, and you shall see they arise
hence, that we reckon not God to be All-sufficient.
The satisfying of sinfull lusts,Satisfying of sinfull lusts. doth it not arise 
from hence? He that is given to any pleasure, to
any delight, of what kinde soever, if he did beleeue
those two things, that the Lord is able to fulfill
him with joy, and comfort sufficient, that the
Lord is able to mortifie those lusts, and to heale
the^ in him, he would keepe close to him, and would
not goe out from him: for he need not, the Lord

is All-sufficient. That is. He is able to satisfie him,
he is able to fill him with ioy and peace, through beleeving,
which should be enough to satisfie his
heart with contentment; he is able, likewise, to
mortifie that lust, so that, as he is forbidden the satisfying
of it, so, likewise, he should haue no such
prevailing desire to it. And therefore (Beloved)
the way to keepe our hearts perfect with God (for
that is the thing for which I presse all this, for
which I bring all these instances) it is to come to
this, to set downe this conclusion with our selues,
that he is All-suffi-cient: No man is ever fit to
serue him without this: except a man be content
to haue God alone for his portion; if he will joyne
any thing with him, if he will joyne God, and credit
together, God, and riches together, God, and
pleasures together, he will never keepe close to
him: for one time, or other there will fall out a separation
between God, and these things, and whosoever
doth not resolue thus with himselfe, I will
be content with God alone, though he strip me of
all things in the world, I say, he will never keepe
close to the Lord, but his wayes will be vneven towards
him.
 The young man, in the Gospell, would never haue
gone away sad,(...) if he had thought God had beene
All-sufficient: but he thought, when his riches
were taken away, that some what was taken from
him, that belonged to his happpines, that he could
not haue beene to well without it. Againe, Abraham,
on the other side, would never haue beene
willing to haue offred Isack, if he had not thought

that God was All-sufficient: as we see Heb. 11. 19.Heb. 11. 19.
It is sayd there, that, though I sack were the sonne
of the promise, yet he willingly offred him; why?
sor he thought God was able to raise him from the dead
againe, from whence he also after a sort received him:
As he received him from Sarahs dead wombe, so
he thought, he might be raysed againe from the
dead ashes. What was the reason that Paul served
the Lord with a perfect heart? You see in
1 Tim. 4. 10.1 Tim. 4. 10. that he trusted in God, and therefore
(saith he) we labour, and suffer rebuke; those are
the two parts of new obedience, (to doe, and to
suffer) and therefore, saith he, we doe it, because we
trust in the living God: that is. We trust in him for
all things: I beleeue him to be Almightie, and All-sufficient,
every way, both to defend me from all
evill, and also to provide all good things for me,
and therefore I serue him, and labour in his service,
and suffer rebuke. What was the reason, on
the other side, that Demas turned from the Lord?
was it not, because he thought there was not enough
in him? and therefore, saith the Text, he
imbraced this present world: and therefore, (Beloved)
the way to keepe our hearts perfect with
God, is to consider well the great power of God,
and the great goodnes of God, for in these two his
All-sufficiencie to wards vs consists; consider his
might^^ power, and say thus, with thy selfe, he is
able to doe all things for me; consider, withall, the
greatnesse of his goodnesse, and mercy, and say,
he is my father, he is willing to doe all things for
me Indeed, that conclusion we should set downe

with our selues, (if any thing be not done, if we
want any thing, if any crosse lie vpon vs at any
time,) to be readie to say, this is not because the
Lord cannot doe it; for he is Almightie. Againe,
it is not because the Lord will not doe it; for he is
as infinite in loue to me, as he is in power: What
is the reason of it then? because it is not best for
me. So should every man say, if there be any want,
if there be any crosse, it is best for me. It is better
for thee, it may be, to be in a low estate, than to be
in a high: it is better for thee to be pinched with
povertie, than to liue in abundance: it is better
for thee to lie vnder temptation, (though it be a
great vexation to thee for the present) then to be
freed from it: it is better for thee, it may be, to
haue meane gifts, than to haue high gifts: it is better
for thee, to be in a low place, than to be in eminent
place: it is better for thee, to be crossed in
thy name, in thy estate, it is better for thee to be
sicke in bodie, it is better for thee to be troubled
(sometime) in minde, than to be freed from it:
Beloved, this we must come to, and yet we must
thinke the Lord to be All-sufficient. For if it be so,
thou oughtest to say thus with thy selfe, it is best
for me to be so. You wil say, how shall we do to be
perswaded of it?Digress. Beloved, there are many instances,
where in we are in such a condition, which we
thinke worst for our selues, which many times is
the best, nay, alwayes it is best for every man that
is in covenant with God. For this rule must be
kept, he is All-sufficient to his children, and they
finde him so, he hath performed it, and made it

good to their experience, and therefore, whensoever
they finde any want, it is best for them to be
so: It is not either defect in the power of God; or
in the loue of God: for example; Abraham
thought it a hard thing, a great crosse, that he was
put to expell Ishmaell his sonne, whom he loved;
Was it not better for Abraham? had he not another
sonne that was fitter for him, borne of his
owne Wife? And so Moses thought it a hard
thing, to be barred from comming into the land
of Canaan; but what lost he by it? was he not led
into a better Canaan, into Paradise, into a more
glorious condition? So likewise, when he went
downe into Egypt, if he had had a tongue of eloquence
given him, to his will, that would haue
satisfied him: but was it not better for Moses to
haue a stammering tongue, and yet to haue the
worke done as well, Aaron and he being joyned
together? For by that meanes Moses was kept
humble, and his loue likewise was increased. For
that mutuall indigence knits men together,
when they haue need one of another. In like manner,
David had an exceeding great desire to build
the Temple, when it was not the Lords will, that he
should doe it; was he a looser by it? David was at
that time not fit to haue done it, he was not able
to haue done it, as circumstances were: but was
he a looser by it? had not he a house built him, as
well as if he had built the house of God? had not
he as great a reward, as if he had performed it?
So likewise in the losse of his childe, it was exceeding
grievous to him, yet, was it not better that

that childe should be taken away, and that another
ther should be given him, that was legitimate?
Did not the Lord recompence it abundantly to
him, when Salomon was given to him in his stead?
And so Paul, he was exceeding desirous to be
freed from that temptation, which, no doubt, was
very grievous to him, that did gall, and vexe his
minde continually, even as a pricking of the flesh
doth: yet it was much better for Paul, it was not
because God was not All-sufficient, either in power,
or in loue to him: but he was an exceeding
great gainer by that meanes, he was emptied of
himselfe: for that is the scope of God, in the wayes
of his providence towards his children, even to
magnifie himselfe towards them, which cannot be
without emptying them of themselues, by discovering
to them their owne insufficiencie: and that
is done partly, by affliction, and partly by sinne,
but chiesly by sinne, because that workes more
immediately vpon man, it makes him to see how
little excellencie, and how little worth, there is in
him; it makes him againe to see the glorie, and
the power, and the purenesse of God, to magnifie
him, and to humble himselfe; this Paul got by it,
and it was better for him, he was in a better condition
by it. Therefore I say, this conclusion must
be set downe, that the Lord is All-sufficient, and
when we fall short of any thing that we desire,
lay it not vpon God, that the Lord is short of his
performance, of any promise, that he compasseth
vs not about with mercie, on every side, as much as
we need, that he delivers vs not from every evill:

for he will make that good alway, that no good
thing shall be wanting to them that lead a godly life:
He is a Sunne and a shield to them. And whensoever
it is otherwise, it is because it is not best for
them: but this is a digression; the thing we haue
to doe (for all this is but a preparation) is to perswade
you now that the Lord is All-sufficient: as
we told you, we handle this poynt first, because
it is a preparatiue to the rest: It shewes you of
what moment it will be so to be perswaded, and
of what evill consequence it is, not to be so perswaded.
Now I will adde a word of the second
poynt; that
God is All-sufficient.Doct. 2.God is All-sufficient.
To proue that he is so, I will propound to you
but these two reasons;
First consider that all that is in the creature,Reas. 1. all
the comforts, all the excellencie, all the beautie
that is to be found in them, it is but borrowed,
and derived: God is the primitiue, he is the originall,
he is the first, the vniversall cause, the generall
cause of all: hence we gather this, that there
is an All-sufficiencie in him, and in him onely, he
is All-sufficient exclusiuely: so that no creature
hath any sufficiencie at all in it selfe: for (Beloved)
you must know, that the creature addes nothing
at all to his sufficiencie, but all sufficiency is comprehended
in him; for if they be all derived and
borrowed things, then they are in the creature,
but as farre as it pleaseth him to communicate the

same to them: now that it is so, see Ier. 2. 13.Ier. 2. 13. My
people (sayth the Lord) haue committed two evils,
they haue for saken me the fountaine of living waters,
and (secondly) haue digged to themselues pits that
hold no water: Where we may briefly obserue:
First, that God is the spring, from whom all comforts
come originally, the pits, you know, haue the
water, but borrowed and derived from the fountaine;
secondly, there is something in this, that he
calleth them pits, that is, the comfort in the creature
is a mixed comfort, it is like water in a pit,
it is muddie, and not pure and cleare, like the water
in the fountaine: That is, the comfort that
comes meerely from the creature (if you receiue
any comfort in the creature, and Gods hand be
not in it) it is alway mixed with some sorrow,
with some evill, but if it come from the Lord, it is
a pure comfort: he giues riches, and no sorrow
with them, Thirdly, the comfort that is in the
creature, it is but a dead comfort, co^pared to that
which is in the Lord, and therefore he is sayd to
be a fountaine of living water, that is, running water.
The comfort that is in the creature, it is able
to doe little, it is quickly spent, and when it is
spent, there is no more in it: but the comfort that
is in God, it is like water that commeth out of the
spring, which is still renewed from day to day,
and therefore it is called living water, there is no
end of it, but still it flowes more and more. Last
of all, they are broken pits that cannot hold the
comfort that they haue, thought there be comfort,
yet it is like liquor in a brittle glasse, that is not

able to hold this comfort. In the creature, it is but
borrowed comfort, and therefore we see 1 Tim. 6.
17.1 Tim. 6. 17. (where an instance is given of riches) Charge
those that are rich in this world, that they be not high
minded, that they trust not in vncertaine riches, but
in the living God, that giveth all things abundantly
to enjoy. Marke, you shall see there the difference,
that they trust not in vncertaine riches, but in the
living God, (that is) riches are but dead things,
God is the living God: they are able to doe but
some things for you; God giues you all things, and
giues abundantly. And againe, if riches doe something,
yet the enjoying they are not able to giue;
but the Lord giues vs all things abundantly to enioy.
Now, when we consider, that whatsoever is
in the creature, it is but a borrowed and derived
comfort, then the sufficiency is wholly in the Lord,
he is the God of all comfort; as the Sunne is the
cause of all light, whatsoever the ayre hath, it is
derived from the Sunne, so whatsoever is in the
creature, it is derived from God: and therefore this
is one ground, why wee should perswade our
selues, that he is All-sufficient.
The second,Reas. 2. is this, he is All-sufficient, because
he onely can be the author of good and evill:God onely the author of good and evill. that,
you know, which can doe neither good nor evill,
there is no sufficiency in it at all; Now that is the
propertie of the Lord, as we see Ier. 10. 5.Ier. 10. 5. a place
worthy our consideration; The Idols stand vp as a
palme-tree, but they speake not; they are borne, because
they cannot goe; feare them not, because they can
doe neither good nor evill: this is the argument,

whereby the Lord proveth them to be Idols, because
they can doe neither evill not good: as if he
should say, if they could doe either evill or good,
they were Gods, and not Idols. The same we may
apply to any creature, considered in it selfe, without
the influence and concourse of God: If it were
able to doe either good or evill, you might worship
it as God, for God onely can doe good and evill
of himselfe. My Beloved, if we could bring
our hearts to this perswasion, that it is the Lord
onely, that can doe good and evill, we would then
cleaue to him, it could not be, that we should depart
from him vpon any occasion, for that which
is able to doe neither good nor evill, we contemne:
if your opinions were such of the creature,
that it were, without God, neither able to do good
nor evill, you would never turne from God to any
creature, vpon any occasion: for certainely, he is
able to doe both good and evill, he onely can
make every manslife, comfortable, or vncomfortable;
it is his prerogatiue royall, it belongs to
him alone. In Mat. 5.Math. 5. it is sayd, a man is not able to
make one haire white, or blacke; so small a thing he
is not able to doe: and in Luke 11.Luk. 11. it is sayd more
plainely, if we be not able to doe the least thing,
we be not able to doe the greatest. That place,
you know, Amos 3.Amos. 3. shall there be evill in the Cittie, and the Lord hath not done it? The Scripture is
plentifull in this; I should loosetime to vrge places;
I say, there is no creature in heaven or earth,
that is able to be the author of the least good, or
the least hurt.
But you will say to me,Ob. we finde it otherwise in
experience; we finde that they are able to doe vs
good, and to doe vs hurt.
You haue an answer for that, Ioh. 19. 11.Answ. Ioh. 19. 11. when
Pilate sayth to our Saviour, haue I not power to crucifie
thee, or to loose thee? He answereth, no: thou
hast none at all of thy selfe: Indeed, thou hast a
power, but it is given thee from aboue, thou hast
not a jot more then is distributed to thee: if you
compare that with Act. 4. 28.Act. 4. 28. you shall see it was
so; Pilate and Herod joyned together, to doe whatsoever
God had appointed before: they did not the
least evill, but God had appointed it: And so it is
with all the creatures, the principall creatures,
that we haue to doe with, and that we see before
vs, even men, they doe vs not (without his commission)
the least good, not the least hurt. When
shemei cursed David, you know, what expression
he vsed; The Lord hath bid shemei curse, as if he
should say, shemei, nor any man else in the world,
could not moue his tongue, if God did not say to
such a man, goe curse him, goe and reproach him.
It is sayd of Pull and Tiglapellazer,TiglathPileser. Kings of Assyvia,
that the Lord stirred them vp, and they carryed
his people away captiue: if God had not stirred
vp their spirits, they had not done the least thing.
You know, oft it is sayd, the King of Ashur the
stasse in my hand; and so Cyrus is sayd to be his servant,
he stirred him vp, he was his Shepheard, to
doe whatsoever he desired to his sheepe.Isa. 44. Isa. 44.
Now if a man be able to doe nothing, but as farre
as God sets him on worke, then much lesse can other

ther things, as riches, and the like, they can doe
no more then men can doe: for what serue they
for, but to set men a worke; so, honour, and credit,
and estimation, which men so much esteeme,
they can doe no more then men can doe; for they
set men on worke to doe good, as reproach sets
them on worke to doe hurt. Now if there be no
man, nor no creature in heaven or earth, that can
doe good or hurt, (Beloved) why should we be
servants to men? why should we be subiect to carnall
delights? to carnall feares? to carnall hopes,
and the like? surely, it is hence, we over-value the
creature, we thinke it is able to doe something,
we thinke that there is some suffciency in that,
and not All-sufficiency in God: certainely, all the
Commandements of God, are grounded vpon
cleare reason, if we were able to finde it out: But
now when the Lord requires at our hands, that
we worship him altogether; Thou shalt haue no other
Gods but me, thou shalt serue me onely, thou
shalt bestow thy selfe wholly vpon me, thou shalt
be perfect with me, as you see here: surely, it is
vpon this ground, thou shalt haue all from me,
and therefore thou shalt doe all to me. If any creature
were able to doe good or hurt, without the
Lord, if they had any part or portion with him in
being authors of our good, certainly, they should
haue a portion of our service: for there is reason
and equitie in it, that that which doth vs good, in
such manner, we should seeke vnto it, we should
serue it: and likewise, if it could doe vs hurt; but
now in that the Lord challengeth all to himselfe,

(I say) it is vpon this ground, I am All-sufficient:
there is no creature is able to adde to me more or
lesse: and therefore (Beloved) consider the ground
of it, and let the equitie of it establish your hearts
to be perfect with God, that he onely is able to
make your liues comfortable, or vncomfortable.
Put the case, a man hath a great addition to his estate:
put the case, he hath much credit, and esteeme
among men: put the case, he haue the favour
of Princes, that are most able and powerfull
among men: if the creature be able alone, to doe
neither good nor hurt, they shall not make the
least addition to his happines; and if it be so,
why should we esteeme it so much? if on the contrary
side, it turne against vs, it shall not doe vs the
least hurt. Should not this free vs, from fearefull
perplexities, from vaine hopes, and vaine feares?
should it not keepe our hearts perfect with God, if
we were thus perswaded? for, what are all the
creatures? are they not like servants in the great
house of the world, and we as children? and the
servants are all at the Maisters command, to doe
whatsoever he hath appointed: if we want any
thing, he can appoint them to provide for vs;
there is not any creature in heaven or earth, that
stirreth without a command, without a warrant
from the maister of the house: if he doe command
them, they goe: they are readie and nimble to doe
vs any service: this is the nature of all the creatures
we haue to doe with. Thinke with your
selues then, it is no great matter for them; if the
Maister of the house be our friend, they are all at

his command; you know those meane creatures,
the Caterpillers: are they not all the Lords host,
that goe and come as he bids them, as Ioel 2.?Ioel. 2. So
the meanest creatures, the fire, and the ayre, and
whatsoever they are, they are all at the Lords command:
and therefore thinke not, that the creature
is able to doe any thing for vs.
There are but two things, one is our everlasting
happines,The creature cannot helpe to eternall happines. and there the creature by fruition of it
selfe, is able to doe nothing; there it is wholly excluded,
for it is inferiour to vs. Besides, there is a
curse vpon the creature, there is an emptinesse in
it: besides, it is vnder the Sunne, and therefore it
cannot helpe to the happines, that is aboue the
Sunne. These arguments you shall finde in Ecclesiastes.
Besides, it is temporall, whereas we must
haue an eternall happines; for, our soules are eternall,
and therefore, for eternall happines: for
the chiefe good of man, the creature is nothing at
all, it helpeth but in particulars. Take credit, it
doth but helpe against ignominy and obscuritie:
learning doth but helpe against ignorance: health
is but a remedie against sicknesse, and distemper
of bodie: riches are but an helpe against povertie:
and so goe over all the creatures in the world.
But the Lord is vniversally good, he giues vs all
things, and therefore godlines is profitable for all
things: he giues vs all things to enioy: that is, he
fills the soule of man every way, not, Beloved, that
simply an infinite object is necessary, as it is vsually
vnderstood, (I see no ground for that) I see
it not necessary, that a finite facultie, should haue

an infinite obiect, if that which is proportionable
be enough; but this I affirme withall, that vnlesse
God were infinite, he could not satisfie the
soule of man, for this is the nature of the soule, if
it finde a bottom in any particular, it passeth over
that, and hasteth after more, and, therefore, in all
particular creatures (you see) when we haue had
once tryall of them, when we haue had the inioying
and possessing of them, we leaue them and
seeke after that which we want. Now the Lord
giues vs satisfaction, because the contentment,
the happines, that we haue from him, is without
a bottom, it is without limits, that, when we haue
had never so much, still there is more to be found
in him; and hence it is, in regard of the vniversalitie,
he hath all things in him, he is All-sufficient,
and, in regard of the latitude, when we enioy never
so much, still there is more behind in him,
and therefore he onely hath to doe in that busines,
in making vs eternally happie, in giving vs
that summum bonum.
For the helpe that the creature giues for the
things that belong to this life: there, I confesse,
the creature hath somewhat to doe, but it doth it
all as an instrument, and if it doth all as an instrument,
then the creature doth nothing, in a manner;
we thanke not the hand, but the minde within
that moues the hand to doe a good turne,
much lesse dowe thanke a dead, inanimate instrument.
Let vs looke vpon every creature, and every
man as Gods instrument; when any man doth
you a kindnesse, when any man doth you a favour,

or doth you good, say as the Scripture
phrase is; The Lord hath given me favour in his
sight; he stirred vp his spirit. And so, when he doth
vs hurt, say such a man is but a meere viall, an instrument,
whereby the Lord hath powred out
some part of his displeasure vpon me. This will
cause your eye to be vpon the Lord altogether;
you will over looke men, not regarding preferment,
or advancement by them;
nor the contrary; for in all these
things, they are but instruments.
And so much
for this time.
FINIS.



THE
SECOND
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
I am God All-sufficient.

THe second doctrine that we have
delivered out of these words,
and are now to insist vpon,
was, that
God is Allmightie, or All-sufficient.
I put them both together; for, the word, in the
originall, signifieth as much, Elshaddai, El signifieth
the strong, the mightie God, and Shaddai,
properly signifieth, All-sufficient; when one hath
all in his owne compasse, that he needeth not goe
out to fetch in, or borrow any commoditie, any
comfort, or any advancement, or any excellencie
from any other; and, therefore, that is the
(...) translation, and most agreeable to the word,

in the originall, All-sufficient, (though some translations
haue it, the All-mightie) and, this is a
poynt that will well sute with the present occasion
of the Sacrament; for, as I told you, these words
containe the Covenant on both sides, sayth the
Lord, this is the Covenant that I will make on my
part, I will be thy God; and I will tell you what a
God I will be vnto you, I will be a God all-sufficient.
That is; you shall haue all things in me that your
hearts can desire: The Covenant, againe, that I
require on your part, is, that you be perfect with
me, that you be vpright, that you be without hypocrisie; for so the word signifieth in the originall,
that the heart be single, so that though a man be
subiect to infirmities, yet, if he haue a single heart,
an vpright heart, the Lord accepts it; and therefore,
when you are to take the seale of the Covenant,
how can you be better exercised, and prepared
for the worke, than by considering the Covenant
it selfe? that is the poynt then, that God is
All-mightie, or All-sufficient, wherein two things
are to be considered;Two things considerable.
First, that the Lord is so in himselfe.
Secondly, that he is so to every one of his children.
 First,That God is All-sufficient in himselfe. I will shew that he is so in himselfe; for,
except he haue an All-sufficiency in himselfe, he
cannot communicate it to another. Thought this
be a poynt that we all beleeve,Difference betweene the All-sufficiency in God, and that which is in the creature yet the opening of
it will not be vnprofitable to you, and, therefore,
you must know, that he is All-sufficient, not onely
as the creature may be All-sufficient: for there

is this difference betweene him and the creature.
The Angels and blessed men, and other creatures,
they, in their kinde,Difference. may haue an All-suffiencie,
but it is such an All-sufficiency as belongs to
them, in such a spheare, and such an order, and
measure: as the creature, that hath all things belonging
to the life that it leads, it hath an All-sufficiencie
sutable to it selfe: a beast, that hath all
things belonging to the life of a beast, hath an All-sufficiencie fit for it, and so hath every creature els,
when God will make it happie; but the All-sufficiencie
that is in God, is different from it in this, that
he hath a simple All-sufficiencie. That is. Take all
things that you can possiblie take, take them all
without comparison, take them without all limits,
and so he is All-sufficient, that is one difference.
The second difference is this; that the creature,
though it haue an All-sufficiencie within its owne 
compasse, yet that which it hath it cannot communicate
to another. The Angels that are blessed
themselues, they cannot make others so. A man
that hath excellent gifts and graces himselfe, he
cannot convey them to another, but that is the
propertie of God, that is peculiar to him alone,
that he can make another All-sufficient, he can
cause another to partake of that All-sufficiencie
that is in himselfe; this is the difference betweene
God and the creature. Now, to make it evident to
you that he is All-sufficient, you shall know it by
this.
First,Reas. 1. in that he is most simple, without all mixture,
as we say, that is, perfect: for perfection and
All-sufficiencie are all one. Perfection is that,
whereby a thing is made vp, so that there be nothing
wanting to it; first, therefore, he is perfect, in
that he is without all mixture; we say, that is perfect
gold, that hath no mixture of drosse in it; that
is perfect wine, that hath no mixture of any thing
besides; and in that the Lord is simple and most
pure of essence, it must needs be that he is All-sufficient,
that he is most perfect, as it is 1 Iohn 1.
He is light, and there is no darknesse in him. That is.
There is no mixture of any thing in him.
Secondly.Reas. 2. As he is without mixture, so he is
without composition; wheresoever there is composition
(as there is in every creature,) there is
some imperfection: for, wherethere is composition,
there are parts, and wheresoever there are
parts, there must needs be imperfection: for the
part wants something of the whole; but in the
Lord there are no parts, he is without composition,
and therefore he must needs be most perfect,
and most absolute, and All-sufficient in himselfe.
Thirdly.Reas. 3. As he is without composition, so he
is without number: for all number, and all multiplying,
ariseth from imperfection: for if one
would serue the turne, what needed more? And,
therefore, he, being one, simplie one, must needs
be All-sufficient, for there is no multiplying in
him, and, therefore, there is no signe of imperfection.
Fourthly.Reas. 4. As he is without number, so he is
without any passive power. If he had any passiue
power in him, (as every creature hath,) he were
capable of receiving something that he hath not,
but the Lord is not so much as capable of it; for,
if there be no receptiue power, no passiue power
in him, it is impossible that any more should be
put, or infused into him, or imprinted, or stamped
in him, then is in him alreadie. And, therefore,
he is all in act. There is nothing in possibilitie in
God.
Fiftly. He is (...), (I finde no word to expresse 
it so well,) that is, whatsoever he is, he is it
of himselfe, whatsoever the creature is, it is borrowed,
all the excellencie that it hath is borrowed,
and derived, and is a participated excellencie
and therefore there is imperfection: for alway
when one hath any thing from another, there is
an indigence, in the thing, of it selfe, there is a
want: if a man haue enough at home, he will not
goe out to borrow* Now, the Lord whatsoever he
hath, he hath it of himselfe, and, therefore, in Ier. 2.Ier. 2.
he calls himselfe, a spring of living water, where (...)
all the creatures in the world are as pits, and Cisterns.
That is. Such as haue it borrowed, he hath
it of himselfe, and therefore, he is All-sufficient,
which no creature is.
Lastly.Reas. 6. He is without all causes, and is himselfe
the cause of all things, Rom. 11. 3 6.Rom, 11. 36. And what hast
thou that thou hast not received? This may besayd
of every creature: and if God haue given to every
creature all that is in it, that there is no excellencie,

no happinesse, no gift, no comfort, no blessing
that any creature hath, but it is from the Lord,
then he himselfe must needs haue it in a greater
measure. As the fire, that makes any thing hot,
must needs be houer it selfe, and the Sunne that
enlightens other things, must needs be more full
of light it selfe; so is the Lord, when all that is in
the creature, is taken from him, he himselfe must
needs haue an All-sufficiencie, he must be full of
all things; and this shall be enough to shew you
that the Lord is in himselfe All-sufficient.
 Now that he is so to vs. First, we will shew you
wherein this All-sufficiencie consists to vs,That God is All-sufficient to vs. then
we will make that good, that he is to every one
of his children All-sufficient. His All-sufficiencie
consists in there two things,Which consists in two things. as you shall see Gen. 15.Gen. 15. Feare not Abraham, I will be thy Buckler, and thy
exceeding great reward.
 First, in that he is a Buckler, to keepe vs from all
evill,To keepe vs from evill. that is one part of his All-sufficience, which
he communicates to vs, that he will suffer no evill
to come neare vs, he is a Buckler that compasseth
vs round about: that speech is delivered
vpon this occasion, when Abraham had gone out
to warre against those Kings that came out against
Sod^m, the Lord delivered him, and after
this deliverance he tells him, Abraham, sayth
he, as I haue dealt with thee at this time, so feare
not, when thou ^allest into the like distreffe; for,
I am the Buckler, I will defend thee from all evill,
as I have done from this. Now, he is such a Buckler,
that no creature can peirce though, he is such

a Buckler as covers vs all over, he is a wall of Brasse,
as it is expressed in Ier. 1. 18.Ier. 1. 18. not so onely; but he
is said to be a wall of fire about his children. That
is. He is not onely a wall that keepes them safe,
but a wall of fire to consume all them that come
against them: for a fire, you know, doth not onely
defend those that are within the compasse of it,
but it burnes those that come neare it Such a one
is God to his children; And that is one thing
wherein this all-sufficiency consists, that God communicates to them.
The second is,Filling them with all good. in filling them with all comfort,
which is expressed in Psal. 84.Psal. 84. The Lord will be a
Sunne, and a Shield; he will be a Shield to keepe off
evill, and a Sunne to fill them with all comfort.
I am (sayth he) the exceeding great reward. That is.
As if he should say, Abraham, whatsoever is in
me, all that I haue, all my attributes are thine,
forthy vse, my power, my wisedome, my counsell,
my goodnes, my riches, whatsoever is mine
in the whole world, I will giue it for thy portion,
I and all that I haue are thine. And might he not
well say, he was an exceeding great reward? Who
can vnder^tand the height, and breadth, and
length, and depth of this reward, I am thy exceeding
great reward? That is. Thou shalt haue all
kinde of comforts in me, and thou shalt haue them
in the highest and greatest measure. And in these
doth Gods All-sufficiencie consist, that God communicates
and deriues to vs from himselfe.
Now to shew that he is so, you must vnderstand
not onely that the Lord is wholly All-sufficient to

his children on the one side. That is. He brings
all comforts with him, but this must also be vnderstood,
that in the creature, on the other side, there
is no sufficiency at all. It was the poynt I began to
touch vpon the last day; I will now open it vnto
you more fully.
That in the creature there is no sufficiency at all,
and in the Lord there is All-sufficiencie.
We will not dis-joyne them, but handle both
together; (for it would be in vaine for me to
proue the Lord is All-sufficient,) but the great deceit,
which prevailes with the hearts of men, is
this, that they thinke there is somthing to be had
in the creature of it selfe. And, therefore we will
spend those Arguments by which we will proue
this chiefly, and convince you of it, that there is
nothing in the creature, no stabilitie, no sufficiencie,
it can doe you, of it selfe, neither good, nor
hurt, as we told you the last day. All the good
and hurt that the creature can be supposed to do,
it stands in one of these two things, Either, in making
vs happie, or miserable; Or else, secondly,
in affording vs subsidiarie helpes, such as we haue
neede of, vpon occasion. In neither of them the
creature of it selfe,The creature can doe nothing, of it selfe, to make vs happie. Because is able to doe any thing. You
must remember (that which we then delivered)
that the creature is not able to doe any thing in
the matter of our happinesse;
 First. Because it is inferior to vs,It is inferiour to vs. and that which
is inferior cannot adde to that which is aboue it.
Secondly. Because the creature is accursed; 
there is a curse lyes vpon the creature,It is accursed. there is an
emptines, and a vanitie in it, and that which is
emptie in it selfe, can giue no fulnes to vs.
Thirdly. The creature is vnder the Sunne, and 
therefore you haue that phrase so often repeated
in Ecclesiastes,It is vnder the Sunne. All things vnder the Sunne, are vanitie
and vexation of spirit. Now the happines
that we seeke for, is aboue the Sunne, which the
creature is not able to reach.
Fourthly. The creature is corporall, the minde 
is spirituall,It is corporall. it is a spirit, and therefore it can receiue
no happines from it; therefore in Heb. 12.Heb. 12. 23.
we are sayd to goe to the spirits of perfect men, as
if that were a sutabl converse for a spirit.
Fiftly. It is temporary,It is temporarie. whereas the soule is immortall,
it is not able to run the course with it
to its journeyes end, but it leaues it in the middle
way, and therefore it is not able to make it happy.
Besides. As I told you then, the creature is 
finite,It is finite. and therefore is not able to fill the soule;
God is infinite, and therefore is able to doe it.
That no creature can doe it, we see in continuall
experience. Take any comfort that you finde in
the creature, and, when you haue enioyed it, still
you want somewhat, and you would haue more:
But when you come vnto the Lord, and enjoy him,
when your hearts are filled, still there is somewhat
beyond in him, there is no stop, there is no restraint.
And, therefore, he onely can make the
soule happie. Now the ground of it, why he is onely
able to doe it, is, because the soule is made for

him, the soule is fitted for him, and therefore
there is nothing els answerable, there is that constitution
of the minde, that it will not be filled
with any thing besides. The Lord might haue put
the minde into such a frame, he might haue so
constituted the soule of man, that the creature
might haue filled it, and satisfied it, and haue bin
an adaequate obiect to it, but he hath not done so:
for he made it for himselfe, and therefore, it is
not filled but with himselfe. So much for that,
that the creature in the matter of happines is able
to doe nothing.
But you will say to me,Quest. This is a thing of which
we make no doubt; But what doe you say for ordinary
vses, and for the vicissitudes of this life,
is not the creature, in these, able to doe good and
hurt?
Beloved,Ans. as I sayd to you the last day, the creature
is not able, considered without the influence
of the first moover,In doing vs good, or hurt. to doe you the least good, or
hurt; as the words are Ier. 10. 5.Ier. 10. 5. speaking of Idols,
they can doe neither good, nor hurt, and therefore feare
them not. As if he should say. If they could doe
you, either good, or hurt, you might feare them,
and it is certaine, if any creature were able, in
manner aforesaid, to doe you any good, or hurt,
you might feare the creature: for, God alters no
Law of nature, that which is in it selfe to be feared,
we may feare, that which is to be observed
and regarded, we may regard it. Now, if any creature
were able to doe good, or hurt, certainely
it were to be feared in regard of the hurt it could

doe, and to be regarded and observed in regard
of the good it could doe. Then, againe, the Law
of the Lord should be vnequall, if the Lord should
require all worship, that the intent^o^ of the mind
be wholly taken vp about him, and that we should
haue no eye to the creature, if the creature had
any selfe-part with him in doing vs good or hurt;
for, if the creature could doe vs hurt, we should
not onely looke to God, that he should be a Buckler,
but we should haue an eye vpon the creature.
If a man should say, I will be a defence to you,
I will keepe you safe; but I cannot doe it wholly,
such a one stands by, that may reach you a blow,
from which I cannot defend you; In nature and
reason, a man will haue an eye to that man, and
so we would to the creature, if it were able to hurt
vs: And so, likewise, for good, the Lord restraines
not that, nor sayth, you shall haue a partiall happines,
you shall haue no more then is in me,
though there might be something besides in the
creature; but he suffers our soules to be at full libertie,
to seeke their happines to the vtmost, and,
therefore, if the creature did adde the least drop
of happines, or if the least beame of happines did
spring from the creature, certainely, you might
haue an eye vpon it, you might so farre worship
it, and regard it; but it is wholly from the Lord:
therefore, sayth he, let your hearts be onely fixed
vpon me, let your eye be onely towards me, let
your affections be taken vp about nothing but
me, you shall spend all the strenght of your soules
in obeying me, and keeping my Commandements:

for, there is none in the world that is able
to doe you good, or hurt, but my selfe. Now, to
make this good to you, I will propound but these
two things. First. That all the creatures are absolutely
at his disposing. Secondly. That when
he hath disposed of them, when he hath distributed
them to vs to afford vs comfort, yet they cannot
actually comfort vs, without a speciall hand
of his. Those two, being fully opened, will make
this poynt good to you, that the creature thus is
able to doe you neither good nor hurt.
 First, I say, the creature is fully at his disposing,
that is,Because the creature is fully at Gods disposing. all the creatures in this world (let a man
cast his eye vpon the whole vniverse) they are all
but as so many servants, which are in the Lords
house, prepared to waite vpon his children, to
convey such comforts to them, as he hath appointed
them, so that there is not one creature in heaven
or earth, stirres it selfe to doe you the least
good, but when the Lord commands it, and sayth,
Goe, comfort such a man, goe, refresh him, doe
him good; it stirres not without a warrant, and
without a speciall command from him. The bread
and meate, which you eate, nourish you not, except
he say, goe, and nourish such a man; the fire
warmes you not; and so of all the creatures else.
Againe,Instance. when he doth command them, they doe
 it, and they doe it fully.
So all the goodnesse that we participate of,In Man.
 both by good and evill men, all is from the Lord;
either it is from his mercy,Others. or from his providence;
therefore we should learne to sanctifie the

Lord, both in our hearts, and in our speeches, not
by saying I haue gotten me favour and friendship
of such a man, but, the Scriptures expression is,
the Lord hath given me favour in such a mans eyes.
So, againe, not by saying I haue procured the hatred
of such a man against me, but say, the Lord
stirred vp such a mans spirit against me, and so
not by saying, I haue gotten such and such things,
but, as Iacob, the Lord of his goodnes hath given me
all this, not Laban, not my owne labour; if, in any
enterprise you haue successe, say not, I haue done
it, but say, as Abrahams servant sayd, the Lord hath
prospered my Iourney. That is. The Lord doth all in
all, it is he that commands all, it is he that disposeth
all; I say, that we should sanctifie the Lord in
our speeches; this is the language of the Scriptures;
But, chiefly we should sanctifie him in our
hearts. That is. Thus we should conceiue of him,
and thus we should thinke of every creature.
Beloved, it will not be vnprofitable, if we draw this
a little neerer into particulars. That all the creatures
are so at his disposing, that they stirre not a
iot, but at his command, you shall see in Eccles. 3.Eccles. 3. 14.
the generall there set downe; I know that what soever
God shall doe, it shall be for euer, to it can no man
adde, nor from it can no man diminish, for Cod hath
done it, that men should feare before him. (Make)
I know that what soever God shall doe, it shall be for
ever. That is. The creature cannot alter any course
that God hath set, neither at this time, nor at any
other time, but it shall run in a constant course,
like a strong streame that cannot be resisted, it

shall be for ever, to it shall no man adde, and from it
can no man diminish. That is. The creature cannot
onely doe no substantiall action, but, when the
Lord hath done any thing, the creature cannot
adde the least thing to it, and as it cannot adde,
so it cannot diminish, nor take away the least
thing from any blessing that he bestoweth, nor any
evill that he will doe, the creature addes not a
iot to that evill, to that crosse, to that affliction,
nor the creature mitigates not the crosse in the
least degree, though you thinke it doth: But that
we shall answer afterward. But why is this? This
(sayth he) the Lord hath done, that men should feare
before him. As if he should say; they would not
feare me, but they would feare the creature, and
looke to the creature, if it were able to adde any
thing, or to detract any thing, either to or from
any blessing, or comfort, that we haue, or to or
from any evill, or any crosse that lyes vpon vs.
Now, that it is so, that the creature is thus guided
and disposed by him, that it is able to doe nothing
without him, we will not instance in the vnreasonable
creatures, which you all beleeue well enough
to be at his command, but we will instance in
those that seeme to be at the greatest libertie: that
is, the wills and vnderstandings of men; certainly,
if there be any liberty in the creature it is there,
the will of man is so free a thing, the devises of a
mans heart, his turning of himselfe this way or
that way, who can set any Rules to it? But in this
the Lord guides all: take it in other mens hearts.
Pro. 29.Prov. 29. 26. Every man seekes the face of the Ruler, but

his Iudgement is from the Lord. That is. Men are deceived
in this, if they thinke the Ruler, as of himselfe,
can doe any thing, though he seeme to haue
much power, and abilitie, to doe some good, and
hurt to men, if any else can; therefore, sayth he,
men seeke his face, but, sayth he, you are deceived:
he is not able to doe any thing, but what the Lord
dictates to him, or permits him, what he prescribes
to him to doe, what he sayth he shall doe,
iust so farre he goes and no farther; for, the whole
judgement that a man hath, it is from him, it is
from the Lord. That is. All the good and evill that
he doth, that minde of his, from whence it proceedeth,
is guided and fashioned by the Lord,
vpon every particular occasion, whensoever he
hath to doe with vs, or we with him: but that is
for men that are without vs, for other men.
But, now, for a mans selfe: there is the same 
reason,Our selues. indeed, of the one as there is of the other,
but man thinkes he hath libertie, he thinkes he can
goe to such a place, or not goe; he can doe such a
thing, or not doe it; Beloved, it is very true, and
therefore the All-mightie power of God is seene
herein, which we are not able to comprehend,
that when there is such a libertie in the soule, in
the will of man, in the devices and thoughts of a
mans heart, yet that they should be all so guided
by him, that there is not the least stirring of them
this way or that way, without his ordering and
concurrence; even, as you see, Birds flying, they
seeme to flie at libertie, yet that all should be guided
and ordered by an over-ruling hand; Such

are the wils of men; and that you shall see in these
particulars; when a man thinkes with himselfe,
he consults with himselfe about a thing that lyes
before him, that is his owne power to doe, or
not to doe, in this, sayth the Text, Prov. 19. 21.Prou. 19. 21.
Many devices are in a mans heart, but the counsells of
the Lord shall stand. That is. Though there be such
varietie of devices, that he is able to cast things
this way, or that way, and to reason to and fro,
and to thinke with himselfe, I can doe this, and I
can doe the contrary, yet, sayth he, looke what
the Lord, by his counsell, will haue that man to resolue
vpon, looke what issue he hath put to his deliberations,
that counsell shall stand, and all those
devices shall be guided and ruled by it, and not
goe one step out of it. Come now to the counsells
of a mans heart, when a man hath thought this
with himselfe, I will speake or vtter this, or act
that, as he hath resolved to doe, you would thinke
this man hath power to doe it; but in Prov. 16.Prov. 16. 1. a
place that you know, There are preparations in a
mans heart, but the answer of the mouth is from the
Lord. That is. Even when it is so neere, that, you
thinke, there is nothing that can come betweene
that a man hath resolved with himselfe, and sayth
this will I doe, or this will I speake, sayth the Lord,
notwithstanding, this preparation, though you
haue made all these readie, that now it is vpon the
very poynt, on the act of execution, yet now, saith
he, the answer shall be given, as I thinke meete:
and, that which is sayd of answering, may be applyed
to all kindes of actions, when a man hath

thought with himselfe, and hath made his heart
ready, that all the wheeles of his soule are guided,
and turned, and compassed to effect such a busines,
yet the Lord comes betweene the cup and the
lip, betweene the preparation and the execution,
and he doth but that which the Lord would haue
done. My Beloved, thus it is in others, and this
vse you may make of it, by the way; take a man
that is full of good thoughts towards you, the
Lord can turne it in an instant; take a man that is
full of evill devices towards you, if the Lords counsell
be otherwise, that shall stand; Put the case that
the Lord suffer him to goe so farre as to resolue to
say, I will doe some hurt, or I will doe some good
to such a man, yet this preparation of the heart
shall not stand, vnlesse it be the same that the Lord
hath appointed; that shall be spoken, and that shall
be acted; and therefore, you shall see what conclusion
is gathered vpon it, Prov. 20. 24.Pro. 20. 24. sayth the
wise-man there; The steps of a man are ruled by the
Lord, how can then a man vnderstand his owne way.
That is. A man, in the morning, when he riseth,
and thinkes with himselfe, this and this will I doe,
sayth he, deceiue not thy selfe, thy steppes are ruled
by the Lord, thou takest not a steppe into any
action, thou takest not a steppe into any good or
evill to thy selfe, thou takest not a steppe into prosperitie
or adversitie, but it is ruled, and over-ruled
by the Lord, so that a man cannot vnderstand
his owne way. That is. He cannot say this, and
this will I doe, but like that in Dan. 5. 23.Dan. 5. 23. Him hast
thou not feared, in whose hands is thy life, and all thy

wayes. That is. Every thing that thou doest, every
steppe that thou takest, every thing that befalls
thee. So, my Beloved, this shall be enough to shew
you, that man in his actions is at the disposing of
the Lord.
As for other creatures, if you will haue a proofe
for it, to make it evident to you, that no creature
stirres without him, consider that in Esa. 40. speaking
there of the armies of the Lord; they are called
the armies of the Lord, because every creature is like
a Souldier that stands vnder his Generall, readie
to goe, readie to doe, and to execnte whatsoever
he commands. In the 26.Isa. 40. 26. Verse, Lift vp thine eyes
on high, and behold who hath created these things;
he brings out their Armies by number, and cals them
all by their names, by the greatnesse of his power, and
his mightie strenght nothing ^ayles. This is the thing
I would haue observed out of this place, that they
are all Gods armies. Now an army consists of many
particulars; take all the creatures vnder the
cope of heaven, they are not single, you know,
but there are multitudes of them, thore are many
Dealls, many Fowles, many Fishes; sayth the Lord
hore, I call them every one by their name. That is.
He knowes every one of them, notwithstanding
that infinite number of them, he knowes them
every one: even as a Maister knows every servant
in his house, and can call them by their names;
So, sayth he, every particular creature he knowes
by name. It is a comfortable consideration, when
you consider that there is not one of these, but the
Lord knowes them by name, and they are (...) Instruments

to doe either good or hurt, as it pleaseth
him; the sleepe that you take, the meate that
you eate, the comforts that you haue, whatsoever
is done by any creature, all comforts come from
him: But this is enough for that. But, that wherein
there seemes to be the greatest liberty, the greatest
varietie, the greatest changablenes, the minds
of men, we see also is disposed by him. That is the
first thing we are to shew, to make this good,
that the creature can neither doe good nor evill;
because though it doe both (for that there is such
a thing experience shewes, that the creature doth
good and hurt, and every creature sometimes
comforts, and sometimes hurts and grieues, but
that is at Gods disposing) and since it is an Instrument,
and is in the hands of the Lord, as an Axe,
or a Sword, or a Staffe, and is not vsed, except it
be at his disposing; it appeares, that it is perfectly
and absolutely subiect to the dominion of God.
But, now, for the second, which is more than
this, when the Lord, I say, hath sent such a creature
to thee, aud thou hast it before thee (that is
the second thing) that it is not able to comfort,
nor hurt thee, without him. Put the case, the creature
be pregnant, full of comfort, yet it is not able
to giue downe that milke of comfort that is in it,
except the Lord educe and bring it forth, except
the Lord apply it in particular to thee. And the
same I may say of any hurtfull creature; be
it never so pregnant with evill, be it never so
full of it, yet, it is not able to exercise it, it is
not able to act that hurt it hath, except the Lord

bring it forth, except the Lord set it a worke, and
vse it for such a purpose: as an Axe if it be never
so sharpe, yet, if the Carpenter doe not vse it to
cut such a Tree, to lop such a branch, it is not able
to doe it.
Now the ground of it, why the creature is not
able to doe this, is from hence, that all the comfort
that ariseth from the creature, proceeds from
that sutablenesse and that agreeablenesse which is
betweene the mind and it. That is; when the blessing
and the minde are fitted one to another, as
the sword to the sheath, or as the meare to the palate,
then the creature comforts; but, if there be
an vnsutablenesse, a disagreement, a disproportion,
betweene the creature and the minde, now
thou receivest no comfort from it: for what is it
to thee? for comfort lyes not simply in any thing;
but that is comfortable that agreeth with the appetite,
and the desire of a man. Whatsoever it is,
let the desire be what it will, if that which thou
hast, sute with that desire, it is comfortable; when
a mans heart is sad, such actions as are sutable to
the disposition, are pleasant; weeping is pleasant,
and complaints are plealant; musique grieues,
because that is not sutable to the present disposition.
And so in every thing else. It is no matter
what thy condition is, but what sutablenesse and
agreeablenesse is betweene thy minde and thy
condition; if thou be in never so good condition,
yet, except God make that and thy mind to agree,
thou shalt receiue no comfort from it; if a man
be in meane condition, if he be in prison, if he be

in the lowest estate, if he be in bondage, if he be in
exile, wheresoever he is, if the Lord make but that
condition and his minde to agree, it will sute well
enough. And therefore, hence comes the discomfort
that is in the creatures, when a man hath
them, and enioyes them, it may be, those things
which thou hast, are such as sute not with thee,
somewhat there is that thou affectest, something
that thou desirest, that thou hast not, and that thou
canst not get. As, for instance, Haman had an estate
full of comfort, and of all kinde of blessings,
yet there was not a sutablenes betweene his mind
and that estate, one thing came betweene, Mordecai
sate in the Gate, and, therefore, this avayled
him nothing.Hester. 5. 13. Hest. 5. That is; Though there
were all this together, yet since there was not a
coniunction of the facultie and of the obiect, this
avayled him nothing. Why? because it was not
sutable to his desire, there was something that he
would haue, that his affections and appe^ite were
set on, that if he had he should be well. And therefore,
sayth he, all this avayles me nothing; that is
his expression. So Amnon, he was the Kings son,
and had all things that a Kings sonne might haue,
yet all this was nothing, there was something els,
that his heart was set on, that he had not. Many
the like instances I might giue, but I neede not.
Therefore, I say, when the Lord puts an vnsuitablenesse
betweene thy minde and the comforts
that thou hast, and suf^ers thee to haue an in ordina^e
appotite; as women that haue good meate to
^ate, yet sometime doe long after ashes and coales,

and such things; so when God giues a man an estate,
when he compasseth him about with mercies
and blessings on all sides, yet if he suffer such
an inordinate appetite to take hold of him, to desire
some odde thing, some by-thing that possesseth
his soule, he may haue the blessing, and haue
it present with him, and yet receiue no comfort
from it at all. Now, my Beloved, all this tends to
this purpose, that you may know, that it is the
Lord that giues all good and evill, both in that the
creature is at his disposing that doth it, and, not
so onely, but, the efficacie of the creature (to exercise
such an act of good or evill to vs, that we
should receiue actuall comfort of discomfort
from it) it is from him, and all, I say, chiefly ariseth
from that dominion that the Lord hath over
the spirits of men, it doth not lye so much in the
creature, as in framing the apprehension of the
minde, and therein is seene the truth of this poynt
chiefly that we haue now delivered, that the Lord
onely is the Author of good and hurt, and not the
creature; because he guides the apprehension;
for,The apprehension of the mind, maketh happines miserable. if it be true, as it is most true, Animus cuiusque
etc. it is the mind and apprehension of every man
that maketh his life pleasant, or it is the minde of
man that maketh him happie, and not the thing,
then the Lord that guides the minde, and that fashions
the heart, he hath the onely hand in making
the life pleasant. When thou hast gotten all
thou wouldst haue, yet what is that, except thy
heart be fashioned to it? This you shall see in Psal.
33.Ps. 33. 13. 14. The Lord looked downe from his dwelling, and

from his habitation, vpon the men that dwell vpon
the earth, and fashions their hearts every one of them.
(Make) he fashions their hearts. That is; A man
hath such a frame of heart, such an apprehension
of things, as it pleaseth God to giue him; So that,
take any estate or condition that a man is in (as
you know there is a great varietie of conditions,
to be rich, and to be poore, to be in prison, and to
be at libertie, to be in health, and to be sicke, to be
in honour, and to be in disgrace) these are, as it
were, the severall moulds, into which the Lord
casts men. Now, if he will frame the spirit to that
mould, like soft clay to the seale (for that is an expression
in Iob) I say, if he fashion the spirit to it,
and make it pliable to the condition, to that mould,
a man will beare and indure it well enough, he
shall finde comfort in it, it is nothing to him. And
therefore, the Saints, the Apostles, and Prophets,
when God was with them to fashion their hearts
to passe through the varietie of troubles, might
say of themselues, Non patimur etc. They seemed
to suffer, but in truth did not suffer. What was it to
Paul, when he indured that state and condition
that he did, when his heart was so fashioned to it
as it was? Now, I say, in that the Lord hath this
dominion over the spirits of men, hence it is that
he makes a mans life comfortable. Put the case,
thy hand hath gotten much, that thou hast gathered
much wealth together, yet, you know, Eccles.
2. 24.Eccles. 2. 24. There is no profit to a man, but that he eate and
drinke, and delight his soule with profit after his
labour, I say this also, that it was of the hand of God.

That is. All this is nothing, except a man delight
in it,Quest. except a man enioy the comfort of it. Well,
but is not that an easie thing, when the mind and
the state are put together? No;Ans. (sayth the Wiseman)
this is of the hand of the Lord. That is. Except
the Lord doe it by a speciall hand vpon the creature,
it is not able to doe it, except he fit the mind
to the state, except he sute them together, it cannot
doe it: so I may say of all things else. A hony-Combe
may be very bitter to a man, his stomacke
may be so disposed, as in a Feaver, you
know, that which is sweete is bitter; againe, that
which is bitter may be sweete to a man; so those
that are the greatest comforts may be bitter, and
those things that may be bitter to other men, may
be sweet to him. It is sayd of evill men, they feare
where no feare is. That is. When there is no cause
of feare, yet the Lord can so fashion their hearts;
and so frame their apprehension, that they shall
feare where there is no cause of feare, when they
are but laru^ et spectra, shadowes of evils. Againe,
another feares not when there is cause of
feare. That is; Though things be pu^ vpon him
that are terrible, yet the Lord can take away that
feare. And as we say of that affection, so I may
say of any other, of joy, and gladnes, he fashions
the heart.Deut. 28. 75. Deut. 28. 65. where the Lord threatneth
many Cursles, and this is one amongst the rest,
You shall goe into a strange Nation, and there you shall
liue. A man might obiect thus; Though I liue in
a strange Nation, yet I hope I may haue some rest
and some comfort there. No, sayth the Lord, you

must know this, that I haue dominion over the
apprehension of your hearts and affections, when
you come thither, I will giue you trembling hearts,
and sorrow of minde. That is. Though there be
comforts there, yet you shall not take comfort
from them; and the reason is added, for thine eyes
shall sayle. That is; When thou commest thither,
I will put a restles vnquiet disposition into thee,
that thou shalt not content thy selfe with the
comfort thou findest, but shalt haue a longing desire
to returne to thine owne home, and that thou
shalt not be able to doe; so thou shalt haue a restles
minde whilst thou art there* Thus I will follow
thee with judgements I am sorry, I haue stayde
so long in the doctrinall part, the life of this poynt
is in the vse and application of it; I will adde a
little, that I may not wholly dismisse you without
it.
And first,Vse. this vse you may make of it.How to guide our comfort. If the Lord
be All-sufficient; hence we should learne how to
guide our comfort, how to guide our joy, how to
guide our affections. That is. Labour to see that
fulnesse that is in God, and that emptinesse that is
in the creature; if the Lord be thus All-sufficient,
my Beloved, then let your hearts be satisfied with
him alone, let them be filled with him, let them
be so bottomed vpon him, and so strengthned by
him, that you neede not to goe out from him to
fetch in any comfort from any creature whatsoever;
if the Lord fill the heart, it should strengthen
you against all carnall joy. What neede you goe
out to others, if you haue enough in him; it will

strengthen you against that expence of spirit, and
of your thoughts, which you bestow vpon vaine
things; for, my Beloved, we haue but a short time
to liue in this world, the strength of our minde is
the most precious thing we haue, the thoughts
and affectio^s that we haue, the busines, the actiuenes
of our mindes, we should be carefull to improue
them, we should be carefull that none of
this water runne besides the Mill. That is. That it
be not bestowed vpon things that are vnworthy
of it. If the Lord be All-sufficient, why should you
not bestow it altogether vpon him? Why should
you spend it vpon the creature? Why should your
minde be occupied about it? Why should you
be so intent vpon them? Why should you be so
subiect to carnall griefes, and feares, and carnall
desires? Surely, all these should be taken vp about
the Lord: for he lookes for it at our hands, I am
All-sufficient: therefore let all these be bestowed
vpon me. And againe, as we should learne to see
this fulnes in God, to haue our hearts bottomed
and fixed vpon him, so we should labour to see
the emptines of the creature.Quest. But, you will say,
who doth not know that the creature is emptie?
It is no new thing,Answ. my Beloved, it is certaine we
doe not fully know it, if we did, what meane those
complaints, and those griefes, that we take vp vpon
euery evill accident that falls out? for nothing
is said to be emptie, but when you looke for a fulnes
in it; you say a Well is emptie of water, because
you looke for water there; you doe not say
a Rocke is emptie, for you doe not expret it there:

So we may say of the creature, if we thought, and
did beleeue, that there were an emptines in it,
we would never expect so much from it as we do.
But, when we complaine and say, I thought to
haue found such and such things, and I find them
not, it is a signe that we looke for a fulnes there;
and, therefore, let vs labour to correct that conceit,
it will helpe vs against those griefes and complaints,
to which we are so much subiect; let vs
looke for no more in the creature then is in it.
All griefe and stirring of affection, ariseth from
this expectation, this over-weening, this high
prizing of the creature: if you finde inconstancie
in men; why doe you looke for constancie in
them? they are creatures; if you looke for stabilitie
in your estate, and wonder why a change
should come (I was heretofore rich, and now I
am poore, I was honourable, and now I am in
disgrace) why didst thou expect stabilitie in that
which is subiect to vanitie? Things would not
trouble vs, if we did not expect too much from
them, if we knew there were an emptines in them;
he that lookes not for much from the creature,
can never be much deceived: he that lookes for
much from God, shall be sure to haue his desire
answored and satisfied; he shall never fall short of
his expectation. And therefore, Beloved, labour
to alter your conceits that way, that whensoever
any thing falle out, you may not be troubled ^^it,
you may not feare for that a coident, for it ariseth
hence, because you looked for more in it, than
was in it. It is (...) saying that we haue in morall

Philosophie, that after a man is put into expectation
of any thing, then every affection is stirred
more vehemently, whereas had he not had that
expectation, he would haue beene more quiet.
Therefore, if we were perswaded, and convinced
of the vanitie of the creature, and the emptines in
it, we would never expect much from it; and, if
we did expect nothing, our hearts would be quieted
within vs, for all varieties of accidents that
fall out; for, I say, it ariseth hence, that we thinke
there is some fulnes, some stabilitie in them, we
are not fully perswa^ed of the vanitie of the creature,
we thinke it can doe good or hurt. You will
say; Is not the creature able to doe good or hurt?
Beloved, I will name but one place, besides that I
named before,1 Cor. 7. 30. 1 Cor. 7. 30. Let those that weepe be
as those that weepe not, and those that reioyce as those
that rei^yce not, and those that buy as th^se that possessed
not, and they that vse this w^rld as they that
vse it not, for the fashion of this world goeth away.
When the Lord giues such a precept as this, certainely
there is a ground for it (as that we haue often
told you, that) in all the Command^ments of
God, if they were open to vs, if we did see the
ground of them, we would see that there were so
much reason for them, that if God did not command
them, you would see it best for you to practise
them, you would see reason for it. Now, when
the Lora bids them that grieue, to do it as though
they grieved not, and them that reioyce, to doe it
as though they reioyced not, I gather this from it,
that the creature can doe very little good or hurt;

for, if the creature could doe much hurt, certainly,
then we might grieue to some purpose; but,
sayth he, let the evill be what it will, yet grieue as
though you grieved not. That is; Let it be as good
as nothing, that, as a man is said to heare as
though he heard not, and to see as if he saw not,
when he doth not intend the tale that is told, but
yet he heares it* so, sayth he, if you haue some
griefe, let it be so small, so little, as if you grieved
not; And so likewise for Ioy; Put the case, you
had all the preferments, all the comforts and blessings
in this world heaped vpon you, yet reioyce
in these so rmisly, as if you reioyced not. Now,
it is certaine, if they could doe vs any speciall
good, we might reioyce in a greater measure then
so: but, when the Lord sayth, reioyce as if you reioyced
not, it is certaine, they can doe vs very little
good. That is; So little as if they did vs no good
at all.
But,Ob. you will say, it seemes it is a little good that
they can doe vs, whereas it was sayd before, the
creature can doe neither good nor hurt.
We will answer that briefly;Answ. The meaning is
this, that the Lord giues vs leaue to grieue a little,
and to reioyce a little, so that it be in a remis^e
manner, so that it be kept within bounds, but the
creature can doe vs no good, nor no hurt at all of
it selfe, but as it is disposed by the Lord, and therefore
though it doe something, yet that is done by
God, and not meerely by the creature. So the rule
holds good, though the creature doe something,
yet seeing it is not of it selfe, but as it is an Instrument,

you may truely say, it is not the creature
that hath done any thing, but the Lord hath done
me good and hurt by the creature.
But,Quest. why then is it said, it is a little? for this
takes all away.
I answer,Ans. the meaning is this, it can doe a little.
That is; All the evill any creature can doe, it is
but a little in regard of the eternall that God inflicts
on the soule, it is as good as nothing in comparison
of those eternall good things. As if he
should say; The things that belong to God immediately,
the things that belong to the Kingdome
of God, and to a mans salvation, the things that
are spirituall and eternall, these are good indeede,
and evills indeed, if any of these befall you, you
must grieue exceedingly: for you haue great cause:
for that can doe you great hurt, and so grace can
doe you much good, for it tends to eternitie, it
tends to set things even, or odde betweene al-mightie
God and you; and, therefore, in these
things, let your reioyching be very great, and
your griefe very great. But for any thing
that belongs to this present life, it
is exceeding small, it is as
good as nothing.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE
THIRD
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
I am God All-sufficient.

THe next Vse we are to make of
this,Vse 2. that God is All-sufficient,Be content with God alone. is,
to learne to be content with
him alone for our portion. That
is a Vse both to those that are
strangers to the life of God, and
likewise to those that are within the Covenant;
To those that are strangers,For those without the Covenant. to bring them in, for
the Lord propounds that but vpon reasonable
conditions. It is true, he requires of you absolute
and perfect obedience, that you serue him altogether,
But then withall he propou^ds to you an absolute
and full reward, I am All-sufficient, you shall
neede nothing out of me. As he requires you to
Ieaue all for his sake, so he promiseth that he will

be to you in stead of all things; and therefore let
men consider that in Heb. 11. 6.Heb. 11. 6. Whosoever comes
to God, must beleeue that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that serue him. That is; a man will
never change, except it be for the better, except a
man thinke his condition will be better with the
Lord, than it was out of him, he will never come
in, but, when he is once perswaded of that, he
cannot keepe out; you know, that argument is
vsed by the Prodigall sonne,Luke 25. sayth he, if I stay here,
I shall perish, if I goe to my fathers house his servants
haue bread enough; that double argument brought
him home. So when a man considers, out of God
there is no sufficiency at all, there is not any thing
in the creature, as we shewed to you before at
large: then if you come home to the Lord, there
is All-sufficiencie in him. That is; All your desires
shall be satisfied, there is nothing that you neede,
nothing that you want, but it shall be supplyed.
This, I say, is that that brings a man in to consider
of Gods All-sufficiencie; but this we doe not meane
to inlarge now, but rather proceede to the other.
Whether a man be come in or not, there will
not be much difference in the application of this
that we are now to deliver, to be content to haue
God alone to be our portion; for that is the cause
of all our vnevennesse, and of our imperfect walking
with God, we would haue somewhat besides.
And therefore the Lord taketh this course with
his Disciples, he tells them the worst first; he tells
them they must part with all, that they must deny
themselues throughly and perfectly, and they must

be co^tent with him alone; because the Lord knew,
otherwise, they would never haue constantly followed
him, and though they might haue gone
farre with him, yet, when they had met with a rub,
when that, which they would not part with, and
the service of God should come in competition,
surely, they would turne aside, and leaue him.
Now, my Beloved, you must consider this, and
worke your hearts vnto it, that, if you haue him
alone, it is enough; for if men were perswaded,
that he is enough, they would be content with
him alone. When the Sunne shines to you, though
there be never a Starre, is it not day? Doe you
not call it so? Againe, when all the Starres shine,
and the Sunne is set, is not that night? Is it not so
when you haue the Lord alone? Suppose you haue
nothing but him for your portion, shall not the
Lord be sufficient to make you happie? Is he not
a Sunne and a Shield, sayth the Psalmist? Is he not
a Sunne. That is; All-sufficient, to fill you with
comfort of all kindes? What then though you haue
nothing but him alone? Againe, put case you had
all those creatures, all those Starres to shine to
you (for they haue an excellency in them, they
haue a light, and a comfort, though it be a borrowed
and a derived light, as we heard, such as
they receiue from the Sunne) suppose you haue
them, it is but night notwithstanding, you are
but in a state of misery. And therefore, Beloved,
why should you not be content to haue the Lord
alone for your portion? Take all the creatures,
and you finde, by experience, that when they are

inioyed, you see an end of their perfection, you
quickly finde a bottom in them; the heart hasteth
after somewhat else, you quickly sucke out the
^oney that is in every one of those flowers, and,
when you haue done so, you goe to another flower,
and to another, and no where doth the soule
finde rest. God did purposely set forth Salomon,
and gaue him all things that his heart could desire,
so that no man had the like before him, nor
any man since. And for what end doe you thinke
did the Lord it? Surely, for this purpose, that he
might be a perpetuall example (as things were
written for our learning, so all these things that
were done in those former times, which are the
Rule of these latter, they were done for our learning)
he had all varietie of blessings, more then
any man else can hope to attaine to, yet you know
what verdict he giues of them;Eccles. 1. All is vanitie and
vexation of spirit. That is. He found in them an
emptines of that good he looked for, they were
emptie Clouds, Wells without water. Againe,
they were a vexation of spirit. That is. There was
the presence of much evill in them tha^ he looked
not for, many stings, many troubles. And therefore
why should you not be content with God alone?
Take all outward things; before you inioy
them, they seeme to be great; when you haue inioyed
them, and tryed them, you quickly finde a
bottom in them; for there is but a false lustre that
Sathan and your owne lusts put vpon them; they
haue gilded outsides, but when they come to wearing,
the guilt weares off, and you finde after a

while, what they are. But come to spirituall
things; the more you weare them, the more you
finde the beautie and excellencie that is in them;
for there is a dust and a rust that is cast vpon them,
which likewise, the wearing takes off. And therefore
why should you not be content to take God
alone? What is it that man so seekes after? is it
not happines, and comfort? Alas; suppose that
you had all these in the highest degree that you
can looke for, when all is done, you shall finde
that but labour lost, you shall finde no stabilitie in
them. You know what Davsd sayth in Psal. 30.Psal. 30. 7.
when he thought his mountaine was made strong
and vnderpropped well on each side; What caused
now an alteration? He doth not say, there was
a change in the thing, he doth not say, his mountaine
was pulled downe, or that there was an alteration
in his estate, that this or that accident fell
out, that the people rebelled against him now
which did not before, or, that he had lost such
and such friends that he had before. But, sayth
he, thou turnedst away thy face, and then I was troubled.
The meaning is this, that, if there was a
change in his estate, the change in God was the
cause, so then it was the Lord that comforted him,
though he saw it not, it was not the mountaine
that held him vp, it was not all those blessings that
he enioyed in it that refreshed his heart, but it
was the light that shined through them; and therfore
he found, when this light was with drawne,
though he inioyed them still, his comfort was
gone. So, I say, if it were from the things, they

might continue your comforts to you, but when
there is a change in heave^, then comes the change
vpon earth. And on the other side; if God continue
constant, if he remaine safe, you neede feare
nothing, the creature followes him, it is he that
shines through them. What if a man had the avre
and no light in it? So, what if we had never so
much, and no beames flowing form him though
them, who onely is the God of all comfort, and the
Father of all consolation?
But, my Beloved, to be briefe; Put the case a
man were stript of all things, and suppose he were
exiled out of his owne Country, suppose he were
reduced to extreame povertie, or shut vp close
Prisoner, suppose all imployments were taken
from him, and he were laid aside like a broken
vessell; now for a man to say, yet God is enough,
and that he is content with him alone for his portion.
This is the tryall, and this we ought to doe:
and there is great reason why we should doe it;
you shall see it was practised by the Saints. When
Abraham was an exile from his Countrey, and
had not a foote of land, was not the Lord All-sufficient
to him? did he not provide for him abundantly?
When Eliah fled, and had no meate, he
had neither money, nor any body to provide any
thing for him, did not the Lord provide for him?
he set the creature a-worke to doe that, to feede
him in an extraordinary way, when the ordinary
fayled. When Paul was shut vp in Prison, yet the
Lord filled him with joy and comfort; you know,
Syl^s and he, their feete were fast in the Sto^kes,

yet they sang with joy of heart, there was such a
flush of joy, their hearts were so filled with it, that
they could not containe. If a man be brought to
povertie, it cannot be beyond that of Iobs; was
it not enough for Iob to haue God for his portion?
did he not soone turne it? did he not soone take
away that, and turne the River another way, as it
were, and fill him with abundance?
Oh;Ob. but you will say, if I were a spirit, and consisted
onely of an immateriall soule, and no more,
I should be content, (it may be) to haue the Lord
for my portion, but, besides that, I haue a body,
I haue a temporall life, and therefore I need temporall
comforts, and therefore though I would
haue the Lord, I would haue these things added;
for, how should I be without them?
To this I answer.Ans. First; that, though thou be
deprived of all these temporall blessings and comforts,
yet thou shalt finde them all in the Lord,
I say, though ^hey were all lost, and all scattered,
though thou wert stript of them all, yet thou shalt
finde them all in the Lord, if thou haue him alone.
You will say,2. Ob. Answ. how can that be? This you must
know, that all that God hath wrought in the creature,
all the excellencie, all the beautie, and delight,
and comfort, he hath put into the creature,
into meate, drinke, musicke, flowers, yea, into
all creatures of all sorts; who is the cause of all this?
Is not the Lord the cause? It is certaine then, that
whatsoever is in the effect, is in the cause, and in
the cause in a more excellent manner. There are
some causes that produce but their like, as when

fire begets fire, or, when a man begets a man,
here there is an equalitie betweene the cause and
the effect: but there are other causes that are vnlike
their effects; as the Sunne produceth many
effects, that haue a dissimilitude to it, it hardens,
and softens, and heates, and dryes, and all these
are in the Sunne, but they are in a more excellent
manner, then you shall see them in the effect: that
is but a poore similitude, to expresse that I would,
but yet it is the best we haue. Looke now vpon
whatsoever thou hast found in the creature, whatsoever
beautie thou hast ^eene, whatsoever delight
thou hast ta^ted of, whatsoever excellencie
thou hast discovered, and be perswaded of this,
that all this is in the Lord in a more excellent
manner, than it is in the creature.
Well,Quest. you will say, I grant this; but what followes
on that? what is this to my comfort?
Beloved;Answ. It is this to thy comfort; If thou loose
all,Mark. 10. 29. make vse of that in Mark. 10. If thou loose father,
and mother, or brethren, or sisters, or lands, and
houses, and all that you haue, you shall finde all these
in him: for, if all these comforts be in him, if thou
hast him alone, thou shalt finde all these comforts
communicated to thee. That is; Thou shalt finde
the comfort of them in a greater measure, in a
more excellent manner, than thou shouldst in the
things themselues: why else should he say, You
shall haue an hundreth fold with persecution? And
marke the instance; for you shall finde the promise
repeated againe, and he names them every one;
I say to you, there is no man that forsakes father, or

mother, wife, and children, brother, or sister, or lands,
and houses, for my sake, and the Gospells, but he shall
receiue an hundreth fold in this world, and in the
world to come eternall life. That is, you shall finde
comfort in God alone; if thou be shut vp alone,
and yet conversest with God, and hast communion
with him, and seest no creature in the world besides
him, thou shalt haue abundance of sweete
comfort: take all those varieties of comforts that
these giue; as, lands giue one kinde of comfort,
and Parents another, and wiues another; thou
shalt finde all these varieties of comforts in him,
he will fill thy soule with all these, for they are in
him alone. Marke that reason that the Lord vsed
to Moses, when he complained of his tongue, that
he was not able to speake; Send, sayth he, by whom
thou shouldest send; (sayth the Lord) who made the
tongue? who made the dumbe, and the deafe, and
the hearing,Exod. 4. 11. and the seeing? Is it not I the Lord?
As if he should say; Moses, sure I am the maker of
all these, though I haue not the things in me (the
Lord hath no tongue, he hath no eye) yet, sayth he,
thou shalt finde them all in me. That is; His comfort
is this, I will be with thee; when Moses might
haue made this obiection; Though thou be with
me, yet I shall want a tongue to speake, what will
that helpe? Sayth he, I, who made that, I haue a
power in me, and if I be with thee, it shall be sufficient.
I will finde out a way for thee, that shall be
as good as if thou hadst the most eloquent tongue
in the world. The same may I say of all other comforts
in the world; who made them? who made

those fathers and mothers? who made those brothers
and sisters, that thou art deprived of in exile,
or vpon any such occasion, in povertie and disgrace?
Is it not he that made them? What if the
Lord will be with thee? What if he will goe with
thee into banishment, or into prison, as he did
with Ioseph? What if he will be with thee in disgrace?
What if he will be with thee in povertie?
Is there not enough in him, who is full of all
comfort? He can fill thee with all varietie by that
immediate communicating of himselfe. Beloved,
what doe you thinke heaven is? When you are in
heaven, doe you thinke your estate shall be worse?
You see what varieties of comforts we now haue
here. When we come to heave^, shall we haue lesse
varieties? No; we shall haue more; how shall we
haue it? for we shall haue none but God alone;
we shall haue fellowship onely with him. If there
were not that varietie in him that is in the creature,
certainely, we should be loosers, the soule
should not be filled, nor satisfied: And therefore,
sayth the Text;Rev. 21. 23. There shall neede no Sunne nor
Moone; all the creatures that now giue vs comfort
shall be taken away, why? for the Lord shall be Sun
and Moone, he shall be every thing, he shall be all
in all things. That is; Thou shalt finde them all
collected in him; and doe you thinke, that the
Lord shall be thus in heaven, and will he not be so
to his servants vpon earth? It is certaine, wheresoever
he pleaseth to communicate himselfe to any
man, to reveale himselfe, and to take any man
into fellowship with himselfe, if he please to come

to the soule of a man, to dwell with him, to suppe
with him, as he hath promised so to doe and doth,
then when all other comforts fayle, at that time
God delighteth to come, then thou shalt finde varietie
of comfort enough. And therefore, why
shouldst thou not be contented to haue God alone
for thy portion? Thou shalt finde enough in him
as in an adaequate obiect. This is the first thing I
haue to shew you, that in your very communion
with him, you shall finde enough, when the Lord
hath done it, when thou art filled with the joy of
the holy Ghost, what will all be to thee? what doe
you thinke all the world was to them, if it should
haue beene presented to the Apostles, if one
should haue presented them with a Kingdome,
with all that ever the sonnes of men could devise?
Doe you thinke they would haue regarded them
much? Surely, they would not, as they did no^
regard the contrary. Imprisonment was nothing,
and death was nothing to them; you see with what
facilitie they passed through them. By the Rule of
Contraries, outward happinesse had beene nothing:
for he that grieues much for any outward
losse, he would much reioyce in the contrary
con^^^^ments: when the Apostles were thus filled
with the joy of the holy Ghost, in regard of the
one, certainely they would not haue regarded the
other, if it had beene represented vnto them;
what was now the joy in the holy Ghost? it was
but the Lord communicating himselfe: they had
but the Lord alone, they were but led into a neerer
fellowship with him: there was but a little cr^vis

opened, as it were, to see that excellency and fulnesse,
and that All-sufficiencie in God, and it filled
them so, that they cared for nothing besides. But
this, I say, we would worke our hearts to, if we
did looke vpon God as an adaequate obiect.
But,Ob. you will say, though this be something to
haue my soule filled with comfort thus; yet there
are many necessities, many vses, that I haue of other
things.
Therefore,Answ. I will goe yet further. Doe thou consider
the Lord, what he is; goe through all his attributes,
consider his almightie power, consider
his great wisedome, his counsell, and his vnderstanding,
consider his great goodnesse, and his
truth, and kindnesse, consider his patience, and
his long suffering, etc. all these are thine. My Beloved,
God is not knowne in the world, we consider
not aright what he sayth, when he sayth, I will
be thy portion, I will be thy God; for so he sayth, I
my selfe am my beloveds,Cant. 1. 6. and my welbeloved is mine.
Now to haue the Lord himselfe, is more than if he
should giue thee all the Kingdomes of the earth;
consider this, the power of God is thine, to worke
all thy workes for thee, to make passage for thee,
when thou art in a straite, to bring thy enterprises
to passe, to deliver thee out when thou art in any
affliction, out of which the creature is not able to
deliver thee. Thinke what it is to haue an interest
in Gods almightie power, and thinke this is one
part of thy portion: the Lord himselfe is thine,
and all his power is thine. Consider, likewise, his
wisedome, if thou neede counsell in any difficult

case, if thou wouldst be instructed in things that
be obscure, if thou wouldst be led into the mysteries
that are revealed in the word, to see the wonderful
things contained in the Law; the wisedome
of God is thine, thou hast interest in it, it is thy
portion, thou shalt haue the vse of it as farre as he
sees it meete for thee. And so the Iustice of God
is thine, to deliver thee when thou art oppressed,
to defend thee in thine innocency, and to vindicate
thee from the iniuries of men. And so we may
goe through the rest. Now consider, what a portion
it is to haue the Lord alone: if thou hadst nothing
but him,Simile. thou hadst enough. When a woman
marries with a Tradsman, or with an Artist,
that is excellent but in some one Art, or with one
that is excellent in learning and knowledge, shee
is content, it may be, and thinkes it to be a great
portion, as good as if shee had many thousands
with him, for, sayth shee, this is as good, it will
bring it in. Thinke then, if thou hast the Lord alone
for thy portion, if thou hast nothing else,
thou hast sufficient. Thinke of all these attributes,
and say within thine owne heart, all these are mine.
And therefore, why should I not be content to
haue him alone? But yet this is not enough, I will
goe yet further with thee, if thy heart be not satisfied
with this, yet consider all things in the world
are thine: for whatsoever is the Lords, is thine.
When a virgin marries with a man that is rich,
shee lookes vpon all his possessions, and sees so
many thousand sheepe, so many fayre houses, and
so much land, he hath so much gold and silver;

and, she sayth thus with herselfe; now he is my
husband, all this is mine: I shall haue my interest
in them, I shall haue that that is fit for me. So,
looke now vpon the Lord, consider when thou
hast chosen him to be thy portion: though thou
shouldst be content to haue him alone, yet all this
comes together with him, it cannot be separated
from him, so that even then when thou art deprived
of all, yet all is thine: he hath it readie for thee,
to bestow on thee, as there is occasion.
You will say,Ob. these are notions, these are hard
things to beleeue, to see these really is another
thing.
My Beloved,Ans. will you beleeue your senses, I finde
that the Scriptures take away arguments from
those things, that are exposed to the view of men,
looke on nature and see what the Lord doth there,
doe but compare a house-keeper on earth with
the Lord, and see what the difference is betweene
them; Consider how many there are in this house
of the Lord, of which he is Maister, how many
there are at vprising and down-lying from day to
day; Consider how he provides for them all in
Psal. 104.Psal. 104. and in Iob. 38.Iob 38. you see the holy Ghost
reasoning with the sonnes of men, even after this
manner; Why, sayth he, doe you doubt him?
why are you not content to consecrate your selues
to him, to be to him alone? Doe but see how he
deales with all creatures, in the morning they
know not what to doe, but they looke vp vnto him;
he instanceth in the Ravens, and other creatures,
he openeth his hand and giveth them foode,Psal. 104. 28. 29. he shuts

his hand and they perish. That is; He feeds them
all. Consider the Treasures in Iob 38.Iob 38. 22. Doest thou
(sayth the Lord) know the treasures of snow and
hayle that I haue hid? When there is a snow all the
Land over, thinke what a great treasure the Lord
hath, from whence it comes: in the mightie
hayles that be, sayth he to Iob, dost thou know the
treasures of hayle? When you see a mightie raine,
sayth he, who can open the bottles of heaven,Vers. 37. and who
can shut them? That is; Consider well, looke on
these outward things, and thinke who it is, that
doth this,Vers 38. when the earth is hot, and the clods knit
together, who can open the earth? These sensible
things would leade vs to see the Lord in his greatnes;
so sayth he, who is the father of the Rayne,Vers. 28. who
hath begotten the drops of the dew? Againe, as in a
great house, there must be water to furnish the
roomes; so sayth he,Psal. 104. 10. from his chambers he sendeth
springs throughout the world. My Beloved, if the water
were all in one place, if it were all in one river,
in one chamber, what would become of mankinde?
What would become of the Beasts? But,
sayth David, he sendeth forth his springs to every
mountaine, and every valley, that the Birds, and
Beasts, and mankinde might haue water to refresh
them: for otherwise (sayth he) they would perish.
Thus the Lord hath done. So againe, sayth
he, who is it that enlightens the earth? Whence comes
the light? and wh^ drawes the Curtaines of the night?
Againe, who is it that maintaines all the creatures?
the Lyon when he runs out of his denne in
the morning,Psal. 104. 21. he knowes not where to haue his

prey: and not he onely, but all the creatures besides.
Consider how he provides for all: the Ostridge
(Iob 39). God hath taken vnderstanding,Iob 39 17. 20.
sayth he, from her, and she leaues her young ones behinde
her, and provides not for them; how comes
it then that they grow vp, that the species is not
extinguished, but continues? Sayth the Lord,
I take care for them. And so the Hinde that is in
the Wildernes, as shee calues shee bruseth her
young, and casts them forth, and there she leaues
them, who should provide for them? Is it not I
sayth the Lord? And so along. But I will not enlarge
my selfe further in this; because I hast to
that which remaines. Onely this Vse is to be
made of it, that when you looke vpon the vniverse:
looke vpon all the parts of it; see the worke
of God in every kinde; and see how he provides
for the Ravens,Math. 6. 26. that haue neither barnes nor storehouse;
see how he clothes the earth, that spinnes not,
that hath no garments made for it; see all that he
doth in the worke of nature, and by this you may
learne to know God: by this you may know, what
he is, how you may well be content to haue him
alone for your portion.
But this will be obiected;Ob. I but we finde it otherwise,
those that are his children, are they not
poore? are they not forsaken many times?
Beloved,Answ. I answer in a word; It is true, while
the children are vnder age, they enioy nothing in
comparison of that inheritance, that is provided
for them. The servant many times liues in a farre
better condition, and escapes that correction, and

that discipline and nurture, which the childe is
subiect to; and he hath money in his purse many
times, when the Sonne hath none: he hath many
liberties, which the childe is deprived of. The
reason is, because it is the time of his nurture;
And so sayth the Lord to Israell, I could haue
brought you into the land of Canaan at the first:
it was no difficult thing to me, but I led you fortie
yeares: to what purpose? Deut. 8.Deut. 8. 2. 5. that I might teach
thee (sayth he) that I might nurture thee, that thou
mightst learne to know me, and to know thy selfe:
that I might humble you, that you might learne by
that to see the vanitie and emptinesse of the creature.
So the Lord deales with his children; But yet,
my Beloved, why should you not be content to
haue him alone for your portion? he hath it for
you, it is not for want of good will towards you,
it is not for want of power, but because it is best
for you: And therefore, likewise, that is answered,
that the children of God want, and those that
are his enemies haue abundance, but they are but
land-flouds of comforts, that make a great shew,
and haue some reality in them to comfort, for the
present; but it is but a Pond, it is but a land-floud;
the spring of comfort belongs onely to the Saints,
it may be, they are but little, but yet they are
springing, they are renewed to them from day to
day, they are such springs as make glad the heart
of all the houshold of God: And therefore, what if
his enemies haue abundance? it is but as summer
flowers; though they be set in gawdy places, yet
they are but slippery places, though they flourish

for a time, it is but the flourishing of a greene
tree, that lasts not long. And therefore be not
mistaken in that, that Gods children want, and others
haue it, his children haue it in a better manner.
But I will not stand vpon this any longer.
If the Lord be All-sufficient,Vse 3. then learne hence,To looke onely to God in our wayes.
to haue your eye onely vpon him, when you haue
any enterprise to doe; if there be any crosse, that
you would haue prevented, if there be any blessing,
that you would obtaine, if there be any affliction,
out of which you would haue deliverance,
let your eye be to him alone, rest on him alone:
for he is All-sufficienet, he is able to bring
it to passe; as he sayth here to Abraham, I am All-sufficient,
so he will be to all that are within the
Covenant, as well as to him. And therefore, I say,
whatsoever thy case be, looke to him onely, and
thou needest no other helpe, and be readie to say
thus with thy selfe, the greatest meane, without
his helpe, is not able to bring this enterprise to
passe, it is not able to deliver me, it is not able to
comfort me, it is not able to worke such a worke
for me; and the weakest with him is able to doe it.
You see Asa was able to say this in 2 Chron. 14.2 Chro. 14. 11.
Lord, sayth he, it is all one with thee to saue with
many or with few. And the Lord made it good to
him; for when he had but a few, and a great multitude
came against him, you see he was saved
with those few; and, afterwards, when Asa had a
great multitude, he was not delivered, that he
might learne to know the truth of that which then
he heard; And therefore, sayth he, we rest vpon

thee, Oh Lord, it is all one with thee to deliver with
many or with ^ew: I say, so it is in all things else.
Therefore, Beloved, learne to conceiue thus indeede
of things: we doe not vsually doe so, if we
did, what is the reason, that you provide much
for your children, and all your care is to leaue them
portions? I would aske you but this question;
Whether can all that portion make them happy,
or make your selues so, or any one else? It cannot
make them happie, without Gods favour, without
his blessing* Put the case, againe, they had his
favour and blessing without this portion, Is not
that enough? Is it not sufficient? We may run
through many instances, but it is enough to touch
vpon this. And therefore thou shouldst be readie
to say thus with thy selfe; If I haue never so much,
if I were in the greatest floate of prosperitie, what
is this without him? If againe, I were in the lowest
ebbe, is not he enough? And therefore in every
busines say this with thy selfe; All my busines
now is with God in heaven, and not with men, nor
the creatures, and therefore, if I want comfort at
any time, if I cannot haue it from men, nor from
the creature, yet I know where to fetch it; if I want
wisedome, counsell, and advice, if I want helpe,
I know whether to goe; if the Cisterne fayle, I can
goe to the fountaine, I can goe to him alone, that
is able to be my helper in all my needs, to be my
counfeller in all my doubts, and to comfort me
in all my distresses. But, Beloved, the thing I
would presse is this, to settle your eyes vpon God
alone.
It may be,Ob. you will say, you haue an eye to God,
but you would haue other helpes too.
No:Answ. All the tryall is in this, to trust in him alone:
for if you did thinke him All-sufficient;
why should you not doe so? If he had but a part
of sufficiencie, and the creature had another part,
you might joyne helpe with him; but since he is
All-sufficient, you must be content with him alone.
Put the case, he giue you no pawne, as he
did not to Abraham, the Text sayth, he had not a
foote of land in all his possession, and yet he beleeved;
for he thought God was sufficient: Therefore
when thou hast any thing to doe, trust in him
alone, and thou shalt then finde it the best done:
for when we trust in him most, then we pray best,
and when we pray best, we speede best: and therefore
we commonly finde, when things are in the
lowest condition, then it hath best successe with
vs: because, by that meanes we are taught to goe
to him alone. To giue you an instance of this,
consider David and Iacob; I will shew you but
these two cases; you shall see it in David and Iacob.
DavidInstance. David. did not make hast when the Lord promised
him the Kingdome, and sent Samuell to annoint
him, (though at one time he did, when he
fled into the land of the Philistines, yet in the generall
he did not) if he had made hast, he would
haue taken away Sauls life, when he was put into
his hands, but, sayth he, I will stay the Lords leasure,
I will not meddle with him, wickednesse shall
come from the wicked. What was the issue of it?

you see how the Lord brought it about without
paine, and labour to him, (as you shall see in the
wheeles of his providence, how he wheeled that
about, to bring David to the Kingdome) you see
first he takes away Saul by the hands of his enemies,
Davids hand was not on him, he tooke him
away in due season. When that was done, then
there was Abner a mightie Captaine, you see, he
was taken away, and that without any fault of Davids,
vpon a quarrell betweene Ioab and him.
When Abner was taken away, there was Isbosheth
left behinde; you see, there were two set a-worke
by his providence (for those things come to passe
by his providence) to take away his head when
he was asleepe; so that all the posteritie of Saul
was gone. He tooke not onely Saul away in the
battayle, but all the rest, and there were but two
left, Mephibosheth, that was lame in his limmes,
and not fit to mannage the Kingdome, who likewise,
afterwards, put himselfe into Davids hands,
and Isbosheth, that was lame in his minde, as the
other was in his limmes. And therefore, when
Abner was gone, there was no strength in him;
So the Lord brought it to passe without any action
of his: so it is when men learne to trust in God.
Likewise, see it in Nabals case: he was making
hast, he was stepping out to an inordinate way to
helpe himselfe, but when he stayed himselfe, and
did it not, how did the Lord bring it to passe without
him? did not he himselfe take away Nabals
life, and giue Nabals wife and goods, as he did
Sauls goods, and his house, and his wiues to him?

This the Lord did: for he trusted in him, he made
not hast, but he stayed on him alone. I say, if we
could learne this in all our enterprises, to trust in
him, he would worke our workers for vs. On the
other side; wheresoever you see a man that makes
hast, and that joynes others with the Lord, and is
not content with his All-sufficiencie; doth it not
cost him much, when he will doe his owne works,
and will not leaue it to the Lord to worke it for
him?
Iacob,Iacob. you know, what it cost him, when he made
hast to get the blessing by a wrong way, how many
yeares exile, how much paine, and separation
from his friends? And so Saul, it cost him the
losse of his Kingdome, for making hast when he
offered sacrifice, and did breake the Commandements
of God, because the people were dispersed;
And so of the rest. And therefore, Beloved, what if
there be nothing besides (for that is the case I
presse) suppose you were in such a straite, that
there is no more but the Lord to rest on, yet, if
you be content to trust in him alone, he will doe
it, as he did for David; if you will needs indent,
and bargaine with him, then, I say, it may be,
you shall haue the thing you would haue, but you
had better be without it; as we see in Math. 20.
when the workemen would not be content with
the All-sufficiencie of God (as we see in that Parable)
but would make a bargaine with the Lord,
we will not serue thee, say they, except thou wilt
giue vs so much wages, if thou wilt, we will doe it;
so he bargained with every man for a penny a day;

Goe then, sayth he, and worke in my Vineyard,
and thou shalt haue a Penny; Well, when he comes
to pay them, he giues them their Penny: they
thought that was not enough, but they murmured
against him;Mat. 20. 13. sayth the Lord, did you not bargaine
with me for a Penny? The meaning of it is this,
it doth most concerne the labourers in Gods
Vineyard, but it is appliable to all others. They
will not worke for the Lord, they will not reckon
him All-sufficient, but they will haue wages, they
will bargaine with him to haue a Penny. That is;
One to haue a Benefice to maintaine him; another
will worke for him, if he may haue fame, and
credit, and esteeme; Another will worke for him,
if he may haue some great place. Sayth the Lord,
I will giue thee that Penny, thou shalt worke in
my Vineyard; I but when a man hath it, (marke
it) he murmurs, why? for when the end of the
day comes* he sees that preferment, that riches,
that credit, are but emptie things, they are but
small things when he is to go into another world,
there is nothing left for him, he is naked and destitute,
it is but a Penny, and therefore he murmurs
and complaines. That is; He sees now that
it was but a poore bargaine that he made; But,
sayth the Lord, thou wouldst needs bargaine with
me for a Penny, and thou hast it. So, I say, to
those that are not content with the Lords All-sufficiencie,
but will haue present wages, they will
bargaine with the Lord: He will giue thee this
particular, thou shalt haue this, but remember this,
that it is sayd in Math. 6. thou hast thy reward.Mat. 6.

If thou wilt haue prayse of men, and wile doe it
for that, thou shalt haue it, but that is all thou
shalt haue. If a man will haue his portion, as that
Sonne had of his Father, Luk. 15. 12.Luk. 15. 12. it may be,
he will giue thee thy portion. The Sonne that
stayed at home, had no portion given him, for
sayth his Father, I and all that I haue is thine.
But if a man will haue his portion, and will not
be content with Gods All-sufficiencie, he shall find
that it is not best for him. My Beloved, consider
whether it be not better to trust in God alone, to
rest in him alone.Ps^l. 146. 3. 4. 5. 6. Consider that, Psal. 146. 3. 4. 5.
6. Trust not in Princes, nor in the sonnes of men, for
their breath is in their nostrils, and their thoughts
perish, but happie is he that trusts in the God of Iacob.
And he giues two reasons for it, For he made
heaven, and earth, and the Sea; and secondly, He
keepes Covenant and mercy for ever. There are two
reasons in that place, why we should trust in God:
One is, though the enterprise be never so great
and difficult, though the blessing thou wouldst obtaine,
be never so hard to come by; yet consider,
thou hast to doe with him, that made heaven and
earth. As if he should say; Lay those two things
together, dost thou thinke it an easier thing to
make heaven and earth, then to bring that thing
to passe? If he made heaven and earth, doest thou
not thinke he is able to doe that? You will say, we
doubt not of his abilitie. Beloved, wee doe: Wee
shewed this at large before, we will adde that to
it, inRom. 4. 21.^ in Rom. 4. You know Abrahams faith is every^where
commended, and what was his faith? Surely,

he trusted in God, that he was able to doe it, he being
assured, and not weake in faith, but strong, He
gaue glory to God, and beleeved that he that promised
was able to doe it. Beloved, though we thinke it not,
there is the stop that we make in beleeving the
promises; that is one reason, he made heaven and
earth. The second is, he keepes fidelitie for ever.
And in another place, as it is interpreted, he
keepes covenant and mercy for ever. Marke, sayth
he, let Princes doe their best, alas, what can they
doe, they are but weake men, their breath is in
their nostrils, but God made heauen and earth. Secondly,
sayth he, their thoughts perish, but God
keepes co^enant and mercy for ever, there is no
change in him.
Oh,Ob. but you will say, there may be a change in
vs, all my doubt is of that, of keeping covenant
on my part* thus men are readie to say.
My Beloved,Ans. consider (for this I will be very
bri^fe in) that thou needest not feare that thy disobedience,
if thou be once within the Covenant
(if thou be one whose heart is vpright with him)
shal (...) the Lord to depart from thee, he will
not be unfaithfull to thee, though thou be weake
in thy carriage to him; for he keepes Covenant for
ever. That is His* Covenant is to keepe thy heart
in his fea^d, that thing we forget; if the Lord keepe
Covenant with vs, he doth not suspend his promise
of helpe vpon our obedience, and leaue vs
(...) but he promiseth to giue vs a heart and (...)
he hath promised to circumcise
(...),

that we shall not depart from him: and therefore in
Esay 40. the Lord expresseth it thus; You shall know
me as Sheepe know their Shepheard, and I will make
a Covenant with you, and thus and thus I will deale
with you: And how is that? Why the Covenant
is not thus onely; As long as you keepe within
bounds, and keepe within the Fould, as long as
you goe along the pathes of righteousnesse, and
walke in them, but this is the Covenant, that I
will make, I will driue you according to that you
are able to beare; if any be great with young, I
will driue them softly, if they be lame, that they are
not able to goe (sayth he) I will take them vp inIsa. 40. 11.
mine armes, and carry them in my bosome. If you
compare this with Ezech. 34.Ezek. 34. 16. you shall finde there
he puts downe all the slips that we are subiect vnto;
(speaking of the time of the Gospell, when
Christ should be the Shepheard,) he shewes the
Covenant that he will make with those that are
his; sayth he, if any thing be lost, if a Sheepe loose
it selfe, this is my covenant, I will finde it: if it be
driven away by any violence of temptation, I will
bring it baeke againe: if there be a breach made into
their hearts, by any occasion through finne and
lust, I will heale them and binde them vp. This the
Lord will doe, this is the Covenant that he makes.
Now consider these Reasons, I made heaven and
earth, and, I keepe Covenant and mercy for ever.
But,Ob. you will say, though I must trust in the
Lord, because he made heaven and earth, and because
he keepes covenant and mercy for ever, yet the

Lord doth it by meanes, he doth it by friends, by
some mediate instruments.
My Beloved,Answ. here is the great deceit of mankinde,
that we thinke, that the Lord dispenseth his
comforts according to those means that we haue.
A man thinkes, if he haue a great estate, his comforts
shall be more, if he haue many friends, he
thinkes, he shall be safer; sayth the Lord (you
know that place, Psal. 62.) if riches increase,Psal. 62. 10. set
not your hearts vpon them: for, sayth he, they are able
to doe little good. Power, and kindnesse belongs
to me.Ob. But then this obiection comes in, the Lord
dispenseth comforts by such meanes?Answ. No, sayth
the holy Ghost there, he rewards not men according
to their riches, but he rewards every man according
to his workes. And therefore thinke this
with thy selfe, thou that hast abundance of outward
comforts, if the Lord did reward thee according
to them, thou hadst cause to reioice in them,
but he will reward thee according to thy workes;
and therefore, trust in him, learne to reckon him
to be All-sufficient, learne to be to him alone.
But,Ob. may not a man that trusts not in God, but
lookes a little too much to the creature, prosper?
A man againe that withdrawes his heart from
them, and trusts in the Lord, may not he wither?
Beloved,Answ. I will adde but that in briefe; seest thou
a man that doth not reckon the Lord to be All-sufficient,
that doth not rest on him alone, but
makes flesh his arme,Ier. 17. 5. and trusts in any creature,
that hath such thoughts as these, I haue the favour
of high persons, and therefore I am safe, or I haue

many friends to backe me, and to support me, and
defend me, and therefore I am safe, I haue a great
estate to helpe me against dangers, to provide for
me against the time of difficultie, and therefore it
shall goe well enough with me. I say, be it thine
owne case, or seest thou any man doing so, be assured
that such a man shall certainly wither: cursed
shall that man be that doth this, that makes
flesh his arme. Againe, on the other side, seest thou
a man that is willing to depriue himselfe of all
these things, when it is to keepe a good conscience,
when he put to it; It is an evidence that he
resteth on God, that he trusts in him alone; be assured,
howsoever that man may be vnder a cloud,
and, though it may be winter with him for a little
while, yet he shall spring againe, his light shall
breake forth, and he shall prosper, sayth the Text,
Ier. 17. (That is the place I haue reference to)
and his leafe shall be greene. The other man, sayth
the Text there, though God doe come to him,
and all about him, yet he shall not see good, he shall
haue no part in it, but he shall surely wither sooner
or later. On the other side; Though evill doe
come vpo^ this man that trusts in God, yet he shall
not see evill. Now, my Beloved, consider (that we
may draw to a conclusion) whether you doe this
or no,Ob. which you are here exhorted vnto. But it
may be, a man will be readie to say, I hope I doe
performe this.Ans. It is well, if you doe. But I will say
but one word to you, if you doe thus looke vpon
God as All-sufficient, if you reckon him your portion;
doe you walke as one that sees him in his

greatnesse, and in his almightie power? Remember
that in Pro. 30.Prov. 30. 2. 3. 4. when Agur lookes vpon God
and himselfe together, sayth he, I am worse then a
Beast, I haue not the vnder standing of a man in me.
And why? sayth he, I haue not the knowledge of the
holy one, he that ascends and he that descends, he that
holds the winds in his fist, he that gathers the waters
in his lap as into a garment, he that stretcheth forth
the ends of the earth, and that settles it, who knowes
him, sayth he, who can tell his name, or his sonnes
name? The meaning of it is this; sayth he, when I
consider what God is, and beginne to thinke how I
haue walked with him, and how short I am of
knowing him as I should; sayth he, I am as a Beast,
I am confounded and amazed. Now, consider
that, and make it your owne case; who walkes with
God, my Beloved, and seeth him that ascends and
descends; (which hath reference to that vision that
appeared to Iacob; The Lord was on the toppe of
the ladd^r, and the Angels descended and ascended.
That is; All the Creatures both in heaven
and earth are like messengers that goe to and
fro at his Commandement) who walkes with God
as knowing this providence of his, that sets the
Angels a-worke, all the hoasts, all the particulars
of them in their kinde, to doe this busines and that
busines? Who walkes with God, as seeing him
sending a messenger to doe every thing that we
see done in the world, sending a messenger to
take away such a mans life, to giue another life
and health, sending a messenger to remoue such
a difficultie from one man, And againe stopping

vp another mans passage. This you call accident,
when you see a concurrence of two things together,
the cause whereof you know not, but he
knowes both, who walkes with the Lord, as seeing
him do this or that, through the ends of the earth.
Againe, he holds the windes in his fist; who sees
him as such a God, that is able to hold the windes
in his fist? Who lookes vpon him as such a God?
The breath of a man, that is lesse then the winde,
he holds it in his fist, as a man holds a thing in
his hand, and that he keepes there at his pleasure.
Who lookes vpon God, as thus great in power?
And so againe, breathing the holy Ghost, who
lookes vpon God, as one that dispenseth it, as it
pleaseth him to giue it and withdraw it at his will?
Who lookes vpon him, as one sending forth motions,
and iniecting them into the minde, stirring
it this way, or that way, as the windes, and the
stormes, and the Creatures? He hath them all in
his hand, and holds them all in his fist: for by these
workes of nature, we may learne to know the
greatnesse of God, and to reflect vpon our selues,
and see how farre we are short of him.
And so againe, who lookes vpon him as lapping
vp the waters as in a garment? That is;
When the Sea is outragious, yet he takes it as
you would take a little water in your lap sometimes,
and he containes it, and gathers it vp,
and sometimes he lets it loose againe. And so
likewise, he is able, when the people are vnruly,
even great Nations that sometimes are readie to
over-spread his Church, and to run over it with

proud waters, yet he is able to keepe them backe,
he is able to restraine them, and to shut them vp
with barres and doores, as he doth the waters.
He that lappes the waters in a garment, is he not
able to restraine men that are violent against vs in
wrath? Who can stand before wrath, and envie,
that is like a violent water, that overflowes all, and
that carries all before it? Yet he that laps the waters
as a garment, he is able to restraine them
wheresoever he findes them. And so againe, who
walks with him, as knowing him that establisheth
the ends of the earth. That is; (as the originall
shewes more clearely) as one that hath founded
the great and waightie earth vpon nothing?
Sayth he, that God (when a mans spirit hath instabilitie,
and inconstancy in it naturally,) he that establisheth
the earth vpon nothing, making a
mightie building where there was no foundation,
he can establish thy spirit too. Suppose there
be nothing to support the Church, to suppo^^ a
man when he is falling, or, that he hath no friend
to prop him, nothing to vnderlay him, yet he (that
hath set the earth vpon nothing, but vpon the
thinne ayre, that, you know, is not able to support
it, but he onely sayth to the earth stand there) is
he not able to support a man in any case? See now
the Lord in this greatnesse of his. But who walkes
as seeing him thus in his greatnesse, and in his
All-sufficiencie? For all these doe but expresse
the All-sufficiencie of God. Beloved, if we did it,
why are our hearts discouraged? Why doe wee
hang downe our heads vpon every occasion,

when troubles come? If we see the Lord in his All-sufficiencie,
he is able to stay our hearts, if we trust
in him alone. What though he suffer his Church
to be over-runne with enemies for a time? What
though he suffer men to prevayle against it, (as
you see how the Adversaries prevayle against the
Church of God by their strength) yet, if you did
see him in his All-sufficiencie, your hearts would
not fayle you a jot. You may either apply it to the
Churches, or to your own particular cases. (And
to giue you yet an insta^ce of these sensible things.)
When the disease prevayled farre on Hezekiah;
sayth the Lord, thou seest Hezekiah what I can do,
I will make the shadow to goe backwards. Thinke
with thy selfe; Though the disease be gone thus
farre, yet I, that make the shadow to goe backwards,
am I not able to make thy disease to returne?
And so we may say of any trouble, or affliction,
of any temptation, or crosse that lyes on
yo^, that you thinke it so farre gone, that there is
no recalling of it againe, yet he that made the
shadow to goe backward, is he not able to reduce
it? And so againe, when you see the Church in
such a case as it is now in, we are readie to cast away
all hope, and to say, What shall we doe?
Beloved, consider that which was sayd to Gideon
(as we are readie to say, when we say the Lord is
All-sufficient, he hath enough, if he be with vs,
we desire no more) we make the objection with
Gideon thus; If the Lord be wish vs, why is it thus?
Why is Israell oppressed? Sayth the Lord to Gideon,
thou shalt see what I am able to doe, when the

Fleece is dry, all the ea^th shall be wet, and when the
earth shall be dry, the Fleece shall be wet. That is; As
if he had sayd; Though the Church now be overflowne,
yet I can dry it vp, and lay misery vpon
them. As againe, that little Church, that little
Fleece, when that was in peace, they were afflicted,
as they were in peace when that was afflicted.Gen. 15. 10. 11
The like, you see, in Gen. 15. where there is another
resemblance of the Church, when the Sacrifices
were cut in peeces, and he had divided the
Rammes; sayth the Text, the Fowles come and
would haue devoured them. There are two similitudes
of the troubles of the Church, and Gods rescuing
them. When the Crowes came, Abraham
droue them away. That was one. And the other was,
when there was a very fearefull darkenesse, there
came a Burning Fornace, and a Lampe. The meaning
is this; The Church then was in Egypt, (for
that he hath reference to) it was a dead Sheepe,
exposed to Ravens, and you would thinke there
was nothing there to helpe it, but it must needs
be devoured. Why yet sayth the Lord, though it
be thus neere, I will driue away the Ravens, and
I will saue my Church. You know, what the
strength of Pharaoh, and of Egypt was. Againe,
sayth he, the Church was in fearefull darknesse,
in the valley of the shadow of death. That is;
They thought they should never be recovered,
you know, what wayes Pharaoh tooke, and at how
low an ebbe the Church was, when he would
haue all the males destroyed. Who would haue
said, that this Church should haue recovered?

Yet, sayth he, as, after this fearefull darkenes, the
Fornace came and gaue light, so, sayth he, I will
scatter this darknes. Beloved, consider, if you beleeue
Gods All-sufficiencie, and consider, if thou
dost thus know him in his greatnes, what though
the motions be exceeding great and strong that
come against the Church, yet in Esay 40. (it is to
that purpose brought in) What are they to the
Lord? they are but as the dust of the Ballance, or as
the drop of a Bucket. The Bucket it selfe is no great
thing, but the droppes that fall from the Bucket,
when it ariseth out of the Well, they are exceeding
small; Sayth he, the Nations are no more to
me, than the drop of a Bucket, or the dust of the
Ballance, which doth not sway them either way;
So, looke what I doe, the Nations are notable to
sway me, be they never so strong, they are not able
to turne me, but according as I pitch things
they shall stand.
Now my Beloved, consider whether you be able
to comfort your selues thus out of Gods All-sufficiencie.
We doe, for the most part, as Hagar
did, when the Bottle was spent, she falls a crying,
shee was vndone, shee and her childe should dye,
and there was no more hope, till the Lord opened
her eyes to see a Fountaine neere her; the Fountaine
was neere her, but she saw it not; when she
saw it, she was well enough. Is it not so with vs
all? because the Bottle is dryed vp, because such a
meanes is taken away, we thinke presently there
is no more hope, when the Fountaine is neere,
the Lord himselfe is the fountaine, and he is neere,

if he did open your eyes to see. Consider whether
you walke thus with God, as seeing him in his
greatnesse. Beloved, if we did see him in his greatnesse,
why should Torches and Candles haue so
great a light before vs? That is; Why should we
regard men so much? Put the case, many Nations
were against thee, thou wouldst looke vpon
all those in comparison of God, as a drop of the
Bucket, or as a little dust on the Ballance.
Art thou able to doe so, to see and know
him thus in his greatnesse? if thou be
not, certainly, thou art exceeding
short of seeing God in
his All-sufficiencie.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE
FOVRTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
I am God All-sufficient.

ANother Vse, and deduction that we
will draw from this poynt,Vse 4. that God
is All-sufficient, is, to comfort vs in
regard of our imperfect obedience.To comfort vs in our imperfect obedience.
Wee ought not to thinke, because
we are not exact in keeping all the Commandements
of God because we haue much unevennesse
in our wayes, because we are not able to keepe
the Rule so strictly, as wee ought, that therefore
God reiects vs: for he is All-sufficient in himselfe,
he needs not our righteousnesse, and therefore he
can well beare with the imperfections of our
righteousnesse. You shall see this vse made of it,
Act. 17. 24. 25.Act. 17. 24. 25 God that made all things, the world,
and all that is therein, seeing he is Lord of heaven and

earth, he dwels not in Temples made with hands,
neither is he worshipped with mens hands, as if he
needed any thing. (Marke) he giues to all life,
and breath, and all things. Thus the Apostle
makes his argument; if God, sayth he, made the
world, and all things therein, if he giueth to all
life, and breath, and all things; then, when you
doe worship him, it is not because he hath any
neede of your worship, or any need of your righteousnesse,
or of all that you can doe, he hath enough,
he doth it not as if he needed any thing:
for he is All-sufficient.Psal. 50. 12. And so like wise in Psal. 50.
sayth the Lord there, If I be hungry, I will not tell
thee. That is; To shew how little neede he hath of
Sacrifices, how little regard he had them, when
they were brought in, and how little he was moved
when they fayled in it. For, sayth he, all are
mine, the sheepe vpon a thousand mountaines are
mine: If I be hungry, I will not tell thee. That is;
I may satisfie my selfe, (I doe but apply it by way
of allusion) if I would haue Sacrifice in abundance,
might I not haue it? If I were hungry after
them, who could keepe them from me? We may
say the same of the obedience of his children: If
he were hungry. That is; If he were desirous of
perfect and absolute obedience, could he not haue
it? Hath he not spirit enough? Hath he not grace
enough to put into their hearts, that he might
reape the full fruits of righteousnesse? And therefore,
I say, in regard of Gods All-sufficiencie, he
needs it not; and if he need it not, he will be content
with a more imperfect measure of it, since he

is no looser by it. This is to perswade our hearts
more fully of that truth, which wee assent vnto
with some difficultie: for we are something discouraged
with the imperfections of our obedience;
whose faith is not weakned by it? who
comes not more vnchearfully before God, because
of it? Now, if that feare were taken away, we
would draw neere more boldly. We see what Iob
sayth in this case,Iob 35. 6. 7. Iob 35. 6. 7. If thou sinnest, what
dost thou against him, yea, when thy sinnes are many,
what dost thou to him? If thou be righteous, what givest
thou to him? or what receiues he at thy hands?
Marke, you know, sinne and righteousnesse, are
the two pathes that we walke in, those are all that
trouble vs; the sinnes that we commit, and the
defects of our righteousnesse. Sayth he, if thou
sinne, what is that to him? It doth him no hurt.
Againe, if thou fayle in thy righteousnesse, or in
thy performances, it is all one that way: for it reacheth
not to him: because he is blessed for ever,
he hath all sufficiencie in himselfe: and therefore
he pleaseth so to administer the world, and so to
guide the hearts of his children, and to dispense
to them but such a measure of grace, to leaue sinfull
lusts in them in such a measure vnmortified;
because himselfe is neither a gainer, nor a looser:
therefore let not your faith be weakned at this his
administration of things, let not carnall feares
possesse your hearts, to keepe you off from comming
with boldnesse to him, since he is All-sufficient,
since he needs not your righteousnesse,
he can be without it.
Moreover;Mans benefit, should encourage him to Gods service. This we may draw further from it;
if God be thus All-sufficient, that what we doe
comes not neere him, then all the Commandements
that God giues to the sonnes of men, are for
their good, and not for his profit. Marke that,
that should breede in vs a great willingnesse to
keepe his Co^mandements, and a great chearefulnesse
to performe them, when we vnderstand that
it is for our owne good. When a servant knowes
that all is for his owne good, that he doth, he will
goe about all the businesse his Maister imployeth
him in with more chearefulnesse, because he loues
himselfe; this is a principle God hath put into nature.
Now,That Gods Commands are for mans good, declared by Instances. if God be All-sufficient, then he commands
nothing for his owne benefit in any thing;
no, not in that, in which he seemes most to doe it.
The Sabbath, that he hath taken for himselfe, and
hath called it his day, Some may aske, is not that 
for his owne sake?In the Sabbath. No: God sayth, the Sabbath is
made for man. As if he should say; If it had beene
made for mine owne sake, I would haue taken
more then one day from you; But I haue given it
for your sake, I made it for man: for man could
not be without it, he could not be religious without
it, his heart could not keepe neere to God without
it, it would soone be estranged from him, it
would be over-growne with weeds, if it were not
looked to ever and anon, he would soone be defectiue
in his knowledge, he would soone forget
the purposes that he takes to himselfe: therefore
the Sabbath is made for man. That is; O^e day

wherein the Lord commands him to set aside all
other busines, and to intend his service. And that
which is said of the Sabbath, may be said of all other
Commandements: for he is All-sufficient.
 He bids a man deny himselfe,In selfe-denials. and take vp his
crosse. Is it for him? No, my Beloved, it is for our
selues, and therefore when a man denies himselfe
in his profit, in his credit, when he denies himselfe
in the satisfying of his lusts, all this is for his
owne profit: as you haue it clearely set downe in
Esay 48. 17.Isa. 48. 17. I am the Lord that teacheth thee to profit;
therefore hearken to my Commandements. As if
he should say, It is for thy profit that I command
thee, and not for my owne: therefore let that cause
thee the more willingly to doe it. And so that is
often repeated in Deut. the Commandements that I
haue given thee for thy wealth, for thy good. Beloved,
all the Commandements of Sathan are for our
hurt, we doe him service, as bond-slaues serue
their Maisters, not for their owne profit, but for
their Maisters. But all the service we doe to God,
is for our wealth; for he is All-sufficient.
Last of all.We giue nothing to God in our obedience. If God be All-sufficient, then, when
you performe any thing, doe not thinke that you
giue any thing to the Lord, and so looke for recompence;
(there is that secret Popery in every
mans heart, that he thinkes when he hath done any
speciall service to be rewarded for it) Indeede,
if thou wouldst do God a good turne, thou mights
looke for somewhat againe at his hands, but it is
done to him that is sufficient; and how can you
doe him a good turne? how can you giue to him?

Marke. It is the ground which the Apostle layeth
Rom. 11. 34.Rom. 11. 34. Who hath given to him, and it shall be
recompenced to him? He that is capable of no gift,
there can be nothing done to him, to premerit any
thing; For he is All-sufficient, there can be no
addition made to him, and, sayth he, dost thou
looke for any recompence? What doest thou else
but giue to him of his owne? Shall a man merit in
giving to the Lord the fruits of his owne Vineyard,
the Apples of his owne Orchard? When as
all the graces we haue, are but as streames springing
from that fountaine that he hath put into vs;
therefore, when thou hast done thy best, say within
thy selfe vnto thine owne heart; I am but an vnprofitable
servant, I can looke for nothing for all
this: for he is All-sufficient, and needs it not; I
haue done him no good turne, I haue given him
nothing, he is vncapable of my gift, and therefore
I looke for no recompence, as by merit, from him.
Againe;Vse 5. If God be All-sufficient; let vs be exhorted
to make a Covenant with him;Gods All-sufficie^cie should perswade vs to enter into covenant with him. for (as I told
you before) these words doe but containe the
Covenant betweene God and vs. Now, this is the
Covenant, that God will make with you; if you will
enter into Covenant with him, that he will be All-sufficient
to you. Now, that which is expressed
here generally, I finde in other places, divided into
these three particulars, where in the All-sufficiencie
of God consists, as if they were the three parts
of this Covenant.
 First, He is All-sufficient, to justifie, and to forgiue
vs our sinnes.
 Secondly. He is All-sufficient, to sanctifie vs,
and to heale our infirmities.
 Thirdly. He is All-sufficient, to provide vs whatsoever
we neede; so that no good thing shall be
wanting to vs.
These are the three parts of the Covenant, which
we finde set downe in divers places;Ier. 31. 34. in Ier. 31. 34.
Heb. 8. 9. 10. 16.Heb. 8. 9. 10. But most clearely are they set
downe in Ezek. 36.Ezech. 36. Sayth the Lord there; I will
powre cleane water vpon you, you shall be cleane, yea,
from all your filthines, and from all your Idols will I
clense you. There is one part of the Covenant, that
he will clense vs from all our sinnes. That is; From
the guilt, and the punishment of them. Secondly.
A new heart will I giue you, also a new spirit will I
put into you, and I will take away your stonie hearts
out of your bodies, and I will giue you a heart of flesh.
There is the second part of the Covenant, consisting
of Sanctification. The third is; You shall dwell
in the Land that I gaue to your Fathers, and I will
call for Corne, and I will increase it, and I will lay no
more famine vpon you, and I will multiply the fruit
of the tree, and the increase of the field, that you beare
no more the reproach of famine among the Heathen.
Here are the particulars set downe; some are named
for the rest; I will call for Corne and Wine,
That is, For whatsoever you want. That is the
third part of the Covenant. These are the three
parts of the Covenant, which I shall spend this
time in opening, and shewing you, that God is sufficient
in all, and to answer those objections that
mens hearts haue against his All-sufficiencie: for

the heart is readie to object against these three,
to haue sinnes forgiven, to be sanctified, and to
haue abundance of all good things, belonging to
this present life: in all these he is All-sufficient, to
fulfill all the desires of mens hearts. Now, to begin
with the first.
First, I say, He is All-sufficient, to take away all 
our sinnes.Gods All-sufficiencie in forgiving our sinnes. My Beloved, it may be, when you heare
this poynt, you will say, it is an easie thing to beleeue
it, there is no difficultie in this, the Lord is
All-sufficient to forgiue sinnes. Surely, whatsoever
we say, or pretend, wee finde in experience it
is exceeding hard. Who is able so fully to beleeue
the forgiuenes of his sinnes, as he ought? Who is
able to doe it when he is put to it? At the day of
death, at the time of extremitie, at that time when
the conscience stirres vp all his strength, and, opposeth
it selfe against him, when all his sinnes
are presented vnto him in their colours, who is able
then to beleeue it? therefore we had neede to
finde out the All-sufficiencie of God in this: for the
greatnesse and exceeding largenesse of his power
is shewed in it, in nothing more then in forgiving
of sinnes.Hosea 11. 9. Hosea 11. 9. See there how the Lord expresseth
it; Sayth he, I will not execute the fiercenes
of my wrath, I will not returne to destroy Ephraim;
for I am God and not man. Marke, my Beloved, when
we haue committed sinne against God, we commonly
thinke thus with our selues, if my sinnes
were but as other mens, if my sinnes wanted these
and these circumstances, I would beleeue the forgiuenesse
of them; but something, or other, a man



hath still to object. Now, sayth the Lord, it is very
true: If I were as man is, it could not be, but I
should execute the fiercenesse of my wrath vpon
Ephraim, who hath provoked me so exceedingly
(for Ephraim was a part of Israell, and is put for all
Israell; and the Prophet wrote this in the time of
Ieroboam, the sonne of Ioash, when Israell abounded
in sinnes, and in Idolatry) but, sayth the Lord,
though their sinnes be exceeding great, yet I am
able to forgiue them: for I am God, and not man.
As if he should say; Looke vpon weake man, and
compare God and man together, and see how farre
God exceeds man: see how much he is stronger
then man, being infinite and almightie; so, sayth
he, his mercy exceeds the mercy of man. As if he
should say; If I were not God, it were impossible I
should forgiue the sinnes of Ephraim, which they
haue multiplied against me from time to time.
So,Isa. 55. 7. likewise, in Esay. 55. 7. the Lord cals them in
there, and vseth this as an argument: for, sayth
he, I will forgiue, and multiplie my pardons; so the
word signifieth in the originall; when a man
makes this objection. But it is more then any
man can beleeue, that my sinnes that I haue thus
and thus repeated, that the Lord can so easily put
them away, and multiply his pardons, as I haue
multiplied my sinnes? Sayth he, my thoughts are
not a^ your thoughts, my wayes are not as your wayes,
but as high as the heaven is aboue the earth, so are my
thoughts aboue your thoughts, and my wayes aboue
your wayes. That is; As a man lookes to heaven,
and considers the great distance betweene the

earth, and it, so farre, sayth he, doe my thoughts
exceede your thoughts. That is; When you thinke
with your selues, I cannot forgiue; because you
measure me, and draw a scantling of me by your
selues, when you haue gone to the vtmost of your
thoughts, my thoughts exceede yours as much
as heaven exceeds the earth. And therefore, sayth
he, my wayes are not as your wayes. That is;
When you would not forgiue, yet I am able to
forgiue in so great a disproportion. We doe with
this as we doe with all the Attributes of God, we
are able to thinke him powerfull as a man, but to
thinke him powerfull as God, there we come short.
We are able to thinke him mercifull as a man,
but to thinke him mercifull as God, there our
thoughts are at an end; we can thinke and see no
reason why he should pardon vs. Now, sayth the
Lord, my thoughts goe beyond your thoughts as
much as the distance is betweene heaven and earth.
If you say to me, who doubts of this, that the Lord
is able to forgiue? My Beloved, if we did not doubt
of it; what is the reason, when great sinnes are
committed, that you fall to questioning of Gods
mercy, when you can more easily beleeue a smaller
sinne to be forgiven? Therefore, certainly, men
doubt of his power, whether he be able to forgiue:
for, if the difference of sinne, doe cause in
you vnbeliefe, it could not be that you should
pitch vpon the power of God, and his readines to
forgi^e.In doubting of forgiuenes, we question Gods power. Therefore it is certaine, that it is his power
that is called in question, and, therefore, the
thing we haue to do, is, to make this good to you,

that the Lord is able to forgiue. But you will say
to me: It is true; If it were a matter of power,
I make no question. Beloved, you shall finde it a
matter of power: take a man; Is it not a matter
of strength in him to forgiue, to passe by an infirmitie?
If it be strength in a man to be meeke, to
forgiue, and to passe by iniuries, to be kinde to
those that be vnkinde to him; Is it not also power
in God to doe so? Besides, is it not a power to be
rich? Riches giue a man a potencie, and the Lord
is said to be rich in mercy. That is; As a man
that is rich, though he giue much, yet he is not
exhausted; So, when you haue made thus much
vse of Gods mercy, yet still there is more behinde,
still there is more and more mercy for you, there
is a spring of mercy, there is no end of it. Besides,
as there is a power in his wrath; Who knowes the
power of his wrath? so likewise, there is a power in
his mercy* as we see Rom. 9. 22. 23.Rom. 9. 22. 23 (it is a place
worth the considering for this purpose) What if
God, to shew his wrath, and to make his power known,
will suffer with long patience, the vessels of wrath
prepared for destructio^? (And the next verse is thus
to be read, otherwise, you cannot make the sence
perfect) and what if he would also, to shew the greatnesse
of his power, declare the riches of his glory vpon
the vessels of mercy, that he hath prepared to glory?
(Marke) as God shewes the greatnes of his power
in executing wrath vpon evill men; so he shewes
the exceeding greatnesse of his power, and declares
his glorious riches. That is; The riches of
his mercy vpon the Saints.

Now, as it is hard to finde out the depth of the
one, so it is to finde out the depth of the other, to
consider the height, the length, and bredth, and
depth of his mercy. When a man considers his
sinnes, and lookes vpon them in the height of
them, in the bredth, and depth of them, when he
sees a heape of sinne piled vp together, reaching
vp to the heavens, and downe againe to the bottom
of hell; now to beleeue, that the mercy of
God is higher then these sinnes, and that the depth
of his mercy is deeper then they, This is to comprehend
the length, and bredth, and depth of mercy in him.
Ephes. 3.Ephes. 3. 10. This is exceeding hard and a great thing
for vs to doe: but yet this the Lord is able to doe,
his mercy is able to swallow them vp; and therefore,
you shall finde this expression in Iames 2.Iam. 2. 13. mercy
reioyceth against Iudgement. As if he should say;
There is a certaine contention betweene the sins
that we commit, and the mercy of God; though
our sinnes oppose his mercy, yet his mercy is
greater, and, at length, it overcomes them, and
reioyceth against them, as a man reioyceth against
an adversary that he hath subdued. Therefore
herein we must labour to see Gods All-sufficiencie,
that although our sins be exceeding great,
yet the largenes of his mercy is able to swallow
them vp.
But,Ob. you will say to me, we could beleeue this,
if we were qualified, but all the difficultie is to beleeue
it, when we want those qualifications: God
requires softnesse of heart, godly sorrow, truth of
repentance, etc.
Beloved,Ans* to this, I answer briefly, that wha^soever
thou seest, that discourageth thee, that thou
seest in thine owne heart, when thou reflectest vpon
it, it is either sinne, or emptinesse. That is; A
want of that righteousnes that should be in thee.
If it be sinne, the greatnesse of his mercy is able to
swallow it vp.Neither sinne nor emptines, should discourage vs from beleeving forgiuenesse. And if it be emptinesse, know this,
that he is rich in mercy, and All-sufficient, able to
bestow this riches, even vpon nothing: you know
he did bestow all the glory of the creature on it
when it was nothing. There was nothing, you
know, when he made the world: when he made
^he Angels, what was it he bestow^d his riches
vpon? And is he not able to bestow it on thee,
though there be an emptines in thine heart? Therfore,
thinke with thy selfe, what is the exceeding
(...) of his loue? It was a great loue that moved
him to give Christ to vs; but after we are in
Christ, then you must consider this, ^hat his loue
hath increased to a full object, his loue is fully bestowed
on him, and is derived from Christ to vs.
(...)

sinnes, yea, all the degrees of my sinnes, to overcome
them, and ^ubdue them, yet, if the fulnesse
of his loue, that he loues Christ with, be derived
on me, what neede I make question?
But you will say againe,Ob. What needs this perswasion
of Gods All-sufficiencie in forgiving? This
is but to open a dore of liberty, to make men more
loose?
Beloved,Answ. it is not so, it is the most profitable
thing yo^ can doe for your owne soules, to beleeue
his All-sufficiencie in forgiving sinnes, as
well as his All-sufficiencie in any thing besides:
therefore we see in Rom. 6.Rom. 6. 15. 16 concerning the abounding
of grace (for so the objection stands) where
sinne hath abo^nded, there grace hath abounded much
more. If mens sinnes be multiplied, grace and mercy
shall be multiplied much more, and still outgoe,
and swallow them vp. Shall we therefore sinne
that grace may abound, or because grace hath abounded?
No, sayth the Apostle, for the abundance
of grace kils sinne (for so the consequence
stands) how shall we that are dead to sinne, li^e any
longer therein?Grace kils sinne, and not increa^eth it. So that his answer stands thus;
Sayth he, the abundance of grace doth not cause
men to sinne more: for it kils sinne. And therefore,
the more we beleeue this All-sufficiencie in
God to forgiue sinne, the more sinne is killed in vs;
it is not enlarged by it, life is not given to sinne by
it, but we are made more dead to sinne by it.
You will say,Ob. how can that be?
Because the beleeving of Gods All-sufficiencie in
forgiving our sinnes,(...). increaseth our loue, and our

Ioy.Beliefe of Gods All-sufficie^cie to (...), increaseth loue. It increaseth our loue; for, when there is no
scruple in our hearts of Gods loue towards vs, it
makes our loue more perfect towards him. It increaseth
our joy also; because, when we haue a full
assurance of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, that fils
the heart with joy and peace in the holy Ghost.
Now spirituall loue eates out of the heart all carnall
delights, all sinfull lusts, and all inordinate loue
vnto the creature, And so likewise, spirituall joy
takes away the vigor of all carnall joy, and sinfull
delight: So, the more you see this All-sufficiencie
of God towards you in loue, the more you are able
to beleeue it, and the more it kils sinne in you,
the more it sanctifies you, and the more it drawes
you to God. Therefore this is to be considered, to
helpe vs against this objection, that there is a double
feare;A double feare. the one is that which keepes vs from
comming to God: The other is a feare that keepes
vs from going out from God. Wee are very apt to
exceede in the first feare, And to come short in
the second.1. Keep^ from comming in to God. Now, the feare that keepes vs from
comming in to God, is a feare that he is a feare that he is not readie
to forgiue, that he is not All-sufficient, that he
hath not power enough of mercy to forgiue our
sinnes, and to heale our infirmities; this makes a
man tumorous and fearefull; as a man is fearefull
to come neere a Iudge, to come neere one that is
terrible: Now the more this feare is taken away,
the neerer we come, the neerer we draw in assurance
of faith to him.
On the other side;2. Fr^^ going out from him. there is a feare that keepes vs
off from going out from G^d, and that is, the more

we beleeue this All-sufficiencie, the more we beleeue
that happinesse is in him; the more we beleeue
the riches of his mercy, and the abundance
of his goodnesse, the more we feare to steppe out
from him, to haue our hearts estranged from him,
to haue our hearts sit loose. Now, the more we
can beleeue this All-sufficiencie, the more it takes
away the first feare, and increaseth the second,
it takes away the feare that keepes vs from comming
in to God, and it increaseth the feare that
keepes vs from going out from God. So much
shall serue for this first, the All-sufficiencie of God,
in forgiuing sinne.
The second part of the Covenant, is his All-sufficiency
in healing our sinnes,Gods All-sufficiencie in sanctifying vs. or in sanctisying vs;
as you haue it in Psal. 103.Psal. 103. 3. That forgiues all our
sinnes, and heales all our infirmities. This belongeth
also to his All-sufficiencie. This, my Beloved,
is a necessary poynt to beleeue; It serues likewise,
to bring vs in to the Lord: for a man is readie to
make this objection, when he lookes vpon Gods
wayes, the wayes of righteousnesse, and then vpon
the strength of his lusts, he is ready to say with
himselfe: how shall I be able to leade a holy life,
as I ought to doe? This is the answer to it; God is
All-sufficient.
He that is able to bid the light shine
out of darknesse, sayth the Apostle, he is able to
kindle a light in thy darke heart, where there is
not a jot of goodnesse; though thy heart be never
so averse, he is able to change that heart of thine,
and therefore say not, I shall never be able to doe
it: for he is able to take away all that reluctancy.
For hence comes the difficultie:Ob. how shall the
strength of my lusts, this crooked and perverse
heart of mine, and the straight wayes of God stand
together?
It is very true.Answ. Is thy heart continue in that temper,
it is impossible;God changeth the nature of things. but the Lord, that is All-sufficient,
is able to take away that reluctancie: for
he doth in the worke of grace, as he doth in the
worke of nature: he doth not as we doe, when we
would haue an Arrow goe to the marke, when we
throw a stone vpward, we are not able to change
the nature of it, but we put it on by force: God
carries all things to their end, by giving them a
nature suitable to that end. An Archer makes an
impression vpon an Arrow, but it is a violent impression;
God carries every thing to that end, to
which he hath appoynted it; but with this difference,
he makes not a violent impression, but a
naturall impression, and therefore he doth it not by
an onely immediate hand of his owne, as we doe,
but he causeth the Creature to goe on of it selfe,
to this or to that purpose, to this or that end. And
so he doth in the worke of grace; he doth not carry
a man on to the wayes of righteousnesse, leaving
him in the state of nature, taking him as he
is, but he takes away that heart of his, and imprints
the habits of grace in it, and he changeth a
mans heart, so that he is carried willingly to the
wayes of God, as the creature is carried by a naturall
instinct to its owne place, or to the thing it
desires. So that thou mayst thinke thus with thy
selfe: It is true; if I haue my old heart, my old lusts

still, there must needs be such a reluctancy, as I
shall not be able to overcome; but, if the Lord
change this heart of mine, and take away these
lusts, if the Lord put another impr^ssion v^on on me,
that is naturall to me, which is like that instinct
he putteth into the creature, then it is easie for me
to doe it. And this the Lord out of his All-sufficiencie
is able to doe.
But you will be readie to object,Ob. if the Lord be
thus All-sufficient,Why there are many imperfections in vs, though God be All-sufficient to sanctifie vs. if he be able thus to kindle light
in the darke heart, to change a mans crooked and
perverse spirit, to implant and ingraft such naturall
habits, and instincts into it, to carry it on with
such facilitie and connaturalnesse to the wayes of
his Commandements, why am I thus? why am I
no more able to overcome my sinnes? why doe I
fall backe so often to the same sinne? why doe I
come short of the performance of such purposes
and desires? why doe I finde so many things in
my life contrary to the Rules of Sanctification,
and so contrary to this All-sufficient power of
God?
To this I answer.Answ. First; It may be it is from
hence, that thou observest not those Rules by 
which God communicates this All-sufficiency,We obserue not Gods Rules. and
this power of his. What though the Lord be willing
to communicate it, yet there are some Rules
to be observed, which himselfe hath given. That
is; Thou must diligently attend vpon his ordinances,
thou must observe and keepe them, thou must
be carefull to abstaine from the occasions he bids
thee abstaine from: if thou sayle in either of these,

he hath made thee no promise to helpe thee with
his All-sufficiencie. Sampson, as long as the Lord
was with him, you know, had great strength, you
know, the Lord tels him so long as he nourished
his hayre, so long he would be with him, which
was but a symboll of Gods presence, but it was such
a thing, as he would haue him to keepe exactly,
and, if he did not keepe that, he would withdraw
his presence, and would not be with him. So likewise,
the Nazarites were commanded to abstaine
from drinking wine, if they dranke wine, the Lord
would withdraw himselfe. And so it is in this
case: the Lord hath appointed vs to keepe his ordinances,
and so long he will be with vs, as he was
with Sampson, to be All-sufficient to vs, to giue vs
strength to inable vs to doe the duties he commands
vs, and to abstaine from the evils he would
not haue vs to doe. But we must keepe his ordinances,
and goe by his Rules, and if we fayle in either
of them, that we neglect the meanes, or adventure
vpon the occasions, now the Lord is discharged
of his promise, as we may so say, the Lord
now withdraws his power from vs, as he did from
Sampson. If you will needs marry with such a people,
sayth the Lord, they shall turne away your hearts:
for now I will not keepe you. If you will needs
touch that tree, if you will needs goe into such a
company, if you will needs gaze vpon such objects:
or, if againe, you will neglect prayer, and
hearing, and sanctifying the Sabbath, if you will
neglect to obserue the Rules that he hath appointed,
in all these cases, the Lord withdrawes his

All-sufficiencie. And therefore lay the fault where
it is; That is; Vpon your selues. Doe not say with
thy selfe, it is because the Lord is not All-sufficient,
but rather thinke, that he hath power to goe
through the worke he hath appointed me to doe,
but it is because I haue not kept those Rules, I haue
neglected the meanes, I haue ventured vpon such
occasions.
Secondly.Answ. Consider with thy selfe, that the Lord
doth this to humble thee. It may be, he is as willing 
to be bestow a greater measure of grace,To humble vs. but he
dispenseth a lesser measure; it is that the heart
may be kept humble: for humilitie is the nurse
of graces, take away that and grace withers in the
heart. And therefore when he is willing to bestow
a mercy, or a grace on vs, he doth as he did
with Iacob, he leaves a lamenesse together with it,
he will not so bestow it on vs, that he will make
vs perfect, but he leaues some defects, some wants,
that by that, humilitie may be preserved, and that
may cause vs to cleaue to him, and depend vpon
him, that he may keepe vs from an All-sufficiencie
in our selues, and teach vs to waite on him: for
without that he doth not communicate, and dispense
vnto vs that sufficiencie that is in himselfe.
Moreover;Answ. Consider with thy selfe, that the
Lord many times suffereth vs to see changes in 
our liues and conversations,That we may know God and our selues better. that by them we may
learne to know him better, and our selues also;
if we were able to doe it by our selues, the Lord
would spare vs, but who is able to doe it? It is

said in the Psalmes, that therefore the wicked feare
not God, because they haue no changes, and truely, even
the godly men, if they had no changes, they
would feare him lesse, so that every change in a
mans state, and the falling into sinne, and the rising
againe, leades a man to some new knowledge
of God, and of himselfe also, to a new experimentall
knowledge, and that knowledge leades him to
a new degree of feare: so that still by their sinnes
they get advantage, that they shall finde in their
spirituall estate: for, even as we see the Sun when
it breakes out of a thicke Cloud of darknesse, it
shines the brighter, so grace when it breakes out
of a thicke cloud of sinnes, or of temptations, it
shines the brighter, we are still gainers by those
changes. I say, we learne to know God, and our
selues also the better, and for these causes he
leaues vs to those changes, that we may be gainers
by them, and so we are. Therefore, say not
with thy selfe, because I finde some defects, and
some unevennesse in my sanctification, therefore
the Lord is not sufficient: for it is for thy advantage,
it is not for want of sufficiencie in the Lord,
nor of willingnesse in him to communicate it to
thee, but it is for thy adva^tage, that thou shouldst
finde these changes, and this vnevennesse in thy
wayes. Therefore, my Beloved, build vpon this
that he is All-sufficient. It may be, when thou goest
about a worke thy selfe, thou findest it a difficult
thing to overcome such a lust, but that which
is impossible with men, is easie with God. Those
that rowed all night, and did no good, a word

from his mouth brought them to shore presently.
The spirit that is in vs lusteth after envie,Iames 4. 5. 6. Iames 4.
but the Scriptures offer more grace. That is; Grace
is able to heale these naturall hereditary diseases,
there is an All-sufficiencie in him, he is able to doe
it; He that can still the Sea, and command the
windes, that at his word they are quiet, can he
not still strong lusts? He is able to restraine them:
therefore labour to see his All-sufficiencie in this,
as well as in all things else. Thinke with thy selfe,
he hath a soveraignty over all thy affections, over
all thy lusts: for what is it that troubles vs, and interrupts
vs in our way, but some temptations of
the flesh, or the world? Is not the Lord the Master
of them? As Paul sayth, 2 Cor. 12. though Sathan
were the chiefe Buffetter,Lusts are at Gods command. and the lusts of the flesh
the messengers, yet the Lord sent that messenger,
(marke it) therefore he goes not to Sathan, he
wrangles not with the messenger, but he immediately
sought the LORD, he beseeches him
to recall it. So thinke with thy selfe, when
thou art set on with a strong lust, with a temptation
that seemes too hard for thee, say with thy
selfe, this is a messenger from God, and I must goe
to God, and beseech him to take it off, and rebuke
it: for he is able to doe it, he is All-sufficient,
they are all at his command, as the mastiue is at
the Maisters command, he is able to rate him,
but a stranger is not able to doe it, and when he
hath done that which his master would haue him,
he cals him in;Simile. so the Shepheard sets his dogge
vpon his Sheepe to bring them in, but when they

are brought in, he rates his dogge: And so doth
the Lord with lusts, and sinne, and temptations,
he sets them on his owne Sheepe, his owne Children,
but for this end, to bring them in* it is not
in their owne power to rate these temptations,
and lusts, nor in the power of a stranger, but
onely in the Lords, who is Maister of them, whose
messengers they are, he is able to rebuke and recall
them, they are at his command, as it is sayd
of the diseases of the bodie, they are like the Centurions
servants, if he bid one goe he goeth, if he bid
another come, he commeth: so it is true of the diseases
of the soule; if he say to such a messenger as
Paul had, to such a lust, to such a temptation,
goe, and seaze vpon such a man, goe, and vexe
him for a time, it shall goe; if againe, he call it
backe, and restraine it, shall it not be restrained?
Labour thus to see Gods All-sufficiencie.
My Beloved,We stand in Gods strength, as we may see if you looke vpon other men, or
your selues, you shall see experience enough of
 this. Looke vpon David, or Paul, vpon Salomon,
Lot,In others. and Noah, and all the Saints, so long as God
was with them, how strong were they? Their
strength was like the stre^gth of Sampson: but when
the Lord withdrew himselfe, we see what base lusts
they fell into; what lusts was David given vp vnto?
Also Salomon, and Peter, and Lot. All this the
Lord hath done, even for this purpose, that they
might learne to know that All-sufficiencie is in
him, and not in them. Therefore, when thou lookest
on any Saint of God that excels in grace, and
goes beyond thee, thinke thus with thy selfe; it is

not because this man is stronger then I, but because
the Lord hath done more for him, he hath
bestowed more grace vpon him: he that hath done
this to him, is he not able to doe it to thee? He
that is so strong, if the Lord withdraw his hand,
thou feest what he is. And therefore comfort thy
selfe with this, that he is able to strengthen thee.
Thinke againe with thy selfe, how thou hast found 
him at other times.In our selues. My Beloved, there is great
strength in this, even when thou art at the worst,
to keepe life in the roote of grace; in the Winter
time it is a mightie power of God, if we looke on
the workes of nature, to keepe life in the Plants,
when they seeme to be dead, that the hardnesse,
and coldnesse of Winter take not away the life of
them: So it is no lesse All-sufficiencie, and almightie
power of God, to keepe the life of grace in our
greatest fals, and temptations, to keepe life in David,
and Salomon, that it should spring againe
when the spring time was come. Againe, who is
it that restrained thy lusts before? who is it that
hath given thee any abilitie to thinke those good
thoughts, to doe those good things? thou hadst
not power in thy selfe, all was from the Lord.
Therefore, if he haue an All-sufficiencie in him, as
he is All-sufficient to forgiue sinnes; so likewise,
he is All-sufficient to sanctifie thee. Be not discouraged
then: Let not a man thinke with himselfe,
oh, I shall never overcome it, I shall never be able
to be so exact in the wayes of rightcousnesse, as I
ought to be; Remember God is All-sufficient.
Our endevour must be to make our harts perfect,

to resolue to serue him with a perfect heart. But
for the power, and performance of it, this belongs
to God. Therefore, Beloved, hence comes all the
difficultie, that our hearts are not so perfect: for
when a man is readie to object, I, but I finde no
experience of this almightie power? See that the
cause be not in thy selfe; he hath made promise
vnto those, whose hearts are perfect with him; it
may be, thy heart is imperfect, it may be, there
hath beene hypocrisie in thy heart, thou hast never
beene willing to part with all, to serue him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde all
thy dayes. But, when once thy heart is brought
to sinceritie, doubt not that he will performe that
thou lookest for on his part* for it belongs to his
part to giue thee power, and strength to doe that
which thou desirest to doe. So much likewise,
for the secoud part of the Covenant.
 The third part of the Covenant, is to provide
all good things for vs,Gods All-sufficiencie in providing outward good things belonging to this present
life: herein the Lo^d is All-sufficient to all those
that are in Covenant with him. I neede not say
much to make this good vnto you. All ^hings are
his, whatsoever a man needs; Riches are his, they
are his Creatures in Pro. 23. they come, and goe
at his command; Honour is his. I will honour those
that honour me, he takes it to himselfe to bestow it
as he pleaseth; Health and life is his; the issues of
life and death belong to him; Friendship is his: for
he puts our acquaintance farre from vs, and drawes
them neere to vs. Goe through all the varietie of
things that your hearts can desire, and they are all

his, he is governour, and the disposer of them as
he pleaseth* and therefore, certainly, he is All-sufficient,
he is able to provide all things for thee
that thy heart can desire, so that no good thing
shall be wanting to thee. I will not stand to inlarge
this, but rather answer the objections: for
here we are readie to object;
If the Lord be All-sufficient,Ob. why is it thus then
with me? why doe I want so many things which I
haue need of, and desire to haue? If God be All-sufficient;
why are there so many defects in my estate,
in my health, this way and that way?
To this,Answ. I answer. Thou must consider with thy
selfe, if those desires of thine be not unnaturall desires,
whether they be not sinfull desires; the Lord
hath promised to be All-sufficient to the naturall
desires, to the right desires of the soule, but not to
those that are unnaturall,A double desire in the soule. and inordinate. There
is a double desire in the heart of man, as there is a
double thirst: there is a naturall thirst, you know,
which is easily satisfied with a little;Naturall. there is an
unnaturall thirst, as the thirst of a dropsie man,
who desires exceeding much,Vnnaturall. and the more you
giue him, still the more he desires, and is never
satisfied. So, it is with the soule; there is a naturall
healthful desire, which desires so much credit,
and so much wealth, as is needfull; there is, besides
this, an vnnaturall desire of the soule, when
a man doth long after abundance* now, Beloved,
doe not looke that the Lord should satisfie this,
nay, the best way, in this case, is not to satisfie,
but to take from our desires* as we say of the

Boulemeia, that disease wherein a man eates much,
that is called Caninus appetitus, and likewise, in the
dropsie, the one excessiuely eates, and the other
excessiuely drinkes; and the Rule of Physitians is,
Opus habent purgatione non impletione, such a man
hath neede of purging and emptying, and not of
filling; so I may say of all these, such men haue
neede of purging and emptying, which is to be
desired in this case: that wherein God shewes his
All-sufficiencie now, is not in supplying thy defects,
in adding that which thou desirest, but in
purging the heart, and taking away those desires;
that is the way to heale thee: Therefore consider
seriovsly what that is that thou desirest, if it be an
inordinate desire, if it be a worke of fancie, know,
that thou canst not looke for this All-sufficiencie
of God to satisfie this, but to heale it. You shall see
Ecclesiast. 5. 10.Eccles. 5. 10. He that loueth silver shall not be satisfied
with silver, and he that loveth riches, shall be
without the fruit thereof. You see what the Lord
hath set downe concerning this case: now a man
may seeke for a competency, but when he comes
once to riches, that he seekes for them, the Lord
sayth, such a man shall not be satisfied, or, if he
be, it shall be in wrath: for it is in wrath given to
such a man. It is the destruction of a dropsie man,
to haue much drinke given him, or to giue a man
much meate that is sicke of the disease, we spake
of before. And therefore, sayth he, he shall not be
satisfied, or, if he be, it shall be in Iudgement:
Such are these desires, and therefore examine thy
selfe, whether thy desires be not such as proceede

from fancy, such as proceede not from the health,
but the weaknesse of the soule. Therefore it is said
in 1 Tim. 6.1 Tim. 6 6. that godlinesse is great gaine with contentment.
How doth godlines giue contentment?
Beloved, after that manner that Physicke giues satisfaction.
A dropsie man after he is brought into
health,Simile. you know, he is contented with lesse
drinke, for now he is in health, God brings the
soule to a good temper, he takes away the distemper,
the lustfull humors, that were there before,
and brings him into a right temper, it giues him
now the content that before he wanted.
Againe.Ob. Another objection is; If God be All-sufficient
for these outward things, why am I thus
crossed? why doe I suffer these afflictions? why
are they not removed from me?
To this I answer briefly.Answ. Thou mayst be deceived
in them,That is not alway good for vs, that we desire. that which thou makest account is
so great an evill to thee, it may be for thy great
good, as we see Ier. 42.Ier. 42. that whole Chapter, the
Captaine there, and the rest of the people, they
reckoned it an exceeding great misery, a very
great affliction to continue in Ierusalem, they had
a great desire to goe downe into Egypt, but the
Lord tels them, they were very much deceived:
for this misery shall be for your good, sayth he,
but, if you will needs goe downe into Egypt, when
you thinke to haue abundance of all things there,
you shall meete with the Sword, and with Famine,
and with the Pestilence, and with vtter destruction.
So, I say, in this case, we are often times
deceived, we thinke that to be good for vs which

is not. Certainly, the Lord is All-sufficient, he will
with-hold no good thing, but it is not alwayes
good to haue such an afflictio^ removed, perhaps,
it were better for thee to beare it, it were better
for thee to lye vnder it, then that it should be removed:
we doe, in this case, many times with the
Lord, as the children of the Prophets dealt with
Elisha; they would needs goe to seeke the body of
Eliah, Elisha forbad them, but still they were importunate,
sayth he, if you will needs goe, goe,
but they lost their labour, they had better to haue
taken his counsell at the first: And so in this case,
many times when the Lord would haue vs to doe
such a thing, and to be content with the want of
such a comfort, to be content to suffer such a defect
in our estate, in our bodies, in our businesse,
we are still importunate with him, sometimes he
hearkens to vs, he suffers the thing to be done,
but we were as good to want it. I would aske thee
in this case, wouldst thou haue it without thy Fathers
good will? If thou haue it, it will doe thee no
good: The best way in this is to consider with thy
selfe, that he is All-sufficient; though this affl^ction
seeme to be exceeding bitter, yet it is a cup of
thy Fathers providing, it is that which the Lord,
that loues thee, hath ordained, it is that which the
Lord, that wants nothing, who is able enough to
take it from thee, and to supply it, it is that which
he hath seene meete to dispence to thee: therefore
it is not for want of sufficiencie in him, but it
is better for thee to suffer the want of this comfort,
or to lye vnder this crosse or affliction.
But lastly,Ob. some will say, if the Lord be All-sufficient,
and I must be subiect to his will, why is it
not his will to put me into a higher condition?
why hath he given me but such a measure of gifts,
but such a meane place, but such a quantitie of
health, of wealth, of vnderstanding? a mans heart
will goe further, if there be such riches in God, such
an All-sufficiency in him, why is it not better with
me? why am I not in a higher condition?
To this,Ans. I answer. First; That he that entereth
into Covenant with God, he should be content 
with the lowest place in all the family,A Christian should be content with a mean^ place in Gods house. and be glad
that he is within the dore, as we see the Pr^digall
did, and so the Apostle Paul, I am the least of all
the Saints, and he was contented to be the least.
A man that hath beene truely humbled and
brought home to God, that hath tasted and seene
how gracious the Lord is, that hath had experience
of his owne sinne, and of Gods goodnesse,
he will be content with the least measure, if he be
put into the lowest place, if he be made the least
of all Saints, he will not exalt himselfe aboue that
measure, and that place that the Lord hath allotted
him.
But besides this;Those that are meane in some things, may excell in others. Consider, secondly, further 
with thy selfe, that, if thou haue a lower place, or
condition in this, or that thing, yet, it may be, thou
hast a higher condition in somewhat else, and
know this, that God giues no man all things, but
hath mingled his comforts, he hath dispensed
them diversly,1 Sam* 1. 2. as we see in 1 Sam. 1. in that case
betweene Hannah, and Peninnah, Hannah had the

loue of her husband, but the Lord had made her
barren: On the other side; Peninnah had children,
but she wanted the loue of her husband: it is purposely
noted there, that you may see how the
Lord dispenseth his comforts: And so it was with
Leah and Rachell, the one, you know, had children,
and wanted her husbands loue, the other had a
greater abundance of loue, but shee was barren.
As it was with these, so generally the Lord dispenseth
good and evill together. There is no man
that hath all things. You see Moses, he wanted eloquence,
that Aaron had, as Moses againe had
the wisedome, that Aaron wanted: so Paul, and
Barnabas, they had different excellencies, the one
had that the other wanted, and so it is generally.
Therefore thinke with thy selfe, there is no man
that hath all, and why should I desire it? there
must be a mingling of some defects.
 Againe. Thirdly; Consider with thy selfe, that
the varieties of the sufficiencies that God giues to
men,God can satisfie the desires in a low condition. that he placeth some in a higher degree and
some in a lower, to some he giues greater gifts,
to some lesser, some he makes rich, and some
poor, some honourable, and some base; this varietie
in all the workes of God takes not away from
the perfection of each one: every man in his place
may haue a perfection, he may haue it within his
spheare, so that there shall be no want at all: for
the Lord, out of his almightie power, is able to
doe it, that the desire may be satisfied as much,
they may be filled in a lower condition as well as
in a greater, thou shalt feele no more want, but

haue as great a degree of happinesse as the other,
you know, there are sundry expressio^s in that case.
A little Bottle is as well filled as a greater. What
can a man desire more but to be satisfied? And
therein God is All-sufficient, there is in him an
All-sufficiencie to fill every Creature in his owne
spheare, and compasse, when he hath made vessels
of glory, they are not all of one sort, but of divers
sorts, some of one, some of another sort, but
they are all vessels of glory, they haue all experience
of his riches, and of his mercies, so that none
haue cause to complaine.
Last of all; Consider in that meannesse of place,
gifts,A Christians faithfulnesse is accepted in a meane condition. or condition, that thou art in; consider, thou
mayst be as faithfull in a little, as another may be
in much: Consider, that he that hath much, yet
there is nothing his, but the sinceritie wherewith
a man hath vsed that which he hath, werewith he
performes all that he doth: he that hath the gifts
that Eliah and Paul had, that excellency of gifts,
it is not his, but the Churches, all that is his is but
his faithfulnes in dispensing those gifts, they are
not his owne, but they are bestowed vpon him;
and he that hath the lesser measure of gifts, he that
hath the lower part given him to act, while he is
on the stage of this world, is accepted according
to his faithfulnes, every man shall be rewarded
according to his faithfulnes, every man shall be rewarded
according to his faithfulnes and sinceritie: therefore
content thy selfe with a lower condition, say
not that God is not All-sufficient, because thou
hast not a higher degree (...) thou seest here is an
All-sufficiencie in God, to p^eserue thee in all comfort,

and to defend thee from all evill. It may stand
with a great difference of condition, though thou
be not so high as another, though thou haue not
so much grace, though thou haue not so high a
Calling as another, yet even to thee also God is
All-sufficient. So we haue run through all these
three parts of the Covenant; He is All-sufficient
in forgiving; He is All-sufficient in
sanctifying vs; And he is All-sufficient,
in providing for vs
whatsoever we want.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE
FIFTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
I am God All-sufficient.

YOu know, where we left; We proceed
to that which remaines, that
wee may finish the poynt at this
time. There remaine but these
two Deductions from this,Two Deductions. that
God is All-sufficient.
First; This should leade vs to a further knowledge 
of the insufficiencie of the Creature.The insufficiencie of the Creature proved. (That
we will first doe, and after it we will adde but a tryall
to all that we haue said, to see whether we be
indeede perswaded of that All-sufficiencie, that is
in God, and of that vanitie, and emptines that is in
the Creature; And this will be our busines at this
time.) If God be All-sufficient, and that exclusiuely,
as I shewed before, then there is an emptines,

a vanitie, and an indigence in the Creature, there
is nothing in it: and to make this good to you,
consider;
 First; That the Creature is made by some thing
else without it.It is made by another. It is certaine, no creature is able to
make it selfe: for that which makes another, must
be before another; if a creature could make it
selfe, it must be before it selfe, and therefore all
things are made by God; by this All-sufficient God.
Now then, if that which makes the creature be
something without it selfe, then the end of the
creature, must be some thing also without it selfe:
for it is the maker that is the efficient cause of all
things, and in all things that propounds an end
to it selfe, and the end of every ^hing, you know,
is the perfection of the thing; so that here we gather,
that all the perfection of the creature is
without it selfe, for if the end be the perfection,
and the end to which every creature is carried, is
without it selfe, it must needs be, that, it hath no
perfection, nor excellency within it selfe: hence it
is, that every creature is bound to doe something
for another, the inanimate, and vnreasonable creature
for man, and man for God: because all are
made for a further end. The Almightie God himselfe,
the All-sufficient God, that hath no efficient
cause, and, by consequent, no end without himselfe,
he may doe all for himselfe, and for his owne
sake, and his owne glory; if he will dispense with
the creature, and doe good or ill to the creature,
and make himselfe the end of all that he doth. I
say, he may well doe it: for he hath no higher end;

But if any creature shall say, I will seeke no further
end, but to haue an happines and perfection within
mine owne compasse, it is all one, as if the
herbe should say, I will not be beholding to the
Sunne, but I will liue of my selfe, or I will not be
beholding to the rayne, etc. this creature must
needs perish, because his end and perfection is
without himselfe altogether; It is as if the hand
should say, I will seeke a perfection in my owne
spheare, as I am such a part, as I am such a member,
without looking to the soule, that giues life,
or without looking to the rest of the body it subsists
in, this is the way to destroy it: So it is with
every creature; if it seeke a perfection within it
selfe, it is the undoing of it selfe. On the other side;
when it denies it selfe, when it emptieth it selfe,
when it lookes for nothing within its owne compasse,
but goes out of it selfe, and out of every
creature besides, to that Ocean of happines, from
whence it must receiue all the perfection it hath,
I say, therein consists the beatitude, and blessednesse
of the Creature.
 Secondly. As that is one argument, to shew
the emptines of the creature,It is in continuall motion. that the happines of
it is without it selfe altogether, and therefore it
must needs be emptie, so this is another Reason,
which you shall finde in Eccles. 2.Eccles. 2. Every creature,
naming divers of them, the Sunne and the waters,
and the winde, the severall generations of the creatures,
whereof one goeth, and another succeedeth;
thus the Wiseman concludes, sayth he, all things
are full of labor, man cannot vtter it. And he prou^s

it by this, The Sunne riseth, and sets, and is never
at quiet, the Clouds goe about by their circuits, and
never remaine still in their places, the water is still
ranning to and fro, some Rivers are running to the
Sea, some running out of it, so that all things are full
of labour. Now what is the end of all motion, and
of all labour? Beloved, when any man, or any thing
moues it selfe from one place to another, it is out
of a desire, out of an appetite to be there rather
then in the place where it is, there is no appetite
or desire but of something that is wanting: for, if
it had the thing, it would haue no desire to it, and
therefore it is carried to something without it
selfe: So that the motion of the creature is a signe
of the imperfection of it. Besides, whatsoever
moues, it moveth to get that which it hath not,
yet it is in possibilitie to haue it, and it hath it not:
for, if it had it, the creature would rest there, it
would remaine in that terme, it would stand still
vpon the Center; but, because it wants somthing
it hath not, therefore it moues it selfe, and therefore
it labours. Now when you see this is the condition
of every Creature vnder the Sunne, we see
all things are full of labour, and sorrow, and man
that is the Lord of them (you know what is sayd
to him, that in labour he should eate his bread, and all
his life should be full of labour) it is an argument of
the imperfection, and of the vanitie and indigence
of the creature, and that what it hath it must haue
elsewhere.
 Last of all; you shall know it by this, that whatsoever
the creature hath,It hath all by participation. it hath it but by participation,

it hath nothing of it selfe; as in things that
are made hot, some things are more hot, and some
things lesse hot, it is an argument they haue not
hotnes in themselues, but there is something else
that is perfectly hot: for that which hath but a
part, it presupposeth that there is something else
that is the whole, of which that is but the part:
If you looke vpon all the goodnesse, excellency,
and beautie in the Creatures, you see some creatures
haue it more, and some lesse, which is an argument
that there is something else without the
creature that hath a Sea of perfection, that is full
of goodnesse, full of excellency, as the Sunne is
full of light, and as the Sea is full of water, and
this is not within, but without the Creature.
Now the Creature being thus imperfect in it
selfe, it hath somthing communicated to it from
day to day: for if there be a continuall neede,
there is a daily supply that it must haue, and it that
fayle, or be not so good as it needs, the Creature
languisheth. This is so in every kinde: if it be in
matter of life, if meate, or drinke, or Physicke, or
ayre be wanting, the creature dayes for it: for it
hath not in it selfe, it is communicated from another.
And so likewise, if it be contentment, if it be
refreshing, if it be joy, without which no creature
is able to liue; if that be wanting, if God withhold
his hand, that there is not an influence into it, the
Creature languisheth according to the proportion
of that defect; if it be in matters that belong to
eternall life; if the Lord withhold his hand, if he
shut vp his hand, they perish eternally. And so

we may say of all things else. So that this is the
condition of every creature, it is exceeding emptie;
Man himselfe is emptie, and so all other creatures
besides are, there is no happines to be found
in them, there is no satisfaction, there is no contentment
to the soule of a man. If I should goe
through the particulars, you should finde it so.
If you aske, where this happinesse is to be found?
whether in riches, or in matter of estate? Surely,
it is not there:Riches of two sorts. for riches are but of two sorts, either
they are naturall riches, such as meat, drinke,
and clothes; or else they are artificiall riches,
things that consist in exchange, that are invented
by art, to be the measure of them for commutation;
it cannot consist in the naturall; for what
serue they to but to maintain the body? and what
doth the body serue for but for the soule? and if
this were all, what should become of the principall
part of man, that which is indeede the man
himselfe? Besides, it cannot consist in credit, in
estimation, in honour, surely, it cannot consist in
that: for that is in the power of another, and is
not in a mans owne power, and the happinesse
and blessednesse of any thing, the contentment
which consists in the power of another, and that
in the power of the Creature, it cannot make a
man happie, it can giue little contentment to
him.
Besides;Honour of two sorts. As we said of riches, so we may say
of honour, and glory, it is either emptie glory,
as the Scripture often cals it; That is; glory that
is gathered from vaine things, as apparrell, or

houses, or learning, or knowledge: for there is
nothing that brings true prayse, but grace onely,
as nothing drawes shame after it properly but
sinne, it is not in this, for this is a deceivable
thing, it is a shadow that hath no substance to
answer it, or else, it is true honour and credit, and
if it be that, that is but the shadow that followes
the substance. And therefore our blessednes, our
contentednesse, and satisfaction, rests rather in
the thing from whence this credit is gathered,
then in the credit it selfe: for that is but a shadow
that sometimes followes it, and somtimes it doth
not, sometimes it is a larger shadow, and sometimes
a shorter, though the body be the same.
I might goe through many others,The Wiseman proveth the insufficiencie and emptines of the Creature. but I will
rather confirme all this to you, that I haue said of
the emptines of the Creature, by that testimony
that is without all exception, That is; By the testimony
of God himselfe, even the testimony of 
the Scriptures,By three Arguments. in Eccles. 1. 2. where the scope of
the Wiseman is to set out this poynt, that we are
now vpon; That is; The emptinesse of the Creature.
First;1. Argu. Sayth he, vanitie of vanities, all is vanitie.
That is; There is in the Creature an excesse
of vanitie, as you know, that is the height of the
Hebrew Superlatiue, vanitie of vaniti^s. Besides,
it signifieth a heape of vanities, a nest of vanities,
a wondrous exceeding great vanitie, such as he
knew not how to expresse what that vanitie is
that is in the Creature. Beloved, it is a vaine thing,
we say, that cannot profit, and therefore we see in

the 2. verse, What remaines to a man of all his travels,
or what avayles it, or what profits it, according
to that in the Gospell, which is the best expression
of it? Sayth our Saviour, Put the case
thou hadst all the good things in the world, that
all the glory of the world, that all the riches in the
world were in thy possession, yet, sayth he, when
thou shalt loose thy soule, what is all this? It cannot
helpe thee to saue thy soule, what wil it profit
thee? That is; It is an unprofitable thing to make
vs happie. Besides, in this the vanitie of the Creature
is seene, that it is of a mouldring, vanishing
nature. Isa. 40. Rom. 8. those two places expresse
it:Isa. 40. 8. Isa. 40. 6. All flesh is grasse, and all the glory of it
as the flower of the grasse. That is; As it is expressed
in the next Verse, as the grasse is of a fading
nature, so is the Creature it selfe, and as the
Flower of the grasse, sets out all the excellency,
all the gifts, and beautie of the Creature that is
found in it, The spirit of God blowes vpon it, and
the grasse withers, and the flower fades away:
so in Rom. 8. the Creature is subiect to vanitie.
That is; It is of no abiding condition, it withers,
and wasts, and hath nothing in it, to maintaine it.
Besides, it is called vaine: because it is not able
to bring any enterprise to passe. You would
thinke the Creature were able to doe much, but
you see what the Lord sayth; A man thinkes he is
able to build a house, or he thinkes he is able to
watch a Cittie. No; sayth the Lord, if I withdraw
my selfe, thou shalt be able to doe nothing, nor
any Creature whatsoever. What is said of that,

may be said of any thing else. A man thinkes a
Horse is a Creature that will stand him in much
steade in the day of battayle, but a horse is but a
vaine thing. And so it is of all other Creatures,
they are not able to bring any enterprise to passe,
herein is the vanitie of them.
But now this is but the simple expression of vanitie;
Let vs consider (for what can we doe better
since we are vpon this argument) what arguments
the holy Ghost vseth to perswade vs of this
truth, that there is nothing but emptinesse in the
Creature. My Beloved, I beseech you, harken to
it: for all of vs thinke there is too much in the
Creature, we should not seeke it as we doe, our
thoughts and affections should not be so much
stirred about it as they are, if wee did not thinke
there were something in it. I say, consider the arguments
which the holy Ghost vseth, I will but
name the places in briefe to you, you may reade
them in these two Chapters at your leasure, it will
much helpe to bring them to your memory.
First, sayth the holy Ghost, there is nothing but vanitie:
for, sayth the Wiseman, when I looke vpon
the whole universe, vpon the whole frame of
things, this I finde; first, a great instabilitie in
them, one generation commeth, and another goeth,
the Sunne riseth, and the Sunne setteth, there is nothing
constant vnder the Sunne. Now the happinesse
of a man, that which will giue content to
a man, it must be some stable thing: for a man
cannot rest but vpon some Center, vpon some
place, where his soule may finde some quiet, and

therefore an vnstable thing, that is in continuall
passage, is not able to giue it rest.
Secondly;2. Argu. Sayth he, there is no new thing under
the Sunne: (Marke it) for, sayth he, if you goe
through the whole course of things, you shall
finde nothing new, one generation comes, and
another generation succeeds like it. And so forward,
that as in the waues of the Sea, one followes
another, till they be all broken vpon the shore;
so it is in the succession of generations, and there
is nothing in one generation but what was in another,
because, sayth he, the Sunne riseth and sets,
the winds goe to and fro, they goe about by their Circuits.
And so the waters in the springs, and in the
Rivers, they goe and come, and there is no new
thing vnder the Sunne. What shall wee gather
from that? Why this, that there is no satisfaction
to the soule of a man. And therefore, sayth he,
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with
hearing. Those are the onely disciplinall senses
we haue; you know, all the knowledge you haue,
is gathered by the eye and the eare. Now if there
be no new thing vnder the Sunne, but all things
are the same; hence it is that the minde of man
when it looks about it, can finde nothing to giue
it satisfaction, for there must be some newnesse,
some varietie, something, that we haue not here,
that the soule seekes after. But, sayth he, you shall
find nothing but the same, nothing but Identitie.
But,Ob. if it be objected, there is some thing now
that was not before, and there were some things
before that are not now;
The Wiseman answers thus,Ans. those things that
were done then, they are forgotten, they are not had
in remembrance; And so likewise the things that
are now will be forgotten. And therefore there is
no new thing. Indeede, in grace there is some
thing new, there is a new Creature, there are all
things new within and without, there is a new
Iudgement, a new Conscience, new affections,
every thing is new, all things are become new there.
Let him that hath grace, looke about him, and
there is some thing new, he comes into a new
Company, he is brought into a new world, his
eye sees things, his eare heares things that never
entred into any mans heart. That is; into any
naturall mans heart, which onely hath to doe
with naturall things, let him looke into the word
of God, there is a newnesse: for the more you
reade it, the more you desire still to reade it, the
more you heare it, still you finde some new thing
discovered: Looke on the depth of those mysteries,
looke on the consolations of the spirit, still
there is some thing new in all the wayes of God,
that belong to the new Creature, still thou shalt
haue a fresh renewed vigor in every thing, that
satisfieth the soule of a man, and there the eye is
satisfied with seeing, and the eare with hearing.
In all the workes of Nature, there is some thing
new.
The third and last reason that he vseth to shew
the emptinesse of all things under the Sunne,3. Argu. is,
because that which is crooked cannot be made
straight, and that which is defectiue, can none

supply; That is; There are many things in the
Creature, that are crosse to vs, that fall thwart
vpon vs, there are many ils that we finde in our
selues, and in all the things we haue to doe with.
But, sayth he, if you looke vpon the Creature,
there is nothing that is able to make straight that
which is crooked: the daughter of Abraham that
was crooked, all the Creatures both in heaven
and earth, were not able to make her straight.
A perverse and crooked minde, who can make
straight? Crooked Children, who can make them
straight? Crooked affections, inordinate feares,
and inordinate griefes, who can rectifie them?
And so, likewise, who can supply that which is
wanting? When he lookes vpon all this, and sees
it in the nature of the Creature, he concludes vpon
all this, that all is vanitie.
 When he hath done all this, he goes further,
and confirmes all this by experience of his own;By his experience.
and now there were two things wherein Salomon
did excell, which all men would desire vpo^ earth.
That is; Greatnesse of Wisedome; And, secondly,
 Greatnesse of estate; And, sayth he, first before
I come to the particulars, let me say this to
you concerning my experience, and see whether
the arguments that are taken from thence, be not
strong arguments to expresse the vanitie of all
things under the Sunne; Sayth he, I was a King
in Ierusalem, a mightie man, and therefore able
to haue experience of those things that other
men had not, I had oportunities that other men
 had not. Secondly; As I was a King, so I was

such a King as exceeded in all kinde of wealth,
and abundance of all things, as never any before,
or any that came after; so he sayth of himselfe,
and therefore he had more libertie, and more experience,
then any of the sonnes of men besides.
Moreover, he had better meanes to finde out
good and evill vnder the Sunne, because of the
largenesse of his Wisedome.
Last of all, sayth he, I gaue my selfe to this, I se
my selfe to search and finde out,His experience. what is good and evill
to the soones of men. Now, if you would know
what Salomon found, sayth he, there are but two
things wherein this experience consists; That is;
to know what is in wisedome and folly; Secondly,
to know what is in great estate.
First, for matter of wisedome, he concludes 
thus,Of the vanitie of wisedome. he that increaseth in wisedome, increaseth
griefe. That is; Let a man goe either way, sayth
the Wiseman, (speaking of morall and civill wisedome,
not of sanctified wisedome, for that is another
thing.) Now the question is this, among
the Creatures wherein vanitie is seene, sayth he,
he that increaseth knowledge, increaseth sorrow:
for when a man is a wise man, he findes many
defects, he sees all the miseries a-farre off that are
comming vpon him, he lookes to all the corners
of his vnhappines, which are hid from another
that is foolish. And therefore, sayth he, the more
that a man seeth, the more misery he seeth, and
the more misery he seeth, the more his griefe is
increased and multiplied. Besides, he that increaseth
wisedome, increaseth griefe: for he sees many

defects, he seeth many things out of order, many
things in his owne soule, many things in his own
family, many things in the Common-wealth,
many things in the Church, many things in the
course of nature, but all a mans wisedome will
not remedie it; now when a man sees ill, and is
vnable to helpe, in such a case, sayth he, he that
increaseth wisedome, increaseth griefe. Besides, if
the things themselues that are knowne, cannot
giue any filling, any contentment to the soule of
a man: certainly, the knowledge of them cannot
doe it; for the knowledge cannot goe beyond
the thing, there is more in the thing then in the
knowledge of it. But there is a vanitie, and a curse
lyes vpon all the Creatures, and therefore, he that
increaseth wisedome, takes much paines, and hath
little for his labour, it costs him much paines,
much wearinesse in reading, and searching, and
when he hath done all this, as there is a vanitie in
the Creature, which is knowne; so there is in the
knowledge it selfe.
But,Ob. you will say, on the other side, there is
some thing then in folly* if a man be ignorant,
if a man know not that which a wiseman seeth.
No;Answ. there is a madnesse in that, there is no
 happines or contentment there: for such a man
multiplies griefe,Of the vanitie of folly. but it is of another kinde; for
evils come vpon him, and he cannot see how to
prevent them, they lye vpon him, and vndoe him
before he is a-ware, he is full of gray harres, and
knowes it not, as it is sayd of Ephraim. These are
the fruits of folly, he is precipitate, and runs into

mischiefe, he fals into quick-sands, and hath not
eyes to discerne it, So he that increaseth folly,
on the other side, likewise, he increaseth griefe.
This, sayth Salomon, I haue found out, therefore
it is not in folly, nor in wisedome, I gaue my selfe
to know wisedome, and madnesse, and foolishnesse,
I know also, that this is vanitie and vexation of
spirit. That is; both wisedome and folly. Folly,
because it is madnesse, and Wisedome, because
it increaseth griefe.
Now for the other, for the matter of his estate,
I will be very briefe in it,Of the vanitie of outward things. you shall finde there,
that he proues a vanitie in that, by an induction,
going through all the particulars almost that the
sonnes of men enioy vnder the Sunne. And first 
he beginnes with Laughter and Iollitie,Laughter. that which
commonly every man seekes after, sayth he, I
thought, I would indevour my selfe to see if there
were any contentment to be found in that, but it is
not there, sayth he, I sayd of Laughter thou art mad,
and of Ioy, what is this that thou dost? These three
things he sayth concerning Iollitie, concerning
that carnall mirth, wherewith men refresh themselues.
First; Sayth he, I finde it a madnesse: because
it sets a man a-worke vpon trifles, when he hath
greater things in hand, madnes, you know, is humorous,
exulting and reioycing in vaine things,
and intending of idle things, and letting goe
things tending to our profit, as a mad man cares
for nothing belonging to his health, or his
wealth, but bestowes himselfe in picking of

flowers, or in doing some idle things, sayth he,
there is a madnes in this to consider, that in the
middest of sinne, and of danger, and in the midst
of so many great bvsinesses and imployments,
in the midst of that labour that God hath given to
the sonnes of men, for them to be full of mirth
and jollitie, this is madnes. That is one of his
censures of it.
The second is, it is Folly; Folly is a stupiditie,
when stupiditie possesseth the soule of a man,
that it is not able to judge of things that are presented
to him, that is folly, so, sayth he, I found
this is jollitie and carnall mirth, it breeds stupor,
and takes away all taste and relish from me, that
as a man that tasts sweete things, is not able to
finde the relish of his Beere or Meate; so, sayth he,
when I had tasted of jollitie, and carnall mirth,
it caused me to difrelish all things: for that is the
disposition of folly, when it takes away the sense
that we should haue of other things, when it stupifieth
a man; stupiditie and folly we expresse one
by another. Last of all; What doth it? That is,
it passeth away like as musicke, there is nothing
left, it goes and leaues nothing behinde it, yea, it
leaues sadnes, if any thing, and sinne behinde it,
the thing passeth away in a moment, but the sinne
remaines, and continues, This is his censure of
that part, namely, carnall mirth and jollitie.
 Then he comes to the rest, which I will but
name;Wine. Then, sayth he, I gaue my selfe to wine, to
 see if it were in that. After this, I gaue my selfe
to great workes,Great workes to make stately buildings, to shew

my magnificence. After this, to get great store 
of Servants,Store of Servants. great possession of Sheepe, and Beeues,
and to get a great retinue, to liue in much pompe.
After this, I sought all pleasant things; I made 
my selfe Paradises;Paradises, i. e. pleasant Orchards. That is; Orchards, and Vineyards,
and Gardens. Likewise, I sought Singing
men, and singing women. All these things, sayth 
he,Singing men, etc. In those he found. I sought for. And this is the verdict he giues
vpon all this, this I found.
First, that in doing this, I tooke hold of folly,
though my wisedome,Folly. in some measure, restrained
me, yet I tooke hold of folly; That is the nature
of these things, when a man is conversant
with them, they depriue him of wisedome, they
leade him on to folly; That is; They draw a man
on to sensible and outward things, to corporall
things, they abstract and withdraw his minde
from God, and from wisedome, and from spirituall
things; this I found, sayth he, that the more
I had to doe with them, the more my wisedome
forsooke me, the more I tooke hold of folly, the
more it grew vpon me, the worse I was by medling
with them, and by being conversant with
them.
Secondly; Sayth he, I found an emptinesse in 
all;Emptinesse. I found them emptie Cisternes, I looked for
contentment in them, but I found none.
Thirdly; not so onely, but I found a vexation 
of spirit,Vexation. for that which is sayd of Riches, that
they are Thornes, (they are such Thornes as doe
not onely choke the good seede, but they pricke
and gall vs) so it may be said of these, they haue

Thornes in them, there is vexation of spirit in
them.
 But he addes further, fourthly, sayth he, I found
they gaue me no rest neither day nor night;Restlesse care. That
is; All the while I was conversant in them, I was
full of care, and trouble, and thoughts; whereas
those that are vacant from such things are at
rest, they haue rest in the night, and in the day,
but I haue none; As if he should say, he that will
be occupied in all things of this nature, he shall
finde a restlesnesse in his soule.
 Fiftly; sayth he, I found that I had my labour
for my travaile;Sore travaile. this fore travaile I had, and that
was all that I had. As if he should say; I found
no comfort to answer it, I found no fruit from
them, I found certaine labour, but vncertaine
refreshments from them: This I found, that they
cost me much trouble, and paines, but when I
came to enioy the fruit of them, to receiue comfort
from them, then they fayled me, then they
deceived me. Moreover, sayth he, I sound no
happinesse in them, no rest: for I was weary of
my selfe, and of my life, and of all my labours,
that I had wrought vnder the Sunne: for how
could he finde that there, which was not there?
for if God had ever sowne any happinesse in the
Creature, he might haue reaped it from the creature,
but in all these things it was never sowne:
the Creature may giue as much as is in it, but to
giue more is impossible. And therefore, sayth he,
I fought diligently to see, if there were such a
thing there, but I found it not.
Againe; Sayth he, moreover, when I had gotten 
all this,No comfort. yet I found this, that I was not able
to take comfort in it: for I saw that was the gift
of God; That is; Further than he gaue me power
to receiue any comfort from all the things that
my hand had gotten, further I could not: for,
sayth he, who hasted after outward things more
then I? the meaning is this, I indevoured, to the
vttermost of my power, to finde out contentment
in the Creature, who could doe it more,
with more diligence, who could hast after outward
things more, and with more attention seeke
for all the contentments that are to be found in
the Creature then I? And yet, sayth he, I found
it was not in me, but God dispenseth that according
to his owne pleasure.
The last thing of all, the last argument he hath 
against it,We must leaue them. is, he must leaue all, I must leaue it.
But then comes an objection,1. Ob. I, but I shall
leaue it to my Sonne?
True,Answ. sayth he, there is also a vanitie in this,
for, sayth he, first I tooke paines in equitie, and in
wisedome, and honestie, but I shall leaue it to him
that hath not taken paines for all this. As if he
should say, I shall leaue them the estate that I
haue gotten by wisedome, but I cannot leaue
them my wisedome to guide the estate when
they haue it. This, sayth he, I found in my sonne
for the present, this I saw in Rehoboam.
But whereas it may be said,2. Ob. who knowes what
he may be?
Sayth he,Answ. this is a mi^ery, that I know not what

he will proue; or, put case I could know what he
would proue, who knowes what his sonne may
proue? So that all this estate that I haue gotten,
it shall not stay with them, it may be: for this is
the nature of Gods blessings (marke it) that they
abide not but vpon that Center where God hath
set them; if they come to a man that is wicked
in his sight, they are vpon a Center, they are in
a place where they will not rest, they will not a^ide;
fire, if be out of its place, water, if it be out
of its place, it is still wrastling, (though for a time
it may be kept there) till it returne to its owne
place; So it is with all those outward blessings;
It is true, evill men may haue them, and perhaps
their heires may haue them, but, if they be not
right in Gods sight, these things will roule from
them, they will not be at rest, as it were, they
will not be established there, but they will goe to
their proper Center. This he expresseth in the
last Verse, This is a vanitie (sayth he) that a man
must gather, and heape vp, to giue vnto him that is
good before God, this also is vanitie. So that, if he
had knowne what a one his sonne would haue
proved, yet he knew not what his other sonne
would haue proved, and that all his estate should
abide with him. Now, in all this, yet, sayth he,
two things I haue observed. And, Beloved, what
 shall I say more?What due is to be given and acknowledged to be in the Creature, declared in two things. What can I say more then Salomon
said in this poynt, to teach vs the vanitie,
and the emptines of the Creature; yet wee must
not take from the creature more then we should,
we must giue its due to it, yet, sayth he, two

things haue I found: One is, that wisedome is better
then folly; As if he should say; Looke vpon the
whole vniverse, and see the varietie of the Creatures
vnder the Sunne, with the Creatures and
the workes of the Creatures, this I finde, that
wisedome is best of all; though wisedome be a
vanitie, though it be vaine, because it cannot
helpe vs to true happines, it fals short there, yet,
sayth he, it is the best thing vnder the Sunne,
as the light is better then darknesse, and the sight
better then blindnesse: for, sayth he, wisedome
teacheth a man to direct his way, it guids a man,
when another man knowes not how to goe to
his journeyes end: wisedome teacheth a man
how to avoyde mischiefe, when a man that is in
the darke, stumbleth vpon it, and cannot see it;
That is the reason he giues; And yet, sayth he,
there is a vanitie in it, sayth he, if you looke vpon
the wisest man, and the most foolish, the same event
befals them, the same sicknesse, the same
troubles, and vexation, the same death, as dyes
the one, so dyes the other; That is; for the outward
appearance of their condition there is no
difference; Againe, there is a forgetfulnesse of
both, both are swept away, both passe, and are
blowne over, and they are even alike, the wiseman
as well as the foole; But, sayth he, there is
this difference, Wisedome is the best of all vaine
things vnder the Sunne.
The second thing, that he hath found, is, that 
to enioy them, to take the comfort, the profit,
the benefit, and refreshment, that may be had

from all the blessings of God, that he hath given
vnder the Sunne, it is a better way, and there is
lesse vanitie in it, then to heape vp still, and not
to enioy it. This I found, sayth he, that this is the
best way for a man, to take the present benefit,
this is the wisest way, so that this be remembred,
that you enioy them with weaned affections,
that you doe not so enioy them as to commit Idolatry
with them: for, if you doe so, indeed then
there is a vanitie in them; for then the Lord
lookes vpon you with a jealous eye, as that he
will destroy both the things, and the man, as a
jealous man will destroy the adulterer and adulteresse.
There is a vanitie in them then, but to
enioy them with weaned affections, this, sayth
he, I found to be the wisest thing vnder the Sun,
rather then to heape vp, and increase possessions,
and not to enioy them. This is that which Salomon
sayth. If a man say now; But I finde contentment
and satisfaction, though Salomon found
none, I finde I haue a sweetnes in enioying pleasure,
and mirth, and a high estate: Why, consider,
if thou doe, I will say but this to thee, it is an
argument, that thou committest Idolatry with
them, and therefore God hath made thee like to
the very things themselues. You shall finde the
Psalmist speaking of Idols, say; They haue eyes and
see not, they haue hands and handle not; and he
addes this, they that trust in them are like to them.
That is; This is the curse of God vpon those that
worship Idols, the Lord giues them vp to as much
stupiditie, as is in the Idols, that, they haue eyes

and see not, that they haue eares and heare not.
So, I say, when a man will so enioy these things,
that he can finde contentment in them, that he
can terminate his comfort in them; let him know
this, that is an argument, that he is made like
to them, that the curse of God is come vpon him,
or else, it may be, because thou hast not summed
vp thy accounts, thou hast not looked backe vpon
them, as Salomon did, thou hast not yet runne
through the course of them; if thou hast full experience
of them, and the end of them, as he
had, thou wouldst finde them vanitie, and vexation
of spirit. So much for the first, the emptines
and vanitie of the Creature.
I say this,2. Deduction There is a fulnesse in God, as there is an emptinesse in the Creature. if God be All-sufficient, it should lead
vs vnto a further knowledge of the Creature, and
so likewise it should leade vs to a further knowledge
of Almightie God. That is; To see a contrary
fulnesse in him, I must runne briefly through
this, Labour to see him in his greatnesse, labour
to see him in all his Attributes, to see him in his
vnchangeablenes, to see him in his eternitie, in
his power, in his providence. You shall see in
Psal. 102. 21.Psal. 102. 24. what vse the Psalmist there makes
of the Attributes of God; I said O my God, take me
not away in the midst of my dayes, thy yeares indure
from generation to generation, thou hast before times
laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens
are the worke of thy hands, they shall perish, but thou
shalt indure, even they all shall waxe olde as a Garment.
The meaning is this, when a man hath
proceeded to this, that he sees the vanitie of the

Creatures, he lookes vpon them all, as that they
will all weare and waxe old as a Garment. A garment
that is new at the first, with long wearing,
you know, will be spent, and will breake into
holes, and at length be fit for nothing, but to be
cast away. So, sayth he, shall the whole body of
the Creatures be. Now, when we consider this,
that it is a mans owne case, and every Creatures,
let a man helpe himselfe with this, that God is eternall,
and remaines for ever, and therefore, if
a man can get to be ingraffed into him, to dwell
with him, that will helpe him out of that weakenesse,
and mutabilitie, and changeablenesse that
is in the Creature; and therefore in Psal. 90. sayth
he,Psal. 90. Lord thou art our habitation from generation to
generation. As if he should say; When a man
dwels with God, he is a safe house, a Castle, that
when generations come, and goe, and times over
our heads, there is a change of all things, yet he
is a Rocke, he is a Castle, he is a Habitation, there
is no change in him; So that, when you finde
these defects in the Creature, goe home to him,
and labour to see his immutabilitie, and eternitie.
And so, likewise, when thou seest thy inabilitie
to doe any thing, when thou seest that weakenesse
in the Creature, that it is not able to bring
any enterprise to passe,Gods All-sufficiencie, proved by his providence. then looke vpon his providence,
and his almightie power, in that he doth
all things that belong to him, he guides them.
My Beloved, the serious setting of our selues to
consider the providence of God, and his almightie
power, will discover to vs his All-sufficiencie

more then any thing besides. In briefe, consider
this (to perswade you a little of the necessitie of
it, that you may be fully convinced of it, that every
particular, and every common thing, must
needs be guided by him,Gods providence, proved and directed by him;
I would aske but this question) First, are not all 
made by him?By the Creation. you will grant that, that every
Creature, even the smallest, are from him, there
is no entitie but from him: Certainely, then there
is an end of it: for he made nothing but for some
end; and, if there be an end of it, he must guide
it, and leade it to the end, otherwise, he should
leaue the building imperfect, otherwise he should
but begin a worke, and leaue it in the middle, otherwise
the Creature should be lost, and perish,
and that through a default of his. But there cannot
be said to be any default, any want of goodnesse
in him, in the great builder of things, and
therefore, it must needs be ^hat he guides every
Creature vnder the Sunne, even the smallest of
the Creatures, he guides, and directs them to
their ends. Providence is nothing else, but to
guide, governe, and direct every Creature to their
severall ends, and businesses, to which he hath
appointed them. Besides, how is it that you see
things sitted one to another as they are? Is it not
the providence of God? When vousee the wheeles
of a Watch fitted one to another, when you see
the sheath fitted to the sword, you say this is some
Art, this is not by accident; Even so it is in nature,
you see a fitting of one thing to another, in
the body, in the Creatures, in every thing in all

the senses, in the Sunne with the ayre, in the eye
with the light and the colours, with the transparent
medium.
 The fitting of one thing to another, shewes
that there is an Art that doth it,The constant course of things. the providence
of God. Besides, the constancy of things; we see,
they goe their course. Those things that come
by accident, that come by chance, and not by
providence, they fall out vncertainely, now one
way, and then another, but, we see, all the workes
of nature, goe in a certaine constant course.
 And, lastly; Looke but vpon a house, or a family;The necessitie of one gouernour and disposer of things
if there be not a providence, it will quickly
be dissolved; there is not any family, but it will
be so; and therefore, there is a neede of government
also in the great family of the world: and
if there be a government, it must needs be by
him: for by man it cannot be governed: for the
preservation of every thing is in the vnitie of it,
and therefore, you see, any thing that is divided,
that is the dissolution of it, as when the soule is
divided from the body, and when the body is divided
from it selfe; So, likewise, in a family, or
in a Common-wealth, when it is divided,
looke how farre it goes from vnitie, so neere it
comes to perishing, and the more peace, and vnitie,
the more safetie. Now, if there were not
one guider of all these, if there should be many
guiders, there would be different streames, there
would be divers well-heads, and if there were divers
principles of things, that swerue this way,
and that way, there would be a division in the

nature of things, there would not be a vnitie, and
by consequence, it would be the destruction of
them. And therefore, of necessitie, first there
must be a government, or else how could the family
stand; and if there be a government, it
must not be by man; and if it be not by man, it
must be by one that is God.
Now the objections in briefe;Ob. we see many
things are casuall, and you may strengthen the
objection out of Eccles. 9. 11.Eccles. 9. 11. I see (sayth he)
that the race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the
strong, nor yet riches to a man of vnderstanding,
but time, and chance befals every thing.
To this,Answ. I answer, in a word, that it is true,
there are chances that fall out in all these things,
that we call properly casuall, or accidentall, when
some thing comes betweene a cause, and the effect,
and hinders it. As when a man is going a
journey, and an Axe-head fall off, and either
wounds him, or kils him, it comes betweene the
effect, and the cause, betweene his doing, and
that which he intended; if the fire be burning,
and water cast vpon it, and hinders it, that is casuall,
because it takes off the cause from its intention;
So it is in this, wherein the Wiseman instanceth,
when a man is strong, and some accident
comes betweene, and hinders him from obtaining
the battaile, when a man hath wisedome,
and some accident comes betweene, and hinders
him from obtaining favour; This is that which
we properly call chance. Now it is true, there is
such a chance in the nature of the thing, but yet,

consider this, though this chance be contrary to
the particular causes, yet it hath a cause, and it
riseth from the vniversall cause; so that it is called
chance; because it thwarts, and comes betweene
the intention of the particular cause, but
it doth not differ from the intention of the vniversall:
for those accidentall things haue a cause,
as well as the things that we intend, haue a cause:
somewhat there is that is the author of all causes,
that is the first of all causes, and therefore it
is impossible, that any thing should be totally by
accident. And therefore, I say, whensoever you
finde this, it is so farre from being casuall, if you
looke into it exactly, that then the providence of
God is most seene in it of al others, so far is it from
comming by chance; because those things that
are done by particular causes, according to their
intention, we vsually ascribe it to them, but when
there is an intercurrent action comes, that we
call chance, that belongs to the vniversall cause,
and is to be ascribed to him, and hence it is, that
the Lord vsually in the dispensing and administring
of contingent things, he turnes things rather
by accidentall causes, by casuall things, then
by those causes that haue influence into their
effects; because his owne hand is most seene in
it, he gets the greatest glory by it, when he turnes
greatest matters by a small accident, as we turne
a great Ship by a little Rudder, therein his power
and his glory is seene. And therefore, I say, when
you see such a vanitie in the Creatures, labour to
see the more fulnes in God; if there be such an

emptines, such a mutabilitie, such an instabilitie
in the Creature, looke vpon his immutabilitie,
and his eternitie, and labour to be partakers of it.
When you see such an inabilitie in the Creature,
to bring its enterprises to passe, labour to see his
almightie providence, and to be perswaded of it,
to think with thy selfe, there is not the least thing
without this, there is not the least Creature that
makes a motion, this way, or that way, but as it
is guided and directed by him.
I would willingly adde but this one word concerning
the tryall, when we haue said so much of
the All-sufficiencie of God, and of the emptines of
the Creature,Examination, or Tryals of our beliefe of Gods All-sufficiencie. All the question is now how farre
we practice this: Let every man examine his
owne heart, and aske himselfe these questions.
First, if a man beleeue that All-sufficiencie that
is in God, why doth he terminate his affections 
in the Creature? If there be nothing in the Creature,
but emptines, why doe you loue the Creature?
why doe you feare the Creature? why doe
you reioyce in the Creature immediately as you
doe? Beloved, if there be nothing in that, but all
be in him, we should see through the Creature,
we should looke beyond it. It is that which is
said of Shisack, 2 Chron. 12. he was but the viall,
through which Gods wrath was powred vpon Israell;
so it was true of Cyrus, he was but the viall,
through which Gods goodnesse was powred vpon
Israell. If you did looke vpon every man, vpon
every friend, and every enemy, vpon every
Creature, he is an instrument of good, or hurt to

you, but as an emptie viall in it selfe, through
which God powres either his goodnes, and mercy,
or else his wrath, it would cause you not to
sticke vpon the Creature, not to wrangle with
men, not to hate men, or to be angry with them:
for that is but the viall: It would cause you againe
not to be proud of the friendship of men,
not to be secure in them, not to trust in them,
not to thinke your selues safe in them: for they
are but vials, through which God powres his
mercy, and goodnesse towards you. Consider
whether you be able to doe this. Looke on David,
when Naball sent him a rough answer, an
vntoward answer, he was exceedingly moved at
it: When Shemei did the same, yea, and to his
face, in a farre greater measure, he was not moved,
what was the reason of it, but, because when
he looked to Naball, he forgat God, he saw not
God setting Naball a-worke to giue such an answer,
he looked not to Naball as a viall, but as if
he had beene the principall in the action in hand,
and therefore he was ready to fly vpon him with
impatience (as you know how angry he was with
him) but when Shemei did curse him, he had reason,
he thought, to be quiet, and not in the other
case: because he looked on Shemei as a viall:
God (sayth he) hath bid him doe it, and therefore
he goes to God, and not to Shemei.
Beloved, if you doe beleeue this All-sufficiency
in God, and this emptines in the Creature, why
are you not able to doe this, not to loue the creature,
not to terminate I say, your affections in

them, but to vse this world as though you vsed it
not. That is; All the things in the world, all the
men in the world? for indeede you would vse
them, as if you did not vse them, if you did see
an emptines in them, and a fulnes and an All-sufficiencie
in God.
Secondly; If we doe beleeue there is an All-sufficiencie
in God, why doe we goe out from him
to take in present commodities, to avoyde present
dangers? Why doe we not serue him with
the losse of all these? For if he be All-sufficient,
it is no matter what thou loosest, thou hast enough,
if thou hast him. You may see it in Paul
(to resemble it to you, to shew you what I would
haue said) sayth he, we serue the living God, we
take much paines in our Ministery, we suffer
much, but haue nothing but imprisonment, nothing
but fastings, and whippings, and stonings;
and why doe we it? for we trust in the living God,
and we thinke him to be All-sufficient: when he
sayth, we trust in him, that is implyed. I say, now
looke to thy selfe, art thou able to serue him,
without looking to present commoditie? Art
thou able to doe as they did, when they were
sent emptie, and yet were willing to doe the
worke, and were content to haue no wages given
them, because they trusted in God, and thought
he was sufficient? you see, our Saviour put them
vpon it; it is true, they lacked nothing, but yet
that was the tryall. Moses, when he might haue
had present commoditie, he left all, he left the
Court of Pharaoh, he left Egypt, and went emptie

away, he did not turne aside to these present
Commodities, why? because he thought the
Lord was All-sufficient. And so Abraham, he left
his Fathers house, and came into a Land, where
he had not a foote; because he thought God was
All-sufficient; God speakes to him, vpon that occasion,
feare not Abraham, thou art in a strange
Countrey, where thou hast no body to provide
for thee, yet I will be All-sufficient. Those that
wandered vp and downe in sheepes-skinnes, and in
Goats-skinnes; no question, they might haue had
outward comforts aswell as others, if they would
haue tooke that course that others did, but they
were willing to leaue all present commodities:
because they trusted in God, that he was All-sufficient.
They suffered (sayth the Apostle Heb. 11.)
the spoyling of their goods, they lost all, and wandered
vp, and downe, and had nothing but dens
to lye in, in stead of houses, and sheepe-skinnes, in
stead of cloathes. This they did, because they
thought him to be All-sufficient.
I say, Consider whether thou be able to doe
this, to let goe present wages, present comforts,
and commodities, and not to turne aside to them:
for, if God be All-sufficient, what neede is there
of them? If there be enough in him, why should
you step out to them? Moreover, if God be All-sufficient,
why doe we sticke so much vpon particular
meanes, to say, if such meanes be not vsed,
I shall be vndone, if he be All-sufficient, it is no
matter what the meanes be, he is able to bring
it to passe. It is vsuall with men to say, if such a

thing sayle me, I am vndone, and if such an evill
be not removed. What are these but particulars?
this sticking vpon particulars is a signe we thinke
him not All-sufficient. Isa. 60. 10. See what an
expression there is for matter of meanes, He that
walkes in darkenesse, and sees no light, let him trust
in the Lord God; he that walkes in darknesse, and
hath no light, yet, if God be All-sufficient, put the
case, there be no meanes at all, put the case there
be vtter emptines, that there be not a sparke of
light, but that thou walkest in darknesse and seest
nothing to helpe thee, if he be All-sufficient,
trust in him, let him that hath no light, but walkes
in darkenesse, trust in the Lord: for he is then able
to helpe him.
Againe, if we thinke him to be All-sufficient,
when we loose any particular means, it is but the
scattering of a beame, it is but the breaking of a
Bucket, when the Sunne and the fountaine is the
same. Why should we be troubled at it? If we
did thinke him to be All-sufficient, when one
meanes is broken, cannot he finde out another,
if he be All-sufficient? When he said to Paul, that
all the soules with him should be safe, you see,
there were divers meanes, all were not able to
swim to the shore, and the Ship was not able to
bring them to shore, but yet, by broken boards,
and by one meanes, and another, all got to the
shore; So the Lord brings things to passe in a
strange manner, sometimes one way, sometimes
another, he breakes in peeces many times the
Ship, that, we thinke, should bring vs to shore,

but casts vs on such boards as we did not expect;
so he doth in the meanes both good and evill,
somewhat comes in, and brings vs helpe that we
never thought of. An enemy comes in and doth
vs hurt, that we never dreamed of, and those,
that we had our eye fixed vpon, it may be, doe
neither of them.
 And so likewise, if God be All-sufficient, if he
be thus exceeding great, consider, if thou see
thine owne vilenesse, thy ignorance, thy emptinesse,
in comparison of him. When Agur looked
vpon God, and saw his greatnes, Pro. 30. he cryes
out, that he had not the vnderstanding of a man in
him. When Iob saw him in his greatnes, he abhorred
himselfe in dust, and ashes, he had spoken once,
and twice, but he would speake no more. And so Abraham,
when God appeared to him, sayd, I am
but dust, and ashes; whether art thou able to say
thus when thou lookest vpon God in his greatnes?
First, art thou able to say, I haue not the vnderstanding
of a man in me; That is; Canst thou see
the emptinesse, and vanitie of thy owne knowledge?
Canst thou learne not to murmur against
God, in any of his wayes? Canst thou learne to
captivate, and bring vnder thy thoughts to the
wayes of Gods providence? Canst thou doe, as
Iob did, saying, I haue heretofore taken exceptions,
and murmured, and was discontented, and
wondered at the wayes of God, and the workes of
his hands, I haue done this once, or twice, but
now I will doe so no more? Iob knew God as well
as we know him, but when God spake out of the

whirle-winde, and made knowne his greatnes to
him, this was the fruit of it to Iob, though he had
spoken once, or twice, that is, before that time,
yet now he would doe it no more. Canst thou
be content to see the Lord going all the wayes
that he doth, setting vp evill men, and putting
downe good men, causing the Churches to wither,
and the enemies to prosper? Canst thou see
all this, and yet sanctifie him in thine heart. Art
thou able to say, that he is holy in all his wayes,
and in this to see the greatnesse of God, and thy
owne folly and weakenes? Canst thou say, that
thou art but dust, and ashes, and to say it in good
earnest? Canst thou looke on thy selfe as on a vile
Creature, as Peter did, saying, Goe from me: for
I am a sinfull man? Then I will beleeue, that thou
hast seene God in his greatnes, I will beleeue that
thou hast seene him in his All-sufficiency, that he
hath represented himselfe by his spirit into thy
soule, in some measure, when thou seest these
effects in thy soule, when thou seest thy ignorance,
and thy vilenes, when thou seest what an
emptie Creature thou art, sure this is another
thing, by which thou mayst judge, whether thou
hast experience, whether thou hast practised this
doctrine, that we haue delivered of the All-sufficiencie
of God, and of the emptines of the Creature.
Moreover, if God be All-sufficient, why are 
we then so readie to knock at other mens dores?
Why are we then so readie to goe to the Creature,
to seeke helpe, and comfort, and counsell

from it, and to knocke so little at his doore by
prayer, and seeking to him? for, if he be All-sufficient,
thou shouldst be abundant in prayer, thou
wouldst take little time to looke to others, thy
chiefe busines would be to looke to him, not onely
in praying to him, but in serving him, and
pleasing him: We knocke at his doore as well by
the duties of obedience, as by prayer, and seeking
to him; if thou thinkest him to be All-sufficient,
why dost thou not doe this?
 Againe, if thou thinke him to be All-sufficient,
why art thou not content to be at his immediate
finding? Put the case, he deprive thee of all
things else, and doe with thee, as Parents doe
with their Children, who giue them not a penny
in their purse, but tell them they will provide
for them, why art thou not content that God
should doe so? What, if he strip thee of all thy
wealth, of thy libertie, of thy friends, so that thou
canst looke for nothing but immediately at his
hands, to feede thee as he feeds the Ravens, and
the Lyons; if he be All-sufficient, why dost thou
not trust in him, in such a case, and rest vpon
him?
 Againe, lastly, if thou thinkest God to be All-sufficient,
why dost thou not when thou hast any
service, or dutie to doe, either belonging to God,
or man, why dost thou not resolue vpon the doing
of it, without looking to the consequence
whatsoever it be? For, my Beloved, if he be All-sufficient,
then all our care should be nothing but
to doe our dutie, and to leaue the successe to him.

A servant that thinkes his Maister is able, and
willing to giue him wages, and provide for him
sufficiently at the end of the day, or the yeare,
or the end of his service, he will be carefull to
doe his worke, without looking to his wages,
without making provision for himselfe, and so,
if thou beleeue God to be All-sufficient, thou wilt
seeke no more but to finde out what thy dutie is,
what rule thou oughtest to walke by, what service
thou owest to man in such a case, how to keepe
a good conscience in such a businesse, in such a
straight, in such a difficultie, thou wilt set thy
wits a-worke to finde out this, but when thy wit
is over-running thy dutie, and thou lookest to
the consequence (if I doe this and this, this will
befall me) that is a signe thou thinkest not God to
be All-sufficient, thou thinkest thy Maister cannot
provide for thee, but thou thinkest I shall be
poore, when I haue done his service, and therefore
I will provide for my selfe, I shall want comforts,
I shall haue enemies come in vpon me; if
thy Maister be a Sunne, a Shield, and a Buckler,
and an exceeding great reward, and thou beleevest
him to be so, thou wouldst finde out onely thy
dutie, and it is no matter what the consequence
is; So you see the three men did, we haue resolved
that we will not worship thine Image, and
whereas you tell vs of casting vs into a burning
fiery Fornace, that we care not for, God is able to
deliver vs, they did see Gods All-sufficiencie, and
therefore they did the dutie. Certainely, Belovid,
in any difficult case, no man will doe his dutie,

except he be perswaded that God is All-sufficient;
Those three men would never haue refused
to worship the Idoll, except they could haue
said, and thought in their hearts, God is able to deliver
vs out of thy hands, O King. This they sayd,
and resolved to doe. And so Daniell resolved to
doe his dutie, and not to goe a steppe out of the
path, besides the Rule; Well; he shall be cast into
the Lyons denne; yet he keepes his resolution
firme; it was enough for him to doe his dutie,
for the consequence of it, he left it to God: for he
knew he was All-sufficient. You see, God watched
over them, and delivered them all. And so likewise,
in refusing to eate of the Kings meate, Daniell
would not pollute himselfe, it was not lawfull
for him being a Iew, it might haue cost him
life, for ought he knew, if he had looked on the
his consequence, but he resolved to doe it: Sayth
the Text, he resolved in his heart to doe it, and committed
it to God. And we see in all these three cases,
God shewed himselfe sufficient: So he doth,
when we looke to our dutie sincerely, and faithfully,
when we doe it, and looke not to the consequence,
he is then All-sufficient, and will shew
himselfe to be so. And the like we see in the case
of Mordecai, he thought it was a sinne to bow to
Hamman, who was an Amalekite, he would not
doe it; Well, but they shall all be destroyed, he,
and all the Iewes; He tels Hester confidently, the
Church should be delivered, but he knew not
how, but, sayth he, if it be not by thy hands, thou
shalt fare the worse for it, but certainly, sayth he,

deliverance shall come to the Church, one way,
or other, God is All-sufficient; Herevpon she resolueth,
saying in effect, whatsoever be the consequence,
I will doe it, it is my dutie. And, you
know, God shewed himselfe All-sufficient in delivering
her, and him, and all the people of the
Iewes: So, I say, if thou wouldst finde out whether
thy heart beleeue all this, that is delivered,
whether thou doe practise it, or no; Consider,
if thou canst doe it now or no: Consider, what
thy dutie is vpon every occasion, and never looke
to the consequence, either to the losse of preferments,
of riches, or favour: for God is All-sufficient,
he can bring it in. Be it againe, on the other
side, such crosses, and losses are like to follow
vpon it, yet he is All-sufficient,
so that thou dost it more or
lesse according to thy
opinion of his All-sufficiencie.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE
SIXTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
Walke before me, and be thou perfect.

WE haue alreadie finished the first
part of these words, God is All-sufficient.
Which words containe the
Covenant on Gods part, I will
be All-sufficient, which here is
expressed in the generall, but in other places more
particularly, as I shewed you then when we handled
the words:
The other part of the words containeth the
Covenant, or condition required on our part;
Walke before me, and be thou perfect. God will be All-sufficient vnto vs, that is his promise, and he requires
of vs, that we should be perfect with him,
he will be All-sufficient to them that depend vpon

him, he will be wholly theirs that will be wholly
his.
So the maine point that we haue to handle, is
that which God requires on our parts, without
which we haue no interest in his Covenant, namely,
that we be sincere and perfect, but before I come
to handle this poynt, which is the maine, I will
touch an observation or two by the way.
And first from the Connexion, I am God All-sufficient;
therefore walke before me, and be thou perfect
(I will but touch it, because I handled the negatiue
part of it at large.)
This we may obserue, that
Every man is more or lesse perfect,Doct. as he is more or
lesse perswaded of Gods All-sufficiencie.Men are more or lesse perfect, as they are perswaded of Gods All-sufficiencie.
You see, that is made the ground of our perfect
walking with God, that we beleeue him to be All-sufficient,
and therefore, I say, as our perswasion
of that is more or lesse, so every man more or lesse
is perfect with God; That is; Looke how a mans
faith in Gods promises, and in his providence, is
more or lesse, looke how he hath found, by his experience,
God to be more sufficient to him, or lesse,
so is every mans walking with God more or lesse
perfect.
The reason of which is,Reas. 1. partly, because it is
Gods argument: when God vseth any argument,It is Gods argument.
looke how farre that takes place in the heart, looke
how farre the vnderstanding is convinced of it,
so farre it prevailes also with the will and affections,

and so farre it prevailes with the practise, and
conversation of a mans life: When God shall make
this the ground of our perfectnes, so farre, I say,
as a man is convinced of it, so farre as he is perswaded
of it, so farre it will prod^ce this effect, to
make him perfect, and sincere in his walking with
God.
Againe,Reas. 2. partly, the reason of it, is, because it
heales that which is the cause of all our vnperfectnesse,This perswasion heales selfe-loue.
and vnevennesse, which is selfe-loue.
The reason why men walke not constantly, and
perfectly with God, is because they loue themselues
inordinately, they thinke to provide better
for themselues: when a man is fully perswaded of
Gods All-sufficiencie, it answers all those false reasonings,
all those deceitfull arguments that selfeloue
is readie to bring to vs, vpon every occasion;
there is no man departs from God, but he thinkes,
at that time, it is better for him so to doe: when it
shall be answered him, God is All-sufficient, it is
better for thee to keepe in the straite way, if thou
seeke thy selfe, by disobeying of him, it shall be
worse for thee, let all the false reasonings of selfeloue
be answered, and the heart must needs be
perfect.
The Vse of it,Vse. in briefe, is that we should labour
to be perswaded of this truth,To labour for this perswasion. and apply it to
make vse of it, vpon every occasion: when any
command is presented vnto vs, when any thing
is to be done, run to this principle, to be perswaded
of Gods All-sufficiencie, that shall helpe thee
to doe every dutie, that shall preserue thee from

every sinne: for example, God hath commanded
vs to deny our selues in our profit, in our credit,
and our pleasures; and many times it comes that
we are to performe this dutie in particular cases,
consider seriously then of the strength of this principle,
that God is All-sufficient; it will make thee
able to doe the dutie throughly. What though
thou be a looser in thy credit? if God be All-sufficient,
he is able to make it vp. What though thou
be a looser in thy profit, as Amaziah was? is not
he able to giue thee fourescore talents, sayth the
Prophet to him? What though thou be a looser
in thy pleasures, that thou loose, or want the pleasures
of sinne for a season; is not he able to make it
vp with peace of conscience, and ioy in the holy Ghost?
And so againe; We are commanded to take vp
our daily crosse, and not to take base and sinfull courses
to avoyd crosses, and troubles, and affl^ctions,
when we meete with them in right and straight
wayes, and surely, the way to performe this dutie
is to be perswaded of Gods All-sufficiencie, let a
man thinke that God is able to defend and carry
him out, that he is able to keepe him in the time
of those sufferings, that it is he that keepes the
keyes of the prison doore, that opens, and shuts,
when he pleaseth, it is he that makes whole, and
makes sicke; the issues of life and death, belong to
him: Every mans iudgement, though he seeke the
face of the Ruler, yet it is from hi^: let men consider,
that it is not the creature that inflicts any
crosse, or affliction, or punishment vpon vs, but
it is he that doth it by the creature, and that will

inable a man to beare any crosse, to passe through
all varietie of conditions, and not to divert from
a straight way, but to goe through the storme
when he meets with it.
And so we may say of every other dutie, to exercise
the duties of our particular callings, not for
our owne good, but for the good of others: Beloved,
this is a speciall thing, men loose their liues,
they loose that blessed opportunitie they haue to
grow rich in good workes, that when every day they
might adde much to their treasure, to their reckoning
against the day of Iudgement, whilest they
serue themselues, and seeke themselues altogether,
it is but time lost. Now, I say, what is the reason
that men in the exercise of their callings haue such
an eye to their owne profit, and not to the profit
of others, whom they deale with, that they haue
such an eye to their owne credit, and advantage,
and not to others good? it is because they thinke
they must be carefull to provide for their owne esta^e,
to looke to themselues* they haue no bodie
else to doe it: let a man be perswaded that God
takes care for him, that riches are as the shadow
that followes the substance of a mans perfect ailking
with God, that it is he that giues them, it is he
that dispenseth them, it is he that giues the reward,
the wages belongs to him, the care of the
worke onely belongs to vs; if a man would deny
himselfe, and be a looser many times in his calling,
be content to doe many things for the profit
of others, to vse those talents that God that given
him, not for his owne, but for his Maisters

advantage* I say, if he would doe this, he should
finde God All-sufficient, and the perswasion of his
All-sufficiencie is that that strengthens a man, and
makes him constant in the performance of it.
I might giue you the like instances, but I will not
run any further. But this you may take for a sure
rule, there is never any dutie that shall cost a man
any perill, that shall cost him any labour, any losse
that a man will be willing to doe, without the perswasion
of Gods All-sufficiencie, he never doth it
without this perswasion, he never fayles in it but
as farre as he fayles in the beliefe of this. For example.
Abraham when he was put on the hardest taske,
to leaue his Countrey, and his Fathres house, he was
perswaded that God would be with him, and would
blesse him: for God had made him a promise to doe
it, it was easie then to performe it, but afterwards,
when he began to shrinke, and to doubt of this,
that God might fayle him, that he would not be
God All-sufficient to him, as when he went downe
into Egypt, he denied Sarah to be his wife, what
was the cause of this sinne? but because he was afraid,
the God could not defend him. And so David,
how many hard taskes went he through,
with all chearefulnesse, and constancie? but when
he began to fayle of this perswasion, that God was
able to deliver him from Saul, and to bring him
into the Kingdome, then he beginnes to step out
from that dutie, and way of obedience, that he
should haue walked in, to flie to Achis, etc. Therefore
the way, I say, to make our hearts perfect with

God, is to increase this perswasion of Gods All-sufficiencie.
Now this we should doe especially at
these times, when we are to receiue the Sacrament:
for what is the Sacrament, but the seale of
the Covenant, on both parts? It is the seale of the Covenant, on Gods part, he promiseth to be All-sufficient,
and the Sacrament seales this to you;
when it is said to you, take, and eate, this is my bodie,
the meaning is this, Iesus Christ giues himselfe,
and God the Father giues him, and sayth,
take him; That is; Take Christ, with all his: it is
certaine, he is a husband, that is All-sufficient,
he is a field that is full of treasure, and so you must
thinke with your selues, when you come to receiue
the Sacrament, that Iesus Christ himselfe, is
given to you; That is; Iesus Christ, with all his riches,
and treasure, with all his benefits, and priviledges.
Now, when you haue taken Christ, as it
is a free gift, then consider all those particular
benefits, labour to dig that field, and to see all the
varietie of treasures in it, you shall finde that there
is nothing that you can desire, but you shall finde
it in him, you shall finde an All-sufficiency in him,
both for this life, and for the life to come.
Againe; As this is the Covenant, on Gods part,
that is sealed to vs in the Sacrament, so you must
remember, that you put to your seale likewise,
to confirme the condition of the Covenant, on
your part: for so you haue promised, there is a stipulation,
an engagement, remember that you
keepe Covenant, and Condition with him, (for
it is reciprocall): for all Covenants must be

mutuall, they must be betweene two parties, and
remember, that thou put thy seale to it, that thou renew
with God the Covenant, that thou hast made
to walke before him perfectly. Now, the end of the
Sacrament, is to remember this, doe this, sayth
Christ, in remembrance of me; as if he should say;
you will be ever and anon readie to forget this
Covenant.
Another point I desire to obserue, before I
come to handle the maine, is from these words,
walke before me, etc. it is a metaphor I finde very
frequently vsed in Scriptures, and therefore we
will not passe it over, walke before me, and be thou
perfect. Whence we will therefore obserue, that
There is a great similitude betweene a Christians
life,Doct. and walking from place to place.A Christian life like a walke.
I finde not any metaphor in the Scriptures vsed
more frequently, and therefore it should teach vs
some thing: for a metaphor, you know, is but a
similitude that is contracted to one word, it is a
short similitude, folded vp in a word, and somewhat
is to be taught vs, some resemblance there is
that we will labour to expresse, and make some
short vse of it.
When the Lord saith to Abraham, I am All-sufficient;
therefore walke perfectly before me, it is
as if he had said, Abraham, I meane to be a good
Maister to thee, I meane to giue thee sufficient
wages, thou shalt want nothing thou needest;
now be thou carefull to doe thy worke, be not idle,

sit not still, but be working (for that is intimated
by walking) to walke is still to be acting in
some thing, still to be working, to be in employment,
and not sit still, so that this is intimated to
vs, when he sayth, walke before me, that the whole
course of this life is like a Iourney from one place
to another. And againe, every particular action,
is like so may steps taken to that Iourneys end,
and (marke it, I say) looke what the rounds are
in a Ladder, that goe from the bottom to the top,
looke what the paces in a Iourney are, so many
paces goe to make vp the Iourney, so doth every
particular act go to make vp that Christian course
that every man is to fulfill: so then, as every step
a man takes, tends to some scope, or other, either
East, or West, or North, or South, in generall and
in particular, to some particular place, neare some
Cittie, some Towne, or some Roome, so every
action in a mans life, it either tends in generall to
East, or West, that is; to good or evill, it tends to
the service of God, or to the service of Sathan, and,
likewise, in particular, it tends either to this good
dutie, or to avoyde this particular sinne, to this or
that particular service of God, of Sathan, or of our
selues, every action we doe.
So that not onely the greater actions (marke it)
but even the lesser, every one of them, it is like a
pace in a Iourney, which that I may make plaine
to you, you must know, that all the actions we do,
either be actions that belong to our generall, or
to our particular calling, or such as fit vs to them.
Now take the lowest and the meanest action,

your eating and drinking, your sleepe and recreation,
they all are steps that tend to this Iourney,
that tend to this scope, they are steppes, every one
of them is a step nearer to God, and to heaven, if
they be rightly vsed; and from him, if they be not
vsed as they ought. Whether you eate or drinke, or
whatsoever you doe, doe it to the glory of God. Wha^
ever you doe, marke that supreame scope, so that
all actions tend to one or other of these; now you
make no question, but even those co^mon actions
are steppes that lead to the Iourney, even as you
see, take a servant that is set to worke, or to goe a
Iourney, that is to mowe, or to driue a Cart, even
the whetting of the sithe, is a part of his worke, as
well as his mowing of the grasse, the provendring
of his horse, is a dispatching of his Iourney, a going
on in it, as well as when he rides, and so the
oyling of the wheele, is a drawing on, as well as
every steppe he takes: so, I say, it is in these common
actions, that we make lesse account of, our
sleeping, our eating, our drinking, our recreation,
every one of them, is a steppe in the Iourney.
I speake it for this end, that we may not neglect
any action, that we may not despise the least of
our actions: for there is not one of them, but it is
a pace, or a steppe: so that this you must make account
of; every day you finish a great part of your
space: for you doe many actions, and looke what
actions you doe, see what they be, examine them
at night: for every actions is a step, and either you
step towards God in it, or you step from him; either
you step towards heaven, or towards hell: therefore

looke to every action. But this is in generall.
Now in particular (to bring this similitude a
little nearer) you must consider in a walke from
one place to another, when you goe in a Iourney,
you haue these particulars.
First; There must be a place, a terme to which
you walke, some whither, whither a man goes.
Againe; There must be a place, or terme from
which a man comes.
Againe; There is a distance: for in a point, or
a little space a man cannot walke.
Againe; There must be a ground to walke vpon.
And there must be a path: for in particular
Iourneys, as from Thebes to Athens, there is a
straight path-way to walke to it, etc. These particulars
we will expresse to you in this course of a
Christian life.
 First; I say, there must be a place to which a man
goes,That which he goes to. terminus ad quem, as we call it, and that is to
grace, we travaile to grace, we travaile to the service,
and glory of God, and we travaile to salvation,
these I finde in the Scripture to be the ends,
and the aymes, and the scope, and marke, at which
every man is to looke in his Iourney, in the course
of his life: Labour to grow in grace, which enableth
vs to serue God, without which we can doe
nothing: Labour also, when you haue it to come
to the fruits, and operations, and effects of it;
that is, to spend your time in doing some thing
that may tend to Gods glory, and service. And last
of all, looke at the reward, looke at salvation,

which is the end of that Iourney, there is no question
of the two former, that the end is grace, and
righteousnes; there is more question of the latter,
whether a man may make salvation, and the recompence
of reward, an end, a marke, and scope,
to which he travailes: but all these are our ends
you shall see Act. 26. 18. PaulAct. 26. 18. is sent to preach to
the people; and this is the scope of his preaching,
he was sent to open their eyes, that they might turne
from darknes to light, from the power of Sathan to
God, that they might receiue the forgiuenes of sinnes,
and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by
faith in Christ. Marke it, that they may turne from
darknes to light, there you see the scope is light;
because, without light, a man cannot see his way,
Grace helpes a man in his Iourney, as light doth:
the next thing is, from the power of Sathan vnto
God; That is; from living in bondage to Sathan,
to serue God, to doe that which stands to his glorie,
and advancement, and then lastly, that they
may receiue forgiuenes, and inheritance amongst them
that are sanctified by faith in me; there is the reward:
for a mans ayme is likewise that he might
receiue the inheritance, that he might be saved,
and haue heaven in the end. So likewise you finde
it expressed Philip. 3. 14. Paul,Phil. 3. 14. sayth he, pressed
hard toward the marke, for what purpose? for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ, there you
see that the ayme that Paul had in following hard
to the marke, you see there was a marke that he
aymed at, and that he had expressed before to be
found in the righteousnesse that is in Christ, and,

sayth he, that I might obtaine the price of the high
calling, the price (that is) the wages; as a man
that runs a race, there is a price propounded to
him, and when he hath finished the race, he obtaines
it, sayth he, this is one of my ends to obtaine
the price:Heb. 11. so it is said of Moses, Heb. 11. he
had respect to the recompence of reward. So, my Beloved,
in the journey you must make this account,
you travaile towards grace, that is the scope that
you ayme at, againe, your end is to serue God, to
seeke his glory, that all your actions may tend to
it, and lastly, that you might be saved, that you
might haue the inheritance with the Saints.
Now the terme from which we travaile is from 
sinne,That he goes from. from the service of Sathan, a^d our selues,
and likewise it is from damnation; so that you shall
finde this difference in it, that all men, though
they haue but one Iourneys end, yet there are
different places, from which euery of them travaileth,
according to the different sinnes, to which
they are inclined, some men had need to travaile
from covetousnes, some men againe, from prodigalitie,
these seeme to goe contrary wayes, yet
both ayme at the same Iourneys end, as two men
that intend to come to London, one comes out of
Kent, another comes out of the North, these men
seeme to goe contrary, one goes North, and the other
South, yet both agree in their Iourneys end;
so it is in this travaile, some men are subiect to be
timorous, and discouraged, and cowardly in their
actions, some men againe to be rash, and bold,
these men haue contrary courses, yet they both

travaile to the same mediocrity, to the same grace,
to the same way of righteousnesse: so, I say, the
termes from which we come are exceeding different,
though the Iourneys end be the same to every
man. Looke what the severall inclinations
of men are, even therein to part from himselfe, to
deny himselfe, to resist his personall, and particular
lusts, that is the terme, from which he is to goe:
and so likewise it is to be considered, that we travaile
from damnation, that every steppe that a
man takes in the way of righteousnesse, it is so
many steppes from death to life, he is so much neerer
his Iourneys end: for salvation is now neerer
then when you beleeved, sayth the Apostle; that is,
looke as you travaile faster in the way of righteousnesse,
so your reward is neerer, your comfort
is neerer, and so you are farther from judgement,
farther from destruction.
Now, on the other side, it is to be considered,
that as this is the ayme of the godly man, to looke
to grace, and at the service of God, and at salvation,
that is the way, tha^ they travaile; So there is
another way that other men travaile, that looke
at sinne, at destruction. I doe but set one by another,
that you may learne to know the difference:
there is a scope that every man hath, whatsoever a
man doth, though he consider it not, yet he takes
every steppe by vertue of that vtmost end that he
hath. There is a generation of men that ayme at
destruction, that ayme at sinne, at those wayes that
lead downe to the Chambers of death.
And,Ob. if you object, and say, I but no man propounds

pounds such an end to himselfe, there is no man
intends the destruction of himselfe.
I answer;Ans. It is true, it is not the end of the man,
but it is the end of the course, as we say, it is not
finis operantis, but it is finis operis; as a theefe, that
steales, his end is not that he should come to the
gallowes, but his end is to get profit to himselfe,
but yet it is the scope of the worke, though not of
the workman; so I say in this case, a man that hath
not this ayme to serue God, to walke toward him,
though he obserue it not, his ayme is destruction,
that is the end of his worke, that way he walkes
in leads downe to the Chambers of death. So you
see, First, there is an end, a terme to which every
man goes; And, secondly, there is a terme from
which every man comes.
 Thirdly; in every Iourney there is a distance;
That is;The distance in it. that dissimilitude betweene grace, and vs,
and betweene God, and vs. Looke what distance,
and difference there is betweene grace, and sinne,
betweene righteousnesse, and wickednesse, that is
the space that every man is to goe, that is the distance
that he is to passe through; so that even as
in a Iourney you cast some part of the way behind
you, and another part you are to passe vnto; so
you are to thinke in this Iourney: Looke how
much victory thou gettest over any sin, so much
of thy way thou hast passed. Againe; Looke in
what measure any sinne remaines vnmortified,
any lust is not fully overcome, so much of thy
way thou art yet to goe: so likewise, it is in the
defect of graces, that is the distance that thou hast

to fulfill. So in every mans particular calling, that
course that God hath fixed to every man, that he
hath prescribed to every particular man, to some
longer, to some shorter, this is the distance of a
mans Iourney. Iohn Baptist had a shorter course,
he fulfilled his course, he preached not aboue
three or foure yeares. Paul fulfilled his course
likewise, a longer race, but it was that which God
had appointed him; so the dissimilitude betweene
grace and sinne; and againe, the course that God
hath appointed every man he must fulfill, and
serue God in his time, this is the distance and the
space of this Iourney.
Againe; the next to this is the ground: for a 
man must haue some thing to hold him vp,The ground. when
he walkes, the ground vpon which he walkes, is
the time of this life in this world, the latitude of
this life, that God hath afforded to every man, that
is the field, as it were, that he walkes in: we see in
the world great varietie of men, and varietie of
courses, that is the ground, the space allotted to
him, he may walke whither he will, he may walke
which way he pleaseth.
But lastly (as there must be a terme to which,
another from which,The path. as there must be a distance,
and a ground, so chiefly he, that walkes must haue
a certaine path, a certaine way to walke in. In a
wildernes, there is ground enough, but there is no
path, but when you goe to a certaine place, there
must be alwayes a certaine way, a certaine high
way, a path that leades to it: now the path that
we haue to walke in, you haue it diversly expressed

in the Scriptures: Christ is said to be the way,
we are said to walke in the spirit, if you be led by the
^pirit, walke in the spirit, and the way of Gods Commandements;
I will ranne the way of thy Commandements,
saith David, when thou shalt inlarge my
heart: and of Zachary, and Elizabeth, it is said, they
walked in the way of Gods Commandements without
reproofe. These are said to be the wayes, or the
paths that we walke in, they all come to one:
Christ is said to be the way: because as a man cannot
come to a place, except he goe in the way that
leads to it, so no man can come to God the Father
without Christ; that is; without his intercession,
without his guidance, and direction, except he
lead you to the Father, that you come as sprinkled
with his bloud, as clothed with his righteousnesse,
except you come as being made accepted
by his intercession, you cannot be accepted, and
besides, except you goe the way that he directs
you: for he is the day-starre, springing from on
high, that guides our feete in the way of peace,
without him you cannot come to heaven, you
cannot come to the throne of grace: so he is said to
be the way: Againe, the spirit is said to be the way,
walke in the spirit; That is; walke according to
the guidance of the spirit, follow the direction of
the spirit; and so the way of Gods Commandements,
they are said to be the way; because they
are the rules we ought to walke by: So that the
way is, when, in the name of Christ, when, out of
respect to him, we walke by the direction of the
spirit, in the wayes of Gods Commandements,

when we obserue the rule. This is the way, this is
the path.
Now,Quest. if you aske how one should finde this
way?
You must know,Answ. that though this be the way
in generall, yet, in particular, that which must
teach it thee, is to consider, first, there is a certaine
tract that God hath made for vs to walke in, a certaine
path that he hath chalked out, that which he
hath described in his Word, that which all the
Saints haue trodden before vs, both those that lived
in former times, whose examples are related
to vs, and those that liue among vs: First, there is
a tract that God himselfe hath made, the way of his
judgements are sine vestigijs etc. but the way of
his Commandements are as a beaten tract, as a
beaten roade; A way that himselfe hath made
plaine, by many directions, by many way-markes
that he hath set, that men might know them, and
likewise by the course of all the Saints, which is
like a beaten way that is trodden by many thousands,
from generation to generation, that is one
thing that you are to looke ^o^see, if you be in that
way, in the old way, in the way that the Law leads
to; in the way that all the Saints haue go^e in.
Next to this the question will be,Quest. well but how
shall I finde it? I may be readie to misse this tract.
I answer;Answ. there is a certaine ^agacitie that God
giues to a man, by which he findes out this way:
for though the way be pl^ine in it se^fe, yet, my
Beloved, it is not so (...) every man, it is hard to find
out this (...) way. These steppes of Gods

Commandements, I say, it is hard to finde them
out, except there be a particular gift given him
even as you see, there is a gift given to the dogge
to finde out the hare, to follow her steppes, there
is a certaine sagacitie given to that Creature, that
another wants, by which it followes the steppes
of the hare, which way soever she goes: (I may vse
it for a similitude, a farre-off expression) So, I say,
there is a sagacitie given to the Saints, a certaine
new qualitie, that others want, by which they are
able to finde out the steppes of Gods way; so that
they are able to tract him: When they are at a
losse, they will not run on vopon a false sent; but
cast about, (as sometimes they loose God, sometimes
they know not which way they must follow
him.) This gift we must labour to haue. Therefore
David prayes so oft that God would teach him
the^e wayes, that he would make his way plaine before
him, that he would direct him, etc. As acknowledging
that he was not able of himselfe to
finde it out, except God had guided him, and directed
him to it.
 One thing more is to be added, that there is
this similitude in it,Similitude that as, when a man goes a
 journey, it is a constant continued pace, it is not
a little stepping to, and fro,A constant course. and walking for recreation,
a walking as a man doth in a Gallery, but it
is a constant course, he walkes on; So likewise,
the course of a Christian life, it is a constant continued
terme of action; when a man doth not
good by a fit or two, but when he continues in
well-doing, when it is the ordinary constant tract
of his life.
Now we will briefly make some vse of it, and
the vses shall be but these two, a^cording to this
similitude, and the agreement of this walking
with a Christian life.
If a Christian life be of this nature,Vse 1. that it is like
a walke in a Iourney, that every act is a steppe,
then, my Beloved, it should stirre vs vp to consider
seriously, what busines we haue in hand, for what
purpose wee came into the world, namely, to
goe a Iourney, not to sit still, not to be idle, we are
to travaile a part of this Iourney every day, and
therefore the first thing we are to doe, is to choose
a right way: you must know therefore, that there
are many thousands (it is the common condition
of men in the Church) that thinke they are in a
right way, and so goe on in it without examination,
whereas you must know this, that every man
by nature is set in a wrong way as soone as he
comes into the world, wherein he travailes, as in
a way that leads to destruction; so that, till a man
begin to see his error, till he begin to come seririously
to consider, this is not the way I should
follow, and to choose a contrary, No man travailes
towards heaven, no man is in Cu^su, as we
say, no man is in this Iourney till then. David
sayth, he chose the way of Gods commandements;
that is; there must be a choice: for this must be a
speciall consideration, no man hath this without
choice, and not onely so, that is not onely meant,
to take it into consideration, that is naturall, but
then a man is said to choose, when he pitcheth vpon
it, when his resolution is fixed, when he determines

vpon this way. Therefore, when you heare
that there is such a walke, make that vse of it,
choose the way of Gods Commandements. To
choose; that is, willingly to take that way, to goe
it resolutely, to sweare within himselfe, as David
sayth, I haue sworne that I will serue thee, and walke
in thy way. I say, this we should bring our heart
to, and you shall know it by this, whether you doe
so or no: A man, that chooseth a way, that resolues
to goe that way, if he be out of it at any time, and
be told, Sir you are out of the way, he is glad of
the admonition, he is willing to goe in to it againe:
So that, I say, thou maist know, whether
thou choosest the way of Gods commandements,
what dost thou when any suggestion comes from
the holy Ghost, that tels thee, this dutie ought to be
done, this sinne ought to be abstained from, art
thou obedient to it? When thou art admonished
by thy friend, that tels thee, this is not the way,
this is an error, this is an obliquitie, art thou ready
to turne out of it? art thou glad of such an advertisement?
When thou hearest rules given thee out
of the Word, from day to day, from Sabbath to
Sabbath, art thou willing to practice them, when
thy error is discovered to thee? It is a signe thou
choosest the way. Let a man resolue on the way to
a Coast, to a Cittie, when it is discovered to him
that ^e is out of the way, certainely, if it be the
way that he hath chosen, he will easily be readie,
and willing to returne to it. Indeed, that is a signe
a man hath often the way. David chose to serue
the Lord, and therefore, wh^^ (...) him told him of

his adulterie, and murther, he quickly returned againe;
So it is with all the Saints, it is not so with
other men, when they are told of going out, they
goe on still, because, in truth, they haue not chosen
the way of Gods commandements.
Secondly;Vse 2. It is not enough to choose it in generall,
but likewise, you must looke to every step
you take, take heede to every steppe in this way.
My Beloved, as you heard before, there is not an
action, but it is a step, it is a pace in the way that
leads, either on the one side, or on the other, either
towards hell, or towards heaven, and therefore
it is not enough to looke that you walke in
the way in generall, but likewise, you must ponder
your steppes. You see that expression Pro. 4. sayth
the Wise-man, Ponder thy wayes, and order thy
steppes aright; ponder thy wayes; that is, a man
is to consider every step he takes, is this right?
Doth this tend towards such a Iourney or not?
This pondering of our wayes, is exceeding necessary,
it is that which David constantly practised
Psal. 119. 36. I considered my wayes, that I might
turn^ my feete to thy testimonies. I considered my
wayes; that is; Except a man looke narrowly to
it, except he consider his steppes, from time to
time, except he reflect vpon them, and looke
which way they tend, he will not be able to keepe
the wayes of Gods Commandements.
And if you object now;Ob. why, but is it necessary
that a man must thinke vpon every action what his
end is, when a man is busie in his studie, when he
is busie in his trade, when he is busied in his particular

cal^ing, is it necessary that every particular
action should be looked vpon, that he should haue
this actuall thought, whither doth this step tend?
I answer;Ans. Beloved, it is not necessary, that it
should be done vpon every action, but that it
should be so farre done, as is necessarie, to keepe
vs in the right way, even as, you see, it is in a iourney,
when a man resolues to goe from one towne
to another, he chinkes not every steppe he takes, I
am going to such a towne: for, by vertue of his
first intention he takes these steppes: so that the
marke and the ayme that he hath, is the cause of
every step, though he thinke not of it, every step
he takes: So in the actions that we doe, I say, if
the ayme be right, though we thinke not vpon every
action we doe, yet it is done by vertue of it,
and so God accepts of it. As, we see, an Arrow,
when it flyes to the marke, or a Bowle, when it
runs, there is not a new putting on, but by vertue
of the first strength, by which it was throwne out,
or by which it was shot, it passeth, and goes on towards
the marke, so it is in a mans life: by vertue
of the first ayme that a man hath, though he think
not of it, vpon every particular occasion, his heart
goes on, he travailes towards the marke: therefore,
I say, it is no necessary in every action. Notwithstanding,
it is necessary that it be very frequently
done: because we are so readie to goe out
of the way. There is a straight way, that God hath
chalked out to vs, and we are readie, ever and anon,
to turne out, we haue still some byas, or other,
vpon vs, that drawes vs out from that way.

Either some false feares, or some vaine hopes, or
some fancy, and inordinate appetite, some thing,
or other drawes vs out, that except a man looke
very narrowly to it, except he be ever and anon
reflecting vpon his wayes, he will not keepe the
way, therefore it is necessary, that we be still considering,
and pondering our wayes, and so much
the rather, because, as the Apostle sayth, Know you
not, that many run in a race; As if he should say,
all the world travailes towards heaven, every man
goes something that way: therefore, sayth he, take
heede; there are but a few notwithstanding, that
get the goale, that get the price, few that obtaine,
few that overcome: therefore, saith he, take heede
how you runne. So I say, there is much heede to
be taken in this race, many goe out of Egypt, many
that goe from sinne a certaine way, but they
never come to Canaan, they walke a certaine way
in the Wildernesse, but they come not home.
Therefore, to direct you in it, you must know this,
that there is a length in this way, there is a rectitude,
and a straightnes in this way; and thirdly,
there is a certaine breadth in this way. There is a
length in this way, and therefore you must goe
hastily in it, you must run the way of Gods Commandements,
as David sayth: for there is a length in it;
that is; it will not be dispatched with an easie
pace. God requires every man to make hast in it,
he must quicken his pace in the way to heaven.
My Beloved, the cause why men goe on slowly in
this way, is from halting; because they halt in this
way: In other paces, sometimes we grow slow by

wearinesse, but in the wayes of Gods Commandements,
still our slacknes comes from halting, and
therefore you haue that vsed often in the Scriptures;
men are said to halt betweene two opinions,
that is one kinde of halting, betweene two Religions,
he goes slowly forward in either of them, that
halts betweene two, he profits little, he goes slowly
on. As there is a halting betweene two opinions,
so there is a halting betweene two objects,
God and the world. A man desires to serue God,
and yet he desires to haue vaine glory, or desires
to make vp an estate, etc. I say, these divers affections,
these divers respects to divers objects,
when a man hangs too much vpon the world,
when he hath an eye too much vpon vaine-glory,
when he is tooke vp too much with pleasures, and
divers lusts, this causeth men to halt in the wayes
of Gods Commandements: halting, you know, is
either when one leg is sound, and another lanie,
or when we goe with one leg in a higher way, and
another in a lower way, it comes all to one; that
is, when the heart doth not wholly looke vpon
God, but lookes much to the world, therefore you
see men much dre^ched in worldly businesses, that
are over-come with them, that are drowned in
them, they goe slowly on in the wayes of Gods
Commandements, that goe with one leg in Gods
wayes, and another out of them: And so likewise
when one affection, and one desire shall be good,
and another shall be lame, this causeth a halting
in the wayes of God. And therefore, if you would
run, you must haue both feete whole, and sound,

without lamenes, and both feete must he in the
way* When a man is thus disposed, he runs the
wayes of Gods Commandements; that is; let him
finde what is the cause of his halting, and of his
slacknesse, if it be worldly mindednesse, the way
to quicken him in his pace, is to weane his heart
from the world; if this be the cause that makes
thee slacke, and dull, and heavie, and indisposed
to prayer, and to other holy duties, something
thou doest, and thou goest in thy way, but slowly,
and dully, that is the way to heale it: And so againe,
if it be some strong lust, be it what it will
be, that causeth thee to halt, and to goe slowly on,
heale that, and thou shalt be able to run the wayes
of Gods Commandements. David cals it a straightning,
when he could not run. Therefore, sayth he,
I shall run the wayes of thy Commandements, when
thou hast inlarged my heart. That is; Every lust is a
straightning; the remooving of it giueth a libertie
to the heart, every lust is as fetters, and shackles
that straiten the spirit, that are a bondage to the
spirit, that take away the libertie of the spirit:
Therefore the remooving of the lust, whatsoever
it is, that sets thee free, as it were, and when thou
art free, and at libertie, when there is no impediment,
thou artable to run the wayes of Gods commandements.
The second is,Gods wayes straight. there is a straightnesse in this
way, there is no way that leads to any place, but
it is straight: for, if it were crooked, it would not
lead to that place. So that every walke, every certaine
walke is straight, so are the wayes of Gods

Commandements, they are straight; now straight
is a relatiue word; that is, it is betweene two extreames,
as we say, it is straight, when a lyne runs
betweene two points, and goes not out, from either
of them, that we call straightnes, if there be
any exorbitation of the lyne, now it is not straight
but crooked, now the way is said to be straight
in regard of these two termes. A man indeede
goes from misery to happinesse, and the wayes
of Gods Commandements, are the straight wayes
that lead to that; if you walke crooked in the way,
you step out to one of the two extreames; that is;
you step out from the way that leads to happinesse,
you step out to some trouble, to some mischiefe,
to some evill, to some punishment, when
you step out from the way of Gods Commandements.
So that that is to be observed, that this is
a straight way; And therefore, seeing this leads
straight to happinesse, every declination is a stepping
out to misery. You haue reason to take it;
for it is the shortest way, that is one condition:
you haue two motiues to take this way.
One is,Gods wayes nearest. it is the shortest way; the other is, it is
the plainest way. We haue a rule in the Mathematicks;
Alwayes the straightest line is the shortest,
looke how much bending, and crookednesse there
is, so much the more length there is in it, the
straightest way is the shortest: So, if thou wouldst
goe the shortest way to happines, keepe the way
of Gods Commandements, (if thou dost not know
that, thou goest about, thou art a looser by it)
that is the neerest way. For example; that I may

a little expresse it to you, Iacob, when he would
goe about, and not keepe the straight way, when he
would make hast to get the blessing, it was a going
out from Gods wayes; was it not a going about
to his happinesse? You know how many
yeares trouble it cost him. So David, when he
would goe out of the way, in his adultery, and
murther, did he not goe about towards his happines?
Was he not an exceeding great looser by
it? You know how much it cost him, what great
afflictions he had, the sword never departed from
his house; what great trouble, being cast out of his
Kingdome by Absalom? etc. that was a going about
to his happines. So this is a sure rule, let there
be any crookednesse in a mans wayes towards
God, it is a going about to happinesse. And so Asa,
his heart was perfect all his dayes. But when he
was out of the wayes of God, when he stepped out
of these wayes, and made to his feete crooked
paths, did he not goe about for his owne happines?
The Prophet comes, and tels him, Asa, because
thou hast done this, from hence thou shalt
haue warre: the case was this, Asa would needs
seeke to the King of Assyria, and the King of Damascus
for helpe, it was a sinfull pollicie in him, it
was a going about, he shuld haue kept the straight
way, and haue trusted God with it, when he would
doe this, when he was crooked in his wayes, it
was a leading about to his happines, the Prophet
comes and tels him, the host of the King of Aram
should escape out of his hands, and likewise he
should haue warre all his time, and so he had

much trouble at home, and warre abroad, and at
length he was given vp to a sore disease that was
his death. Thus he went about, and so doth every
man when he finneth: for the other is the
straight way.
Secondly;It is the plainest. As it is the nearest way, so likewise
it is the plainest way. When a man will goe out of
it, he meets with snares, there are vanities in those
wayes, as it is said, he catcheth the craftie in his
owne deceit, or in his owne actions, and enterprises,
1 Cor. 3. he catcheth the craftie; that is, if a
man will goe out of the way of Gods Commandements
by any carnall pollicie and wisedome, it is
not a plaine way, it is a way wherein he shall meet
with one trouble or other, he shall meete with
some snares there, he shall not goe safely in it. So
that, my Beloved, you may take that for a sure rule,
when a man goes out of Gods wayes, he is not safe,
he is subiect to some snare, to some (...)* where in
he may be taken: therefore let vs keepe the straight
way, it is the best, and it is the neerest. As it is said
of Ahymaaz, he ran the way of the plaine, and so
though Cushi went out before him, yet Ahsmaaz
came to his journeys end much before Cus^^; because
he went the way of the plaine: So he that
goes through the plaine way, though he seeme to
haue present disadvantage, and trouble, yet when
all is summed vp, that will bring him soonest to
his journeys end, he shall come soonest to happinesse
and quiet that way, he that takes the fairest
course, by probabilitie in carnall wisedome, and
pollicie, and steppes out of Gods wayes, though he

thinke that the neerest way, yet he shall finde that
he goes about. Let a man thinke with himselfe,
by declining, I may escape such a trouble, such a
straite, such a disadvantage, that will befall other
men: perhaps thou maiest, but yet, I say, thou goest
about, thou art no gainer by this, it shall be paid
thee home in arrerages, thou shalt loose it in the
long race, thou shalt finde, that he that goes the
plaine way, shal come before thee to thy journeys
end, to the happines that we all ayme at; that is
certaine still, he that keepes the right way, he takes
the shortest way to happinesse, he that thinkes he
takes a wiser course then God, and therefore will
decline those troubles, by wynded wayes, that another
brings vpoa^ himselfe by keeping the plaine
way, I say, he shall finde himselfe deceived, he
goes about towards his happinesse.
The last is,A breadth in Gods wayes. as there is a length in this way, and
a straightnesse in it, so there is a breadth in this
way, there is a latitude, or breadth, a certaine proportionall
breadth. The way to some man is broader
then to others, and to the same man the way
in some places is broader, in some narrower.
The Iewes way was narrower, then ours, there is a
Christian liberty that hath inlarged this way, and
made it somewhat broader to walke in: for, as the
Christian libertie is more so likewise is the way
broader: We haue more libertie then the Iewes
had in many things, we are freed from that yoke
of bondage, that strict observation of Mosaicall Ceremonies:
And so againe, I say, one Christian
hath a narrower way then another; that is; as a

man is subiect to more temptations, to more occasions
of sinne, so must he make his way narrower,
he may not walke in so broad a path as another.
Againe, the same man in some part of his way
must choose a narrower way, in some he needs
not; As, for example, a man that is subiect to run
out in such a recreation, another man may walke
in a broader path in the vse of that recreation,
then he may: for to him it is an occasion, he is readie
to be snared, and to be transported with it:
one man is apt to be carried to drunkennesse, if
he see but the Wine, if he come but neere it, he
must not looke on the Wine in the Cup; one man is
quickly set on fire with incentiues of lust with an
object, he may not come so neere, nor be so bold
with them as another man may, one man is apt,
if he come to such a company, to receiue some
hurt, to be intangled with them, he is apt to learne
their wayes, to goe along with them, such a man
may not be so bold to come neere that company,
as another may, that is not subiect to that temptation,
so that there is a breadth and a narrownes
in these wayes.
Now our care must be, not to goe beyond this
breadth: for it is a narrow way, there are few that
finde it, Math. 7. Therefore, I say, we had more
need looke to it, that we step not aside, that we
loose not our way. Beloved, it concernes vs much
to looke to it; because, when we goe out of Gods
paths, we are still exposed to some hazard, and to
some danger, we should looke to it, not onely for
obedience to God, but for our owne sakes: let a

man be found out of the breadth of this way; that
is, let him take more libertie then he may (for it
is profitable for vs to know both our libertie, and
our restraint,) and he shall finde still some misery,
or other shall come vpon him; take heede, therefore,
least God meete thee out of the way at any
time; as he said to Eliah, What dost thou here? What
makest thou here Eliah? indeed it was his fault,
when God had beene with him so mightily, and
had given him rayne at his desire, to worke such
miracles: againe, to send fire from heaven to consume
the sacrifices, and after to slay so many Prophets
of Baal, for a word of Iezabell, that was but
a weake Woman, to run from her so many miles,
as farre as his feete could carry him, it proceeded
from timorousnesse, and feare: God meetes with
him, and saith, What dost thou here Eliah? What
makest thou here? As if he should say; thou art
out of the way. Though the Lord dealt mercifully
with him, yet it was his fault, he was out of the
way, as sometimes feare puts vs out of our way,
and sometimes againe other passions, as Hagar
went out of her way from he mistris (as we see
in the Chapter before the text) Hagar Sarahs maid,
whence commest thou? And whither goest thou?
Gen. 16. 18.Gen. 16. 18. Where he puts her in minde of that
dutie she did owe to Sarah, of that particular calling
she was in; As if he should say; Hagar dost
thou remember what thou art? dost thou remember
what particular calling thou art in? Art thou
not Sarahs maid? Thou shouldst be about Sarahs
businesse, what dost thou here in the Wildernes,

running from thy mistris? If thou be Sarahs maid,
whence commest thou? And whither goest thou?
As if he should say; thou art out of thy calling,
thou art out of thy way.
So you must thinke with your selues, when any
man goes out of his calling, when he goes out of
his duties of either of his callings, if God should
meete him, if an Angell should meete him, and
should say, What dost thou here? thou that art a
Minister, what dost thou doing the thing that belongs
not to such a one to doe? Thou that art a
Tradesman, a Lawyer, a Student, whatsoever the
calling, and busines be, that God hath set a man
in, when he is stepping out to by-wayes, that are
not suteable to such a calling, God may say to thee,
and thou maist say to thy selfe, What dost thou
here Hagar, Sarahs maid? He puts her in minde
of her calling, so must we, and so much the rather,
because we are never out of our way, but at that
time we are from vnder Gods protection, we are
from within the pale, we haue no promise of safetie,
it makes vs exposed to some hazard, or other,
and, therefore, Beloved, be carefull of this. As the
Israelites, in the Wildernes went not a step, but as
farre as they saw the Cloud going before them,
so, I say, goe not a steppe, but as farre as you haue
a warrant, as farre as you see God going before
you, and this shall be for your comfort.
But you will say,Ob. it may be, God will lead me by
these straite rules to prison, to losses, to crosses,
to disgrace, to losse of preferment, to losse of
friends?
Beloved,Answ. know this, that the Cloud, as it was a
direction to them, so it was a protection likewise,
they never followed the Cloud, but they were
safe, the Cloud was a defence to them wheresoever
they went: As we see, Esay 45. The Lord will
create vpon every place of Mount Sion, and vpon the
assemblies thereof, a Cloud of smoke by day, and a shining
flame of fire by night: for vpon all the glory there
shall be a defence. Before he had said he would lead
them by the spirit, this leading of the spirit, he
compares to the leading of Israell in the Wildernes;
as they were led with the Cloud, so shall you,
and if you follow the Cloud, it shall be a defence
to you; so, I say, walke with God, and he will be a
defence to you: it is no matter what the wayes
are, he is able to beare you out: for safetie is a part
of your wages; therefore that belongs to him,
your businesse is nothing, but to finde out what
your way is, and to walke in it, the care of the
worke belongs to you, and the other is not your
care: therefore (to shut vp this exhortation)
learne to doe this, to pray, that God would shew
you his wayes, that he will incline your hearts,
that he will reach you, as he doth the Ants, and
the Bees and not onely shew you the wayes you
are to walke, but giue you a secret instigation, and
inclination to them, and if you seeke him, and
your hearts be vpright, and depend vpon him,
he will shew you the path, that you are to walke
in: he puts in that condition, that your hearts be
sincere, and vpright. Againe, let vs depend vpon
him, that we may seeke to him, and trust in him,
and he will shew vs the way.
 And, as we are to seeke the way, so we must
run it,Having found the way, wee must runne. and not be slow, and slacke in it, but runne
the way of Gods Commandements, that is; goe apace.
Now every mans pace is according to his
meanes, and his abilitie, according to the might
that God hath given him: for that may deceiue vs;
A man may thinke he goes fast, when he goes but
slowly; because it is not according to his ability.
As, you know, a tall man when he doth but walke,
he goes much faster then a childe when he runs,
and yet he goes but slowly; because it is not according
to his abilitie. Beloved, our walking is
faster and slower, according to the severall meanes,
and strength that God hath given to every one of
vs: some man hath a larger vnderstanding, hath
more grace, more experience, better education
then another; he must runne faster, he must doe
much more good in his owne person, he must be
more frequent, and servent in holy duties, he must
be more diligent in drawing others to God; another,
that hath received lesse, though he goe a
slower pace, yet it may be running to him, when
the former doth but walke: So, in every particular;
A rich man that giues so much, it is but a
slow pace to him, when another, that is poore,
giues lesse, and that is a quicke pace to him. And
so in like cases. Therefore, I say, let vs choose out
the right way, let vs pray to God to direct vs, to
shew it to vs, vpon every occasion, that we may
not misse it. And let vs not onely walke slowly,
but let vs walke apace, and run the way of Gods
Commandements. So much for this first Vse.



THE
SEVENTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
Walke before me, and be thou perfect.

WEE proceede to the second Vse which
remaines;Vse 2. I told you the similitude
lyes in these two things.No man to be iudged by some particular actions.
First, in the manner of the Iourney,
there is a Terme to which we goe, there is another
from which, there is a distance, there is a path,
etc.
The second Similitude was in the constancie,
and continuednesse. Now our second Consequence,
or Corollarie, we must draw from the
second Similitude; betweene a Christian life,
and a Iourney from place to place: I say, it agrees
with it in this, that they are constant, there is a
continued tenor of actions in a Christian mans
course: from whence, I ^ay, we draw this: If it be

so, if there be this Similitude betweene them;
why, then let no man Iudge of himselfe, or of others,
by a step, or two; let him not judge of himselfe,
I say, by a few actions, but let a man consider,
what his walke is; Walke before me, and be perfect:
Let a man consider what the ordinary, and
vsuall course of his life is: if you should doe otherwise,
my Beloved, you shall finde it, it you judge a
man by an action, or two, you shall see, the best of
the Saints haue beene subject to divers fallings,
you shall see, Noah drunke, and you shall see Lot
committing incest, you shall see Moses speaking
vnadvisedly with his lippes, you shall see David
committing murther, and adulterie, and making
Vriah drunke, many such faylings you shall see in
all the Saints, you shall see Hezekiah boasting of
his treasure, you shall see David numbring his
people, etc. So that, if you judge of men by a few
actions, and not by their constant course, you
shall condemne the generation of the just.
Againe; It is as true on the other side, if you
will judge a wicked man by a few steppes, and not
by his ordinarie course, you shall be as readie to
justifie the wicked; you shall finde Cain sacrificing,
you shall finde Saul among the Prophets, you
shall see Iudas among the Disciples, you shall see
Herod entertaining Iohn Baptist, you shall see him
heare him gladly, doing many things at his Preaching,
and admonition, this you see frequent, and
vsuall: Therefore, I say, were not to be judged
by a few actions, and a few paces, but by the constant
tenor of our life, by what we doe in ordinarie,

and vsuall course: for there is no man so good,
but he may haue some swarvings, though he haue
chosen the way of Gods Commandements, yet oft
he may misse that way, oft he may be drawne out
of that way, oft he may be transported with some
strong temptation. Againe, on the other side,
there is scarce any man so bad, but sometimes he
may come into the way. You haue men that haue
no constant place to travaile to, yet, for a fit, they
may goe into the high way, as a theefe, or a robber,
you know. Therefore, let vs learne hence,
not to judge our owne estate, or other mens, or
censure either our selues, or others by a few actions:
for I haue this ground for it, that you may
see the reason of the rule. A mans constant course
proceeds from the inward roote, and frame of his
disposition, from those principles, that are ingrafted
in him, I say, his constant course proceeds
from it. Those same by-scapings out, whether to
good, or evill, they doe not proceede from the
frame of the heart, but from the evill that is in the
good, and from those good things that may be
in the evill. You shall see it so in nature: Take a river,
let it be dammed, and stopped vp, yet let the
course of it be naturall, let the vent, and streame
of it be to goe downeward, at the length, it will
over-beare the damme, and will runne over it;
or let water, that is sweete, be made brackish by
the comming in of Salt water, yet, if naturally it
be sweete, at the length, it will worke it our; so, I
say, it is with every man, looke what the constant
streame of his disposition is, looke what the frame

of it is, that which is most naturall, and inward
to a man, though it may be dammed vp, and
stopped in such a course, for a time, yet it will
breake through all impediments. Though there
be some brackish, some evill, and sinfull dispositions,
that may breake in vpon them, yet they will
weare them out; So it is as true, on the other side;
let a wicked man step into a good course by some
trouble, he is fallen into, or by some good familiaritie,
or good education, or some good Minister,
yet long he will not hold in it, he will breake
through that impediment: because his naturall
disposition, the streame of his heart runs another
way.
Besides;2. Cause. As there is this ground of it, so there
is another cause of it; Because the outward occasions
both for good and evill, I say, they are both
forcible, and yet transitory. Evill men, haue some
outward things, some outward helpes, which put
them on to a good course, they are so effectuall;
and yet God suffers them not alwaies to haue them,
but takes them away, they are but transitory,
Therefore a man may walke in a good course,
whose heart is not yet right, and yet long he shall
not doe it: because those outward occasions shall
be tooke from him: As, for example, Ioash walked
in the wayes of God, all the while that Iehoiada
lived, here was the outward occasion, he was
drawne with another mans synewes, he was heated
with another mans heate; and when that man
was tooke away, you see, he fell to his owne
course, and by as againe; the outward occasion

was strong, but it was but for a time, and so he returned
to his old course.
The like in the case of Vzziah, he was hemmed
in for a time, with Zachariah the Prophet, but,
sayth the text, after his dayes, his heart was lifted
vp to destruction. And so Herod, he kept within
compas^e, he was stirred vp to doe many things
at the Preaching of Iohn Baptist, but he did not alwayes
continue: for God so disposeth it, in his
providence, he will not suffer evill men alwayes
to haue these outward occasions of good; As it is
as true, on the other side, good men may haue
strong temptations, that may transport them for
a fit, but God will not suffer them alwayes to lye
vpon the godly, he will not suffer a temptation of
affliction, he will not suffer the rod of the wicked to
lye alwayes vpon him, it may for a time, and he may
for a fit, put out his hand to wickednes, he may, vpon
some exigent, vpon a sudden, when he is put
to it, vpon some outward trouble, or cros^e, when
his heart is shaken, and distempered, when he is
not himselfe, but God so disposeth of it in his providence,
that they shall not alway lye vpon him,
but they shall be remooved in due season, as well
as the helpes to good shall be taken from the wicked.
So, you see, that may come to passe for a few
steppes, for part of the Iourney, an evill man may
goe right, and a good man may swarue from the
straight way: Therefore, let vs neither judge our
selues, nor others by it: for, if we should, we should
justifie the wicked, and condemne the generation
of the just. So much shall serue for this, and for
that point.
The next, and maine point, that we intended,
was this,
That whosoever hath interest in Gods All-sufficiencie,Doct.
must be a perfect man.
That is; He must be sincere, he must haue integritie
of heart; though he may be subject to
many infirmities, yet God requires this of him.
If I be All-sufficient, sayth he, to any (that is the
scope of it) he must be perfect with me; I am All-sufficient,
therefore be thou perfect; otherwise
thou hast no interest in this All-sufficiencie of
mine. The poynt is cleare, and it is a poynt well
knowne to you, I shall not need to confirme it by
any other places of Scripture, but rather spend the
time in giving you the grounds of it: And secondly,
in shewing to you what this intirenesse, and
perfection, and sinceritie of heart is.
First, I will shew the grounds why no man
shall be saved, he shall never haue part in this All-sufficiencie
of God, except he be perfect, except he haue integritie of heart.
First;Reas. 1. Because the new Adam should otherwise
not be so effectuall as the old; the new Adam
should not be so powerfull to communicate grace
and life, as the old Adam is to instill corruption
and sinne; for the finne, that hath beene conveyed
to vs by the first Adam, hath an integritie in it,
it hath gone over the whole soule, there is a whole
bodie of death, that hath possessed vs; Now should
there not be in those redeeming actions by Christ
a contrary integritie, and perfection, a throughout
holines, as I may call it? The plaister then

should be narrower then the sore, and the remedy
should be inferior to the disease. Beloved, you
know, a leprosie is gone all over, except the holinesse
went all over too from top to toe, I say,
there would not be an answerablenesse in the second
Adam, he should not be able to doe as much
good, as the first was able to doe hurt.
Secondly; the worke of Redemption should 
be done but by halues, if the Lord should dispense
with imperfect holinesse. The workes of Creation,
you know, were perfect, God looked vpon all
his workes, and he saw that they were very good.
Beloved, doe you thinke the workes of Redemption
should come short of the workes of Creation?
Are not they likewise perfect? when the Lord shall
looke on that worke, shall he not say likewise, it is
very good? If you doe marke the parts of it, hath
not Christ redeemed vs from our vaine conversation?
The holy Ghost, doth not he mortifie every
sinfull lust? The bloud of Christ, doth it not wash
every sinne? The Word, and meanes of grace,
doe they not strike at every rebellion? It is certaine,
they doe, and therefore, there is an integritie
required in all: otherwise, I say, there should
be an imperfection.
If you object,Ob. notwithstanding this, though
Christ hath redeemed vs, yet, you see, there are
many imperfections left in men; and therefore,
how can you say the workes of Redemption are
perfect?
I answer;Answ. They are not perfect in degrees: for
they must haue a time of ripening; but that which

wants any part of perfectio^, though it be ripened,
when it wants the roote, and principle, when the
frame, and first disposition is not right, let it grow
vp never so fast, it will never be perfect: So this
is true of the workes of Redemption, of the works
of God in a mans heart, of destroying the workes
of Sathan, and setting vp a new building, which is
the worke of Iesus Christ, and the end, for which
he came; I say, this is true of it, it is perfect, it
wants onely growth: As, you may say, it is a perfect
seed, when it is ripe, it will be a perfect flower;
or it is a perfect plant, when it growes vp, it
will be a perfect tree, it is perfect in all respects.
Such a perfection is in the workes of Redemption,
and, if the heart of man be not entire, if the
worke of grace be not throughout, if there be a defect
in the principle, and constitution of it, there
should be a defect in the workes of Redemption,
that cannot be.
 Thirdly; if there was not a perfectnesse of heart
wrought in all those that should be saued, the commands
of the Gospell should be commands of
impossibilitie: for the Gospell requires at our
hands, that we should haue respect to all the Commandements,
that we should keepe the whole Law
in an Evangelicall manner; that is; in a true indevour;
the Gospell requires that we should loue
the Lord our God with all our hearts, for the truth
of it; It requires, in a word, that we should keepe
the whole Law, in that sence, so as to square our
liues to it; to keepe it all in truth, and sinceritie,
though we cannot reach the highest top, and degree

of it; Now if the heart were not perfectly holy;
that is; thoughout, there could be no proportion
betweene the Commandement, and the facultie,
and abilitie vpon which the Commandement
lyes: for it is certaine, except the heart
were perfectly holy, it could not keepe the whole
Law, there were an impossibilitie, we should not
reach every Commandement. And therefore,
there must be integritie and entyrenesse in the
heart, that we may be able to keepe them, at the
least in a Evangelicall sincere manner, though
wee cannot perfectly keepe the whole Law of
God.
Fourthly, it is required: because otherwise there 
should not be a correspondencie, and agreement
betweene the Covenant on Gods part, and on ours:
God hath said, he will be All-sufficient, but he requires
this againe, on our part, that we be altogether
his; My beloved is mine, and I am his; and
Psal. 18. I will walke perfectly with them that walke
perfectly with me; there are the termes of the Covenant,
the Lord will haue it thus farre vpon even
termes, there shall be an integritie on both sides,
and therefore, if a man be holy but by halues, that
makes not the match, it makes not the agreement
betweene the Lord and vs: for all, and halfe is not
a match, but all, and all is that which makes the
match, the agreement, and sutablenesse betweene
God, and vs; and this is another reason why it is
required.
Now last of all; this perfection, and integritie 
is required: because otherwise, all that we doe is

nothing, it is to no purpose: for, except you seeke
the Lord, and serue the Lord with a perfect heart,
you serue him not at all, you cannot serue him as
God, you cannot serue him as a Maister, you cannot
serue him as a Lord, as a soveraigne commander,
except your hearts be perfect with him. This
reason I take out of Math. 6. a place well knowne,
No man can serue two Maisters. That is; It is true,
a woman may loue many as friends, but shee can
loue but one as a husband: A man may looke to
many subordinate ends, but he can haue but one
vltimate end: A man may haue respects, he may
affect many things in a remisse manner, but to affect
many things in the highest degree, it is impossible,
it can be bestowed but vpon one: Therefore,
I say, to serue him as God, it cannot be, except
the heart be wholly bestowed on him; if you
will take in any thing with him, either credit, or
profit, or pleasure, now you make God an Idoll,
and you make that as God; so that whatsoever a
man loues, and respects or obeyes; I would aske
him but this question; Eyther it commands the
same thing with God, when it commands vnder
him, and so, in yeelding to that, you obey God
himselfe, or else, it commands somewhat different,
and if you yeeld to that, and not to the Lord,
you reject him, and take that for God. Therefore,
I say, the heart must be perfect, or else the obedience
is nothing at all. So much shall serue to shew
you the grounds of this, why such a perfection,
and sinceritie, and integritie of heart, is required
in all those that shall be saved.
But the chiefest businesse will be here,What sinceritie and vprightnes is. to shew
you what this integritie is: the best way to finde
it out, is to open to you all those expressions in the
Scriptures, by which it is presented to vs, and you
shall finde them to be these fiue: And in the opening
of them, we shall sufficiently shew you, what
this sinceritie, or perfection of heart is.
First, you shall finde it often expressed by puritie,
and soundnesse,Puritie. blessed are the pure in heart;
and, God is good to Israell, even to them that are of a
pure heart. Now what is it to be pure? That is pure
which is full of it selfe, and hath no other Heterogeneall
thing mingled with it; So, that heart is
pure, which hath no sinne in it, which is holy,
which hath a renued qualitie of grace, which hath
an inward regenerate man, that will mingle with
no sinne, that is full of it selfe, and admits not the
mixture of any sinne. My Beloved, I must be warily
vnderstood here, I say, it admits not the mixture
of any sinne. It is true, sinne may cleaue, and
adhere to a man, as drosse doth to the silver, but it
mingles not with the regenerate part, that mingles
not with it; that is, it enters not into the
frame, and constitution of a mans heart, it is not
weaved into the texture of his heart; it is no ingredient
into the very frame, and fabricke of it,
but though sinne be there, yet the heart still casts
it out of it selfe, it resists it, and rejects it, and purifieth,
and clenseth it selfe from it, this properly
is a pure heart: As in other things, you say, a thing
is pure, when it is solid, and cleare, and vnmixed,
though it may haue some drosse, and some mudd

cleaving to it, you say, it is pure gold, when it is
digged out of the minerall, though there be much
drosse in it, and we say, it is pure ayre, though,
for a time, there be many fogges, and mists, and
adventitious vapours within it; So, we say, it is
pure water, though there be many inundations of
mud cast into it, or that come from the spring, or
Channell, from which it runnes; So a man may
be said to haue a pure heart; that is, a perfect heart,
though there be an adhesion of much drosse,
many evill thoughts, that cleaue to him, yet, I say,
they mingle not with him; that is, Beloved, it is
certaine, that the holiest men haue a fountaine of
originall corruption in them, and from this fountaine
sinnes arise continually, as the scumme in
the pot, but yet, if the liquor be pure, and good,
if it be right wine, or right honey, whatsoever the
liquor is, though the scumme arise, still it purifies
it selfe, and casts it out; this is the propertie of a
pure heart: with the impure, it is quite contrary,
the scumme ariseth as in the other, but it is sodden
in, it is mingled, and confounded with it,
there is not such a segregating, such a clensing disposition
in it but there is a mixing of them together:
this similitude you shall finde Ezek. 24. 12.
whence I take it, she wearied her selfe with lyes, etc.
And her great scumme went not out of her. There is
a similitude going before of a boyling pot, into
which much flesh was put, to which he compares
the Children of Israell of that time, but this is the
Conclusion that God makes, her great scumme went
not out of her; As if he should say, it is very true,

the holiest men haue their scumme rising in their
hearts, as well as the wickedest men, but, sayth
the Prophet, here is the difference, her great scum
went not out of her: That is; though it arose, and
might haue beene cast out, it was not so, but was
sodden in, and mingled together. And therefore,
sayth he, her scum shall be consumed with fire. That
is; God will deale with her, as we doe with pottage,
when the scum is sodden into them, we cast them
in the fire, and the reason is given in the words
following; for I would haue purged thee, but thou
wouldest not be purged, therefore thou shalt not be
purged from thy silthines, till I haue caused my wrath
to light vpon thee: That is; As if he should say, I
put my Word to thee, which is as fire, I vsed such
ordinances, and meanes, I withheld none of them,
and with those I would haue purged thee; not,
Beloved, by the inward purifying worke of the
spirit: for that could not efficaciously be resisted,
but I would haue purged thee; that is, my Word is
as fire; It is a segregating thing, that differenceth,
and puts a separation betweene the scum, and the
liquor, as that indeede was the end of the Prophets,
to separate the precious from the vile. Now,
sayth the Lord, when these meanes were vsed,
when thou haddest the Prophets that would haue
separated the precious from the vile, in thy heart,
as well as to doe it in the companies of men: Seeing
this had no fruit, nor effect vpon thee, but still
thy scum, and filthines continued in thee, and thou
wast not purged: therefore, I will destroy thee,
thou shalt never be purged, but my wrath shall

light on thee: So, my Beloved, it is not the having
impurities in the heart, that makes the heart imperfect,
(that is the Conclusion I grow to) but it
is the suffering of them to be mingled, even with
the inward frame of the heart.
Thus you shall finde, if you would know the
true difference betweene a pure and perfect, and
an impure and vnperfect heart, it stands onely in
this; he that hath a pure heart, there is in him a
clensing, and purifying, a segregating disposition,
that casts out whatsoever evill comes, though it
be continually rising, yet still hee casts it out,
though he be still falling into some finne, yet still
he is repenting, though many times he be myred,
yet still he washeth himselfe againe, he cannot endure
it, he doth not, as the swyne, delight in it;
but he hath another, a contrary disposition, he still
clenseth himselfe from it: That I take to be the
meaning of that, Math. 15. where it is said, That,
which comes from within the man, as adultery, fornication,
etc. they defile the man. The meaning is this,
when sinne riseth in a man from day to day, if he
cherish sinne, and entertaine it, and suffer sinnes
to dwell, and abide in his heart quietly, without
disturbance, if he suffer them to be sodden in, as it
were, now they defile the heart, But if sins arise
in the heart, and he continually resist them, he
continually cast them forth, he continually clenseth,
and purifieth himselfe from them, such a man
is not defiled with them, not is his minde defiled,
not his conscience defiled; but notwithstanding
this continuall Ebullition of evils (that I may so

call it) he is a man of a pure heart, and perfect with
God, and that, I say, is one of the expressions of
purenesse.
And so likewise soundnesse,Soundnesse. when a man is sound
at heart, that is another expression of this perfectnesse.
Now a thing is said to be sound (as an Apple,
you know, is said to be sound, when it is not
rotten at the core, though there be many specks
in it; and a Ship is said to be sound, when there is
no leake in it, though it may haue some other
flawes, and defects; And a Vessell is said to be
sound, when there is no clift in the bottom,
though it may otherwise be brused, and battered,
yet, you say, it is a sound vessell) I say, so it is in
this case, when the bottom of the heart, and the
inward frame of the heart is right and sound.
Though a man be subject to many faylings, yet
this is a perfect man, he hath a sound heart;
whereas, on the other side, take a man, my Beloved,
(that we may shew you what this rottennesse
at heart is) take a man, I say, who doth admit a
constant neglect of any duty, or an ordinary commission
of any sinne, such a man may properly be
said to haue a leake in the bottom of his heart, to
be rotten hearted, to be vnfound at the bottom;
But a man, that, though he be subject to infirmities,
yet had rather dye then omit a knowne duty,
or to be in a knowne sinne, I say, this man, though
he haue many infirmities, yet he hath a sound
heart: And the reason of it is this, because, such a
man although he haue some weaknesse, some sicknesse,
and infirmitie hanging vpon him, yet he

will grow it out, as one that is sound in his bowels
will weare out his sicknesse, and distemper, as
it is said, if the inside be cleane, the outside will follow:
And that is as true, on the other side, let the
inside be rotten, though there be a faire and a golden
outside, as in an Apple oft times, that doth
not continue long, but rottennesse will possesse
the outside also; That we see often in experience,
and you shall seldome see it otherwise; (I thinke
there is scarce an example of it) but that an hypocrite,
a man of an vnsound heart, though he may
carry a faire shew long, yet, in the end, even the
outside shall be tooke away, that shall vanish also,
and rottennesse shall seize vpon it: for that is the
nature of things, that are vnsound, they stay not
there, but they putrifie, and corrupt more and
more; So that, you see throughout the Scriptures,
still those that were of imperfect hearts; that is,
that had vnfound hearts, they were discovered before
their death; as Amaziah was, he held out long,
and so was Ioash, and divers others; It is a rule, I
thinke, that seldome fayles: because God hath said,
I will curse the name of the wicked, and it shall rot.
Now except their hypocrisie should be discovered
in time, and that their outside were removed,
and made as rotten as the inside, how should his
name rot? So much shall serue for this first expression,
that it is expressed by purenesse and soundnesse.
 Secondly; you shall haue it expressed by simplicitie,
and singlenes of heart;Simplicitie. he, whose heart is
perfect before God, he is said Mat. 6. to haue a single

eye; and Iam. 1. he, that is imperfect is sayd to be
a double minded man, contrary to which is (...),
a man that hath a simple heart, a heart without
guile, a single heart. Now, if we can finde out
what this singlenesse of heart is, this singlenesse of
eye, and of heart, you will finde out this perfection,
that is here spoken of; Walke before mee, and be
thou perfect. Now a single heart is called so from
the singlenesse of the object, that is a single eye,
that lookes but vpon one object, and that is a single
heart, that lookes but vpon one thing: likewise
that is a double eye, and a double heart, that lookes
vpon two objects, and is divided betweene two,
and knowes not which to choose; like a man that
is in bivio, in a double way, he stands, and lookes
on both, and knowes not which to take; so an imperfect
hearted man, an vnsound hearted man, he
stands, and lookes vpon God, and vpon the world,
and he knowes not well which to choose, sometimes
he is following the one, sometimes the other,
this is his condition, he is distracted betweene
both; such a man hath a double eye, and
therefore, sayth the text, a wicked eye: for so it is
called, if the eye be single, all the body is light, but
if the eye be wicked: (for so it must be interpreted)
if the eye be double, which is a wicked eye; So,
my Beloved, an vnsound harted man is not described
to you by any thing so plainely, and perspicuously,
as by this, that his heart is not pitched vpon
God alone; but he hath an eye vpon God, and
an eye vpon credit, he hath an eye vpon God, and
an eye vpon his walth, vpon his pleasures, or

whatsoever it is, when there are two objects: for,
in that regard a man is sayd to haue a heart and a
heart, not as commonly it is taken to make a shew
of one thing, and haue another within; But it is a
heart and a heart, when there are two objects, vpon
which the heart is set, that the heart is divided
betweene two, and so is cloven asunder, as it were:
And so it is a double heart, by way of division,
and not by having one thing in shew, and another
within. Now then, if you will finde out what a
perfect man is, I say, it is he that hath a fixed resolution
to cleaue to God alone, that hath his eye
vpon him, and vpon nothing besides. This is a
single heart, when a man shall resolue (for instances
will best make it cleare to you) when a man
shall say, as Ioshuah did, Well, sayth he, I see you
are readie to take divers wayes, but I am resolved
for my part, for me and my house, we will serue
the Lord, that I am resolved on. So David, I haue
chosen the way of his commandements, I haue sworne
to keepe them, and that I will doe: When a man is
once resolved throughly, when he is grounded,
and hath a setled resolution, an vnchanged resolution,
that pitcheth him vpon one, he is no longer
in doubt betweene two, this is a perfect hearted
man, So Moses takes that resolution, I will suffer
affliction with the people of God, as if he should say,
I haue chosen it, whatsoever become of mee,
though I be a banished man, though I liue a poore
life, though I turne from Pharaohs sonne-in-Law
to keepe sheepe in the Wildernes, yet this is my
resolution, here I haue fixed my staffe, this will I

doe. Herein the perfection, and integritie of his
heart was seene; So the three men, Sidrach, Mesech,
and Abednego, This, say they, we are resolved
vpon, whether we be delivered, or not delivered,
whether we dye, or liue, whatsoever come vpon
vs, we will serue the Lord, we will not worship thine
Idoll. And so I^b, (the place you know) though he
kill me, yet will I trust in him; That is, though he
multiplie miseries vpo^ me, even to the very death;
yet I am resolved to serue him, my heart is there
pitched, his, will I be. This is, Beloved, to haue a
single eye, and a single heart; When the heart is
divided, it is imperfect, such a man is vnconstant
in all his wayes, sayth Iames: Such a one was Saul,
and such a one was Amaziah: that indeede is the
case of all hypocrites. And to this, I adde that
which is said Math. 8. the fourth ground is said to
haue an honest heart, (I put them together, a single
heart, that I would explaine to you, they come
much to one,) an honest heart stands in this, that
a man resolues to serue the Lord with patience, and
with abstinence, that is the definition, that I will
giue of it, he that hath an honest heart, he resolues
to serue God in all things with patience, and abstinence,
one of them is exprest in the text, he brings
forth fruit with patience, the other I adde, for a
more full explication of it. The meaning is this,
he hath an vpright, and honest heart, that so pitcheth
vpon God, that he will not be drawne aside
for any thing: Now there are but two things that
draw vs aside; that is, eyther persecution affliction,
and trouble. And for this the honest heart

hath patience, he resolues to suffer them, whatsoever
they be, and therefore he is able to goe on;
or, on the other side, pleasures, and divers lusts,
that drew away the third ground, as persecution
did the second; here he hath a resolved abstinence,
he is content to part with them, and to be without
them: therefore he brings forth fruit when another
doth not; that is, another may haue a faire
blade, but either persecution, or else pleasures, and
divers lusts come betweene, and intercept his maturitie,
that he never comes to any bearing of
fruit, to any purpose; This expression I put together
with singlenes of heart, a heart without guile,
and without mixture, because there is a similitude
betweene them. So much fo that expression likewise.
 A third Expression there is in the Scripture,
which you shall finde in these words,Integritie. Ier. 3. 10.
They did not turne to me with their whole heart, but
faignedly. And very oft, Thou shalt serue the Lord
thy God with all thy heart. So that the wholnes of
the heart, the integritie of the heart, he that hath
this is a perfect man, he, that wants it is an vnsound
hearted man.What it is. Now what is this Integritie,
and wholnes of heart,In 3. things. you shall see in these three,
the integritie of the subject, the integritie of the
object, and the integritie of the meanes, whereby
the subiect, and the object are joyned together.
 The Integritie of the subject, that is the heart
of a man,The integritie of the subject. that I call the subject; The Integritie of
the object I call the Commandements, when he
hath respect to all of them; The Integritie of the

meanes I call that, which brings the heart, and
the Commandement together; that is, the vse of
all holy ordinances, and the abstinence from all
occasions, that may draw vs another way. So
now he is a perfect man with God that first hath a
whole heart; that is, such a heart whereof every
part, and facultie is sanctified; There is no part
of it, but it is seasoned with grace, there is no
wheele in all the soule, but it is turned the right
way, according to that 1 Thes. 5. He is sanctified
throughout, in body, soule, and spirit. I say, when a
man shall finde every thing within him readie to
prayse the Lord, and to looke toward the Lord,
all that is within him. There is not any thing
within him, of which he can say, the bent of it is
another way. I say, such a man hath an integritie
of heart: Another man, you shall finde it thus alway
with him, that, though in many things he
wish well, and hath a good meaning, and good
purposes, yet there is something, or other, hath
stollen away something in his heart, something
within him is not right, it may be in his feare, he
cannot say he feares God, and nothing else: for
there are many things that he feares more then
God, so he cannot say of his loue to God, that that
is right, it may be, it is misplaced, though many
other things may be right in him, he loues riches,
he loues credit, he loues reputation, he loues his
ease, and conveniencie, his practise, and imployment;
So that, if God and these should come in
competition, he would be readie to violate his
conscience towards him, rather then to part with



these: And so his griefe, that is not principally
for sinne, there is somewhat, or other, that you
shall finde him fayling in, there is not an integritie
in the subject.
 And secondly, there is as little in the object;
he hath not an eye to all the commandements,Integritie in the object. whereas
the perfect hearted man, there is no dutie but
he giues vp his heart to it: And againe, there is
nothing forbidden, no sinne, but his heart is averse
from it, and he resists it to the vttermost.
You shall see this expression, Iam. 3. He that can
guide his tongue is a perfect man, in many things we
sinne all, if any man sinne not in word, he is a perfect
man: Iam. 3. 2. Compare this with Iam. 1. 26.
If any man among you seeme to be religious, and
refraineth not his tongue, but deceiues his owne heart,
this mans religion is in vaire. I say, you may take
but this one instance, that this is the judgement
of the holy Ghost: Should a man haue an eye to every
Commandement, and should he but fayle
in this one thing, not bridling his tongue, but
giue vp his tongue to evill speeches, to let it
walke loose, vp and downe, whither it will, if he
doe but neglect this one particular, yet, sayth the
Text, all the rest of his Religion is but vaine;
Why? because there is not an Integritie in the
object, he hath not an eye to the whole Law, so
that, if a man fayle in this, he is not a perfect
man, if either it be in the subject, or in the object.
 Or thirdly; if it be in the meanes, that knits
these together;Integritie of the meanes. that is, take a man that will not

vse all Gods Ordinances conscionably, and in their
season; that he doth not pray, and receiue the
Sacrament, and vse the Communion of Saints,
and fasting, and every one in their season: I say,
if he doe not vse all the meanes: And againe, if
he doe not abstaine from all the occasions, but if
he venture vpon evill occasions, and incentiues
to lust, vpon such objects, as are readie to worke
vpon him, I say, if there be a defect in these, he
is an vnperfect, and vnsound hearted man; as
you may say of a mans bodie, if you see those
things that are essentially to a mans health, if he
faile in any of them, he will not drinke, nor he
will not eate, nor he doth not sleepe, he fayles in
the meanes that should make him sound; or else,
if he adventure vpon the occasions that may corrupt
him, he venters vpon poysoning, and infecting
dyet, infected, and pestilent ayre, etc.
he cannot haue a sound bodie; no more can such
a one haue a sound soule: So, I say, that the wholnesse,
and integritie of the heart, it lies in these
three put together. First, the heart must be all
sanctified: If you say, how shall wee know that?
Thus: he hath respect to every Commandement,
he fayles not in any thing, not in looking to his
thoughts, not in looking to his speeches, he doth
not neglect any affection that riseth in him, at any
time.
But how shall a man know that, whether he
haue done this?
So they hang, one vpon another, that you may
know the first by the second, and the second by

the third, you may know whether a man haue an
eye to every Commandement, if he vse all the
meanes, and abstaine from all occasions of sinne:
for if thou doe not this, pretend what thou wilt,
thy heart is false; So much for this third.
 The fourth Expression, that I finde in Scripture,
is vprightnes,Vprightnesse. or straightnesse of heart: the
word, in the originall answers (Rectitudo) and an
vpright man, in the originall is as much as (vir
rectus) a straight man: Marke the way of the vpright,
and perfect man, his latter end is good, it is
peace, Psal. 37. That is, of a straight man: So the
straightnes of the heart, if we can finde what it is,
we shall know what it is to haue a perfect heart
with God. Now the straightnes of a man (for so
I will rather expresse it) in the Concrete is seene
in this, whether he hath straight and vpright ends:
An vpright man you shall know by his aymes,
he hath a right end; the ayme, and scope, and
marke, that his eye is vpon, is Gods glory, and his
owne saluation, to doe, and suffer the will of God,
whatsoever it is; that is, to be faithfull, and diligent
in his Calling, to be serviceable an profitable
to others, these are the things that are in his
heart, these are the right ends, and he is sayd to
haue a right heart, whose ends are right, that pitcheth
vpon right, and straight ends, and likewise,
he that goes by a straight rule: for a right end never
hath a crooked rule leading to it. But, if a man
would know whether he hath a right end; thou
shalt know it by this, there needs not any oblique
way to lead to such an end, but thou wilt goe by a

straight rule; that is, the way of Gods Commandements
is the rule that thou wilt walke by:
Therefore if thou finde this in thy heart, that
there are devices, and plottings, and windings,
and turning wayes, that thou projectest to thy
selfe to bring any end to passe, now thou goest
not by a straight rule, but by a leaden Lesbian
rule, by a bended rule: whereas a right man, his
eye is still vpon the rule, he considers not this,
and this I will bring to passe; but he considers
with himselfe, what is the rule I ought to walke
by; As indeede every man hath some certaine
rule, and principle in his heart, and all the actions
that hee doth, proceede from those secret
rules, though himselfe take no notice of them.
Now this is planted in the heart of an vpright
man, that still he goes by a straight rule, though
he could desire many things might be brought
to passe, yet if the rule will not hold, he will not
seeke it. This you shall finde Gal. 6. Peace on the
Israel^ of God, as many as walke by this rule. They
are the true Israell, that keepe the right rule; so I
will commend this to describe to you a right,
and straight man, when his end is right, and his
rule is right: That is; when his heart is not a crooked
heart: for it hangs all vpon a string, crooked
ends, and crooked wayes, and a crooked heart.
He that hath a right heart; that is, not a perverse,
and froward heart; as we see Pro. 17. 18. A froward
heart (as the translation is, that is, a crooked
heart) it findes no good. A man is then sayd
to haue a crooked heart, when if you will lay to

him any straight rule; that is, giue him any right
precepts, tell him this you ought to doe, this is
the iust course* this is the way you ought to hold,
you shall never bring a crooked heart, and a
straight lyne together, his heart will still be starting
aside from it, it will not cleaue to it, it will
not accommodate it selfe to that: for his heart
is crooked. Therefore, Beloved, when wee giue
straight Counsels to them that haue ^rooked
hearts, we doe but loose our labour. If it were
a straight heart, straight Counsell, and it would
soone agree: such an expression you see Psal. 125.
He that seekes himselfe in crooked wayes, I will leade
him forth with the workers of iniquitie. That is,
when the inward bent of a mans heart is crooked,
when it will not entertaine straight, or right
Counsels, but i^ is still jarring, and disagreeing
with them, such a man God rejects* There^ore
(sayth he) he will leade him forth with the workers
of Iniquitie; that is, he will reckon him as
a worker of Iniquitie, and so will he deale with
him.
 The last Expression,Approoving a mans selfe to Gods sight* that I finde in Scripture,
to set forth this perfection of heart, is, to doe every
thing in Gods sight: When thou hast an eye
vpon the Lord, as well as he hath an eye vpon
thee. So you shall finde, 1 Cor. 2. As of sinceritie
in the ^ight o^ God, where the second is an explication
o^ the first, and so here, Walke before mee,
and be perfect: That is, if a man walke before God,
and approue himselfe to him, he is a perfect man,
for that shewes the difference betweene perfection

and soundnesse of heart, (...)
the one is truely such as will (...)
tryall, such as will endure even the eye of God
himselfe, when that which is (...)
to the vrmost tryall; that is able to say ^o
God; Lord thou knowest mine Innocency, as David
did, and Lord, I beseech thee, search m^ reynes,
and my heart; when one (...) say, as Hezekiah,
Lord,
thou knowest, that I haue walked with an vpright
heart.
Now, I say, when a man is so entire, that there
is such truth in him, that bring him to what
touch-stone you will, let him be brought to the
light, he knowes his workes are right, he is not
afraid, let God himselfe looke into his heart, that
hath pure eyes, that can search every cra^nie of
it, to whom every thing is naked, yet he shall
finde him true; that is, he doth every thing, if
God looke to the most inward retired thoughts,
he doth all in Gods fight, he approues himselfe to
him, such a one hath a perfect hea^t* So much
shall serue now for the opening of this to you,
what it is to be a perfect man; Beloved, I will apply
it very briefly.
If this be perfection*Vse 1. now you haue seene the
ground why God requires it,To examine our selues. and that no man can

be saved without it, let vs make this vse of it, to
try our selues; let a man examine himselfe whether
he be a perfect man, or no: you will say, how
shall we doe it? Indeede, my Beloved, I confesse
it is a hard thing to doe: for men are children in
vnderstanding; and, as children are apt to be deceived
with guilded things, they see the outside
to be fayre, they see a fayre peece of gold, but
they are not able to finde out the base mettall,
that is hid within; So it is our case, for the most
part, we are not able to finde out this truth, whether
our hearts be imperfect, and vnsound, and
rotten, or no: Therefore we had neede of helpe,
I will name one or two.
And this is one rule (I take but such as I finde
in Scripture) that is a rule that our Saviour giues,1. Tryall.
by which you may try your selues; sayth he to the
young man, when he comes to professe to him,
that he had done thus and thus from his youth,
saith he, if thou wilt be perfect, goe sell all that thou
hast: As if he should say; wouldest thou know
now if thou be perfect (those are the words) that
is, whether thou haue a sound heart, or no, goe
sell all that thou hast: That is, thou shalt know it
by this, that is the meaning of rhe Rule, Goe sell,
etc. Let a man looke round about him; if there
be any thing in the world, any evill, any calamitie,
that he is not willing to suffer; if againe, there
be any blessing, any comfort, that he is not willing
to part with, I dare boldly affirme it, that
such a man is an vnsound hearted man: for example;
put the case that such a thing befall him, as

imprisonment, that a man sayth thus with himselfe,
I will endure other things, but for that, I
haue a crazie bodie, that will not beare it, I haue
a wife, and children, that must be maintained,
I haue debts to pay, etc. that is a thing that I cannot
beare, and endure: let a man haue but such a
resolution as this, I will not beare this, such a man
will proue an vn^ound hearted man, if he be put
to tryall. And whensoever the heart is not sound,
God will bring one to it, at one time or other: or
againe, put the case a man say thus, I will endure
any thing else, but to be despised, but to be contemned,
to be disgraced, to loose my reputation
with my neighbours, to be a singular man, ^o be
an Owle for every body to wonder at, this is a
thing I can never endure, let this man be put vpon
it at any time, to doe any strange thing; that
is, a thing that seemes strange to worldly men,
that shall bring the censure of them vpon it, let
him be put to passe through evill report, as sometimes
he must be, let him be put to walke in the
wayes of righteousnesse, it sometimes seemes
strange to them that you doe not thus and thus,
such a man will deale vnsoundly, he will discover
himselfe to be rotten hearted.
So againe, a man that saith thus with himselfe,
I will not loose my practise, I will not loose my
imployments, I will not loose my trade, I will
not loose my dealing with my Customers; this
is my Plowe, this is it, that maintaines both mee
and mine, though I suffer many things, ye this is
that I cannot beare, it would breake me asunder,

etc. I say, let any man say thus in his heart (I doe
but giue you Instances, that you may vnderstand
what I would say) such a man will deale vnsoundly,
and imperfectly, when he is put to it, let it be
any thing in the world, I will not stand to giue
further instances. Let a man examine himselfe,
and thinke what is neare, and deare vnto him,
except he be inwardly willing to part with it,
that he can say, if any of the wayes of God fall
crosse with this; If I be any whit hazarded in the
keeping of a good conscience, by keeping this,
I will part with it: I say, except thou canst say
this, it is certaine thou hast a rotten heart; And
the like I may say for suffering; If a man say, such
a great mans favour I will not loose, my making,
or my marring depends vpon it, if there be any
such case, be it what it will be, thou art an vnsound
hearted man; and that is the meaning of
that; If any man will be my Disciple, he must denie
himselfe, and take vp his daily Crosse: As if he
should say, if a man will not deny himselfe, in every
thing, if he will not take vp every Crosse
(he may take vp to himselfe a profession to be a
Disciple, he may make as many pretences, and
shewes, as he will, to be my Disciple, but a true
and a genuine Disciple he cannot be) he cannot
be my Disciple, except he deny himselfe in every
thing, and take vp every Crosse, and therefore let
a man examine himselfe in that, whether he be
thus prepared to part with every thing, if thou
wilt be perfect, sayth the Lord (that is the place I
^ake it from) then sell all that thou hast, that was

the tryall, he was put to, and it is a tryall by which
you shall judge of your selues.
So likewi^e,2. Tryall. you shall finde another tryall of
that, Math. 6. and the last; Be you therefore perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect. There is another
way of finding out this perfectnesse of heart,
whether it be in vs or no, you must be perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect: no lesse will
serue the turne; if you be not so perfect, as he is
perfect, you cannot be saved, you are vnsound
hearted.
You will say to me, this is very hard,Ob. who is able
to be perfect, as his heavenly Father is perfect?
Beloved;Answ. the meaning of this, is not that you
should reach his perfection; for, who can ever
doe it? but the meaning of it is this, there must
be as great a length, as great a breadth, and latitude
in your perfection as in his, your perfection
must answer his. How shall we know that? Gods
perfection is knowne by his Commandements*
Looke how largely the perfection of God is set
forth in the Scriptures, so large your obedience
must be. If it come short in any thing, if it be not
as long, and as broad, as it were, it is vnsound,
and (...), and imperfect obedience, that shall be
cast away as evill, and counterfeit: for you must
be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, sayth
Christ, he giues this as a reason of all that he had
delivered before, (you shall see in a word in particular)
sayth he, you haue thought it enough to
loue your friends, but, sayth he, it is not enough,

you must loue your enemies, you must blesse those that
curse you, and speake well of those that speake evill
of you. And when a man shall object* but this is a
hard thing? that is the Conclusion, sayth he, you
must be perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect;
he doth thus, he causeth his Sunne to shine vpon the
good, and the bad, he causeth his rayne to fall vpon
them, and your perfection must be as large as his:
And so againe, perhaps thou art one that wilt
abstaine from swearing greater oaths, but that is
not enough, thou must not sweare by thy haires,
thou art not able to make one white, or blacke,
much lesse, my Brethren, must we sweare by our
truth, and by our faith, which is more worth then
haires. So againe, perhaps thou art one that wilt
not commit Adultery, but if thou cherish sinfull
lusts, contemplati^e fornication, and vncleannes
in thy heart, thou fallest short, in that thy perfection
is not so broad, as the Lords; that is, that
his law requires, that sayth, thou shalt not lust:
And so againe; perhaps thou sayest, he hath done
me wrong, and I will doe him no iniustice, but
an eye for an eye, thou requirest justice according
to retaliation, and proportion: But that is not enough,
but thou must forgiue perfectly: if hee
haue done thee two or three or foure wrongs,
thou must beare them, and leaue revenge perfectly
to God: if you object, this is hard, who can doe
it? He saith, be perfect, etc. so you see the meaning
of it. If you would finde out now, whether
your hearts be perfect or no, consider whether
the latitude of them be such, whether it be thus

broad, that is (that I may expresse it fully to you)
whether you walke so exactly, that you haue not
onely an eye to the maine poynts of every Commandements,
but you obserue the least particle
of every Commandement, the least Iota, the least
pricke, and poynt, that you finde in every Commandement.
Except you doe this, I say, your hearts are not
perfect: the scope of the Chapter is to require
the exact keeping of every Commandement, to
the least, and to the smallest things. And there
are these three reasons put together, to confirme
it.
One is; for, sayth he, every Iot of the Law, is
of so much worth, though you thinke it a small
thing, That it were better that heaven and earth
should perish, then that it should. It is of greater
price then the whole world. Therefore the Lord
will not haue the least jot of the Law to perish.
Againe; sayth he, the Pharisies would keepe the
great Commandements, the principall poynt,
and part of every Commandement; but the particles
of it, the nicer poynts of it, they would
not keepe. And, sayth he, except your righteousnesse
goe beyond theirs, except you goe further then
theirs, you shall never be saved.
Then the last is, that I named to you before,
except you be perfect, etc. there must be such a latitude,
for the extension of your perfection,
though not for the intention, and degrees of it,
as is in your heavenly Father, you cannot be saved

else. Therefore, if you say, this is a hard condition;
Beloved, you must know this, that Iesus
Christ hath given to all those that shall be saved
grace for grace, that looke as he requires perfection
of obedience, in a latitude answerable to all the
Commandements, to all the particles of them,
even a perfection answerable to his owne perfection;
so he hath given vs grace for grace, that
is, he hath given vs an inward abilitie of graces
which answer every Commandement; he hath
given vs grace for grace, as the Father giues lim
for lim, part for part, there is not a little finger,
not a toe, but the Father giues it the Sonne, and
the Sonne hath given it to vs, Moses brought the
Law, but grace comes by him; and when he would
shew what grace it is, it is grace of such a latitude,
that it enables you to be holy, as he is holy in
all manner of conversation, there is another expression
like that to be perfect as etc. Therefore,
my Beloved, if you would haue the testimony of
sinceritie, and of perfection to your selues, take
heed you neglect not the smallest things, I know how vsually it is found fault with,
when men are
so curious to looke to every m^ate (it is to be
more nice then wise) it is too much straightnesse,
and too much precisenesse, and exactnesse: I beseech
you, consider the ground, I will be hold to
say this; that man that neglects the smallest thing,
say it be vaine speech vpon the Sabbath day, say
it be the neglect, or overly performance of prayer
from day to day, though he will not omit the maine dutie; though it be (...) vaine speech; or

vaine thoughts, though it be that which the best
are continually subject vnto, yet, if it be so that he
haue not a continuall eye to them, so that he neglect
not the smallest of these things, or if you can
name any lesser Commandement, I say, let any
mans heart be of this constitution, that he neglects
them, that he hath not a speciall eye to the
observance of them, a speciall care to keepe them,
he is vnsound, and rotten at the heart, he shall
never be saved contin^ing such; for the confirmation
of it, I will name but that one place, Pro. 19.
16. He that keepes the Commandements, keepes his
owne soule, but he that despi^eth his wa^, shall dye for
it: That is, he that keepes the Commandements
every way, that lookes to all the Commandements,
and every particle of them, and sees how
farre they reach, as they are particles of the Commandement.
The Commandement sayth, thou shalt not kill,
to be angry with thy brother, to admit an inward
distemper of malice and envie in thy hear^* this
small thing, though it be but a transient passion,
yet thou must make a speciall conseience of it.
And so, thou shalt not commit adultery; That is the
maine of the Commandement, yet, if thou haue
an adulterous eye, an adulterous tongue, or adulterous
thoughts in thee, these are the touches of
vncleannesse, the tinctures of it, I say, except thou
makest conscience of these, and keepe the command
thus farre in this extent, and thus exactly,
thou dost not keepe thine owne soule, but he that
thus keepes the Commandement* keeps his soule,

for, sayth he, he that despiseth his way, that is the
word I meane to vrge, he shall dye for it; that is,
he that thinkes thus with himselfe; Alas, these
are poore, and small things, they are things of little
moment, and therefore he despiseth them;
Well, sayth he, he that despiseth the least thing,
he that despiseth any of his wayes; that is, the least
particle of any Commandement, you see what he
sayth, he doth not say, he shall be afflicted for it,
but he shall dye for it. Therefore I pronounce
this out of that place as well as the rest, that he
that despiseth any of his wayes, any part of Gods
Commandement, seeme the dutie to be of never
so little moment, vnlesse he repent, and amend,
he shall dye for it; for now thou despisest some of
thy wayes: Beloved, a godly man, though he fayle
much, yet this is an inseparable propertie of a
perfect heart, still he hath an eye vpon every
thing, he doth not despise the least of
his wayes, the least steppe, the least
particle, the least tincture of the
Commandement, but he
hath respect to all.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE EIGHTH
SERMON.

G^NESIS 17. 1.
Walke before mee, and be thou perferct.

WEe now proceed to the rest of
the properties of this perfection,
that you may try your
selues by them; And wee will
hold the same course we did, in
opening to you the nature of
this perfection: that is; wee will open to you
those places of Scripture, wherein the Scripture
expresseth the proper effects of a perfect heart:
And therefore, to that second we will adde this
as a third that will keepe you from mis-vnderstanding
it:3. Property, He purifieth himselfe. that is; we must be perfect, as our
heauenly Father is perfect; that property of perfection
you shall finde,1 Ioh. 3. 3. 1 Ioh. 3. 3. He that hath
this hope in him, purifieth himselfe, euen as hee is
pure.2 Cor. 7. 1. So likewise 2 Cor. 7. Since we^ haue such

promises, let vs cleanse our selues from all pollution
of flesh and spirit. That is; those that haue these
promises, and beleeue them, will be still cleansing
of themselues: Contrary to which is that
generation spoken of Prou. 30. 12.Pro. 30. 12. There is a
generation that are pure in their owne Eyes, but yet
they cleanse not themselues from their filthinesse. So
that, my beloued, to haue a purified disposition,
to haue a heart and a spirit ready to cleanse it
selfe, this is to haue a perfect heart: So that a
Godly man, he may be many times defiled with
sinne and vncleannesse, he may haue his heart
many times muddy and imp^re, hee may haue
it clouded and ouercast with passions and vnruly
affections, but yet it cleeres vp againe, and hee
comes out of them all with more brightnesse,
and with more cleerenesse and purenesse of
heart. The substance of it is this* wee deny not
that a godly man may fall into many sinnes, into
many impurities, into many defilements* but
yet he riseth out of them againe by an assiduous
and daily repentance, and still he growes vp dayly
to more and more perfection, as Dauid, and
Hezekias, and the rest; whereas, on the other side,
a man that hath an imperfect and vnsound heart,
though hee bee recouered out of a sinne againe,
and againe, yet hee returnes to it, as it is said, 2.
Pet. 2. 14.^ Pet. 2. 14. men that haue eyes full of adultery, that
cannot cease to sinne: that which is said of that
sinne there, they cannot cease to sinne, that is,
though they make many Couenants with God
to leaue their sinne of vncleannesse, yet they

haue eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease to
sinne, I say, it is true of any other sinne, to which
an vnsound-hearted man is giuen vp, he cannot
cease to sin, as Pro. 19. 19. A man of much anger
shall suffer punishment, though he be deliuered, his
anger shall come againe: that is, though hee bee
often punished with his anger, for his distempered
anger and passion, though he finde many
euill effects of it, and so be deliuered from it by
many purposes to returne to it no more, yet,
saith he, his anger will come againe and againe;
So that it is true which is said in the generall,
Let the foole be beaten in a morter, yet he will returne
aga^^e to his folly and wickednes, it cannot
be beaten out of him: it is the nature of an vnsound
hearted man, though he be often deliuered,
he will returne againe, and againe. Ieroboam,
though he were admonished, yet still hee
will returne: the Israelites, though they were
often quieted, and satisfied, yet being a stiffe-necked
people, they still rebelled and murmured
against God; so did Phoroah: so that you
may take this for a sure r^le, that, take a man
whose heart is not sound, and all the miracles
in the world, all the preaching, all the admoni^ions,
all the mercies, all the afflictions, all the
experience that he can gai^e by all the passages
of Gods prouidence towards him, and about
him, will no^ keepe him from returning to his
si^ne, but still he fals backe to it againe and againe,
it gets strength still; but with a man that
ha^h a sound heart, that is perfect, it is not so,

hee doth not easily returne againe, but though
he doe fall for a time, (as I deny not but hee is
many times ouertaken with the same infirmity)
yet he still cleanseth himselfe,
But,4. Obiect. you will obiect, take the holiest man,
may he not relapse many times into sinne, may
he not fall into the same sinne againe and againe,
yea, euen into grosse and great transgressions?
Beloued,Ans. I cannot deny but he may, (for we
must not take away the right^ousnes from those
that are perfect, whilest wee seeke to exclude
those that are hypocrites and vnsound-hearted,
and therefore I say) I deny not that there may
be many relapses into the same sinne, though
the heart be perfect and sincere; and therefore
to shew you cleerely the difference, wee must
spend a little time in this point.4. Differences betweene the relapses of sound and vnsound-hearted men. There are these
foure differences between the turning againe
of a man whose heart is vnsound, and betweene
the relapses that are incident to a man whose
heart is perfect with God.
First,1. Difference. you shall finde this difference between
them, that a man whose heart is perfect with
God, though he doe relapse into sinne, yet still
he gets ground of his sinne, euen by euery relapse;
marke it; I say, he gets ground of sinne,
and grace gathers strength by it; whereas, on
the other side, an vnsound-hearted man, the
oftner he fals, the more sinne gathers strength,
and euen the goodnesse, he seemed to haue had,
is lessened more and more, till, at length, it bee

quite abolished. This is a point much to be obserued,
and the ground of it is this; because any
grace, where it is a proper grace, where it is a
right grace, let it be wounded by any relapse,
by any transgression, I say, it gathers ^trength,
euen by that relapse, it is the nature of true grace
so to doe; It gathers strength euen from the
contrary, as fire doth when it is compassed about
with coldnesse, by an Antiperistasis, so it
is with grace: It is a common saying that you
haue, and true, as you commonly vnderstand it,
that Vertue growes stronger when a man fals
into affliction: but more true, if thus taken,
that grace gathers strength, when it selfe hath
receiued a wound, when the grace it selfe is
weakned, as thou thinkest, it gathers more
strength: As for example, let a sound-hearted
man, whose grace is true and right, and genuine,
and not counterfeit, let him fall into any transgression
that giues a wound to his graces, say he
fall into an act of intemperance of anger and
passion, he gathers more strength by it; euen
these graces they grow brighter by it: It is not
so with other men, the more they fall; the weaker
they grow; Dauid, when once he had committed
the sinne of cutting off the lap of Sauls
garment; none was more carefull then he was
afterward, he would not offer him the least violence:
And so Peter, when that grace of Courage
and boldnesse for the Truth, had once receiued
a wound by his denying of Christ, you
see what strength hee gathered by it, hee grew

af^e^wards ^he boldest of all the Apostles, as
you see Acts 4.Acts 4. 12. So it is generally with all the
Saints; euen those wo^ds, by which it is expres^sed
in the Scripture, discouer as much vnto vs;
Hezekiah, when hee was falne into the sinne of
pride and boasting of his Treasure, saith the
Text, hee humbled himselfe; you shall fi^de, 2.
Chron. 32. 25.2 Chro. 32. 25. the words there vsed, are, the
Lord tryed Hezekiah, the Lord left him, that he
might (...) him, and know all that was in his
heart: The like phrase is vsed of Peters falling,
Satan desires to winnow thee, but I haue prayed for
thee, that thy faith doe not faile: And, now
marke it, when they doe fall into any sinne, it
is to them as a tryall to the Gold, and as a winnowing
to the Corne; euery sinne, euery temptation,
euery fall, though Satan intend to burne
out the good mettall, yet the issue still is this,
they lose nothing by their fals, but their drosse,
the chaffe is still winnowed out; euery sinne,
they fall into, discouers that corruption that
before they tooke no nocice of; as Hezehiah
knew not the pride, before, that was in his
heart, but that action discouered it to him, so it
was thereby cleansed and emptied forth: So
likewise Peters cowardlinesse and fearefulnesse
was discouered by that act, hee knew it more,
and therefore he was more watchfull against it,
hee gathered more strength against it: so that
this is the nature of the relapses of the Godly,
that still they empty their hearts more and
more of those sinnes that they fall into: againe;

^he graces, to which they giue a wound, still
gather more strength; but with others it is not
so, still they are weakned by their relapses, the
good things, they seemed to haue, are still lessened,
and suffer diminution, till at length they
be quite abolished, that is one difference.
The second is;2. Difference. though a godly man fall
backe to sinne againe and againe, yet hee neuer
fals backe to the allowance of any sinne: there
is a great difference, my beloued, betweene these
two, betweene returning to the act of a sinne,
and the allowance of it: Another man doth
not onely returne to the sinne, but hee returnes
likewise to the continuance in it, he is ready, in
the end, either to excuse the sinne, to finde out
some deuice and excuse for it, or else hee is ready
to say, I see it is impossible for me to ouercome
it, I see there is no remedy, I must giue
vp my selfe to it: This you shall see in the relapses
of Saul; Saul tooke a resolution more
^hen once, that he would pe^secute Dauid no
more; and no doubt this resolution was exceeding
hearty for the time; but, you see, hee
did not onely returne to the act, but to a continuance
in it, and an allowance of himselfe in it.
So likewise did Pharoah, hee resolued many
times that hee would let the People goe, and
made that promise to Mos^s and to ^he Lord,
that he would let them goe; but, you see, hee
returned againe, not onely to the sinne, but to
such an allowance of it, that hee excused himselfe
in it, hee thought rather, hee had erred in

his purpose of letting them goe, and so continued
still to retaine them. This you shall finde
in all the falles of Hypocrites, in all their relapses,
that in the end (howsoeuer for a time they
may resume their purposes againe) they weare
them out, and they step backe to a resolution
to continue in that sinne; they thinke thus with
themselues, I see it is a sinne that preuailes against
me, I am not able to resist it, it is too
strong for me, and therefore I will goe no more
about it.
Thirdly;3. Difference. as there is a difference in this;
so there is a difference in their manner of ouercomming,
and in their manner of returning,
when they arise out of a sinne, when they preserue
themselues from it after a relapse, by
which you may iudge likewise; for you may
iudge the one by the other: A man whose
heart is vnsound, may take to himselfe a strong
and fixed resolution, by which hee may resist
the sinne, and yet this banke may bee borne
downe by the violence of Temptation: But,
in a godly man the resistance is otherwise, and
accordingly the relapse is of a different nature:
for the resistance is after this manner, it is as
when you see one streame resist another, as you
see in Riuers that are subiect to ebbing and
flowing, there runnes a contrary streame that
ouer-beares it; so it is in those that are sound-hearted,
there is a strong inclination, that carries
them another way, such as that expressed,
Gal. 5. 17. the spirit lusteth against the flesh: so

that, if you marke the manner of their ouercomming,
the manner of their rising out of
their relapses, you shall finde them to bee in
this manner; put the case the flesh, for some
brunt, for some fit, haue gotten the better,
notwithstanding, saith he, the spirit lusts against
it, and suffers not the flesh to doe what
it would; that is, there is a contrary streame
within him, which resists those desires of the
flesh, that binds them againe, and leades them
captiue, as, before, the spirit was led captiue:
In others it is not so; there may be a certaine
fixed resolution, which may resist a strong
temptation, as a Banke or a Rocke resist a strong
billow: but there is a great deale of difference
betweene this and those risings out of relapses
that are done by a contrary streame, by the
lusting of the spirit: for they haue no such
spirit in them, to lust against the flesh, and
so to binde it, as it were, to ouercome it, that
they returne no more to those sinnes to which
before they were giuen vp.
Last of all,4. Difference. there is this difference betweene
them, that hee that hath a perfect heart, hee
that is sound-hearted, while hee is himselfe,
he neuer relapseth into any sinne; marke it,
while hee is himselfe, which note I take
out of Romanes 7.Rom. 7. 20. a place which you know:
It is no longer I, but sinne that dwelleth in mee:
that is, as if hee should say, I, while I am my
selfe, neuer fall into any sinne; but when I am
distempered, when I am ouercome, and ouerruled

by sinne, that dwelleth in me, then I sinne
and fall backe: But, otherwise, I say, a godly
man, while he is himselfe, neuer relapseth into
any sinne, he cannot sinne, because he is borne
of God, he keepes himselfe that the euill one
touch him not; the ground of which is, because,
while he is himselfe, Hee that is in him is
stronger then all the world:1 Ioh. 4. 4. 1 Ioh. 4. 4. He that
is in you, is stronger, etc. that is, if hee bee vpon
euen termes, still he gets the victory. But, my
beloued, now let there be an inaequality, let him
not be himselfe, let there be some violent transportation
from the flesh, so that he is led Cap^iue
b^ it, now he is ouercome: for hee is not
himselfe in s^ch a case; i^ is, as Paul saith of
^imselfe, the good I would doe, that doe I not; and
the euill that I would not doe, that doe I: tha^, as
you see in a combate betweene two, suppose
that one that were the stronger, were it vpon
aequall termes, would carry the victory; notwithstanding,
when his adue^sary gets the hill,
and hath the wind on him, he ouercomes him,
and leades him captiue: So it is in this case;
^he Spiri^, the regenerate part, though it might
and would alway get the better, were it vpon
aequall term^s with the ^^^sh; yet, when the
flesh shall get the hill, as it were, get vpon the
hill of temptation, and shall haue wind to driue
^he smoke vpon the eyes and face of the Combatant,
that is, to blinde him; in such a case,
vpon such a disaduantage, he is ouercome, and
fals into sinne: And therefore you see how the

Apostle expresseth it,Rom. 7. 22. Rom. 7. 22. I delight
(saith he) in the Law of God, according to the inward
man: as if he should say, That is my constant
course; might I doe what I would, That
would I alwayes be doing; That is my inclination,
there is my delight; b^t ye^ (saith he) I see a
law of my members, rebelling against the law
of my minde, leading me capti^e to the law of
sinne; that is, there is a strong power within
me, that sometimes distempers me, and puts me
out of my selfe: that he cals a law; because it
is commanding and powerfull like a law; and
the law of my members, (whereas the other is
called the law of my minde) because, though it
be through the whole soule, yet principally the
force and vigour of it is seene in the me^bers,
that is, in the inferiour parts of the soule: saith
the Apostle, when I am thus distempered and
put besides my selfe, when there is such a law
rebelling against the law of my minde, in such
a case, I am ouercome, and led captiue; but,
when I am my selfe, I sinne not, it is the sinne
that dwels in me. So much shall serue, to haue
shewed you the differences betweene those relapses
which godly men are subiect to, and those
turnings and fallings backe into a continuance
in sinne, to which other men are subiect: For,
my beloued, it must not seeme strange to vs; for
both are alike subiect to infirmities, both are
subiect to returne, as you see, a sheepe may fall
into the myre as soone as a swine, for the commission
of sin, and so likewise for the omission of

duties: an Appletree may haue a fit of barrennes
and vnfruitfulnes, as well as a Crabtree, or any other;
but the difference is great in the manner of
them, as we shewed: But still the maine difference
is to be remembred, that hee that hath a
perfect heart, is still clensing and purifying himselfe;
the other doe not that, but so fall backe
to sinne, that they wallow in it, as a Swine doth
in the myre. So much shall serue for this.
A fourth property of a perfect heart you shall
finde expressed Phil. 3.4 Property, He pres^eth to the marke that is before him. if you take the words
together, from the 12 Verse to the 15: (for, I
say, the course we will hold, shall be, to open
to you those places where the Scripture sets
downe,Phil. 3. 12. 15. the Characters and properties of A perf^ct
heart) not as though I had already attained it,
or were already perfect, but I follow after, if I may
comprehend that, for which I am also comprehended
by Iesus Christ, etc. I presse hard to the
ma^ke, for the price of the high Calling of God,
in Christ Iesus; Let therefore as many as be perfect,
be thus minded; the meaning of it is this,
saith the Apostle, this is my course: I am not
yet attained to perfection, but, saith he, this I
doe, I ayme at the vtmost, euen at the price of the
high Calling of God in Iesus Christ: I ayme at
the vtmost, euen at the toppe of perfection, and
againe, saith he, I follow hard to it: And, saith
he, not onely I, but as many as are perfect, let them
be thus minded, where, by the perfect, he meanes,
you see, not one that hath already a perfect holinesse,
but one that is sound hearted: for, hee

had said before, not as if I were already perfect;
and yet here he saith, Let vs, as many as bee perfect,
be thus minded: so you shall finde heere
these two property of a perfect man,Which co^nsists of one
whose heart is perfect with God.
First,1. In ayming at the highest degree of holinesse. he aymes at the highest degree of holinesse,
he lookes at the very marke it selfe, hee
lookes at the toppe, at the standard, at the vtmost
exact line of holinesse, and hee labours to
square himselfe to it, though hee cannot reach
it, yet it is his endeuour, he propounds not to
himselfe a shorter iournies end then hee should
doe, but his ayme is euen at the very toppe of
perfection, at a perfect conformity to the Image
of Christ; for that is it the Apostle heere
speakes of, that wee may be conformable to the
Death and resurrection of Iesus Christ, this was
his ayme:An vnsound heart aymes not at perfect holinesse. whereas, on the other side, another
doth not so, but he sets a certaine compasse, a
certaine limit to himselfe, there hee fixeth his
staffe, hee doth not intend to goe any further,
he doth not intend to grow vp to full holinesse,
as it is expressed,2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Cor. 7. 1. hee doth not intend
to be holy, as the Lord is holy, in all manner
of conuersation, this is not his intent, this is not
the thing he aymes at. So herein they differ;
hee that hath a perfect heart, hee followes hard
after the marke, hee aymes at the very toppe
of perfection; and the ground of this difference
is, partly, because a man that is vnsound-hearted,
will not be at so much cost and paines
for heauen,He will not be at the cost. as to ayme at the top of perfection;

he thinkes th^s with himselfe, that to bee so
strait laced, that he must be exact in euery thing;
to obserue all his speeches, that hee may not
speake freely; and to giue an account of all his
time, and of all his actions, that hee may not
walke in many things according to his owne
phantasies, according to his owne delight and
pleasure, he thinkes, if he must be tyed to this,
that he may not, at any time, giue the bridle to
his humour, and to his inordinate appetite, but
still he must be so restrained and fe^tered, and
pinioned, as it were, to walke by an exact r^le,
that all his actions, and all his steps may bee
pondered; he thinkes with himselfe, it is more
then euer he shall be able to doe; hee doth not
indeede prize Christ and Heauen at such a rate,
^hat he will be thus exact and perfect; and therfore
he aymes not at it, he neuer goes about it:
And partly againe;2. He aymes not at God. because God indeed is not
his ayme, but his owne safety, his owne happinesse
and security, his owne escaping of Hell
and Iudgement: therefore hee doth not seeke
simply to please GOD, and keepe his Commandements,
but he seekes so much perfection
as will ser^e his owne turne; and therefore he
doth with it, euen as a lazie scholler doth, that
intends not simply to excell in learning, but
would haue as much learning as should passe
through examination, and get a Degree; or as
a man that labours not simply to get an excellencie
in the Art of Arithmeticke, but would
haue so much only as would keepe a Merchants

booke; or as a Lawyer that would haue so
much Law onely as will serue his turne, as will
serue his practice: I say, when a man aymes
at this, you doe not say knowledge is his ayme;
for were it so, he would desire to know whatsoeuer
is knowable, hee would set no limits to
himselfe, were knowledge his ayme simply:
but we may truly say of such a man, it is not
learning, but it is his trade, his degree, or some
such particular thing, that is his ayme: So it is
with a man whose heart is vnsound, and not
perfect with God: God himselfe is not his ayme,
and therefore he doth not desire to keepe his
Commandements perfectly and exactly; for
did he so, he would set no limits to himselfe; he
would doe as Paul doth here, he would ayme at
the vtmost degree of perfection; but such mens
ayme is their owne profit, their owne aduantage,
their security and deliuerance from Hell
and from Iudgements: that is, they doe not
care for holinesse simply considered, but so far
as it may serue such a turne, as it may deliuer
them from such a Iudgement, as it is a bridge to
lead theem ouer to such a benefit to themselues.
And the last ground of this difference betweene
them,3. He wants light. that they ayme not at the vtmost
degree, is, because an vnsound-hearted man
ha^h not so much light in him, as to discouer to
him, to shew to him the vtmost degree of perfection.
A man that hath but a morall light,
a naturall, common light, is able to see g^osse
Euils, and common duties that are contrary to

^hem; but exactnesse of perfection that is required,
he sees not; or, if hee doe discerne it
practised by others, yet in his iudgement hee
disallowes it, hee thinkes it a thing more then
needs: Whereas a man that is sound-hearted,
one that is perfect, hee approues it, hee sees an
excellency in it, hee admires it in others, and
would faine imitate it himselfe: and hence is
the difference, that they ayme not at perfection;
it is not their scope, they desire not the vtmost,
the highest degree of holinesse; whereas a man
that hath a sound heart, still he labours to adde
to that which is wanting, in his faith, in his
loue, in his obedience: and this is one diffe^ence,
that he ^hat is perfect, saith hee, is thus
minded.
The second is;2. A perfect hea^t followes hard to the marke. hee followes hard, hee doth
not onely make the marke his vtmost ayme,
but hee followes after it hard; that is, it is
the property of a man that is perfect, that hee
doth not loyter in the way, but hee followes
hard after the marke; though he be subiect to
many decayes, to many sweruings and declinings,
yet, still he makes them vp againe, still
hee repaires those breaches in his heart; and,
though many times he step out of the way, still
he recouers himselfe againe; so that his constant
and ordinary worke is, euery day to make
his heart perf^ct; where he finds any crookedn^sse,
to set it streight againe; where he finds
any defect, that he labours to supply; this is
^is ordinarie and constant course: So, beloued,

you shall finde this difference betweene a
man that is imperfect, and another that is sound
hearted, that he still amends his heart, he still
makes it vp, he still brings it to a good temper,
that is his worke from day to day, that he sets it
right and streight before God in all things: and
you shall see,Ma^. 18. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 18. 1. such an expression;
there the Disciples aske Christ this question;
Master, (say they) who shall bee the greatest in
the Kingdome of God? Our Sauio^r takes a little
child, and sets him vp amongst them, and saith,
except you bee conuerted as one of these little children,
you shall not enter into the Kingdome of God.
The meaning is this; I see there is pride arising
in your hearts, you are looking after great
things for your selues, that ariseth of a selfe-conceit
you haue; I tell you, (saith hee) Except
you conuert from this euill, except you
turne your selues from it, except you become
as this childe, and empty your selues of this
pride, and become humble, as this childe, become
little in your owne eyes, as this childe is,
you shall not enter into the Kingdome of Heauen.
So that the meaning of it is this; that a
man who is sound-hearted, he is still following
hard, he is still making his heart perfect from
day to day, he is still turning to God againe and
againe, as it is said,Lam. 3. 40. Lam. 3. 40. Let vs search
and try our wayes, and turne againe to the Lord:
that is, it is his constant worke: My beloued*
this is the nature of a mans heart, still there is
something or other rising amisse in it, as you

see weeds in a field.Simile. As it is in a Corne field,
except you weede it, and till it, a^d plow it, and
manure it, and neuer giue it ouer, it will bee
ouer-growne with weeds, and waxe fallow againe,
and not be fit to beare Corne with any
constancy; so it is with our hearts; except wee
still plow them, and weede them, and watch ouer
them, they will be ready to grow fallow,
they will be ready to be ouer-growne: therefore,
I say, it is the property of a man that is
perfect, he is still returning, and making vp the
breaches, and defects; as we see, 2 Ioh. 8.2, Ioh. 8. Let
vs looke to our selues, that we lose not the things
that we haue wrought, but that wee may receiue a
full reward: Marke, let vs looke to our selues,
that we lose not the things wee haue wrought;
as if he should say, euen those that are perfect,
that are sound-hearted, there is this property
in them, (though he deliuer it by way of Exhortation,
yet is a property that neuer is seperate
from them) they still looke to themselues, that
they lose not the things they haue wrought:
and see, my beloued, there is great reason for it:
for a man may lose all that he hath wrought, he
may lose his reward altogether, as you see, Reu.
3. 11.Reu. 3. 11. Take heed, hold that thou hast, lest another
take thy Crowne. You know; Ioash went farre,
and so did Iehu, and so did those Israelites in the
Wildernesse; and yet they lost their reward,
for not looking to themselues: but this is for
those that may fall quite away: But for the Elect,
that can neuer fall quite away, this diligence

is required, and is proper to them; they
still looke to themselues, lest they lose that
which they haue wrought, lest they should not
receiue a full reward: for, though they cannot
lose their reward altogether, yet they may
lose a part of their reward; as, you see, Dauid
did, because he did not looke narrowly to himselfe,
he did not follow hard to the marke, (for
in some things they may faile, though it bee
their property to looke to themselues; that I
expresse to you by the way: I say, part of their
reward they may lose, for) the Sword departed
not from his house: if, like those builders 2 Cor. 3.2 Cor. 3. 12. you build hay and stubble, then you shall bee
saued, if your hearts be vpright, yet as by fire:
that is, you shall be scorched by the fire, it shall
haue some impression vpon you, something or
other vpon your name, or some other iudgement;
somewhat you shall haue; but this is their
property, They looke to themselues, that they lose
not the things they haue wrought, but that they
may receiue a full reward: For still they are apt
to fall backe from the degree they haue attained:
And, againe, the sinfull lusts they thought
they had mortified are ready to returne: now
he that is perfect, is thus minded, hee not onely
aymes at the vtmost, but from day to day, hee
makes vp the defects that he findes in his heart,
and againe, labours to bring downe and to
mortifie those lusts that are renewed, and begin
to gather a new strength, and to bud forth
againe; this is their property: so, I say, if thou

wouldest k^ow it, marke what thy aime is, whether
thou ayme at the vtm^st degree of holines,
or whether thou set li^its to they selfe; and
likewise, whether thy constant course be, to
make thy heart perfect with GOD, from day to
day, and to walke exactly with him; whether
thou be carefull to husband thy time, that thou
mayest haue leasure to doe it: for, my beloued,
a man cannot doe a thing exactly, except hee
haue time to doe it in: And therfore. Ephes. 5.Eph. 5. 15. 16.
Walke exactly, not as foolish, b^t as wise, redeeming
the time: As if hee should say, if you would
walke exactly, redeeme the time, it is your wisdome;
for else you lose all your labour: walke
exactly, and not as fooles; for else you had as
good doe nothing at all; be so farre wise, that
you doe not lose the things you worke; and to
doe this, redeeme the time, that you may haue
leisure to doe it: I say, consider, whether yo^
be willing so to husband time, to gaine so much
leasure from your other calling and affaires, that
you can spend time to search your hearts, in
trying your wayes, in setting all things straight
within you, that you may walke perfectly with
GOD from day to day. So much for this property
likewise; So many as are perfect, le^ them
be like minded.
The next property of this perfectnesse of
heart,5 Property, With a whole hea^t. you shall find in those two places compared
together, Ier. 3. 10.Ier. 3. 10. They haue not returned to
me with their whole heart, but feignedly; if you
compare that with Hosea 7. 14.Hos. 7. 14. the Lord there

complaines, though they did returne and sanctifie
a Fast, and did seeke him very deuoutly,
saith he, you returned not to the most high, but against
me haue you rebelled. The meaning of
both places is this; they haue not sought me^
with their whole heart, but feignedly; the word
feignedly shewes, that by whole heart, hee
meanes there, a true heart: So that, as you
would iudge now of an vnsound-hearted friend;
you say, he is not perfect, he is not sound, he is
not true, when his actions carry a shew and appearance
of loue, and his heart doth not answer
it; there is a dissonancy betweene the appearance
he makes, and his heart: his heart is
knowne by this, he loues not the person of his
friend; he may obserue him, for some othe^
respects, but his person he doth not inwardly
respect: So, if a man would know whether his
heart be perfect with God, let him consider whether
he do not as false-hearted men are wont to
doe, that obserue other men out of respects,
because they see those parties haue power to
doe them good or hurt, therefore they are diligent
to obserue them; as the Apostle saith,
They haue the persons of men in admiration because
of aduantage: that is, they haue them
in admiration, they are very obsequio^s to
them, ready to doe them offices of friendship;
but it is for their owne aduantage,
not because they loue their friends, they are
nor aff^cted to their persons. Contrary to this
is singlenesse of heart; when wee loue not

in word onely, in deed and in truth, when we
loue with a pure loue, such a man, we say, comes
to be perfect with his friend: and so it is in this
case, when a man lookes on God, as one that
hath power to doe him good and euill, as one
that hath power to aduance him, or to cast him
downe, and out of these respects he serues him,
and obeyes him, and will doe many things for
his sake; but yet he doth not serue him with a
single heart; that is, he doth not inwardly loue
the person of God, he doth not looke on him
as he is seperate from all punishments and rewards,
as he is sequestred from all such respects,
so as to be hearty to him. This was the fault of
the Iewes; saith he* they returned againe; but
to whom was it? to their corne, to their oyle,
and not to the most high: they returned, and
were very de^out to keepe the Fast, ready to
heare, but against mee they rebelled. The meaning
of it is this, the Iewes returned to the Lord,
they were carefull to please him, but it was because
they desired freedome from the Famine,
and Warre, and oth^r Calamities* and therefore
they serued the Lord, but they did not lay
hold on God himselfe, vpon the graces and comforts
of the Spirit, vpon aeternall life, these were
not the things they did inwardly respect; and
therefore, God himselfe they loued not, to him
they did not returne, (as you shall see, because
I will vse that exppession of laying hold vpon
God, and vpon aeternall life, 1 Tim. 6.1 Tim. 6. 12.) when
the Apostle Paul had spoken there of diuers

men that were contentious, he puts these two
properties together; they are exceeding contentious,
and couetous, they reckon gaine godlinesse;
but thou, saith he, doe not so; but fight the
good fight of faith: doe not contend with such
a kind of contention, and in such a manner as
they doe: and againe, saith he, when they lay
hold on wealth and preferment, and such aduantages,
doe thou lay hold vpon aeternall life.
I say, this was the case of the Iewes, they laid
hold of such benefits as a carnall man is capable
of, such as indeed they conceiued to come from
the Lords hand onely, and therefore they returned
vnto him; but they did not lay hold vpon
God himselfe, vpon aeternall life, vpon the
spirituall priuiledges and promises of grace, and
therefore they returned to him but feignedly;
that is, they did not seeke the face of God, that
which is required,2 Chron. 7. 14. 2 Chron. 7. 14. If my People
humble themselues, and seeke my face: that is,
seeke my presence; this they did not: Now
with those that haue sound hearts it is not so,
but they seeke the Lord himselfe; they are thus
minded, that if they may haue the Lord himselfe,
though they be stripped of all things else,
they doe not much heed it; though they passe
through euill report, though they lose their estates,
though they bee put in what condition
they can be, yet they are content to haue the
Lord aboue for their portion, for they looke on
him as an exceeding great reward: as long as
they may haue his loue, as long as they may

haue him, though alone, they care for nothing
else: thus they are affected when God puts them
to it, as you see, Naomi put Ruth and her other
daughter to it, saith shee, Wilt thou goe with
mee? I haue nothing for thee, Gods hand is
gone out against me, I haue no more sonnes in
my wombe; or, if I had, thou wouldest neuer
stay vntill they were of age: when they were
put to it thus, one daughter forsooke her, namely
Orphah, and returned backe to her people;
but Ruth gaue her this answer; Bee it so; ^yet
whither thou goest, I will goe, I will dwell
where thou dwellest, I will neuer forsake thee:
So it is with the Saints, they choose the Lord,
though alone, they cleaue to him alone, they
reckon it reward enough, if the^ may haue him,
as you see Abraham did, as GOD said to him,
I my selfe will be thy exceeding great reward;
he would not so much as take any thing from
the King of Sodome, Why? because, saith he,
it shall neuer be said that hee hath made Abraham
rich: GOD alone shall make me rich, hee
is reward enough, he is alsufficient, I will not
take any of these things in with him: So all the
Saints are thus minded, they are contented
with GOD alone, because they looke on him as
an alsufficient reward, they haue a good opinion
of him, and therefore they forsake him not;
whereas others haue beene in admiration of
him, but for aduantage; when they haue gotten
what they would haue, and are deliuered
from what they feare, they start aside as a

broken Bow,Hosea 7. 16. Hosea 7. the place before named,
as you see Rehoboam,2 Chro. 12. 1. 2 Chron. 12. 1. Saith the
Text, the Lord helped him till hee was strong,
and when he was strong, hee and all Israel departed
from following the Lord.2 Chron. 26. 7. 15. And so Vzziah, 2 Chro.
26. It is said, the Lord helped him vntill hee
was mighty, and what then? when hee had
gotten what he would haue, his heart was listed
vp to his destruction: that is, he serued GOD, as it
were, a slippery tricke; then he departed from
him, when hee had gotten what hee desired,
which was a signe hee did not returne to the
Lord, or that he did serue him with his whole
heart, but feignedly; he did not seeke the Lord
himselfe, he did not seeke his face and presence.
And the ground of all this is, because they haue
no constant fixed good opinion of GOD, but
they thinke well of God for fits, and for times, as
we see the Is^aelites did; they would ^ollow
GOD for such a time in the Wildernesse, after
hee had refreshed them, and deliuered them;
but as soone as new trouble came, when they
wanted bread, and water, and flesh, presently
they murmured againe, and grew discontented.
And so Ioram, King of Israel, when he was pressed
with famine, saith he, I will waite no longer
vpon the Lord, but he would needes take away
Elisha's head, the man of GOD, that exho^ted
him to wai^e on GOD. Thus it is with men,
they haue no constant good opinion of GOD;
but it is not so with the Saints; they haue
knowne the LORD himselfe, hee hath shewed

his owne selfe to them, that good opinion
they haue of him, is fixed and established; it is
the Lord himselfe that hath taught it ^^em; and
that which they haue beene confirmed in by
long experience, and therefore they will neuer
forsake him, no^ part from him; it is hee himselfe
whom they haue chosen. And this is the
next difference betweene an vnsound-hearted
man, and he that hath a perfect heart, that hee
seekes the Lord himselfe, his heart is perfect
with him, when another returnes not to the
most high, but returnes to serue him for other
ends, and for other respects* but against the
Lord himselfe, when he hath serued his turne,
he is ready to rebell.
The next property you shall find,6 Property, He accounteth the Gospell wisdome. 1 Cor. 2. 6.1 Cor. 2. 6.
Howbeit we speake wisdome to those that are perfect,
not the wisdome of this world, or of the Princes of
this world, but the wisdome of God in a mysterie,
euen the hidden wisdome that GOD hath
ordained before the World to our gl^rie:
Heere is another property the Holy Ghost sets
downe of a perfect-hearted man; the Apostle,
when he had said, I come not among you with
the excellency of wisdome, or the words of
man, but my ayme is, my desire is, as to know
Christ crucified alone, so to teach nothing else
to you, and to preach to you in the plaine euidence
of the Spirit, and of power; whereas it
might bee obiected, I but Paul, euery man
thinkes not so, many men thinke you would
doe better, if you would preach as other men

doe, and bee curious and quaint of Oratory:
saith hee, these things, as I deliuer them, whatsoeuer
they may seeme to other men, yet to
those that are perfect they seeme wisdome;
though others may despise it, and reckon it
foolishnesse, yet to the perfect it is wisdome.
So that, I gather hence, A perfect man in this
is distinguished from another that is not sound-hearted,
that he hath eyes to see the wisdome
of the Holy Ghost, he knowes wisdome. Now
a perfect man is there so called, in opposition
to him that is meerely animalis, that hath onely
a reasonable soule, and no more; for that is the
word, the same word that is vsed in another
place of this Chapter, the naturall man, it is
translated, but the word in the Originall signifies
a man that hath onely naturall abilities and
endowments, and naturall perfections, such a
man is reckoned an imperfect man, a man that
is not sound: But, saith the Apostle, to a man
that is perfect, that is, to a man that hath, besides
the strength of naturall gifts, the sanctifying
Spirit that enlightneth him, that the Spirit
of God possesseth and informes his soule, it
ioynes with his soule, it is dwelling in him; such
a one is a perfect man, saith hee, and you shall
know him by this, hee discernes the wisdome
of GOD, he iudgeth aright of it: so that, my
beloued, the meaning of it is this, there is a certaine
wisdome of God, there are certaine things,
that no naturall man in the world reaches or relishes:
take the hypocrite, that goes the furthest

in the profession of holinesse, euen as farre as
the second or third ground, euen as far as those
Heb. 6.Heb. 6^^ 5. that were much enlightned, and had
tasted of the power of the world to come, yet
this wisdome that he speakes of here (we speake
the wisdome of GOD) consists of such things
as they neuer knew; certaine things that the
most knowing man that liues in the Church of
God, that is not regenerate, can neuer know
them, as he saith, Verse 9. such as eye neuer saw,
and^. signifying thus m^ch, the eye and the eare
haue the sences by which knowledge is gathered;
yet mans eye a^d his eare neuer saw, etc.
and his heart, that is more actiue then eyther of
^hem, neuer vnderstood them. You will say,
what are these things? They are expressed by
di^ers names in this Chapter; they are called
the wisdome of God, they are called the wisdome
of GOD hid in a mysterie, the deepe
things of God, the things of the Spirit of God,
the things that are giuen vs of God for our glory:
Beloued, these are things that no vnsound-hearted
man did euer sound; and therefore I
will bee bold to say to you, if euer you knew
th^se things, if euer you reckoned these things
wisdome, certainely your hearts are perfect,
you are not meere naturall men, but you haue
receiued the Spirit of ^od, that is, the sanctifying
and enlighning Spirit of God.
But you will say,Q^^st. How can it be, that a naturall
man should neuer know these things?
B^loued,A^s. I say, it may be very well: for they

are things that no Minister in the world can
teach you; we may propound them to you,
and you may heare them seuen yeeres and seuen;
you may reade the very same things in the
Scriptures, and in other Bookes, a thousand
times ouer, and yet, for all this, not vnderstand
them: It is the wisdome of God in a mystery,
and they are the deepe things of God: As a
man may looke on a Trade, and neuer see the
mystery of it, he may looke on artificiall things,
pictures, or any thing else, and yet not see the
Art by which they are made; as a man may
looke on a Letter, and yet not vnderstand the
sense, something there is that he sees, and something
that he sees not, not it enters not into his
heart; (and therefore it is said, seeing they see
not; which argueth that there is something
that they see.) Thus there are some things,
there is a wisdome of GOD, that an vnsound-hearted
man can neuer know, it can neuer enter
into his heart: which wisdome therefore if
thou hast, certainely thou art a perfect man.
You will say,2. Quest. How shall a man know whether
he know this wisdome or no, whether hee
thus iudge of the wayes of God?
I answer;Ans. You shall know whether the w^sdome
you haue bee such as belongs to perfect
men,Foure Markes whereby to know this wisdome. or no, by these foure things, which I will
deliuer distinctly vnto you.
First,1. It humbleth him. you shall finde this, that, when this
knowledge is discouered ^o a man, it exceedingly
humbles him, all other knowledge doth not

so, it rather puffes him vp: But this brings a
man exceedingly out of conceit with himselfe,
it makes him to stand amazed at himselfe; that
is the property of this wisdome, which shewes
it selfe to the perfect: and the reason is, because
it is a sanctified discouering wisdome; a wisdome,
which that Spirit that giues it, enables
him to make this vse of, that hee vseth it as a
Lanthorue to his feet, as a light to discouer the
crookednesse of his wayes, to finde out the defects,
to which he is subiect, both in his heart
and in his conuersation; therefore this wisdome
discouers him, and opens him to himselfe;
wheras all the knowledge of any naturall
man, or that any hypocrite hath in `the World
besides, opens him not to himselfe properly,
but rather lifts him vp, he vseth it to reproue others,
he vseth it for other purposes, he holds it
as a light to other mens feet, he makes not this
vse of it, to search the inside of his owne heart,
he searcheth not euery defect and crannie of
his soule with it, and he findes not out himselfe
what he is. Therefore, you see, assoone as they
haue been enlightned with this wisdome, (Paul
and others) how they were confounded in
themselues, how vnworthily they thought of
themselues: that is the property of this wisdome,
first to humble.
Another property is,2. He knowes things as he ought* He that hath that wisdom
reuealed to him, that is proper only to the
perfect, those things that he knowes, he knowes
them as he ought to know them; whereas another

man, though hee know exceeding much,
yet hee knowes nothing as hee ought to know,
as we see,1 Cor. 8. 2. 1 Cor. 8. 2. He that thinkes he knowes
any thing, knowes nothing yet as he ought to know
it, saith the Apostle; he knowes not sinne as
he ought to know it, he knowes not the promises
of grace, hee knowes not aeternall life, hee
knowes not these as he ought to know them:
for, did hee; he would bee wrought vpon by
them; if he did know GOD as hee ought, hee
would feare GOD with all his heart, and with
all his soule, and with all his strength; so, if he
did know sinne as he ought, he would make it
his chiefest sorrow, he would abhorre it, hee
would not come neere it, hee would cleanse
himselfe from it, he would flye from it, as from
a Serpent, vpon all occasions: So, did he know
remission of sinnes; hee would not esteeme so
lightly of it as he doth, but hee would seeke it
earnestly, euen as a condemned man doth his
Pardon: So that is the difference; they know
not these things as they ought to know them;
for, beloued, this is to bee obserued, when any
man is conuerted to God by the reuelation of
this wisdome, he doth not alwaies know n^w
things, hee hath not new things reuealed vnto
him, more then he knew before, but the same
things he knowes now as hee ought to know;
whereas before, though hee knew them, hee
knew them not as he ought to know them; he
neuer knew sinne what it was, he ne^er knew
what grace was, all those promises and threatnings,

all that wisdome of God, reuealed in the
Booke of GOD, in the holy Scriptures, he neuer
knew it as he ought, therefore, it is not profitable
to him, to bring him home, and worke a
change: that is the second difference.
Thirdly;3. He discerns things that differ. Wisdome to the perfect, is such a
wisdome, as enables him to distinguish of
things that differ, he is able to discerne between
good and evill, as you shall see an expression of
it, Heb. ^. but strong meate belongs to those that
are perfect; (for so it ought to bee translated,
and so it is in the Originall) the old Translation,
by reason of custome, and the new, by reason of
vse, but neither is so full as the Originall, by reason
of habit, in respect that they ha^e their sences
exercised to dis^erne both good and euill: that is,
hee that hath this true wisdome, he hath such a
distinguishing faculty, that, as the taste discernes
of meate, or as a man that is accustomed
to taste Wine, can easily discerne between
good and bad, so, (not by meere custome, as
other men haue it, but) by a certaine wisdome
that is infused into you, you are able
to discerne betweene good and euill, euen
as the sences doe; (for that is the scope of the
place;)(...) As the sences discerne betweene colour
and colour, betweene taste and taste, so there is
an ability in those that are perfest, to discerne
betweene good and euill: so that, take such a
man to whom this wisdome is reuealed, you
shall finde such an aptnesse in him to discerne
betweene good and euill, that is, hee knowes

the voyce of the shepheard, hee knowes and
discernes betweene that which is good, and betweene
that which is counterfeit; hee knowes
morall goods and euils, what is to bee chosen,
and what to be refused; this he knowes, such a
distinguishing faculty he hath, this is proper to
those that are perfect; the like you shall haue
expressed,Rom. 12. 2. Rom. 12. be renewed in the Spirit of
your minde, that you may discerne the good will of
God: that is, that you may distinguish between
the good will that is truly perfect, and that
which is not his will: This property will follow
a minde that is renewed, he will be able to
discerne what another cannot.
Lastly;4. His iudgement is changed that I may conclude; He, to whom
this wisdome is reuealed, he that is perfect, there
is a wondrous change in his iudgement; that
which before seemed foolishnesse to him, now
he reckons it to be the true wisdome; and that
which before was the greatest wisdome, now
it appeares to be follishnesse; as a Child, when
hee is growne to yeeres, and is perfect, the
things that before he magnified, now he disregards
them; and the things that before he made
no account of, now they are prized and esteemed;
such a difference there is, such a change
in the iudgement, when once this wisdome is
reuealed. So it is in other things: take a yong
beginner in any thing, a young Scholler, hee
indgeth otherwise of the exercise of what hee
learnes, then when he is growne to maturity;
as we see, a man that is vnacquainted with

Musicke, that hath no skill in it, the common
tunes like him best; but when hee growes a
skilfull Musician, he cares not for them; those
that haue more perfect Musicke in them, those
he regards, when he hath a more skilfull eare:
so, it is the meaning of the Apostle, we speake
wisdome to those that are perfect, as if hee should
say, they are able to discerne things, their iudgement
is another kinde of iudgement then yours
is, or then their owne was before; that which
they could finde no relish in, no taste, when
they are perfect once, they finde a more excellent
vse in it then others: So that this change
of iudgement, iudging otherwise both of the
persons and of the things, argues they are perfect.
And this is the last signe, that I will now
name to you, of this property heere spoken
of, We speake wisdome to those that are perfect:
that is, it is the property of those
that are perfect, to reckon that
wisdome to be wisdome
indeed.
So much shall serue for this time.
FINIS.



THE NINTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 1.
Walke before mee, and be thou perfer^t.

BEfore; we deliuered to you certaine
properties or adjuncts,
which are not disjoyned from
this sincerity and integrity of
heart: That which wee haue
now to doe, is to shew you the
effects of it,Effects of sincerity. what operation it hath in the heart.
First,1. It exalteth God. you shall finde this, to be one proper
effect of it, that it teacheth a man to exalt God
in all his waies, to lift vp GOD in all his waies,
aboue himselfe, aboue his owne ends, aboue
any thing that tends to his owne happinesse:
for indeed heerein is sincerity of heart seene,
when a man prefers God before himselfe in all
things: for hollownesse and vnsoundnesse of

heart is in this, when one prefers himselfe before
God: it is a sure rule, and it is practised by
all the Saints,Psal. 148. 13. which you haue Psal. 148. 13,
Thy Name, O Lord, (saith the Propher there) is
onely to be exalted. The meaning is this, when
a man hath any businesse to doe, when he hath
any designe or proiect in his thoughts, he is not
to thinke how hee shall aduance himselfe, or
any end of his owne, but, (saith he) O LORD,
thy Name onely, thy Name onely is to be exalted.
Such an expression you shall finde, Prou.
4. 8. speaking of wisdome,Prou, 4. 8. and describing the
sincerity of their hearts that sought it; it is expressed
by this phrase, exalt her, and shee shall
exalt thee: that is, looke not to thy selfe, to the
way that thine owne heart shall suggest to thee,
but what way wisdome and godlinesse shall
propound, exalt and prefer those waies before
thine owne, and let wisdome alone for exalting
of thee, take thou no care for that, exalt her:
And it is a phrase frequently vsed in the Scriptures,
that God is to be exalted,1. In matter of honour. to bee lift vp;
the meaning of it is this, as when a man takes
another and sets him vpon his shoulders, that
he onely might be preheminent, that he onely
might appeare and bee exposed to view, and
himselfe stand in the croude, and not be seene;
so when a man exalts God in all his wayes, that
he may haue aduancement, and honour, and
preheminence, though himselfe appeare to bee
no body; this is to exalt God, and this is the
proper effect of sincerity and integrity of heart:

another man, whose heart is not sound, howsoeuer
he may exalt God in many things, hee
may exalt him in many Commandements, hee
may seeme to seeke him, and to seeke him diligently,
yet he doth all in such a manner that he
may exalt himselfe, and his owne ends aboue
the Lord: you shall best see it in particulars;
the Pharises did many good workes, but (saith
the Text) they did them to bee seene of men: that
is, they had an eye to themselues, that themselues
might be exalted in what they did, that
they might be heard, that they might be seene:
and so Iehu; though he were employed in an
honourable seruice, and hee did it diligently,
which was to avenge the quarell of God against
the House of Achab, and so did it, that he went
through with his worke, yet he had an eye vpon
himselfe all the while: Come and see (saith
he) my Zeale for the Lord of Hosts, etc. as if hee
should say, indeed, I doe all this for God; but
he secretly intimates in the speech, before hee
was aware, that it was the appearance and preheminence
of himselfe, that he might haue the
praise of the zeale and diligence that he shewed
in the worke, he exalted himselfe. Looke vpon
the Saints now, and you shall see a quite contrary
disposition. Iohn Baptist takes this resolution
to himselfe, saith he, let me euen decrease,
that is my condition, I am content to doe so,
and let Iesus Christ increase; so he bee exalted
and honoured, I am content to decrease, I am
content to wither in my honour and reputation

which I haue had, so the Lord may receiue aduantage
by it: So likewise Pauls is an excellent
example,2 Cor. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 5. saith he, I doe not preach
my selfe, but the Lord Iesus, and my selfe your seruant
for his sake. I doe not preach my selfe; the
meaning is this; saith he, in my preaching, my
ayme is not that I might set forth my selfe, that
men might looke on mee, on my wi^, on my
learning, on my eloquence; no, saith hee, I
desire that I might be concealed, as it were, that
I might be obscured and hidden in the World,
and that Iesus christ might onely appeare, that
he might be seene, that those that heare mee,
may haue their thoughts and affections carried
to him alone; I am but a spokesman, but the
friend of the Bridegroome, I would haue your
affections bestowed on him, therefore I set
out him altogether; for his sake I am your servant,
and I carry my selfe as a seruant, that still
my Master may haue honour. This Paul did,
and thus he exalted the Lord. And so Moses,
when the Spirit of God was poured vpon many
of the people, that they grew vp to some ripenesse
of gifts, and so seemed to be more equall
with him, Moses seemed to bee obscured by
this meanes, in the opinion of Iosuah, who
comes and tels him, Dost thou not see what
these men doe? Moses answered againe, hee
was very well contented, so God might haue
honour, that himselfe should be somewhat obscured
and lessened; Dost thou enuie for my
sake? And this is the disposition of all the

Saints, that looke what Ioab did in the case of
Rabbah the City, when hee besieged it, and
was ready to take it, hee sent to Dauid, saying,
come thou and besiege it, lest the victory bee
attributed to me; the same the Saints are exceeding
carefull of, that God might still haue
the preheminence, that still, whatsoeuer victory
they haue, whatsoeuer worke they doe, it
might be attributed to God, and not to themselues,
this is their constant disposition to exalt
him: Therefore you see how iealous the Apostles
were of it, Act. 3. 12. when the people
were ready to exalt them for that Miracle they
had wrought, say they, in much indignation,
Why looke you on vs,Act. 3. 12. as if we by our godlinesse had
done the worke, to make this man whole? No, say
they, the Lord hath done it, that hee might exalt
his Sonne. They were carefull to preferre, and
to exalt him: and herein indeed our sincerity
consists. This is an instance for matter of honour,
that, in any matter of credit, it is the disposition
of those whose hearts are vpright, who
walke before God perfectly, to exalt the Lord, and
to set him aboue themselues.
So likewise it is in all matters of aduantage,2. In matter of profit.
and profit: the heart of an vpright man saith
thus; so God and the Church may bee gainers,
it is no matter though I be a loser; so God may
haue honour, and his people be saued, and the
worke goe on, and the Gospell may haue free
passage, it is no matter what becomes of mee.
You see, this disposition was in Moses and in

Paul: saith Moses, Let my name be blotted out of
the Booke of life, let me lose all my reward and
recompence, so the Church of GOD may bee
safe: and so Paul, though I bee separate from
christ, yet, so the Church of the Iewes may be
safe, so christ may be honoured in their worshipping
of him, and cleauing fast to him, it is
no matter; there is that scope in it. So likewise
Acts 20. 24. there is an excellent expression,Act. 20. 24.
saith the Apostle, I passe not, my life is not deare
to me, so the ministration be fulfilled, that I haue
receiued, to testifie the grace of GOD: that is,
though I bee a loser euery way; though my
life be in danger and in hazard, though many
other afflictions may befall me, of diuers kinds,
I passe not for them, so the Ministration may
be fulfilled, so the Lord may be exalted, so the
grace of GOD may be testified, I passe not, I
heed it not, I regard it not: When another
man, beloued, whose heart is not sound and vpright
with God, saith thus within himselfe, It is
no matter though such a Church, though such
a People, though such a Kingdome, or such a
Nation perish, so I may be safe, so I may enioy
my comforts, my ease, my profit, my liberty,
this in the heart of euery naturall man: But a
man whose heart is perfect with God, still exalts
him, both in matters of credit, and likewise in
matter of profit and aduantage.
Last of all;3. In matter of pleasure. in any matter of pleasure: He finds
his heart disposed after the same manner; hee
saith thus with himselfe; I care not though

my owne desire of pleasure and ease be crossed,
so men may be pleased in that which is good
for edification; as we see that disposition in
Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 33.1 Cor. 10. 33. Saith he, I please all men in
all things. Saith hee, I haue liberty to eate flesh,
and I desire to vse that liberty, it is as acceptable
to me as to any other, notwithstanding, I will
euen depriue my selfe of that liberty, to please
men; not in this onely, but in all things else;
and why? for, saith hee, I seeke not my selfe,
and my owne profit, but the profit of many, that
they might be saued; and that is the reason of it:
And why did he seeke the profit of many? We
see in the 31. Verse hee giues this rule, Whether
you eate or drinke, etc. doe all to the glory of God:
for this cause, saith hee, I doe not please my
selfe, but others; I please other men in all
things, because I would glorifie GOD: that is,
in pleasing them, God is aduanced, he is preferred
and exalted: therefore, saith he, I please
not my selfe, but I please others in all things.
So, I say, that is one effect, and the first that I
name to you; That it is the property of sincerity
and integrity of heart, to set a man aworke
to exalt God, to preferre GOD before himselfe,
in all occasions.
A second effect arising from sincerity of
heart,2. effect, Nothing moues a man, but Gods command. from this perfectnesse of heart, is this; he
whose heart is perfect with GOD, you shall
finde in him this disposition, that he is not moued
to his maine actions ordinarily, but by
vertue of some command from GOD; if hee

haue not some such motiue, he stands still, and
stirres not. The ground of this is, because while
a man seekes himselfe, while a man is vnsoundhearted,
while he is full of himselfe, (as euery
man is till he be regenrate, till his heart bee
changed) come and tell such a man, informe
him, and say to him, Sir, this will make for
your profit, or this is for your credit, this will
be for your aduantage, it presently moues him,
and sets him aworke: for his end is to seeke
himselfe,: but let his heart bee changed, and
be perfect with GOD, to seeke him, now motiues
drawne from these respects, doe not so
much worke vpon him; but let a commandement
come from GOD, let this bee presented
to him, this is the will of God, this is for GODS
glorie, this hee will haue performed by thee;
these are the motiues that worke vpon him in
the generall fashion and course of his life: other
respects, that were most preualent with
him before, they moue him not now; but,
when they are suggested, as in former time, hee
stands still, as it were, as a Ship that is becalmed,
that hath no wind to moue it: but when
a Commandement comes from God, that Command
fils the Sailes, it fils the faculties of the
soule, that moues it to and fro, that indeed is
the ground, that sets this man aworke, in all
the Actions, and in all the courses of his life.
you shall see that metaphor vsed Col. 4. 12.col. 4. 12. (it is
Epaphras prayer for the people, that Paul here
expresseth) Epaphras a se^ant of christ, one of

you, saluteth you, and alway striues for you in prayer,
that you may stand perfect, and filled with all
the will of the Lord. Marke, this is the thing he
prayes for, that they might stand perfect: Why?
how should it be knowne they were perfect?
Saith he, this is the effect it will produce, you
shall be filed in all the will of the Lord: that is,
as the word signifieth in the Originall, when a
man is filled with the Commandement, euen as
the sayle of a Ship is filled with wind, so when
a man findes this disposition in himselfe, that
the principall motiue, that which sets him aworke
vpon all occasions, is some Commandement
from God, and not selfe-respects, it is an
argument that he is perfect, that he is filled with
the will of the Lord: otherwise, he would stand
still as a Ship, when the Sayles haue no wind
to driue them: this is an argument of perfectnesse
and integrity of heart.Psal* 119. 6. The like expression
you shall finde Psal. 119. 6. then I shall not
be confounded, saith David, when I haue respect
(marke the phrase; for it is the phrase that hee
chooseth to ^xpresse his sincerity by) when I
haue respect to thy Commandements. That is,
saith he, the time was, and it is so with other
men, that when a Commandement of GOD
comes, they little heede it, they little regard
it: if other motiues come, which propound
honour, credit, and ad^ancement, and profit to
themselues, those things they respect; but, saith
he, heerein is my sincerity seene, and vpon that
ground I desire I may not be confounded, that

I haue now respect to thy Commandements:
euen as you see, a man that hath some princip all
friend, that he regards aboue all the world besides,
it may be, when many others come and
speake to him, and make suite to him to haue
something done, he regards them not; but, if
such a friend speakes, hee hath respect to him:
or, as a seruant, if another man bid him goe, and
bid him doe, he stands still; but, if his Masters
command come once, he goes about it presently:
for he hath respect vnto him: this is Dauids
meaning: for, saith he, LORD, I haue respect
to thy Commandements; other things
moue me not so much; but, if any Commandement
come from thee, I haue respect vnto it,
and I presently goe and execute it: and in this
regard he is said to be a man after Gods owne
heart,Act. 13. 22. as we see in Act. 13. 22. I haue found,
saith the Lord, a man after mine owne heart: that
is, a man of a sincere, of an vpright heart, a man
in whose heart is integrity and sincerity, a man
without guile, and he proues it by this, saith he,
He will doe whatsoeuer I will: that is, if my will
be known to him, that will he do, that is the motiue
that leades him, that is the thing that stirres
him vpon all occasions: for that is the effect
by which he is described to be a man after Gods
owne heart, hee will doe whatsoeuer I will.
Now, beloued, you may examine your selues
by this, whether you haue those effects that
arise from sincerity and integrity of heart;
consider what mooues you to euery action.

Certainely there is no man that goes about any
businesse, but there is some motiue that sets him
aworke: Is it by vertue of the Commandement
that thou goest about all thy occasions?
Is it that that moues thee? Hast thou that respect
to Gods Commandements, that when other
commandements come, thou regardest
them little, but thou hast still an eye to that? as
Dauid saith, as that is another expression of his
sincerity,Psal* 123. 2. saith he, Mine eyes waite on thee, as the
eyes of the handmaid waite on her Mistris; that is,
I am still looking to thee, to thy Word, to thy
Commandement, any becke or nod from thee
moues me, as the Maide waits vpon her Mistris,
to see what her will is. I say, this is the disposition
of all the Saints; and therefore take heed
of being deceiued in this; beloued, it fals out
ofttimes, that you shall finde them both implicated
and inuolued together, (and therein commonly
we are deceiued;) a Commandement
comes from God, and respects of our own concurre;
(marke it well, that I may take away
this deceipt) as, for example; perhaps there is
a seruice which the Lord himselfe commands;
a man may bee very diligent in this worke;
but it may bee, there is not onely a Commandement
of GOD to mooue him, but
there is much applause, there is a certaine
lustre and splendour that followes diligence,
in a good action, in some great businesse. He^re
now is a double motiue; here is a Commandement
from God, and withall, there is credit

and esteeme from men. As I say of doing, so
likewise of suffering; it may be a man is to suffer,
and it is GODS will to haue him suffer, and
he suffers for the keeping of a good conscience;
but withall there is somewhat more mingled
with it, there is esteeme from men: and so for
other actions; diligence in a mans calling, it is
true, is the Commandement of GOD, and the
worke is the LORDS, he doth it for him, hee
ought to be diligent; but withall, there is profit
and reputation followes it, there is aduantage
comes to himselfe; here, you see, there
are more respects then one; here is the Commandement
of GOD, and other respects likewise:
and so for hearing the Word; it is true,
it is GODS Commandement to heare, and a
man comes, it may be, out of some respect to
that Commandement; but withall, there may
be other respects mingled; a man may come
to feede his vnderstanding with new notions,
with nouelty, he may come to see wit and learning,
or to know the humour and the spirit of
the Preacher, other respects may be mingled.
Now,Quest. you will say, how then shall a man
know whether it bee the Commandement that
moues him, if that be the proper effect of sincerity?
Beloued,Ans. it is easie to know it by this; take
a man whose heart is not sound, whose heart is
impure, who is hollow toward the LORD, and
take out the other respects, and leaue the naked
Commandement alone, and he will stand still,

hee moues not; let other respects be tooke away,
let the worke want that outward glory,
and he stands still, he goes not about it so diligently:
let the suffering bee sequestred from
the praise of men, which accompanies it, let
there be nothing but a bare Command, yea suppose
sometimes they incurre discredit with
men, as sometimes they doe, in suffering, there
is onely a naked Commandement to encourage
them to it, I say, if the heart bee vnsound, it
stands still, and moues not: but when the heart
is vpright, take away the Commandement,
and leaue the other respects, and it stands still
on the other side; by which you may know,
that it is not respect to mens commandements
that moues a man, because when that is tooke
out, when there is not the will of God signified
in it, when he thinkes with himselfe, this is not
for GODS glory, I haue no warrant from GOD
to doe it, though there be other respects to my
owne credit and profit, the heart stands still,
as a Mill doth, when it hath no water nor no
wind to driue it. This is an argument of sincerity,
when still the Commandement moues it.
But this obiection may be made,Quest. May not a
man be moued with other respects, may he not
be moued with regard to credit and aduancement
that may follow vpon the performance
of good duties?
I answer,Ans. he may in the second place, he may
not primarily be moued with it, it is the Commandement

that must set him on worke; but
when he is vpon the way, these respects may
carry him on with more facility and alacrity:
as a seruant, that is commanded to goe a iourney,
if there be concurrence of other things,
if he haue a good way, and good weather, and
good company, and money in his purse, it is
his aduantage, he doth it the more willingly and
cheerefully; but if there be none of these, it is
enough that it is his Masters businesse, that is
enough to set him aworke. You know Paul
had many hard taskes, when he went to Macedonia,
and vpon other occasions, you know
what his entertainement was, and yet it was his
Masters worke, it was his Commandement:
for it is a sure rule, that as wee ought to vse all
Gods Ordinances, so also may wee vse all Gods
Arguments. It is an Argument that himselfe
vseth, that we may haue respect to the recompence,
The reward of the feare of God, and humility,
is riches, and honour, and life, etc.
If you aske,Quest. But how shall a man know when
he doth it thus in the first place, when he is moued
with the Commandement?
I answer;Ans. you shall know it by this: A seruant
that seekes his masters profit altogether,
with the neglect of his owne, it is an argument
that he serues him not out of selfe-respects, but
that which he is primarily moued with, is regard
to his Master. Indeed, heere is the difference:
A seruant that trusts not his Master, so
mannageth his businesse, as a Factor that still

hath an eye vpon himselfe: ^or hee trusts not
his Master: Another, that trusts him, that
thinkes thus with himselfe, my Master is wise
to obserue, and he is willing and able to recompence
mee* that seruant lookes not to himselfe
and his owne ends, but he doth his Masters businesse
faithfully, and he cares not so it may be
for his Masters aduantage: for hee loues his
Master, and he thinkes his owne good and prosperity
consists more in his Masters then in his
owne; this is that that moues him, and therefore
without respect to himselfe, he serues him
he doth his businesse faithfully, he lookes what
may be for his aduantage, and not for his owne.
So much for this second effect.
A third effect that ariseth from this sincerity
or integrity of heart,3. Effect, He serueth GOD with all h^s might. is to serue the Lord, to doe
his will with all a mans might, to doe it exceeding
diligently, not onely to haue respect to
his Commandement, but to doe it with all a
mans might and strength: when a man doth it
remissely, it is a signe he doth it feynedly; when
he doth it diligently, it is a signe he doth it with
a perfect heart. A seruant, when he slubbers ouer
his worke, and doth but eye-seruice, it is an
argument that hee doth it not with his whole
heart, but feynedly: for when he doth it hear^tily,
he doth it painefully, he doth it throughly,
and exactly, and with all his strength. The
ground of it is this, because, when a man doth
any thing truly, and in good earnest, when he
doth it for it selfe, he doth it alway exceeding

diligently, they are neuer disjoyned. When a
man doth a thing for a respect, he doth it so far
as that respect requires, so much diligence hee
vseth, and no more: you may see it in other
things; if a man haue money but for his vse,
he will seeke so much as will serue such a turne,
and no more; but if he doth it for money it
selfe, if he loue riches, hee will doe it with all
his might, hee sets himselfe to it with all his
strength. You haue an excellent place for
the expression of this,1 Pet. 1. 22. in 1 Pet. 1. 22. saith the
A postle, Seeing your hearts are purified to loue one
another, without feyning, see that you loue one another
with a pure heart, feruently. The meaning
is this, Let a mans loue be sincere, without feyning;
let it be with a pure heart, without respects,
without dissimulation, and this property
it will haue, you will loue one another feruently.
Beloued, these cannot be disjoyned, when
one serues the Lord with a perfect heart, when
his eye is vpon him, when he doth trust to him,
without any other by-respects, he will doe it
exceeding diligently. Therefore that expression
you finde so oft in the Scriptures, Thou shalt
loue the Lord thy God, with all thy soule, with all
thy heart, and with all thy strength, it is not an
expression of the degrees of loue; that is not
the sole scope of that place, but it is an expression
of the sincerity of a mans loue; as if hee
should say, herein is the sincerity of a mans
loue, this is an argument that a man loues God
truly, and not for respects, when he loues him

with all his heart, and with all his might: it is
so in all things; when you doe any thing for
it selfe, you will doe it with all your might.
Besides,The intention is deuided, when things are done re^iss^ly. there is this further ground of it;
you shall finde this, that all remissenesse, when
a man doth a thing remissely, and ouerly, and
perfunctorily, itargues alway a diuided intention,
it is an argument that the whole minde is
not set on it, but that the intention is distracted,
and bestowed on other things: whence that
common saying is, He that will be excellent in
euery thing, is so in nothing: because his intentions
are diuided. So, beloued, you know,
this is the property of sincerity, to haue a single
eye, to haue the heart set vpon one obiect,
to looke to GOD alone; If a man doe so, the
heart is sincere, and he that lookes vpon GOD
alone, he must needs doe it with all diligence:
whensoeuer a man mindes one thing, hee will
doe it with all his might, because all the faculties,
the intention, the thoughts, and affections
of the soule, they are then concenterate, and vnited,
and drawne together into one point, they
are still running in one channell: and therefore
a man that hath a sincere heart, that chooseth
GOD alone, that saith thus with himselfe, I haue
but one Master to serue, I haue but one to feare,
I haue GOD alone to looke to, my businesse is
with him in heauen, I thinke him to be alsufficient,
and an exceeding great reward: I say, this
will alway accompany such a heart, such a resolution,
that he serues him with all diligence; if

there be any worke of his to be done, hee will
doe it with all his might: for that is the disposition
of a mans mind, when once he is able to
say as Da^id saith,Psal. 27. 4. Psal. 27. 4. One thing haue I
desired of the Lord, and that will I seeke, to see the
beauty of the Lord, to liue in his Temple, etc.
Why one thing I haue desired, and that will
I seeke with all diligence? when a man desires
but one thing, his minde will be exceeding intent
vpon it; and therefore if you would finde
out now what is a proper effect of sincerity,
you shall finde this alway to be in those, whose
hearts are vpright with God, that they giue
themselues vp to his seruice; I say, they giue
themselues vp to do it with all diligence: therefore
for a man that saith this, I hope my heart
is vpright with God, and yet you see him exceeding
busie with other things, the worke of God
he doth ouerly, he slubbers it ouer, he, doth it
negligently, as a seruant that doth eye-seruice;
but for businesses of his owne, he is exceeding
intent vpon them, hee is ouerwhelmed with
them, in following pleasures, and diuers lusts,
his minde is exceeding much taken vp in things
of that kinde; I say, hee doth but dissemble,
when he saith he hath prepared his whole heart
to seeke the Lord, that hee walkes before him
perfectly, it cannot bee: a man whose heart
is vpright, hath this disposition in him, that his
speeches, his thoughts and his actions, are still
busied about things that belong to the Kingdome
of God, holinesse is the element hee liues

in, he would still be doing something (...) ^ends
that way, by his good will he would be doing
nothing else: I say, thus he serues the LORD
with all his might, and that is an argument hee
hath a sincere and vpright heart. You haue a
common saying, when a man doth a thing exceeding
diligently, he doth it for his life: now
a man whose heart is vpright, his opinion is
changed of his owne happinesse, of his life and
safety; whereas, before, hee conceiued it t^
consist in other things* now he knowes it whol^ly
consists in the fauour of God, in pleasing him,
and in enioying of him; and therefore when
he reckons that his life consists therein, he doth
exceeding diligently whatsoeuer worke tends
to him, and to his glory. This is the third effect
that arriseth from sincerity, and perfection
of heart.
A fourth effect is this;4. Effect, Euery grace hath its perfect worke. a heart that is entire,
and vpright, and perfect with GOD, you shall
finde thus disposed, hee s^ffers euery grace to
haue his perfect worke: that is a signe the heart
is sound, and entire, and perfect, when the graces
of God are not restrained, when they are not
dammed, and barred vp, but are suff^red to
haue their perfect worke; as it is said of patience,
you shall see that expression,Iam. 1. 2, 3, 4. Iam. 1. Let
patience haue her perfect worke. Re^oyce (saith the
Apostle there) when you fall into t^oubles of diu^r^
sorts, reioyce, knowing that the (...) of your faith
brings forth patience, and let patience haue her
perfect worke, that you may be perfect and entire,

wanting nothing. Where you see, that this is
put downe, as an effect that ariseth from perfectnesse,
and integrity of heart, when we suffer
the graces of God, as patience in particular, to
haue their perfect worke. Now, patience is
said to haue its perfect worke, when it endures
all kinde of tryals: for that is the scope of the
Apostle. Reioyce (saith the Apostle) when you
fall into tryals of diners sorts: that is, tryals that
concerne you in soule, in body, in name, and in
state, tryals of euery sort, and euery kinde: if
patience be perfect, (and it will be perfect, if it
be in a heart that is perfect, and entire, it will
haue a perfect worke) it will make vs stay no
where: So that, beloued, patience hath then its
perfect worke, when it will suffer any thing, be
it death, be it disgrace, bee it imprisonment, or
pouerty, be it losse of friends, be it what it will
be, afflictions of any kinde; name all sorts of
trouble that you can deuise, if patience haue a
perfect worke, it will beare all of them. When
the heart is sound, beloued, then this grace, or
any other, hath a perfect worke: therefore you
see, men whose hearts are not sound, nature
will stand some where; a man perhaps will
beare many things for Religion, but if it come
to death, there he shrinkes; a man will endure
much, but if it come to disgrace, to discredit, to
losse of reputation, there his patience hath not
a perfect worke; and therefore he giues ouer.
As patience must haue a perfect worke, which
is seene in suffering, so likewise it is seene in

doing. So you see that expression,Heb. 17. 1. Heb. 17. 1. Seeing we haue such a cloud of witnesses, saith the
Apostle, let vs runne the race with patience that is
set before vs. The meaning of it is this: saith
he, if patience haue a perfect worke, it will carry
you through the whole race to the iournies
end; but if otherwise, a man will runne so far,
or so farre; but when he meetes with such a
rubbe, with such a barre, by the way, there hee
will make a stand, when he comes to thick way,
or to thornie way, or to rough way, there hee
will not runne; and why? because patience
hath not a perfect worke. Therefore, saith he,
runne with patience the race that is set before
you. So, beloued, a mans heart is then entire,
when euery grace (I instance now in this) hath
his perfect worke.
If you obiect;Obiect. But you see sometimes patience,
euen in the best of the Saints, hath not a
perfect worke, but is sometimes interrupted?
I answer,Ans. it is true, you see it was so in Iob;
though he were a man of an vpright heart, (God
beares that witnesse to him, hee was a iust man,
one that feared God) and likewise this grace was
perfect in him, (as that witnesse is giuen him,
Iam. 5. 11.Iam. 5. 11. You know the patience of Iob,) yet,
notwithstanding this, it seemed to be interrupted,
it seemed not to haue its perfect worke. Beloued,
to this I answer; that it did not rise from
the hollownesse of his heart, or the imperfection
of the grace, but it ariseth many times from

some other impediment, some other accident,
from some distemper that may arise in the
soule, that sometime or other may hinder euen
a perfect grace, from hauing a perfect worke;
as you see in the workes of nature, there may
be a perfect Spring, and yet sometimes it may
be hindered from running, by some outward
impediment, it may some way or other be dammed
vp: so, it may be a perfect Drug, fit and
apt enough to worke, and yet some impediment
there may bee that may hinder it, and
choake it, and dead the vertue of it for a time,
but it is but for a fit; ordinarily, and in ordinary
course, euery grace will haue its perfect
worke; and as I say of patience, so likewise,
you see, in all other graces, (to giue you another
instance, the same the Apostle giues there
of faith) faith, when it ariseth, when it dwels
in a heart that is entire, that is perfect, it hath a
perfect worke: when it is otherwise, it workes
but imperfectly, and but by halues. I will giue
you an experiment of it; you shall see two notable
examples of it, one in Amaziah, 2 Chron. 25.2 Chron. 25. 7, 8, 9. you shall finde there what worke faith had
in him; you see, in the 8, 9, 10. Verses, Amaziah
was to goe to warre against the Edomites,
he hyred 100000. of Israel, that was halfe his
Armie, to goe and assist him in the battell: there
comes a Prophet from the LORD* and tels him,
Amaziah, know this, the Lord is not with Israel,
and therefore seperate these men, and send
them home; if thou doe not, thou shalt fall

before the enemy: for in the Lord there is power
to helpe,Men may doe much, and yet want sauing grace. or to cast downe; Amaziah
beleeued the Prophet: so that, you see, faith
had a great worke in him; but saith hee, I am
not able to hyre any more. That is no matter,
(said the Prophet) goe with those thou hast;
and hee was content to doe so, hee went on
to the Battell; and in the next verse, hee was
encouraged to goe on: it was a great worke
of faith, to send backe halfe his Armie, and to
goe on so much encouraged notwithstanding;
yet after, in the same Chapter you shall finde,
though faith went thus farre in him, and carried
him through so difficult a case, yet it
had not its perfect worke: for immediately
after hee had ouercome the Edomites, hee
set vp their Gods, and a Prophet comes and
tels him, Amaziah, art thou so foolish, to
set vp the Gods of the Edomites, that were
not able to deliuer their owne people? Saith
the Text,Vers. 16. hee would not hearken to the Prophet,
but bade him cease, and the Prophet ceased. So
you see, faith had a worke in him, and a great
worke; but heerein he had an vnsound heart,
as it is said, Verse 2. hee walked before the
LORD, in the way of his Fathers, but not
with a perfect heart. And you shall finde
this very Storie, that I haue now named,
brought in as an euidence that his heart
was not sound, that his faith had not a perfect
worke: so farre his faith went, thus
far he did by vertue of that faith that he had,

but a perfect worke his faith had not. Another
example is in Rehoboam,2 Chro, 11. 2, 3, 4. 2 Chron. 11. When
the Kingdome was diuided, and giuen to Ieroboam,
and the tenne Tribes had made that defection
from Rehoboam, hee gathered together
ninescore thousand fighting men to goe vp against
Israel: but, saith the Text, the Word of
the Lord came to Shemaiah, a man of God, saying,
Speake to Rehoboam, the sonne of salomon, King
of Iudah, and to all Israel, and Iudah, and Beniamin,
saying, Thus saith the Lord, You shall not
goe vp to fight against your brethren, returne euery
man to his house: for this thing is done by mee.
They obeyed therefore the Word of the Lord, and
returned from going against Ieroboam. You see
heere a very great worke of faith, that caused
him to giue ouer, to sit downe, to be content to
lose so great a part of his Kingdome, and to
looke no more after it; that, when hee had an
Armie ready of valiant men, yet hee was conteut
to sit downe; though he were a man that
was not sound-hearted, yet faith had thus farre
a worke in him; and not onely for this time,
but for three yeeres after, hee cleaued to the
Lord, and serued him in all things: and yet,
for all this, it had not its perfect worke, it carried
him not through: for afterwards he departed
from the Lord. Beloued, this is a signe of
an vnsound heart, when faith shall goe so farre,
when it shall inable a man to doe many things,
and yet for all this, it hath not its perfect work.
Wee see the contrary in Abraham,Rom. 4. 19. Rom. 4. 19.

when he was put to it, when God had made him
a promise, that he should be the Father of many
Nations, saith the Text, he was not weake in
the faith. The meaning is, he was not vnsound,
but was perfect in the faith. What did he doe?
How did that appeare? Saith hee, hee went
through, when the Lord came with such a promise,
hee considered not his owne body, that was
dead: for hee was a hundred yeeres old; nor
he considered not the deadnesse of Sarahs wombe:
but (saith he) he belee^ned that he was able that had
promised. This is giuen as an euidence of the
truth of his faith; he made not a stand in such a
difficult case: for he was not vnsound, but hee
was perfect in the faith. So likewise, when he
came to offer his sonne; here in the perfection
of his faith was seene. And beloued, by this you
may know whether your hearts be right; if you
suffer euery grace to haue its perfect worke,
when your faith doth not picke and choose,
and take heere a promise, and leaue there another;
here to beleeue a threatning, another not
to beleeue; here to take hold on a Commandement,
to beleeue that this is the will of GOD,
in another case not to beleeue: for so doing
is a signe of an vnsound heart.
If you obiect,Obiect. But faith many times hath not
a perfect worke in the Saints, as Moses, at the
waters of strife, saith the Text, hee fayled through
vnbeli^fe: and againe, Dauid, when hee fled
from Saul, to Achis, we see his faith there had
not its perfect worke: so likewise, Peter, when

the waues beganne to arise, to swell, and hee
beganne to sinke, his faith had not a perfect
worke.
To this I answer,Ans. that faith may haue a perfect
worke, that is, there may be an aptnesse in
it, that ordinarily it goes through the worke,
^hough, by some accident, it may be hindred:
for (marke the faith of those) wee see Dauid,
though he fayled at this time, yet at other times
he did not; no more did Moses, nor Peter,
which is an argument that it rose not from vnsoundnesse,
from hollownesse of the grace, or
of their hearts:True grace may be interrupted. but from some interueniall impediment,
some passion; as it was a passion in
Moses, he was distempered; and so it was a feare,
a mist that was cast before the eyes of Peter at
that time. Now you know a man may bee said
to haue a perfect eye, and yet, for all that, in a
mist he may not be able to see as at other times;
and a man may be said to haue a perfect hand,
and yet a fit of a Palsie may make it shake, and
make it v^fit for any thing: so a man may haue
a perfect taste, able to distinguish one thing
from another, yet when hee is in an Ague, in
such a fit he takes things amisse; things that are
wholsome, seeme bitter to him: so in the graces
of the Spirit, there may be sometimes much
imp^rfection admitted, when a man is in the
mist, when he is in the fit, when some distemper,
some passion or affection, hath ouercast and ouerclouded
the soule, as it were, and possessed
he pallate; these may be defects, and yet the

grace may be perfect. But you shall know it by
this; ordinarily it is not so, it is but by accident;
and therefore it comes to passe but now
and then. And as we say of the grace of faith,
so (to giue you another instance) truth, or the
knowledge of truth: this great grace, if the
heart be sound, will haue a perfect worke; it
will goe through, it will not make a stand heere
and there, as it doth in those that are vnsound,
as you see, Rom. 1. 18.Rom. 1. 18. it is giuen there as a signe
of an vnrighteous man, when they withold the
truth in vnrighteousnes; that is, when the truth
is not suffered to haue a perfect worke; when
there is truth, and they suffer it perhaps to informe
their vnderstandings, but they suffer it to
goe no further; when they suffer it not to
walke abroad into all the corners of the soule,
into all the inward roomes of it; or, if they doe
that, yet they suffer it not to come into the outward
Courts of their conuersation, it is a signe
that this grace hath not a perfect worke, but is
restrained: and such an expression you shall
finde,2 Pet. 3. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 5. This they willingly know not,
(marke) that the heaue^s were of old, etc. Hee
speakes there of certaine Atheists, that were
mockers, and despisers, that were ready to say,
Where is the promise of his comming? doe not all
things continue alike, since the time of the Fathers?
The Apostle answers them thus; saith he, they
haue truth in them, there is light enough, GOD
hath borne witnesse to himselfe in their owne
consciences; there are many things that they

might obiect against these temptations of Atheisme:
but, saith he, they willingly will not
know them; that is, they will not take them
into consideration; as if hee should say, their
will, because they will not be troubled, because
they will liue loosely, it suffers them not to vnderstand,
and to enquire into these things,
that they might know them; these things they
willingly know not. So, beloued, it is an argument
that the knowledge of God, and the knowledge
of the truth hath not a perfect worke,
when there is something that a man willingly
will not know, when a man shall winke with
his eyes, as it is said, Mat. 13. 15.Mat. 13. 15. They winke
with their eyes, that they might not vnderstand
with their hearts, and bee conuerted, that I should
heale them. They winke with their eyes; that is,
when the light shines to them, they will not see
it; when the conscience suggests something,
when there is somewhat intimated, and whispered
to the hearts of men, their will runnes a
loose course; therefore they will not suffer
their vnderstandings to be informed, they will
not see all the light: whereas a man whose
heart is perfect, if the light beginne to appeare,
if he see it thorow a creuice, he opens the windowes
of his soule, and lets it in, euen into euery
corner of it; and the ground is, because
his heart is sound, he desires to make his heart
perfect, he is not willing to spare it in any thing,
hee desires not there should bee any exempt
place in his heart, or in his life, or any of his

courses; for he sees, Ioh. 3. 21.Ioh. 3. 21. Hee that deth
euill, comes not to the light: but hee that loues
the truth, hee whose heart is sound, that is not
an hypocrite, he comes to the light, he comes to
be enlightned in what he doth, hee comes to the
light, that his deeds might be made manifest; that
is, that it might be euident that his workes are
according to Gods will; he desires not that the
light should bee kept off. This is another instance.
Patience will haue her perfect worke,
and the knowledge of the truth will haue its
perfect worke: so I may say of all other graces.
Temperance will haue its perfect worke, if the
heart be sincere and sound; that is, it will restraine
euery inordinate appetite, it will cause a
man to for beare euery inordinate delight, euery
inordinate pleasure; it will make him withdraw
himselfe from excesse in euery thing, in
dyet, in sports, in ease, etc. So likewise chastity,
holinesse, and purenesse, it cleanseth the
heart from all kinde of vncleannesse, if it haue
its perfect worke; it suffers none of that leauen
to remaine in soule, or body eyther; neither in
the eye, not in the thought. This is another effect
of an vpright heart, of one that is perfect
with GOD, that euery grace hath its perfect
worke: and by this thou maist know, whether
thy heart be sound, or no.
I will adde but one more exceeding briefely,5. Property, or effect, The Sp^^it is quieted,
and so conclude. This is a fi^th effect, that ariseth
from integrity, and sincerity of heart; It
breeds in vs (...), and a quietnesse

of spirit, as you may see, Iam. 3.Iam. 3. 17. vlt. But the
wisdome that is from aboue, is first pure, and then
peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercie
full of good fruits. That wisdome is first pure,
and then peaceable: As if hee should say, The
purity of wisdome, the perfectnesse, the entirenesse,
the sincerity which holy wisdome brings
forth, it is seene in this eff^ct, it will make the
heart peaceable; it is first pure, and then peaceable.
His meaning is, that peaceablenesse is an effect
of the purenesse and entyrenesse of the heart:
so that, when any mans heart is perfect with
GOD, you shall finde this effect rising from it,
that his heart is quiet, and humble, and gentle,
and peaceable towards men; full of loue, and
of mercy, and of good fruits, and of good actions,
and workes: but when the heart is impure, and
vnfound, and hollow, it is awkward, and froward,
and contentious, and implacable towards
men; they are not full of mercy, but full of
wrath; they are not full of good fruites, and
good workes and actions, but they are like the
^aging Sea, that casts vp myre and dirt vpon
those with whom they haue to doe. So that
this is the effect of a pure heart, it breeds a quietnesse,
a peaceablenesse of spirit; whereas the
other bring forth tumult, and a turbulent disposition:
they are easie to be intreated, to be handled,
saith the Text; whereas the other, whose
heart is vnsound, they are, as Dauid saith of the
wicked, they are as thornes, that they cannot
^asily bee handled, a man cannot easily deale

with them, they are not easily intreated. So,
my beloued, this frowardnesse, this waspishnesse
of spirit, this implacablenesse, is a signe of an
vnsound heart, of an impure heart, of a heart
that is not perfect with the Lord: as you see,
the Deuils are the most impure Spirits of any
other, the most full of malice, and of enuy, and
reuenge, of all other. Iesus Christ, on the other
side, as he had the most pure heart, so hee was
the most gentle of all others: he returned not
rebuke for rebuke, but he was as a sheepe before
the shearers, etc. Vse a Wolfe or a Tyger neuer
so kindely, they will bee still implacable and
greedy; vse Sheepe neuer so roughly, they
will still be meeke and gentle: so it is with the
Saints, because their hearts are pure: I say, the
ground of it is this, because an vnsound heart
breeds in it continually strong lusts, and eager
desires; and eager desires are vnyeelding, and
vnruly, and that is the cause of contention, and
implacablenesse with men: whereas when the
heart is cleansed, when it is pure, and perfect,
it is emptyed of these strong and domineering
lusts, it growes to a quietnesse of spirit; to be
quiet within, and when it is quiet within, i^
will bee peaceable towards others without.
When it is quiet thus, the spirit is ready to
see GOD, and to yeeld to GOD in his prouidence,
in all vnkindnesses, and in all the
euill dealings of men; they are neither ready
to murmur against GOD, nor to fret against
men: for quietnesse followes a pure heart, as

vnquietnesse and awkwardnesse and frowardnesse
followes impurity and imperfection
of heart. So much shall serue
for this.
FINIS.



THE TENTH
SERMON.

G^NESIS 17. 1, 2.
Walke before mee, and be thou perfect. And I
will make my Couenant betwenne me and
thee.

I Will not repeate what hath
beene deliuered, but come
to that which remaines,
and so proceede to the second
Verse.Last effect of sincerite, To see God. The last effect
therefore of this sincerity,
or integritie of
heart, is that which wee
finde expressed,Mat. 5. 8. Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure
in heart, for they shall see God. That is, this ariseth
alway as an inseparable effect of purenesse
of heart, that it is able to see God; to see him
heere, and it shall see him face to face hereafter.
When the heart is yet vnsound and impure, it

is not able to see him; but when a mans spirit
is cleansed from that drosse, from that corruption,
a man is growne pure, and entire, and faithfull,
he is able then to see God, that before hee
could not doe; that is, he is able to see God in
his attributes,1. In his attributes. as Moses saw him that was inuisible;
that is, he saw in him more then he could
see in Pharoah, he saw him in his power to recompence
him; he saw him in his wrath, and
fearefulnesse, if he had disobeyed him; he saw
him in his goodnesse and mercy, and therefore
hee chose him rather then Pharoah, or his fauour.
Againe,2. In his works of prouidence. they are able to see him in his works,
as Iacob did; it is said of him, hee was a plaine
man, and he was able to see the LORD, he was
able to see him in the workes of his prouidence,
he was able to see him when he got the goods
of Laban; saith hee, God hath tooke the goods
from your Father, and hath giuen them to me;
it is his speech to his wiues: hee did see him,
when he met with Esau, (saith the Text) he saw
the face of God, when hee saw the face of Esau;
he saw him in his cattell, and in his children that
he had gotten: these are the cattell, and these
are the wiues, and the children, and the bands,
that God of his goodnesse hath giuen mee: hee was
able to see God in all these; hee saw him in all
his workes of prouidence and goodnesse: so
likewise in all his chastisements. Dauid saw
God in the cursing of Shimei; It is the LORD
that hath bid him doe it: And so Iob, hee saw

God, it is he that hath giuen, and he that hath taken
away, he ouerlooked those that were the im^mediate
instruments.
Thirdly,3. In his guidance and direction. they see him in his guidance and
direction, they are able to see the fiery
cloudy Piller, which way they are led by him;
they are able to see which way he would haue
them goe, vpon all occasions, when others
walke in darknesse, and they see not the way
that God would leade them.
Lastly,4. In his Ordinances. they see him in his ordinances, they
see God in the preaching of the Word, they receiue
it not as the word of man, but, as it is indeed,
the word of God: they see him in the Sacraments,
for they are able to discerne the Lords
body, that is, they able to see Christ crucisied,
to esteeme him, and to set that price vpon him
as they ought, and so they come prepared; this
they are able to doe, because they are pure: but
when the heart is yet vnsound and impure, they
are not able to see God cleerely; a sight and a
knowledge they haue, but it is another kinde of
knowledge. So much shall serue for that point.
And I will make my Couenant, etc.
These words containe a further and a greater
fauour expressed to Abraham, then the former
words doe: it was a great merc^ to him, to expresse
thus much to him, I am al-sufficient, I am
able to helpe thee, I am thy exceeding great reward,
I am able to be a Sunne* and a Shield vnto

thee, to fill thee with all comfort, and to deliuer
thee from all euill: but yet this which is
heere added, is a mercy of a much higher nature,
(saith the Lord) I will make my Couenant
betweene mee and thee; that is, I will not onely
tell thee what I am able to doe, I will not onely
expresse to thee in generall, that I will deale
well with thee, that I haue a willingnesse and
ability to recompence thee, if thou walke before
me, and serue mee, and bee perfect; but I
am willing to enter into Couenant with thee,
that is, I will binde my selfe, I will ingage my
selfe, I will enter into bond, as it were, I will
not be at li^erty any more, but I am willing
euen to make a Couenant, a compact and agreement
with thee.Gen. 17. 7. I will make my* Couenant betweene
mee and thee: that is the generall. You
shall finde it expressed more at large, Vers. 7.
Moreouer I will establish my Couenant betweene
mee and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an euerlasting Couenant, to be a GOD
to thee, and to thy seed after thee: that is, as if
hee should say, First, I am not onely willing,
to make it with thee, but with thy seed.
Secondly, I will not make a temporary Couenant,
but an euerlasting Couenant, there shall
be a mutuall ingagement betweene vs, and it
shall continue for euer, both to thy selfe and to
thy posterity: in particular, it is added I will
multiply thee exceedingly, that is but a branch of
the Couenant, I will make thee a Father of many
Nations, thou shalt haue a Sonne, and his

children shall grow in number as the starres of
heauen, and as the dust of the earth; that is but a
particular: whence, this is the point that wee
haue to obserue, that
God enters into Couenant with all those that are
faithfull.Doct.
For it was not with Abra^am, as he was Abraham,
but as hee was a faithfull man; and
therfore all the faithfull are reckoned to be the
seede of Abraham. For the opening of this to
you, which is one of the maine points in Diuinity,
I will shew you these fiue things:
First, what this Couenant is.
Secondly, with whom it is made.
Thirdly, how we shall know whether we bee
in the Couenant or no.
Fourthly, what the breach of this Couenant
is.
Lastly, the reasons why God is willing to make
a Couenant with men.
1. What this Couenant is.Twofold Couenant, 1. of workes, 2. of grace. You must know 
that there is a double Couenant, there is a Couenant
of workes, and a Couenant of grace: The
Couenant of workes runnes in these termes, Doe
this, and thou shalt liue, and I will be thy GOD.
This is the Couenant that was made with Adam,
and the Couenant that is expressed by Moses in
the Morall Law, Doe this, and line. The
second is the Couenant of Grace, and tha^
^unnes in these termes* Thou shalt b^leeue,

thou shalt take my Sonne for thy Lord, and thy
Sauioar, and ^hou shalt likewise receiue the gift
of righteousnesse, which was wrought by him,
for an absolution of thy sinues, for a reconci.
liation with me, and thereupon thou shalt grow
vp into loue, and obedience towards me, then
I will be thy God, and thou shalt be my people.
This is the Couenant of grace, Thou shalt beleeue,
and take my Sonne, and accept of the gift of
righteousnes,A threesold difference between them. and I will be thy God. The difference
between them you shall find, 2 Cor. 3. where you
shall see 3. differences, to reduce them to those
heads, I will not trouble you with particular
places, lest I stay too long vpon them.
The first Couenant was a Ministration of the
Letter;1. Difference. that is, in the first Couenant, there was
no more heard nor seene, but the naked Commandement,
it was written in Tables of stone,
and presented to them, there went; with it no
aptnesse, no disposition to keepe it; they heard
what the Law was, they saw what God required,
but there was no more and those that were
decla^ers of it, were but the Ministeri of the
letter, and not of the Spirit.
Secondly,2. Difference. this Couenant, it brings onely a
seruile feare, and an enmitie; for when a man
lookes vpon the Author of this Couenant, and he
heares no more but the Law, and what it requires;
he lookes vpon God as a hard Master,
as an enemy; againe, he lookes vpon his Law
as a hard and cruell Law, as a heauy yoke, as an
vnsupportable bondage, and therefore he hates

i^, and wishes there were no such law; he runs
from it, as a Bond-slaue runnes from his master,
as far as it is in his power. This is that which is
said Gal. 4.Gal. 4. 24. Hagar gendreth to bondage: that is, the
Couenant of workes it begets bond-men and
slaues, and not sonnes, and freemen: and likewise
that, Heb. 12. 18.Heb. 12. 18. saith the Apostle, You
are not come to Mount Sinai, to the burning of
fire, to clouds, to darknesse, and tempest, to the
sound of a Trumpet, so that Moses himselfe did
quake and tremble. That is, when a man lookes
vpon this Couenant of workes, it causeth in him
a feare, and an enmitie: that is the 2. difference.
The third is,3. Difference. That it is a ministration of death,
as it is called, 2 Cor. 3. a ministration of death,
that is, it propounds a curse to all those that doe
not keepe it, and it shewes no meanes to auoyd
it; and therefore a man is affected to it, and to
God the Author of it, as one is to an enemy that
seekes his destruction; and therefore the ministratio^
of it is said to be the ministratio^ of death.
The reason of all this is, not because there is any
ill in the Law, it is a ministration of the letter, it
begets feare and emity, it is a ministratio^ of death;
I say this ariseth not fro^ hence, that the Law of
God is a cruell deadly Law: for the Law is good,
but it ariseth from the weaknes and the infirmity
of the flesh: As for example, if you would take
a Pot^ers vessell, and dash it against a firme wall;
the reason why the wall is the destruction of the
vessell, is not any infirmity or weaknesse in the
wall, for it is the excellencie and vertue of the

wall to bee hard, it should bee so; but it is
the weaknesse, and fragility, and brit^lenesse of
the Vessell, and thence comes it to bee broken
asu^der: and so in this case, the reason why this
Law, or Couenant of workes (is a ministration
of death, and of enmity, is not because there is
any imperfection in the Law, it ariseth rather
from the perfection of it, but) is from the weaknesse
of the flesh, that is not able to keepe the
Law; it is the excellencie of the Law, that it is
so perfect, that a man is not able to keepe it;
and so it ariseth from the weaknesse and in^irmity
of the flesh, that is not able to obserue this
Law.
Now, on the other side, as this is the Couenant
of workes, so you shall finde that the Couenant
of grace,
First, is a ministration of the Spirit, and not of
the letter.
Secondly, a ministration of loue, not of enmity;
of freedome, not of bondage; it is a ministration
of righteousnesse, as it is there called
the ministration of righteousnesse; for if the
ministration of condemnation were glorious, much
more shall the ministration of righteonsnesse exceed
in glory.
Thirdly, a ministration of life and iustification,
and not a ministration of death and condemnation.
The ground of this, and how it is
thus, we shall shew shew you, by expressing to you,
he order how these depend, and follow one
vpon the other: when a man hath looked vpon

the Couenant of workes, and sees death in it,
sees a strict Law that hee is not able to keepe;
then come^ the Couenant of grace, and shewes
to him a righteousnesse to satisfie this Law, that
himselfe neuer wrought, shewes him a way of
obtaining pardon and remission for the sinnes
that hee hath committed against this Law, by
the death and satisfaction of another; when
he sees this, hee sees withall the goodnesse and
mercie of GOD, giuing this to him, for his saluation,
out of his free grace and mercie; when
he sees this, the opinion of a sinner is changed:
marke; I say, his opinion, his disposition and
affection is altered, he lookes not vpon God now
as vpon a hard and cruell Master, but he lookes
vpon him now as a God exceeding full of mercy
and compassion; whence this followes, that
his heart melts towards the Lord, it relents, it
comes to be a soft heart, that is easie and tractable,
it is not haled now to the Commandement,
but out of an ingenuity and willingnesse,
he comes and serues the LORD with alac^ity
and cheerefuln^sse: this disposition is wrought
vpon him, because now hee sees another way,
his apprehension is altered, euen as a seruant,
when it is reuealed to him that he is a sonne, and
that those hard taskes that are laid on him, are
the best way to leade him to happinesse, they
are but rules of direction, for his owne wealth,
and for his owne aduantage, he doth them now
with all willingnesse, the case is altered, hee
lookes not now vpon the Law of GOD as an

enemy, or as a hard bondage, but he lookes vpon
all the Law of God, as a wholsome and profitable
rule of direction, that hee is willing to
keepe for his owne comfort: now when the
heart is thus softned, then the Spirit of God is
sent into his heart, and writes th^ Law of GOD
in his inward parts, as you shall see, if you compare
these two places together, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10.Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10.
Behold, saith the Lord, I will make a new Couenant,
and this is the Testament that I will make
with the House of Israel: After those dayes, saith
the Lord, I will put my Lawes into their mindes,
and in their hearts will I write them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people: If you compare
it with that 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. You are our Epistle
written in our hearts, which is vnderstood and
read of all men, in that you are manifest to bee the
Epistle of Christ, manifested by vs, and written,
not with inke, but with the Spirit of the liuing God,
not in Tables of stone, but in the fleshy Tables of the
heart. The meaning of it is this, when the
heart is once softned,The Metaphor of writing the Law in mans heart, explained 3. wayes. God sends his Spirit to
write his Lawes in the heart: which Me^aphor
will bee expressed to you in these three
things:
 First, the meaning of it is this, looke what
there is in the outward Law, as it is written and
laid before you, there shall be a disposition put
into their heart, that shall answer it in all things,
there shall be a writing within, answerable to
the writing without, that, euen as you see in a
seale, when you haue put the seale vpon the

wax, and take it away againe, you finde in the
wax the same impression that was vpon the
seale; you shall see in it, stampe answering to
stampe, character to character, print to print;
so it is in the hearts of the faithfull, after they
are once thus sof^ned, the Spirit of God writes
the Law in their hearts, so that there is a Law
within, answerable to the Law without, that is,
an inward aptnesse, answering euery particular
of the Law, an inward disposition, whereby a
man is inclined to keepe the Law in all points;
which Law within, is called the law of the mind:
therefore, if you adde to this, that Rom. 7. I see
a law in my members, rebelling against the law of
my minde, so there is a Law in the mind within,
answerable to the Law of GOD without; it answers
it, as Lead answers the mould, after it is
cast into it; it answers it, as Tallie answers to
Tallie, as Indenture answers to Indenture, so
it agrees with it in all things; that is, there is
an aptnesse put into the minde, that it is able,
and willing, and disposed in some measure to
keepe euery Commandement, that answereth
to all the particular Commandements of the
Law of GOD; this is to haue the Law of GOD
written in the minde: and this is that which is
first meant by it, there is a Law within, answerable
to the Law without in all things.
The 2. thing meant by it is, that it is not only 
put into the mind, as acquisite habits are, but
it is so ingrasted as any naturall disposition is, it
is so rooted in the heart, it is so riuetted in,

as when letters are ingraued in Marble, you
know, they continue there, they are not easily
worne out, and that is meant by it, I will
plant my Law in thy heart, it shall neuer out againe,
there I will write it, there it shall continue:
so that is the second thing that is meant
by it, it shall bee naturall to you; for that is
meant by this, when it is said, it shall bee printed,
it shall be grauen and written in the heart;
and likewise it shall be perpetuall, it shall neuer
weare out againe, as things that are written in
the dust, but it shall be written so as it shall neuer
againe be obliterated.
 The third thing to be expressed, is the manner
of the writing of it; the Apostle here compares
himselfe and all other Ministers to the
pen, but it is Christ that writes the Epistle, the
Epistle is his, for these workes he doth in it, it is
he that takes the pen, it is he that handles it, and
vseth it, it is he that puts inke into the pen, it is
he that applyes it; so that though the Minister
be the immediate writer of these Lawes in the
heart, yet the inke is the Holy Ghost, and it
comes originally from Christ; and besides,
they are not left to themselues, but the LORD
must concurre with them immediately; we are
but coeworkers with him, he holds our hands, as
it were, when we write the Epistle in any mans
heart, it is hee that guides the penne, it is hee
that puts inke into it, it comes originally from
him, and therefore the Epistle is his. Besides,
this is further to bee considered in this Metaphor,

that God will write his Lawes in our
hearts, that we may see these Lawes, wee may
reade them, and vnderstand them: for when a
thing is written, God may see it, and man may
see it; a man himselfe may see it, and others
also may reade it: God sees it himselfe, for he
hath written it: man sees it, for hee is able to
see the Law in his minde, he is able to see that
habituall disposition that is infused into him:
and others are able to see it; for, saith he, you
are our Epistle, euident to all men; that is, they
see the fruits and effects of it, as you may see
letters grauen in stone, so they see this Law
written in your hearts. So, beloued, you see
now what this Couenant of Grace is, and how it
differs from the Couenant of Workes; it is the
ministration, not of the letter, but of the Spirit,
because it doth not onely present the o^tward
letter of the Commandement, but there is a
Law written within, and that is done by vertue
of the Spirit. So that the order is this; first,
it reueales righteousnesse; secondly, it softens
the heart, it is the ministration of the Spirit; and
thirdly, it is a ministration of loue, it is a ministration
of freedome, and not of bondage and
enmity: for when the Law is thus written,
a man is not haled to it, he comes not to it as a
bond-slaue, to doe his worke, but hee comes
willingly, he finds he hath some ability to doe
it, he findes a delight in it, as Paul saith, I delight
in the Law of God according to the inward man.
So you ^ee the difference betweene the Couenant

of Grace, and the Couenant of Workes.
Now this Couenant of Grace is two^old,Couenant of Grace twofold it is
eyther the Old Testament or the New: they
both agree in substance, they differ onely in the
manner of the administration; that, which is
called the New Testament, Heb. 7. 8* 9. which
is opposed to the Old Testament, for substance,
is the same Couenant, they are both the Couenant
of Grace, onely they differ in the manner;
and you shall finde these 6.Six differences between them. differences between
them.
 First, the New Testament, or the New Couenant,
is larger then the Old, it extends to the
Gentiles, whereas the first was confined onely
^o the Iewes, it was only kept within the walles
of that people, and extended no further.
 Secondly, the Old was expressed in types,
and shaddowes, and figures; as for example,
they had the blood of Bulls and Goats, they
had the washings of the body in cleane water,
they had offering of Incense, etc. by which
things other things are meant, as, namely, the
d^a^h of Christ, and that satisfaction he gaue to
his Father by his death, and likewise the inward
sanctificatio^ of the Spirit, signified by the washing
of water, and also the workes and the prayers
of the Saints, that are sweet as Incense: now
(saith the Text, Gal. 4.)Gal. 4. these were clements,
and rudiments that God vsed to them as children;
that is, as children haue their A, B, C,
^heir first elements, so GOD did shew to the
^ew^s ^hese spirituall mysteries, not in themselues,

but in these types and shaddowes they
were able to see the^ from day to day: for therin
was their weaknesse, they were not so able as
to conceiue spirituall things without a mediate
view; they saw the blood shed, and againe,
they saw the washings, and the rites, these were
in their eye; whereas now in the time of the
Gospell, these things are taught to vs, these we
comprehend in our minds, wee serue the Lord
in spirit and in truth, but there is not that visible
sight, that was a helpe to their weaknesse; so
that these differ, as the Image, and the substance
it selfe, euen as you see things in prospectiue
shewes, and in painting, that are different from
the things themselues, when you come to see
Countries, and Cities, and Mountaines, and
Woods, it is another thing. And this is the second
difference betweene the Testaments, the
one was expressed but in types and shaddowes,
the other hath the substance it selfe.
Thirdly they differ in this; the Old Testament 
in it selfe is but weake and vnprofitable,
(as you shall see likewise in the same place, Heb.
8. 18.)Heb. 8. 18. for the Commandement that went before
was dissanulled because of the weaknesse
and vnprofitablenesse thereof: for the Law
made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope makes perfect, by which wee draw
neere to GOD; that is, this was able of it selfe
to doe nothing, further then as it did leade to
that which was effectuall, therefore it waxed
old, and vanished away; so he puts them together;

it was weake and vnprofitable, and therfore
it co^tinued no^, it had an end, as you
know, the second proued eff^ct^all to take a way
sinne, and to sanctifi^ vs, and therefore it is an
euerlasting Couenant, the Testament that continues
for euer.
 Fourthly, they differ in the confirmation;
this second Testament, the New Testament,
was confirmed by an Oath, and confirmed by
the blood of the Testator, by the blood of
Christ, whereas the other was confirmed by
the blood of Goats,Ex. 2^. as we see, Exod. 24. it is
called the bloud of the Couenant* wherewith the
Booke of the Couenant was sprinkled, that is,
the shedding of the blood of beasts confirmed
the Couenant; but this is confirmed by the
death of Christ himselfe, and accordingly, it
hath new seales put to it, Baptisme and the Lords
Supper, when the Old Testament had other
seales, Circumcision, and the Passeouer.
 Fiftly, they differ in this; in the New Testament
there is a more cleere perspicuo^s
knowledge of things, there are better promises,
a larger effusion of the Spirit, there is
more cleerenesse, as we see, Heb. 8. 10.Heb. 8. 10. After
those dayes, saith the Lord, I will put my Lawes
into their mindes, etc. And they shall not teach euery
man his neighbour, and euery man his brother,
saying, know the Lord: for all shall know me, from
the least to the greatest of them. That is, they shall
know much more, and that which they doe
know, they shall know in another manner:

they shall know it more distinctly, more particularly.
Moreouer, as the knowldege is greater,
so the promises are better promises, Heb. 8. 6.Heb. 8. 6.
 But now our high Priest hath obtained a more
excellent office, in as much as he is the Mediator of
a better Testament, established vpon better promises.
The meaning of it is this, the promises
which were made in the Old Testament,
(though the promise of saluation was not excluded,
yet) the maine of them, the most appearing
and insisted on, were, they should haue
the Land of Canaan, and they should haue an outward
prosperity, you see the old Testame^t much
insists vpon that; the New Testament meddles
little with them, but with promises of saluation,
remission of sinnes, sanctification by the Spirit:
therefore, saith the Apostle here, it is established
vpon better promises. And againe, there
is a larger effusion of the Spirit, the Spirit is
now powred on vs in a greater measure, then
it was distilled by drops, now the Lord hath
dispensed it in a greater abundance to the sons
of men, in the time of the Gospell, there is greater
measure of grace, and it followes vpon the
other, Grace and truth come by Iesus Christ; that is,
because there was more truth, and more knowledge,
there went likewise more grace with it;
as there is a greater reu^lation, so likewise there
goes more grace: that is a sure rule, that al knowledge,
when it is increased, when it is sauing
knowledge taught by GOD, it carries grace proportionably
with it. This is the fift difference.
 The last difference was in the Mediator; Moses
was the Mediator of the Old Testament, that
is, it was hee that declared it, it was hee againe
that was the executioner of it; but wee haue a
high Priest, that hath obtained a more excellent
office, in as much as he is the Mediator of a better
Testament; that is, now Christ is the Mediator of
the Couenant, it is he that declares the Couenant;
and, secondly, it is hee, that by the interuention
of a certaine Compact, of certaine Articles
of agreement, hath reconciled the disagreeing
parties, he hath gone between them, as it were,
and hath vndertaken for both sides; hee hath
vndertaken on Gods part, these and these things
shall be done, all his promises are Yea, and Amen,
in him: and againe he hath vndertaken on our
part, to giue satisfaction by his death, and likewise
to make vs obedient to his Father: This
hee doth, this is to be a Mediator of the Couenant.
I will not stand longer on this; I come
briefly to make some vse of it, and leaue the other
4 things (that is, With who^ this Couenant
is made; How a man shall know whether he be
within the Couenant; When this Couenant is
broken; and The reason why God will make
this Couenant with men) to another occasion.
Now this vse we will make of it:Vse 1. First, we
may consider hence the great goodnes of GOD,
that he is willing to enter into Couenant with
mortall men. My beloued, it is a thing that is
not sufficiently considered of vs, how great a
mercy it is, that the glorious GOD of Heauen

and Earth should be willing to enter into Couenant,
that he should be willing to indent with
vs, as it were, that he should be willing to make
himselfe a debtor to vs. If we consider it, it is
an exceeding great mercy, when wee think^
thus with our selues, hee is in heaue^, and wee
are on earth; hee the glorious GOD, w^e dust
and ashes; hee the Creator, and wee but creatures;
and yet he is willing to enter into Couenant,
which implyes kinde of equality* betweene
vs; as when Ionathan and Dauid made
a Couenant, though there was a difference, the
one was a Kings sonne, yet, notwithstanding*
when the Couenant of friendship was made,
there did arise a kind of eq^ality between them;
so it is betweene the LORD and vs, when hee
is once willing to enter into Couenant with vs.
Beloued, this should teach vs to magnifie the
mercie of God, and to be ready to say, as Dauid
did, What am I, or what is my Fathers House,
that I should be raysed hitherto, that I should
enter into Couenant with the great GOD, that
hee should come to a Campact and agreement
with mee, that he should tye himselfe, and bind
himselfe to become (...) You
know, (...)

small thing to enter into Couenant with GOD,
to be in Couenant with the King of Kings: we
commonly reckon it a great adua^^age to haue
allyance* to bee in confederation with strong
Princes. You see what a Couenant there was
betweene Iehoshaphat and Acha^, see how Iehoshaphat
expresseth himselfe, Truly, saith hee*
there is a League betweene vs, (What then?)
therefore my horses are thy horses, and my people
are thy people; and so it is betwe^ne God
and vs* when there is a Couenant betweene
vs, then his strength is our strength, and his
Armies are our Armies, we haue interest, in all;
there is an offensiue and a defensine League;
and when we seeke to him, and put him in mind
of it, he can not deny vs. The people of Rome
had other parts and Nations, that were allyes
with them, and if they were to fight, at any
time, the Romans were bound in honour to defend
them, and to assist them, and they did it,
with as much diligence, as they defended their
owne City of Rome. If we doe implore GOD^
ayde, doe you thinke that God will breake his
Couenant? Will he not (...) vp himselfe, to
scatter his and our (...) Certainely hee
will. This great benefit you haue; therefore
you haue cause to magnifie your ^elues in this
Condition; and to blesse the Lord, to magnifie
him for his great goodnesse, that he would e^ter
into Couenant with you; this was the greatest
fauour that euer hee shewed to Abraham,
and it is the very scope of this place; Abraham,

I am willing to enter into Couenant, to tye my
selfe, to enter into bond; and therefore, since
the LORD is not ashamed to make vs his people,
let vs not bee ashamed to call him our God, to
professe it, and make it good vpon all occasions.
This is the first vse.
Secondly,Vse 2. from this difference of the Couenants,
you haue these two things to obse^ue:
First, in that the Couenant of Grace onely, is
the ministration of the Spirit, when the other is
but the ministration of the letter, it should teach
vs thus much, to labour to grow to assurance of
the forgiuenesse of our sinnes. If a man would
de^ire to change his course, to haue his heart
renued, to be made a new creature, to be translated
from death to life; beloued, the way is
not to consider presently the Commandement,
for a man to thinke with himselfe, this I ought
to doe, and I will set about it, I haue made a
Couenant, I haue resolued with my selfe to doe
it, but the way is, to labour to get assurance of
forgiuenesse, to labour to apprehend the Couenant
of Grace: for by that meanes thy heart
shall be softned, there shall be an infusion of the
Spirit, that shall write the Law of God in thy inward
parts: all those places of Scripture make
this good, wherein it is said, faith purifieth the
heart, and by the promises we are made partakers
of the godly nature, as 2. Pet. 1. 4.2 Pet. 1. 4. and likewise,
Heb. 9. 14.Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of
Christ, which, through the eternall Spirit, offered
himselfe without fault to God, purge your conscience

from dead workes, to serue the liuing GOD. The
meaning is this, if a man would haue his conscience
purged from dead workes, let him labour
for faith, whereby hee may bee iustified,
let him labour to be sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, to haue assurance of the forgiuenesse and
pardon of his sinnes, through that blood, then
he shall haue that Spirit put into his heart, that
eternall Spirit, that shall purge and cleanse his
conscience from dead workes. So likewise,
Gal. 3.Gal. 3. Did you receiue the Spirit by the workes
of the Law? Did you not rather receiue it by
the hearing of ^aith preached? And so, Gal. 5.Gal. 5.
Faith that workes by loue; that is, it is faith that
brings forth loue, and loue sets vs on worke.
All these shew thus much vnto vs, that the best
way to heale any strong lust, the best way to
change our hearts, to get victory ouer any sin,
that it may not haue dominion ouer vs, to haue
our conscience cleansed from dead workes, to
he made partakers of the diuine nature, is to
grow vp in the* assurance of the loue of God to
vs in Christ, to get assurance of pardon and forgiuenesse:
for, beloued, know this, if the
heart doe no more but looke to the Commandement,
if you heare onely that there are such
duties to be done, and consider them, and you
compare your owne heart and the Commandement
together, there growes a quarell betweene
the heart and the Commandement, an
ex^l^eration betweene them, and an enmi^y,
they looke one vpon another as enemies; but

when the heart is softned, and reconciled to
God, it closeth with the Commandement, as the
soft clay doth with the mould, and is ready to
receiue any impression; but, till then, it rebels
against the Commandement, and stands out as
a hard stone, that receiues no impression; and
therfore the way is not ^o go about to reforme
our liues as morall men, to thinke with thy selfe,
there are these duties, I must take a course to
keepe them, and enter into vowes in particular
courses with my selfe to doe them: no, my beloued,
the way is to get assurance of forgiuenes,
to labour to bee partaker of the Couenant of
Grace: your hearts will then be softned, when
you haue receiued the Spirit, that hath wrought
in your hearts a disposition answerable to the
Law without, when the Law is put into your
minds. And this is the first difference.
The 2.2. Difference. is, in regard of the difference of the
two Testaments, the second Testament being
stablished vpon better promises.Quest. What is the
reason that the New Testament is said to bee
stablished vpon better promises? Beloued,Ans. you
shall finde this to be the condition of the New
Testament, you shall finde in it very little expression
of the promises of this life; looke in all
the Epi^tles of paul, and the other Epistles,
looke to all the Doctrine of the Gospell, and
you shall see the things that are i^erated still
they are these; You shall bee saued, you shall
haue your sinnes forgiuen, you shall bee iustified,
you shall bee sanctified, you shall receiue

the adoption of sonnes, you shall receiue the
high price of your calling, etc. These are the
things that Paul euery where magnifies, as the
condition that exceeds, and goes beyond the
conditions in our forefathers times: Now this
great Mystery is reuealed, now these great
riches are opened, that before were hid.
Whence you may gather this much, that grace
and spirituall things, spiritual priuiledges, things
belonging to the Kingdome of God, and of ^esus
Christ, exceed much all outward and temporall
happinesse:Quest. Why are they otherwise called
better promises?Ans. There are many other places,
I know, to shew the vanity of outward
things, and to preferre spirituall things before
them; but let this be added to the rest; this
Couenant is established on better promises; labour
then to worke your hearts fully to that
perswasion, namely, to thinke with your selues,
it is better to be rich in grace, better to haue
the priuiledges of Iesus Christ, then to bee rich
in this world, Reu. 2.Re^. 2. I know thy pouerty, but
thou art rich. You must thinke with your selues,
this is the great riches; and therefore the Apostle
exhorts rich men, that they-change these
other riches they enioy, to spirituall riches.
Now a man will neuer be exhorted to change,
except it bee for the better. Charge those that
are rich in the world, that they bee rich in good
workes: let them so vse their riches, so dispense
them, so mannage them, that they may turne
to other riches. When a man is rich in knowledge,

as it is said of the Corinthians, that they
were rich in all knowledge, and in euery grace,
These are the better promises, this is the better
and more glorious condition. So that, if there
should be a Census of men, as one may so say, if
there should be an estimation of men, as there
was wont to bee amongst the Romanes, they
were put into seuerall conditions, and one was
worth thus much, and another so much. Indeed,
If God should make such a Census; as euery man
is richer in grace, as hee excels in these better
priuiledges, as he hath had these better promises
fulfilled more or lesse to him, so hee should
bee reckoned a more excellent man, and so
should euery man esteeme both of himselfe and
others: and there is very great reason for it;
because when a man is rich in grace, rich in spirituall
blessings, when hee hath the spirituall
promises, he hath Go^^ Image renued in him, he
hath God to be his friend, who is the Gouernour
of the world, and hee is rich (as I said) whom
God fauours; he hath grace that heales his soule,
which is that that makes his happinesse: It is
that, which is the inward fashioning of euery
mans appreh^^sion* that makes him happy, that
brings comfort to him. Now they are these
better promises, they are the graces, the consolations
of the Spirit, the worke of the Holy
Ghost, the vertue of regeneration; I say, it is
that that fashions the heart, and the inward apprehension;
it is tha^ that heales the soule, and
adornes it; it is that tha^ puts it into another, a

fitter condition, and it farre goes beyond all other
^emporall felicity; that reacheth not to
the inward man, it makes (...) is the
Gouernour of the world to be his friend; other
friends he may haue, tha^ may make him potent
vpon the earth, but God, in whose hand is
his life, and all his wayes, it mak^s not^ him his
friend. Beloued, learne thus to iudge of the
condition of the Church. You thinke the
Church is in a miserable* estate, when you see
it a little vnder hatches, when you see in downe,
when you see it harrowed, and plowed by the
enemies; the condition of the Church in the
New Testament is to be so; they haue a poore
ou^side, yet (...); they haue a sorrowfull
ou^side, though alway reioycing* as (...)
himselfe, and all the Apostles wer^ herein exemplary
for after Ages of the Church, yet wee
must not thinke, because the Church is downe
a littl^ because i^ wants that outward prosperity
that before it enioyed, that therefore it is the
worse, It is a true obseruation of one, when
there were but woodden Chalices, then there
w^r^ golden Priests; and in after time* when
there w^re golden Chali^es* they had woodden
Priests: so it is, when the Church is in a lower
condition, commonly it prospers best; and indeed,
properly the prosperity of the Church
consists in these better promises, the* outward
peace is not so proper and so peculiar to it. A^d,
as of the Church, so I may say of euery particular
man: Thinke not, beloued, with your

selues, when your outward condition is base
and low, that it is more miserable; your happinesse
stands in better promises: when a man
hath Gai^s prosperity, that is, when his soule
prospers, that is his best condition; and commonly
his soule prospers best, when his outward
estate fares the worst: the winter of his outward
condition is vsually the spring time of his soule;
we should learne to iudge thus. You know, it
is an obseruable thing, that the promises of outward
prosperity were made to the Church of
God, whiles it was yet in its infancie, while it
was weake; so that this you may obserue from
it, that it is a signe of childishnesse, and weaknesse,
and infirmity, that a man is not growne
perfect, that he is not growne to maturity, to
thinke outward prosperity to be the better condition.
The Iewes had these promises, but in
regard of their infancy, and when the Church
grew vp to a greater height, when it grew to
manbood (as it were) we haue little mention of
any such promises as these; the promises are
quite of another nature; and therefore when
you are able to outgrow those opinions, when
you are able to looke on things with another
eye, when you thinke this outward prosperity
to be but a trifle, in comparison of the better
promises, it is a signe you are growne vp to
more strenght. You see, Salomon, when hee
came to himselfe, when his wisdome returned
to him, (as I may so say) you see how he looked
on all outward things, how he goes through all

the particulars, they are vanity and vexation of
spirit. Salomon, when he was old, when he had
the wisdome of experience ioyned together
with that infused wisdome that hee had from
the Holy Ghost, made this the summe of all,
that outward prosperity is meere vanity, an extreme
vanity, a vanity that hee could not enough
expresse, and only he magnifies these
better promises; this hee magnifies as
the better condition, to feare God
and keepe his Commandements,
etc.
FINIS.



THE
ELEVENTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 2.
And I will make my Couenant betwenne mee
and thee.

THe third Vse (which we did
but touch vpon the last day,3. Vse.
and meane at this time somwhat
to enlarge) is,To mortifie sinne, by applying the promise of free pardon. that if
the Couenant of the Law,
and likewise the Old Testament,
as it consists in types
and shaddowes, be but a ministration of the letter,
a ministration of bondage, and a ministration
of enmity: But this new Couenant, this
Couenant of Grace, is the ministration of the
Spirit, the ministration of loue, the ministration
of freedome, the ministration of righteousnesse,

and the ministration of life: then, beloues,
we may gather this from it, that if a man
will obtaine the Spirit, and thereby mortifie the
deeds of the body, if hee would bee deliuered
from the bondage of sinne and of death; then
let him make vse of, and apply to himselfe the
Couenant of Grace, the free promises of the
pardon and remission of sinnes, let him apply
them, that is the way to get the Spirit, that is
the way to mortifie the deeds of the flesh, that
is the way to get his heart changed, that is the
way to be made a new creature. For the better
vnderstanding of which, this is to he obserued,
that which keepes euery man off, that which
keepes men in a condition of strangenesse from
the life of God, is, because they see such difficulties
in the commandements of GOD, as they
are not able to keepe, when they looke vpon
the Co^mandement, and on the stubbornnesse of
their owne hearts, and the indisposition that is
in them to yeeld obedience, they thinke there
is no hope, and therefore they neuer goe about
it: for they see the Commandement, and they
finde in their owne heart no disposition to keep
it, but an aptnesse to rise in rebellion against it;
I say, this keepes men off from the life of God:
But, on the other side, when a man lookes vpon
the promises, he begins to see the Couenant that
his sinnes shall be put a way, he beginnes to see
the goodnesse, and the mercy, and the tender
compassion of God towards him; hee begins to
see a possibility of fulfilling the Law, in such a

manner as GOD now requires; then his heart
melteth, hee becomes not onely applyable to
the Commandement, but is ready to delight in
it; this a man gets by applying his heart to the
Couenant of grace, or by applying the Couenant
of Grace to himselfe; that very applying
of the promises of forgiuenesse, I say, it begets a
disposition in the heart, which the Scriptures
call a new life; that euen as you see the Sunne,
when it applies its beames to a fitly disposed
matter, and stayes vpon it, when it pitcheth its
beames vpon it with any continuance, it begins
to beget life and motion in it, and makes it a liuing
creature: so doth the Couenant of Grace,
when it is applyed to the heart of a man, it begins
to beget life in him, and to make him a
new creature, it makes him another man: there
is that power in the Couenant of Grace, in the
promises of the pardon and forgiuenesse of sins,
that it begets another life in a man, it makes him
a new creature, it makes him a liuing creature
to GOD, which before he was not; the ground
of which you shall see, 2 Cor. 3. 6.2 Cor. 3. 6. Hee hath
made vs able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter, but of the Spirit: for the letter
kills, but the Spirit giues life. Marke it, the meaning
of it is this, when the Couenant of works
is deliuered to you, that is, when you heare the
Law, the Commands, the duty you cannot
performe, there is no more deliuered to you but
the bare letter, that is, you know the duty, and
no more. And what doth this duty doe? what

doe these Commandements and precepts doe,
when they are applyed to the heart of man?
Saith hee, they kill. Now that which kills,
fights before it kills, and that which fights must
needs be an enemy: so then the Commandement
is an Enemy, that is, euery man esteemes
it as an enemie to himselfe, and therefore hath
an enemy-like affection to it againe; that is, he
hates it, he would be rid of it, he wisheth there
were no such Law or Commandement, hee
desires it should be dealt with as he would haue
an enemy dealt with, he would haue it vtterly
taken away; when they grow in enmity one
with another, as indeed they doe, the naked
Commandement and the heart are at enmity:
for the Commandement would haue one
thing, and the heart would haue another; there
are contrary wils, and there is a striuing betweene
them, the one striuing this way, the other
that way, the one resisting the other, and
in the end, the Law and the Commandement
gets the victory; because the sting of the Law
is sinne: now the Law is the cause of sinne, as
a straight Rule is the cause of crookednesse; for
without the Law there should be no sin: now
it causeth sinne; for if there were no Law,
you know there could bee no feare, no transgression;
because there could bee nothing against
which the transgression should come, this
sinne is the death of a man, so now the letter
kils: But come now to the Couenant of Grace,
saith the Text, it is the ministration of the Spirit,

and the Spirit giues life; that is, when a man
lookes on the Couenant of Grace, he lookes not
on it now as an enemy, as hee did before vpon
the Commandement, but he sees in it much
loue, and much friendship to wards him; he sees
God intends not any hurt, any euill to him, as
he apprehended before; he sees God exceeding
kinde, and mercifull, and willing to put away
all his sinnes, and willing to accept the sincerity
of his obedience, though there be not a perfection
of obedience; now he begins to change
his opinion, both of God and of all his Lawes,
and precepts; when he sees Gods kindnesse towards
him, and his compassion and readinesse
to forgiue him, then his heart begins to relent
towards the Lord againe, he begins to magnifie
Gods goodnesse, and to condemne himselfe, he
beleeues those promises, and thence he growes
vp in loue toward GOD; I say, hee growes vp
in faith, and loue, and in this act of faith is the
Spirit infused into his heart; this Spirit being
thus infused, writes the Law in his inward
pa^ts, that is it that breeds in him a holy disposition,
that inables him in some measure to
keepe the Law, it prints in him all those graces
that giue him strength to obserue the Commandements
that God hath given him: so, my
beloued, if a man will goe about this great
worke, to change his heart, and to change his
life, let him not goe about it as a morall man;
that is, let him not onely consider what Commandements
there are, what the rectitude is

that the LORD requires, and how to bring his
heart to it; but let him goe about it as a Christian,
that is, let him beleeue the promises of
pardon in the blood of Christ, and the very beleeuing
of those promises, will be able to clense
and purge the heart from dead works: (in that
place* we then named, and we could doe no
more but name it) you shall finde it, Heb. 9. 14.Heb. 9. 14.
How much more shall the blood of Christ, which
by the eternall Spirit offered himselfe without fault
to God, purge your consciences from dead workes, to
serue the liuing God. The meaning of it is this,
when a man hath once applyed the blood of
Christ for his iustification, this effect will follow
vpon it, there will accompany it a certaine vigour,
a certaine vertue, a certaine power and
strength, which will also purge his conscience
from dead workes; that is, there shall goe a
power of the Holy Ghost together with this
blood, that shall not onely forbid him, and
shew him that hee ought not to doe such and
such euill things, but it shall clense his conscience
from those rootes of dead workes, those
corrupt lusts, and sinfull affections, that are in
him, that dispose him to that euill; he shall find
this power growing vpon him, if hee doe but
apply the blood, that is, if he apply the promise
of pardon and forgiuenesse through the blood
of Iesus Christ. The like you shall see, Gal. 3. 5.Gal. 3. ^.
He that ministreth to you the Spirit, and workes
miracles amongst you, doth he doe it through the
workes of the Law, or through the hearing of faith

preached? That is, saith the Apostle, if I should
onely deliuer to you the Commandements, and
the Precepts, and the Rules, by which you
ought to walke, I might preach long enough to
you, but you should neuer haue ability to keep
any of these; saith he, you may obserue those
that preach the Law to you, did you receiue the
Spirit then? no, but when I preached to you
the promises of pardon and forgiuenesse, then
you receiued the Spirit, it was conueyed into
your hearts.
Now,A double infusion of the Spirit. I take it, there is a double meaning of
this infusion of the Spirit here: in the time of
the Apostles, there was a miraculous infusion
and giuing of the Holy Ghost, that when they
preached to them, as Peter to Cornelius, and Paul
to others, and laid their hands on them, the
Holy Ghost fell on them; that is, they were filled
presently with an immediate infusion of
knowledge; they had, some the gift of tongues,
some extraordinary manifestation of the Spirit;
saith the Apostle, when this was done, was it
done by the preaching of the Law? was it not
done by the preaching of Christ, and by offering
to you the pardon and forgiuenesse of sins
through him? Therefore you see how hee expresseth
it; Hee therefore that minist^eth the
Spirit to you, and workes miracles among you,
how doth hee worke these miracles? hee doth
them not by the workes of the Law, but by the
hearing of faith preached; that is, by our preaching
of it, and your hearing it: So, my beloued,

looke how the S^i^it was then conueighed
to men, after the same manner it must now bee
conueyed to vs: so that beleeuing the promises
is the way to get the heart healed; when a
man hath any strong lust to conflict wi^hall, hee
must not thinke, that setting himselfe with
strong vowes and resolu^ions to resist it, is
the way to beginne with: no, the way is to
get assurance of pardon, to get ass^rance of
Gods loue to himselfe, in Christ, to labour to get
communion betweene Christ and himselfe, to
labour to delight in God, as he will when there
once are ^ermes of reconciliation betweene
them, and when this is done, his heart will grow
to an application of the Commandement, it
will cloze with the Commandement: Whereas
before it resisted it, and rebelled against it,
it will cleaue to it, and loue it, and delight in it,
and will receiue an impression from it: this I
take likewise to be the meaning of that 2. Pet. 1.
4.2 Pet. 1. 4. Hereby (saith he) we haue most gracious promises,
and are thereby made partakers of the Diuine
nature: that by them we shall be partakers of
the godly nature; that is, by beleeuing the
promises of pardon, we are thereby made par^akers
of the godly nature; there is a renuing,
there is a change of the nature, a man is made
another nature, euen while hee is looking vpon
the promise of pardon and remission, the promises
of the New Couenant, that offer Iesus Christ,
and the gift of righteousnesse through him, euen
by beleeuing those promises it is wrought.
That it is so, you may compare this with that
Rom. 6. where this obiection is made, If there
be a promise of pardon, and of grace, through
Christ, then belike we may liue as we list? No,
saith the Apostle, doe you but beleeue those
promises of grace, and the care is easie for the
rest, in 1, 2, 3.Rom. 6. 1, 2, 3. Verses, What shall wee say then?
shall we continue in sinne that grace may abound?
God forbid: Shall we that are dead to sinne liue
yet therein? Know you not, that as ma^y as are
baptized into Iesus Christ, are baptized into his
death? The meaning is this, if once you receiue
Iesus Christ, and the pardon and remission
of sinnes through him, you cannot be so baptized
into him, but you must be baptized into his
death; that is, of necessity, sinne must bee crucified
in you, you must be dead to sinne, as hee
was dead; you cannot be baptized into him for
iustification, but you must be baptized likewise
for morti^ication of the flesh, and for resurrection
to newnesse of life; Know you not, that
all that are baptized into Iesus Christ, that is, that
are baptized into him for reconciliation with
God, of necessity they must also be baptized into
his death? Therefore, saith he, you are dead to
sinne, by being thus baptized with Christ, it
is impossible you should liue in in it. So, I
say, beloued, hee that hath the strongest faith,
he that beleeues in the greatest degree the promi^es
of pardon and remission, I dare boldly
say, he hath the holiest heart, and the holiest
life: for that is the roote of it, it ariseth from

that roote, sanctification ariseth from iustification,
the blood of Christ hath in it a power, not
onely to wash vs from the guil^ of sinne, but to
cleanse, and to purge vs likewise from the power,
and staine of sinne: And therefore, I say,
the best way to get a great degree of sanctification,
and of mortification of sinfull lusts* the
best way to get a greater measure of the graces
of the Spirit, to grow vp to greater holinesse of
conuersation, is to labour to grow in faith, in
the beliefe of those promises of the Gospell:
for there is no other reason in the world, why
in the New Testament there is an infusion of
the Spirit that giues life, but because now there
are more euident promises of pardon, and forgiuenesse,
and reconciliation with GOD, which
by the Couenant of workes could not be. And
so much shall serue for this.
The fourth,Vse. 4. and maine Vse, that wee are to
make of this, from this description of the Couenant,
is to learne to know the ground vpon
which we expect saluation, and the fulfilling of
all the promises; the ground of all is this Couenant.
My beloued, it is the greatest point
that euer we had yet opportunity to deliuer to
you, yea, it is the maine point that the Ministers
of the Gospell can deliuer at any time,
neither can they deliuer a point of greater moment,
nor can you heare any, then the description
of this Couenant of Grace: this is that
you must lay vp for the foundation of all your
comforts, it hath beene the corner stone vpon

which the Saints haue beene built, from the beginning
of the world, vnto this day: there is
no ground you haue to beleeue you shall be saued,
there is no ground to beleeue that any promise
of God shall be made good to you, to beleeue
that you shall haue the price of the high
Calling of God in Iesus Christ, and those glorious
Riches of the inheritance prepared for vs in
him; I say, there is no other ground at all, but
vpon this Couenant; all that wee teach you
from day to day, are but conclusions drawne
from this Couenant, they are all built vpon
this: therefore, if euer you had cause to attend
any thing, you haue reason to attend to this; I
say, this Couenant betweene GOD and vs.
And therefore we will labour to open to you
now more cleerely, and distinctly, this Couenant;
though a difficult thing it is, to deliuer to
you cleerely what it is, and those that belong to
it; yet you must know it, for it is the ground
of all you hope for, it is that that euery man is
built vpon, you haue no other ground but this,
GOD hath made a Couenant with you, and
you are in Couenant with him: therefore, that
I may shew it to you, we will proceed from the
very first preaching of the Couenant to Adam.
When the Serpent had ouercome the Woman,
and supplanted her and the Man, and had
throwne them from their happinesse, God himselfe
first preached the Gospell to them, and
that in these termes, after he had charged them
with their sinne, and had humbled them, (for

that method he vseth) he sheweth Eue what
she had done, and saith to Adam, Hast thou eaten
of the tree, of which I said thou shalt not eate?
he shewes them their sinne, and after that the
curse; then he begins to tell them hee will not
leaue them without hope; it is true, saith hee,
the Serpent is your enemy, and hath ouercome
you; but, saith hee, you shall not bee slaues to
him, and captiued to him for euer; but you
shall resist him, and be an enemy to him, I will
put enmity betweene the Serpent and the Woman,
and you shall fight together, there shall be
a warre betweene you, and this shall bee the
issue of the warre, the Serpent shall afflict you,
and hurt you something, but thou shalt ouercome
him, and bruise his head, thou shalt bee
the death of him, thou shalt haue the victory
ouer him. The Woman might aske, But how
can this bee? Alas, I am weake, I finde my
selfe too weake already in the Battell, he is too
strong for mee? Saith hee, I will giue thee a
certaine seede, one that shall bee borne of thee,
and he shall be an enemy to the Serpent and his
seede; that is, to all euill men, that are called
his seede, because they are like him: there shall
bee enmity betweene them two, and hee shall
fight the Battrell for thee; and in that Battell
betweene him and the Serpent, this shall be the
issue, the Serpent shall bruise his heele, that is, he
shall preuaile so farre as to cause men to crucifie
him, which is but as the bruising of the
heele; but, saith he, he shall breake his head, he

shall vtterly destroy him, and ouercome him
for thee: so thou shalt preuaile againe, and be
set in the place, and enioy all the promises.
The Church continued in the vertue of this
promise, this preaching of the Gospell, vntill
Abrahams time, and then GOD beginnes to
manifest his Couenant againe; hee calls forth
Abraham and tells him he meanes to make a
Couenant with him, he tells him that hee will
blesse him, and that all the Nations of the
world should bee blessed in him: one while it
is said thus; another while, all the Nations of
the Earth shall be blessed in thy seede. Beloued,
there are many difficulties in this, how the promise
should be made to the seede? how againe
it should be made to Abraham himselfe? (for
it is said to be made to both) how all Nations
are blessed in Abraham, and yet it is said, they
shall be blessed in thy seed?
Againe, the condition of the Couenant,
which he requires of Abraham, is the same
thing that God makes a part likewise of his own
Couenant.
Besides, GODS Couenant seemes not to
bee the giuing of the M^siah, but the giuing of
the promised Land, giuing him a sonne, and
making him a great Nation; many difficulties
there are in this: Therefore, that you may
vnderstand them distinctly, I will deliuer
it thus to you; not in the method wherein
it is set downe, but so as I shall make it much
clearer and perspicuous to you, and best

to bee vnderstoost by you: therefore you
shall obserue in GODS preaching the Gospell to
Abraham;
First, the Couenant.
Secondly, the conditions of it.
Thirdly, the confirma^ion of it.
Fourthly, the parts of the Couenant.
Fiftly, the obiections the Iewes might bee
ready to make against it. And shewing those
fiue, we shall open it fully vnto you.
First, The Couenant1. The Couenant. that GOD made with Abraham,
was after this manner: Abraham,
saith the LORD, I will giue thee a seede, and
in that seede, both thou thy selfe, and all the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed; and the
question is, how this shall be done? Saith the
Lord, hee shall blesse thee, he shall haue power
in his hands to blesse thee; for I will make him
a Prophet, a Priest, and a King. All the blessings
that the people euer had, they were conueyed
to them by these three, by their Priests,
by their Prophets, and by their Kings: saith
he, this promise I haue made to that seede, that
be shall be a Prophet, a Priest, and a King; yea,
saith he, that seede of mine that I shall send,
that shall bee borne of thee, hee shall bee my
Sonne, and my Heire, and in him likewise thou
shalt be made an heyre, and a sonne; an heyre
of all the World, as he is a Sonne, as hee is endowed
with all spirituall priuiledges belonging
to him; yea, thou shalt not onely haue this,
but, saith he, thou shalt euen haue the Spirit of

the Sonne, and be made like to him, thou shalt
be made a Prophet, as he is a Prophet, he shall
^each thee so, by infusing of the same Spirit that
dwels in himselfe, hee shall ^each thee such
knowledge, that thou shal^ be a Prophet, as he:
Yea, he shall make thee a Priest, as himselfe;
thine owne person shall bee accepted aswell as
what thou dost: yea, hee shall make thee a
King, as he is a King; that is, thou shalt haue
the spirit of a King, to rule ouer all thy sinfull
lusts and dispositions, thou shalt haue the peace
of a King, the ioy, the comfort, the riches of a
King, and the victory of a King, I will deliuer
thee from all thine enemies: and for a Type
of this, (for the Couenant was made after Melchizedeck
came to him, as we may see, Chap.
14.) thou shalt see a r^semblance of it, in that
Melchizedeck hath done to thee, hee came to
thee, and blessed thee, and hee was a King, a
a Priest, and a Prophet; hee was the King of
peace, and the Priest of the most high God; and
what was the blessing that Melchizedeck
brought to Abraham? Saith hee, The LORD
blesse thee; he blessed him, that is, hee bade
him goe on, and prosper, hee wished that all
blessings might come vpon him, that he might
ouercome his enemies, etc. that hee might
haue blessings of all sorts, they are not set down
particularly; and in a word, hee made him
heyre of all things: for, saith he, I am the Priest
of the most high God, possessor of Heauen and
Earth, and heere I haue brought thee Bread

and Wine, that is, an earnest, a little for the
whole, to shew this to thee, that GOD hath
made thee heyre of all things: And thereupon,
when the King of Sodom^ presently offered
him the riches that he had taken, when he came
backe from the Victory, No, saith Abraham,
I will not take them; for it is the LORD that
blesseth mee, it is hee that shall make me rich, it
is he that is my exceeding great reward, it is he
that hath entred into Couenant with mee; and
therefore, saith he, it shall neuer be said that the
King of Sodome hath made Abraham rich* I haue
receiued all from him, and I will restore all to
him: therefore, you see, hee paid Tythes to
Melchizedeck, he gaue him the tenth of all that
he had: So is it now, saith God, that Mesiah,
that promised ^eed, is a Priest after the order of
Melchizedeck; he is a King, he shall come and
blesse thee, after that manner he shall make thee
heyre of all things, onely thou shalt doe him
homage, saith hee, as thou didst to Melchizedeck;
What was that homage? That thou
shalt giue him the tenth of all thou hast, that is,
by that thou shalt shew thine homage, thou
shalt shew that thou art bound to yeeld him obedience,
thou shalt shew vpon what tenure
thou holdest all that thou hast; thou giuest him
that as a rent, acknowledging him to bee the
Lord, of whom thou hast receiued all things,
and to whom thou owest all things: therefore
Abraham would take nothing of any else, hee
would take nothing of the King of Sodome, nor

he would doe nothing for the King of Sodome,
that is, not to him, nor any man, but as from
God, as a meanes vnder him. Beloued, this is the
great Couenant that the Lord made with Abraham:
So you see how the promise is made to
the seed: for the promise was made thus to the
seed, God had promised that hee should bee a
King, a Priest, and a Prophet, I haue sworne,
saith he, thou art a Priest for euer, after the order
of Melchizedeck: againe, I will giue vnto him
the Kingdome of Dauid. Thus the promises
come after in the Old Testament: So the promise
is made to the seed, and againe it is the
seede that blesseth him. This is the promise.
Now for the Condition that God required
of Abraham,2. The Condition of the Couenant, which is faith. it was this, Thou shalt beleeue
this, thou shalt beleeue that such a Mesiah shall
be sent into the World: Art thou able to beleeue
this, Abraham? He answers, Yes. Well,
saith the Lord, I will put thee to the tryall, I
will see whether thou canst beleeue this, or no;
and, withall, I will giue thee a signe or euidence
that I am able to performe it: saith he, I will
giue thee a Sonne: It is true, thou art as a dead
man, thou art almost a hundred yeeres old, and
the wombe of Sarah is dead: I will promise
thee a Sonne, art thou able to beleeue it? Againe,
thou seest the Land of Canaan, thou hast
not one foot in it, I will giue this land from the
length and breadth of it, for thy possession:
Art thou able to beleeue this? saith the Text,

Abraham did beleeue, and God accounted that
faith of his for righteousnesse; that is, hee accepted
him for it: for that faith he reckoned him a
man fit to make a Couenant with all, hee accounted
him a righteous person; that is, hee was
willing to enter into Couenant with him, because
he beleeued him. Beloued, this was not directly
the beleeuing of the Mesiah, (he did not
intend the Mesiah) but it was the beleeuing that
he should haue a sonne. You see, the Text is
plaine, Gen. 15. when God had said to Abraham,
that hee would bee his exceeding great reward,
saith Abraham, I goe childlesse, and the Steward of
my house will be my heyre. Saith the LORD to
him, Verse 4. This man shall not be thine heyre,
but one that shall come out of thine own bowels shall
be thine heyre. Goe looke vpon the Starres, if
thou be able to number them, then thou shalt
number the seed that thou* shalt haue. Saith the
Text, Verse 6. Abraham beleeued, and hee accounted
that to him for righteousnesse So likewise
he addes, in the Verses following, againe hee
said, I am the Lord that brought thee out of
Vr of the Chaldees, to giue thee this Land to inherit
it. So, my beloued, this was the promise.
Now, when Abraham had beleeued this, saith
the Lord to him, This faith of thine, that is, not
this particular act by which thou beleeuest that
thou shalt haue a sonne, that shall be thine immediate
heyre, but that habit, that grace of
faith, that b^leeuing disposition in thee, whereby
thou art able to beleeue this promise, saith

he, with the same faith thou also belieuest the
promise of the Messiah, that a certaine seed^
shall be giuen thee, in whom all the Nations of
the Earth shall be blessed. Saith he, this faith
of thi^e I take for the condition of the Couenant
on thy part, I will for this reckon thee as righteous,
I will account thee as a man fit to be entred
into Couenant withall. Againe, the Lord
tryes him afterward, when Isaac was growne,
Verse 22. Goe, saith hee, and kill thy sonne:
Abraham was able to keepe it, hee went, and
meant to haue done it in good earnest; so there
was the same ground for beleeuing now, that
there was before: So, saith hee, GOD could
haue raised him from the dead when I had killed
him, aswell as make mee, when I was dead,
and Sarahs wombe, when that was dead, to
bring forth a sonne: God can aswell raise him
from the dead, as he could giue him mee from
a dead wombe at first. Wee see, that God vpon
this renewes the Couenant againe, and renewes
it with an Oath; sure, saith he, I will performe
my Couenant, since I see that thou beleeuest, and
fearest mee, and preferrest me before thine only
sonne: these are but the concomitants of
his faith. So, my beloued, it was this act of
Abraham, by which hee did beleeue the promise
of God, that made him partaker of the Couenant.
And if you aske now what is the condition
that makes euery man partaker of this
Covenant of grace? It is nothing but onely
faith, ability to beleeue it, that GOD would

send such a Messiah, before the Law, and
that hee hath exhibited, and sent him since:
for you must know this, that all the promises,
the very giuing of Isaac, the giuing of the promised
Land, all these were but shaddowes, as it
were, of the great promise, of the maine Couenant
in Christ. So likewise, that act of Abrahams
faith, whereby hee beleeued that he
should haue a sonne, and beleeued that GOD
would giue his children possession of that Land
where he had not a foot, was but likewise a
branch, and a shaddow, and a pledge, as it
were, of the maine act of faith, whereby he beleeued
the promised seed should be giuen him,
in whom himselfe, and all the Nations of the
Earth should bee blessed. So then wee haue
found out this, what the Condition is that God
requires of euery man to bee made partaker of
his Couenant; it is nothing but to beleeue in
God; that is, God saith, I will giue my Sonne
to you; to vs a Sonne is giuen, etc. that shall be
the promised seede, and I will make him a King,
a Priest, and a Prophet, to blesse you; hee
shall giue you remission of sinnes, etc. he shall
teach you, and instruct you to mortifie your
lusts, and shall make you partakers of his
Kingdome; he shall make you heyres, and
sonnes; this is a very great promise, can you
beleeue this? If a man will but beleeue GOD
now, I say, it makes him partaker of the Couenant,
this puts him within the Couenant:
you will say, this is very strange; how can it

be, that so small a condition as this, that to
bel^eue, should make a man partaker of the
Couenant? that vpon which all the promises
hang initially, is nothing but beleeuing. You
see Abraham did no more but beleeue GOD,
when hee told him hee should haue a sonne,
you see how much GOD made of that: So
it is with vs, if we doe but beleeue this, God
will make as much of it, he will make good all
the promises of the Couenant to vs: But, I say,
this hath need of a reason why it is suspended
onely vpon faith, and beliefe; the reason is
this, marke it well,Reasons why faith is the Condition. it is a point of exceeding
great moment.
First, though there were nothing but faith,
yet that beleeuing brings with it, and workes
sanctification, and holinesse of life: for whereas
you might object, May a man beleeue this
promise, and yet walke according to the lusts
of his owne ignorance, and so to be made partaker
of the Couenant? Let him, if he can beleeue
truly, and doe this, but it is impossible, let him
beleeue, and the other will follow. Behold
Abraham himselfe, (to giue you an instance
of it) he beleeued GOD, and it was accounted
to him for righteousnesse; I say, it was enough
for him to beleeue GOD: For that
drawes after it inherent righteousnesse of sanctification,
and holinesse of life: for, saith the
Text, Rom. 4. Abraham is said to beleeue
GOD, when hee said he should haue a sonne,
he gaue him glory, that is the ground, which

drawes with it all other graces, after this manner;
he that beleeues GOD, hath a good opinion
of him, hee loues him; hee that loues
him, must needs be full of good workes. Besides,
he that beleeues him, when GOD shall
say to him, I am thy exceeding great reward, see
that thou keepe close to mee, thou shalt haue
an eye vpon mee, and walke with mee from
day to day. Let a man beleeue that GOD is
alsufficient, that he will be a Sunne and a Shield
to him, and his exceeding great reward, hee will
be ready to doe it. Abraham did so, when God
called him from his Fathers house, and from
his kindred, hee was ready to doe so; when
GOD would haue him to offer vp his onely
sonne, he was ready to doe it: for he beleeued
GOD, hee beleeued his promise, and his
ability, and willingnesse to helpe him; hee beleeued
his Almighty power, and therefore
whatsoeuer GOD bid him doe, he would doe
it; hee preferred GOD before his own ease,
before his owne profit, before his onely sonne
whom hee loued: Let any man beleeue as Abraham
did, and of necessity it will produce
good workes; let a man beleeue truely, and
truth of beliefe will bring forth truth of holinesse:
and therefore wee heare what S. Iames
saith, Iam. 2. saith he* Abraham was iustified by
faith; it is true: but, saith hee, Abrahams
faith had workes ioyned with it: for it was
not a dead, a counterfeit faith, but a true faith,
and being a true faith, you see, Abraham had

workes aswell as faith: for when GOD bade
him offer his sonne, he did it: Was not that
an exceeding great worke? saith the Apostle
there: So say I, no wonder that it is by faith,
that the LORD requires no more but to beleeue:
for when a man beleeues, workes will
follow, it will breed holinesse of life; let him
beleeue GOD to bee an exceeding great reward,
that hee is a Sunne and a Shield, he will
follow GOD wheresoeuer hee leades him; let
him beleeue the promise of GOD, when he
describes himselfe, hee must needes haue a
good opinion of him, and loue him, and bee
exceeding fruitfull in good workes, and obedience
to him; therefore that is one reason for
it.
A second reason of it is,2. Reason. because it could not
bee done by obedience to the Law; it was
impossible to haue made the sonnes of men partakers
of the Couenant, that way: for if it
could haue beene done by the Law, and by
the Commandement, it should haue beene;
but the LORD tryed that in Adam, hee
gaue Adam a Commandement, and ability
to keepe it, (so hee made him perfectly innocent,)
yet Adam did not keepe it. Put
the case that GOD should haue tryed him
the second time, and haue giuen him a Commandement
againe, and not haue required the
Condition of faith, but of obedience, hee
would haue broken it, as hee did before; and
therefore it could not bee by the Law: Therefore

it must needes bee by faith, and the promises,
otherwise it could neuer haue beene
sure. Adam brake it; surely, if hee brake
it, we should haue broken it, if it had beene
any other way but by faith: and therefore
wee see what the Apostle saith, Galat. 3. 21.
Is the Law then against the promise of GOD?Gal. 3. 21.
GOD forbid: for if there had beene a Lawe
giuen that could haue giuen life, surely rig^teousnesse
had beene by the Law: If Adam had stood
and had kept the Law, and if men could haue
entred into Couenant, and haue kept it, Christ
had beene spared, the Couenant of Grace
had beene spared; if righteousnesse had beene
by the Law, there had needed no Messiah,
there had needed no Couenant of Grace;
and therefore, through the infirmity of the flesh,
(Adams flesh, that would not keepe the Law,
and ours, that is not able to keepe it) there
was no other way to make mankind partaker of
the Couenant of Grace, but onely by faith,
by beleeuing GOD, and by taking the promise,
and the gift of Righteousnesse, through
Iesus Christ: for it could neuer else in likelihood
haue beene sure to the seede. This is
the way to make it sure, when there is no more
but an ac^eptation required, and not exact obedience
to the Commandement.
Thirdly,3. Reason. it is by faith: because nothing
else can answer the Couenant, but faith: you
see, the Couenant is not a Commandement,
Doe this, and liue, but the Couenant is a promise,

I will giue thee, It runnes all vpon promises,
I will giue thee a seed, and in that seede
thou shalt bee blessed. I will giue thee this good
Land, etc. so that the Couenant of Grace
stands on GODS part all in promises: Now
you know that it is faith that answers the promise:
for the promise is to beleeued; if the
Couenant had stood in precepts, and Commandements,
and rules of the Law, then it must
haue beene answered by workes, and obedience,
and therefore it could not be by obedience:
for that holds not proportion, there is
not agreement betweene them; but since
the Couenant consists of promises, that
must needes bee by beleeuing, and not by
workes.
Fourthly,4. Reason. and lastly, it is by faith, because
the Lord would haue it by free grace, and not
of debt: for, saith hee, If I should giue a
Law, and rules to men, and promise them life
vpon it, when they had performed the worke,
they would challenge it of debt: no, saith
the LORD, it is an inheritance, I doe not vse
to deale with my children, as men doe with
their seruants, that I should giue them worke
to doe, and when they haue done it, I should
giue them wages, then they would come and
challenge it a my hands by way of debt: no,
saith the Lord, this is an inheritance, and you
are my sonnes, and you shall haue it giuen you
freely, and giuen you as it becomes a Father
to giue it, so you shall take it; therefore, that

it might bee of free grace, and not of debt,
therefore it is by faith, and not by workes.
And that is added, likewise, if it had beene
by workes, men would haue beene ready to
boast* and haue said, I haue done this, I am able
to keepe the Law, therefore the promise of
eternall life shall bee made good to mee, I shall
receiue it as wages, men would boast in themselues:
No, saith the LORD, no creature shall
boast in it selfe: for that puts euery man further
from the LORD, the more a man reioyceth in
himselfe, the more he stands vpon his owne
bottome, the more he is diuorsed from GOD,
and separated from him: but, saith he, he that
reioyceth, let him reioyce in the LORD: for
that fits a man for the LORD, and therefore I
will haue it by faith, it shall not bee by workes.
So, beloued, you see now what is the Condition.
Surely, looke how Abraham was made
partaker of the Couenant, so euery one of vs
must bee; Abraham was made partaker of it
by saith, so shall euery man be made partaker
of it by faith, and no otherwise. Abraham beleeued
God, when hee had a promise, and because
he beleeued him, (not that particular act
of faith but) that grace of faith, whereby he beleeued
this, and the other promises of the Messiah,
was counted to him for righteousnesse: and
so for this cause, because wee beleeue the promises,
and the Couenant of Grace, therefore
the LORD accepts vs, and accounts vs righteous;
and because this seemes strange to the

sonnes of men, therefore we see with how much
adoe Paul labours to make it good, what strong
obiections were against it in all times. I haue
shewed the reason. Now when you reade Rom.
3. and 4. and Gal. 3. and 4. you may know the
better the meaning of those places. Well, so
you see the Couenant; secondly, you see the
Condition; now you heare that there is such
a Couenant as this.
The third thing is the confirmation of the
Couenant;3. The confirmation of the Couenant. when a man heares that GOD will
vouchsafe so much fauour vnto mankinde, a
man is ready to say as Gedion did, alas my family
is poore in Manasses, I am the least in all my
Fathers house, And who am I, that I should
be raised vp hitherto? that such a promise as
this should be made to mee, that I should goe,
and saue Israel? etc. I say, after the same manner
a man might bee ready to obiect, Alas,
what are wee the sonnes of men, that the great
GOD of Heauen and Earth should enter into
such a Couenant with vs, that he should make
vs such promises as these, that he should make
vs heyres of the World, that hee should blesse
vs in that manner, to make vs sonnes, to make
vs Kings and Priests? Saith the LORD, I confesse
it is a Couenant that needes confirmation:
therefore the LORD hath confirmed it all these
wayes; the LORD hath confirmed it, first, by
his promise; saith he, you haue my sure word
for it; if that bee not enough, I will confirme
it by an Oath, and because he had no greater to

sweare by, he saith, by my selfe haue I sworne,
that I will make it good: this is not enough,
but he confirmes it by the blood of Christ himselfe;
the Mediator shall come, and confirme
this Testament, and when the Testament is
confirmed by the death of the Testator, there
is no more altering of that;Gal. 3. 15. saith hee, Gal. 3.
A mans Testament no man changeth, after once
it is confirmed: and when the Testator is dead,
Heb. 9. then the Testament is confirmed: so it
is confirmed by the blood, by the death of the
Testator. This is not enough, but hee hath
added seales vnto it, hee hath confirmed it
likewise by them; saith hee, I will adde the
seale of Circumcision, and of the Passeouer.
For Circumcision, saith the LORD, Goe, and
circumcise your selues, and when I see the
Circumcision, I will remember my Couenant,
and make it good to you; that, as hee said of
the Bow, he set the Bow in the Cloud, saith
hee, I will make my Couenant, that I will
neuer destroy the Earth againe with raine,
this Bow shall be the witnesse of the Couenant,
and when I looke vpon it, I will remember my
Couenant; after this manner are the signes and
seales of the Couenant; saith he, Circumcise
your selues, and when I see that, I will remember
my Couenant, and will spare you, and I
will make good to you all the promises of it:
So likewise the Passeouer, saith hee, See that
^ou keepe it, take the Lambe, and sprinkle the
blood, etc. Saith he, when I see it, I will remember

my Couenant. Where, beloued, this
is to be obserued, that these signes or seales of
the Couenant, not onely confirme the promises
on our part, but they signifie that faith, that
condition which is required on our part: for
when the LORD comes, and lookes into his
Church, and sees a great company in it, sees
his House full, and he comes, and askes, What
doe you in my House? What doe a number of
those that professe themselues to be within the
compasse of the Couenant there? Their answer
is, LORD, we beleeue, wee are among
those that keepe the Condition. If you beleeue,
where is your Circumcision? It may
be you haue that outward Circumcision in the
flesh, but where is the Circumcision of the
heart? for, if you did beleeue indeede, it
would worke a change in the heart, as faith, I
told you, that is indeede a liuely faith, workes
a cha^ge, it c^ts off sinfull lusts, it makes a man
deny himselfe, and cleaue to God, and serue
him with a perfect heart. So againe, after that
manner doth the second signe of the Couenant,
which is the Passeouer, when the LORD shall
aske, Doe you beleeue? Yes, heere is the
sprinkling of the blood of the Lambe. But
where is the true sprinkling vpon the heart and
conscience? heere is the outward Passeouer,
the outward profession, you come and take
the signe and the seale, but where is the inward
sprinkling? Therefore you see what was required
in the Passeouer; saith hee, when you

eate the Lambe, etc. haue you tasted of the
sweet of the Lambe, haue you euer tasted of the
sweetnesse that is in Iesus Christ, so that you can
loue him, and delight in him? are you clad
like those that went out of Egypt, with their
staues in their hands, and their feet shod; that
is, are you ready to goe out of Egypt; that is,
from sinne and wickednesse; from the state
of vnregeneracie, wherein you were before?
Againe, hath your soule tasted of the
sowre hearbs, of that bondage, that now you
are weary of all the bondage of sinne and Satan,
that you desire exceedingly to goe from it,
that you reckon the contrary condition a condition
of freedome, wherein you are willing and
desirous to continue? saith the LORD, when
I looke vpon these signes, I will remember my
Couenant; onely see that your Circumision be
not in the letter, as we see, Rom. 2. but see that
you be circumcised in your hearts; that there
be not only a Passeouer, but see that you keepe
the Passeouer with sincerity, see that all leauen
bee cleansed out of your hearts, that is, that
your hearts be empty of the dominion of euery
sinne; see that you haue tasted of the sowrenesse
of that bondage, that you bee willing to
be rid of it, see that you bee willing to trauell
out of Egypt, to another, to a further Country;
see that this be reall, not in profession and shew,
but in deede; and, saith the LORD, I will remember
my Couenant; and these are the confirmations
of the Couenant, saith the Lord, you

shall not neede to doubt it, I haue sworne, it is
repeated, Heb. 6. besides, it is confirmed with
blood, with the death of the Testator, and
there is none that alters the Will of the dead,
when he is dead, they adde nothing to it, nor
taks nothing from it: besides, I haue confirmed
it with seales, and therefore it stands
vnalterable. These three things we
haue obserued now in this
Couenant.
FINIS.




THE
TVVELFTH
SERMON.

G^NESIS 17. 2.
And I will make my Couenant betweene mee
and thee. And I will multiply thee exceedingly.

YOV haue heard what the Couenant
is in the generall.
The fourth thing is, What
the particular branches, and
parts, or gifts, and priuiledges
of this Couenant are; and those
we will reduce vnto three heads.
Now the three parts of the Couenant are answerable
to the three Offices of Christ: for,
we told you, it is Christ* himselfe, to whom the
promises are immediately made; he is a Priest,
a King, and a Prophet; it is hee that makes

good all the parts of the Couenant, and he doth
^t according to all his three Offices; remission
of sinnes, he giues as a Priest: The other Priests
were but a shaddow of this Priesthood of
Christ, he is the great High Priest, that is holy,
and harmlesse, and vndefiled, that is higher then
the heauens; the great High Priest, that is en^red
(saith the Text) into the very heauens themselues;
hee that sits at the right hand of God, and
is now present with him; he that is not entred
in by the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, but by his
owne blood. This is such a High Priest, as is able
indeed to giue remission of sinnes; and therefore,
saith the Apostle, Heb. 10. 22. Seeing wee
haue such an high Priest, doub^ not, but now come
with full assurance of faith, when you see such
an High Priest as this: if they were able to beleeue,
that had but a weake man to bee their
Priest, before the comming of Christ, that offered
for his owne sinnes, as well as for the sinnes
of others, that often repeated his Sacrifice, that
that had but the blood of Bulls and Goats, that
did but enter into the Tabernacle; saith hee,
when you see Iesus Christ himselfe come, that
hath no Si^ne of his owne, that offered one
perfect Sacrifice, that he needes not to repeate,
that entred not into the Tabernacle, but into
the Heauen it selfe, that did this with his owne
blood, and not with the blood of beasts, saith
hee, draw neere now ^with assurance of faith:
^hat is, Why should you make question now?
you haue great ground of assuring your selues,

that your sinnes shall bee forgiuen; now you
may trust perfectly to the grace reueiled through
him. This is the first.
The second is, I will teach you knowledge,
and that he doth as a Prophet; you shall no
more teach euery man his brother, but all shall bee
taught of mee. Beloued, it is another kinde of
teaching, when the LORD teacheth vs knowledge,
then that is that wee can haue from the
hands of men; Christ is another kinde of Prophet,
you come not to heare him speake, to
heare him teaching as a man heares other Lectures,
where his vnderstanding is informed,
but hee is such a Prophet, as enlightens euery
man within, that comes into the world; that
is, euery man that is enlightned, is enlightned
by him, he is such a Prophet, as baptizeth you
with the Holy Ghost, he is such a Prophet that
makes mens hearts to burne within them when
he speakes to them; such a Prophet as saith to
Matthew and Leuy, Follow me, and they doe it;
such a Prophet as saith to his Ministers, G^e
teach all Nations, and I will bee with you, and I
will make you able Ministers, not of the letter,
but of the Spirit; there is no man in the world
can say this, but this great Prophet; and this is
the Prophet that the Lord hath raised vp, the
Prophet that he promised hee would raise another
like Moses, that great Prophet that should
teach men after another fashion, then all the
Prophets before were euer able to doe. And
that is the second part of the Couenant.
Beloued, we may know many things, but it
is a hard thing to know as we ought to know.
It is said of an vnregenerate man, 2 Cor. 8. Hee
knowes nothing as hee ought to know. For example,
thou mayst know sinne, and know it most
exactly, but if this doe not worke vpon thy
heart, if the sinne lye not exceeding heauy vpon
thee, if it breed not in thee godly sorrow, for it,
if it doth not amaze thee, as it were, with the
filthinesse and vilenesse of it, it is, because thou
dost not yet know it, as thou oughtest to know
it: And how shall a man doe then? Goe to
CHRIST, hee is the Prophet, that is, hee teacheth
a man to see things so, that his heart, his
will and affections shall likewise be moued with
it: You are to consider the Couenant when you
goe to the LORD; and therefore that man
that saith, I can looke vpon my sinne with dry
eyes, I can looke vpon it, and neuer be affected
with it, this is because he is taught but with the
teaching of men; hee must remember that this
is a part of the Couenant, and God hath bound
himselfe by an Oath to performe it. Iesus
Christ, as he is a Prophet, God hath sent him to
teach thee all things belonging to saluation,
and so to teach thee, that thou shalt be in a right
manner affected with it. And so likewise put
the case thou know God, thou seest him in his
attributes, thou hearest him often described,
and art able to describe him to others, but for
all this, thou findest not thy heart affectioned
towards him, thou seest not that excellency

and beauty that is in him, so that thy heart is
not enamoured with him, thou canst not say
thou louest him with all thy heart, with all thy
soule, and with all thy strength, What wilt thou
doe in this case? Goe to Christ the Prophet,
and beseech him that hee would teach thee to
know the LORD, this is his promise; if thou
pray to him, and he doe not doe it, vrge him
with this, it is a part of his Couenant, that hee
hath confirmed by Oath, and must doe it, and,
beloued, be assured of this, if wee seeke, and be
earnest with him, he will teach vs to know the
Lord, and to know him so, that wee shall loue
him with all our soule, and with all our strength.
The like may I say of any thing else; put the
case afflictions come vpon thee, and thou bee
not able to bee patient vnder such afflictions,
suppose that it be a matter of disgrace and discredit,
that so wounds thee, that thy heart cannot
be at rest, what is the reason of this? thou
callest to minde, it may bee, all the rules of patience,
that should teach thee to beare afflictions;
well, and yet thou art not able to doe it:
the cause is, because thou dost not yet know
these outward temptations, these outward euils,
as thou oughtest to know them, if thou
diddest, they would seeme small to thine eyes,
sinne would be an exceeding great griefe, but
these would be but trifles and flea-bitings, in
comparison of the other: goe to Christ now,
and beseech him to shew thee what is the nature
of these outward crosses and losses, that

thou mayst be taught of him once: hee is the
great Prophet, that teacheth a man so, hee so
presents things in their owne colours to the vnderstanding,
that the will and affections follow
and apprehend them aright; goe to him,
and beseech him that thou mayst know them as
thou oughtest, and thou shalt finde, that thou
shalt be able to bea^e the greatest crosse with
patience, it shall bee nothing then to thee, it
will appeare to be a small matter, when he hath
taught thee to iudge aright, thou shalt not be
deceiued in it.
So likewise, for pleasure, when a man finds
his heart so wedded to any sinfull lust, to any euill
haunt, wher^in his heart is held inordinately,
that it cannot diuorse it selfe from it, goe to
Christ, hee is the great Prophet. Thus we may
doe, beloued, with the rest. This is the second
part of the Couenant.
The third part of the Couenant is, that which
he will performe to vs, as he is King, and it consists
in these 3. things.
You know the Office of a King is to guide
and rule; now, if thou finde thy heart vnruly,
if thou finde thy selfe subiect to vnruly affections,
to sinfull inordinate lusts, which thou canst
not master, it is a part of his Kingdome, now to
set vp his owne gouernment in thy heart, to put
his Law into thy minde, and to write it in thy inward
parts, that so thou mayst bee indeed subiect
to the Kingdome of Christ in a willing
manner. When a man sees nothing (as wee

said before) but the outward letter of the Law,
he will neuer be subiect, he will neuer yeeld obedience,
but Christ comes as a King now, and
puts an inward disposition into the minde, that
shall answer the letter without, and so he makes
a man subiect to his gouernment. Beloued, that
Phrase is to be marked, Heb. 2. 10. Saith the
Lord, I will put my Law into their mind^; there
are Lawes out of mens minds, Lawes without,
that euery man may see; but it is another thing
to haue the Law put into a mans minde: for
example, this is the Law without, Thou shalt
loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all
thy soule, and with all thy strength. To answer
which, you shall see, Deut. 30. 6. I will circumcise
thy heart, and then thou shalt be able to loue
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all
thy soule, and with all thy strength. That is, I
will put this affection, or this grace of loue within
thy heart, it shal not be without onely, but I
will put it within, that there shall bee a grace
within, a habit of loue within, answerable to
the Commandement without; this is to put
the Law into the minde: and so likewise, Ier.
32. 40. you know, this is the Commandement
of the LORD, You shall feare the LORD, and
keepe his Ordinances, and his Statutes, and his
Commandements to doe them. Well, saith the
Lord there, I will make a Couenant with you: and
what will I doe? I will put my feare into your
hearts. I will not onely giue you this precept,
that thou shalt looke on without, Thou shalt

feare mee, and keepe my Commandements,
but I will put the affections of feare into thy
heart, there it shall bee, and then thou shalt easily
feare mee, and keepe my Commandements;
thou shalt feare to disobey me, thou shalt feare
and tremble at my Word, and take heed how
thou doe any thing contrary to my mind: and
beloued, when this is done, hee makes indeed
Kings, as hee makes vs Priests and Prophets:
for when a man is thus taught, he is a Prophet,
other men need not to teach him, for hee is a
spirituall man then, and is able to iudge of all
things; I say, when this gouernment is set vp,
and the Law is put into his minde, when it is
put into his inward parts; I say, when this is
done, then he makes vs Kings: for when men
haue so much strength within themselues, that
they can guide and rule themselues* and walke
in the way of righteousnesse, now they are
made Kings, and such Kings the Lord makes all
those that come to him. This is the first part of
this Kingdome.
The second part is, to giue vs abundance of
all things, to giue vs peace: for the Office of
a King, you know, is to keepe his people in
peace, as it is said of Saul, hee cloathed them
with scarlet* that is, he made his people to abound
with wealth, and peace, and quietnesse:
this the Lord doth likewise, and this is a part of
his spirituall Kingdome. Now his Kingdome
is spirituall; therefore the maine worke of it is
to giue vs inward peace and ioy; you may

haue troubles in the world, but my Kingdome
is not of this world, and therefore wee are not
so much to expect an outward worldly peace,
though we haue likewise a promise of that, but
in mee you shall haue inward peace, saith hee,
the Kingdome of God is in righteousnesse, that
is the first part, when God workes righteousnes,
as I haue named before, the second is peace,
and ioy, so that that is a part of the Couenant,
GOD, promised inward peace and ioy; beloued,
when you want it, know it is a part of the Couenant,
you may goe to GOD, and beseech him
to fill your hearts with this peace that passeth vnvnderstanding,
and with this ioy which is vnspeakable,
and glorious; goe, and beseech him
to enrich your hearts with those spiritual riches
that belong to saluation, this is a part of his
Kingdome, and that which hee hath promised
to vs: now this is not all, but likewise an outward
peace he promiseth, hee hath promised
we shall be heyres of all things, all things are
yours, he hath promised outward riches, we
are heyres of all the world; so that it is likewise
a part of his Couenant, when a man wants
any outward comfort, any outward helpe, any
blessings, or deliuerance, he may goe to Christ,
that is the King of all Kings, as hee is Lord of
all things, as he himselfe is heyre of all things,
and beseech him to grant it vnto him: for it is
a part of his Couenant.
And the third and last is, that we shall ouercome
our enemies, that is the third branch of

this Kingdome; And that which was promised
to Abraham, thou shalt possesse the gates of
thine Enemes* when hee renewed his Couenant,
vpon the offering of his sonne, and you shall
finde it, Luke 1. 74. repeated againe, this is the
great promise that God hath made, that being
deliuered from the hands of all our enemies, wee
might serue him in righteousnesse and holinesse all
the dayes of our life. Now as his Kingdome is
spirituall, so the chiefe part of this Kingdome
stands in ouercoming our spirituall enemies;
and therefore you may challenge this Couenant
at his hands, when you are to wrastle with Satan,
or any temptation and lust, LORD, hast
thou not said that thou wilt deliuer me out of
the hands of all mine enemies? Is it not a part
of thy Couenant? But, beloued, that is not
all neither, there is a promise, and that is a part
of the Couenant likewise, that wee shall ouercome
our outward enemies, thou shalt possesse
the gate of thine enemies, so farre as it is good
for vs, as farre as God sees it meet, he dispenseth
these in a different manner, but yet it is a part of
the Couenant, and therefore a man may goe
and challenge this at Gods hands; LORD, if it
be good, if it be fit, and meet for me to haue it,
thou hast promised it, I shall haue victory ouer
them also. So now you see what the Couenant
is: But now there is one maine generall, that
likewise is a branch of this Couenant, that is generall
to all the three, that is the giuing of the
Spirit, it is a branch of the Couenant, as wee see,

Ioel 2. which is repeated, Act. 2. I will powre
out my Spirit vpon all flesh in those dayes, and your
yong men shall see visions, etc. Beloued, know
that this was a part of the Couenant that was
made with Abraham, It was expressed to Abraham
in generall, I will blesse thee, afterwards
there were seuerall branches of it; now one
thing was expressed, as part of the Couenant,
and then another; among the branches, this
was one, I will powre out my Spirit vpon all flesh,
which is that which you haue likewise, Esay 44.
3. I will powre out my Spirit as water vpon the
dry ground, and you shall grow as the grasse, and
as the Willow by the Riuers of water. Whereof
that this is the meaning, Peter makes it good,
Acts 2. and so likewise our Sauiour Christ, the
great promise that he made to them was, I will
bapize you with the Holy Ghost, this promise was
made before hee departed in the flesh, but it
was fulfilled after, when hee powred forth his
Spirit. Beloued, this is that great part of the
Couenant, that which comprehends the life of
all the other three, that which inabled vs to doe
all the rest, that which makes vs Kings, and
Priests, and Prophets, this powring out of the
Spirit vpon vs, euen as Christ himselfe was anoynted
with the Spirit without measure, that
he might be able to teach vs, that he might bee
a Prophet, a King, and a Priest, that which enabled
him to performe all those Offices, was
the effusion of the spirit vpon him without measure:
Beloued, that which makes vs able to be

partakers of those three parts of the Couenant,
is likewise the same Spirit, wherewith wee are
anoyn^ed according to our measure. So much
shall serue for this, namely what the particular
branch^s, and parts, and priuiledges of the Couenant
are.
The fift and last is,5. Obiections against it. the obiections that are
made against this Couenant. There were two
great obiections that Paul euery where met
with, (for our scope is, that when wee put all
this together, that we haue deliuered about this
Couenant, you may reade at leasure Rom. 3. 4.
and Gal. 3. 4. and all the promises made to Abraham,
and when you haue this before you,
will be able then to vnderstand i^) I say, there
are two great obiections that Paul euery where
met with.
The one is from the Law,1. Obiect. Is it not said euery
where, Those that obey the Commandement
shall liue, and euery promise is made still to
them that feare the LORD, and keepe his Commandements?
and therefore it is by the
Law.
Nay,Ans. saith the Apostle, Gal. 3. it is impossible
that it should be by the Law: for the Law
was giuen 430. yeeres after the promise, and
Couenant was established with Abraham long
before it; it cannot bee now, that that which
comes after can dissannull that which went before:
but besides there is another great reason,
and that is this, saith the Apostle, you were
neuer able to keepe the Law, you could neuer

be saued, if you would haue it by the Law, to
what end is the Law giuen then? By reason of
transgression, that you might learne to know
how impossible it is for you to come to God, to
be partaker of the Couenant any other way,
then by faith; saith he, you might remember
that Adam, when he was in innocency and
perfection, was much stronger then you, yet
did not keepe the Law; but, because that was
easie for people to forget, the Law was giuen
againe by Moses, vpon Mount Sinai, that the
LORD by that meanes might reminde you of
the Commandement, and of your sinnes, and
of the curse belonging to you; and therefore,
saith hee, when the Law was deliuered, it was
so terrible, that Moses himselfe did tremble;
and therefore, said the People, Lord, doe not
thou speake to vs any more, deliuer not the Law
to vs any more, but let Moses come, and bee
as a Mediator betweene vs, let him speake; for
we are not able to see these fires, these burnings,
wee are not able to see this and liue. The meaning
of it is this, the Law, if any man looke on
it, it is so terrible, when GOD comes to speake
to a man in his Law, and in his Commandements,
that there is nothing to be expected but
death: that same fearefulnesse at Mount Sinai,
was but onely an expression of that feare which
the Law of God puts vpon euery mans conscience;
and therefore, when the people then
desired a Mediator, that might speake, and that
GOD might speake no more, another thing

was signified by it, that no man is able to come
to God by yeelding obedience to the Law, but
he must needs haue a Mediator to goe between
GOD and him.
The other obiection is from the Ceremonies
of the Law;2. Obiect. they were ready to say, We
haue a Priest, we haue Sacrifices, we haue diuers
washings and Rites, etc, wee were wont
to bee saued by them, why may we not so
still?
The answer to it is,Ans. That these were but the
oldnesse of the letter; for indeed all these did
but cloathe the Couenant of Grace; the Couenant
of Grace was deliuered to the Iewes, the
Ceremonies did indeede but set it out, they
were but types and shaddowes, by which it
was expressed to the Iewes: the Iewes, by reason
of their ignorance, were not able to see the
body for the clothes, they were not able to see
the signification of the Spirit for the letter, they
were not able to see the sword for the sheath,
the kernell for the shell; that is, they could not
see Christ himselfe, the inward promises, but
stucke in the outward barke, and rinde of Ceremonies,
in the shell of them, and so they became
vnprofitable; but indeed those Rites did
nothing, but cloathe the Couenant of Grace,
and set it forth to them. So much shall serue
for the dispatching of those fiue things.
Now hence you see how those difficulties
may bee answered, that I mentioned before.
For example, it is said, the promise is made to the

seede, yet the promise is made to vs,Obiect. and yet againe
the Couenant is made with Abraham,
How can all these stand together?Ans. The promises
that are made to the seede, that is to Christ
himselfe, those are these promises: Thou shalt
bee a Priest for euer, and I will giue thee the Kingdome
of Dauid, thou shalt sit in that Throne,
thou shalt be a Prince of peace, and the gouernment
shall be vpon thy shoulder; likewise thou shalt
bee a Prophet to my people, thou shalt open the
prison to the Capti^e, thou shalt be anoynted, etc.
and then shalt goe and preach to them: These
are the promises that are made vnto the
seede.
The promises that are made to vs, though
they bee of the same Couenant, yet they differ
in this, the actiue part is committed to the Messiah,
to the seede it selfe; but the passiue part,
those are the promises that belong to vs, You
shall bee taught, you shall bee made Prophets,
likewise, you shall haue your sinnes forgiuen,
you shall haue the effect of his Priesthood made
good vnto you, you shall be subiect to his gouernment,
by an inherent righteousnes that he
shall worke in you; for you shall bee made
Kings; So the promise is made to vs. How is
the promise made to Abraham? for it is said,
In thee all the Nations of the Earth shall bee blessed.
The meaning of this is, they are deriuatiue
promises, the primitiue and Originall was
made to Iesus Christ; but why is it said then,

that in Abraham all the Nations of the Earth
shall be blessed? the meaning of it is this, there
was none that was euer partaker of these promises,
but the children of Abraham, and therefore
they were deriued from Abraham to all
the men in the world besides, that euer haue
beene since. Now what is it to be a childe of
Abraham? not to be borne of Abraham according
to the flesh, but to be like Abraham; you
are the children of the Deuill, Why? You are
like him. So that all that haue faith, are the
children of Abraham: but more is meant then
that; I say, all that doe partake of this promised
Messiah, are deriued from Abraham, either
deriued from him, or grafted into him, one of
these two; all that were saued before the comming
of Christ, were either such as descended
from him, or were ingrafted into the same Nation.
But what doe you say of the Gentiles,
that are now come in? How doe they receiue
from Abraham? How can it be said, in Abraham
shall all the Nations of the world bee blessed?
Beloued,Rom. 11. 17. you know it is said, Rom. 11. that the
naturall branches were broken off, and the wilde
Oliue is ingrafted in: that is the reason likewise
why the Law comes from Sion, the Lord will
haue the Gentiles to bee ingrafted into the
stocke, as it were, he will haue the Law to proceede
from Ierusalem, he will haue them put into
that Famely as the proselytes, and so were
all Nations: for they receiued it from Ierusalem:
for they had the Oracles of God committed

to them, all the Nations in the world receiued
them from them, they drew that sap of
knowledge from them, so that they were grafted
in: thus all the Nations in the world were
blessed in Abraham, and Abraham was blessed
in the seede it selfe. But yet one obiection is
behinde, that is, how comes this to passe,Obiect. that
to be renewed in the spirit of our minds, and to
walke in the wayes of the LORD, in the way of
regeneration, should be a part of the Couenant
on our part, you shall repent and beleeue, and
be renewed, and then you shall be forgiuen, etc.
you shall haue the Kingdome, and yet, for all
this, you see it is a pa^t of the Couenant on
Gods part, saith the LORD, I will giue you a new
heart, and a new spirit, Ezek. 36. 26. I will giue
you, etc. there is an expression of the Couenant,
and yet it is a condition that is required
on our part?
Beloued, to this I answer briefly,Ans. the condition
that is required of vs, as part of the Couenant,
is the doing of this, the action, the performance
of these things, it is to repent, to
serue the LORD in newnesse of life, but the ability
by which we are able to performe these,
is a part of the Couenant on the LORDS pa^t,
to haue new hea^t^ and new spirits, whereby
we are able to repe^t, and to bring forth fruite
worthy of amendment of life; I say, the inward
abil^ty, the change of the heart, the renewing
of vs in th^ spir^t of our mindes, the wr^ting of
the Law in the inward pa^ts, that is a branch

of Gods Couenant, but the doing of this, the
bringing forth the fruite of these inward abilities,
of these inward habits and graces, that are
planted in vs by the power of Christ, that thing
is required in vs. As, for example, the very habit
of faith, the very grace and power of beleeuing,
that God hath promised to giue, it belongs
to him, but to beleeue, to take the promises, to
accept of Iesus Christ, and to receiue him, and
the gift of righteousnesse by him, this is required
as a condition on our part. And so much
shall serue for the opening of this, and for this
point.
The next question wee had to propound to
you,Quest. was this, How a man should know whether
he be within the Couenant, or no?Ans. You
shall know it by this, How did Abraham know
whether he was in the Couenant, or how will
you know whether Abraham, or any other
were? saith the Text, Abraham beleeued
God, and therefore God reckoned him as a man
that was righteous, and accepted him to bee a
partaker of the Couenant: and so, if thou beleeue,
it is certaine then, thou art within the
Couenant; but how shall a man know that?
Gal. 5. 5. Neither Circumcision auaileth any thing,
nor vncircumcision, but faith which worketh by
loue. If thou canst finde this now, that thou art
able to take Iesus Christ, to take him as a LORD
and Sauio^r, thou art able to beleeue all the
Couenant of Grace, thou art by that put into
the Couenant.
But how shall a man know whether this faith
be right or no? for, you know, there is a false,
dead, and counterfeit faith: if it be right, thou
shalt finde it to be of a working and liuely nature,
but many times we may bee deceiued in
that. A woman many times thinkes she is with
childe, but if she finde no motion nor stirring,
it is an argument she was deceiued: So, when
a man thinkes that hee hath faith in his heart,
but yet he finds no life, no motion, no stirring,
there is no worke proceeding from his faith*
it is an argument he was mistaken, hee was deceiued
in it: for, if it be a right faith, it will
worke, there will be life and motion in it. As
Abrahams faith, you see, it enabled him to doe
whatsoeuer GOD appointed him, to offer his
sonne, to excommunicate Ismael, when GOD
bid him cast him out, though hee loued Ismael
exceeding dearely, yet he did it, and did it readily;
so, whatsoeuer God bade him doe; here
was a working faith.
But yet a little further, a man may be yet deceiued
in this, a mans faith may worke, and
an Hypocrite may doe many workes, if it bee
but bare working, a man may bee deceiued,
and therefore this is added further, it
workes by loue. Beloued, a man may doe exceeding
many duties, as you know, hee may suffer
Martyrdome, he may giue all to the poore, hee
may be a very diligent Preacher of the Gospell:
for Paul saith, I may speake with the tongue of
men and Angels, I may giue my goods to the poore,

I may giue my body to be burned* and yet if these
great workes be done, without loue, they are nothing.
But, on the other side, if you finde this,
that you doe but the least worke, if it be but to
giue a cup of cold water, and doe it out of loue,
if you abstaine from one sinne, if you ouercome
any one lust whatsoeuer, that is deare and neare
to you, because you loue Iesus Christ, if you set
your selues vpon any worke, vpon any imployment
and endeauour, and thy heart witnesseth
this to thee, it is because I loue the LORD, and
desire exceedingly to please him, he is one that
I would faine haue communion with, my delight
is in him, therefore I doe these workes:
for it is my meate and drinke to doe his will;
now thou art on a sure ground, now thou maist
know thou art within the Couenant: for thou
beleeuest as Abraham did, and therefore thou
art within the Couenant, as hee was; thou maist
know it, because thy faith workes, and then
thou maist know that it workes right, because it
is done by loue. Well, yet there is another
way to know this, that is in thy seede (saith the
Text) shall all the Nations of the world bee blessed,
if a man be then ingrafted into this seede, into
the Messiah once, then he shall bee blessed, if
once he belong to him. Well, how shall a man
know that.
If thou haue receiued the Spirit of the Son:
for whosoeuer is in Christ, hath receiued the
Spirit of Christ, if he haue not receiued the Spirit
of Christ, he is not in him. Consider whether

you haue receiued the Spirit of the Sonne,
the Spirit of the promised seede, that is, thou
art made like Christ by the Spirit: for the Spirit
will assimulate thee, and renew this Image
in thee, he makes thee such another in some degree,
as he is; yea, he will not onely doe this,
but he will witnesse to thee, that he is thy God,
and that thou art of those that are partakers of
the Couenant, and therefore that is the way to
finde it out, that is the thing I intend to insist
vpon, to finde out whether you haue this Spirit,
you shall finde it, this is the great marke that
the Apostle Paul insists vpon, still in all his Epistles,
by which a man may know whether he
be within the Couenant, or no, still it is this,
we haue receiued the Spirit, and the Spirit seales
vs to the day of redemption, we are established and
sealed by the Spirit of promise, and wee haue receiued
the Spirit, which is an earnest, etc. Now
to know whether you haue the Spirit, I will
commend these two places of Scripture to you
to consider: one is, Rom. 8. 15. You haue not
receiued the spirit of bondage, to feare againe, but
the spirit of Adoption, whereby you cry Abba
Father; the same spirit beares witnesse with our
spirits, that wee are the sonnes of GOD. The
other you shall finde, 1 Iohn 5. 8. And there
are three that beare record in Earth, the Spirit,
the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree
in one. If you would finde out whether you
haue the spirit of the Sonne, or no, you shall
know it by these three:

In the Antecedents, the Concomitants, and
the Consequents.
The Antecedent is the Spirit of bondage; beloued,
that of necessity must goe before, so that
if thou neuer hadst the spirit of bondage, certainely
thou hast not yet receiued the spirit of
the Sonne: for the Apostle speakes of it heere,
as the common condition to all Christians, they
doe not receiue the spirit of bondage againe;
you had it once, but now you haue the spirit of
Adoption: I say, euery man must haue this spirit
of bondage, and the ground of it is this, because
no man can come to Christ, except the
Law be a Schoolemaster to bring him to Christ;
now the Law is not a Schoolemaster, it teacheth
no man, except the spirit of bondage worke
feare, except the spirit of bondage put an edge
vpon the Law, put a Sword into the hand of
the Law, to pricke the heart, to wound the
heart,Act. 2. as it is said, Acts 2. this is the spirit of
bondage, Beloued, you may heare the Law,
and the threatnings and curses, applyed to you
10000. times ouer, and yet no feare be bred in
you, except the spirit of bondage ioyne with it,
that makes it effectuall. Now in the Law are
included iudgements and afflictions, which are
but the execution of the Law, sometimes it goes
with the Law it selfe, somtimes with the iudgement
and afflictions, it is the spirits of bondage
that must goe with both; as for example, when
it thundred and rained in Wheat-haruest, 1 Sam. 12,1 Sam. 12. 18. the people feared exceegingly; and Ezra 10.Ezra. 10. 9.

when there was an exceeding great raine, the
people did exceedingly tremble, and, you know,
in that Earthquake, though all were safe, Act.
16.Act. 16. and there was no cause why he should be so
vnquiet, yet we see how the Goaler was amazed,
his heart was wounded, this was not for
these particular Iudgements, there might bee a
great raine, there might be a great Earthquake,
and thunder in Wheat-haruest, and yet mens
hearts little moued, but there went a spirit of
bondage, that bred a feare in them, this is that,
I say, no man can come to Christ without the
Law, either in it selfe, or in afflictions, which
are but the executioners of it, and these are not
effectuall without the spirit of bondage: and
there is a very great reason for it; because, otherwise
wee should neuer know the loue of
Christ, he that hath not knowne what the meaning
of this spirit of bondage is, what these
feares are, what these terrours of conscience are
in some measure, knowes not what Christ hath
suffered for him, or what deliuerance hee hath
had by him; besides, he will not be applyable to
Christ: But I will not stand more vpon this.
Hast thou not had the spirit of bondage? I say,
surely, if thou hast not t^sted of this, Christ, hath
not sowne the seed of grace in thy heart: doth
any man sow before he hath plowed? doth any
man make a new impression before there bee
an obl^t^ration of the old? Beloued, before the
hea^t be me^ted w^th (...) the spirit of bondage,
there is no sence of a new spirit, to make a new

impression vpon it; I confesse it is different, it
is sometimes more, sometimes lesse, but all
haue it, more or lesse; sometimes the Medicine
goes so close with the reuealing of sinne,
and of Iudgement, that it is not so much discerned;
sometimes againe, God meanes to bestow
vpon some men a great measure of grace, and
therfore he giues them a greater measure of the
spirit of bondage, because God meanes to teach
them more to prize Christ, he meanes more to
baptize them with the baptisme of the Holy
Ghost, and therefore hee baptizeth them with a
greater measure of the spirit of bondage, they
shall drinke deeper of that spirit, because his intention
is, that they shall drinke deeper of the
spirit of Adoption: and therefore Christ takes
it for an argument concerning the Woman,
when he saw she loued exceeding much, surely
she had a great measure of the spirit of bondage,
she was much wounded for her sinnes, there
had beene exceeding much forgiuen her, in her
apprehension; and so was Paul exceedingly
wounded, you know. This must goe before.
The things which goe together with it, are
these three, the testimony of the blood, of the
water, and of our owne spirits.
First, beloued, there is the testimony of the
blood* there are three that beare record in the
Earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood, though
the spirit be set first, as it is vsuall amongst the
Hebrewes, and in the Scriptures, to put the last
first, if a man would know now, whether hee

be in Christ, whether he hath receiued the promised
seede, or no, let him consider first, whether
hee hath beleeued in the blood, that is,
there is a word of promise, that saith thus to
vs, there is a Sacrifice that is offered, there is
the blood of the Lambeshed from the beginning
of the world, and this blood shall wash
thee from all thy sinnes, when a man stands to
consider this promise, beloued, this promise
bath two things in it, there is the truth of it,
and the goodnesse of it; a man doth, with
Abraham, beleeue the truth of it, he beleeues
God, and saith, it is true, I beleeue it, but withall,
there is a goodnesse in it, and therefore, as
the vnderstanding saith, it is true, so the will
saith, it is good, and therefore he takes it, and
embraceth it, and is exceeding greedy of it:
for when the spirit of bondage makes a man
feare, it empties a man of all righteousnesse, as
a man empties a Caske, that there is nothing
left in it, when it puls away all other props and
stayes from it, it leaues a man in this case, that
he sees nothing in the world to saue him, but
the blood of Christ; when a man sees this, hee
takes fast hold of that, he will not let it goe for
any thing; and though it be told him, you shall
haue many troubles and crosses, you must part
with all you haue, you shall haue somewhat
hereafter, but you shall haue little for the present;
he cares not though it costs him his life,
so he may ha^e this blood to wash away his sins,
it is enough, this he layes fast hold vpon.
Beloued, when a man doth this, at that very
houre he is entred into Couenant, he is translated
from death to life, he hath now receiued the promised
seede, and he shall be blessed, for God hath
said it, and sworne it, and it cannot be otherwise;
and this is the testimony of the blood, when a
man can say, I know I haue taken and applyed
the blood of Christ, I rest vpon it, I beleeue that
my sinnes are forgiuen, I graspe it, I receiue it,
this is the testimony of the blood.
Now, when a man hath tooke the blood,
What? shall he continue in filthinesse now, and
walke after the lusts, of his former ignorance?
No, the Lord comes not by blood onely, but
by water also, that is, by sanctification, that is,
he sends the Spirit of sanctification, that cleanseth
and washeth his seruants, that washeth away
not onely the outward filthinesse, but the
euill nature, the swinish nature, that they desire
no more to wallow in the myre, as before: for
the Lord will not haue a sluttish Church, and
therefore,Eph. 5. Eph. 5. he washeth his Church, and
clenseth it; he washeth euery man in the Church
from top to toe; there is not one place in the
soule, not one place in the conuersation, but
it is rensed in this water; and then, when a
man comes to finde this, that he hath not onely
found the blood of Christ applyed to him by
faith, but hath found that he hath been able to
purifie himselfe, and by the worke of Christs
Spirit ioyning with him, when he goes about
to purge himselfe, that helpes to cleanse his

conscience from dead workes. There is the
second testimony.
Now follows the testimony of our own spirits,
that gathers conclusions from both these,
and saith thus, Since I haue receiued the blood,
and seeing I am able to purifie my selfe, I conclude,
I am in a good estate, I am a partaker of
the Couenant: if a man could say this truely, it
is said, whosoeuer beleeues, shall be saued, but I beleeue,
this is the testimony of the blood onely;
but when a man can say, I doe labour to purifie
my selfe, I desire nothing in the world so much,
I doe it in good earnest, this is the testimony of
the water to this signe, and testimony of the
blood, which shewes that it is true, it is a linely
hope: for he that hath a liuely hope, hee purifies
himselfe, 1 Ioh. 3. But some man may say,1 Ioh. 3. 3. This
testimony of a mans owne spirit may deceiue
him. I answer, it cannot, because though it be
called the testimony of our owne spirit, yet it
is a spirit enlightned, it is a spirit sanctified with
the Spirit of Christ, and then that Rule is true,
1 Ioh* 3. If our owne heart condemne not;1 Ioh. 3. that is,
if the heart of a man enlightned, if the heart
of a man with which the Holy Ghost ioynes,
if the heart of a man sanctified doe not condemne
him, if hee haue the testimony of this
Spirit, he shall be saued, he needs not doubt it,
he hath boldnesse towards GOD, then againe
hee must consider this worke, the testimony of
the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and these
three agree in one; it is not the testimony of the

Spirit alone, but it is the testimony of the water
ioyned with it; if it were but the testimony
of one, indeed the ground were not good,
but they all agree in one; and therefore if thou
haue one sure to thee, it is enough. These are
the things which goe before, and accompany it.
Now followes the testimony of Gods spirit;
which we shall see described, besides the places
I named to you,Eph. 1. 13. Eph. 1. Wherein after you beleeued, you were sealed with the spirit of promise. My
beloued, when a man hath beleeued, and tooke
lesus Christ; secondly, when hee hath washed
and purified himselfe, that is, hee hath gone about
this worke, and so his owne spirit gathers
a testimony hence, that he is in a good estate;
after he hath thus beleeued, then, saith he, comes
the Holy Ghost, and seales the same things vnto
you; that is, the LORD leaues a man alone a
while, as it were, to champ vpon the bridle, as
I may say, he lets a man alone to some doubts
and feares, that so hee may purge himselfe the
more carefully; but after a time, when a man
hath put to his seale that God is true, then the
LORD seales him againe with the spirit of promise,
that is, the LORD sends the spirit into
his heart, and that spirit giues witnesse to him,
and when he hath put to his seale, that GOD is
true, then the LORD puts to his seale, and assures
him that hee hath receiued him to mercy.
You will say, What is this seale, or witnesse of
the Spirit? My beloued, it is a thing that wee
cannot expresse, it is a certaine diuine impression

of light, a certaine vnexpressible assurance
that we are the sonnes of God, a certaine secret
manifestation, that God hath receiued vs, and
put away our sinnes; I say, it is such a thing, that
no man knowes, but they that haue it; you
shall finde it expressed by all these places of
Scripture,R^u. 3. 20. Reu. 3. If any man will open to mee, I
will come in and sup with him; that is, when the
Lord enters into a kinde of familiarity with a
man, when he vouchsafes him so much fauour,
as to come and suppe and dine with him, as it
were,Reu. 2. 17. and to dwell with him* and so, Re^. 2. 17.
To him that ouercommeth will I giue of the hidden
Mannah; I will giue a white stone with a new
name written in it, t^at no man knowes but he that
hath it; that is, there shall bee a secret priuy
token, as it were, of my loue giuen him, a secret
marke of it, that there is no man in the world
knowes besides:Io^. 14. 21. So, Ioh. 14. 21. If any man
loue mee, and keepe my Commandements, I will
shew my selfe to him; that is, hee shall haue an
extraordinary manifestation of my selfe, hee
shall haue such an expression of loue and peace,
that shall fill his heart with peace and ioy, such
a thing that no man knowes but himselfe. Beloued,
this is the testimony of the Spirit. I confesse,
it is a wondrous thing, and if there were
not some Christians that did feele it, and know
it, you might beleeue there were no such thing,
that it were but a fancie or enthusiasme; but,
beloued, it is certaine, there are a generation of
men, that know what this seale of the Lord is;

indeed you must remember this, to distinguish
it from all fancies and delusions, this Spirit
comes after you haue the water and the blood,
after you are beleeuers, after you haue purged
your selues; and therefore if any man haue such
flashes of light and ioy, that witnesse that hee
hath receiued the promise, and that he is in the
Couenant, and for all this he haue not the things
that goe before it, now thou maist take it for a
delusion; I will come and sup with him; but with
whom? with him that first openeth to me. If thou
open thy heart to the Lord, whensoeuer hee
knocks, and comes to thee. And so, To him that
ouercomes, I will giue of the hidden Mannah. If
thou be one that art able to ouercome temptations,
and vnruly affections, and sinfull lusts, thou
maist conclude, it is a true testimony that thou
ar^ not deceiued; but if thou be one that art ouercome
with euery base lust, with euery temptation,
thou art deceiued, if thou art perswaded
thou art in a good estate, this is not the witnesse
of the Spirit; for it is to him that ouercomes. So
againe, to him that loues me, and keepes my Commandeme^ts, etc.
Now if thou be one that breaks
the Co^mandements of God, that find'st not that
holy fire in thy brest, that find'st not thy heart
affectioned to him, and yet thou hast t^ese great
flashes of assurance, and t^inkst thy state good,
beloued, you deceiue your selues, whose case soeuer
it is, the Lord hath not shewed himselfe to
thee, b^t it is a delusion, a fancy, and therefore, I
say, consider it; and this is the consequent of it,

that he that hath it is able to pray. So I will conclude
all, he is able to cry Abba Father. If thou
haue such an assurance of a good estate, and yet
art not able to pray, thou art deceiued likewise:
for that is the property of the Spirit, it makes a
man cry to God, and call him Father. You will
say, Is this such a matter? euery man can pray.
Beloued, it is another thing then the world
i^agines it to be* he that hath this spirit, is
mighty in prayer, he is able to wrestle with God,
as Iacob did, by the spirit of Adoption, hee had
power with God, as it is said there, and he is able
to preuaile with the Lord, and why? because
he can speake to him, as to a Father, he can continue
in prayer, and watch ther eunt^ with all perseuerance;
he can speake to him, as one that he
is well acquainted with; he can not only speake
remiss^ly, but he can cry Abba Father, that
shewes feruency in his prayer; there is no man
in the world that is able to doe it besides. We
see a description of other men, Esay 33. 14. when
they are troubled, they are not able to pray indeed,
they may haue formes of prayer, that they
may vse in times of peace, but, beloued let any
great trouble come vpon them, let them be put
to it, and then you shall finde they are not able
to doe it, but they runne away from God as fast
as they can, at that time, they are not able to
come and say, Thou art my Father, I beseech
thee heare me, I beseech thee pitty me, and forgiue
me: no, but they tremble at Gods presence,
as the Thiefe doth at the presence of the Iudge;

the sinners in Sion are afraid in that day when
God comes, at the day of visitation, the sinners
in Sion are afraid, etc. for who shall dwell with deu^ouring
fire? That is, they tremble at such a day,
when the day of death comes, when God begins
to shew himselfe to them, in the fiercenesse of
his wrath, when he begins to come neere them
in the day of visitation, then they fly from him,
as one would fly from deuouring fire, they fly
not to him, as one would fly to a mercifull Father,
that is ready to heare them, and helpe
them, but they fly from him as fast as they can,
as one would fly from euerlasting burni^g. The
like place you haue,Iob 27. 8, 9, 10. Iob 27. 8, 9, 10. For what
hope hath the Hypocrite when hee hath heaped vp
riches, when God shall come and pull away his soule?
Will God heare his prayer when he cryes, etc.? Will
he call vpon God at all times? A wicked man
may make some shew of prayer to God in time
of health, and in time of peace, but at that time,
saith he, when he hath spent his time in gathering
vp riches, in heaping vp them, and GOD
comes vpon him suddenly, and shall pull away
his soule, he teares and rends it from him, (for
so the word signifies in the Originall) that is, he
is not willing to resigne it into Gods ha^ds, as the
righteous man doth, but he is busie about his
wealth, and God surprizeth him, and rends his
soule from him. What will he doe in this case?
What? will he pray? saith Iob, No, hee giues
two reasons. He hath ^o delight in the Lord, he
neuerloued the Lord, there is no such loue betweene

the Lord and him, as there is betweene
the Father and the Childe, betweene the H^sband
and the Wife, he neuer had the spirit of a
son, he cannot pray, for he delights not in God.
But he doth pray sometimes?Obiect.
Yea, for some fit,Ans. he may be in some extremity,
he may cry as a Thiefe at the Barre may cry
to the Iudge, as he doth sometimes exceeding
hard, not because he loues the Iudge, but it is a
cry that comes from extremity, and it is but in
extremity, and by that the falsenesse and hypocrisie
of them is known: So an Hypocrite may
cry in the time of extremity, but it is a cry, it is
not a prayer, and it is but in the time of extremity,
it is not at all times that he doth it, hee is
not able to doe it; for the Lord is a stranger to
hi^, he lookes vpon the Lord, as vpon a terrible
Iudge; and therefore if you would know whether
you haue the spirit of the Sonne; As first
thou shalt know it by that which went before;
and as, secondly, thou shalt know it by that
which goes together with it, the testimony of
the blood, the testimony of the water, and of
thine owne spirit,
So thou maist know it thirdly by this, by the
Consequents, it makes thee able to pray, and
in the time of extremity it makes thee able to
goe to God as to a Father, when another flyes
away from him, as from euerlasting burnings.
So much shall serue for this time.
FINIS.




THE
THIRTEENTH
SERMON.

GENESIS 17. 2.
And Iwill make my Couenant betweene mee
and thee. And I will multiply thee exceedingly.

THE point which we were in
handling,Wayes to know whether we are in the Couenant, or no. was this, How a
man may know whether he
be in the Couenant or no? I
told you, there are 3. waies
to know it. Let a man consider
how Abraham came
into the Couenant; Abraham beleeued God, and
it was imputed to him for righteousnesse. If thou
beleeue, then thou art within the Couenant; but
it must be a faith that workes by loue; if it bee a
faith which workes not, it is but a dead faith,

and if it doe worke, yet if it worke not by loue,
the Lord regard^th it not* it is true, it is faith
that layes hold vpon the Couenant, but it works
by loue; faith is the point of the Compasse,
that fastens vpon the Couenant, but loue is the
other part, that goes about, that doth all the
businesse, it is that which keepes the Commandements,
it is that which quickens vs to euery
good worke.
 The second way to know whether wee be in
the Couenant, or no, is, to consider whether we
haue taken the promised seede; for in him shall
all the nations of the world be blessed. How
shall wee know that? If we haue the Spirit of
the Sonne, that is knowne by the Spirit it selfe,
the Spirit beares witnesse; the witnesse of the
Spirit, as I told you, it is knowne by that which
goes before it, by that which accompanies it,
and that which followes after. This is the
point, that we were in handling, and wee were
broken off in the middest of it; wee will recall
it a little, and deliuer it somewhat more distinctly
to you, than wee could doe then for
haste.
First, I say, whosoeuer hath the Spirit of the
Sonne, he must haue, before it,Rom. 8. 15. the spirit of bondage:
Rom. 8. 15. You haue not receiued the
spirit of bondage againe to feare, but you haue receiued
the spirit of Adoption. As if hee should
say, there are none, but first they receiue the spirit
of bondage: for there is no man can come
to Christ, except the Law be his Schoolemaster,

and the Law is not effectuall without the
spirit of bondage, neither the Law, in the threatnings,
nor the iudgements, which are the executioners
of those threatnings: you may heare
the Law opened vnto you a hundred and a hundred
times; that is, the particular sinnes, of
which a man is guilty, described; yea, the particular
iudgements; yea, the LORD may follow
you with afflictions and crosses, yet except
there be a spirit of bondage to worke together
with these, it will neuer molifie an obdurate
heart.
And therefore, my belo^ed, you must make
this account, if you haue neuer been affrighted
with the terrour of God, if you haue neuer bin
put into any feare by this spirit of bondage, be
assuted that you haue not yet the spirit of Adoption.
If men would haue looked to the
brazen Serpent, without being stung of the fiery
Serpents, God would haue spared the spirit of
bondage; but, beloued, who doth it? who is
able to doe it? Wee bee all in a dead sleepe,
and, except we be wakned with the terrours of
the Almighty, there is no man would seeke after
Iesus Christ; wee may preach the Gospell
long enough, and men, for the most part, turne
the deafe eare to vs, till the LORD open their
eares by afflictions, and especially by the spirit
of bondage: it cannot bee, but there must be
some precedent worke, wee will not come
home to the Lord without it. Wee doe all as
the Woman that had the bloody issue, as long

as she had mony in her purse, or that there were
Physicians to goe to, that shee had ability to
haue them, shee would not come to Christ, but
when she had spent all, when she saw there was
no more hope, then shee comes to Christ, and
was healed of her bloody issue: so doe we, so
long as we can liue in sinne, wee consider not
the greatnesse, nor the dearenesse of the disease;
but if we can but subsist with them, wee
goe on, we come not to Christ, but when wee
are spoiled of all by the spirit of bondage, when
wee are put in feare of death, that is it that
brings vs home to Iesus Christ, and therefore
we must make an account of it as a generall rule,
there must be such a spirit of bondage to bring
vs home: we doe in this case as Ioab did with
Absolon, when hee liued in the Cour^, in
ease and pleasure, hee would not come to Absolon,
hee might send againe, and againe, but
hee would not come at him, till his Corne
was set on fire, and that brought him: beloued,
except there be some such crosse as may
make an impression vpon vs, such a crosse
as hath the spirit of bondage ioyned with it,
to cause it to wound our spirits, (as it is said,
they were pricked in their hearts when they heard
Peter) I say, wee would not come home vnto
the LORD, wee must haue such an avenger
of blood, to pursue vs, before wee seeke
to the Citie of refuge. And therefore consider,
whether thou hast tasted of this spirit;
and therefore you may obserue this by the

way, that when God doth write bitter things
against a man, it is not a iust cause of deiection:
for this is a signe that God is beginning a good
worke in thee, seeke not to put it off, and to
thinke, it is a miserable thing to bee vnder such
a bondage as this: no, but make this vse of it,
let it bring thee home to Iesus Christ. And
heere, by the way, that men may not bee deceiued
in this, and say,Obiect. Alas, I haue not had this
spirit of bondage, and feare, and therefore I
feare I am not right.
My beloued,Ans. you must know for what end
the Lord sends it: hee sends it for these two
ends, and by that you shall know whether you
haue it or no: for if thou hast the end once, if
the effect be wrought, no doubt but thou hast
had the cause that produceth that effect.
One end is to bring vs home to Christ; if
thou finde thou hast tooke Iesus Christ, it is
certaine, there hath beene a worke of the spirit
of bondage vpon thy heart, if thou finde thou
art willing to take him vpon any conditions,
thou art willing to deny thy selfe, thou art
willing to serue him, to loue him, and to obey
him.
And a second end is, GOD sends this Spirit
of bondage, that thou mightest know the bitternesse
of sinne, and learne to abstaine from
it* that thou mayest learne to tremble at his
Word, for the time to come, I looke to
him that is of a contrite spirit, and that
trembleth at my Word: that euen so

as parents doe with their children, they would
neuer afflict and correct their children for that
which is past, but their end is for the time to
come, that they may not commit the same fault
againe; otherwise the parent would not lay
any affliction vpon the childe; and, beloued,
know that the Lord hath this very end in sending
the spirit of bondage, thou must not
thinke it is for thy sinnes past, that there may
be a kinde of satisfaction made for them, that
is not the end, but the end is, that thou mightst
know the bitternesse of sinne for the time to
come, that thou being scorched once with it,
thou mightst not easily meddle with it againe;
and therefore if thou findest this to be thy case,
thou hast so farre tasted of the terrours of the
Almighty, that thou darest not aduenture vpon
sinne, thou standest in awe of the LORD, that
thou darest not bee so bold with sinne as thou
hast beene, that thou darest not meddle with
the occasions of it, that thou darest not come
neere it; I say, if thou finde such a tendernesse
of conscience in thy selfe, if thou finde that that
sinne is made terrible to thee, that thou diddest
despise before, (for it is the property of a
carnall man to despise his waies) I say, if this be
wrought in thee, defer not, make not dainty of
applying the promises, because thou hast not
receiued the spirit of bondage: for thou hast,
thou hast the effect, therefore thou needest not
doubt, but that thou hast the thing. This is it
that goes before: that which goes together

with it, I shewed you; then is the witnesse of
the blood, and of the water, and of our owne
spirit; there bee three that beare witnesse in
Earth, 1 Io^. 4. the spirit, and the water, and the
blood; by spirit there, is meant our owne spirit
enlightned; by blood is meant Iustification;
by water is meant sanctification; so that that
goes together with the witnesse of the spirit.
The first is the witnesse of the blood; that is,
when a man is humbled, when a man is broken
with the spirit of bondage, then hee beginnes
to make out for a pardon: when he sees hee is
arrested, as it were, when he is shut vp, as that
phrase is vsed,Gal. 3. Gal. 3. and sees what a debt is required
of him, and he is not able to pay the least
farthing, now he beginnes to looke out for a
surety, now he beginnes to hunger and thirst
exceedingly after Christ, now he is not content
onely to watch with him, to serue him, and to
obey him, but hee is willing to part with his
life, and all that he hath, vpon that condition.
Now when a man is in this case, then the Lord
beginnes to shew him the blood of his Sonne,
he begins to open a little crevis of light, and to
shew him the New Testament in his blood that
is, the New Testament confirmed in his blood,
shed for many, for the remission of sinnes. I say, he
begins then to looke vpon the promises, to consider
such promises as these, Come to mee, all yee
that are weary, etc. and, If any man sinne, we haue
an Aduocate; and, Let whosoeuer will, come,
and take of the waters of life freely; and, Goe

and preach to euery creature vnder heauen, and
t^ll them, if they will beleeue, and take my
So^ne, they shall be saued. I say, these are all
promises made in the blood of Iesus Christ.
now he begins to consider these promises, and
he begins first to thinke, What? are these promises
true? Yes, surely they are most true,
they are confirmed wit^ an oath, they are confirmed
with the blood, with the death of the
Testator: a mans Couenant, after it is once
made, and the Testator is dead, Gal. 3. no man
addes to it, or takes from it. Now when a man
considers this, Are these the promises of the
LORD? hath hee confirmed them with an
Oath? are they confirmed with the blood of
the Testator? Certainely, they are most true,
I cannot doubt of them: but then he begins to
consider, As they are true, how fit are they for
mee? what is the goodnes of them? They are
also exceeding good, there is nothing in the
world so excellent, so precious, so sweet, and
so comfortable, as these promises bee: I say,
when he hath done these two, when the vnderstanding
sayes they are true, and beleeues them,
and when the will saith they are good, and embraceth
them, at that very instant, saluation is
come to thy house, and to thy hea^t; I say,
Christ Iesus is come to thee, at that very instant,
hee hath made a Couenant with thee, though
perhaps thou see him not at that time, (as Mary
could not see him, but ^ooke him for the Gardner)
but, I say, at that time thou art t^anslated

from the Couenant of Workes, to the
Couenant of Grace.
But you will say,Quest. How comes this blood to
be a witnesse?
Beloued,Ans. it is a witnesse in this manner;
when a mans spi^it shall consider the promises,
and ponder them well, and shall say this with
himselfe, Well, I haue applyed these promises,
b^t vpon what warrant? vpon what
ground haue I done it? euery body will be
ready to apply the promises of mercy and forgiuenesse,
but what warrant haue I to apply
them? To know that, vpon good ground, I
lay hold of these promises? then a man considers
with himselfe the promises, they are
sure, they are cleerely and distinctly set downe
in the Word; hee considers to whom these
promises are offered, to those that are vnrig^ t^ous;
the LORD iustifieth the vnrighteous,
euen to Publicans and Harlots, to sinners; such
they were that came to CHRIST, to such
the promises were offered. Well, I know I
am an vnrighteous man, and th^r^fore the
want of sor^ow and con^rition, and the want
of holinesse, and the want of tendernesse of
heart in the beginning shall not exclude me:
for they are promises that are made to the vnrighteous,
to the vncleane and polluted, to the
hard-hearted, such they are at the first to whom
the promises are made; but what doth the Lord
require of those? That they thi^st: all that
thirst, come, I finde an ext^^me thirst,

I would dye that I might haue Christ, and his
righteousnesse: Is this all? No, it is required
further, that when thou art come in, thou take
this resolution, now I will serue him, now I
will loue him, now I will obey him, I will bee
content to take Iesus Christ, for better for worse,
I will be content to deny my selfe, to take vp
my Crosse, to follow him, in all his wayes.
When a mans spirit hath pondred this well,
when he hath looked on the blood of IESVS
CHRIST, and the promises, and sees himselfe
qualified, vpon this, he sayes, surely these promises
belong to mee; this is the witnesse of
the blood: then followes the witnesse of the
water; for the blood hath a double vertue in
it, it hath not onely the vertue to deliuer vs
from the guilt of sinne, to cause the LORD to
passe ouer vs, when he sees the sprinkling of the
blood vpon our hearts, and vpon our persons,
but there is this more, it hath a clensing vertue
in it, cleanseth the conscience from dead
workes; and so hath faith, it hath not onely a
vertue in it, to receiue, and to digest and to take
the promises, but it hath an ability to worke;
as the hand, you know, hath two offices, it hath
an office to receiue, and to take, and likewise
it hath ability to worke: Beloued, these are
neuer disioyned, the blood neuer washeth from
sinne, but likewise it cleanseth the conscience
from dead workes; faith neuer receiues the
promise, but it workes likewise; indeed for the
^eceiuing part, wee receiue all alike precious

faith; but for the working part, there is much
difference: you know, a weake hand is able to
receiue, as well as a stronger, but a stronger can
doe more worke: therefore, as faith growes
more, so it workes more. Some man hath a
more working faith then others, though, as it
is a receiuing faith he hath it alike: therefore
thou maist consider this with thy selfe, if I haue
the testimony of the blood, I haue also the testimony
of the water, that is a sanctification
ioyned with iustification; Christ came not by
blood onely, but by water also: if the spirit of
a man looke on this now, and can say, I see, I
am renewed in the spirit of my minde, I see I am
washed from my filthinesse, I see my conscience
is in some measure cleansed from dead
workes, then he may conclude with himselfe,
surely I am in the state of grace, I am in the Couenant.
And this, beloued, is the witnesse of
our owne spirits, and the witnesse of the water,
and of the blood. But when this is done, it
may be the LORD continues, yet, at some fits,
to write bitter things against thee, he seemes to
cast thee off, hee seemes to wound thee sometimes,
with the wounds of an enemy. This
the LORD many times doth, that he may put
vsto it; hee turnes the deafe eare, that hee
may try what we will doe: when the spirit of
a man hath now these testimonies, and yet
hath not rest, though it haue them on good
ground, (for I meane not the naked spirit of a
man, but his spirit enlightned and sanctified

by the Holy Ghost) yet when hee hat^ good
ground, and saith thus with himselfe, Yet for
all this, I will trust in him, I haue his sure Word
for it, I haue his promise, I know that heauen
and earth shall passe, rather then any promise of
his shall passe: now when the Lord seeth a
man beleeuing thus, and trusting him vpon
his bate word, then the Lord goes a step further
with him, and seales the same things to him,
with the spirit of promise, that is, (as I shewed
before out of Eph. 1. 13. In whom after you bel^^ued,
you were sealed with the spirit of promise)
when you put to your seale that God is true, God
then comes and puts to his seale, he giues you
the spirit of promise, and assures you that it is
so; that is, he doth by his owne Spir^t say to a
mans soule, that he is his saluation. My beloued,
this is a certaine expression of the Holy Ghost
to the soule of a man, that we know not how to
expresse to you: therefore it is called the hidden
Manna^: it is called a white stone, with a new
name written in it, that no man knowes but he that
hath it, a certaine manifestation of Christ to the
soule, a certaine diuine light, a certaine secret
token of his loue, whereby Christ manifests
himselfe to the soule of a man, that which the
Scriptures call supping with him; I will come
and sup with him; Rev. 3. and Iob. 14. 21. I and my
Father will come to him, and I will manisest my
owne selfe vnto him; this is the witnesse of the
Spirit, that when the witnesse of our owne
spirit is somewhat obscure, we may then say,

Lord, thou now speakest plainely, now there
is no question. My beloued, this is the witnesse
of the Spirit; that thou be not mistaken
in it, still remember this, that it is giuen to those
that ouercome; if thou be ouercome of euery
thing* of euery small temptation, if thou bee
ouercome with a blast of praise, with a little
pelfe, and wealth, dost thou thinke now thou
hast got the white stone tha^ Christ giues as the
witnesse of his Spirit? No, my beloued, it is
to those that ouercome, and so it is to those that
open: if thou bee a stubborne seruant, that
Christ may come againe and againe, a^d knocke
at the doore, and tell thee of such a sinne, that
thou lyest in, and of such a duty that thou neglectest,
and yet thou carriest thy selfe like a stubborne
seruant, that will not heare him, or if thou
doe, thou wilt not goe about thy wo^ke, that he
hath appointed thee; dost thou thinke hee will
come in, and sup with thee, when thou wilt
not open to him? No, my beloued, it is not
Christ that sups with thee* but it is a delusion
of Satan* but how shall we know this? These
are the things that accompany the Spirit;Six consequents of the Spirit. but
now for the Consequents of it, they are (...)
First there followes a spirit of prayer,1. A spirit of prayer* that
goes together with it, prayer in the perfection
of it is not a lip labour; no, it is not a putting
vp of petitions, be they neuer so exceellent;
it is not a crying to the Lord: for other men
may doe so, but it is when a man can come to
God with considence, because he knowes him

to bee his Father, because hee hath beene acquainted
with him, because hee hath receiued
the Spirit of the Sonne, that tels him in plaine
termes, he is his Father: when a ma^ can come
with holy affections to the Lord, this is the spirit
of prayer; a wicked man, as we shewed out
of Iob 27. when God comes to him, and rends,
and teares his soule from him; that is, he parts
with his soule vnwillingly, when God puls on
the one side, and he on the other, when GOD
puls away his soule, saith he, will the LORD
heare him, when hee cries to the Almighty?
No: for hee doth not pray, it is indeed
a cry, a man in extremity may cry hard,
as a thiefe at the Barre, he cryes hard, not because
he loues the Iudge, or hath any confidence
in him, if it were not fot that extremity, hee
would not doe it at all, saith he, he prayeth not,
he doth not delight in the Almighty, hee goes
not to him as to a father, and it appeares hence,
that were there not such an extremity, hee
would not pray, for hee will not pray at all
times.
Secondly,2. Loue. it breeds loue; wheresoeuer the
witnesse of the Spirit is, alwayes there followes
it loue, towards God, and Iesus Christ: for it
cannot bee otherwise, all loue comes from
knowledge; now when a man hath seene Iesus
Christ indeed, that is, when the Lord hath shewed
him his owne selfe to him, when hee hath
drawne neere to a man in the witnesse of his
Spirit, when he hath manifested himselfe, it

cannot be but a man must loue him. What is
the reason that wee shall loue him perfectly in
heauen, but because we shall know him fully?
any man that knowes him in part heere, loues
him in part; and therefore, if you haue euer
knowne the LORD, that hee hath thus shewed
himselfe, it cannot be but thou shalt loue him.
Besides, loue comes from kindnesse, and goodnesse
of one that hath shewed loue to vs; loue
begets loue, as fire begets fire. Now when
this was thy case, when thou wast a man expecting
nothing but death, and hell, and the wrath
of God, and the Lord hath come, and spoke
kindly vnto thee, as it were, the LORD hath
come and spoken to thee, when thou wast to
die, and hath said, thou shalt liue, when he hath
ouercome thee with kindnesse, as it were, it cannot
be now but that thy heart should be affectioned
towards him, as Dauid saith Psal 18. Lord
I loue thee dearely; for, when I was in distresse
thou didst heare mee; so when a man hath felt
the terrours of the Almighty, when hee hath
lyen vnder the spirit of bondage, for a time,
when he expected nothing but death, and condemnation,
and the Lord hath shewed mercy
and louing kindnesse vnto him, loue will follow.
Thirdly,3. Cl^nsing a mans selfe. thou shalt finde this follow vpon
it, likewise; if thou haue the spirit of Adoption,
it will set thee a worke, to clense thy selfe,
as, 2. Cor. 7. 1. see a notable place for this purpose;
saith hee, if you haue such promises, that

is, the promises of grace, and of forgiuenesse,
and of the pardon of sinne, if you haue applyed
them indeed by the spirit of Adoption, then
you will clense your selues from all pollution of
fl^sh and spirit. So, beloued, by this thou maist
know whether thou hast the spirit of adoption,
whether thou hast applyed the Couenant of
Grace, and the promises of it, indeed, and in
good earn^st; this will certainely follow, thou
wilt clense thy selfe: but if thou finde now,
that thou wallowest in thy lusts, in thy filthinesse,
that thou art not yet washed from thy
sinnes, and from thy swinish nature, be assured
thou hast not yet applyed the promises, thou
hast not yet the spirit of Adoption, be assured,
if thou hast any hope, it is not a true and liuely
hope, it is but a false and dead hope: for, if it
were a true and a liuely hope, 1 Ioh. 3. it would
set thee aworke to purge thy selfe, and therefore
Heb. 10. 22. you see the difference there, betweene
the assurance of faith, and of presumption,
Draw neere in assurance of faith: What
then? hauing your hearts sprinkled from an euill
conscience, and your bodies washed in pure water.
If it be assurance of faith, it hath alwaies this following
with it, the heart is sprinkled from an
euill conscience; but if it bee a presumptuous,
a false assurance, vpon false grounds, there followes
no such clensing, no such watchfulnesse.
Beloued, this is a sure rule that will not deceiue
you you, those that haue but false flashes of
comfort, they grow secure after them, these

breed carelesnesse, they are more bold to commit
sinne, they walke loosely, and are apt and
^eady to say, I doubt not but it shall bee well
enough with mee; but those that haue assurance
indeed, it makes them much more diligent,
and sollicitous, and carefull to please the
L^^d in all things; for it is as a feast to them,
when Christ leads them into his Sellar, as it
were, and makes a mans heart glad with Flaggons
of Wine, that is, with the consolations of
the Spirit; I say, it quickens him, and makes
him zealous, and ready to euery good worke,
when he hath once tasted of this Wine, his
case is like Elihuds, he cannot hold in, but hee
must breake forth into good workes, into holinesse
of life. A man walkes in the strength of
such a testimony of the Spirit for many dayes,
for so many yeeres, so farre it is from making
a man remisse in the wayes of God.
Fourthly,4. Peace. that which accompanies it, is peace,
and Ioy, Rom. 15. 13. the Apostle prayes that
they may be filled with peace and i^y, through belee^i^g;
as if he should say, if you beleeue once
indeed, ioy will follow; and therefore you
know it is called the ioy of the Holy Ghost, that is,
when once a man receiues this witnesse of the
Spirit, there followes a wondrous quiet, and
peaceablenesse, and calmenesse in the heart.
Beloued, it is with euery sonne of Adam, as
it was with Adam; when he had lost the Image
of GOD, there followed troub^e and
horrour in his conscience, till that Image was

recouered, his heart was neuer fully at peace,
but as soone as that was recouered, the heart
recouers the former ioy that Adam had, that
former quiet, and peace, and comfort, that Adam
had in that innocency, hee hath it in a
measure: So, when the LORD returnes againe
to a mans spirit; that it is his returning,
and no delusion, I say, there ariseth a certaine
peace in the soule, and a ioy that no worldly
man euer tasted of* that they neuer vnderstood,
nor knew the meaning of; a certaine peace,
and ioy that goes beyond all worldly ioy
whatsoeuer, that which Da^id called the s^ining
of Gods countenance, Psal. 4. and, beloued,
one good looke of God, is worth more then
all the wealth in the world, yea, then the very
corporall presence of I^SVS CHRIST; and
therefore CHRIST tels his Disciples* that they
should be great gainers by losing of him: for,
saith hee, you shall get this by it, I will send the
Comforter, the Holy Ghost, and hee shall fill you
with peace, and ioy, and this shall bee much
better for you, then if I should bee with you
still; it is better, beloued, that Christ should
dwell in our hearts then in our houses; it is better
the LORD should be with vs, with his spirituall
comforts, then with his corporall presence;
and this comfort, I say, euery man receiues,
as soone as hee receiues the Spirit, hee
receiues peace that pass^th all vnderstanding.
But now in the fift place, when a (...) hath receiued
this ioy, and this peace, whe^ h^ i^ lift

vp into the third heauen, as it were, What followes
vpon this? Will he be lift vp, and puffed
vp with all this? Oh no, it is impossible:
and therefore in the fift place, this accompanies
it, there followes an exceeding great humility,5. Humility.
a man is neuer so humble, as after hee hath receiued
the spirit of promise; beloued, it is very
exceeding certaine, that no men in the world
are so vile in their owne eyes, as those to whom
the Holy Ghost hath borne this witnesse: there
is a place for it, that puts this out of all doubt,
Ezek. 36. 31. when the Lord saith, he will powre
out his Spirit on them, and giue them a new heart,
and a new spirit; then, saith he, then at that time,
when you haue receiued the spirit of Adoption,
and I haue made my Co^e^ant with you, then
you shall consider your owne deedes that were not
good, and you shall acknowledge your selues worthy
to be destroyed for your iniq^ities and tra^sgressions;
the new Translation is, (...) shall loath y^^r
sel^es, that is, a man shall bee exceeding vile in
his owne eyes. Beloued, presumption alwayes
puffes vp a man, it brings him into better conceipt
with himselfe; but this puts him quite
out of conceipt with himselfe; the neerer the
LO^D drawes to any man, the more rottennesse
he findes in his bones, as, wee see, when the
Lord came neere vnto Io^, then he abhorred himselfe
in dust and ashes: because the Lord comes
alwayes with a bright light, as the Sunne doth,
that shewes to a man the corr^ptions that be in
him, that he neuer saw before, that he wonders

at himselfe, that hee hath liued so long with
himselfe, and yet knowes himselfe no better:
this is the ca^e of e^ery man, when the LORD
comes home to him, it humbl^th him exceedingly;
and therefore consider whether thou
bee thus vile in thine owne eyes, whether the
spirit of humility haue gone together with it.
And last of all,6. Not to receiue the spirit ^f bondag^ againe. to end this point, this will
follow vpon it, though it bee a negatiue, those
that haue the spirit of Adoption, they neuer receiue
the spirit of bondage againe, Rom. 8. 16.
You haue not receiued the spirit of bondage againe
to feare: as if he sh^uld say, this is the condition
of all the Saints, you haue tas^^d of it, that
is the common condition, and tha^ you must
looke for; and saith hee, this testimony you
haue, (for it is the Apostles scope to giue them
a testimony of their good estate, that they were
within the Co^^nant, that they were vnder
grace, saith he) by this you shall know it, you
haue not receiued the spirit of bondage ag^ine,
as if he should say, should you euer receiue the
spirit of bondage againe* you were not vnder
grace: for it is impossible. So likewise, you see
an excellent place for this, Gal. 3. 25. Wherefore
the Law is a Schoolemaster to bring vs to Christ,
that wee might bee made righteous by faith: But
after faith co^es, we are no longer vnder a Schoolemaster.
There is no man comes to Christ, but
the spirit of bondage is first a Schoolemaster to
bring him, that is, the Law must set him hard
taskes, that hee is not able to perfor^e, and

then he sues to Christ, as a weake Scholler doth
to a Schoolemaster, and desires him to performe
it for him, this brings him to Christ; but,
saith hee, when you are once come to Christ,
when faith comes, wee are no more vnder a
Schoolemaster, a man neuer comes vnder the
Law againe. But you will obiect, Was it not
Iobs case? did not the Lord write bitter things
against him, and he was a iust man, and one that
feared God? Was it not Dauids case? was not
his bones broken, as hee complaines, after the
committing of the sinne of adultery? Doe not
many finde by experience, that GOD hath
wounded them sometimes with the wounds of
an enemie, and hath seemed to cast them off,
euen after they haue receiued the spirit of Adoption?
Beloued, to this I answer, it is very
true, there are some awakings that a man may
haue, a man may be put into a great feare after
he hath receiued the spirit of Adoption, he may
tremble exceedingly at the wrath of God; I
say, all this he may doe, yet hee neuer receiues
the spirit of bondage againe, that is, hee neuer
comes to this, to be to God, as a seruant is to a
hard Master, but alway this perswasion is in
him, that God is his Father, and still hee hath
the affection of a sonne, and still he hath that opinion,
that God is his Father, that aff^ction neuer
weares out of him, he neuer comes againe
to looke on God, as the Thiefe lookes on the
Iudge, hee neuer comes to be such a stranger
to the Lord, so as to flye from him: for the spirit

of bondage is nothing but this, when it makes
a man to feare the Lord, and to tremble at him
exceedingly, as a man doth at the wrath of a
Iudge, that thinkes hee will condemne him;
though he may in his extremity say, Lord, why
hast thou forsaken mee? yet there goes a secret
spirit of Adoption, that neuer leaues him altogether,
although there be some mixture with
this, to awaken him, and to quicken him, and
to cause him to come home to Christ: for that
is the end. Still as a man is brought home by
the spirit of bondage at the first; so, my beloued,
when a man steps out from Christ, and beginnes
to grow wanton, when hee will r^nne
out from the LORD IESVS, and will not
keepe close, the Lord sends the same Spirit againe
to bring him in; the Spirit doth its
worke againe; but as hee was neuer wholly
out, so he neuer hath the full worke of the spirit
of bondage. So, you see, this is the 2. meanes
to know whether we bee in the Couenant.
Now followes the third meanes of knowing
whether we be in the Couenant, and t^^t is this,
you see this is a part of the Couenant, Heb. 8. You
shall know me from the greatest to the least, and I
will teach you, you shall no more teach one another
his neighbo^r,Third way of knowing wh^ther we be in the Couenant, is by our k^owledge, which hath ^ properties. and it shall bee such a knowledge,
that withall, you shall haue my Law written in
your hearts: and in another place, I will circumcise
your hearts. Beloued, then this is the third
way, and the last, by which we may know, that
wee are within the Couenant, Is there such a

knowledge of GOD wrought in you? Hath
Christ so taught you? Marke it well, that from
that knowledge these two things follow; one,
that your heart is circumcised, that the lusts of
your former ignorance, that raigned in you before,
bee dissolued: Secondly, it is such a
knowledge, as breedes in you a forwardnesse
and willingnesse to serue the Lord in all things?
Is the Law of God thus written in your hearts?
Haue you had experience of this? Then certainely
you are within the Couenant. There is
a double knowledge, there is a knowledge that
men haue, that know much, but are not affected
according to the things they know, no^ doe
they practise according to the things they
know; this a knowledge that the Minister
may teach them, but it is not the knowledge
that Iesus Christ teacheth.
But there is a second knowledge, that which
Christ teacheth as hee is a Prophet, when hee
teacheth a man so to know sinne,1. It circumseth the heart. id est, subdueth Iusts. and euery
thing else, that withall, the lust, the dominion
of sinne is dissolued by that knowledge; that
this knowledge circumciseth the heart, it cuts
off those lusts that did cleaue to vs before. If
thou finde this effect of thy knowledge, now
Iesus Christ hath taught thee this knowledge.
You know, The old man is corrupt, Ephes. 4. 22.
through lusts, that come from errour, and the
new man is renewed through holinesse, that comes
from truth. There are certaine lusts in the old
man, that proceede from errour: now those

lusts we see what they are, Iob. 2. all lusts are
referred to those three heads, the lusts of the
eye, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life. Now
if thou wouldest know whether Christ hath
taught thee or no, whether thou hast this euidence
of being in the Coue^ant with him, consider
whether the truth be so farre taught thee,
that these lusts are dissolued by it; for Iesus
Christ came into the world to dissolue lusts; as the
lusts arise from errour, so they are dissolued by
truth: Beloued, the roote from which euery
lust growes, is some errour, some mistake; well,
take away the foundation of it, and the lust
dyes. Now, when Christ ^eaches the ^ight
knowledge, when hee reueales his truth to vs,
as a Prophet* hee takes away the roote, the
bottome and foundation of a lust, and when
the foundation is taken away, the worke of
the Diuell is dissolued in vs, it fals to the
ground.
As for example, to giue you an instance of
it, in those three lusts to which all the l^sts in
the world are referred: the lust of the eyes,1 Lust of the eyes.
that is when a man lookes vpon wealth, and
and riches, and whatsoeuer a man lookes vpon*
it is but the sight of the eye, Ecclesiast. 5.
What is the reason that men loue riches? that
they seeke them, and heape them vp aboue
measure? It is because a man is deceiued, he
thinkes there is such a worth in riches, and
that they will stand him in such a stead, hee
hath a high opinion of them, and thence

comes a man to desire them so much; from
hence ariseth this lust of the eye: Now, when
Christ teacheth a man that there is no such
thing in riches, hee is but deceiued, hee teacheth
him to looke on them as Paul did. hee
thinkes they are but drosse and dung, but
empty wi^hering Flowers, Iam. 1. As the
Flowers, so doth the rich man fade in all his
waies; ^iches are no better; hee teacheth a
man that they are nothing; Why wilt thou
set thy heart vpon that which is nothing? Pro.
23. All the men in the world are not able to
teach this, till Christ Iesus hath taught it to a
man, but when hee hath taught it him, I say,
the lust is dissolued, there is an end of it, hee
doth no more seeke wealth in that manner as
hee did, he sets no more that price vpon it as
hee did, hee thinkes how he may doe good
with it, how h^e may make good vse of it,
how hee may ^edeeme time now from worldly
things to better things: for now hee heedes
them not, as Paul, What doe you tell mee
of money? I heede it not, but to further your
reckoning; I reioyce that I may ^urther your
reckoning against the Day of Iudgement.
And so for pride of life, that is honour,2 Pride of life. and
dignity, and esteeme, and place of prefermen^,
and applause of men, all things of that
nature; What is the reason that this lust rules
and captiuates a man? Beloued, it is because
hee thinkes that there is an excellency in these
things, but when CHRIST hath taught him,

when hee hath written the New Couenant
within him, when hee hath written his Law
in his heart, when hee hath taught him with
his owne teaching, hee beginnes to see a vanity
in all these things, as the Apostle saith; the
praise of men is empty glory, the applause of
men, that pleased him before, he lookes now
vpon it, as a bubble blowne with the breath of
men, an empty thing; hee esteemes it a thing
that quickly liues and dyes, and vanisheth hee
seekes no more after it. And so for the lusts of
the flesh; when a man before thought it the only
life for a man to satisfie the flesh, and the desires
of it, now hee beginnes to looke on it after
another manner, he begins to see the filthinesse
and the bit^ernesse of those sinnes, he beginnes
to see, that fleshly lusts fight against the
soule, as enemies, hee lookes vpon them as
things more bit^er then death, more sharpe
then a two-edged Sword. Now when GOD
hath enlightned a man thus, and hath written
his Lawe in his heart, and hath taught
him that hee iudgeth so of his sinnes, and lusts,
now his sinnes and lusts are dissolued in him,
his heart is circumcised. now they are cut off,
now the building of Satan is pulled downe;
and yet beloued, this is but one part of this Couenant.
There is not onely this, but likewise there
followes this, further, when Christ hath written
his Law in the heart, that man hath not
onely his heart weaned from all the finfull

lusts that before he delighted in, but there followes
a wondrous forwardnesse and propensnesse
to the Law of God, to keepe it; there is
a wondrous desire to grow in grace, to doe
the duties of new obedience, that by his good
will hee would liue in another Element. But
in doing the duties, and vsing the meanes, by
which he may receiue strength to doe them;
beloued, when that Law is out of the heart,
when wee looke vpon the letter of the Law,
there is no such matter; but when it is put into
the heart, when it is written within, there is
an inward disposition and pro^enesse put into
the heart. If you looke vpon the Law without,
Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, and shalt
feare him, etc. it is a hard Law, who can keepe
it? but when thou hast it put into thy heart,
that is the grace of loue, (for that is to put the
Law into the heart, when there is such a habit
planted in the heart, a habit of feare, and of
euery good grace) then there is a great
pronenesse and aptnesse in a man, and willingnesse
to keepe the Law; and therefore in that
place, 1. Tim. 1. 9. The Law is not giuen to the
righteous, they are a Law to them selues. Beloued,
if thou fi^dest this to bee thy case, that thou
needest not the Law to set thee on with terrours,
and the threatnings of it, but thou art
now a Law to to thy selfe; that is, thou findest
in thy selfe such an inward aptenesse and
propensnesse to keepe the Law of God, that, if
thou were put to thy choise, if there were no

necessity laid vpon thee, if there were no
threatning, no Hell, yet thou delightest in
God, and desirest exceedingly to haue communion
with him, there is nothing seemes to
be so beautifull as Grace, as the Image of God
renewed in thy soule; I say, this will bee thy
disposition, and this is for a man to be a Law
to himselfe: for you know this common nature
is betweene the Image of the old Adam,
and the Image of the new, betweene the flesh
and the spirit, betweene those lusts that remaine
in thee, when thou art vnder the Couenant
of Workes, and betweene this Couenant of
Grace, and feruency in well doing; I say, common
nature is betweene these two,Simile. as a Bowle
betweene two byasses: Now the LORD, when
he comes to write his Law in the heart, he doth
not only knocke off the old by as of sinfull lusts,
that carried him out, but he sets a new by as vpon
thy soule, that bowes and bends thee to the
waies of God, that still there is a strong inclination
that carries thee on that way, besides the
Commandement; that thou dost not euery
thing as of necessity a man before this time, it
may be, prayed, it may be he was constant in
prayer, he would not let a morning or an euening
goe without it, it may be he would doe euery
other duty, but hee did it as a taske, as a
man that dares not omit it, there is a naturall
conscience in him, that will be vpon him if hee
doe; he feares God will become his enemy,
hee shall taste of fearefull Iudgements if hee

neglect it, all this while he doth it out of feare:
but one that hath the Law written in his heart,
that is a Law to himselfe, that hath a new byas
put vpon his heart; I say, it still bends and inclines
him to it, he cannot doe otherwise, hee
longs after it exceedingly, he is exceeding forward
to it, the inward inclination of his minde
stands to i^. This is the third way, whereby
you may know whether you be in the Co^enant,
or no, if you finde that Christ hath thus taught
you, and hath written his Law in your hearts,
if you bee thus enlightned with knowledge,
that both the lusts of the former ignorance are
dissolued, and likewise there comes in the
roome of them, a wondrous pronenesse and
propensenesse to well donig, when there is a
certaine connaturalnesse betweene good duties
and thy heart, when thou canst say indeed, as
P^ul, I delight in the Law of God, in the inward
man, and, if I might haue my desire, if GOD
would giue me my wish, as hee did to Salomon,
that which I would desire aboue all things in
the world, is, that I may haue a greater measure
of the Spirit, that my sinfull lusts may bee
more and more mortified, that I may excell
more in grace and holinesse, that his Image may
be more renewed in mee, and that it may shine
more bright in all the parts of it: I say, when
^hou findest this, be assured thou art in the Co^enant.
So much, beloued, for that point.
I will adde a second, which is this, from this 
difference; whereas this is one of the differences

betweene the old Co^enant and the new,
the Old Testament was made with the Iewes
onely, it was shut vp within the compasse of
that Nation; the New Co^enant is enlarged to
the Gentiles, there is now an open doore for
them to come in, there are now better promises,
more knowledge, a larger effusion of the
Spirit, both for intention, and for the extent
of it, it is to many more; and, beloued, were
it not for this Co^enant, all you now that heare
this Couenant of Grace preached vnto you, and
haue heard it often, you had neuer heard it,
but this benefit you haue by the New Testament,
that now this good newes is come to
your eares; Beloued, this God brings home to
the Gentiles, and they haue their seuerall
times, and this is the season that GOD hath
brought it home to you, euen when you heare
these promises of Grace made. And what vse
should you make of it? surely this.
Take heede of refusing the acceptable time,Take the present opportunity.
take heed of not comming in when the doore
of Grace is open; take heede of doing as the
foolish Virgins did, they would come, and
came, but they stayed still the doore was shut
vpon them: Beloued, there is a certaine acceptable
time, as we say to you, when God offers
grace, and after he offers it no more, as wee
told you, the time of this life is the time that we
can propound, we know no other; but there
are certaine secret times, that God reserues to
himselfe, that none knowes, but himselfe, and

when that time is past ouer, hee offers it no
more. You know, those in the Wildernesse,
they liued many yeeres after, and therefore it
was not the time of this life to them, after God
had sworne in his wrath: therefore, I say, take
heede of deferring; it is an exceeding dangerous
thing; beloued, delay in all things is dangerous,
but procrastination in taking the offer
of Grace, is the most dangerous thing in the
world: beloued, we know not what we doe
when we doe it. I beseech you, consider it seriously,
it is that that deceiues all the world, they
thinke to doe it to morrow, to morrow, though
they be not come in, yet they will doe it, and
doe it speedily: take heed you bee not deceiued
in this, I will doe it now, and now, Modo,
and modo, etc. The Charriot wheeles, when
they runne, the second runnes neere the first all
the day long, but neuer ouertakes it; as in a
Clocke, the second minute followes the first,
but it neuer ouertakes it; so it is with vs, this
doing of it, now, and now, and to morrow,
and to morrow, these little distances deceiue
vs and delude vs: we thinke to doe it in a short
time, and by reason of the neerenesse and vicinity
of the time, that we shall doe it easily, that
we can take hold of that time; but it is not so,
we are deceiued and deluded with it: as Grasse-hoppers
and Butter flies deceiue children, when
they thinke to lay their hand vpon them, they
hoppe a little further, and a little further, that
in the conclusion, they take them not at all; so

it is with vs, we coozen our selues in that manner,
we lose our life, wee lose our opportunity
of taking grace, because wee thinke it to bee so
neere, we thinke we can take it the next weeke,
or the next moneth, and out of this we are confident
it is in our power, we may take it. No,
my beloued, for the most part wee are deceiued,
when we thinke it so neere, it may flye
away, so that thou shalt neuer haue part in it.
you see how God dealt with men in the first Couenant,
I meane in the time of the Old Testament,
you see, when they would not take the
offer, how God sware in his wrath, that they should
not enter into his rest; and I am f^lly perswaded,
that in this New Testament, in these dayes of
Grace, the Lord is much more quicke and peremptory
in reiecting men, and casting them off,
the time is shorter, he will not wait so long as
hee was wont to doe in those times, hee will
sooner sweare in his wrath now that you shall
not enter in to his rest; that I speake vpon this
ground, saith hee, if the Lord would doe this
for the Law of Moses, how much more, if wee
neglect so great saluation, as was preached by the
Sonne himselfe? as the mercy is much greater
now in the new Couenant, then it was then, so
the wrath and danger is greater in refusing:
therefore when we consider what a hazard it
is, my beloued, me thinkes, the doubt, and the
brittlenesse of this life, the vnsearchablenes, and
certainety of Gods seasons, and times, that hee
hath put into his owne power, the liberty of

the Spirit, that breatheth where and when it
listeth, the exceeding danger that we precipitate
our selues into, when we lose the opportunity
once, me thinkes these should moue vs to come
in, and to take heed of refusing the offer at any
time; those expressions you shall finde so often
in the Scripture, that God stands and knocks; that
he waites, and stretcheth forth his hands; that hee
will gather vs, as a henne gathereth her chickens;
signifie these two things to vs: First, how exceeding
ready God is to receiue vs, if we come
in, while the acceptable time lasteth.
Againe, withall, how dangerous it is to refuse
it: for who knowes how long the LORD will
waite? who knows when he will cease waiting,
and shut vp the doore of grace to vs? and then
when the day of peace is gone, it is no more to
be recouered, when the acceptable time is past.
I beseech you therefore, consider and apply it,
take heed of refusing, when you heare yet this
Couenant of Grace is offered, your doores are
now open, you may come in, if you will; take
heed of staying till the acceptable time is past,
lest the Lord sweare in his wrath (at a time when
you thinke not) that thou shalt neuer enter into
his rest. So much shall serue for this. Beloued,
that which I intended most was this, the reason
why this Couenant is made, the reason why God
makes a Couenant with man; which was chiefely,
that we might haue strong consolations, that
we might know his good will towards vs, that
he might not onely doe vs good, but that hee

make it manifest to vs. Of this likewise wee
should haue made some vse, which is the laying
hold of the Couenant, the promises of free Iustification,
the promises of Sanctification, and the
promises of such blessings as belong to this present
life, those are the three parts of the Couenant:
we should haue shewed how wee should
lay hold of them, that when the Lord hath promised
once, when faith hath a promise to cloze
with, when it hath such a ground to set footing
vpon, then to apply them, and if the Lord defer
to performe them, then to put him to it, for the
fulfilling of them; and so wee should doe for
the promise of Iustification, the promise of forgiuenesse
of sinnes, that you haue cause to make
vse of this time when you receiue the Sacrament:
For what doe you? You come to renew
your Couenant with God, that wee haue now
spoken of: for it is the seale of the Couenant;
there is a Couenant that God makes with you,
and a Couenant that you make with him: when
you consider this, you should strengthen your
faith, goe to him, and say, Lord, thou hast promised
to forgiue me my sinnes, and to remember
them no more; Lord, it is a part of thy Couenant;
Lord, it is thy Couenant that thou hast
put thy seale to; (for the seale is put to it for that
very purpose, that when you see the Bread and
Wine, you might thinke of these seales, as signes
of the Couenant) you haue Gods owne Word,
besides, as you haue his Word, that the raine
shall no more drowne the Earth, God hath set

his Bow in the Cloud, that when he lookes, he
may remember the Couenant: so likewise,
you shall sprinckle the doore posts with the
blood of the Lambe, that when the destroying
Angell shall come and see the blood, hee may
passe you ouer: beloued, after the same manner,
for the same end, God hath appointed the Sacrament,
now when you receiue those elements of
Bread and Wine, Take, eate, this is my body; and
drinke, this is my blood, which was shed for you, and
for many: you may goe to God vpon the same
ground, and say to him, Lord, thou hast made a
Couenant with me, to forgiue me, to receiue me
to thy mercy; Lord, these are the seales of thy
Couenant, that if thou forget them, thou hast
said, that if we doe but shew thee those signes,
(for it is the seale that God himselfe hath put to
it) thou wilt remember thy Couenant, and make
it good: therefore is is an exceeding great confirming
to you, when you looke vpon them,
when you may say to the Lord, Lord, here is thy
seale, that thy selfe hath put, I beseech thee, look
vpon it, and remember thy Couenant that thou
hast made. And as wee should doe thus for the
promises of Iustification, so for the promises of
Sanctification: suppose there be a strong lust
hang vpon thee, an hereditary disease, a lust that
is naturall to thee, that thou thinkest thou shalt
neuer be able to ouercome, yet God hath promised
to breake the dominion of euery sinne,
that he will crucifie the flesh, with the affections
of it, that he will sanctifie thee throughout. Beloued,

you must beleeue those promises of
Sanctification, as well as of Iustification: for
certainely, where the Scripture hath a mouth to
speake, faith hath an eare to heare, and a hand
to receiue: therefore when you grapple with a
strong lust, goe to the Lord, and say to him, I am
not able to keepe this Commandement, I feele
this temptation is too strong for me, I find such
strong naturall inclinations, that I am not able
to out-wrestle; Lord, it is a part of thy Co^enant,
thou hast said thou wilt circumcise my heart,
thou hast said, thou wilt put thy Law into my
inward parts, thou hast said, thou wilt dissolue
these lusts, I beseech thee to doe it; Lord, thou
art able to doe it, as Christ was able to heale hereditary
diseases, so the Spirit is able to heale
the hereditary diseases of the soule, those that
are most naturall to vs, those that are bred and
borne with vs, and therefore trust him. And so
likewise for any other blessing, go to him whatsoeuer
blessing thou needest, it is a part of Gods
Co^enant, he saith to Abraham, I will blesse thee,
and I will be thy God; that is, let a man looke
round about, and see what blessings he needeth,
what euill he would be deliuered from, and let
him goe to the Lord, and say, Lord, it is a part
of thy Couenant, to giue me such a blessing, to
guide me, to deliuer me from such a crosse and
calamity; vrge the Lord, and tell him, it is his
Couenant. For example, if a man bee in some
great trouble, that hee hath some sore disease,
some sore affliction, as imprisonment, or euill

^eport, feare of death, or whatsoeuer; goe to
the Lord, and say, Lord, thou hast said that the
rod of the wicked shall not rest vpon the lot of the
righteous, thou wilt aff^ict but in measu^e, thou
wil^ not breake my bones, as a Father, though
hee cha^ten his childe, ^ee will not breake the
bones of his childe; the ^od of the wicked to
some men, is the breaking of the bones, they
know not what to doe, thou hast said thou wilt
chastise vs according to our strength, and thou
wilt chastise vs for our good; when it is too
much, thou wilt s^ay thy hand. As for euill report,
a man may goe to the LORD, and say,
LORD, thou hast said thou wilt blesse the name
of the righteous, thou wilt honour them that honour
thee. And so for euery other particular
case, be it what it will be, lay hold on the promise,
and comfort thy selfe with it: it is a great
mat^er, beloued, when you consider this, that
God is entred into Couenant with you, when you
haue promises once; therefore, if thou finde a
promise from GOD, beloued, build vpon this
ground, be assured that thou art one within the
Couenant: secondly, if thou finde a pr^mise in
Scripture, neuer let thy hold goe, but the assured
of this, that the Lord will surely doe it, though
he defer long, yet he will doe it, it cannot
bee but hee will performe it, etc.
So much shall serue for
this time.
FINIS.




THE
FOVRTEENTH
SERMON.

G^NESIS 17. 2.
And I will make my Couenant betweene mee
and thee. And I will multiply thee exceedingly.

YOV remember how farre wee
are proceeded in this point*
for my purpose is not to repeate
any thing of that which
hath beene deliuered: onely
this wee must call to remembran^e,
that the maine difference which is betweene
the Old Testament and the New, it
stands in this, that the Old Testament was hi^
with shaddowes, and types; in the New T^^stament,
there is a more cle^re (...)
of all things; The things that were ^id, ((...))

Paul) from the beginning of the world, are ^ow
reuealed vnto vs; that is, the great difference
betweene them, it lyes in this, that there is a
greater abundance of knowledge discouered to
the sonnes of men, now, in the time of the
Gospell, then there was in the time of the Old
Testament, and from hence it is, that now God
makes a Couenant with vs, and wee doe not
breake it;Heb. 8. but, saith he, Heb. 8. I made a Couenant
with your Fathers, when I tooke them by the
hand, and led them out of the Land of Egypt; but
they broke my Couenant; And what was the reason?
Because their knowledge was exceeding
slender, and therefore their grace and strength
were exceeding little, and therefore they were
not able to keepe the Couenant, there is no other
reason and ground, why the Couenant is better
now, as it is said to be a better Couenant, Heb. 8.
6. stablished vpon better promises; I say, there
is no other ground for it, but this, the difference
of knowledge between the two Ce^enants; for,
for substance they are the same, onely in the administration
of them, the glorious Mysteries of
the Gospell are more openly and more cleerely
reuealed to vs in the New Testament, then in
the Old.
Whence wee will onely make this vse,Vse. that,
if we would haue the benefit of the New Couenant,To labour for knowledge.
wee must labour to get the knowledge of
it; otherwise it is no aduantage to you at all,
that you are borne in the time of the New Couenant,
in the time of the Gospell, except knowledge

abound, except you take the benefit of
it, except you labour to vnderstand the vnsearchable
riches of Christ, that are vnfoulded
to vs in the Couenant of Grace. What is the
reason why the Apostle,Gal. 4. 9. Gal. 4. cals the Old
Testament, those teachings that the people had
then, impotent and beggerly rudiments? The
reason is, because their knowledge was exceeding
little, therefore it brought little profit to
them, they were beggerly, they had little riches
in them, and they were impotent, they could
communicate little power, and strength, and
efficacy to the inward man: On the other side
now, the New Couenant is strong, and rich,
and liuely, and effectuall; and the reason is, because
there is more knowledge in it, wee are
taught to know GOD better, and to know the
whole mysterie of the Gospell better.
Therefore,Growing in kdowledge increaseth grace I say, if you would bee strengthned
in grace, if we would be enabled to keepe
the Couenant more then they were, labour to
grow in knowledge, let it not be vnusefull vnto
you, whatsoeuer is deliuered, but make benefit
of it. You see what riches of knowledge are
deliuered to vs in Pauls Epistles, let none of
this be lost, it is thy benefit, that this is now
discouered to thee, that was hid from all the
world aforetimes. It is that benefit that the Apostle
Paul so exceedingly magnifies, that to vs,
this mystery is reuealed, that wee haue this grace
to make knowne to principalities and powers, the
manifest wisdome of God, the vnsearchable rich^s

Christ: make this vse of it, grow in know^edge,
and thou shalt grow in grace, by that
(...), the strength thou gettest in grace, it is
^^om ^he abundance of knowledge: beloued,
this is an exceeding vsefull point. Those are
^he complaints ordinary amongst men, they
would faine doe otherwise, they would abstaine
from such sinnes, and they would obserue such
^^uties, they intend it, and desire it, and purpose
it, but they are not able to performe it. What
is the reason of that? Because they want grace
and strength, that is the immediate cause. But
what is the cause they want grace? Because they
^ake not paines to grow in knowledge. Beloued,
that place,2. Pet. 3. 17. 2 Pet. 3. see how they are put together;
Take heede you bee not plucked away with
the errour of the wicked, but grow in grace. How
shall we doe that? Grow in the knowledge of our
Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. I deny not but a
man may haue much knowledge, and want
Grace: but, on the other side, looke how much
grace a man hath, so much knowledge he must
haue of necessity. Though there may be much
wood that is not kindled, yet looke how much
fire there is, so much fuell there must needs be.
Knowledge is the Oyle, wherein the flame of
^he Spirit liues, and you cannot haue more
G^ace then you haue knowledge, though you
^ay haue abundance of empty and vnprofita^le
knowledge, without grace. Therefore, if
(...) would haue the fruite of this Couenant, la^our
to grow in knowledge. Ioh. 1. 17. that

place is excellent for this purpose; The Lawe
continued till Iohn Baptist, the Law came by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Iesus Christ. Marke
it, grace and truth. What was the reason there
was more grace dispersed by Iesus Christ than
by Moses? The reason is, because there was
more truth reucaled to the sonnes of men by
CHRIST, then there was by Moses; truth was
hid in Moses time vnder vailes, and shaddowes,
but was manifest in the time of Iesus Christ.
Now because truth was more reuealed by him,
hence it was, that there was a greater communication
of grace, a larger effusion of the Spirit,
because there is more truth: but that place
comes as neere to this purpose, that you shall
finde,2 Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 3. you shall see there an expression
of the difference betweene the two Couenants:
Neuerthelesse when their hearts shall bee
turned to the Lord, the vaile shall bee taken from
before their eyes. Hee said before, To this day
when Moses is read, there is a vaile laid ouer their
hearts, but when their hearts shall be turned to the
Lord, the vaile shall bee taken away: And what
then? They shall behold as in a glasse the glory of
God, with open face, and be transformed and changed
into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by
the Spirit of the Lord. The meaning is this;
saith he, in the time of the Old Testament there
was a vaile, that couered their hearts, and their
eyes, that they were not able to see the truth
cleerely; but now, saith he, that vaile is tooke
away, and we see the truth with open face, euen

as you see an Image in ^ Glasse. But what is the
benefit of this knowl^d^e? Now the vaile is taken
away, we know much more, saith hee, by
seeing with open face, we are transformed into
the same Image, that is, by the knowing of it,
by looking vpon it, by renewing those truths
that are deliuered in the Gospell, by seeing the
wayes of GOD, and the Image of GOD there
described, and set forth to vs; by this knowledge
we are transformed and changed into the
same Image, from glory to glory; that is, from
one glorious degree of that Image to another;
not that the very knowledge shall doe it, but it
pleaseth the LORD to accompany that knowledge
by the Spirit; this is done, saith hee, as
by the Spirit of the LORD. So, my beloued,
the way to grow in grace, and in strength, to
receiue that immediate benefit of the Couenant,
is to grow in knowledge,Ioh. 17. 17. Ioh. 17. it is a part of
Christs prayer, vers. 17. Sancti^ie them with thy
truth, thy Word is truth. The meaning is this*
as if he should haue said, Oh Lord, I know, that
the way to sanctifie them, the way to increase
grace and holinesse in their hearts, is to reueale
more truth to them; now, Lord, I beseech thee,
reueale thy Word to them; for thy Word is
that truth, teach them to know thy Word, acquaint
them with it more and more; for by
that meanes they shall get grace and sanctification.
So then, if you would receiue the strength
of the Couenant, you must labour to grow in
knowldge, labour to vnderstand it more and

more: for, beloued, this is a very sure rule,
there is not a new notion that a man gets, there
is not a beame of truth, of new truth, there is
not a further enlargement of knowledge, and
illumination, but it brings some riches of grace
with it, it comes not empty, but it comes loaded
with something, it hath some power, and
strength, and it giues a new vigour to the inward
man; and therefore if thou wouldest abound
in grace, study the Scriptures, much attend
to them, much meditate in them day and
night, labour still to get some new sparke of
knowledge, some new light out of them, and
thou shalt finde this, that grace will follow, as
it is the Apostles exhortation to Timothie, saith
he Giue attendance to reading, and to learning, so
thou shalt saue thy selfe, and shalt be able also to saue
others. The meaning is, the way to get that
grace that will saue a man, is to giue much attendance
to reading and to learning: for, beloued,
whatsoeuer it is that begets a man, the
increase of that likewise edifies and builds him
vp further. First, we are begotten by the word of
truth, it is the reuelation of the truth of GOD
to a man at the first, that renewes him in the spirit
of his minde, it changeth his iudgement, it makes
him thinke all things in a cleane other fashion
then he was wont to doe: thus he is begotten
to God, and he is made a new man, a new creature:
now the increasing of the same truth,
that is it that builds vs vp further: for whatsoeuer
begets, the increase of that also edifies; and

hence it is that Salomon so exceedingly magnifies
wisdome and knowledge: aboue all getting,
saith he, get that. There are many things that
are precious in the world, Pearle, Gold, and
Siluer, but this is beyond them all. Why doe
you thinke the Wiseman would magnifie wisdome
so much? Because this wisdome brings
grace with it; and therefore when Christ is said
to be the light of the world, he is said likewise to
be the life: the light he was, 1 Ioh. 4. and, Ioh.
8. he is the true light, that lightens euery man.
And what is that light? Why, it is that light
that brings life together with it, Therefore,Eph. 5. 14.
Eph. 5. 14. Arise thou that sleepest, etc. and Christ
shall giue thee light. Now, you know, life is
contrary to death, but the Apostle expresseth
it thus, CHRIST shall giue thee light; because
when a man hath much light, hee shall withall
haue much life and grace: and therefore this I
will commend to you, as one of the principall
meanes of all other to grow strong in grace,
and in the inward man, to grow much in knowledge.
Beloued, it is another thing then wee
are aware of: if we were fully perswaded that
it were a thing so excellent, that it would bring
so much grace with it, certainely wee would
study it more then we doe:2 Pet. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 20. saith
hee, You haue escaped the filthinesse of the world,
through the knowledge of Christ. That is, that
that deliuers you from the bondage of sinne,
that which enables you to escape the filthinesse
that is in the world, when other men are yet

tangled with it, it is because you know that,
that other men are ignorant of, it is through the
knowledge of Christ, if you haue escaped; and,
2 Pet. 1. 2.2 Pet. 1. 2. Grace be multiplyed through the knowledge
of God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ. Grace
be multiplyed through that knowledge, as if
he should say, multiply you that knowledge, and
this is that meanes whereby Grace shall bee
multiplyed to you.
That you may see the ground of all this, there
is no grace that any man hath, but it passeth
in through the vnderstanding: For example,
What is the reason that any man loues GOD
more then another, but because God is presented
to his vnderstanding in another maner then
he is to another? hee knowes God better then
others; and so for other graces. Why is one
man patient, when another is not, but because
his vnderstanding is enlightned to iudge otherwise
of the euill he suffers, than another doth?
hee reckons them not so great and intolerable
euils, he sees another hand of prouidence, hee
sees another end in it. And so, What is the reason
one is temperate, and sober, and meeke,
when another is not, but because he hath another
iudgement of pleasures and delights? he
lookes vpon them, as on things that are enemies
to his soule, he sees a vanity and an emptinesse
in them, that another doth not; I say, all
the grace that a man hath, it passeth through
the vnderstanding; and therefore if a man
would be strong in grace, let him labour to get

much light, to get much truth, much knowledge
in his minde: for certainely all the difference
betweene Christians, the difference of
stature betweene men in Christianity, the difference
of degrees, as one man hath a higher degree
of faith, and another a lower degree, it
followes from hence, that one is more enlightned,
he hath more knowledge, hee hath more
truth reuealed to him, which truth carries grace
with it.
What is the reason that Paul exceeded other
men in grace?
Because there was more truth reuealed to
him then to other men: but still remember that
I deny not, but that there may be much knowledge
without grace; but this is a sure rule, there
cannot bee much grace without knowledge.
the reason why any man is strong in grace, and
able to doe that which another is not able to
doe, that he is able to goe through those troubles,
and those crosses that another shrinkes at,
hee is able to ouercome those lusts that another
is not able to grapple with, it is still the
strength of his knowledge, that hee hath more
vnderstanding of things, that hee is better and
more enlightned: Ioh. 16. when the Apostles
were to come into the world, and CHRIST
tels them what entertainement they should
haue, they beginne to bee exceeding fearefull,
alas, what shall we doe in the world, when wee
haue such things to doe? wee haue men to
wrastle with, that shall thinke they shall doe

God seruice when they put vs in prison; ^aith
he, feare not, I will send my Spirit along with
you, and he shall helpe you to worke, he shall
co^^ince the world of ^inne, of righteousnesse, and
of Iudgement. The meaning is this, it is true,
when you come into the world, you shall finde
mens opinions exceeding false, you shall finde
Satan building vp strong holds, in their deceipts
and errours, and their euill imaginations that
they haue of things; and, saith he, if you should
goe alone without my Spirit, truly you might
besiege the City, you might vse your spirituall
Armour, but you should doe no good; but I
will send my Spirit that shall conuince, (the
word in the Originall signifies the refuting of
an opinion that men had before drunke in,
and were possessed of) the end of the Spirit is to
sanctifie men; now what is that way that the
Spirit vseth to sanctifie men? It is to weare out
those old opinions, to confute them, to let men
know they were exceedingly deceiued. Alas,
they did not know that they were so exceedingly
sinfull as they bee, but when the Spirit
comes, he shewes them what natures they haue,
and what liues they haue liued, they know they
are other creatures then they imagined themselues
to be: for the Holy Ghost refutes that opinion,
and conuinceth them of sinne, and of iudgement*
that is, the Spirit shall shew men the
beauty and the glory of sanctification, of spirituall
priuiledges, and shall make them in loue
with it: so iudgement is to bee taken, as you

haue it taken in t^at place, where it is said of
Christ, he shall not breake the bruised Reede, nor
quench the smoking Fl^x, till hee bring forth
Iudgement to victory* for it shall not cease till
he haue brought forth Iudgement to victory:
that is* by Iudgement is meant holinesse, and
beginning of grace or sanctification, he cals the
first part, that doth but begin to smoke, Iudgement:
saith he, the Lord shall not put it out,
but shall blow that sparke, he shall put new fuell
to that sparke till it ouercome, till hee haue
brought forth this beginning of Iudgement, or
integrity, or sanctification, to victory; that is,
to get the victory ouer sinfull lusts: now this
is done by conuincing, by dealing with the vnderstanding,
it is the worke of the Holy Ghost,
with the minds of men. Now, beloued, the
vse you may make of it is this* If this bee the
way by which the Holy Ghost sanctifies, and infuseth,
and communicates to the hearts of men,
the graces of his new Couenant, if it bee by the
altering of the opinions of mens vnderstanding,
the way then that thou must take to grow
excellent, to grow strong in grace, is to grow
much in knowledge, to study the Scriptures
much, and therefore let not this exhortation
be in vaine to you, make this vse of it, still to
meditate in the Law of God day and night, still to
doe somewhat therein, to be trading therein, to
be busied in speaking, or reading, or in thinking
on it.
Beloued, if you doe but take any piece of

this word, and stay vpon it, as the Bee doth
vpon the Flower, and will not off till you haue
got somewhat out of it; if you be still digging
in this Mine, here is enough, it is a large, it is a
deepe Mine, this would make you rich in
knowledge, and if you be rich in knowledge, it
will make you rich in grace likewise: it is the
expression that is vsed,1 Cor. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 1. Therefore be
assured of this, we haue many businesses to doe
in this world, and euery man bestowes himselfe
on something, he spends his time, and placeth
his intentions some where: now there is nothing
in the world that you can bestowe it so
profitably on, as to get n^w light daily; get
new truths: if a man gather knowledge of other
things, they are but trifles; and yet that is a
thousand times beyond the gathering of
wealth, but yet that is nothing to the other
knowledge, it is beggerly, and impotent, and
poore, as the Apostle saith: for the things
themselues are poore. Is there any thing in the
world can helpe a man to happinesse to any
purpose? if the things cannot doe it, the
knowledge cannot bee better then the thing.
I say, the best naturall thing you can doe is to
gather wisdome, that will serue for this present
life, but to get that wisdome that will
build you vp in grace, that will make you
strong in CHRIST, that is farre more to bee
chosen; remember that which Salomon saith,
that it is aboue Pearles, and that is not enough
to expresse it; but, saith hee, goe through all

the precious things in the world, it goes beyond
them; Why? because it exceedingly increaseth
grace; And what is the profit of it?
It makes God to set a high esteeme of you, it
makes the mighty God, who is able onely to
doe thee good, to delight in thee, it makes
him ready to doe thee much good; which I
gather out of that Heb. 8. saith the LORD there,
When I tooke your Fathers by the hand, and led
them out of Egypt, saith hee they broke my Couenant,
and I regarded them not, saith the LORD;
marke it, but I will make another kinde of Couenant
with you. Now, by the rule of contraries,
these men had little knowledge, and by that
meanes, they had no strength, and therefore
they broke the Couenant of the LORD, and
therefore the Lord regarded them not, but cast
them away, as you refuse things: on the other
side now, there is much knowledge, that brings
men much grace, that makes them keepe the
Couenant of God in a greater measure; if hee regarded
not them that brake the Couenant, certainely
now he will regard them that keepe the
Couenant, those that are his peculiar people, the
men of his delight, the men whom he loues,
vpon whom hee meanes to bestowe all his fauours,
they are fauourites to the Court of heauen;
this you shall haue, if you excell in grace,
there are many other benefits, but still, I say,
remember this; if thou wouldest haue much
grace, reade the Scriptures exceeding much,
make it thy chiefest study from day to

day enquire into them, if thou canst liue vnder
a good Minister, that is liuely, and powerfull,
and enlightning, set a higher price vpon him
then thou hast done; if thou hast an estate,
spare nothing for thy soules good: for if wisdome
be better then Gold, and Siluer, why
should you not part with them for it? and so
by conference be doing something. Wee see,
Psal. 1.(...) what they are that are pronounced blessed,
that meditate in the Law of God day and night;
it is vpon this ground, when a man meditates,
that is, when he delights in it, (he will not meditate
in it else) grace will follow: for there
is no man bleffed, except he hath grace, and the
proposition should not bee sure, except a man
doe settle himselfe to meditate day and night, it
brings ability to keepe the Law; and therefore,
Ios. ^. 8. you shall finde it so expressed, saith the
Lord to Iosuah, Let not the Law depart out of thy
mouth, but meditate in it day and night, that thou
maist obserue and doe it, that so thou maist make
thy wayes to prosper, then thou shalt haue good successe.
Marke, if a man be still taken vp in doing
something, in the things that belong to the
Kingdome of God, that hee make that the element
that hee liues in, as it were, that hee
make it his chiefe and principall study, that he
busie himselfe about it from time to time, as
much as possibly hee can get leasure, that hee
preferre it before all things else, doing it both
day and night, by this hee shall bee more
abl^ to keepe the Law, he shall be more able to

obserue it, and when that is obserued, it makes
way for prosperity, then God will blesse thee,
and giue thee good successe. So much shall serue
for this.
The next thing to be considered, which wee
propounded, is, When the Couenant is dissolued.
You must know,When the Couenant (...) broken. that the Couenant is then
dissolued, when that is dissolued that did make
the Couenant. Looke what it is that puts a man
into the Couenant of Grace at the first, when that
is taken away, then the Couenant is disannulled
betweene God and vs, but till then the Couenant
remaines sure. Now, what is it that makes the
Couenant? Marke it, This is that that makes
the Couenant, when Iesus Christ offers himselfe
to vs, and makes knowne his consent, he is the
promised seede, in whom all the Nations of the
Earth shall be blessed; when wee againe come,
and take this promised seede, and giue our consent,
and make him our LORD, and we be subiect
to him to be his; when we say to the promised
seede, he shall be my God and my Gouernour,
and I will be among his people, and
be subiect to him; I say, when the heart giues
a full consent to this, when the heart hath thus
tooke the promised seede, and receiued him,
and lookes for all from him, now the Couenant
and Contract is made betweene them.
Now, beloued, as long as this vnion continues
betweene CHRIST and vs, the Couenant is
not disannulled; so that, in a word, the Couenant

is neuer nullified, vntill thou hast chosen
to thy selfe another husband, till thou hast taken
to thy selfe another Lord. In a marriage,
there may be many failings of a Wife towards
her Husband, many neglects, many disobediences,
many fits of passion, many offences shee
may giue him, but till she commit adultery, the
bond co^tinues sure, there is no diuorse between
them; the Couenant of God still remaines betweene
them, there is no dissolution of the Couenant:
Beloued, so it is here, thou committest
many transgressions, thou offendest God
oft, thou failest much in thy seruice thou owest
him, but till thou shalt commit spirituall adultery,
till thou leaue him, as it were, and shalt
select and choose to thy selfe another Master,
another Lord, another Husband, the Couenant
remaines sure betweene you, there is no
dissolution of the Couenant. Beloued, this is
a point exceeding full of comfort: thou must
not thinke, that vpon euery sinne the Couenant
is ouerthrowne betweene GOD and thee:
no, the Couenant remaines sure, the bond is
not vntyed as yet, though thou faile exceeding
much, though thou fall into many actuall rebellions
against him, yet the Couenant is not
dissolued.
But you will say to me,Obiect. If this bee to breake
the Couenan^, to chuse another Husband, I
hope there are none of vs that are breakers of
the Couenant then, wee haue not chosen another
GOD, we are willing enough to serue the

Lord?Ans. Beloued, the rule is exceeding true, if
thou deceiue not thy selfe in applying it: therfore
I say this to thee, take heed* thou deceiue
not thy selfe: it is certaine the Couenant remaines
sure, notwithstanding all infirmities,
as long as thy heart cleaues to thine Husband,
as long as thou takest not another in his stead:
therefore if thou wilt not be deceiued,Two rules to know whether we haue broken the Couenant. as many
doe deceiue themselues, I will giue thee but
these two rules to know it by.
The first is an immediate examination of
thine owne heart,1 Rule. ^ooke to thy heart. looke narrowly to this, if
there bee any creature in the world, any pleasure,
any profit, any matter of credit, or honour,
or whatsoeuer the thing be, any delight, or
sport, or inclination, or lust, wherewith thy
heart commits adultery, certainely thou hast
chosen another Husband, whatsoeuer thou
pretendest: If there bee any sinne that thou
art in league with, wherewith thou art entred
into Couenant, as I may so say, thou hast
broken the Couenant with thy first Husband,
as you shall see an expression thereof,Iam. 4. Iam. 4.
Yee adulterers and adulteresses, if you loue the
world, you loue not GOD. That is, if there bee
any thing in the world that you loue in that
manner, it is enmity to GOD, the Couenant is
broken. Now, you will say, How shall wee
know this? You shall know it by this, if it di^ert,
and put out, and quench the loue to your
Husband. You shall see a wife oft times, her
heart is stolne from her husband, she comes to

be in his presence from day to day^ to doe all
seruice to him, she performes, it may be, euery
duty, as carefully, and as diligently as the best
wife in the world, and yet for all this her heart
is gone, here is but a shaddow of performance,
she doth them, but not with loue, and delight,
she doth them not with cheerefulnesse and willingnesse,
she would be free: if thou finde this
thy case, that thou art so in loue, that thy heart
is stolne away with any thing in the world,
with matter of estate, pleasures, or whatsoeuer
it is, any outward excellency that thy heart is
set vpon, any haunt, any delight, any lust that
hath dominion in thy soule, that thou hast made
a league with it, so that thou commest indeede
to performe holy duties from day to day, but
they haue no taste, no relish, thou dost them not
with liuelinesse and quicknesse, thou dost them
as one that must doe them of necessity and preforce;
but thou delightest not in thy Husband;
thou comest before him, but thou delightest
not in his company, thou d^lightest
not in his presence, but the loue of other things,
worldly mindednesse, quencheth that delight,
it is certaine thou hast commited adultery,
thou hast chosen another husband.
You must know this, beloued, that a godly
man that is once entred into the Couenant,
though he faile exceedingly in many things,
yet his delight is still in the LORD, hee desires
exceedingly to please him, hee had rather
be in his company, hee had rather haue

communion with him, then with any other in
the world besides; hee had rather bee doing
seruice to him then to any other; he had rather
be employed in any thing that ^ends to him; so
that if it could be, (I make that supposition) if
there were such a proposition as there was in
the old Law, euery seuenth yeere, those that
had serued an Apprentiship, that were bondslaues,
they might goe free, yet we see some so
loued their Masters, that they would not goe
free, but would be their seruants for euer, and
they were bored thorow the ^are, and were
their seruants: for, saith the Text, they loued
their Masters, and would stay with them. Beloued,
so it is in this case, take a man that commits
adultery with any thing in the world, let
him haue such a Proclamation, that hee might
goe free, he would, were it not for the losse of
heauen, and for going to hell, (but suppose it
were free to him) hee would goe free with all
his heart, he would choose another Master, and
would be free from that bondage, (for so hee
accounts it;) but he that loues the LORD, will
not goe free if he might: for hee reckons that
seruice the greatest freedome, and delight, hee
had rather liue in His Family, then in any seruice
in the world; it is not a seruice, but a friendship;
it is a marriage, he liues as a sonne in the
Family, and therfore he is willing to continue:
for, beloued, as soone as a man is gotten into
the Co^enant once, (this is the ground of it) there
is such a disposition put into his heart, there is

such a disposition grafted in him and rooted in
his inward parts, that he longs after the LORD,
as looke what disposition and inclination there
is in the Loadstone, in lingering after the Iron,
if you pull it from it a thousand times, still it
lookes after it, and it cannot choose, it is the
disposition of the Iron: so, such a disposition
there is in the seruants of the Lord, to chuse him
for their Lord, and Husband; and it is not an
empty choice, that c^^sists onely in affection,
or in the naked resolution of the mind, but it is
such a choice as hath strong affections running
together with it, a strong inclination carrying
the soule to him, so that though he be hindered
many times, and often in his life, vnruly lusts
come, and make a separation betweene the
LORD and him, yet he cannot abide to bee
long from him; it is the Lord that hee loues,
he cannot for his heart choose another Master,
hee cannot choose another Husband, another
Lord, another friend, but it is hee with whom
he will dwell, liue, and dye: if this be thy case,
know, that thy continuall failings make not a
breach of the Couenant: for thou knowest that
thy heart hath not chosen another Husband:
for though thou be forced sometimes, through
the violence of temptation to serue another, yet
thy heart cleaues to thy right Master, it cleaues
to him, it inclines to him, it bends that way:
this is one way to finde it, looke to thy heart
immediately.
If thou canst not doe it by this, if this be too

obscure a rule for thee, (I will adde but this
for the making of it plain) Looke to the effects.2. Rule. Looke to the effects.
Thou pretendest, I haue not chosen another
husband, I haue chosen the Lord for my God,
and him will I serue. It is very well, it is a good
profession, but take heede you bee on a sure
ground. Now, saith our Sauiour, Ioh. 8. You
pretend that you are the children of Abraham,
that you haue him for your Father, and not the
Deuill, but I say vnto you, hee that committeth
sinne, is the seruant of sinne: and so likewise,
Know you not, that to whomsoeuer you obey, his ser^ants
you are, to whom you obey? Rom. 6. And
againe, 2 Pet. 2. Of whomsoeuer a man is ouercome,
to that he is in bondage. Looke to it now,
art thou ouercome with sinne? dost thou obey
sinne, when it comes with a command vpon
thee? dost thou commit sinne? Certainely
thou hast chosen another husband, thou dost
but deceiue t^y selfe.
Alas* you will say,Obiect. is it euery committing of
sinne?
No,Ans. beloued, that is not the meaning of it,
but take heed of this, when a sinne is drawne
out as a thread in the course of thy life, now intruth
thou obeyest it, now thou art ouercome
of it, now it hath dominion whensoeuer it commands
thee; when there is, I say, a tract of
sinne, when a man is still giuen to such a way,
to such an infirmity, (I cannot properly call it
an infirmity) that you may say it is such a mans
trade, he walkes in it, now a man obeyes sinne,

he is ouercome of it, it hath gotten the victorie
ouer him; as we vse to say of men, he is a worldly-minded
man, goe to him when you will,
you shall finde him so disposed, you shall finde
him in all his carriage to shew himselfe to bee
such a man, this sinne it runnes as a thread
through his whole life, still he mindes earthly
things, he is taken vp about them, he disrelisheth
the Word, he doth not minde it, hee doth
not delight to reade it, or to heare it, hee doth
not loue the company of the Saints, and the
like; and so for any other sinne. If this will
not serue the turne, thou maist iudge it by one
sinne, but that is somewhat more difficult: I will
giue you 3. examples, you shall see Adam, and
Balaam, and Saul, you shall see euery one of
them in one sinne breake the Couenant, and if
you can finde yours the same case, you shall
know whether you haue broken it by one miscarriage.
Take Saul first, he was commanded to
goe and kill the Amalekits, and God would haue
him destroy them vtterly; Saul goes about his
Commandement, he seemes to keepe it exceeding
well, and where he failed in it, he seemed to
haue a faire excuse, saith he, I did but saue the
King, the whole body of the people was destroied:
again, he saued but a few of the fattest of the
cattell, and for what purpose? not for his owne
profit, to make him rich, but to offer sacrifice to
the Lord, and he hoped there was no fayling in
this. Well, saith Samuel, thou hast cast away the
Lord, thou hast chosen another God. Samuel

charged him with no lesse; for, saith hee, thy
sinne is as witchcraft, it is as Idolatry, that is, thou
hast now cast God quite away, thou hast chosen
to thy selfe another Lord, another Husband
to obey, How shall this be made good? The
meaning is this, when a man receiues a Commandement
from God, (marke it) when a man
knowes it is the Lords will, that I should walke
thus, and thus before him, that I should abstaine
from such and such sinnes, I cannot deny but
this is his Commandement; well, when a man
comes to the keeping of it, and his heart finds out
excuses, and saith in such and such a case, I hope
I may be somewhat excused from a strict performance
of it; I say, when the heart at any
time deliberates, and yet that word is not sufficient
to expresse it, but when the heart workes
according to its owne proper inclination, and
then disobeyes the Lord in any Commandement,
certainely then it casts God away. Beloued,
it is not such disobedience, as when a man
is transported with a strong affection, a strong
temptation, when he is not himselfe for a time,
and his sinne be discouered, he easily returnes,
and will be the same man he was; but, I say,
when a man deliberately commits sinne, when
a man considers himselfe well, and hee is not
transported with the strength of temptation,
but his heart workes at liberty, so that hee acts
himselfe, in this case he doth as Saul did, hee
casts God away, and God sent him word that he
had cast him away.
The like was the case of Balaam, hee carried
it exceeding fairely, I will not, if Balaac will giue
me his house full of gold, curse the people: I cannot
doe that which God hath not said to me, yet Balaam
desired much to doe it, hee thought hee
would make tryall, he would goe as farre as he
could, God saw it, and found it out, and you see
what iudgement was giuen vpon him, and this
was presently discouered, he gaue aduice to Balaac
to put a stumbling blocke before the children of
Isra^l, that is, by offering with the Moabites, and
committing fornication with their women; and
so, saith he, I shall be able to curse them, when
they haue committed sinne once, then I may
curse them to purpose. I say, there was the naturall,
the proper inclination of Balaams heart,
it was not a thing that he was drawne to; but
when his heart was left to it selfe, to goe which
way it would, that way it went: it is not so
with a man that is in the Couenant: for grace,
it still preuailes, and hath power ouer him, it is
that which hath dominion and possession, it is
that which is the Lord of the house, and whensoeuer
he is lest simply to himselfe, that his heart
workes which way it would, certainely then he
pleaseth God, he cannot, he doth not sin against
him. I cannot stay to presse this further, but rather
come to make some vse of it; but this remember,
so long as a man doth not chuse another
Husband, so long the Couenant is not broken*
though the failings be exceeding many.
The vse wee are to make of it is this,Vse. If there

be this comfort, that though a mandoe commit
many sinnes, yet, so long as he hath the Lord for
his husband, as long as he is not willing to chuse
another Master, still the Couenant is sure; Beloued,
then comfort your selues with these words,
and make vse of the Couenant, and apply the
promises of the Couenant, say this with thy selfe,
it is very true, I am sinfull, I prouoke God from
day to day, yet, for all this, I am not out of the
Couenant, and therefore the promises of the Couenant
belong to me, and therefore, notwithstanding
my sinnes, I will go boldly to the Throne
of Grace, and I will lay claime to the promises,
and to all the parts of the Couenant, for they belong
to me. Beloued, this vse you should make
of it, whe^ you heare the Couenant is not broken.
Now the promises of the Couenant are of 3.
sorts; the promises of iustification, the promises
of sanctification, and the promises of blessings
of all sorts, that belong to this life, and to the
life to come. This threefold vse then thou
shouldst make of it, First, put the case there lies
vpon thy heart the conscience of any sinne that
thou hast committed, that troubles thee, thou
art afraid that this sinne should make a s^paration
betweene God and thee, thou hast yet no assurance
of the forgiuenes of it, but the conscience of the
sinne lyes vpon thee, as that expression you haue
Heb. 10.Heb. 10. what wilt thou doe in such a case? Goe
to the Lord, and say to him, Lord, notwithstanding
this, I know I am in Couenant with thee,
and Lord, this is one part of thy Couenant, that

thou wilt remember our sinnes no more, but, when
they are sought they shall not be found. My beloued,
as you haue heard before, they are the very
words of the Couenant. I say, if thou come to
the Lord thus, and bring Christ in thine armes,
(for that is the nature of ^aith, faith first seizeth
vpon the dead body, as the Vul^ures and as the
Eagles doe first seize vpon the body; so faith
first seizeth vpon Christ) I say, if thou canst go
to him, and say, Lord, I haue thy Sonne, he hath
offered himselfe to me, he is freely offered, and
I haue tooke him, and all thy promises in him
are Yea and Amen, and this is one of thy promises,
that thou wilt forgiue me: if one plead the
Couenant hard with God, and tell him it is a part
of his Couenant, and he must be iust, hee cannot
be a Couenant-breaker; doe you thinke that God
will breake his Couenant with thee, or any man?
he cannot deny thee, he will put away thy sins:
strengthen thy selfe with this: for this Couenant
is continuall, the Mediator of this Couenant
is Iesus Christ, who is such an High Priest
that is able perfectly to saue those that come vnto
him, when a man hath commit^ed the greatest
sinne, and sees but the blood of Buls and Goates,
he might thinke thus with himselfe, alas, what
can this poore and beggerly Ceremony doe, to
deliuer me from the conscience of my sinne?
Well, saith the Apostle, we haue another kind
of Sacrifice, and another kinde of Priest,Heb. 7. Heb. 7.
We haue such an High Priest, as is able perfectly to
saue those that come to him: And why? For, saith

he, he is gone, not into the Tabernacle, as the other
Priests, but he is entred into the very heauens. Besides,
saith he, he goes not once a yeere, as they did,
but he liues for euer to make intercession for vs, hee
is not gone with the blood of Buls and Goates, but
with his owne blood, he is a High Priest, holy, harmlesse,
vndefiled, separated from sinners, higher then
the heauens, and therefore doubt not but hee is able
perfectly to saue those that come vnto him.
Beloued, consider this, it is the very Vse that
the Apostle makes, Heb. 10. 22.Heb. 10. 28. saith he, seeing
these things are so, since we haue such an High
Priest as we haue described, since it is the very
Sacrifice of his blood it selfe, let vs draw neere
in the assurance of faith; that is, if the conscience
of any sinne lye vpon vs, let vs not goe to God
with a quarter wind, or w^th a halfe wind, but
with a full assurance of faith, let vs make no
question, but trust perfectly to the grace that is reuealed.
You must thinke so of Iesus Christ, hee
would haue you thinke so, and conceiue of him,
that he is now in heauen, that he is able perfectly
to sau^ you, that there is nothing you haue
committed, that can doe you hurt; he is like a
friend in the Court; if a man were sure that hee
had one that were neuer from the King, that
hath his eare continually, that is alway in his
presence, that is such a Fauourite, of such power
with him, that certainely he can deny him
nothing, a man would be secure: put the case
there were some whispering fellows that would
be ready to informe against him, yet, saith hee,

I haue one there, that will be ready to take care
for me. My beloued, this is thy very case. Christ
Iesus is gone to Heauen, it is a thousand times
better for thee, that he should be there, then that
he should be here in this world still, there he is
thy Attorney, as it were, he takes care of thee,
hee sees all the accusations that are brought against
thee, and he is ready to answer for thee,
saith the Text, he makes intercession, if there
come any thing that tends to make a breach between
God and thee, he is the Mediator for thee,
he dwels there for that end, if there be any offence,
any breach comes, that he may make it
vp betweene God and thee; consider this, and
when thou hast committed a sin, go to this high
Priest, that is able to saue thee perfectly, and remember
that it is a part of his Couenant, and so
labour to grow vp in full assurance of faith, that
no conscience of sinne may lye vpon thee, to
make a separation betweene God and thee: for,
beloued, you ought to trust perfectly to the
grace that is reuealed through him.
And as I say for sinne, so in the second place
you are to make vse of the Couenant, as put the
case there bee some strong lust, some violent
temptation, that thou art not able to outwrestle,
it is too strong for thee, thou wouldest faine be
rid of it, but thou art not able, why what shalt
thou doe in this case? remember that it is a part
of the Lords Couenant, that he will deliuer thee
from all thine enemies, that thou maist serue him
in righteousnesse and holinesse all the dayes of thy

life. It is a part of his Couenant to remember it,
he hath sworne to remember it, he hath said he
will write his Law in thy heart, and that can neuer
be, without he obliterate all old writing, he hath
said he will giue the Holy Ghost, he hath promised
to giue thee a new heart, and a new spirit* now
consider this, it is a part of his Couenant, goe to
the Lord, and beseech him to make good his
Couenant, this is the way for thee to ouercome
it; if thou go about it any other way, thou shalt
neuer be able to out-wrestle it. Beloued, for a
man to thinke thus with himselfe, to say, I haue
receiued grace, I hope I haue some strength,
therefore I will be bold to venture vpon such a
temptation; or, at least, I hope by my promises,
by my vowes, and prayers, and reading, one way
one way or other to master it, and ouercome it,
this is not the way; thou must goe to GOD, and
make vse of this Couenant, and beseech him to
giue thee strength: for, marke it, GOD would
not take this vpon him, to giue vs new hearts,
and new spirits, to sanctifie vs, to make vs new
creatures, to crucifie the flesh, to weaken the dominion
of sinne, hee would not take this vpon
him, and make a promise, if wee were able to
doe it: but hee knowes it is in his owne power,
and he must doe it for vs; and therefore in
such a case we must goe to him, and beseech
him to doe it: for know this, when a man is in
CHRIST once, when he is in the Couenant, he
liues by a principle without himselfe, and not by
one within himselfe, as Paul saith, I liue by Iesus

Christ, that is, he is without me, and it is he still
that giues me strength, therfore goe to him.
If you aske the reason, why will the LORD
haue it so? why may not a man haue a sufficient
habituall strength in himselfe, by which he may
be able to out-wrestle lusts, and to ouercome
temptations? The reason is, because no flesh
shall reioyce in it selfe; and therefore Christ
is made sanctification; that is, you deriue it from
him, from day to day, from time to time, that
you might not reioyce in your selues, but in
him: therfore let no man goe about such a businesse
in his own strength: for a man to thinke,
beloued, by vertue of that habituall grace hee
hath receiued, to be able to ouercome sinne,
and to worke righteousnes, it is all one as if a
man should say thus with himselfe, I see my
house is full of light, now I will shut vp my
doores and windowes, I hope to haue light enough;
when he hath done so, you know, the
light perisheth presently, because the Sun is shut
out, that which giues light: I say, so it is, when
a man thinks, now I am some body, I haue now
gotten some strength, now, I hope, I may walke
with some confidence more then before; this
is to shut vp the windowes, as it were. No, thou
must haue continuall dependence vpon Christ,
otherwise, if thou goe to ouercome any sin, and
thinke to doe it with thy owne strength, it shall
be too strong for thee: for you wrestle with spirituall
things, and without a strength from one
without thee, they will be too strong for thee:

goe to the Lord, and say, Lord, I confesse, I am
able to doe nothing of my selfe, but I bring my
heart to thee, as an empty Caske, beseeching
thee to fill it with grace; Lord, I want much
grace, Iesus Christ is full of grace, and hath filled
himselfe for that purpose, that he might communicate
it to vs: I say, in such a case, now, if
thou goe to the Lord, and beseech him to make
good his Couenant, tell him thou restest vpon his
strength, thou goest against sinne, as Iosuah went
against the Ca^^^ites, not because he was able
to ouercome them: for they were Giants, and
had cities walled vp to heauen; but hee went in
the Lords strength; I say, if a man goe in this
manner, bee assured that the Lord will not faile
thee, he will giue thee ability to ouercome.
The third case is, when any outward trouble
lyes vpon a man, let him goe and remember it is
a part of Gods Couenant to blesse him, To blesse
him with what? Withall kind of blessings, and
to be a Buckler to him; there is no euill in the
world, but God hath promised to bee a Buckler
to shield him, and to defend him from it: put
the case thou lye vnder any pressure, any calamity,
any crosse, any disease, any affliction of
minde, or of body, or estate, or of name, why
goe to God now, and tell him it is a part of his
Couenant to deliuer thee, and labour to find out,
if thou canst, beside the generall Couenant, some
particular. The Lord hath said, if thou bee in
trouble, call vpon mee, and I will deliuer thee; if
thou be in a strait, in extremity, the Lord hath

said he will worke thy workes for thee, and so yo^
may goe to him in particulars. But when fait^
hath once gotten a promise, be sure that thou
keepe thy hold, pleade hard with the Lord, and
tell him it is a part of his Couenant, and it is impossible
that he should deny thee; doe as the
woman of Canaan, when thou art on a sure
ground, take no denyall, though the Lord may
deferre long, yet he will doe it, he cannot chuse;
for it is a part of his Couenant. Beloued, therefore
in this case, doe, as you see two Metaphors
vsed in Scripture, they are excellent for this
purpose, Esay 66. 11. there is a Commandement
of the Lord for the children of Israel, that they
should sucke, and be satisfied with the brests of consolation,
etc. the words are obscure, as they are
read to you, but the Originall makes them exceeding
cleere; there are two Metaphors vsed,
one is to milke consolation out of the promises,
the meaning is this, that the promises are full
of comfort, as a dugge is full of milke; now, if
thou be ready to faint, goe and milke out consolation
out of the promises, that will relieue
thee, that will stay thy heart; goe, saith he, and
sucke, draw out consolation from the dugges,
from the promises, (for that is the meaning)
which he cals the brests of consolation (for hee
repeates the promise presently after,) thus saith
the Lord, behold, I will extend peace ouer her like
a Flood, etc. The other Metaphor is to extor^,
to oppresse the promises, that, as a rich man oppresseth
a poore man, and gets out of him all

that he is worth, he leaues him worth nothing,
he playes the extortioner with him; after that
manner deale thou with the promises, for they
are rich, there is a price in them, be thou as an
extortioner to them, take out whatsoeuer thou
needest, or wring it out of the promises, as it
were. Now when a man is poore and needy,
let him goe to the rich promises, and bee as an
oppressor to them, that is, consider the promises
to the vtmost, see the vtmost riches that is contained
in them, and they will make thee rich againe;
draw out the vtmost of that milke that is
in them, and it will exceedingly reuiue and comfort
thee: for example, (that I may a little open
it to you) Iacob, when Esau met him, and his
heart began to faint, (for, saith the Text, he feared
exceedingly) his heart began to faile him now,
and what did he? he did goe and sucke consolation
out of the promises: for thus he reasons
with the Lord, Lord, thou hast said thou wilt doe
me good; now hee stayes himsel^e vp with this,
and hee got so much strength with this milke,
that hee was able to wrestle with the Lord all
night, and would not let him go without a blessing;
this promise sustained him, from whence
he sucked consolation and strength for thou hast
said thou wilt doe me good, therfore I am resolued,
I am sure I am vpon good ground* I will not let
thee go without a blessing. And so Abraham, when
he was to offer his onely sonne, what should he
doe now? here he was dessolate, poore, and needy,
certainely his heart could not but be ready

to faile, and what should sustaine him in this case?
there was a promise, you see,Heb. 11. Heb. 11. he was
sure God had made a promise, and hae said vnto
him, this is Isaac, and this Isaac I will multiply,
and with him I will establish my Couenant, and
his seede shall be as the Stars of heauen; saith Abraham,
God promised it, and though I should kill
him, God can put a new life into him; he went,
you know how farre from his house where hee
dwelt* surely he sustained himselfe by the promise,
he rested vpon this promise, he drew consolation
from it, and he drew it to the full, there
was much milke in that promise, and that sustained
and comforted him. I might giue you many
instances. So Dauid, when hee comforted
himselfe at Ziglag, what was it that he comforted
himselfe in? Surely Dauid remembred this,
the Lord hath annoynted me King ouer Israel,
he hath said that I shall be King, and shall sit in
the Throne of Saul; it is true, I haue lost all
that I haue, and the Souldiers that should bee
my strength, are now at this instant ready to
stone me; yet he remembred this promise, and
comforted himselfe in the Lord, that is, in the
promise that the Lord had made to him, whereof
this was the maine that he had to comfort
himselfe with.
Beloued, learne to doe this when you are in
any strait, if there be any thing that you need,
remember this, if thou can but get a promise, if
faith can but get this footing, the LORD hath
made it a part of his Couenant, and there is

his hand and seale to it, the Sacrament that thou
receiuest from time to time, is but a seale of that
Couenant, and if he seeme to forget it for a time,
^e will remember it, hee cannot forget it long,
be assured he will performe it, it is impossible
but he should, let not your hearts faile, if thou
haue a promise, he will doe it in due season, although
not in thy season, yet he will doe it in
the best manner, though not in that manner and
fashion that thou imaginest.
Beloued, one thing more we should haue added,
that is, to exhort men to enter into Couenant;
this I should haue pressed to you, the miserable
condition of a man that is without it,
and the happines of the man that is within it,
with this we^should haue concluded the point.
Beloued, consider this, in what a miserable condition
men are without the Couenant; it is enough
that is said,Eph. 2. Eph. 2. without God in the
world, and without the Couenant, they are put together,
they are aliens and strangers from the Couenant,
without the Couenant, without God in the
world: is it a small thing to be without God, and
without the Couenant? when thou con^iderest
this Booke, and the many precious promises in
it, that we spake of before, and thou hast not
right to one of these promises, if thou be without
the Couenant; when thou art in a straite, if
thou be a stranger to God if thou be out of the
Couenant with him, what wilt thou do? whither
wilt thou goe? we are subiect to 1000. straits;
you know what a weake creature man is, what

neede hee hath of assistance; What wilt thou
doe in the time of extremity? thou canst not
goe to GOD, thou art not in the Couenant with
him, but thy case is as that of Zedekiahs, Micaiah
tels him, thou shalt goe from chamber to chamber;
so thou shalt goe from place to place, GOD
will not receiue thee: for thou art not in Couenant
with him. But is that all, that thou shalt
want the comfort of God? No, know, if thou be
not in Couenant with GOD, he is thine enemy:
if thou come neere to him for refuge and comfort,
he will be to thee as a deuouring fire, and
when thou commest to him, thou shalt bee as
soft wax to the scorching flame, as stubble to
the fire; and not only so, but thou shalt come
to euerlasting burnings, such fire as shall neuer
goe out; such the Lord shall be to thee, if thou
be not in the Couenant with him. You will say
to me, this is to come, if it may be well for the
present, I shall beare it the better, I will goe one
step further therfore. If thou be out of Couenant
with GOD, all the creatures are at enmity with
thee, there is neuer a creature in heaue^ or earth,
but it hath liberty to do thee hurt: for if thou
be out of League with GOD, thou art out of
the protection of the Law, if any creature doe
thee mischiefe, it shall neuer be required at his
hands, but there is a liberty giuen them, Satan
may hurt thee, men may hurt thee, beasts may
hurt thee, all the insensible creatures may hurt
thee; for there is no prohibition. Besides, thou
hast no Shield, nor Buckler to defend thee from

them: for thou art not in Couenant with GOD,
he is no Buckler to thee: all this is the case of euery
man that is out of the Couenant; and this is
not a small thing, to be out of the pales of Gods
protection, to haue euery creat^re ready to do a
man a shewd turne, and he to haue no immunity,
nothing to deliuer him; it is not so with the
Saints, all the creatures are at peace with them.
To draw this a little neerer, if there bee any
thing in the body, or out of the body, that troubles
vs, if there be imaginations in the minde,
that be to the soule, as the Gout is to the body,
if thou be in Couenant with God, all these are at
peace with thee: for all these are at Gods command,
it is a part of his Couenant; when thou
art in Couenant and League with him, thou art
in League with them, and therefore they shall
neuer doe thee hurt. Bee assured of that, when
thou art within the Couenant, there is no creature
in heauen or earth can doe thee hurt: for
thou art at peace with it, it is not an enemy, and
that which is not an enemy, it neuer doth hurt;
but if thou be not in Couenant with God, now
these haue a power to hurt thee, there is no prohibition
vpon them, there is no restraint, but
they may doe thee hurt, they are enemies to
thee, both those things, and whatsoeuer else is
in heauen or Earth; Satan, and euery creature
hath power to doe thee hurt: when thou walkest
in the way, when thou sittest in thy house,
wheresoeuer thou art, thou walkest in thee middest
of 1000. dangers, because thou art not in

Couenant with God, therefore thou art exposed
to the enmity of all the creatures.
But this obiection will be made,Obiect. Yea, but many
or those that are within the Couenant, receiue
hu^t from the creatures, and many of those
that are out of the Couenant, liue peaceable
and quiet liues?
I will answer it in a word;Ans. It is very true, they
may be exercised, though all the host of heauen
and earth be at peace with them, and there is
not any creature can doe them the least hurt;
no, they neither will, nor can goe about it, to
lift vp their hand against them; yet they may be
exercised with many afflictions, but there is a
very great difference betweene these two, the
same disease, the same griefe, the same apprehension,
lyes on the heart, and wounds the spirits
of the one man, but to the other that is in
Couenant, it is a rod in the hand of a father, enabling
him to keepe his Couenant the better, it
is as a Medicine in the hand of a Physician, to
heale him, to comfort him, to doe him good;
that very disease to another is as a sword in the
hand of an enemy, as poyson in the hand of the
destroyer to hurt him. As, for example, the
Deuill had power to vexe Saul, and to vexe Iob,
here was the same instrument, the Deuill had
power ouer both, but there was a great deale of
difference, you know, he had power ouer Saul
as an enemy, he had power ouer Iob as a friend:
and so likewise Iudas had a messenger of Satan,
to fill his h^art, and Paul had a messenger of Satan

too, to sollicite him, and to trouble him, and
to ioine with his lusts, to make them as pricks in
his sides, but there is much difference; to the
one he had a restraint, the Lord saith to the De^ill,
What hast thou to doe with Iob? thou shalt
^oe thus far, and no further, thou shalt not hurt
^ob To Paul there was a restraint too, thou shalt
goe th^s far, for what purpose* as there was a
restraint, so there was another end likewise, so
far it shall goe, as till it hath humbled him; Iob
and Paul were humbled by it, a iot further it
cannot goe: for the deuill in truth, though hee
be hostile to them in affection, yet cannot hurt
them in action, because God only vseth him to
doe them good, and to humble them; Iob was
the better, and Paul was an exceeding gainer
by it, but Saul and Iudas were great Iosets; so
there is a great difference betweene these two.
The Shepheard sets his Dog vpon the Sheep to
bring them in, another man sets his Mastiffe on
another creature to worry it, and to destroy it;
the Lord sets the creature vpon his own seruants,
but as the Shepheard sends out his Dogge, to
bring them in; as soone as they are brought in,
he rates the Dog, and will not suffer him to doe
them the least hurt. A man will not haue his
seruants, nor children, nor his friends hurt, but
he will rate the Dog when he fals vpon them;
so the Lord doth with euery creature whatsoeuer,
when it comes to hurt them, he rebuker it,
as he did the stormes and winds: on the other
side, when a man is out of Co^enant with GOD,

then God vnlooseth the coller of the creature, as
it were, and sets him vpon such a man, and saith
vnto him, go and worry such a man, wound him,
be an enemy to him, hurt him. This obiection is
so to be answered, that those that are within the
Couenant, they are often molested and troubled,
the creatures seeme to hurt them, though they
be in League and at peace with them, and can
doe them no hurt.
Secondly it is obiected,Obiect. that others that are
out of the Couenant, they liue in peace?
Beloued,Ans. I beseech you, consider this, and it is
profitable to co^sider, that he that belongs not to
the Couenant, he may liue in his fathers house, he
may sit at Table with the children, he may haue
the same maintenance, the same clothing, the
same vsage, the same liberty, the same priuiledges
of the family as the children haue, and
yet for all this, this is one that belongs not to
the Couenant, but one whom God intends to cast
out. Ismael, you know, liued in the family, as
well as Isaac, and was as well vsed as Isaac, till
the time came that God would cast him out; and
therefore deceiue not thy selfe with out ward
peace, to say, God and the creature are at peace
with me; for I haue prosperity in all that I doe.
No, it may be, the time of casting out is not yet
come, but in due time, when the right season shal
come, then Ismael shall bee cast out, and euery
one with whom the Couenant indeed is not established.
Caine remained for a time, but he was
cast out, and made a Vagabond vpon the earth.

Saul remained for a time in the house, but in
due season God cast him off: so, I say, God may
nourish, and cherish, and defend thee, as if thou
wert one of his owne children, but he will cast
thee off in the end. We haue a notable example
for it, in his dealing with the children of Israel,
they were such as belonged not to the Couenant,
a great part of them, and yet see how
he vsed those very men;Deut. 32. Deut. 32. it is said, hee
carried them on Eagles wings; that is the expression,
that is, the Lord carried them so safely as the
Eagle carries her yong on the top of her wings,
that no Fowle can reach them, but she is aboue
all Fowles, and stronger then all Fowles, and
flyes higher, and so they were safe as on Eagles
wings, nothing could reach them; After that
manner I carried you out of Egypt, I kept you
so safe: besides, I did not onely defend you,
but fed you with the finest Wheat, with the purest
Oyle, with the liquor of the Grape; and yet
notwithstanding all this, these men were such
as God hated, such as were not in League, as belonged
not to the Couenant: deceiue not thy
selfe, God may doe all this, and yet cast thee out;
he may feed the with riches in abundance, and
yet if thou be not a sonne, if the Couenant be not
established with thee, thou shalt be cast out; the
sonne abides for euer, but hee with whom the
Couenant is not made, though he may continue
in the Family for a while, hee shall not abide
long, but shall be cast forth.
FINIS.





FOVRE
SERMONS,
WHEREIN CERTAINE
Objections against the poynt
of GODS ALL-SVFFICIENCIE,
(handled in the fiue first Sermons
of the former Treatise)
are Answered.

ECCLESIASTES 9. 1. 2. 3. 4.
I haue surely set my heart to all this, to declare this,
that the iust, and the wise, and their workes, are in
the hand of God, and no man knoweth either loue,
or hatred, by all that is before him: for all things
come alike to all, and the same condition is to the
iust, as to the wicked, and to the good, and to the
pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrificeth,
and to him that sac^ificeth not; as is the good,
so is the sinner, he that sweareth, as he that feareth
an oath, etc.

WEE haue purposely chosen this
text, that we might answer some
objectio^s, which might be made
against the All-sufficiency of God,
which we spake of lately to you;
for this might be objected;
If God be All-sufficient,Ob. what is the reason of this

dispensation of things that we see in the world,
that there be righteous men, to whom it is according
to the worke of the wicked, and there be wicked men
againe, to whom it is according to the worke of the
righteous?
Here you haue this answer made,Answ. That for a
time all things come alike to all, there is the same
condition to the one, as to the other: the reason
of which you shall see when we come to the handling
of the words. But in briefe, to open them to
you: you shall ^inde, that this was the occasion of
them. In the 16. verse of the former Chapter,
sayth the Wiseman,Eccles. 8. 16. I haue applyed my heart vnto
wised^me, and to behold the busines that is done vpon
the earth, in which I had no rest, either day or night,
I was so intent vpon them. Well; what is the
conclusion? Sayth he, I found this, I was not able
to finde out the reason of Gods workes; I beheld
the workes of God, that man cannot finde out the
workes that are wrought vnder the Sunne, yea though
a wise man thinke to know it, he cannot finde it:
That is, when I see how God dispenseth things,
I am not able to finde out the reason, and not I
onely, but no man is able to finde it, no, saith he,
though he be a wise man; no, although he search
never so diligently, he cannot find out the reason
of Gods wayes, the reason of his providence, of his
dispensing of prosperitie to the wicked, and adversitie
to the godly; yet these two Conclusions
notwithstanding he found, which he expres^eth in
the first verse.
 First, that the iust, and the wise, and their workes,

are in the hand of the Lord: That is, although I see
not the reason why God doth it, yet this I finde,
it is the Lord that disposeth all things, both to
men, and all their workes; All the events that fall
out, both good, and euill, I finde this, that they
are in the hand of God.
The second thing he found is, That all things 
come alike to all: There is the same condition to the
good, and to the evill, to him that sacrificeth, and to
him that sacrificeth not. These be the two things,
that the wiseman professeth he found out, and from
hence he gathereth two Consectaries.
One is,Consectarie. That there is no man able to know loue, or 
hatred, by all that is before him: That is, by all that
he seeth done to himselfe, or by all that he seeth
God doe to other men; he is not able to judge by
that, who it is that God loues, or who it is he
hates.
A second Consectarie from it,Consectarie. is expressed in 
the third verse;Eccles. 9. 3. sayth he, This is an evill I haue
seene vnder the Sunne, that there is one condition to
all: That is, the sonnes of men when they haue
seene this carriage of things, this administration,
and dispensation of good and evill, thus premiscuously,
to men of all sorts; therefore, sayth he,
The hearts of men are full of evill, and madnesse is in
their hearts while they liue: That is, therefore they
seeke not God, but the creature, therefore they doe
not depend vpon him, but seeke to secondaric
meanes; What is the issue of it? therefore they goe
downe to the dead: That is, they perish for ever.
So much briefly for the meaning of the words.

Now before he comes to deliver these two conclusions,
he makes this Preamble; I haue given my
heart, sayth he, to all this, or I bend my selfe with
all my might to this, even to declare these two
things; that all things are in the hand of God, etc.
whence we will gather this (in that Salomon sayth,
that he bent himselfe, with all his might, to declare
both to himselfe, and to others, that all things
are in the hands of God;) that
It is a very hard thing,Doct. to be perswaded of
Gods All-sufficiencie.It is a hard thing to be pers^aded of Gods All-sufficiencie.
It is a very hard thing to be perswaded, that all
things are in the hands of God, it is a hard thing to
perswade our selues, it is a hard thing to perswade
others, that is, I shall not deliver the poynt fully
to you, except God himselfe teach you, except God
himselfe declare it; it is so hard for a man to see all
things in the hands of G^d, to know that he is able
to doe all, that, except God teach it to a man, he is
not able to know it, that is, he is not able to
know it to purpose, he is not able to know it so,
as to haue the vse of it, he is not able to know it in
a practicall manner, except the Lord teach it him.
The ground of which is: because,The holy Ghost must perswade it belongs to
the holy Ghost to perswade, it belongs to God to perswade,
not onely to perswade this truth to the
hearts of men, but also to perswade all saving
truths of what nature soever; And therefore wee
see when Christ sends out his Disciples, his Apostles,
he bids them, Goe, preach the Word to the
Iewes, and Gentiles; and whereas they might object
in that case;Ob. How shall we be able to perswade

men, that bring a strange doctrine, and strange
newes to them, a strange thing that was never
heard of?
Christ answers them thus,Answ. I will send my spirit
with you,Iohn 16. and he shall convince the world of sinne,
of righteous^esse, and of ludgement; As if he should
say, I confesle you are not able to doe it, that is a
worke that onely belongs to the holy Ghost, and he
shall convince men of their miserable estate out
of Christ, he shall convince them of that righteousnesse
that they are to haue by Christ, he shall
also convince them of holinesse, and sanctification,
vnder Christs government. Thus, sayth he,
the holy Ghost shall doe; you are not able to performe
it. And so when the Lord makes the promise,
that the people should serue him, and feare
him: The question is, how they should be able to
doe it; shall the Prophets be able to perswade
them? shall the Apostles in their times be able to
perswade them? No; sayth he, They shall all be
taught of God; As if he should say, without his teaching
it will be all in vaine; but if the Lord teach
them once, they shall be perswaded effectually,
they shall not onely know what their dutie is, but
they shall be readie to performe it.
The reason of which is;
First,Reas. 1. because God onely is the generall,God onely wise, and therfore able to perswade. and vniversall
worker, he onely is vniversally wise, he onely
knowes all things, and therefore he onely is able
to teach all things; men know but in part, and
therefore they are able to teach but in part, (now
he that is perswaded of a thing but in part, though

he may acknowledge the thing to be good, yet
his heart is not wrought to practice it; for there is
something yet behinde, some objections, that are
not yet answered.) It is onely God that hath an vniversall
light, that is a generall worker, and therefore
he is said to be onely wise; for a man is not
sayd to be wise, except he know all things that belongs
to such a busines; If there be any part, or
corner of it hid from him, he is not wise, that is, he
is not able to proceede aright, he is subject to errour:
but God, who hath abundance of light, God,
that knowes all things, is onely wise, and therefore
his is onely able to perswade. Hence it is that men
are able to perswade, that such graces are good,
that such wayes are excellent in themselues, that it
is good to take such courses, but yet to answer all
the secret objections of the heart, to perswade fully,
to turne all the wheeles of the soule, this is that,
that a man is not able to doe, to enlighten all the
corners of the heart, he is not able to convince
fully.
Secondly,Reas. 2. God is onely able to doe it; because
he onely knowes all the windings and turnings of
the heart of man.God onely knowes the severall turnings of the heart. It is sayd in Ier. 17. 9. that the
heart of man is exceeding deceit full, who can know it?
That is, no man in the world can know his owne
heart,Ier. 17. 9. much lesse can any man else know it, there
are so many windings, so many turnings in it,
there is such a labyrinth in the heart, such a depth
in it, that no man is able to search his owne heart,
to finde out the bottom of it: oh but who is able
to doe it? Sayth he, in the next words, it is God

that searcheth the heart and tryeth the reynes: That
is, he onely knowes the severall inclinations of the
will, and therefore he onely is able to perswade.
You know,Simile. if a man make a key to vndoe such
a locke, he must know all the wardes of it, or else
he may make a key that will not vndoe it, he may
endevour, and not be able to turne the locke; So
the Lord that onely knowes all the wardes, all the
secret passages; all the windings, and turnings of
the heart of man; he onely is able to sute it, and to
^it it with such arguments, as shall be effectuall to
perswade. You see when he would perswade Moses
to goe downe into Egypt, there was a secret objection
that Moses had in his heart, if he went thither
that he should loose his life; God that knew
Moses heart, knew where that objection lay, where
it stucke with him, he was able to bring arguments
to perswade him, goe thy way (said the Lord;) for
they are dead that sought thy life.
Last of all,Reas. 3. God is onely able to doe it, because
he is able to mend the heart where it is amisse:God onely can amend the heart.
A man perhaps may be able to shew an object,
and to bring it to light: but what if the eye be amisse?
the man is not able to see and to discerne
for all that; If a man^ oye be blind, if there be any
west in it, he is not able to remoue it; So a man
may propound arguments, but to make the heart
capable of those arguments, he may propound
reasons and perswasions, but to make the heart
apprehensiue of them, it is aboue the power of the
Creature: and therefore it is God onely that re^^^^
vs in the spirit of our mindes: he that hath

made the eye, and so he that made the will, and
the vnderstanding, he only can heale the breaches
of them, he onely can elevate them, and put a supernaturall
light into them, and make them fit to
apprehend those spirituall reasons, of any kinde,
that he objects and propounds to the hearts of
men: So that God onely is able to perswade, as of
all other truths, so of this, that all things are in his
hands; that he is All-sufficient.
We may make this vse of it:Vse. we see the reason,
why one man is able to see and to trust to this All-sufficiencie
of God,Why one man trusteth God, and not another. and another is not. The reason
is, because Christ hath revealed it to one man and
not to another: God hath taught it to one man and
not to another. We see it in common experience;
A wise, learned, wittie, and able man, that can discerne
more then many others of the vanity of outward
things, of the All-sufficiencie, and fulnesse
that is in God, yet when he comes to the practice
of it, he is able to doe nothing: On the other side,
wee shall finde in experience, that many poore
Christians, that are able to say little, yet when
they come to practice, they are able to part with
their libertie, with their credit, with their goods,
and with their liues, that they may cleau^^o God,
and keepe a cleare Conscience: what is the reason
of it? because they be taught of God, they are perswaded
by him, and therefore they are able to practice
it; As for the others they are taught by men,
they are taught by themselues, and therefore they
are not taught it indeed^, they are not fully convinced
of it, and therfore though they know such

things, though they be floating in their mindes,
yet they haue not the vse and the practice of them.
Wherein you shall obserue this difference, That a
man may know a truth, and yet not be led into
that truth,Iohn 16. 13. as you see Ioh. 16. 13. when he shall come
which is the spirit of truth, he shall leade you into all
truth. (Marke it) he shall leade you into all truth.
It is one thing to preach the truth, and another
thing to be led into the truth. The holy Ghost shall
lead you into all truth, as a man is led by the hand
into a place: for we are not onely blind, but lame
too; wee are not onely vnable to see spirituall
truthes, but when we see them, we are not able to
follow the guidance of the holy Ghost; Therefore
sayth he, the spirit shall not onely shew you such
and such things, but shall leade you into those
truthes, he shall leade you into the practice of
them. Many men they know what temperance,
what sobrietie, and patience are, who are not able
to practice them, that are not led into the truth
of these poynts: because that is proper to the holy
Ghost, it is he onely that leades vs into them; it is
he onely that enableth vs so to see them, as to be
fully convinced, so, as to resolue vpon the practice
of them; and therefore you shall finde the Apostle
S. Paul, Ephes. 1. when he revealeth there those
spirituall blessings, that we haue in Christ, when
he had declared many of those glorious priviledges,
in the 18. verse he prayes,Ephes 1. 18. that the eyes of their
vnderstandings might be opened, to see the hope of
their Calling, and the riches of this glorious inheritance
prepared for the Saints, and the exceeding greatnesse

of his power towardes them that beleeue. The
meaning of it is this; when Paul had discovered
all this, sayth he, this labour of mine will be but in
vaine, except the Lord open the eyes of your vnderstanding.
So it is when we preach to you, of
the All-sufficiencie of God, when wee discover to
you those glorious priviledges, that we haue by
Christ, except the Lord open mens eyes, except
he send the spirit of revelation into mens hearts
to discerne those things, except he preach to the
heart, as well as we doe to the eare, it is but lost labour;
sayth the Apostle, if he would open your eyes
to see the hope of your Calling, to see those great
hopes that you haue by reason of your Calling,
to see the riches of that glorious inheritance prepared
for the Saints, it is not onely rich, but abundant
riches. Againe, (sayth he,) to see the exceeding
greatnesse of his power: A man is able to
see some thing, that God is able to doe this, and to
doe that; but to see the exceeding greatnesse of
his power, how farre it reacheth, this none is able
to doe, vnlesse he haue the spirit of revelation, to
open his eyes to see it; That, even as Elisha sayd
to Gehasi^, there are more with vs them against vs.
But how came Gehasie to know that? Elisba prayes
the Lord to open his eyes, and when his eyes were
opened, he saw it visibly: after this manner, the
Lord deales with his children; when such truths as
these are propounded to them, that God is All-sufficient,
yet all this is nothing, except God will open
their eyes, except he will be with them; as he was
with Iob, all that his friends said to him would not

perswade him, till God himselfe spake to him out
of the whirlewinde. When God himselfe will say
to a man as he did to Abraham, I am All-sufficient,
then he perswades him, and not before. And
this, Beloved, is the office of the holy Ghost; it is he
that shewes the Father, and the Sonne, to the sonnes
of men, it is he that glorifies the Father, and the
Sonne. And in this sence he is said to fill them
with Ioy vpon all occasions: for the cause why a
man rejoyceth is, because he is informed of some
good newes, something he is perswaded of, and
when he heareth of it, there followes sudden Ioy;
So when the Apostles were in distres^e, in prison,
when they were in danger, the holy Ghost brought
good newes to them, he revealed to them such
and such things; vpon this revelation, vpon this
good newes that was brought to them, it is oft
said they were filled with Ioy; which is therefore
called the Ioy of the holy Ghost, which the holy Ghost
workes in men by perswasion, by revealing to
them the hope of their Calling, and the riches of their
glorious inheritance, and the exceeding greatnesse of
his power, working in those that beleeue. And therefore
this you must co^sider, that though we preach
to you, and you heare all these truths of Gods All-sufficiencie,
yet you are able to practice nothing,
till Christ reveale it to you. If he come to a man
when he is in a strait, and say to him, as he did to
Paul vpon severall occasions, feare not Paul, I will
be with thee. I say, if he himselfe would come thus
and speake to the heart of a man, that is, if he
would reveale it by his spirit, wee should be able

to practice it, we should be able to stay our selues
vpon him, wee should be able to trust him in his
All-sufficiencie, and would venture vpon any
thing, we should be able to doe our dutie, wee
should be able to suffer persecution, as the Apo^^le
speakes, because we trust in the living God. It is
a certaine and true rule, no man is able to guide
his life aright, his riches, his credit, his libertie aright,
except he be able to neglect them; and no
man is able to neglect them, except he haue some
thing that is better in stead of them; except he see
these two things.
An emptinesse in them.
And a fulnesse some where els.
But now who is able to perswade men of this?
Surely he that perswaded Salomon that all was vanitie;
it is he that must perswade vs; without him
it cannot be done. What was the reason else that
Peter, Andrew, Iohn, and the rest of the Apostles,
were able to forsake all things, when others were
not? Doubtlesle, because they were per^waded
they should finde it againe in Christ, when others
were not so perswaded; flesh and bloud did not
teach them, but the holy Ghost revealed it to them,
that though they had lost all, yet they should find
all, yea, they should finde an hundred fold more.
What was the Reason that Demas, and others,
when they met with persecution, and temporall
preferments in the world, were not able to keepe
on their course, but turned aside, when Paul who
had the same temtations did not? The reason
was, because it was not revealed to Demas, but it

was to Paul; A window was opened to him in
heaven, as it were, to looke into Gods All-sufficiencie,
to see the treasures there, to see Gods power,
and eternitie, and blessednes; and when he walked
in a continuall sight of this All-sufficiencie, Paul
cared not whither he went, nor what became of
him; it was nothing then for him ot passe from
prison to prison, from affliction to affliction.
So, as long as a man walkes in a continuall sight
of Gods All-sufficiencie, as long as he sees him that
is invisible,
so long he is full of comfort, so long he
is able to doe any thing; but when once his sight
is taken from him, when once he is left in darkenesse,
that Torches and Candles begin to appeare
great lights vnto him, (as you know it is in the
darke night,) that is a signe that a man is in darkenesse,
when the feare of men, and the favour of
men, seeme great vnto him: So it will be when
God doth but leaue vs a little, when he doth but
cloud vs, when he withdrawes from vs that light
of his All-sufficiencie, then we are readie to sinke,
and to fayle in our dutie, and to turne aside, to
balke the wayes of righteousnesse. And therefore
if you would haue the vse of this All-sufficiencie,
if you would be perswaded that all things are in
Gods hands, beseech him to teach you to depend
vpon him.
Beloved, it is certaine, that the holiest man that
is, hath as much loue of himselfe as others, they
desire their safetie, as well as others, they desire to
haue libertie, and life, as well as others: but here
is all the difference, they are perswaded that God

is All-sufficient, to restore all these to them, when
they loose them for his sake, when other men are
not so perswaded: they haue a new judgement of
things, they haue another judgement of heavenly
things, and of earthly, they see another vanitie in
the Creatures, and another All-sufficiencie in God,
then other men see, or then they themselues ever
saw before; And this is the reason they are able to
doe that which other men are not able to doe;
and therefore, the way to haue the vse of all this
knowledge, is to seeke to God, to beseech him to
enlighten you, that he would declare this to you,
that he would leade you into this truth; and when
he hath taught you, you shall be able to know all
this, and to know it to purpose. So much for this
first poynt.
As we told you, there are here these two Conclusions:
First; That the iust, and the wise, and their workes
are in the hands of God.
And secondly; That all things come alike to all:
we will take the first as it lyes, and deliver to you
the same poynt, which is this;
That all things, all men, all their wayes, all the
Creatures, with the severall workes of them, are
in the hands of God: for it is thus methodically
set downe; The wise are in the hands of God, and
their workes, and so are the wicked, and their
workes, and so are all the Creatures in his hands,
with all the effects that proceede from them.
This then is the poynt;Doct. 3.
That all things are in Gods hands.All things are in Gods hands.
Now how all things are in Gods hands in generall,
we haue declared to you before: but we will
now deliver it a little more distinctly, that I may
adde some thing to that, which I haue formerly
taught. They are all in the hands of God, that is, originally
in the hands of the Father, and in the
hands of all the persons of the Trinitie, as they
joyne in the deitie, as they are God: but yet, if you
compare this place with some other, you shall see
more distinctly in what manner they are in the
hands of God: They are, I say, originally in the
hands of the Father; but yet they are more immediatly
put into the hands of the Sonne, as he is
Mediator. Therefore compare this place with
Math. 11. 27.Math. 11. 27. All things (sayth he) are given me
of my Father, and none knowes the Sonne, but the Father:
and so likewise with Ioh. 3. 35.Ioh. 3. 35. The Father
loues the Sonne, and hath given all things into his
hands:1 Cor. 15. 24. and with that 1 Cor. 15. 24. you shall see
there this expression; sayth the Apostle, there shall
be an end, when Christ shall giue vp the King dome
into the hands of the Father. The meaning of it is
this, that though all things be in the hands of God,
yet they are all put into the hands of Christ, as he
is Mediator;Psal. 2. 8. and therefore Psal. 2. it is sayd, Aske
of me, and I will giue thee the Heathen for thine inheritance,
and the vtmost parts of the earth for thy possession:
That is, he will giue them into his hands
to doe with them what he pleaseth; So that (to
adde this to that which we haue before delivered)
it will be a profitable poynt for vs to consider, that
though God be All-sufficient, and hath all things

in his hands, yet he hath put all this into the hands
of his Sonne.
You willsay,Quest. what comfort is there in that? or
to what end is it vsefull for vs to know, that they
are in the hands of the sonne, more then that they
are in the hands of the Father?
It is to this purpose;Ans. That you may be more
confident in comming to God, to aske any thing
at his hands: for therefore hath the Lord done it,
that you may come with the more boldnesse: for
Christ hath taken our nature, our flesh; he is neerer
to vs, then God the Father, who dwels in light
inaccessible, he is one whom wee haue knowne,
he dwelt among vs, he is of the same kindred, as
it were, we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone. Now when we shall heare, that all things
are put into his hands, as he is Mediator, as he is
the Angell of the Covenant, we may goe with the
more boldnes, we may haue the more confidence,
that, as wee haue neede and vse of any thing, it
shall not be denied vs: for we know all is in the
hands of him, whom we loue, whom wee feare.
When one heareth that his Prince hath put
all that hee hath into the handes of a friend,
with whom hee is well acquainted, it must
needes glad his heart, and fill him with hope
of obtaining any thing that is fitting for him;
As it was with Iacob, when Ioseph sayd to him,
all this I haue in mine handes, etc. It was a
great comfort to Iacob, that one whom he knew
so well, that was flesh of his flesh, had all things in
his hands: Now this is the comfort wee haue by

it, That the Father hath put all things into the
hands of the Sonne, into the hands of Christ, as he
is Mediator: and this he hath done for these reasons.
First;Reas. 1. That men might glorifie the Sonne, that
men might honour the Sonne, as they honour
the Father, for therefore was it that he would not
keepe all in his owne hands, but gaue them vp into
the hands of the Sonne.
Secondly;Reas. 2. He hath done it, that he might dispence
that All-sufficiencie, that is in himselfe in a
way beseeming himselfe, with that indulgence,
and that mercie, that is sutable to himselfe, and sutable
likewise to our frailtie.Exod 33. 3. And therefore Exodus
33. 3. The Lord said, I will not goe vp with thee,
for thou art a stiffe-necked people, therefore I will not
goe vp with thee, least I consume thee; but I will send
before thee, the Angell of my presence, and he shall goe
vp with thee: As if he should say, I haue pure
eyes, I am not able to see that which I shall see in
thee, but I shall be readie to consume thee; but he
is more indulgent, he is more merciful, he is more
able to beare, because he is made the Mediator,
therefore (sayth he) he shall goe along with thee,
even the Angell of my presence: Whereby you may
see, that the Lord hath put all power into the hands
of the Mediator, that he might dispence it the better
to the sonnes of men.
Thirdly;Reas. 3. He hath done it, that it might be sure
to vs: for if the Lord had made an immediate Covenant
with the sonnes of men, there had be^ne
little hope for vs: Wee should haue broken it, as

Adam did, when the Covenant was made with
him; but he hath put it into the hands of a Mediator,
whom he hath made the Angell, or the Messenger
of his Covenant, that it might be sure to vs,
that is, that the Lord might performe all his promises
to vs, and that we might keepe likewise the
Condition on our part: for therefore Christ is said
to be the Messenger of the Covenant, to dispence
to vs that which God hath put into his hands, partly,
because he is able to reconcile the Father to vs,
(and therefore he is the Priest, that is entred into
the holy of holies, that is, into the very heavens, to
make intercession for vs,) partly also, because he is
able to bring vs in, as a Prophet to enlighten vs in
the knowledge of him, and as a King, to subd^e the
stubbornnesse of our hearts, and enable vs to obey
him; So that the Covenant is immediately made
with him, and not with vs; therefore, all things being
put into his hands, he being the Messenger of
the Covenant, it is made sure to vs, that otherwise
had not beene.
Last of all; The Father hath done it,Reas. 4. that no flesh
might reioyce in it selfe; so sayth the Apostle, he
hath made the Sonne to vs wisedome, righteousnesse,
sanctification, and redemption, that he that reioyceth
might reioyce in the Sonne. And therefore
we see Deut. 8. 18.Deut. 8. 18. how carefull he was to teach
the Israelites this, shewing them, that they were
not brought into that good land for their owne
righteousnesse, but for his Covenants sake, that is,
for the Covenant he made both with them and vs
in Christ, when was manifested to Abraham and
Iacob, but was in the Sonne.
The vse that we are briefly to make of it is this,Vse.
that we should take heede of comming to God
for any part of his All-sufficiencie, except it be in
the name of his Sonne. When you heare that
God is All-sufficient, you must not thinke now to
goe to God immediately, to say Lord be^^ow on
me such and such things, as I want: for in doing
so, what doe we else but draw neere to God, as the
stubble, or the waxe should draw neere to the fire?
who is able to dwell with euer lasting burnings? He is
a consuming fire to the so^nes of men, if they
come to him immediately. But if you come to
him in the name of the Sonne, into whose hands
he hath put all things, he is readie to accept you,
and to grant you whatsoever you aske in his name,
Lev. 17. 5.Levit. 17. 5. it was death for a man, though his sacrifice
was never so good, to offer it without a
Priest; and it is no lesse then death to any man to
come to God without Christ, that is, the Lord doth
not giue life to that man, he doth not raise him
from nature, which is death enough. When we
come to God with out the Sonne, what doe we els
in so doing, but dishonour the Sonne? We giue
him not that honor which his Father would haue
him to haue. What doe we else but robbe him of
that which he hath purchased at a deare rate for
even for this very cause did he suffer* Therefore
(sayth he,) he hath given him a name aboue all
names. What doe we else but reioyce in our selues,
and forget to giue all the glory to Christ? Therefore
whensoever you come to God, still take heede,
that you forget not Christ, but that you come in
his name.
Secondly;Vse 2. As we must not come without him,
so we must come with confidence, and much boldnesse,
if we come in his name; and that especiall
vse is to be made of it in the second place, to come
with boldnes to partake of his All-sufficiencie,
for it is in the hands of the Son, it is in the hands
of a Mediator.
The reason why great things are not done for
vs, notwithstanding God is All-sufficient, is, because
we come not with great faith; If we were
able to beleeue much, it would be to vs according
to our faith. And what is the reason that we come
not with great faith, but because we come not in
the name of Christ? Wee are discouraged in the
sight of our owne weaknesse, or imperfections and
frailties; but if we did looke on Christ, and behold
him, and come in his name, we would come with
a strong faith, and if we did so, it would be according
to our faith. When we come timorously and
fearefully to God, when we come doubting whether
we shall receiue it or no, it is a signe we come
in our owne name; When we come boldly and
confidently, and make no question, but the thing
we aske shall be granted, it is a signe that we come
in the name of Christ; and if we doe so, doe you
thinke he will deny vs? My Beloved, to what end
hath the Father given him all things into his
hands? Why is he made rich with all treasures?
Is it that he might keepe it, and hoard it vp? No,
but it is to bestowe on those that his Father hath
given him amongst men; when a man hath riches
it is a vanitie vnder the Sunne, sayth Salomon, to

keepe them, and hoard them vp; he were as good
not to haue them, as not to vse them; and doe
you thinke that Christ will haue all things given
into his hands for nothing? Is it not to bestow on
vs? Doe you thinke, that he will purchase a thing
at so deare a rate, and when he hath done, make
no vse of it? It is said Phil. 2. 8. 9.Phil. 2. 8. 9. That, because
he tooke vpon him the forme of a servant, and was obedient
to the death of the Crosse, therefore his Father
gaue him a name aboue all names, and therefore he
did thus and thus vnto him, hath he purchased
this for himselfe, for his owne sake? Certainely, it
was not for himselfe, for he had no neede of it,
but he bought it for vs; and will he not make vse
of it, when he hath done? therefore doubt not
when you come in his name, you shall receiue,
and that abundantly too; when wee come in the
name of his Sonne, he is able to deny vs nothing,
onely remember this, that thou come with boldnesse.
It is said,Ephes. 3. 12. Ephes. 3. 12. that we haue this benefit
by Christ, we come with boldnesse and confidence
through faith in him.
If a man through the apprehension and sight of
his owne righteousnesse, of his owne sanctificati
on, that measure of it, that hee hath obtained,
thinke thus with himselfe, I haue thus walked with
God, I haue beene thus perfect, I haue thus farre
kept the way, I haue thus farre denied my selfe,
and therefore I shall be heard. If he goe this way
to worke, he shall finde many objections, much
falsenesse in his heart, much vnevennesse in his
wayes, that will discourage him; therefore so, a

man cannot come with boldnesse. But, sayth he,
you shall come boldly; through whom? through
^aith in Christ, that is, if you come in Christ, consider
that you are in Covenant with him, that you
come in his name, that it is he you present to the
Father, when you aske any thing at his hands,
and thus you may come with boldnesse, what objection
soever there can be made, they will be all
easily answered in Christ.
Then last of all,Thankfulnes. if it be in Christ, if it be put into
his hands immediately, then whensoever you
receiue any thing, let him haue the sacrifice of
prayse, let it adde some new loue, and some new
ingagement, and thankefulnesse to the Sonne.
The Father hath done it for that purpose, that the
Sonne might be honoured, that the Sonne might
be magnified, that wee might learne to loue the
Sonne, to serue the Sonne, as we doe the Father;
and therefore whensoever we obtaine any thing
at his hands, let vs be thankfull to the Sonne; Labour
to see his grace abounding towards vs, and
our hearts abounding to him in thankfulnesse,
and in all the fruits of obedience. So much likewise
shall serue for this poynt.
Now we come to the next Conclusion, All
things come alike to all; The same condition is to the
iust, as to the wicked, and to the good and pure, and
to the polluted, to him that sacrificeth, and to him that
sacrificeth not; such as the good is, so is the sinner, he
that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath. Hence I
gather thus much (before I come to speake of the
application of these events to the sonnes of men,)
That All men are divided into these two rankes,Doct. 3.either they are good or bad,All men divided into two Rankes.either they are polluted or
cleane, either they are such as sacrifice, or such as sacrifice
not: There is no middle sort of men in the
world; all are either sheepe, or goates, all are either
within the Covenant, or without the Covenant,
all are either elect, or reprobates; God hath
divided all the world into these two, either they
are the Lords portion, or the Devils portion.
There are some Reasons of it.
One is;Reas. 1. That God hath made all men to be vessels
of honour, or of dishonour, there is no vessell of
an indi^^erent or middle vse.
Againe;Reas. 2. Who are they that divide the world?
God and Sathan: Either you belong to God, and
are his portion (as Deut. 32. 9.Deut. 32. 9. His people are his
portion,) or you are the Devils portion.
And so likewise may we reason from the two
principles,Reas. 3. either a man is borne of the flesh, or of the
spirit; if he be borne of the spirit, he is spirituall,
and if he be borne of the flesh, he is fleshly. And
therefore in one of these two conditions hee must
needes be; which I obserue for this purpose.
First,Vse 1. you see hence then, that there are but two
places hereafter for men, as there are but two
rankes of men; there is no middle place, as the
Papists affirme, there is no Purgatorie, or Limbus,
either for the Fathers before Christ, or for Children
now; As they are all in one of these two
rankes, in one of these two conditions, so there
are but two places into which all men are divided,
some to the one, and some to the other.
But secondly;Vse 2. The chiefest vse that wee are to
make of it is this; If it be so, if a mans condition
must be one of these two, that either he is within
the dore in the Kingdome of God, or without, that
though some are come neere the Kingdome of
God, some are farther off among those that are
without. And againe, among those that are within
the doore, some are farther in, some are not so
farre, some haue proceeded farther into the Temple,
some a lesse way, yet there are none in a middle
way, but all are either within, or without, let
vs then learne to consider, what our condition is,
let not our perswasion and opinion of our selues,
hang betweene both, but let vs come to this conclusion,
to this disiunctiue proposition, Either I
am in the number of those that are good, or that
are bad; either I am within the Covenant or without;
and so consider in which of these two conditions
we are: Men are exceeding apt in this case
to deceiue themselues; and therefore when the Apostle
hath occasion to speake of this, he premiseth
that still, Be not deceived, such and such shall not
inherit the Kingdome of God:Ephes. 5. 6. and so in Ephes. 5. 6.
Let no man deceiue you with vaine words; for, for
such things comes the wrath of God vpon the children
of disobedience: That is, men are exceeding apt to
deceiue themselues; to be pure in their owne eyes,
when they are not yet clensed from their filthinesse,
to thinke their estate good, when it is not;
and therefore, beware, take heede that it be not so
with you. What a miserable condition is it, that
when a man hath beene at the paines to set vp a

large building, he should then loose all his labour
for want of a good foundation? that a man should
do as the foolish Virgins, get oyle in their Lamps,
and make a great blaze for a time, and when they
come to the very poynt, to the dore, to the gate,
then to be excluded: Nay, what a folly is it for a
man to deceiue himselfe in this. It may be, a man
out of the corruption of his nature, may be willing
to deceiue another; but for a man to deceiue
himselfe, it is exceeding great folly. And truely,
as it is said of flattery, none can be flattered by another,
till first he flatter himselfe; So no man can
be deceived by another, till first he be willing to
deceiue himselfe. Therefore take heede of deceiving
your selues.
Beloved, there is a great backwardnesse in vs to
come to the tryall; as a crazie bodie will not indure
the tryall of the weather; as a weake eye will
not indure the light, for it is offensiue to it; So
when the heart is not sound, this tryall, this searching,
this examining of the heart, it is tedious,
grieuous, and burthensome; but yet, Beloved, it is
profitable, it is that which makes vs sound in the
faith, we must come to it sooner or latter, and it is
best for vs to come to it, while we haue time to
helpe it, if we finde things amisse. To haue a great
fraight, and to make shipwracke in the Haven,
were a greatfolly; and therefore we should looke
to the Barke, and see whether it be sound or no.
To see in what estate we are, in which of these
conditions we are.
You will say to me,Quest. how shall we know?
I will name you but these foure wayes of tryall,Answ.
that are named here: the Wiseman makes this difference
of men,Fouretryals. some are good, and some are evill,
some are cleane, and some are polluted, some sacrifice,
others sacrifice not, some are carelesse of
an oath, others feare an oath. Wouldest thou
know then in which of these two ^ankes of men
thou art? Consider then whether thou be a good
man or an evill man, that is one distinction.
Goodnesse consists in these foure things.
 First;Goodnesse which consists in foure things. The tree must be good, as you haue it in
Math. 7. 16. 17. that is, a man then is said to be a
good man, when there is a good sap in him, when
there is some thing in him that is good, when
there are some supernaturall graces wrought in
him,Mat. 7. 16. 17. he that is not emptie of these, he is a good
 man: as it is said of Barnabas, he was a good man;
and how was that proved? he was full of faith, and
the holy Ghost. See then whether thou hast an emptie
heart or no. You say a thing is good for nothing,
when it is emptie of that excellencie, that
should be in it; when Wine hath not that in it,
that belongs to wine, you say it is naught; and
so we say of all things else; When a man therefore
hath not that in him that belongs to a man,
that is, to a man, as he was created in innocency,
he is wicked and naught, a sonne of Beliall: but
when he hath a blessing in him, as grapes haue
wine in them, when he hath supernaturall grace
wrought in his heart, when he hath the new Adam
putting into his heart, the sap of grace and life, then
he is good. Therefore see whether there be somewhat

put into thee, more then is in thee by nature,
see whether thou finde the new Adam effectually
to co^municate new sap to thee, new grace,
and new light to thee, as the old Adam hath communicated
corruption; See whether thou be made
a good tree or no: for it is the tree, that makes the
fruit good, and not the fruit, that makes the tree
good; So it is the man, that justifieth his worke,
and not the worke, that justifieth the man: and
therefore thou must first see, whether thou be in
the Covenant, whether thou hast this seale, that
thou seest some thing put into thee, which thou
hast not by nature. Every man by nature is emptie:
when grace is put into him, then he is said to
be good. As it is good wine, when it is full of spirit,
when it hath that in it, that belongs to wine;
So he is a good man, that hath that in him, which
belongs to him in his regenerate estate.
Secondly; Consider whether thou bring forth 
good fruit, that is, not onely whether thou doest
good actions, but whether they flow from thee,
whether they grow in thine heart as naturally, as
fruit growes on the tree, that flowes from the sap
within. When a man not onely doth good works,
but when he is zealous of them, it is his meate and
drinke to doe them, when they flow from him, as
water from the fountaine, then he is a good man:
for if the tree be good, that is, if the heart be good,
a man will be as readie, and will as naturally bring
forth good fruit, as the tree, the Vine, or the Figtree
bring forth their fruit.
The third thing you shall see in the 2 Tim. 2.2. Tim. 2. 21.

vessels are said to be good, to be vessels of honour;
when they are prepared to every good worke; So
when a man is good, and brings forth good fruit,
and not onely brings it forth, but if there be any
occasions to put forth the goodnesse, that is in
him, he is parepared for it, as a vessell is prepared
for such a turne, for such a service. The word in
the originall signifieth, when a man is fashioned,
as a vessell is fashioned: and the meaning of the
holy Ghost is therefore to shew, that then a man is
good, when his heart is fitted to good workes,
when he knowes how to goe about them, whereas
another bungles at them, and knowes not how
to doe them, he is prepared for them; and therefore
there needs no more, but to put him and the
good worke together, and he is readie to performe
it.
 The last is;Act. 10. 38. When there is not onely a readines,
but practice vpon all occasions, when a man doth
good, as it is sayd, that Iesus Christ went about doing
good. And therefore he is a good man that is a vsefull
man, such a man that every one fares the better
for, such a man as is serviceable to God and profitable
to men. Before regeneration when a man
is a stranger to this goodnesse, he onely serues
himselfe, he is full of selfe-loue, all his ends are to
looke to himselfe, that he may be kept safe; he
cares not what becomes of any thing els, so it be
well with him; but when once goodnesse comes
into his heart, it hath this fruit, he goes about doing
good; because grace brings that principle into
the heart, that never grew there before, that it

the loue of God and man; whereas before there
was nothing but selfe-loue in him, which plant
growes naturally in the garden of nature, when
grace comes, it brings loue with it, and that loue
makes vs vsefull, and serviceable both to God and
man, So that whatsoever a man hath, what gifts,
what knowledge, what authoritie he hath, he is
readie to vse it for the good of others. As the Apostle
saith of One simus in the Epistle to Philemon;
Now he is profitable to thee and mee, whereas
before he was vnprofitable: So it may be said of all
Saints; when once this goodnesse is put into them,
now they are profitable to God and man; they doe
serue God and man with their fatnesse, and with
their sweetnesse, before they were vnprofitable to
others, but now they are profitable both to themselues
and others.
This is the first note, by which you may know
your selues: Art thou a good and vsefull man,
dost thou goe about doing good, doe those fare
the better for thee, with whom thou hast to doe,
dost thou spend the fatnesse, and the sweetnesse,
that God hath given thee, to serue God and man
with it, then conclude thou art in the ranke
of those that are the Lords portion, otherwise
thou art yet without the Covenant,
thou art yet in the gall of
bitternes. The other three
I must deferre till the
afternoone.
So much for this time.



THE
SECOND
SERMON.

ECCLESIASTES 9. 1. 2. 3.
I haue sarely given my heart to all this, etc.

WEE will now proceede to the second
difference which remaineth;
and that is this;
Consider whether thou bee
cleane and pure in heart, or polluted;
There is the same condition
to the pure, and to the polluted.
 Now what it is to be cleane,Difference. 1 Cor. 6. 11. or to be washed,
you shall see 1 Cor. 6. 11. And such were some of you:
That is, you were polluted with those sins, there
named, but now (sayth he) you are washed. And
wherein stands this washing? He tels vs it stands
in these two things: Now you are iustified; now you
are sanctified. You are iustified through the name of
Christ; and sanctified through the spirit of our God.

So then, he is a pure man, or a cleane man, that is
first washed from the guilt of his sinnes, that is,
that hath no sinne lying vpon his Conscience,
that hath not a polluted Conscience, which is a
phrase vsed Titus 1.Titus 1. whose mindes and consciences
are defiled. Now defilement, or pollution is in the
Conscience, as Divines say, as a thing that is
knowne is in the facultie, or vnderstanding that
knowes it; and therefore the man that hath committed
any sinne, which yet continues vpon his
owne score, which his Conscience is yet guiltie
of, and for which he hath not yet gotten an acquittance
from Almightie God, he is an impure man,
he is yet vncleane; for he is not yet washed from his
filthinesse.
A man againe that hath gotten any assurance
of forgiuenesse, so that all his sinnes are put vpon
the reckoning of Iesus Christ, and there are none
that lye vpon his owne score, a man who hath
made all his reckonings even with God, and hath
some assurance therof such a man is washed from
his filthinesse. Such a phrase you haue likewise in
Ezech. 36. 25.Ezek. 36. 25. I will cleanse you (or wash you) from
all your Idols: That is, from all your Idolatrie, from
all the sinnes that you haue co^mitted, I will wash
you, that is, with imputation, or sprinkling of the
bloud of Christ.
The second cleannesse, is, when a man is not 
onely washed with the imputation of the bloud
of Christ, and the assurance of pardon, but also
when he is washed from the staine of sinne, when
he is sanctified through the spirit, when sinne is

mortified in him, when it is as well healed, as forgiven.
And therefore if thou wouldest know whether
thou art a cleane man or polluted, consider
also this, whether thou hast a cleane heart or no,
that is, whether thou hast such an habituall disposition
of puritie and cleannesse, that thou canst
not indure to looke vpon any sinne, no more then
a man, that is of a neate and cleane disposition,
can indure to see filthines, whether thou hast such
a disposition, as that although thou be sprinkled
with sinne from day to day, though thou be fowled
and spotted with it, yet thou sufferest it not to
abide in thy heart; thy heart workes it out, as we
sayd to you before.
So that this you are to obserue, to finde out the
cleannesse of a mans disposition, whether he can
looke vpon sinne, as an vncleane thing, as a thing
from which his soule hath an aversion, as a thing
that he abhorres, that is, although there be some
thing in him, that loues it, that delights in it, that
likes it, yet the prevailing part of the soule abhorres
it. Both the cleane and polluted may forsake
sinne, and may turne away from sinne, and
therfore in that the difference is not seene, but the
difference is in this, that thou art able to hate and
abhorre sinne, to looke on it as a thing that is filthy
and vncleane.Simile. A Marchant, you know, will
cast out his goods, when he is in danger of his life,
but he hates not his goods; So a man may cast away
sinne, when it puts him in danger of ^inking
into hell, or of the judgements of men. It is one
thing to part with sinne, and another thing to hate
sinne.
A man may withdraw himselfe from sinne,It is not leaving but hating of sinne that sheweth puritie. he
may giue it over, he may seeme to be divorced
from it, and yet he may haue a monthes mind after
it, he may doe with it still, as the husband of
Michall, when shee was taken from him, yet,
sayth the Text, he came weeping after her a far off,
he longed after her still, and loved her still; So a
man may part with his sinne after such a manner,
that still he goes weeping after it, he would haue
it againe, he would faine inioy it, if it were not
for some greater danger, or some greater trouble
that he exposeth himselfe vnto; as you see in Phaltiel,
it was not for want of loue to his wife, that
he parted with her, but it was out of a desire he had
to saue himselfe, to escape the danger of the Kings
wrath, imprisonment, and death, that would haue
followed vpon it. Therefore consider what hatred
you haue of sinne, and by that you must judge
whether you haue a cleane disposition or no.
You must not thinke any man is perfectly cleane,
and pure, but he is a cleane man, that suffers not
any impuritie to take quiet possession of his heart,
although he haue vncleane thoughts and vncleane
affections (as all sinfull thoughts and affections
are) though sinne may passe through his heart, as
they passed through the Temple, yet he suffereth
it not to set vp Tables in the Temple, to set vp an
Idoll in his heart, he suffereth it not to make any
breach of Covenant with God, to be adulterous against
him; though there may be many glances,
some adulterous and vncleane actions, that is
not the thing that breakes the Covenant, when

the heart is still wedded to God, and chooseth God,
and no other. And therefore, I say, in that it is not
seene, but consider what thy disposition is, whether
thou hate that sinne all the while. A man that
is of an impure spirit, of an impure heart, when he
is with impure company, when he delights himselfe
with impure thoughts, then he is where he
would be, he is then in his owne element, and
when he is otherwise, he is where he would not be*
On the other side, he that hath an habituall disposition
of purenesse and cleannesse, though he may
be transported to those acts of sinne and pollution,
yet his heart hates it, he is not where he would
be all the while, he is not vpon his owne center,
his heart still fights against it, and resists it; therefore
consider with thy selfe, what thy heart is in
this case, whether thou haue a heart that hates vncleannesse,
or whether thou hast yet a swinish disposition,
that thou lyest in the mud, and delightest
to lye in it.
A man may fall into the mud, but he delighteth
not to be there; no more will a cleane disposition
delight in sinne. And you may know it by this
effect, where the disposition is vncleane, there
sinne abides, till it staine the heart, till it make a
man spotted of the world, that is, it causeth him to
keepe a tract in sinne, that a man may say, this is
the path he walketh in, it causeth him to weare the
livery of sinne, that he may be knowne by it from
day to day, it causeth the spot so to sinke into the
soule, that a man may see he is such a man. This is
to haue an vncleane disposition, when vncleannesse

so cleaues to his soule, that they agree together:
whereas in a man that hath a pure disposition,
it is not so; as,1 Ioh (...). 1 Ioh. 3. 3. he that hath this hope
purifieth himselfe: The meaning is this, there is a
double hope; there is the hope of the hypocrite,
that is a dead hope, that doth not set a man on
worke to cleanse himselfe from fil^hinesse. There
is againe,1 Pet. 1. 3. a liuely hope, spoken of in 1 Pet. 1. 3. that
sets a man on worke to clense himselfe; that is,
when a man hath a true hope, a reall hope to haue
that vndefiled inheritance, he considers this with
himselfe, that an impure heart, and an vndefiled
inheritance will not stand together, and because
he hopes for it in good earnest, (it is not a false
hope, it is not a dead hope) therefore he sets himselfe
on worke indeede to purifie himselfe; he that
hath that hope purifieth himselfe, he cleanseth himselfe.
Who ever therefore doth not purifie himselfe,
it is an argume^t that his hope is dead which
he hath of being saved, it is but the hope of an hypocrite;
a hope that will stand him in no steede;
for it brings forth no endevour: that is the second
thing. I must be briefe in this, because this is not
the poynt I intend, but that which followes.
The third expression here vsed,Difference. is, he that sacrificeth,
and he that sacrificeth not. This is but a Synecdoche,
where one particular is put for all other
kindes of holy duties; But the meaning is this;
you shall know a man by this, in which of the two
conditions he is, he whose heart is vpright with
God, he dares not omit any holy ordinance, he
dares not omit any sacrifice, he dares not performe

forme them in a slight and negligent manner.
He againe whose heart is false, sacrificeth not, that
is, either he omits the dutie, or else he omits the
substance and life of the dutie. You know in Iam.
2. 10.Iam. 2. 10. he sayth there, he that abideth in all, that
keepes all the Commandements, and yet fayles in one,
he is guiltie of all* and so you may say of the ordinances,
he that keepes them, he that observeth
them, but yet fayles in one, it is argume^t enough,
that he makes not Conscience of any. You shall
finde this true, that whosoever he is, that sacrificeth
not, that is, he that prayes not constantly,
he that heares not, he that reades not the Scriptures,
he that sanctifieth not Gods Sabbaths, he that
partaketh not of the Sacraments, etc. he that vseth
not holy Conference, and fasting, and prayer
in its season, such a man is in an evill condition;
It is given here as a note of an evill man, he
sacrificeth not.
But you will say to me*Ob. may not a man, whose
heart is vnsound, keepe a constant course in sacrificing
to the Lord, that is, in praying to the Lord?
May he not keepe those ordinances constantly?
Beloved,Answ. I answer; He may keepe them constantly,
that is, he may doe the outside of the dutie,
he may performe the dutie in a formall manner;
and many times men are deceived with this,
it is an vsuall case, (nothing more vsuall in the
Church of God,) for a man to content himselfe
with a perfunctory, ordinary performance, a customary
performance of good duties* But herein
Sathan deceiues men, as we deceiue children,

when we take from them gold and silver, that is
truely precious, and giue them Counters, things
that haue no worth in them; onely they haue a
good glosse vpon them, which quiets them, because
they be children, because they cannot put a
difference betweene things of show, and things of
true worth; for even thus Sathan vsually quiets
the Consciences of men, with these bare formes
of pietie, because they are not able to discerne,
not able to distinguish betweene the precious duties,
and the right performance of them, and betweene
the formall and emptie performance,
which hath an outward splendour and glittering
shew of performance; but in truth he cozens and
deceiues men with it; therefore, I say, a man may
doe these duties, he may be constant in prayer
from day to day, he may be constant in hearing,
and performing all the ordinances of God, in sacrificing
(as the Wiseman speakes here,) yet for all
this, not be one of these good men, according to
this note, because he doth not performe them in
a holy and spirituall manner.
You will say to me,Quest. how shall I know that?
You shall know it thus;Ans. when the ordinances
of God are spiritually performed, when holy duties
are performed in a holy manner,How to know when we performe Gods Ordinances aright. you shall finde
these effects in them:
First;Ier* 23. 29. They are a fire to heate the heart; as in 
Iere. 23. my word is as fire.
Againe, They quicken the heart, when it is 
dead, heavie, and dull, and indisposed to any good
dutie, they raise and quicken it.
 Againe; They build vs vp; we are g^iners by
them, wee grow more rich both in grace and
knowledge:Iud^ 20. Iude. 20. verse, Edifie your selues in
your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost; As if
he should say, that will edifie you: and you know
what Christ sayes,Mar. 4. 24. take heede how you heare, for
to him that hath, more shall be given; that is, he
that heares as he ought to heare, every time that
he heares he growes something more rich, he
gaines some more saving knowledge, some greater
degree of saving grace.
 Againe; The ordinances of God heale the soule;
They heale the distempers of it, they compose it
and put it into a good frame of grace:Iob. 15. 3. 4. as in Iob 15.
3. 4. sayth Eliphas there to Iob, dost thou dispute
with words not comely, etc. with talke that is not
profitable, surely, sayth he, thou restrainest prayer
from the Almightie; As if he should say, Iob, if thou
diddest pray, thou wouldest not fall into these distempered
speeches, as thou dost; thy heart would
not be so disordered, thou wouldest not be so passionate
and froward, as thou art; therefore surely
thou restrainest prayer. Whence I gather, that
duties performed as they should be, compose
the heart, and heale those d^stempers.
 Againe; They make the heart fruitfull; and
therefore they are compared to raine, that fals
vpon the earth, and comes not in vaine.
 Againe; They teach vs to disti^guish betweene
good and evill, to divide the flesh and the spirit; still
a man sees somwhat more then he did in his owne
heart, he sees the good, that is in it, and the corruption,
that is in it.
Lastly; They cleanse the heart, yea the heart of 
a young man, where lusts are strong, where the
staine is deepe, and will not out without Fullers
sope,Psal. 119. 9. David Psal. 119. 9. sayth, that the Word clenseth
the heart, etc. Wherewith shall a young man
clense his heart, etc.
Now then examine thy selfe, whether thou so
performest these ordinances, and holy duties,
that God commands thee, that thou finde these
effects of them; If thou dost, then thou art one that
sacrificeth, if otherwise, then thou art one that sacrificeth
not; and therefore consider whether thy
heart be warmed by them; If they be to thee as
painted fire, such as hath no heate, thou dost not
sacrifice, it is but an outward forme; consider if
they quicken thy heart, or if it be as dead, and as
backward, and as indisposed to good duties, and
as prone to things that are evill, after thou hast
performed them as before, if so, though thou
seeme to sacrifice, yet thou art of the number of
those that sacrifice not: dost thou finde it doth not
divide the flesh, and the spirit, that it is as a ^word
without an edge, that it is as salt, that biteth not,
which doth not clense the heart? it is an argument
thou dost not performe them, as thou shouldest;
for there is a sharpnesse in holy ordinances, that
makes vs sound in the faith, because it discovers to
vs the secret corruptions of the heart. Dost thou
finde thy lusts as strong, as they were? are they
not clensed out? it is a signe thou dost not vse the
scowring as thou shouldest; and so we may say of
all the rest. Dost thou finde the word to fall vpon

thy heart, as the raine fals vpon the earth, or as
vpon a stone, that sinkes not into it, that makes it
not more fruitfull? Dost thou finde that thou dost
heare from day to day, and yet art not richer in
grace, and in knowledge; That it cannot be sayd
to thee, that thou hast so much more, as thou hast
heard more? Dost thou finde that prayer builds
thee not vp, that thou gettest not some strength,
some strong resolution, that thou confirmest not
thy Covenant with God, thy purpose of abstaining
from sinne, and the like, that there is not somewhat
added to that spirituall building? thou art
in the number of those that sacrifice not, though
thou keepe a constant course in performing religious
duties. So much likewise shall serue for
this.
 The last expression is, He that sweareth, and he
that feareth an oath. That which is said of this sinne,Difference.
may be applyed likwise to all others, and so here
is a fourth difference betwixt the good and bad.
A man who is within the Covenant, hath this
propertie, that he feares sinne, and dares not meddle
with it, that is, he will not neglect looking to
his heart, he will not be negligent in keeping a
Watch over his heart, and over his wayes, but
hath a continuall eye vpon sinne, as we say Timor
^igens oculos, etc. what a man feares, he will be
sure to haue a continuall eye vnto it.
If a man be about a busines, and there be any
thing that he feares, he will neglect his worke to
haue an eye vpon that, whatsoever it be. If a man
feare sinne, he will be very diligent in watching

himselfe, in taking heede that sinne come not vpon
him by the by, with some by-blow, that he
looked not for; such a man hath a continuall eye
vpon sinne, he is exceeding diligent in looking to
his heart and wayes; when another man neglects
it, and therefore easily slips into sinne, now into
an oath, now into Sabbath-breaking, sometimes
to the omission of prayer, sometimes to the lust
of vncleann^sse, sometimes to lying and dissembling,
sometimes to one sinne, sometimes to another;
and the reason is, because he is negligent.
The foolish goes on and is carelesse, that is, he feares
not sinne, and therefore he neglects, having an eye
to sinne.
Now that you may finde out more distinctly,
what this feare is, consider this, he that feares, he
doth not onely feare the sinne it selfe, but he feares
any thing that he hath a suspition of, he feares any
thing that is doubtfull; if it be such a thing, as may
be evill to him, he feares it; So, a man that feares
sinne, though it be not cleare to him, though he
be not fully convinced that such or such a thing
is a sinne, yet if he be one that feares sinne, he
will not meddle with it.Simile. Put the case he doubt
whether the Sabbath should be so strictly kept,
notwithstanding* because he is doubtfull of it, he
will not meddle with it. Put the case, he doubt
whether gaming is to be vsed, if he feares, he dares
not meddle with it. As if there should be intimation
given to a man, that such a cup or such a dish
were poysoned, he would not meddle with it, because
he feareth it, he feareth death, he feareth

sicknesse, so a man that feareth sinne, if there be
but a su^pition of it, though others swallow it
without making any bones of it, yet he dares not;
and therefore consider what thou doest in that
case.
Besides, when a man feares, he not onely feares
the thing, but that which may make way to it: for
feare, you know, sets the heart to prevent evill to
come; the object of it, 18, Malum ^uturum, whereas
the object of griefe, is present evill; so it is also
with those that feare sinne. Put the case, sinne be
farre off from a man, yet if he feare it, he will not
come neere the occasions, that might leade him
to it,Exod. 23. 10. but keepes himselfe farre from it (as in Exod.
we are commanded, keepe thy selfe farre from an evill
matter,) he dares not suffer his thoughts to
wander, he dares no gaze vpon vnlawfull objects,
he dares not come into company with them,
that will infect him, he dares not come neare the
traine, though he be farre off the blow. Thus a man
is affected that feares. And hence it is that when
a man is possessed with a disposition of feare, he
doth not onely feare for a fit, but if it be a thing
that he naturally feares, it is a constant feare, he
feares it at all times.
You shall finde evill men may feare by fits. Ahab
feared, when Eliah brought a terrible message
to him, he feared and humbled himselfe: So Phar^oh
feared, when Moses brought vpon him those
heavie iudgements, and plagues; but these feares
of theirs were as mists, which cleared vp againe,
that continued not; and therefore you haue that

expression in the Proverbes, Blessed is the man that
feareth alwayes; as if he should say,Prov. 2^. 14. by this we shew
the sinceritie of our feare, that we doe not feare by
fits, but feare alwayes.
The ground of it is this; such a man feares onely
the wrath of God, he feare^ onely the evill, and
therefore when that is taken away, he feares no
more; but with the godly man it is quite contrarie,
he feares the Lord and his goodnesse,H^sea 3. 5. Hosea 3. 5.
and therefore when there is an end of evill and afflictions,
when the feare of that is blowne over*
when goodnesse comes in the roome of it, when
God beginnes to shew mercie to him, to giue him
health, and peace, and quietnesse, when he is rid
of his sicknes, of his troubles, crosses, and calamities,
his feare doth not cease, (as the feare of Ahab
did,) but he feares God still, yea he feares him now
more then ever. The more Gods goodnesse is increased
towards him, the more he feares; because
the more his loue is increased, the more his tendernesse
of Conscience is increased, the more
sweetnesse he findes in God, and therefore the more
he is afraid to loose it, the more he is afraid of any
breaches betweene God and him. This you shall
finde in those that feare.
Againe; You shall finde a difference in the object,
the thing that they feare. When the feare of
God, and the feare of men, shall come in competition,
there is the tryall; When a man shall be
threatned by man with death, when he shall be
threatned with the losse of his goods, the losse of
libertie, the losse of any thing that is precious vnto

to him, and on the other side* God shal^ threaten
eternall death. The question now i^, whether of
the^e he will feare most? mortall man, whose breath
is in his nostrils, or the eternall God, whether shall
sway him most; The feare of man* which is a s^are
on the one side, or the feare of God, and disobedience
to him on the other side. When thou art put
vpon such a strait, (...) a tryall, that thou must offend
one of them; consider what thou doest in this
case. You know what Christ sayth, feare not men,
the (...) that they can doe, is but to take away
life, but feare God, for he can cast thee into hell.
Now therefore, examine thy selfe, whether thou
fe^re men in such a case, when a good conscience
is to be kept* and thereby some evill is to be vndergone
from men, whether thou wilt rather adventure
that, or the wrath and vengeance of Almightie
God, etc. And (which is of the same nature)
whether a man (...) the doing of evill* or
the suffering of evill most, whether a ^a^feare
sinne or crosses more, when they come in competition,
you shall finde this, he that is most fearefull
of (...), he is m^st bold in all things else.
And on the contrary; he that feares other things
most, he feareth sinne least; and the reason of this
is, because a godly man lookes vpon sinne, as the
maine; he knows that toucheth him in the maine,
it toucheth him in his freehold, and therefore, if
he be to vndergoe povertie, disgrace, imprisonment,
if it be death, any of these things, he feares
them not* (for, sayth he, thes^ are lesse evils, these
touch me not in the maine,) but if it be sinne, he

lookes on that, as the greatest evill, and therefore
feares it aboue all things.
So now by this, thou shalt know what thy feare
is, whether thou feare the doing of evill, or the
suffering of evill.
Last of all, consider whether thou feare the word
of God, when there is nothing but the meere word,
when there is nothing but meere threatnings;Isa. 66. 2. as
in Isa. 66. 2. I will looke to them that tremble at my
Word. If thou feare onely the actuall affliction,
the judgement, the crosse, when it pincheth thee,
and is vpon thee, any naturall man is able to doe
that; but the wise man sees it before, he beleeues
the threatning, he sees it in the cloud, before it be
shed downe in the storme, he feares the word of
God, and trembles at it, because he beleeueth it,
when others beleeue it not. Therefore consider by
this, whether thou be such a one as feares sinne,
whether thou hast all these properties of true
feare, or whether on the other side, thou art carelesse
of sinne, whether thou be one that sweares, or
one that feares an oath. So much shall serue for this
poynt; All things come alike to all; and the same condition
to the iust as to the wicked, etc.
The next poynt, that we haue to obserue out of
these words, is this;Doct. 4. For the time of this life, there
are the like events to good men, as to the wicked:Things fall out alike to good and bad in this life.
That is, though God be All-sufficient, though he
make good his All-sufficiencie to the Saints, so
that he is a Sunne and a Shield vnto them, and no
good thing is wanting to them, nor any evill thing
can come neere them, yet for all this, for the time

of this life, in this world, there are the like events
to both, he deales with the one, as with the other.
This is his common course, as the Wiseman expresseth
it both here, and in other places. In the
11. verse of this Chapter, I obserue, sayth he, and
I see, that the Race is not alwayes to the swi^t, nor the
battaile to the strong, nor Riches to a man of vnderstanding,
nor fav^ur to men of knowledge, etc. but he
that is weake gets the battaile, and he that is more
vnwise gets favour, etc. So, he that deserues the
best, misseth it, and he that deserues the worst,
obtaines it. So, likewise in the 8. Chapter, you
shall see this fully, if you compare that and the
latter end of this ninth Chapter together;Chap. 8. 9. 10. There is,
sayth he, a man that rules to his owne hurt, and to
the hurt of others; yet, sayth he, this man continues
in it, yea, he continues in it in peace, even to
his graue, and not so onely, but when he is gone,
and is come from the holy place, that is, the place of
Magistracie, (that is there called the holy place,)
it is all forgotten; though he had done evill, yet he
continued in peace, and died in peace, and after
also there was no blemish cast vpon him, but it is
forgotten; this I haue seene, sayth Salomon.
Againe, you shall finde it as true on the contrary
side; I haue seene, sayth he, a poore man that was
wise, that hath delivered a Cittie, when a great King
had made forts against it: That is, though he were
a poore man, yet through his wisedome, he delivered
it from a great King; but, sayth he, this also
was forgotten; The poore man was forgotten, and
so the good ruler was forgotten, and the evill ruler

was forgotten. And as it is said of the ruler, so it
is said of the errour which comes from the face
of the ruler; I haue seene, sayth Salomon, a vanitie
vnder the Sunne, that ariseth from the face of the
ruler, that is, from the errour of the Ruler. What
is that? Folly is set in great excellencie, and the rich
set in low place. I haue seene servants on horse backe,
and Princes walking as servants on the ground,
Chap. 10. 6. 7. That is,Chap. 10. 6. 7. those that were holy and
good, they were rich, how poore soever they seemed
to be, they were wise, howsoever the world
accounted of them, they were Princes, though
the world reckoned them as servants: And on the
other side, those that were evill, they were poore,
though they appeared to be never so rich, they
were base, though they seemed to be never so noble,
they were foolish, though they seemed to
haue the repute of wisedome. Now, sayth he, I
haue seene these servants on horse-backe, sitting
in great excellencie, when others, though they
were Princes, haue beene set in low places, and
haue walked like servants on foote. Thus you see,
that all things come alike to all, so the Lord disposeth
it; If you looke to the condition of things,
you shall see, that all bastards escape not afflictions,
and againe, that many sonnes haue but little
affliction.
You shall see againe, that not all evill men haue
prosperitie, nor all good men are followed with
adversitie; but God disposeth these things promiscuously.
You shall see Iosiah, a good King,Instances. slaine with an

Arrow, when he changed his cloths, and covered
himselfe, and dissembled his person, even as well
as Ahab was.
You shall see no difference in the case, as it is
decribed 2 Chron. 35. the same condition fell to2 Chro. 35. 23
them both, they both disguised themselues, the
Archers both shot at random, God directed the
Arrowes to both of them, both were sicke and
wounded in their Chariots, both were carried
out of the battaile, yet the one a very good King,
and the other a wicked King.
You see againe Ioseph was put in Prison for his
innocencie, as well as Pharaohs Butler and Baker
were for their offences.
You see Moses and Aaron were excluded out of
the land of promise, as well as murmuring rebellious
Israell: the same condition was to the one as
to the other.
If againe you looke vpon the good successe of
men, you shall finde it the same. You shall finde
Nebuchadnezzar prevailing, and raigning fortie
yeares in pro^peritie, as well as you see King David
raigning forty yeares, and Gods hand was with
him to blesse him in all this. All this you see vnder
the Sunne. Onely this you are to obserue, that it is
but for a time, that the Lord doth this; he doth it
not alwayes; this is not the constant condition,
either of the one or of the other; and therefore
you must know, (that this truth may be cleare to
you) that God vseth a libertie in these two things.God vseth a libertie in two things.
 First,In Election he vseth a libertie in Election; he chooseth
one and refuseth another; and that for no other

reason, but because it pleased him.
Secondly; in his punishing and rewarding the 
sonnes of men,In punishme^t, and rewardes, in two things. elect, and reprobate, he vseth a libertie
in these two things.
First; In the time of their afflictions and rewards.
And secondly; in the manner and qualitie of 
their rewards and punishments.
In the substance it selfe he vseth no libertie at
all; but this is an infallible rule, that will be alwayes
true, That he rewards every man according to
his worke, he rewards the good, according to his
worke, and he rewards the evill, according to his
worke: but yet, I say, with this difference, in the
time he vseth a libertie, it may be, he deferreth the
rewarding of such a man a long time, he deferres
likewise the punishme^t of such a one a long time;
with others he deales quite contrary, he sends punishments
vpon them presently after the sinne is
committed, he giues a reward presently after the
good deede is done.
And so likewise in the manner of the punishment:
there are punishments of divers sorts, some
are more secret punishments, some are more scandalous,
some are taken out for examples, that others
may feare; others he lets alone, and makes
them not examples. This libertie he vseth in the
dispending of his punishments; and the like he
doth in his rewards. Some he rewards openly for
their well-doing, that others might be incouraged;
Some men he suffers to waite a long time,
and there comes no present reward; he shall haue

it, he shall haue a reward according to his works;
but yet this libertie God vseth in the dispensation
of it.
The vse we should make of it is this;Vse. If this be
so, then let vs not be offended, let vs not thinke,
that God is not therefore All-suff^cient, because he
deales sometimes with the righteous according to
the workes of the wicked, sometimes with the wicked
according to the workes of the righteous; for you
see, he will be All-sufficient, he will keepe the substance
of this rule, he will reward every man according
to his worke, he will make good his All-sufficiencie
in performing his promises to them,
that belong to him; and againe, he will make
good all his threatnings to those that are enemies
to him.
But now for the time of his dispensation, and
administratio^ of things, it is true, he takes a libertie
to himselfe. And to make this the clearer to
you, I will doe these two things.
First, I will shew you the reasons, why God doth
thus for a time, why thus he disposeth all things
for a certaine season.
And secondly, I will shew you this, that though
he doe thus for a season, yet certainely, he is All-sufficient;
To the good it shall goe well, and it shall
goe ill with the sinners.
First,Reas. 1. I say, God doth thus for a time: And why?
One reason is;To trie men. That God may try the faith and sinceritie
of men; for if when men haue sinned, God
should smite presently, if when they doe well, God
should reward them presently, they would be

drawne to well-doing, and from evill-doing, not
by sinceritie and by faith, but by sence. Now the
Lord therefore deferres it, he puts it off, that those
that are proved, may be knowne, that what men doe
out of sinceritie may appeare to be so, that men
may liue by faith, and not by sence, that men might
be drawne to liue by right respects, and not by
sensuall and carnall respects; as they would doe, if
either his punishments were presently, or his rewards.
Secondly;Reas. 2. The Lord doth it to spare mankinde;
for if the LORD should punish presently,Tospare men. men
should perish from the earth. And therefore he
doth in this case, as Generals are wont to do with
their Souldiers, when there is a generall fault
committed, they cast lots and picke out two, or
three, and put them to death, that the whole Armie
may be saved; So the Lord doth, he takes here
and there one, whom it may be, he followes with
open and great judgements for open sinnes; But
for others againe, the generalitie, he suffers and
lets them alone, because he would spare mankind.
This reason I finde vsed,Gen. 6. 3. Gen. 6. 3. the Lord sayd
there, when he was about to destroy man from
the earth, My spirit shall no longer striue with man,
for he is but flesh: That is, if I should continually
deale with men, as I doe now, if I should take
them, and sweepe them away with the Besome
of destruction, as I doe these, there would remaine
no flesh vpon the earth; and therefore,
sayth he, I will not striue with them, but beare with
them patiently, though their sinnes are great and
many.

Againe;Reas. 3. the Lord doth it, that he might keepe
from vs the events of things;To hide events from men. It is his good pleasure
to reserue them to himselfe, and therefore he
goes not in a constant course. When men sinne,
he doth not presently punish, neither when a man
doth well, doth he presently reward him, that is,
he goes not in one tract, as it were, but sometimes
he doth the one, and sometimes the other, promiscuously;
and for this end, sayth the Wiseman,
he hath made this contrarie to that, that no man might
finde any thing after him: That is, that he might
leaue no foot-steps behinde him; (as we haue that
phrase vsed,Rom. 11. 33. Rom. 11. 33. How vnsearchable are thy
wayes, and thy Iudgements past finding out.) The
word in the originall signifieth, that when God goeth,
he leaues no vestigia, no print behinde him,
so that a man cannot say, he will goe this way, he
goes it not so oft, as to make a path of it; I speake
of these particular things, he doth not so dispence
good, and evill, punishment, or rewards, that a
man can say, the Lord will doe this. And the reason
of this is, because future things, the event of
things, it is his good pleasure to keepe to himselfe;
as he sayth Act. 1. 7. It is not for you to know
the event of things, which the Father hath kept to
himselfe,Act. 1. 7. and therefore he vseth this promiscuous
dispensation of punishment, and reward, that he
might hide these things from the sonnes of men.
Fourthly,Reas. 4. he doth it likewise, that he may bring
forth the treasures,To bring forth his treasures. both of his wrath, and of his
mercie.
You will say,Quest. how shall that be done?

Sayth God, if I should presently cut off a sinner,Answ.
and should not forbeare him, his wickednesse
should not be full; I will let the Amorites alone,
Gen. 15. 16. That the measure of their sinne might be
fulfilled: That is,Gen. 15. 16. God purposely forbeares them,
with great patience,Rom. 9. 22. Rom. 9. 22. He leaues them,
and heapes mercies and kindnesses vpon them,
that they might continue in their sinnes, and abuse
his patience, recompensing him evill for
good, and then he drawes out the treasures of his
wrath. If he should take them suddenly and cut
them off, there might be but some of his wrath
manifested vpon the sonnes of men; but when
they runne a long course in sinning, when they
make a heape of sinne, then God drawes out the
treasures of his wrath and power; that is the very
reason vsed,Rom. 11. 22. Rom. 11. 22. and likewise Rom. 2. 4.Rom. 2. 4.
The Lord hath certaine treasures of wrath, as wee
see Deut. 32. 33. 34. 35. Where speaking of theDeut. 32. 33. 34. 35.
children of Israell, he sayth, that he suffered them to
grow, (that is the meaning of that place) as a man
suffers a Vine to grow, I suffered you to bring forth
grapes, I did not trouble you, nor interrupt you;
but when you should haue had good wine in your
grapes to refresh God and man, sayth he, your wine
was as the poyson of Dragons, and as the gall of
Aspes; in steede of doing good, and being serviceable
to men, when I gaue you so much rest
and peace. The wine you brought forth was hurtfull
to man, as poyson, and as the gall and bitternes
of Aspes, which is the most hurtfull thing in
the world.
Now, sayth the Lord, all this, I haue done, that
I might lay it vp; I haue sealed it vp among my
treasures; for vengeance and recompence is mine:
That is, therefore I haue suffered all this, that I
might draw forth all my treasures of wrath, which
otherwise would be hidden, and never opened
and manifested to the world.
The like he doth to the godly; he suffers them
to goe on, he suffers them to doe well, and yet for
all this hee giues them no present reward, but
leaues them to the malice of men, to the hand of
the enemy, and suffers them to prevaile against
them, he suffers them to be in povertie, in persecution,
in prison, to be taken away by death, etc.
And why doth he suffer such varietie of temptations
to come to them?Iam. 1. Iam. 1. because their
grace, and their patience, and their faith might be
more tryed, that they might haue a larger Reckoning.
Math. 5. 10.Math. 5. 10. Blessed are those that suffer
for righteousnesse sake; and by this meanes he
drawes forth the treasures of his mercie. If the reward
should be presently, it should not be so great
a reward; but when he suffers any man to doe well,
and then lets him waite, by that meanes he takes
occasion to be the more bountifull; as he sayth to
them,Heb. 10. 36. Heb. 10. 36. When you haue done his will, you
haue neede of patience: That is, the Lord still deferres,
that you might shew your patience, that
you might haue the honour to suffer, as well as to
doe, and so he might shew forth on you the riches,
and the Treasures of his mercie.
Lastly;Reas. 5. another reason why God doth it, is, because

the time of this life is the time of striving,This life is a time of striving.
of running, of acting, it is not the time of being
rewarded; as Iam. 1. 12. Blessed is he that indureth
the time of triall. God puts a man for the time of
this life to many trials, he puts a good man to suffer
many crosses and afflictions, to see whether he
will beare them or no, he giues not him present
libertie, present prosperitie, nor present rewards,
etc. Sayth he, When he is tryed, then he shall receiue
the Crowne of glory, which he hath promised to them
that loue him: then, and not before; so, I say, the
time of this life is the time of striving.
You know men doe not giue the reward till the
wrastling be done, they are not knighted, till the
battaile be ended, they giue not the garland, till
there be an end of the combate,Rom. 2. 5. Therefore Rom. 2. 5. The last day is called the manifestation, or declaration
of his iust Iudgement; So that till then
there is no declaration of the just judgement of
God, one way or other; There is not a declaration
of wrath till then, nor a declaration of mercie till
then, for a time therefore, the Lord suffers them to
goe on, he dispenceth the event of good and evill,
of punishments, and rewards promiscously, that
the sonnes of men might be tryed; but when the
race is done, then he will make good his promise
to the one, and his threatnings vnto the other.
But now, though the Lord doth this for a time,
as you see he doth for a season, yet (Beloved) remember
this againe for your comfort, that it is
but for a season, it shall not alwayes be so; as the
Wiseman resolues in the Chapter before my Text;

Sayth he, howsoever it fall out, I know it shall be
well with the righteous, and it shall be evill with the
wicked; It is certaine that every man shall be rewarded
according to his workes. Godlinesse hath the
promise of this life, and of the life to come. And againe,
vngodlines hath the curses of this life, and
of that which is to come; and certainely, they
shall be both fulfilled. And that it may be made
cleare to you, consider this ground for it, that
though the wicked prosper a while,It shall not alway goe well with the wicked. and good
men suffer affliction a while, yet it must needes be
that this must be the issue of it.
 First,Because God is a iust judge. because the Iudge of all the world must needs
be righteous, as sayth Abraham; As if he should
say, the first standard of Iustice, the first rule, the
first measure, either that must be right, or els there
can be no rectitude in the world. Now that cannot
be; you see there is a rectitude amongst men,
there is a justice amongst men, there is a kinde of
even carriage among the creatures, and therefore
the judge of all the world that giues all these rules,
that sets all these measures, all things in this evennesse,
and that keepes vp that which otherwise
would fall in sunder, surely he must needs be righteous,
and therefore he must needes doe well to
the righteous, and reward evill to the wicked.
 Secondly, this is cleare from his immutabilitie:
looke what God hath done in former times,He is immutable. he
must needs doe the same; Goe through all the
Scriptures, and you shall finde that still the evill
in the end were punished, and the good in the end
were rewarded; he is the same God still, he is still

as holy as he was, still his eyes cannot abide iniquitie,
still he is as powerfull as he was, there is no
change in him, nor shadow of changing. And therefore
thinke with thy selfe, he that was so severe against
Saul for breaking the Commandement,
he that was so severe against Balaam for loving the
wages of vnrighteousnesse, he that was so severe against
Vzziah for touching the Arke, for medling
with holy things, for drawing neare in an vnholy
manner to him, he that consumed Nadab and Abihu
with fire from heaven, because they came with
strange fire, (so doe we when we come with carnall
affections to performe holy duties) he is the
same, and though he doe it not to thee on the suddaine,
as he did to them, (for he did it to them for
example, that they might be rules for future times,
that he might not onely deliver precepts, but
might second them with examples,) yet being the
same God, he will doe it to thee at length, if thou
fall into the same sinne; he that strucke Ananias
and Saphira with death for speaking against the
truth, and against their Consciences, he will doe
the same to thee, though he doe it not in the same
manner, (because it was extraordinarie, he drew
them out for examples,) and so I may say of rewards,
it is certaine he will doe the same.
Moreover, it must needes be so, because Gods
blessednesse stands in the execution of his owne 
Law,Gods blessednes requires it in proceeding according to it.
Take all the Creatures vnder the Sunne, and
their happinesse stands in keeping close to that
rule, that God hath given them: The fire is well, as

long as it followes that rule, the water, and so every
Creature; Man to whom the Law was given,
his happines is to keepe the Law, in doing it thou
shalt liue: The great God hath made a Law to himselfe,
that is, he hath expressed himselfe, his blessednesse
consists in keeping it, and therefore be
assured, that whatsoever his Law is, it shall certainely
be performed. The Law, you know, is this;
Either thou shalt keepe these things, or thou shalt
die for it. Now a disjunctiue proposition is true,
we say, if either part be true, that is, if a man doe
not keepe the Law, of necessitie he must be punished,
or else Gods Law should be broken; but if either
be fulfilled, the Law is kept; So I say, it must
needs be, that the Lord must doe that, wherein his
blessednesse consists. Though a sinner prolong his
dayes, and though his punishment be long deferred,
and sentence be not speedily executed, yet certainely
it must needes be executed, for the Lord must
needs act according to that rule he hath set to
himselfe.
Last of all, if the Lord should not doe it, he
should loose his glory; If wicked men should alwayes
prosper, if good men should alwayes fare
ill, men would say, there were no God in heaven,
to rule things, to administer things by his providence;
therefore, sayth he, I will bring it to passe,
that you may know that I am the Lord. So then, seest
thou a wicked man doing wickedly, and yet not
punished? He cannot continue long; the Lord
should loose his glory if he should. Seest thou
a good man that continues in his righteousnesse,

and yet he suffers adversitie and affliction, he is
set in a low place, he walkes on foote, etc. he cannot
continue so long; for the Lord should loose his
glorie, and the Lord will not loose his glorie, he is
exceeding tender of his glorie. And therefore
this Conclusion must be set downe, that though
for a time all things fall alike to good and bad, though
God dispence them promiscuously for a season,
yet certainely the issue shall be, it shall be well with
the righteous, and it shall be ill with the wicked.
Therefore (to proceede a little further) let not
holy men be discouraged,Vse. because they see things
goe ill with the Churches; be not discouraged at
it; for it shall be well with them in due season.
You shall see Psal. 129. 3.Psal. 129. 3. that the Lord suffers evill
men to plough the Church, and to make long furrowes
on the backe of it; but yet, sayth he, in the
fourth verse; The Lord will cut the cords of the wicked;
He will cut their traces, they plow long,
and make deepe furrowes; but yet the Lord at
length cuts the cords of the wicked. The horses
that draw the plough, as long as the traces hold,
they draw; but when they are cut, they can draw
no longer; So the Lord will doe, he suffers the
Church to be plowed, when they doe not Iudge
themselues, wh^^ they doe not plowe themselues,
when they doe not humble themselues, then he
sets the enemies of the Church to plowe them,
and to humble their soules, and this he doth for a
certaine season; but when he hath done, he cuts
their traces, he cuts their cords, and that in due
season.
As for example;Instances of the wicked. He suffered Pharach a long
time to plowe the Church; you know how long
he afflicted it, you know what long furrowes he
made vpon it; but yet when the period was come,
the period that God had set, the fit time, then God
cut his traces, that is, he suffered him to plowe no
longer, but destroyed him.
And so H^man in the story of Hester, he plowed
the Church a while, till it came to the very poynt,
to the exigent, that he should haue swallowed it
vp, and then he was taken off from plowing any
longer, then the Lord cut his cords, and set his
Church at libertie.
And so he did with the Midianites; They plowed
the Church for a time, (as through the whole
storie of the Iudges we see) they plowed them for
a certaine season, till they were plowed enough;
and when they were humbled, repented, and cryed
to the Lord, (as you shall see every where) then,
sayth the Text, the Lord heard them, and cut the
cords of the wicked, he suffered them to plow no
longer.
But these places will be the clearer, if you compare
them with Isa. 28. 24. sayth the Lord there,Isa. 28. 24.
Doth the plow-man plowe all the day? Rather, sayth
he, when he hath plowed enough, (marke it)
when he hath broken the clods, then he casts in the
seede, etc. And who hath caused the plow-man to
doe this. Is it not I the Lord? If the Lord hath put
this wisedome into the plow-man, that he plowes
not all day, but when he hath plowed the ground
enough, he stayes the plowe, and sowes the seede,

will not the Lord doe so with his Church? therefore,
Beloved, be not discouraged, let not your
hearts faile, though you see him plowing of the
Church, though he suffer the enemy to prevaile
against it; for in due time the Lord will cut their
cordes. You haue a cleare place for it Deut. 32. 35.Deut. 32. 35.
where speaking of the enemies of the Church,
sayth he, his foote shall slide in due time, (that is the
expression there) that is, perhaps you may complaine,
and thinke it too long, but it is not too
long; If it were any sooner, it would be too soone:
in due time, sayth the Lord, it shall be, in due time
his foote shall slide.Heb. 10. 37. Yet a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarrie; it is but a little,
a little time indeede. You know that is too long,
that tarries beyond the appointed time, beyond
that measure, that should be set to it; when the
Lord doth it in due time, it is not too long. He
that shall come, that is, he that shall surely come,
will come, and will not tarrie, that is, he will not
tarrie a jot beyond the due time, and season, that
season, that is fittest for the Church, and for the
enemies of the Church.
And as I say for the enemies of the Church,Instances of the godly.
so I may likewise say for the righteous man; The
latter end of the righteous shall be peace: he may
haue trouble for a time, but his end shall be peace.
Be not therefore discouraged; howsoever God
may deale with thee by the way, yet you know
what end he made with Iob; That expression you
haue in Iam. 5. 11.Iam. 5. 11. You know the case of Iob, and
you know what end the Lord made with him: So I
may say of every righteous man.
You know Iacob had many troubles, troubles
when he was with Laban, troubles with the Shechemites,
troubles with his owne sonnes; yet his
latter end was peace.
David had many troubles, when he was yong,
when he was vnder Sauls government, he was
hunted as a flea, or Partridge; after he came to the
kingdome himselfe, you know he was a man troubled
a great while, there was Civill Warres, after
them he was troubled with his children, after that
with the rebellions of his people, and yet, saith the
Text, he died full of riches, full of honour, and full
of dayes. The Lord made a good end with him;
The latter end of the righteous is peace, that is, a man
that trusteth in the God of peace, he shall be sure to
haue peace in the end, a man, that is a subject to
the Kingdome of peace, that is subject to the government
of Christ, the Prince of peace, it must
needs be, that he must haue peace in the end; for
the Kingdome of God is in righte^usnesse and peace,
and the government of Christ, is the government
of peace, and therefore it shall be peace in the end
to him, whatsoever is in the way. Therefore, let
no man be discouraged, but let this comfort
him.
On the other side, another man may haue peace
by the way, he may haue prosperitie for a time,
he may flourish like a greene Bay tree; but his latter
end shall be miserable. As it is Psal. 37. 37.Psal. 37. 37. Marke
the end of the righteous man, it shall be peace: but the
transgr^ssors shall be destroyed together; the end of the
wicked shall be cut off. And therefore you see what

he sayes of them in the verse before, I sought him,
sayes he, and he was not to be found, vers. 36.Verse 36. As if
he should say, I sought him on earth, and there he
was not, I sought him in heaven, and there he was
not to be found; but in hell he was, there he was
to be found; otherwise there is no remembrance
of them. So I say, evill men, though they haue
peace for a time, though they haue prosperitie
for a time, though they spread themselues as a
greene bay tree, yet their latter end shall not be
peace, but miserie. Therefore, let vs not be discouraged;
Nor on the other side, let not evill men
be secure, let not them be incouraged to evill doing;
for though the Lord spare them for a time,
yet certainely they shall be punished. As Luk. 13.
4.Luke 13. 4. (it is an excellent place for that purpose) our
Saviour saith there, Thinke not that those eighteene,
vpon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater
sinners, then others, that it did not fall vpon: but
except you repent, you shall all likewise perish. The
meaning of it is this, when you see strange judgements
come vpo^ the workers of iniquitie, though
you that are standers by haue had peace and prosperitie
all your time and haue never beene acquainted
with any of these strange judgements of
God, haue never tasted of them, say not that your
condition is better then theirs; for, sayth our Saviour,
you are no lesse sinners then they, perhaps
you are greater, (though the Tower fell on them,
and not on you,) therefore, sayth he, you shall perish
But because it is not presently done, therefore,
sayth the Wise-man, The hearts of men are set

in them to doe evill, that is, because there is not
present execution, therefore, either man thinke
there is no God, or else they doe thinke God is like
themselues: I held my peace, and thou thoughtest I was
ike thy selfe. Psal. 50. 21.Psal. 50. 21. Either they thinke that
there is no God, or else that he is not so just a God,
as we declare him to be. So, either they thinke
sinnes not to be sinnes, or else they thinke them
not so hainous, that they doe not draw so fearefull
judgements after them. Thus men, because the
same Events are to all alike, haue therefore their
^earts set in them to doe evill.
Now for Answer to that,The executio^, not the sentence is deferred. sayth the Wise-man,
though execution be deferred, the sentence is not
deferred, The sentence is past against an evill worke,
though it be not speedily executed: As if hee
should say, it is little comfort for thee when thou
hast provoked God to anger, that thou art not presently
punished; for the sentence is gone out against
thee, thou art an accursed man, th^u art
condemned and shut vp in Prison, it is onely the
execution that is deferred; and therefore is it that
he sayth, because the sentence against evill doers is
not speedily executed, therefore thinke with thy
selfe, whosoever thou art that emboldenest thy
selfe in thy present safetie, it is but a deferring of
the execution; thou art not in a better condition
then others; onely the judgement is executed on
the one sooner, on the other later.
See it in the sinne of Ioab; you know he committed
the sinne of murther, when he killed Ab^er;
it lay a-sleepe you know many yeares. The

sentence went out from Gods Law, God and his
owne Conscience was against him, but yet it was
not executed, till he was full of gray haires; his
gray haires went downe to the graue, not in peace,
but in bloud.
So likewise in the sinne of Saul; when he brake
the oath with the Gibeonites, the sinne continued
fortie yeares vnpunished; the Lord suffered it; the
sentence went out against him, as soone as it was
committed, but yet it lay a-sleepe; The Lord did
not execute the sentence till fortie yeares after, as
we see by computation: for it was all the Raigne
of David to the latter end, and most part of Sauls
Raigne.
And so the sinne of Shemei, the sinne was committed
long before, (yet all the time of Davids
Raigne after his restoring, though the sentence
went out against him; for he was an accursed man,
the Lord brought that curse vpon him which he
had pronounced against David,) yet it was notexecuted
till a fit ^eason* So, I say, it is with sinne,
the execution is deferred, though the sentence be
not deferred. Therefore, sayth Salomon, certainely
the wicked shall not prolong his dayes.
Beloved, it is a place worth considering, Eccles.
8. 13.Ecles. 8. 13 Though a sinner doe evill an hundred times,
and prolong his dayes, yet I know it shall goe well with
them that feare the Lord, and doe reverence before
him; but it shall not be well with the wicked, neither
shall he prolong his dayes, he shall be like a shadow, because
he feares not before God. This Conclusion he
comes to; Although, sayth he, the Lord deferre

execution, yet it shall not be well with the wicked,
he shall not prolong his dayes.
But it will be objected,Ob. That many evill men
doe prolong their dayes, they liue long, they liue
till they be olde, and they liue in peace.
To this I answer; That though they doe liue
long,Answ. yet indeede properly they are not said to
prolong their dayes, because that all that while
they are vnripe, they are not fit for death; So that
they are taken before they are fitted to goe hence,
so they are cut off for substance indeede in the
midst of their dayes.Wicked men die suddenly, though they liue long. As an Apple though it hang
on the tree long, yet if it be taken before it be full
ripe, it may be said not to hang long on the tree,
that is, it hangs not so long, as to ripen it, it is taken
away in an vntimely manner, it is taken away
before the season of it; So it is here, though a
wicked man doe prolong his dayes, yet still he is
taken away before he be ripe, before the time of
gathering.
As it is true on the other side, that holy men,
though they be taken away betimes, yet they are
taken away, when they haue finished their dayes;
he doth prolong his dayes, though he die when
he is young, because he is ripe before he is taken
from the tree; he is now in a fit season. And this
is the meaning of that, when he sayth, certainely
it shall be ill with him, that feares not God, though
he doe prolong his dayes, though execution
should be deferred. I should adde more, as this
for another; but I will but name it.
Doth one condition fall to all,Adversity and both good and

bad? Then you may gather hence,Prosperitie, not truly good nor euill. that all the
good things, and all the evill things, that befall
vs in this life, they are neither truely good nor
truely evill, they are but shadowes of both; for if
the Lord send adversitie vpon good men, if he
send prosperitie to evill men; If there were true
evill in adversitie, God would never doe it, if there
were any true goodnesse in prosperitie, he would
never doe it, but when he dispenceth these things
so promiscuously, it is an argument they are not
such as men account them, they are but shadowes
of good things, and of evill, Larvae et spectra, etc.
that is, they are not the substance of good things,
neither of good nor evill. Let not righteous men
therefore say they are miserable, when they fall
into any kinde of outward miserie, whatsoever
the condition be, it is not evill, if it were, it should
never befall thee. Ag^ine, let not a wicked man
say, he is happie, because of his outward condition,
for if it were truely good, thou shouldest never
inioy it. When God dispenceth those things
so promiscuously, it is an argument, that they are
neither good nor evill, that is, that there is no
substance of true good or evill in them.
And so againe, if they fall out so promiscuously,
then you can judge neither of loue, nor of hatred
by them; that is, a man is not to thinke, that because
the Lord afflicts him, therefore he withdrawes
himselfe from him, or because he giues
outward prosperitie to another, that therefore his
hand, and his favour is with him; for you see he
dispenceth these things diversly, he dispenceth

them to all in such a promiscuous manner, that
you cannot say, this is proper to the one, or to the
other.
An Hoast may entertaine a stranger with better
foode, then he giues his children, with the
daintiest of that he hath, yet he keepes the best
portion for his children: and God may doe much
for those that are strangers to him, but he giues
better prosperitie to his children; though they
fare hard here, though they tast no good thing
a long time, yet the portion he reserveth for
them, which portion, and blessed inheritance,
he of his great mercy reserue
for every one of vs, and conferre
vpon vs, for the mediation
of his deare SONNE,
IESVS CHRIST
the righteous.
So much for this time.
FINIS.



THE
THIRD
SERMON.

ECCLESIASTES 9. 11. 12.

I returned, and sawe vnder the Sunne, that the race
is not to the swift, nor the battell to the strong, neither
yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of
vnderstanding, nor yet favour to men of skill, but
time and chance happeneth to them all.
For man also knoweth not his time, as the fishes that
are taken in an evill net, and as the birds that are
caught in the snare; so are the sonnes of men snared
in an evill time, when it falleth suddenly vpon
them.


THE last time wee spake to you,
we handled the first and second
verses of this Chapter, whence
there may be this Objection
made against Gods All-sufficiencie;
All things come alike to all,
to the iust, and to the wicked, etc. And indeed when

^en see this Conclusion, that it is to the wicked,
according to the worke of the iust, and to the iust, according
to the worke of the wicked, it must needes
stand as a strong objection against the doctrine
of Gods All-sufficiencie. How that objection is answered,
hath beene fully declared to you; Now
there comes another objection like the former.
Because all things come alike to all, sayth the Wiseman,Ob.
(but there he names onely the good and the
bad, the holy and the vnholy) men will be readie
to say, as every man is; howsoever holinesse, and
vnholinesse, make not this difference in the event
of things, yet the naturall strength of men, their
naturall weaknesse, their naturall abilitie, or their
vnabilitie, their wisedome, or their folly, that disposeth,
or indisposeth men in the event of things.
And therefore the Wiseman, when he had finished
that former conclusion, whereof we spake, that
there is one event to the good, and bad, he fals vpon
the second vanitie, that he saw vnder the Sun,
that not onely, as he sayth, All things come alike
to all, that is, to the holy and vnholy, but likewise,
to those that haue naturall strength, and those that
are subject to naturall weakenes; even in this case
also, sayth he, all things come alike to all.
For I haue seene that the race is not alwayes to the
swift, but sometimes to him that is not swift; the
battaile is not alwayes to the strong, but sometimes
to him that is weake; and bread, and favour, and riches,
are not alwayes to men of vnderstanding and
skill, but sometimes to men that are weake, and
foolish, and want skill, etc.
I haue chosen this Text, that I may adde this to
the other, that even in those things also, all things
come alike to all. There is then another caution to
be vsed, and to be taken heede of in this doctrine
of Gods All-sufficiencie. Though God dispence
those comforts to them that serue him with a perfect
heart, yet there are certaine times to be observed
by the sonnes of men, and if you misse of
those times, that are allotted to every purpose and
action, if these be hid from men, if men take not
their opportunitie, though God be readie to dispence
his blessings to those that seeke him, yet
that occasion makes men misse of them; therefore
is it that he sayth in the twelfth verse, Man kn^wes
not his time; that is, there is a time for every pupose,
and action, and if he take that time, he shall be succesfull;
but if that be hidden from him, and he
take it not, evill times fall vpon him, as the snare
vpon the birds, and as the net vpon the fishes.
Now for the particular opening of these words.
First, we are to consider the phrase here vsed in
the beginning, I returned, and saw, sayth he, vnder
the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, etc. That is,
as if he should say; when I looked about me, and
turned my selfe every way, and looked vpon the
whole frame of the Creatures, I saw a vanitie in
every corner, in every place, I saw a va^itie even
in things, that seeme least to be subject to vanitie:
Whence we will gather this poynt,Doct. that
All things vnder the Sunne;All things vnder the Sunne are subject to vanity. even the ^est are
subiect to vanitie.
Let a man turne himselfe which way he will,

he shall finde vanitie and vexation of spirit in every
Creature, and in every condition and state,
in all the purposes, in all the actions and affayres
of men: I returned, sayth he, and which way soever
I looked, which way soever I turned me, I still
sawe vanitie. So it was with Salomon, and so it
must needes be with vs all, if our judgements be
guided as his was by the spirit of God.
 If you looke vpon the course of naturall things,Naturall things.
you shall see vanitie in them, sayth the Wiseman:
The rivers come and goe, and the windes passe and
come about by their circuits, and one generation goeth,
 and another commeth: That is,They are restlesse. in all these workes
of God, in these workes of nature, which seeme not
to be subject to vanitie, yet if you looke vpon
them, you shall finde vanitie in them, they haue
no rest nor quiet, they are all subject to corruption,
One generation goes, and another comes.
 Againe,There is nothing new. there is no new thing in them; that if
a man studie to finde out something to satisfie his
minde, he shall soone come to a bottom, and nothing
will giue him satisfaction, and therefore
there is a vanitie; for that which is restlesse, can
never giue vs rest, that which is subject to corruption,
can never giue vs that happinesse that is immortall
and eternall; in these things, there is no
newnes; The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
eare with hearing.
 If you goe from that,Mortal things and looke vpon other
things that seeme to be least subject to vanitie, as
wisedome and knowledge;Wisedome. It is true, these seeme
to be least subject to vanitie, and the Wiseman acknowledgeth

it,There is wearinesse in getting it. for, sayth he, wisedome is better 
then follie, as light is better then darkenes, yet there
is vanitie in that: for, first there is a wearinesse in
getting it. Againe, there is a griefe in having, in
vsing,Griefe in vsing it. and enioying it: for a wise man sees much 
amisse, but that which is crooked he cannot make
straight. To see evill vnder the Sunne, and not to
be able to amend it, it doth but increase a mans
sorrow; and that is the wise mans misery.
Againe,It freeth not from miserie. sayth he, The same condition is to the 
wise, as to the foolish; as the one dies, so dies the other,
as the one is subject to sicknesse, so is the other,
as the one is subject to crosses, afflictions,
and changes, so is the other; and therefore there
is a vanitie in that.
But now for the perfection of workes, for the
doing of those things that are indeede commendable,
good, and prayse-worthy, is this also subject
to vanitie? Yes,Commendable actions. Eccle. 4. 4. sayes Salomon, Eccles. 4. 4.
I looked, and beheld the travailes of men in the perfection
of workes, and I finde this also to be the envie
of a man against his neighbour: That is, this vanitie
it hath in it,Are enuyed. that a man shall not haue prayse and
loue answerable to the perfection of his worke,
but he shall finde the contrary, he shall haue much
envie for it; it shall cause the envie of a man against
his neighbour.
But take places of great authoritie, wherein a
man hath much opportunitie to doe good,Great places. as,
Princes, Magistrates, and Rulers; This also is a vanitie.
I haue seene men ruling one over another, sayes
the Wiseman, to their hurt, to the hurt of the ruler,

and to the hurt of them that are ruled. So that all
things vnder the Sunne, looke which way you
will, they are subject to vanitie, as these which
here he names, for a man to make himselfe strong,
for a man to get wisedome, and skill, and to be
diligent in his busines, etc. For let a man vse the
likeliest meanes to bring his enterprises to passe,
yet, sayth Salomon, I haue seene, that the battaile
is not to the strong, nor favour to men of knowledge,
nor bread to the wise, nor riches to men of vnderstanding.
So that which way soever he turned himselfe,
still there was a vanitie. We will make some
briefe vse of it, and so come to the next poynt.
If there be so much vanitie vnder the Sunne,
that even the best things,Vse. (those that seeme to be
most free from it,)To see the change sinne hath made in the world. are subject to vanitie; then
First, let vs consider hence, what a change sinne
hath made in the world. The time was, my Beloved,
when the Lord looked vpon all things, and
he saw, that they were all exceeding good; but now
when the Lord looketh, and the Wiseman looketh
vpon them with the same eye, they are all subiect
to vanitie. And whence hath this proceeded,
but because sinne hath blowne vpon the Creatures,
as it were, it hath blasted them, it hath taken
away their vigor, the vertue, the beautie, the
excellencie of them? And if sinne hath made this
change, then consider, that the more sinne there
is, the more these things are subiect to vanitie.
In every mans particular vse, you shall finde
this true: as in riches, a man that is sinfull, shall
not haue comfort from them, but vexation of spirit;

he shall finde a vanitie and an emptinesse in
them. And so wisedome, learning, knowledge,
and skill, the more sinne, the more vanitie is in
them: Euery man shall finde this in all the creatures
vnder the Sunne.
As on the other side, the more grace, the more
substance you shall finde in them, and the lesse
vanity; For that which immediatly brings the vanitie
is the curse, and sinne is the immediate cause
of euery curse. I say, the immediate cause of vanitie
is the curse; of God. When God bids such
a thing wither, when he bids it not prosper with
such a man, when he bids it doe him no good,
(as hee bad the figg tree wither,) that makes euery
thing vaine to a man, euen the curse that
lies vpon the creature, and sinne is the cause of
the curse.
Againe that which giues a substance, that
which giues a filling to the creature, that which
causeth it to giue downe that milke of comfort,
that is in it, is the blessing of God vpon it, when
God shall say to such a creature, goe and doe such
a man good; it is the blessing which doth it immediatly,
but grace is the cause of the blessing.
Therefore, let vs looke on sinne, as the cause of
all this vanitie, and on grace, as the cause of the
contrary, let vs labour to excell in the one, and to
resist the other. So much for this first vse.
Secondly,Vse 2. if there be such a vanity in all things
vnder the Sunne,To see the vanity of man then surely he that hath brought
this vanitie vpon them must needes be much
more vainie. For what causeth this vanitie, that

lieth vpon the whole face of the creature? is it
not man? it came not vpon the creature, as you
know, for its owne sake, but by man; why then
surely man, that hath bin the cause of all this vanitie,
must needes be himselfe much more vaine.
Therefore, if a man looke vpon himselfe, let him
consider this, that he shall neuer find any happines
within his owne compasse, or circle; If hee
will needs build himselfe vpon his owne bottom,
he is subject to vanitie, and more then any other
creature besides, therefore let vs learne to goe out
of our selues, and seeke it else-where.
Againe, if you seeke for any comfort from man,
from friends, from great men, remember they
are vaine,Psal. 62. 9. and more vaine then any other creature,
as in Psal. 62. 9. All men are vaine, and
great men are lvers, if they be layd in the ballance,
they be lighter then vanitie, that is, in all the sonnes
of men there is a vanitie, and the greater they are,
the more vanitie is in them; not that they are in
themselues more vaine, but because wee expect
more from great men, therefore to vs, they are
lighter then vanitie, they are more vaine then all
other men. Therefore let vs neither seeke that in
our selues, nor in other men: for they that cause
the vanitie vpon the creatures, themselues must
needes be much more subject to vanitie.
Thirdly,3. Vse. if the creature be subject to vanitie,
then consider what an euill choice wee make to
loose heauen,It is an ill choise to loose heauen, to gaine the creature. to loose grace, to loose the opportunitie
of growing rich in good workes, for any
thing vnder the Sunne, either for riches, or vaine

glory and praise of men, for pleasures, or whatsoeuer
men reckon precious, and pleasant to
them vnder the Sunne. For if they be all vanitie,
what a change doe wee make? doe wee not giue
gold away for drosse? as our Sauiour expresseth
it, Luke 16. 26. Put the case a man had all the world,
and loose his soule, that is,Luke 16. 26. if he neglect the things
that belong to his saluation, and for the neglect
of them shal haue in recompence whatsoeuer the
world can afford him, so that hee wants nothing
that the world hath, yet sayth hee, what shall it
profit him? that is, there is a vanitie in it, it will
be altogether vnprofitable to him. For to be
vaine, and to be vnprofitable, is all one. Consider
then what a foolish change men make, when they
draw sin on with cart-roapes, that is, when they vse
their vtmost strength to get these vaine things to
them, with the losse of better things; what a
change doe they make, although they should
get the whole world, seeing all would be vnprofitable,
that is, they should finde nothing but vanitie 
and Emptines,Vse. and vexation of spirit in it.
Againe if all things be subiect to vanitie,Not to desire them ouer much. learne
we then, first, not to couet after earthly things, not
to set our hearts vpon it, nor to desire it over
much when we want it. And secondly, when we 
haue it, not to be confident,Not to trust them ouer much. nor to trust to much
to it, not to rejoyce in it to inordinately. For it is
but vanitie; there is an emptines in it; it will deceiue 
vs, as a broken reede.Not to grieue ouer much at the losse them. Thirdly, if God doe
take from vs any of those earthly things, as riches,
credit, health, or friends, let vs be content to

part with them. For even the best of them are
vanitie, subject to emptines, such as will not
performe that, which they promise, such as will
deceiue vs, when we come to vse them,*
Last of all (because this is not the point I intend
to stand vpon,)Vse 5. if all things vnder the Sun
be subject to vanitie,Labour to be weaned from them, and to feare God and keepe his commandements. even those that seeme to be
least subject vnto it, then let vs labour to haue our
hearts weaned from the world, and whatsoeuer is
in the world, to make it our whole busines to feare
God and keepe his Commandements. You know that
is the maine vse that the wise man makes of this
whole booke; it is all but an explication of the
particular vanuties which hee found vnder the
Sun, and the vse that the makes of it, is this, therefore,
saith he, the whole dutie of man is to feare God
and keepe his Commandements. My beloved, I beseech
you marke that expression: for therein we
are exceeding apt to deceiue our selues; A man
is content to doe some thing, that tends to Gods
worship, and to the Saluation of his Soule, but to
make it his whole worke, to haue all the water
to runne in that chanell, to haue his mind altogether
intent vpon it, he is not willing to doe so;
but hee joynes other things with it, because there
is a secret leaning of the heart, and an vnweaned
lingering after some other vanitie. It is certaine,
that when the heart is weaned from all things vndor
the Sun, a man will make it then his whole busines
to feare God and keepe his Commandements,
but because the heart is false in this, it hath some
thing else that it is set vpon. Some men thinke
that wisedome and knowledge, increase of Skill in

such a particular Science Trade and profession,
that that is not subject to vanitie, and so it may be
his heart is set vpon that; and this is enough to keep
a man from making it his whole dutie, to ^eare
God and keepe his commandements.
Another man perhaps neglects this, but to
gather in an estate, to strengthen himselfe that
way, to bottom himselfe well vpon a good estate,
this he thinkes is not subject to vanitie, as other
things, and this therefore his heart is set vpon;
though hee see vanitie in some other things, yet
this his heart is set on; and this is enough to
keepe him from making it his whole dutie to
feare God, and keepe his commandements. And
thus we might goe through many instances. Let
every man therefore search his owne heart; (for
when a man makes not this his whole dutie, some
thing or other deceiues him, a vanitie that hee
yet seeth not.) I say, the best things be subject to
vanitie, if which way so euer the wise man turned
himselfe, they were subject to vanitie, it is
fit we should learne then to make it our whole
dutie to set all our thoughts and affections vpon
this, how we may grow in grace, how wee may
feare God and keepe his Commandements.
Lastly a man may by this trie himselfe whether
tryall he hath done it of no. For, as Salomon when
he grew wise, after his repentance, he saw a vanitie
in all things vnder the Sunne: So a man when
his heart is once changed, he will see a vanitie in
all things.
If there be any thing wherein thou seest not a

vanitie, it is an argument thou art not yet a new
creature. Paul sayth, now know we no man after
the flesh; for whosoever is in Christ, is a new creature;
as if he should say, when any man is a new
creature; hee looketh vpon all things vnder the
Sunne with an other eye, he iudgeth of them with
another iudgment; and therefore if thou finde it
otherwise, if thou looke vpon the world, or vpon
any thing, that is in the world, as vpon things
that are precious, that is a signe that Sathan
hath bewitched thee. You know it was one (of
the witcheries that he attempted vpon our Sauiour,
he shewed him the world, the kingdomes and
glory of it, and so he doth to euery man more or
lesse, he shewes him some thing or other, and if
a man doe not see the emptines and vanitie of
them, but sees a glorie in them, he hath yeelded
to Sathan who hath bewitched him, and preuailed
ouer him: and therefore when you looke on
euery thing vnder the Sunne, riches, credit, wisedome,
skill, knowledge, if you looke on all as on
flowers, if you see a vanitie, and an emptines in
them, that is a signe you are now changed, that
you are now turned to God by vnfained repentance,
that you see a vanitie in all things vnder the
Sunne: So much for this first point.
I returned and saw vnder the Sunne sayth hee,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the
strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of
vnderstanding, nor yet favour to men of knowledge,
but time and chance commeth to all.
The next point that we are to obserue in these
words, is this, that
Men of the greatest abilities, men of the greatest
sufficiencies, are often disappointed of their hopes
and ends.Doct. 2. This is a vanitie vnder the Sun;Men of greatest abilities disappointed of their ends. and not
so onely, but men that are more weake, and insufficient,
doe obtaine their ends and hopes. For
you must vnderstand it reciprocally, the battell is
not alwayes to the strong, therefore it is some
times to the weake; riches are not alwayes to
men of vnderstanding, therefore they are often
to men, that haue not vnderstanding.
The opening of this point will be best done in
shewing the reasons, and grounds of it, why it
comes to passe, that men of the greatest abilities,
haue not alwayes successe answerable to that sufficiencie,
that is in them.
And first,Reas. 1. one cause of it is, because there is no
creature, that is,No man stro^g in his owne strength. or euer shall bee strong in his
owne strength. In his owne strength shall no man
bee strong 1. Sam. 2. 9.1 Sam. 2. 9. A creature in it selfe hath
not so much abilitie althought it be never so well
furnished, as to bring any enterprise to passe.
There is more required then the simple strength
of the creature, be it never so strong, because in
euery enterprise there are many wheeles; many
things that must concure to bring it to passe.
Now a creature is not able to see all the wheeles,
that are in every busines; or if hee doe see them,
he is not able to turne euery wheele, but this belongs
to God. And therefore without his concurring
with the creature, be the creature never

so strong, hee shall not be able to get the battell,
be he neuer so swift, he shall not be able to winne
the race, bee hee neuer so great in skill and vnderstanding,
hee shall not get fauour, nor riches.
This you may see 1. Sam. 2. 3.1 Sam. 2. 3. Where Hanna
giues this counsell in her song, speake no more presumptuously,
neither let arroagancy come out of your
mouth; for the Lord is a God of knowledge, by him enterprises
are established: As if she had sayd, for any
man to say hee is able to bring an enterprise
to passe, hee speakes presumptuously, hee takes
more to himselfe, then hee is able to performe;
The Lord is onely a God of knowledge, that is the
reason of it, and therefore by him onely, and not
by any mans strength enterprises are established;
The Lord is a God of knowledge, as if shee had sayd,
men haue not so much knowledge and wisedome
as to looke through a busines, to see all the circumstances
of it, to behold all the ingredients
into it, all the wheeles that must co^curre to bring
it to passe; The Lord onely is a God of knowledge, and
therefore by him enterprises are established: And
this was that I sayd, that the creatures insufficiency,
was partly, because they are not able to see
 all. And partly agiaine it is,The Creature is ignorant. because though they
doe see all the wheeles that goe to make vp an
enterprise, yet they are not able to turne them.
 As you may see Psal. 33. 16. The King is not saved
by the multitude of an host,It is weake. neither is a mightie man
delivered by his great strength;Psal. 33. 16. A Horse is a vaine
thing to saue a ma^, he shall not deliuer any by his great
strength. Though a man doe see, and though he

can say, such a wheele is necessary, yet it is not in
his owne power to vse it.
An hoast is a great meanes to get a battell, yet
sayth he, be an hoast never so strong, that is not
enough. But what if hee haue valiant men and
Souldiers? Yet that will not doe it, a mightie man
is not deliuered by his great strength. I, but what
if hee haue horses and chariots? etc. Let the instrument
be what it will be, a horse is a vaine helpe,
that is, except the Lord concurre with that hoast,
and turne that great wheele, except hee bee with
those valiant men, except he concurre with the
strength of the horse and of the chariot, all this is
not able to doe it. And therefore I say, this is
one reason why the battell is not to the strong,
nor riches to men of vnderstanding, because the
creature of himselfe is not able to doe it, in its
owne strength, excluding Gods helpe, he is not able
to bring an enterprise to passe.
This likewise may bee added to that, that 
though the creature should haue a strength,God can take away the vse of the strength they haue.
though a man should haue all things readie, that
he should be furnished with preparations of all
sorts, so that nothing shuld be wa^ting, to bring an
enterprise to passe, yet at the very time, at the very
instant, when the thing is to be done, it is not in
his power to make vse of them, because at that
very time God often takes wisedome from the wise,
and courage from them that are otherwise valiant,
he takes from them their abilities, euen at
that time hee takes off the chariot wheeles, even
when they are driuing of them; which plainely

proveth, that the Creature of himselfe is not
able to doe it: As we see,Amos 2. 14. 15. 16. Amos 2. 14. 15. 16. sayth
he, The flight shall perish from the swift, and the
strong shall not strengthen his forces. neither shall the
mightie saue his life, he that handleth the B^w shall
not stand, and he that is swift of foote, shall not deliuer
himselfe, neither shall he that rideth the horse deliver
himselfe, and he of mightie courage among the
strong men shall flie away naked in that day: That is,
Be they never so strong, be they never so swift, never
so full of courage, at the very time when they
haue occasion to vse it, the Lord will take away
that swiftnes, he will take away that courage, he
will take away that wisedome, and suggest it, it
may be, to the adversarie, and how then shall they
prevaile? So that though a man were never so
well prepared to bring an enterprise to passe, as
when a man purposeth in his heart, and hath laid
all things readie, this will I speake, yet the answer
of the mouth comes from God, whatsoever his preparations
and purposes be. So in the actions and
affayres of men, though he make his preparations
never so strong, yet at the very instant, God often
takes courage from those that are most valiant,
and suggesteth it to those that are most cowardly,
he takes away wisedome when they haue most
occasion to vse it, and giues it to the adversaries,
that otherwise are more foolish then they. This
is the first Cause of it.
A second Cause is this;2. Cause. because there is a certaine
time and opportunitie,Men misse their times. that a man must take
to bring an enterprise to passe, and though a man

be never so strong, and never so wise, yet he may
misse of those opportunities, and so he looseth the
battaile, he looseth the bringing to passe of his enterprise.
And this we see is the Reason that is rendred
Eccles. 8. 5. 6. The heart of the wise is to know
the time and Iudgement, because to every purpose there
is a time and a Iudgement; therefore the miserie of
man is great vpon him:Eccles. 8. 5. 6. That is, to every action and
to every purpose, there is a certaine opportunitie,
and be a man never so well fitted, yet if he misse
of that opportunitie, he shall not bring his enterprise
to passe, therefore, sayth he, the miserie of man
is great vpon him, for he neither knowes himselfe,
what that opportunitie is, neither can any man
tell him, as it is in the seaventh verse. And because
it is not within the power of man, it is not within
his compasse to finde out these seasons and opportunities
for every purpose and action, hence it is,
that though they be never so well prepared,
though they haue never so much sufficiencie, and
abilitie to bring such an enterprise to passe, yet
they misse of it, because they discerne not of the
times.
Thirdly;3. Cause. this comes to passe,From the changes appointed by God. because God hath
appointed a certaine varietie and change of condition
to the sonnes of men; and there is no mans
wisedome, riches, or strength, that is able to defend
him from Gods appointment. I say, God hath
appointed a certaine change of condition to all
the sonnes of men, he hath appointed such crosses
and afflictions, he hath appointed such times, (as
the holy Ghost speakes) to passe over their heads,

and all the wisedome, and strength, that a man
hath, is not able to turne God from his purpose, it
is not able to evacuate and to frustrate his decrees,
but they shall come to passe. And that is the
meaning of this in the text. (for I take this reason
out of the text,) The translation is, but time and
chance commeth to all, it were, I suppose, better translated
(and agrees with the originall) for time and
chance comes to all. Now by time in the text is
meant, that varietie of condition, that God hath
appointed to euery man vnder the Sunne, as David
vseth the word,Psal. 31. 15. Psal. 31. 15. My times are in
thy hands; My times, that is, the varietie of conditions,
the changes of my life, the good and evill,
the prosperitie and adversitie that befals me,
sayth he, they are not in the hands of my enemies,
nor in mine own hands, but they are in thy hands
I say, there the word is so vsed, and so we are to
vnderstand it in this place, for time comes to all,
sayth he, that is, when God hath appointed such
changes to the states of men, if riches, if strength,
if wisedome, diligence, or skill, were able to turne
the counsels of God another way, if it were able
to anticipate them, or to diuert them, then the
battaile might be to the strong, etc. but, sayth he,
it is not so; What God hath appointed, they cannot
alter. You shall see it in many examples.
Saul was well established;Instances. but when God had
appointed a change of his Kingdome, that it
should go from him to David, you see he brought
it to passe. Though he were as strong as a Lyon, as
David testifieth of him, though hee had many

children to inherit the Crowne, though the people
claue fast to him (you doe not finde that ever
they rose vp in rebellion against him) yet when
God had appointed such a time to passe over him
and his house, all that strength, all that fitnes and
preparation that was in him, and his familie to
continue the Kingdome to his posteritie, it could
not turne aside Gods Counsell, but it came to
passe.
Ely had a great familie, there were many Priests
of his line; yet when God had said he would cut
off from Ely his whole familie, and would turne
the Priesthood to another, you see how he found
out meanes to bring it to passe; how many Priests
were killed in one day by Dveg in the time of Saul?
and afterwards, when Abiathar, one of that posteritie,
was tooke in, by David, yet he was cast out
by Salomon, through an accident that fell out in
his adherence to Adoniah.
Ahab, the Lord had said he would cut him off
and his posteritie, though he had seaventie sonnes;
you might wonder how it should come to passe,
that none of these sonnes should inherite the
Crowne, and yet all were cut off, and not a man
left by the hand of Iehu. When God, I say, hath appointed
varietie of changes, times, and conditions
to the sonnes of men, mans strength is not able to
divert his Counsell; and therefore the battaile is
not to the strong, etc.
The last reason is likewise here vsed,4. Cause. and chance
commeth to them all: That is, though a man be never
so able, never so sufficient, never so well prepared

to bring an enterprise to passe, yet some accident
may turne it some other way, an accident
that he can neither foresee, nor prevent; Therefore
sayth the holy Ghost, though he be never so wise,
chance may happen to him, he can neither foresee
all the accidents, that come to passe, or, if he
should, he knowes not how to prevent them.
Ahab, for ought we see, went well enough to
the battaile, Iehoshaphat and he, yet, sayth the text,
a man drew a bow at adventure, etc. (which accident
he could not foresee,) the man aymed no
more at Ahab, nor vnderstood it no more then the
arrow that he shot, but it was a meere accident
directed by God, that he could not foresee.
Haman thought he had made his preparations
strong enough to bring his enterprise to passe, to
overthrow the Iewes; there came an accident betweene,
the King could not sleepe, he cals for the
booke of the Chronicles, and turnes to that place
where Mordecaies discovery of a treason was recorded,
and so Mordecai was advanced, etc. This
was a chance that befell him; although he were
never so well fitted to bring his enterprise to passe,
yet this he could neither foresee, nor prevent.
Many such instances we might giue.
So you see now the reason of this, that men of
the greatest sufficiencie and abilitie, men that haue
made their preparations most perfect, yet, they
doe not alwayes attaine to their hopes and ends;
And contrariwise, men that are more weake and
vnable, which haue not made such preparations,
they obtaine often their hopes and ends.
The vse wee are to make of it, is
First,Vse. let men learne from hence. Not to boast
of any outward strength, of any wisedome,Not to boast of outward things. in
that their foundation is made strong vnder them,
that they are well bottomed, that they are thus
compassed about with friends, and estate etc.
For you see though a man intends to get by all
things, yet the event and successe comes not to
passe accordingly, but oft they faile and disappoint
him. Therefore let not men boast of them;
be a man never so strong, never so wise, yet hee
may as soone faile as he that is weake, and most
foolish.
See an example of it in Asa. 2. Cron. 14. 6. 7. 8.2 Chron. 14. 6. 7. 8.
You may see there how he built the Citties, hee
had made him strong Bulwarkes. There was not
a King of Iudah, that wee reade of, that had
strengthned himselfe more then he; he had fiue
hundred and forescore thousand valiant men,
all well armed and appointed to beare the shield
and Speare; (The text sets it downe very particularly,
that we might see Asa's safety, his strength
and his securitie, if you looke vpon the creature)
yet sayth the text the Ethiopians came against
him, with a thousand thousand men; whence I
gather this. That there is no man so safe and so
strong, but he is still subject to danger, and that
partly by reason of the vanitie of the creature.
For all the strength that a man hath, it is but the
strength of the creature, and the creature is made
of such brittle ingredients, that of it selfe it is
readie to moulder away and faile. There is not

in the creature it selfe any stabilitie, they are but
houses of clay, the best of the creatures, that is,
they are made of mouldring mettall, they are readie
to vanish of themselues, and if they were not,
yet there is some thing stronger. Let a man bee
never so strong, (who is the best of all the creatures)
yet, man is but as the grasse, and as the
flower of the grasse. The grasse of it selfe oft-times
fades, though no Sithe come neere it, but if it
doe not fade of it selfe, yet it is cut downe: so
there is none so strong, but there may bee stronger.
Asa was strong, but hee met with one that
was stronger then he, the Lubims and Ethiopians;
and yet as strong as they were, they met with one
that was stronger then they, because God did
helpe him, and assist him, so then let no man
boast of himselfe.
If wisedome would keepe a man safe, Salomon
had never fallen as hee did. If possessions would
keepe a man safe, Ieroboam and Ahab had never
bin ruined, as they were. If the fauour of Princes
could keepe a man safe, Haman had not had
that miserable end, that he had. If courage, fortitude,
and valour could keepe a man safe, Ioab and
Abner had continued safe: but you know how
they both fell. So that you see nothing vnd^^ the
Sunne is able to keepe a man safe. Therefore let
not a man boast in any thing, that he hath; be (...)
never so wel appointed, let him haue all the creatures
agree together, to make a hedge about him,
yet afflictions, crosses, and troubles will finde
some gap or other into that hedge, to breake in

vpon him. All things that he hath are subject to
mutability; Riches take themselues wings, and
flie away, that is, though a man thinke they are
sure, he cannot see how hee could easily be dispossessed
of them, yet sayth hee, they are as a
flocke of Birds,Simile. that sit in a mans ground, hee
cannot promise himselfe any certaintie of them,
because they haue winges, and will flie away;
such are riches.
And so credit; be a man never so innocent,
let him giue no occasion at all, let him keepe
himselfe never so blamelesse, and vnspotted of the
world, yet his credit is not in his owne keeping,
honor est in potestate honorantis etc. Honour is not
in a mans owne power. You know though Ioseph
was very innocent, yet he was blamed; and so David
and Christ. And as it is sayd of honour, so it may be
of all the rest, wealth, and friends, and whatsoever a
man hath; let no man boast himselfe, because he is
a strong man, because he is of vnderstanding, because
he is rich, because he is of abilitie in his busines,
because hee is a man of skill, for by these
things he shall not obtaine his ends and hopes.
Nay, my beloved, let me be bold to adde this.
If a man begin to thinke himselfe safe for these,
and to grow confident vpon them, and say thus
with himselfe and his owne heart, well, now I am
thus and thus rooted, I am now compassed about
with these and these helpes, I see not now how I
shuld be remoued; let him know this, that God wil
so much the rather blow vpon him, that he will so
much the rather dissettle him, and take him off,

that he will so much the rather turne away his face,God delights to crosse men in carnal confidence. and he shall be troubled.
I say God will doe it so much the rather, partly,
 because that successe of things is his,To maintaine his own right* and when a
man will begin to challenge it to himselfe, God
will begin then to looke to his owne right, and
challenge his owne priviledge. You shall find in
1. Sam. 17. 47.1 Sam. 17. 47. David giues this reason, why he
should prevaile against Goliah, it is not I, but the
battle, sayth he, is the Lords, as if hee should say,
if the battle were mine, or thine, it may bee, Goliah,
thou mightest prevaile against mee, it may
be thou mightest over-come me, but the battle is
the Lords: So we may say in this case. The event
and successe of things, the good and evill that
comes to a man, vpon that preparation and indevour
that hee makes, it is the Lords, and not any
mans, nor any creatures. Therefore when a
man challengeth it to himselfe and boasts of it,
and thinkes I will doe this, the Lord will not doe
it, the battaile is his, and as it is said of the battaile,
so all things else are his, and therefore he will
not dispose them according to mans preparations,
but disposeth of them according to his owne
purpose.
 Againe,To shew his power. God will doe it the rather, that he might
shew forth his owne power, and discover the Creatures
weaknesse, especially when a Creature shall
pride it selfe in any of these outward things, as Asahel
did in his swiftnesse, it was the cause of his
overthrow, and indeede God vsually takes men in
such things, when they begin to boast, I shall now

haue the battaile, because I am strong. These
things, I say, are commonly their ruine. The policie
of Achitophell, the hayre of Absalom; and so
many a mans wealth, many a mans wit, that thing
wherein their strength lies, wherein they boast
themselues, God causeth to be the meanes of their
ruine: he takes them in these things, that he might
discover his owne power, and the vanitie and weaknes
of the Creature.
Againe;To shew his providence. The Lord doth it so much the rather,
when men grow in confidence of their owne
strength, that he might manifest his owne providence,
and therefore he puts in many accidents,
which turne things another way. It is true, my
Beloved, when men goe well prepared to the battaile,
and doe overcome, there is a providence of
God in that, as well as when they get the battaile
by some chance, or accident; but by reason of the
infirmitie of man, by reason of the iniudiciousnes
that he is subject vnto, they doe not so much acknowledge
this providence in an ordinary course,
as they doe in accidentall things, that are done by
occasion, by sudden intercurrent causes, that wee
are not able to fore-see. Therefore, I say, God delights
to doe it so much the rather, when men are
prepared, and say with themselues, what should
hinder me? What should keepe me from bringing
such an enterprise to passe? God therefore puts in
some accident, and turnes it another way, that his
providence might be seene and acknowledged.
The Conclusion is, let none boast themselues,
that this and this I will doe, because I am strong,

for God will turne all a contrary way. So much
for the first vse.
Secondly;2. Vse. As men are not to boast themselues
when they are strong;Not to be discouraged in want of preparation. So likewise if the battaile
be not alwayes to the strong, but that sometimes
also to the weake, let no man be discouraged because
he is weake, because he is vnprepared, because
he is not so well furnished to bring such an
enterprise to passe. For as there are certaine times
that God will haue to passe over men for their evill
(that be a man never so strong, as he hath appointed
his change and condition, so it shall come to
 passe,)Because weaknesse cannot frustrate Gods purpose. So also there is a certaine time that God
hath appointed for other mens good and advancement;
when a man is weake and low, his weakenesse,
and follie, and inabilitie, shall no more frustr^te,
turne aside and prevent his advancement,
when God will bring it vpon him, then the strength
or wisedome of the other shall turne away Gods
decree, and prevent the counsell of God against
him.
 Besides,Gods hand is then most seene. when a man is weake, God puts in an
accident, that he may haue the prayse of his providence,
that men may say he hath done it, whereas
if things went in ordinarie course, they might
ascribe it to the second Causes.
 Againe;God hath more glorie in that case. The Lord rather delights to doe it,
even when men are weake, because therein his
glorie is most seene, he delights to manifest his
power in our weaknesse. And therefore Paul, when
he saw this, he sayth, he will reioyce in his infirmities:
That is, he thought his infirmities would be

a very great advantage to him, partly, because they
would keepe him humble; that is one reason;
And partly, because he thought that God would
the rather put forth his power, because he was
weake, that he should the rather haue Gods power
to vphold him. Therefore, I say, let not men be
discouraged for their weakenesse; be the adversaries
never so strong, and their resolutions never
so fixed, yet they shall not prevaile, if God haue
purposed otherwise.
You see how peremptorie Iezabels speech was,
God doe so and so, etc. if I make no Eliah as one of
the Prophets of Baal by to morrow this time; yet
you see he was safe notwithstanding this.
Thus was it also when the Iewes had vowed with
themselues the death of ^aul; he was in great danger,
there was fortie to one, and their resolution
was so strong, as it could not be altered; yet God
kept him safe, he prevailed, and they were disappointed.
So Elisha, when the King thought to haue taken
off his head, though he had the power of a
King, and his purpose was firme, that it should
come to passe, to a full height, there was no doubt
made of it, yet God kept him safe.
Therefore, let vs be incouraged on the other
side that are weake, God is able to hide vs, he is able
to strengthen vs, to giue vs advantage and
successe, when we are vnable to helpe our selues:
for as it is true, that the battaile is not alwayes to the
strong, nor favour to the wise, etc. So it is ture on

the other side, that many times when men are
not strong, when men are not wise, when they
mannage not their businesse with that prudence,
warinesse, and circumspection that they
should doe, yet oftentimes they
haue successe, when the
other want it.
So much shall serue for this time.
FINIS.



THE
FOVRTH
SERMON.

ECCLESIASTES 9. 11. 1^.
And I returned, and sawe vnder the Sunne,
that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battaile to the strong, etc.

YOu know where we left, we proceede
to that which remaines.
In the third place,Vse 3. If men of the greatest
sufficiencie and abilitie may o^ten be
disappointed, that the battaile is not alwayes to the
strong,Not to be over-ioyfull or sorrowfull for good or ill successe. nor the race to the swift, This should teach
vs then not to be lifted vp, but to be thankefulls in
our best successe, and on the contrary, not to be
over-much dejected, but to beare it patiently,
when things speed ill. If any man haue good successe
in any busines and enterprise, he is not to
attribute it to his owne strength, to his own wisedome;
since that, as you see, so often failes.

The Creature hath not power enough in it selfe
to bring any enterprise to passe, it can neither see
all the wheeles, that tend to make vp an enterprise,
or though it see them, it is not able to turne
them all. And therefore if it be done, it is the
Lord that doth it, and the prayse is onely to be given
to him.
Beloved, this is a necessary poynt. It is vsuall
with vs to be very earnest with God, when a busines
is to be done; but we forget to prayse him afterwards.
And whence proceedes this, but from
a secret attribution of what is done to our owne
wit, to our owne strength, to our owne policie,
to other occasions? Whereas if he were acknowledged,
we should be readie to giue him the praise
of all that we doe.
David was a wise man, yet you shall finde,
1 Sam. 18.1 Sam. 18. he did not therefore carrie himselfe
wisely in all his affayres, because he had an habituall
gift of wisedome, but, sayth the text, because
the Lord was with him. The Lord was with him to
guide him in euery action, to direct him what to
doe vpon euery particular occasion, and thence it
was, that he carried himselfe wisely in all his affayres.
Cyrus was a valiant man, and a potent; yet the
Scripture attributes it not to his strength that he
prevailed as he did, but sayth, that he was GODS
Shepheard, he was his instrument, it was God that
vsed him, it was God that wrought his worke for
him.
Nebuchadnezzar was a mightie potent Prince,

and prevailed which way soev^r he turned himselfe;
yet God tels him, it was he that gaue him dominion
and victorie wheresoever he went
And as it is true on this hand, so it is likewise
on the other; when a man hath ill successe in any
busines, let him not say, it was because he did not
mannage it wisely, because he had su^h an enemy
to oppose him, or because such an accident fell
out to crosse him; no, that is not the cause; The
Reason is here rendred: for time and hance happens
to every man: That is, if there he any such
accident, if there be any crosse event fals out to
hinder him in his enterprise at that time, it is in
Gods disposing, it is God that hath done it. And
therefore you see, in the evill events, that haue vpon
any occasion befallen the Church, if you obserue
the phrase of Scripture, it is not attributed
to them, but to God. When the spirit of Pul, and
Tiglapellezer, were stirred vp against the people of
Israell, sayth the Text, 1 Chron. 5.1 Chro 5. 26. the Lord stirred
them vp against the people; it was not they that
did it, but it was the Lord, that stirred them vp.
So likewise he poured forth his wrath by the
hands of Shishak; and, as David expresseth it in
his owne case, God hath bidden Shemei curse David.
So it is in many other places. Therefore let not
men sit downe discouraged, vexing themselues,
and eating vp their hearts with griefe. Let not
men say, If such an accident had not beene, I had
prevailed; for, it is this time and chance, that turnes
the event of businesses, which is from the Lord,
and not from man. Therefore labour to be thankfull

to him in the best successe, and not to sacrifice
to your owne wits, or to giue him thankes in
a formall manner, but heartily to acknowledge
him; And likewise to be patient in all the cros^es
and troubles that befall vs. So much for this
third vse.
Fourthly,Vse 4. and lastly; If men of the greatest abilities
be so often disappointed,Not to make flesh our arme. that the battaile is
not to the strong, nor the race to the swi^t, etc. Then
learne we hence, not to make flesh our arme, not to
trust in any strength of our own, in any wisedome
of our owne, or other mens; for if this would doe
it, if the strength of any man, if the policie of any
man were able to bring any enterprise to pafse,
it would alwayes doe it; If it were the swiftnesse
of him that runs, that could get the race, If it were
the strength of him that fighteth, that could obtaine
the battaile. I say, it would alwayes doe it:
And therefore seeing it fals not out so, but theevents
are turned a contrary way, that is a signe
it is not in them, but in something else. Therefore,
I say, take we heede of making flesh our arme,
of saying thus with our selues, because we haue
these preparations, because we haue these meanes,
therefore our worke shall succeede: for that is not
so; for we see often in experience, when a man
comes to a businesse with much confidence, out
of a reflection vpon his owne abilitie to doe it,
for the most part it succeeds ill: As on the other
side, when a man comes with feare and diffidence
in himselfe, for the most part he prospereth best.
And you haue a rule for it,Ier. 17. Iere. 17. Cursed is he

that makes flesh his arme; Cursed is he, that is God
hath ingaged himselfe, when a man will make flesh
his arme, to blow vpon his enterprises, and to
cause them to wither.
Againe, blessed is he, that trusts in the Lord,
that is, God is tied by his promise to giue successe
in such a case. Therefore that vse we should make
of it, not to trust to our owne strength, to our
owne wisedome, nor to other mens. For, Beloved,
what is it, when we haue other men that are
strong, and wise, and potent to rest vpon? Are
they able to bring it to passe? You shall finde that
expression Psal. 31.Psal. 31. a place that I touched in the
morning vpon another occasion; David tels vs
there, that great men sat and spake against him,
and consulted together to take away ^is life; but,
sayth he, my times are in thy hands: As if he should
say, my times, and the disposing of all my affaires,
good and evill successe to me, they are not in their
hands, be they never so potent, they are not in the
hands of Saul, they are not in the hands of Doeg,
they are not in the hands of all mine enemies,
but Lord, my times are in thy hands. So then, if we
could learne this lesson aright, we should not be
discouraged, when the most potent men are set against
vs, not be much incouraged when they are
for vs. That in Isa. 51. 12.Isa. 51. 12. is excellent for this purpose,
Who art thou, sayth he, that fe^rest mortall
man, whose breath is in his nostrils, and who shall be
made as the grasse? That is, if such a man be never
so potent, yet, sayth he, consider his br^ath is in
his nostrils, and he shall be made as the grasse:

that is,Why we feare men. in truth he is of no power. But the reason
now why men doe feare, why men are discouraged
in such cases, you shall finde in the verse following,
who art thou, sayth he, that doest this,
and forgettest the Lord thy maker, who made heaven
and earth, who stretcheth forth the heavens, and laid
the foundations of the earth? You never finde a man
that feares a great man, a potent man, but the true
ground of it is, because he forgets the Lord his maker;
if he did remember the mightie God, he that
stretcheth forth the heavens, and that layes the
foundations of the earth; Man would appeare a
mortall man. You may take it for a certaine generall
rule, a mans heart is never possessed with feare,
vpon such an occasion, but when he forgets God,
the great God; he would never else feare a great
man. On the other side, he would never be confident
in such occasions, but when he remembers
not the Lord. Therefore learne we neither to feare
them, when they are against vs, or to trust them
when they are for vs.
We vsually pittie the case of Marchants, for say
we, their goods hangs on ropes, they depend vpon
vncertaine windes; but certainely, he that
trusts in man, is in a worse condition; for he rests
vpon the affections of a man, that are more vncertaine
then the winde. What so brittle, and so vnconstant?
We see that for the most part they are
carried to doe vs good or evill with by-respects,
with something touching themselues, they are
turned to and fro, as the Weather-cocks and Mils
are, that when the winde ceaseth, and when the

waters fayle, stand still, they are driven to doe for
vs so long as such respects leade them, no longer.
And therefore, to trust in men, it is not the safest,
it is not the wisest way. See this in some few examples.
David how inconstant did he finde the
people,Instances of inconstancy. and apt to rebell against him? and so Moses,
yea, David himselfe, though he was a holy
men, yet how inconstant was he, inconstant to
Mephibosheth, one that was innocent, one that
had never done him any wrong, one that had never
given him occasion? How inconstant was he
to Ioab, when he had prevailed in that battaile against
Absolom? How quickly was he out of grace
and place, when he had saved Davids life and recovered
the Kingdome, and Amaziah that was
but a reconciled enemy put into his roome?
These and many such like examples you shall find.
Abner how inconstant was he to Ishbosheth? even
for a word spoken against him, and a word that he
gaue him occasion enough to speake, a word that
he neede not haue beene so much offended at, he
fals off from him for it; and this it is to trust in
man; I say, either in a mans owne wisedome, or
strength, or in any other mans. This place shewes
what a great follie it is. The battaile is not to the
strong: That is, let a man be never so well compassed
about with strength, and wisedome of men, let
him put himselfe, and his friends into the number,
yet he is not safe; but let him trust in God, and
he is safe in midst of dangers. Sampson and Ishbosheth,
when they were in the midst of their friends,
when they were asleepe, they were circumvented.

David on the other side, when he was asleepe in
the midst of his enemies, when there was an hoast
pitched against him, yet, sayth he, I laid me downe
and slept: Why? because the Lord sustained me.
So that both for our safetie when we are in danger,
and likewise to haue our workes wrought
for vs, to trust in God, and not to trust either in
our owne wisedome, or in the wisedome, or
strength of man, that we shall finde constantly to
be the best way.
When David abstained from going vp to battaile
against Naball, when he tooke the counsell of
his wife, and when he abstained from putting violent
hands vpon Saul, you see how God wrought
it for him: he gaue him Nabals wife, he gaue him
Saules wiues, and his houses, and his Kingdome into
his hands; this he got by trusting him. But when
men will make their owne wayes, when they will
goe about enterprises with their owne wisedome,
In his owne wisedome and strength shall no man be
strong: God hath said it, and he will make it good
vpon all occasions. The conclusion therefore is,
if the battaile be not to the strong, nor the race to
the swift, etc. If men of the greatest abilitie are often
disappointed of their hopes and ends, then we should
not make flesh our Arme, but trust in God, both
for safetie in danger, and to bring our enterpises
to passe. And so much for this point. Wee now
proceede.
Neither doth man know his time.
This is added, partly as a second vanitie, which
Salomon saw vnder the Sunne, and partly as a reason

of the former. For, sayth he, though men be
strong, and wise, yet there is a certaine season to
doe things in, that they may mistake, which causeth
them to fayle; for man knowes not his time:
and from hence he drawes this Consequence, because
men know not their times, therefore they are
snared in an evill time, because they know not the
good time, when good actions should be done,
therefore evill times come vpon them suddenly,
that is, they take them vnawares; and this he illustrates
by two Similitudes, They come vpon them,
sayth he, as an evill net comes vpon fishes, and as the
snare vpon the fowles. So that in these three propositions,
you shall haue the full meaning of these
words; and these therefore wee will handle distinctly.
First, that there is a time allotted for every purpose,
and to every businesse.
Secondly, that it is very hard to finde out that
time.
And thirdly, because men cannot finde this
time, but mistake it, therefore evill times come
vpon them suddenly, that is, crosses, afflictions,
and destruction comes vpon them suddenly, even
as the snrre vpon the fowle, and as a ^et vpon the fishes.
And that this is the meaning of this place,
and that these three points are included in it, you
may see best by comparing it with another of the
like sence,Eccles. 8. 4. 5. 6. 7. Eccles. 8. 4. 5. 6. 7. Where the word of the
King is, there is power, and who shall say to him,
what doest thou? That is, it is a dangerous thing to
admonish Princes; who shall say to a Prince,

what doest thou, sayth the Wiseman? There is a
time wherein we may admonish Princes safely,
although they be exceeding powerfull, although
they haue it in their owne power to take away the
spirit, etc. as he sayth afterwards, yet there is a
time.
But how shall a man know that time?Quest.
Saith he,Answ. he that keepes the Commandement, shall
know no evill thing, and the heart of the wise shall
know the time and the Iudgement: That is, he shall
know when to giue a seasonable admonition to a
Prince, or to a great man; for, sayth he, to every
purpose there is a time and a Iudgement, that is,
there is a time and a discretion, (that is the meaning
of the word in the originall,) when any actio^
is to be done, there is a certaine exact time; If you
goe before it, or if you come after it, there is much
danger in it, if you hit vpon the iust time, you are
like to be succesfull in it; for to every purpose,
there is a time, and a Iudgement, because the miserie
of man is great vpon him: That is, it is the Lords
pleasure to appoint such a certaine time to every
purpose, and to every action, that he might discover
to men that vanitie to which they are subject,
and likewise that he might inflict his Iudgements
vpon them; The miserie of man is great
vpon him, because every purpose hath a time.
But how shall this be proved?Quest.
He proues it by this;Ans. for, sayth he, he knowes
not what shall be; for who can tell him what shall
be? That is, as if he should say, If a man did know
this time, he were safe enough, he were free enough

from miserie, but since he neither knowes
it himselfe, nor is there any that can tell him,
therefore the miserie of man is great vpon him.
Thus you see that in both these places these three
poynts are included, and these I will run over, and
so make vse of them.
First,There is a time allotted to every a^tion. there is a certaine time, that God hath allotted
to every purpose, and to every businesse;
If you take that time, you may succeede in it, if
you misse it, it is exceeding dangerous. As you
shall see Eccles. 3.Eccles. 3. To all things there is an appointed
time, to every purpose vnder heaven; There is
a time to be borne, and a time to die, a time to
plant, and a time to pull vp; a time to slay, and a
time to heale, etc. A time to weepe, and a time to
laugh. All these particulars mentioned by Salomon,
may be divided into these three rankes; for
all naturall actions, as well as those that are voluntarie,
and done by consultation, there is a time
that God hath set.
Againe, for all lighter actions, as well as for
actions of moment, there is a time.
Againe, for all private actions, as well as for
those that are publique, there is a time, that is, not
a time which man in prudence will chuse out but
a time which God hath appointed, a time which
God hath set downe; if a man hit vpon that time
which God hath allotted, he shall succeede in it,
ots^erwise he failes. So you see Act. 17. 26.Act. 17. 26. he
hath made of one bloud all mankinde to dwell
vpon the face of the earth, and hath assigned the
times that were ordained before, and the bounds

of their ha^itations; That is to say, the times of
every man, the times for every mans state and
condition, the times for the severall changes to
which every man, every Common-wealth, and
every Cittie is subject, these times God hath assigned,
he hath ordained them before, and they are
as bounds that cannot be passed. The like you see
Iob 14. 5. 6.Iob. 5. 6. Are not his dayes determined, and the
number of his moneths with thee, thou hast appointed
his bounds that he cannot passe. (Marke it)
As if he should say; There is not a man comes into
the world, but God hath appointed him certaine
bounds, he cannot passe the number of his
moneths; That even as a man deales with an
hireling, (for that Similitude he vseth presently
after in the next verse,) he agrees with him for
such a time; So long you shall worke and no longer;
So sayth he, God hath appointed every man
so many moneths, so many yeares, he must doe
him service, some ten yeares, some twenty yeares,
some fortie yeares: As you see it is said of David,
Act. 13. 35.Act. 13. 35. When he had served his time by the
Councell of God. As if he should say; There is an
appointed time that David had to do him service
in, he did him service as a King. And so in the
same Chapter, it is said, Iohn Baptist, when he had
finished his course, etc. That is; There was a certaine
race that he was to run; he could not come
short of it, nor he could not goe beyond it. So that
both to the actions of men, to every purpose, to
every action, and busines that is done in the life of
a man, there is a certaine time appointed, there is

a certaine time that God hath allotted, and as a
man obserues this time, So is it better or worse
with him.
But before I come to the second, let me shew
you the Reasons in a word, why God hath appointed
these times, God hath set these times: That is,
God hath appointed such times for busin^sses, for
every purpose;Reas. 1. partly, because they cannot be
done in another time: and therefore it is said to
be an allotted time; If you take another time, you
may labour, and labour in vaine: As you see Eccles.
3. 9.Eccles. 3. 9. after he had sayd, there is a time for every
purpose, he addes this, and what profit hath he that
workes of the thing wherein he travels; As if he
should say, If a man misse of these times, what
profit is there of his worke, though he travaile never
so diligently in it, if he misse his time, if he
pitch not right vpon his time, God workes not
with him, there is no concourse with him, so he
labours in vaine.
Secondly;Reas. 2. There is an allotted time, because
God in his providence, in all his workes, he doth,
what he doth, in measure, in number, he waighes
every thing, and makes it beautifull; now euery
thing is beautifull in its season; out of its season,
it is not beautifull. And that is another reason,
that he likewise here renders, vers. 11. he hath
made every thing beautifull in his time, therefore
there is a time allotted to euery action, and to euery
purpose: because if it misse of this time, it is
not beautifull, there is a desormitie, there is an obliquitie
in it, the beautie, the preciousnes, and the
comelinesse of it, is lost.
Thirdly,Reas. 3.God hath appointed a certaine time,
he hath allotted a time to euery action, out of his
owne royall prerogatiue, he will not haue men
to know the times; but the times must be of his
allotting, he hath appointed a time to euery thing,
wherein his great soveraignty over the creatures,
and over all things appeares; and therefore you
shall see,Act. 1. 7. Act. 1. 7. It is not for you, sayth he, to
know the times, and seasons, neither to know them,
nor appoint them; for, sayth he, those the Lord
keepes in his owne power; and therefore it it he
that hath allotted a time to euery thing. It is he
also that concealeth and hideth them from the
sonnes of men. And this is the first point; That
to every action there is a time appointed.
Secondly;It is hard to finde out the time. to finde out this time, is exceeding
hard, because it is not in the power of any man to
know it, except God guide him to see it, there are
not principles in man, there is not the sufficiencie
of wisedome, to finde out the fitnes of time, except
God guide him to pitch vpon that time.
Now if the Lord were pleased to reveale to men
these seuerall times, allotted to actions, it were an
easie thing to finde it out: but he hath kept them
to himselfe, and that for these two Causes.
One is;Reas. 1. That men might watch, for if men
knew the time,To teach vs watchfulnes. they would be loose, and neglect,
till the time came; Therefore, sayth he, seeing
thou knowest not the time when he will come,
whether at night, or at what time of the night,
whether at the dawning, or at the Cocke-crowing;
whether at the first watch, or at the second,

therefore watch; As if he should say, If men knew
the time certainely, they would sleepe till that
time, and then they would be awake; but God
will haue men watch.
Secondly;Reas. 2. God hath appointed these times, and
reserved them to himsel^e,That men may lea^ne to feare the Lord, and depend vpon him. that men might learne
to feare him, that they might learne to keepe a
continuall dependance vpon him, for if the times
were in our owne hands, we might mannage our
businesse with our owne strength, but when they
are in Gods hands, we know not what to morrow
will bring forth;Iam 4. Therefore Iames sayth, say not,
I will doe such a thing, I will goe to such a place, and
stay there a yeare, and buy and sell; for, sayth he, it is
not in your hands, your life is not in your owne
hands to effect this busines. If you doe liue, it is
not in your hands; and therefore you ought to say,
if the Lord will. And therfore to keep men in this
dependancie vpon him, God hath reserved these
times vnto himselfe.
The third,3. Proposit. and last proposition is, That because
men misse of these times, therefore their miserie is
great vpon them,Because men mis^e the time they ^all into miserie. partly, because they do not effect
the thing they goe about, when they misse of their
time; for the Lord workes not with them, when
they hit vpon a wrong time; partly also because
they fayling in their dutie, not taking the good
time that God hath appointed, he in his most just
judgement sends vpon them evill times, that suddenly
come vpon them, euen as a snare vpon the birds.
As you see when birds are feeding quietly and fearing
nothing, then an evill snare comes and takes

them; So it is with men, when they haue missed
their times, when they thinke they are safest, when
they speake peace to themselues; when they thinke
that danger is farthest off, then evill times come
suddenly vpon them. This you shall see best in examples.
Gehezi,Instances. when he tooke a gift of Naaman; The
Prophet his Maister reproues him in these words;
Gehezi, sayth he, is this a time to receiue gifts? As
if he should say; To take a gift in it selfe is not amisse;
but this is not a time for it: for Naaman was
but a stranger.
Againe, he was but a beginner in beleeving, in
the true God, and therefore to take a gift of him,
that was not a time.
It was the manner (you know) to bring gifts
to the olde Prophets, not for reward of their Prophesies,
but for the maintenance of their estate;
So Saul brought to Samuel a gift, and therefore
in some cases it might haue beene seasonable, but
sayth he, is this a time to take a gift of such a man,
vpon such an occasion, at such a season? And what
miserie came vpon Gehezi for missing his time?
sayth his Maister; The leprosie of Naaman the Assyrian
shall cleaue to thee, that miserie came vpon
him.
So you shall see Haggai 1.Haggai 1. The people did a lawfull
action, but they missed of the time; Thus sayth
the Lord of hosts; This people say the time is not yet,
when the Lords house should be built: Then came the
Word of the Lord, by the ministerie of the Prophet
Haggai, saying, Is it a time for your selues to dwell in

seeled hou^^s, and this house lie wast? Therefore now
saith the Lord of hosts, you haue sowne much, but you
haue brought in little, you eate, but you haue not enough,
you drinke, but you are not filled, you cloath you,
but you are not warmed, and he that earneth wages,
he puts it into a broken bagge. It was a lawfull thing
for them to build houses to dwell in, and to enioy,
but, sayth he, is this a time to dwell in your seeled
houses? As if he should say, You haue mis^ed of
the time. And what then? You see therefore their
misery was great on them; you haue sowne much,
but you bring in little, etc.
Iacob, It was lawfull for him to haue sought the
blessing, but, because he missed of the time, you
see his misery was great vpon him, how many
sore yeares of travaile had he vnder his vncle Laban?
And this was because he missed of his time.
On the other side, David that did hit vpon his
time, God promised him a Kingdome, and he stayed
his time, you see he had it with good successe,
he had it in such a manner, as was fit for him; for
he stayed his time.
Rehoboam is another example, when he consulted
with the olde men; They tolde him, that if he
would serue the people at that time, they should be his
servants for ever; but he followed the counsell of
the young men, and you see what fell out vpon
this, the missing of his time; for that was the
counsell that the olde men gaue him, if thou wilt
serue them at this time, etc. As if they had s^yd,
Rehoboam, thou thinkest it will be disadvantage to
thee, if thou let the raines loose vpon them; and

not restraine, and curbe them in the beginning,
but thou missest of thy time: There is a time for
meeknes, and a time for roughnes; There is a
time for clemencie, there is a time againe for severitie,
but this is not a time for Rehoboam to vse
severitie, in the beginning of his Raigne, therefore
you see his miserie was great vpon him, he lost
ten tribes by this meanes.
So likewise, The people of Israell, when they
sought a King for themselues, it was lawfull for
them to seeke a King; for God had appointed from
all eternitie David to be their King, and if Saul
had not beene their King, David had beene King
at the same season that he was; but their error was
in the time, they would haue a King, when Samuel
raign^d over them; when God was pleased to
Iudge them by the hand of the Prophets, more
immediately then by the hand of the King, and
therefore he sayth, that himselfe ruled over them;
and therefore God tels them, because they would
needes haue a King now, because they would anticipate
him, (they would haue a King before God
had appointed them a King,) therefore this curse
should goe with their King, he shall doe thus and
thus to you; he shall take your sonnes, and put
them into his Chariots, he shall take your da^ghters,
and make them Apothecaries, he shall take
your Vineyards, and your Oliue trees. Thus your
King shall doe to you, because you haue missed
your time, your miserie shall be great vpon you.
The like you shall see in the Children of Israell*
Num. 14.Num. 14. The people might lawfully fight against

the Cananites, you know, they were brought forth
for that purpose; yet because they missed of their
time, they would doe it at that time when they
were not appointed, Moses tels them if they would
needes goe vp, they should fall before their enemies,
and accordingly it fell out so; for they missed
of their time. I neede not run through more
examples, Iosiah, and David, if you lay these two
examples together; you shall finde, David went
not out to warre when he should; and the other
went when he should not, and so missed of their
times; and you see what miserie it brought vpon
them, vpon David it brought the greatest misery
of all other, which was the giuing of him vp to
such sinnes, as that of murther, and adulterie, that
brought all the evill that he suffered afterwards.
And Iosiah, it cost him his life: for he went out
vnseasonablie, and did mistake the time which
God had allotted for such an enterprise. So you
see now these three; there is a time allotted to every
purpose, to every busi^es. And it is hard to
know it; for God keepes it to himselfe, he reve^les
it when it pleaseth him, he pitcheth one man by
his providence, by the secret guidance of his spirit,
vpon a right time, when another misseth it,
I meane not that it is alwayes done in mercie,
but in the ordinary disposition of time, to them
that know him not; for when a man pitcheth vpon
the time, it is he that guides him.
Thirdly, because men misse of their time, the miserie
is great vpon them, it comes vpon them; that
is, some evill times come vpon them suddenly,

it comes vpon them like a snare.
Now briefly,Vse. the vse we should make of it, is
this,Not onely to looke to our actions, but the time of them. That we be carefull, not onely to doe the
actions that belong to our Callings, either our
generall Calling, as we are Christians, or our particular
Calling, in our ordinarie busines, it is not
enough to doe them, but to looke narrowly to the
time. It is a Rule among Divines, that an action
is not good, except it haue all the Circumstances
good. An action may be evill vpon missing any
one, therefore the time is an ingredient into the
goodnesse of the action, were the action never so
good, if the time be missed, it makes the action
evill when we doe it out of its season; when wee
doe it not in its time. As it is said of words, when
they are in season; they are beautifull: So it is true
of euery action, when it is done in its owne season
it is beautifull, if it be not, there is some deformitie
in it, some obliquitie, and by consequent, some
sinfulnesse, if it be a morall action, or somewhat
that brings evill after it, if it be an action of another
nature. Now, the actions wherein we are
to looke so narrowly to our times, are of three
sorts.
Some are the actions that God hath commanded
vs to doe.Watch our times in the things God commandeth. Wherein, it is not enough for vs
to doe the workes, but we must obserue the times.
To admonish is a good action, and it is commanded
vs, but to doe it in an vnseasona^le time, either
vnseasonably to him that admonisheth, or to
him that is admonished, it spoyles the action.
To be thankful for mercies, and to pay our vowes,

it is a good action; but yet if the time be missed,
and we giue not thankes in due season, if you pay
not your vowes but deferre them, he that deferres
his vow, though the action be good in it selfe, yet
if the time be missed, he provokes God to anger,
and sinnes against him. It is a lawfull thing for vs,
to doe the workes of our Calling, and to do them
diligently, yet if we doe them vnseasonablie, and
incroach vpon the time allotted to prayer, wherein,
we ought to renew our repentance, and to set
our hearts straight, and right before God, now it is
not done in season, it displeaseth God, it is an action
done out of its time. To mourne, and reioyce,
are both good actions, but if they be done out of
their season, they are both exceeding evill, and
sinfull: We see how carefully Nehemiah tels them,
they should not haue mourned; for (sayth he,)
this is a time of reioycing, for this time to reioyce,
(it is your strength) for the ioy of the Lord
is your strength; therefore now weepe not, mourne
not, butreioyce. Againe, at another time, to rejoyce,
is as great a sinne, as then to mourne, as we
see Isa. 22. 12. 13.Isa. 22. 12. 13. When the Lord cals to mourning,
if now you giue your selues to killing of sheep,
and slaying of Oxen, etc. Your sinne shall not be
purged from you till you die. I neede not giue you
instances in this case. These are one sort of actions.
All the duties of our Calling must be done
in season.
The second sort of actions,Watch opportunities in actions that concerne others. that we are to obserue
this time in, they are such as belong to others,
that tend to the good of others, the good

of the Church, the good of the Common-wealth,
the good of particular men; There is a time when
(it may be) a mans voyce, or suffrage would haue
turned the scale of a busines, that co^cerned much
the Common-wealth, or the societie where he
liues: but when that opportunitie is past, it can
be recalled no more. There is a time when a mans
speaking may doe much good, and his silence is
sinfull* and doth much hurt, by the losse it brings.
Such times and seasons are to be observed, such
opportunities there be. There is an opportunitie
of preventing a mischiefe to a Common-wealth,
or to a Kingdome, when we neglect that opportunitie,
it causeth the miserie of man to be great vpon
him, as we heard before. So for particular Cases;
There is a time, and a season, and an opportunitie
of comforting the bowels of the Saints,
of relieuing and entertaining strangers, of doing
good to parents, of educating, and bringing to
God children and servants, such as are committed
to our charge; This is but a short time, and opportunitie,
which when it is past, can be recalled
no more. The missing of these times and opportunities,
is that which causeth the miserie of man to
be great vpon him. You know, at the day of Iudgement,
because men did not such, and such actions,
because they lost their opportunitie, they did
not visit the prisoners, they did not cloath the
naked, nor feede the hungry, therefore, this eternall
miserie fals vpon them; Much more temporall
miseries, vpon a man, a Kingdome, or a
King.
The last sort of actions wherein wee are to obserue 
a time,Watch in actions concerning our owne safetie. they are such as belong to our owne
safetie; There is a time that if a man speake, he
makes himselfe a prey to the wrath of men. And
therefore the prudent, at such a time shall keepe silence,
sayth Isa^. And there is a time wherein if a
man doe not speake, he makes himselfe a prey to
the wrath of God. And not to hit vpon a right season
in such an action of speaking and shewing
himselfe, or not doing it, it brings miserie either
from God, or man.
There is a time for a man to giue, and to spend; and
a time againe, for him to spare and gather, if he misse
of this time, if he will not giue when he ought,
if he spare when he ought to giue, it brings a miserie
vpon him, he shall be a looser by it.
In all particular actions, oftentimes God opens
a doore to vs of advantage to our selues, to our
children, to those that depend vpon vs, if it be taken.
You haue the opportunitie, if you stay till it
be shut vp againe, there is a miserie that followes
it, it is a thing that concernes your owne safetie,
but these are but lesser matters. Beloved, there are
times of greater Consequence then these.
There is a time when God offers grace to a man.
Now to refuse it, to misse of that time, it causeth
the miserie to be great, yea to be eternall vpon him,
Luk. 19. 42.Luk. 19. 42. Oh Ierusalem, if thou haddest knowne
the things belonging to thy peace in this thy day, but
now they are hid from thine eyes; As if he should
say, This is the time Ierusalem, when if thou wilt
take the offer, thou maiest, if thou didst know thy

time, if God would reveale it to thee, thou shouldest
be safe enough, thou mightest escape this
miserie, but God hath hid it, that thou seest not
this time, therefore thou and thy children shall
perish.
The time of a mans health, and of his peace, of
his life, quiet, and rest, is the time of making sure
his Election, a time of growing in grace and knowledge,
and of growing rich in good workes. He whose
eyes God opens to see this time, he makes vse of it,
he layes out those talents he hath to such a purpose,
but when God hides it from a man, it is his
vndoing, an evill time, the time of death comes
suddenly vpon him, as a snare on the fowle.
The time of youth, the time of education, is the
seede-time of our life after; he whom God hath inlightned
to see this time, and to consider it, he is
not negligent i^ it, he layes vp the ground and
foundation of his future li^e in it. Such like times
there be.
You shall see an example of them in Saul, and
in the people of Israell; Saul had a time to make
sure the Kingdome to himselfe, and the Kingdome
of heaven to himselfe; but because he lost his time,
God would giue him no more, he had opportunitie
no longer; but it was cut off from him. You
know he lost the Kingdome, by not staying the
time that Samuel appointed him, he stayed to the
very point of the time; but he stayed it not out.
The seaventh day Samuel came according to his
promise; but he thought he would not haue come,
because he stayed so late, but this was the losse of

the Kingdome to him. God intimates thus much
to him there, that if he had discerned his time,
he might haue saved his Kingdome, but because
he did not see it, that miserie came vpon him, he
lost the Kingdome from himselfe, and from his
posteritie for ever.
The Iewes likewise; there was a time when God
would haue received them, and averted that fearefull
Iudgement that came vpon the whole Nation,
when they were carried away captiue; but
when they had passed that time, we see God is resolved
to destroy them; there is no more hope
for them, Iere. 11. 14.Ier. 11. 14. Th^u shalt not pray for this
people, I will not heare their cry in the day of their
trouble: Thou shalt not pray for them; thou shalt
not lift vp a cry, a prayer for them. It is twice repeated,
because the Lord was resolved, the time
was past, and they saw it not, therefore their miserie
was great.
But you will say to me,Quest. (to conclude with that)
How shall a man doe to know that time, to know
the time, and the season, that God hath allotted to
every action, since it is of so much moment; and
the missing of it brings so much miserie vpon
men?
Beloved,Answ. I will run through some directions very
briefly: Consider, what the cause is, that men
misse of their time, and you shall finde by that the
meanes how to finde it out. The cause why men
misse, it is
First,The causes of missing the time. Inability to discerne, man himselfe knowes
it not, and no man else can tell it him. So then it 

is in Gods owne power to reveale it. Therefore to
find out this time, let a man doe these two things,
to haue abilitie to discerne the times.
First,Directions to finde it. let him not leane to his owne wisedome,
 but trust in God; that is, let him goe and aske
counsell of God: Even as David did, Shall I goe vp
to Hebron, or shall I not? So in all such doubtfull
Cases goe to God, shall I doe such a thing, or shall
I not? Shall I doe it in such a season, or shall I s^ay
another? We see what Salomon sayth, Prov. 3. 5.Prov. 3. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and leane not to
thine owne wisedome, in all thy wayes acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy way. The me^ning is
this, let a man in his heart rest vpon God, and trust
in him, and say thus to him, Lord, I confesse, I
know not the times, I know not whether this be
a fit season, or another, Lord, I leane on thee, I beseech
thee discover the times to me. When the
heart indeede rests on him, there is a promise,
trust in the Lord with all thine heart,(that is) trust
in him in good earnest, and he shall direct thy way:
That is, there shall be a secret guidance from his
spirit, that shall pitch thee vpon a right time;
There shall a secret thought come in thy heart,
(which shall be as if a man stood behinde thee,)
that shall whisper to thee, and say, this is the way,
this is the time, turne this way, and not that; So
God directs vs, if we trust in him, and rest on him;
If we goe to him, and pray him, and beseech him
to guide vs.
 Secondly, it is not enough onely to pray to
him, but there is another thing added to it, to

walke in his wayes, not to steppe out of his wayes,
but to keepe the Co^mandements, when we haue
any businesse to doe, goe to the straight path, step
not out to any inordinate course, but keepe the
Commandements, and the Commandements
will keepe thee: This you shall finde Eccles. 8. 5.Eccles. 8. 5. He
that keepes the Commandement, shall know no evill
thing, and the heart of the wise shall know the time,
and the Iudgement; for to every purpose there is a
time and a Iudgement. You see, though it be very
hard to finde, and a man knows it not of himselfe,
nor can any tell him, yet this promise is made, he
that keepes the Commandement, and the heart of the
wise, that is, the godly man, he shall know the time,
and the Iudgement.
Beloved, it is a sure rule; If we be obedient to
Christ as a King, we shall finde him to be to vs as
a Prophet; If you will resigne vp your selues to
keepe his Commandements, that propheticall office
of his, (which is to guide vs in the way,) he
will performe to vs. So I take that place to be vnderstood,
Act. 2.Act. 2. I will powre out my spirit vpon all
flesh, and your young men shall see visions, and your
olde men shall dreame dreames, etc. It begun to be
fulfilled in that extraordinary gift of Prophesie
that was powred vpon the Apostles; but yet, sayth
he, I will powre it vpon all flesh; that is, it shall be
such a spirit, as shall teach you to see those mysteries
that were hid from the beginning of the
world, and such a spirit, as shall guide you, and direct
you, it shall teach you what you ought to
doe, what way you ought to choose. This, I say,

the Lord will doe, if we walke in his wayes.
Beloved, if we will be stepping out of his wayes,
we shall get many knockes, and many fals too, many
troubles, many afflictions shall sticke by vs,
while we liue. You know the Children of Israell
went not a foote, but as they were guided by the
Cloud.
Iacob, in his Iourney would neither goe to La^an
without warrant, nor come from him without
it. David, in all that he did, he asked counsell
of the Lord; shall I stay in such a Cittie, or shall I
not stay? Shall I goe vp to warre to such a place,
or shall I not goe? (As I said before,) shall I goe
vp to Hebron, or shall I not goe at this time? This
walking in the wayes of God, is that which the promise
is made vnto. You shall finde Psal. 25. 12.Psal. 25. 12.
What man is he that feares the Lord? Him will he
teach the way that he shall choose: As the promise is
made to trusting in him; for then he will direct
him in his wayes; So, what man is he that feares
the Lord, and keepes his Commandements? Him will
he teach the wayes that he should choose. And this is
the first direction. The first cause why men misse,
is, Inabilitie to discerne the time, and the season;
therefore let them take this Course, and God will
reveale it to them.
A second Cause why men misse of these times,2. Cause.
that God hath allotted to every action,Of missing the time. and purpose,
is, some passion, and distemper, to which they are
subject; for passion, causeth indiscretion, in the ordinary
course of things; you see, passion makes a
man misse of his time, it makes a man doe things

vnseasonablie; whereas were the heart quiet, the
judgement would be cleare too, to see what were
fit and what vnfit.
As it is in the common Converse with men;
So it is in these great actions, to choose the time
that God hath allotted to every action, and purpos^.
If there be any carnall, worldly, sinfull distemper
in the heart, you are apt to misse of the
time; for every passion and distemper is like
drunkennesse, it casts a man asleepe. Now, he that
obserues the times, must watch, and watch diligently,
and a man that is distempered, is not fit to
watch, and to obserue. And therefore Christ ^ayth
Luk. 21. 34.Luk. 21. 34. Take heede that your hearts be not
over charged with surfeiting and drunkennes, and th^
cares of this world, least that day come vpon you (...)
vnawares: As if he should say; The reason why
you misse of the times, why that great day comes
vpon you vnawares, why you doe not that dutie
as you ought within the compasse of the time
that God hath appointed; it comes from hence,
some excesse in the vse of lawfull Comforts: So
you haue two Causes given there,
Either, when men inebriate themselues too
much with the present Comforts of this world,
when they ex^eede in them, when they take more
then they ought, though the things in themselues
be lawfull.
Or secondly; They take so much care for worldly
things, that it breeds a distemper in them; that
is, it distracts their mindes; for by that a man may
know when his cares are inordinate, when they

breede distractions in the mind; as we see in Martha;
Christ found not fault, because shee was carefull
to provide; but because her care went to farre,
that it troubled her, that she could not attend vpon
spirituall duties, there was the fault, Marthaes
thoughts were troubled about many things, when such
distempers grow on vs, it causeth vs to misse* the
time.
My Beloved, if we would then keepe our times;
If we would know the times allotted vs, take h^ed
of excesse; Take heede we affect not too much outward
comforts, that our hearts be not too much
set vpon any outward blessings, be it what it will
be.
Take heede againe, that we take not too much
^^re for any thing, that we minde not too intentiuely
worldly businesses, they will cause vs to
misse our times. This is the second Cause.
Thirdly, to doe impertinent things, is that which
causeth men to misse the time that is allotted to
every purpose, and to every busines. When a man
is occupied about things that he ought not, he
misseth doing of those businesses that he ought to
doe. Therefore 1 Cor. 7.1 Cor. 7. The Apostle giues this
Rule, sayth he, whatsoever you haue to doe, if you
be to buy, doe it as if you bought not, if you be to
marrie, doe it as if you did not: And generally vse this world as if you vsed it not: That is, All the actions
belonging to this world, be not too much
occupied about such impertinent things as they
be. Impertinent things to the maine businesse for

which you came into the world, for I would haue
you, sayth he, without care; for he that is vnmarried
cares for the things of the Lord, and I would haue
you cleaue to the Lord without separation. The meaning
is this; The reason why men misse their
times that God hath appointed them, is, because
men are too intent vpon impertinent things,
which interrupts their care to serue the LORD.
And therefore we are to passe by them, and not
to put our full intention to every worldly busines,
but reserue the maine intention of our thoughts
for the things of the spirit, for not to take care over^much
for them is that which will make vs
carefull to doe things in their time.
The next impediment is selfe-Confidence;4. Cause.
when a man trusts himselfe, and will be his owne
Counsellour: And therefore the way to hit of a
right time, is, to take Counsell with others; In the
multitude of Counsellours there is peace.
Lastly;5. Cause. The cause of the missing of the time, is,
negligence, when men are idle, slacke, and indiligent
in doing those things that belong to them,
that is the Cause of missing their time. And therefore
you haue that Counsell in the words next before
the text (since the time is short, there is but a
day for you to worke in, and the night comes
when no man can worke,) that is, in the graue, there
is neither worke nor invention, and. And therefore doe
with all thy might that which thou hast to doe. The
doing what we haue to doe with all our might,
and with all our diligence, is that which quickens

vs, and keepes our hearts in a holy preparation to
take the times, and not to over-slippe and over^
passe them. These things I should
haue inlarged, but I had rather
shorten them thus, then
hold you longer,
etc.
FINIS.



