The vnlouelinesse, of loue-lockes. Or, A summarie discourse, proouing: the wearing, and nourishing of a locke, or loue-locke, to be altogether vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians In which there are likewise some passages collected out of fathers, councells, and sundry authors, and historians, against face-painting; the wearing of supposititious, poudred, frizled, or extraordinary long haire; the inordinate affectation of corporall beautie: and womens mannish, vnnaturall, imprudent, and vnchristian cutting of their haire; the epidemicall vanities, and vices of our age. By William Prynne, Gent. Hospitij Lincolniensis. Prynne, William, 1600-1669. The vnlouelinesse, of loue-lockes. Or, A summarie discourse, proouing: the wearing, and nourishing of a locke, or loue-locke, to be altogether vnseemely, and vnlawfull vnto Christians In which there are likewise some passages collected out of fathers, councells, and sundry authors, and historians, against face-painting; the wearing of supposititious, poudred, frizled, or extraordinary long haire; the inordinate affectation of corporall beautie: and womens mannish, vnnaturall, imprudent, and vnchristian cutting of their haire; the epidemicall vanities, and vices of our age. By William Prynne, Gent. Hospitij Lincolniensis. Prynne, William, 1600-1669. TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. C Hristian Reader, I here present vn∣to thy view and censure, a rough and briefe discourse: whose subiect, though it bee but course and vile, consisting of Effeminate, Proud, Lasciuious, Exorbitant, and Fan∣tastique Haires, or Lockes, or Loue-lockes, (as they stile them:) which euery Barba may correct and regulate: Yet the consequence of it may be great, and profi∣table in these Degenerous, Vnnaturall, and Vnmanly times: wherein as sundry of our Mannish, Impudent, and inconstant Female sexe, are Hermophradit d, and transformed into men; not onely in their immodest, shamelesse, and audacious car∣riage, (which is now the very manners and Courtship of the times;) but euen in the 1 Cor 11.5.6.15. vnnaturall Tonsure, and Odious, if not Whorish Cutting, and 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. Crisping of their Haire, their Naturall vaile, their Feminine glory, and the very badge, and Character of their subiection both to God, and Man: so diuers of our Masculine, and more noble race, Conuerter ̄ in muliebre toller a tia viri, non vsum tantu atque naturam, sed etiam vultum, incessum, ha i∣tum, & totu penit quic∣quid aut in sexu est, aut in vsu viri: ade vers sunt in diuersum om∣nia, vt cum viris nihil ma∣gis pudori esse opporteat, quā si muliebre aliquid in se habere videantur: nunc nihil turpi viri quibusda vide∣tur, quam si aliquo viri viderentur. Saluian. De Gubernat. Dei l. 7. p. 263.264. are wholy degenerated and metamorphosed into women; not in Manners, Gestures, Recreations, Diet, and Apparell onely; but likewise in the Womanish, Sinfull, and Vnmanly, Cr sp ig, Cu ling, Frouncing, Powdring, and nourishing of their Lockes, and Hairie excrements, in which they place their corporall Excellencie, and chiefest Glory. Strange it is to see, and lamentable to consider, how farre our Nation is of late de∣generated from what it was in former Ages: how farre their Liues, and their Professions differ. We all profess our selues t be Heroicall, Generous, and true-bred English-men, yea Zealous, downe-right, and true-hearted Christians, desirous to conforme our selues to Christ in euery thing: and yet wee are Pu e eos Nationis suae quod non Ger¦man aut Galli sint pro∣creati, ita pa∣triam capillo tranferunt Tertul. de cul∣tu. aem. c. 4. quite ashamed of our English Guise, and Tonsure, and by our Out-landish, Womanish, and Vnchristian Lockes and Haire, disclaime our very Nation, Countrey, and Religion too: Alas, may I not truely say of too to many, who would be deemed not onely English-men, but Deuout, and faithfull Christians: that the Barber is their Chaplaine: his Shop, their Chappell: the Loo ing-glasse, their Bible ; and their Haire, and Lockes, their Pro Deo quisque habet quod coli G ¦losi, venter, Deus est Hae¦retic , dogma quod fi xit. Hier. Com. lib. 3. in Ose. 14. & in Amos c. 2. Capilla im∣pudicarū mu∣lierum Idola. Granatensis hom in Festo. Mariae Magd. God? that they be∣stow more cost, more thoughts, more time, and paines vpon their Hairie Lockes, and B shes, from day to day, then on their peerelesse and immortall Soules? that they consult more seriously, and frequently with the G asse, and Combe, then with the Scriptures? that they conferre more oft n with their Barbers, about their hairie Excrem ts ; then with their Ministers, about the meanes, and matter of their owne Salua∣tion? Are not most of our young Nobiliti and Ge trie, yea, the Elder too, vnder the Barbers hand from day, to day? Are they not in dayly thraldome, and perpetuall bond ge to their curling Irons, which are as so many chaines, and fet∣ters to their Heads, on which they leaue their Stampe, and Im∣presse? Good God, may I not truely say of our Gentrie, and Nation, as Sen ca once did of his: Qu d illo o tiosos vocas, quibus apud tonsorem mul∣tae horae trans∣mittuntur, dū decerpitur si quid proxima nocte succreui d m de singulis capillis in con∣silium itur: dū aut disiectae co∣ma restitu ut, aut deficiens h atque illinc in rontem compell tur? Quomodo iras∣cuntur si to or paulo negligentior uerit, qu si virum t nderet? Quomodo excandes∣cunt si quid de i a sua decisum est, si qu d extra ordinem i cu t, nisi omnia in annu∣los suos reciderunt. Quis est istorum q non malit rempublicam turbari, quam com suam? Qui non sollicitior si de capitis sui decore, quam de salute? Qui non com t or esse mali , quam hones ior? &c. De Breu. Vitae. cap. 12. That they are now so vaine and idle, that they hold a Counsell about eue∣ry Haire, sometimes Combing it backe, another time Frouncing, and spredding it abroade: a third time Com∣bing it all before: in which, if the Barber be any thing remisse, they will grow exceeding angry, as if they were trimming of the men themselues: doe they not rage ex∣cessiuely, if any Haire bee but cut to short, if it lye not to their liking, and fall not readily into its rings, and cir∣cles? Would they not rather haue the Common-wealth disturbed, th n their Haire disordered? doe they not sit all day betweene the Combe, and the Glasse? are they not more sollicitous of the neatenesse of their Haire, then of their safetie? and more desirous to be neate, and spruce, then Honest? Capillum rangere, & ad muliebres blanditia vo∣cē extenu re, moll tie corpo∣ris certare cum faeminis, & iu∣cundissimis se excolere mun∣ditiis nostrorū adolescentium specimen est. Senec. Contro∣uers. l 1. Proae∣mio Compo∣nit crine ps ∣ca infalix: al∣tera le um ex∣tendit, pectit∣que co as, & voluit in orbē: Est in c nsilio matrona, ad∣mota{que} lanis, emerita qua cessat acu sen∣tentia prima huius erit: post ha t te at∣que arte mino∣res censebunt: tanquam fa∣mae discrimen agatur, aut ∣nimae: tanti est, quaerendi cura decoris. Iuuenal. Satyr. 6. Is it not now held the accom∣plished Gallantrie of our youth, to Frizle their Haire like Women: and to become Womanish, not onely in exilitie of Voyce, tendernesse of Body, leuitie of Appa∣rell, wantonnesse of Pace, and Gesture, but euen in the very length, and Culture of their Lockes, and Haire? Are not many now of late degenerated into Virginians, French∣men, Ru ians, nay, Women, in their Crisped-Lockes, and Haire? haue they not violated the Gra e, and A ent Cut, and decent Tonsure of their Ancestors; and broken the very Ordinance, See 1 Cor. 11 14. Ezech. 44.20. Reu. 9.8. and Law of God, and Nature, by their Womanish, 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. .3. See Mr. Byfields S rmon on 1 Pet. 3 3.4. Embroidered, Coloured, False, excessiue Haire, and Loue-Lockes? and shall they yet professe them∣selues to be English-men ; or Mortified, Humble, Chaste, and pious Christians? What, did euer any of our English An∣cestors; did euer any Christians in former Ages; did euer any Saints of God, that wee can heare, or read of, weare a Locke? or Frizle, Powder, Frounce, Adorne, or Decke their Haire? or wast their thoughts, and time, or lauish out so great expences on their Heads, their Haire, and Lockes, as we doe now? If not, then l t vs be as well conceited of our selues, as may be, yet certainely, as long as these new-fangled Lockes, and Badges of our inuirilitie, Adhuc in processu vitia sunt Inuen t Luxuria ali∣quid no , in quod insan at. Inuenit impu∣dicitia nouam contumeliam sib . Inuenit de∣l ciarum disso∣lutio & tabes aliquid teneri∣us molliusque quo pereat. Ad∣huc quicquid est boni moris, extinguimus leuit te & po∣litura corporis. Muliebres mū∣ditias anteces∣simus, colores meretricios, matronis qui∣dem non indu∣endos viri sumi mus. Tenero et moll ingressu suspendimus gradu ; non ambulamus, sed inceaimus. Exornamus annulis digi∣t s, in omni articulo gem∣ma disponitur. Quotidie comminiscimur, per quae virilitati fiat iniuria, vt traduc ∣tur, quia non potest e i. Seneca. Nat. Quaest. l. 7. c. 1. or more then Womanish, and vnnaturall Effeminacy, which still in∣crease, multiply, and remaine vpon vs, we can neither truely challeng the name of English-men, nor stile of Christians. For, 1 Cor. 6.14.15.16. Iam. 4.4. 1 Iohn 2.15.16.17. what part or portion can they haue in Christ, who weare the very Badge, and Liuery of the World? who complie themselues to the Guise, and Tonsure of the Deboistest, Rudest, and most licentious Ruffians? or giue themselues ouer to the Vanities, Fashions, and Customes of the very scumme, and worst of Men? Is this to be a Christian, to follow euery Guise? to take vp euery new-fangled, Deboist, and Ruffianly fashion? to submit to euery Vaine, and Sinfull humour of the Times? to denie our Selues, and Lusts in no∣thing; and to goe as farre in all externall Emblems, or Symp∣tomes of Vanitie, Pride, Licentiousn sse, Effeminacy, and Prophanenesse, as any others: and to exceede euen Turkes, and Pagans in them, who are not yet so Effeminate, Idle, Proude, and Vaine as we? Alas, what is all this, but to be professed Enemies, and Rebels, vnto Christ? to bee Deuill-Saints, or Bondslaues to the World, the Flesh, and Satan? this is not to be Christians, but Antichristians, Infidels, Pagans, if not mon∣sters: He that is a Christian indeed, is a man of another tem∣per His Wisd 2.1 . Life is not like other mens, and His wayes are of another fashion, C loss. 1.10. 1 Thess 2.12. Ephes. 5.8. answerable to that High, and Holy calling, which He hath vndertaken: Rom. 12.2. Gal. 1 4 Ephes. 2.1 2 Col. 2.20 1 Pet. 1.14. Si inter ancillas Diaboli & Christs discrimen: vt exemple sitis illis, vt edificentur in vobis: vt magnificetur Deus in corpore vestro: magnificatur autem per pudicitiam, & per habitum pudici∣tiae competentem. Tertul. De Cultu. Faem. cap. 7. He fashi∣ons not himselfe to the Customes, Cultur , Guise, and Vanities of the World, which He hath renounced in His Baptisme: 1 Pet. 4 2.3. He liues not to the will, or lusts of car∣nal Men: Rom 13.13.14. neither makes He any prouision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof: all His desire and labour, is to conforme himselfe to Christ in euery thing: 1 Iohn 2.6. to walke as Christ walked; liue as He liued: and to 1 Pet. 1.15. & 2.21. follow His words and footesteps, in all the passages, and turnings of His life: His Life is heauenly, Phil. 3.10. His Conuersation heauenly, 1 Tim. 2.9.10. 1 Pet. 3.3.4.5. Phil. 1.27. Rom. 26.2. His Haire, and Habit, such as answ res His professi∣on, and doe well become the Gospel of Christ: 1 Cor. 10.32 33. not giuing any iust offence, or scandall to the Godly, Col. 4.5. nor any encouragement, or ill example to the Wicked: Nusquam Christia a∣liud est. Ter∣tul. De Coro∣na Milit. c. 9. His out-side, is consonant to His in-side, and suitable to His profession: Mores eos habitu pro∣nunciet, spiritus per aures ab im∣prudenti vul∣neretur. Ter∣tul. De Cultu. Faem. cap. 7. Deus s fuerit in pectore, cog∣noscetur & in capite Faemi∣narum. Ter∣tul. De Velan∣dis Virg. c. 14. His very Head, and Habit, doe, yea, will declare Hi m eke, and gracious Heart, and pro∣claime His Christianitie vnto others: How then can such approoue themselues to be true, and humble Christians in the sight of God, or Men: who are the onely Minions, Sycophants, and Humourers of the World; following it close at euery turne, and complying themselues so fully, and exactly to its dis∣solute Fashions, and Lasciuious guises: Ia religi∣onis antiquae non solū vn tu∣tem amisimus, sed nec speci∣men re ine∣mus: Ecce e∣nim habitus noster qui humilitatis solebat esse insigne, in signum gestatur superbiae. Ber∣nard ad Gul. Abb. Apol. That they haue not onely lost the inward e icacie, life, and power; but euen the very superficies, and out-side of Religion? What euidence can such produce, to prooue their interest, or title vnto Christ, who haue nothing lse to shew, or plead for it, but the V habitu negant quod toto suggest profitentur. Tertul. De veland. Virg. c. 11. Counterpanes, and Indentures, or the Cul∣tures, Pompes, and Vanities of the World, which they haue long since in w rds at least, renounced in their Baptisme? What, will the b re name of Christi ns, or the slight, and cold performance of some out-ward dueties of Religion, conuey you safe to Heauen? or will such a cold profession of Religion saue your Soules, which is so farre from changing the in-ward frame, and structure of your Hearts, that it hath not yet so much, as al∣tered your Vaine, and Sinfull guises, and Attires nor differen∣ced you in out-ward appearance, from the most Gracelesse, Vaine, and Sensuall persons that the World affords? Alas, if we looke vpon the out-sides of men, . 23.26. Elingua Philosophia vita content e t, ipse ha∣bitus sonat Si deni{que} auditur Philosophus dum videtur, de occursu meo viti suffun∣do. Tertul. de Pallio. cap. 8. which would cer∣tainely be reformed, if all were right within:) w at out∣ward difference can you finde between many young Gentlemen, who professe Religion, and the d boist st Ruffians? Video et in∣ter matronas, at{que} prostibulas nullum de ha∣bitu discrimen relictum. Ter∣tul. Apolog. aduers. Gent. betweene many Graue Religious Matrons, or Virgins, who pre∣tend De otion, and our common Strumpets? betweene vs Christians and the most Lasciuious Pagans? are they not all alike Vaine, Effeminate, Proud, Fantastique, Prodigall, Immodest, and Vnchristian in their Attires, Fashions, Haire, Apparell, Gesture, Behauiour, Vanitie, and Pride of Life? are they not all so Irregular, and Monstrous in their antique Tonsures, and Disguises, that men can hardly, distin∣guish Good, from Bad: Continent, from Incontinent: Gracious, from Gracelesse: Beleeuers, from Infidels? See Tertul. De Pallio: & de cultis Faemi∣narum. Cypr. De Habit: Vir∣ginum. Am∣bros. De Virg. lib. 3. Hierom. Epist. 23. Epist. 7.8.10. Ful∣gentius ad Probam. E∣pist. 3. Clem. Alex. Padag. lib. 2. cap. 10. l. 3. . 2.3.11. Salu. de Guber. Dei. l. 4. There was once a time, when as Christians were differenced from Pagans, and Infid ls, by the modestie, and meanesse of their Apparell, and their abandoning of those externall Cultures, Ornaments, and Attires, which the vnbe∣leeuing Gentiles, and themselues before their true con∣version, did admire: but alas, these times are now so alte∣red, and inuerted; that wee may better know a Christian, by these Characters, and Badges of Paganisme, then a Pagan: For what Idolatrous, or Heathen Nation is there in the world, so Proud, so Vaine, so Various, so Fantastique, Effeminate, Lasciuious, o Vnchristian in their Apparell, Fashions, Haire, or Head-attires, as we English, who professe our selues the prime of Christians? Doe we not transcend, and farre surpasse the Persians, Tartars, Indians, Turkes, and all the Pagan Nations in the World, in these? and may they not lay more claime to Christ, and Heauen in all these respects, then wee? Let Christians therefore who are now thus strangely carried away, with the Streame, and Torrent of the Times, and the Vanities, Fashions, Pompes, and Sinfull guises of the World; Quid non inuertat con∣suetud ? quid non assiduitate duretur? quid non vsui ce∣ at? quantis quod prae ama∣ritudine prius exhorrebant, vsui ipso malè in dulce con∣uersum est? Primum tibi importabile videbitur aliquid; processis temporis i assuescas iudicabis non adeò graue; p ulo post, nec senties: paulo post etiam delectabit. Ita pau∣latim in cordis duritiam itur, & ex illa in auersionem: Bernard de Consid. lib. 1. cap. 2. which their owne Hearts, and Consciences condem∣ned at the first, before they were hardned, and inchan∣ted by them, by degrees, and custome: ) looke well vnto their Soules, and to their interest, and right in Christ, in these backe-sliding seasons; when many fall off from Religion by de∣grees, vnto the World, the Flesh, and Satan, whose snares, and grand 2 Pet. 2.11 19, 20. pollutions they had, (at least in out-ward shew:) escaped heretofore; for feare their Euidence for Heauen, prooue counterfeite at last: And if they finde, Psal. 24.4. their Hearts inclined, or lifted vp to vaniti , or their affections and practise, biassed to these Effemi ate guises, Lockes, and Cultures of the World: they haue reason, and cause enough to feare, In hoc cog∣noscim quod seculum dili∣gimus, quia praciosa ve∣stiment ∣mamu . Qui seculum no diligit, pr c sa vest ment non quaerit. Quando hom gaudet de pul∣chritudi e c r∣poris, mens eiu elongatur ab amore Creato∣ris. Quanto amplius in cor∣poris compositi∣one laetaemur, tanto magi ae superno a∣more disiungi∣mur. Bernard. De modo be∣ne viuendi. Sermo. 9. that their Hearts are yet deuoted to the world, and quite estranged from the Lord: Ex cordis Thesauro sine dubio procedit, quicquid foras ap aret vitiosum. Vanum cor vanitatis notam ingerit corpori, & exterior superfluitas, interioris vanitatis indicium est. Mollia indumenta animi molliciem indicant. Non tanto curaretur corporis cultus, nisi prius fuisset neglect mens inculta virtutibus. Bernard ad Gu ielm. Abbatem. A∣polog. that all things are not yet sincere, and right within them, because their out-sides are so Vaine, so Proud, Fantastique, and Vn∣christian: and that their claime to Christ, is meerely coun∣terfeite, because his Graces, Stampe, and Image shine not in them, but the Worlds alone. If therefore wee desire to assure our Soules, and Consciences in the sight of God, that wee are true and reall Christians; that wee haue any share, or portion in Christ, or any inheritance in the highest Heauens: Let vs bee sure now at last, Iames 1.27. to keepe our selues vnspotted from the World: Galat. 5.24. to crucifie the flesh with the af∣fections, and lusts thereof: 1 Peter 2.11. to ab taine from all these fleshly lusts, which warre against our Soules: Romans 1 .13.14. to walke honestly as in the day: not in Chambering, and Wantonnesse; but putting on the Lord Iesus Christ, and making no prouision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof: yea to cut, and cast off all those Loue-Lockes, Pain∣tings, Powdrings, Crispings, Curlings, Cultures, and At∣tires, Mundicies corporis atque vesti us, nimae immunditia: quibus signis animus ibid ∣ osus ostendi∣tur: & per ex∣ e orem ho¦minem, interi oris hominis v tia demon strantur. Hie∣rom. Tom. 1. Epist. 27. c. 10. Cult s mu e bris & luxuri∣osus, non cor∣pus exornat, sed de eg t mē∣ em. Q intil. Instit. Orat. l. 8 Proaemio wh ch b wray the great Deformiti s, ilth, L sciu ousnesse, Pride, and Vanitie of our So es, b t are no luster to our bodi s: that so wee may ad ne the Gospel of Christ, and beautifie our Christian pro essi n, by an humble, lowly, examplary, and corespondent conuersation. And if these Fashions, Lock s, and Cultures s m such Niciti s, Tr fl s, Toyes, or nee lesse scrupul sities vnto any, as may ad∣mit an easie disp nsation, and m y be still retai ed without any h rt, r da ger to mens Soules, or scandall to Religion: I answer ; that if they are not Sinfull, and Vnlawfull in them∣selues, as they ar prooued in this present Treatise by the con∣sent of all Antiquitie: yet they are but See Caluin: Comment. on Numbers 6. v. 5. Mayer Ex∣posit: on 1 Pet. 3.4. E feminate, Ri∣dicul us, Vnpro itable, and Foolish vanities, or Cultures of the World, in their very best acception; which Christians should not dot vpon, since they haue renounced them in their Baptisme; and since they haue farre greater things then these, on which to busie, and impl y their thoughts and time. Christians haue their rich and precious Soules to beautifie, Talis mise∣ricordia crude∣litate ple a est, qua vide∣licet it a corpo∣ri seruitur vt anima iugule∣tur. Qua enim charita est carnem diligere, & spiritum negligere? Quaue discretio totum d re corpori, & animae nihil? Qualis vero misericordia ancillam reficere, & dominam interficere: Bernard. ad Gul. Abbatem. Apolog. See Perkins Cases of Conscience, lib 3. Sect. 3. Quaest. 3. Babington on the 7 Commandement. Mr. Byfield on 1. Peter 3.3. which they vnmercifully butcher, and neglect, whiles they are to c rious, and exa t in the Culture of their bodies ; they haue a great, and holy God to serue continually; they haue sundry Heauenly graces to procure, cherish, and inlarge: they haue a multitude of Christian dueties, and Heauenly ex rcises to discharge from day to day: they haue See Mr. Perkins T eatise of Callings. or should haue callings, and sundry warrantable im∣ployments, both for their owne, and others good, and Gods owne glory; all which will quite ingrosse their time, Tamdi discendum est quem. adm dum viuas, quandiu viu . Vi ere tota vita discendum est; & fortasse quod magis miraberis, tota vita discendum est mori. Seneca. Epist. 76. & De Breu. Vitae. cap 7. their liues, and thoughts, and take them off from all these head-altiring cares, in which too many wast, and spend their dayes: No reason therefore haue they to allow themselues in these be∣witching, and time-deuouring Vanities, which steale away their Hearts, and Liues from God, and better things. And why should Christians take any libertie to themselues at all, in these nugatorie, and Vnchristian vanities? Is it not exceeding scandalous vnto others, and d ngerous to themselues to doe it? doeth it not Quam blas∣phemabile est, si quae sacerdo∣tes pudicitiae aicimur, impu∣dicarum ritu procedatis cul∣ ae aut expictae Tertul. de cul∣tu. Faem. c. 7. blaspheme, and scandalize Religion, and make it odious vnto Pagans, who are not halfe so Vaine, so Proud, and Vitious in this kinde as Christians? Mens Deo¦dicata sic caue∣at minora vi∣tia vt ma ora: quia a minimis incipiunt, qui in maxim proruunt. Ber∣nard. de Ordi∣ne vitae. Col. 112 . C. and will it not draw all such, who take this libertie to them∣selues, to greater, and more scandalous sinnes at last, to the wrecke, and hazard of their Soules? Alas, such is the strange deceitfulnesse of our Hearts, and the inbred prauitie of our Natures: that if we once Vanitas ad iniquitatem l bitur, & dum ex al is ad ali semper impellitur, sub∣orientibus cul∣pis inquina∣tur. Ex vani∣tate ergo, ad iniquitatem ducimur: cum prius per leuia delicta defleuimus, vt vsu cuncta leuigante, equaquam post commit e∣re etiam grauiora timeamus. Na dum moderari lingua otiosa verbae negligit, au∣dax ad noxia prorumpit: dum gula incumbitur, ad leuitatis protinus ins niam pro∣ditur: cumque mens sub gere delectationem carnis renui , plarumque & ad perfi∣diae voraginem ruit. Si enim curare parua negligimus insensibiliter seducti, auden∣ter etiam maior perpetramus: quia si vanitatis culpa nequaquam caute compesci∣tur, ab iniquitate protinus mens inca ta deuoratur. Vanitatis quippe finis est, vt cum peccato mentem sauciat, hanc ex culpa audacem reddat. Et sit plerunque vt pra∣uis d sideriis seruiens, a ugo se diuini t moris excutiat, & quasi in malorum perpetra∣tione iam libera, omne quod volupt s suggerit, implere conte dat. Greg. Mag. Moral. l. 10. c. 13.14.15. begin to play, and dandle with small and pettie Vices, yea, though it bee but with Vanities, Toyes, and idle Fashions: they will quickly draw vs on to scandalous, great, and hainous sinnes at last; and so fetter vs in the ginnes, and snares of grosse impieties; that we shall sooner sincke downe in∣to Hell vnder their weight, and pressure, then shake off their bondage. Hee that beginnes to nourish, or reserue a Locke, or to adorne, set out, and Crispe his Haire but now and then: though he were a Modest, Sober, Chast, Industrious, or some-what Religious person at the first: if he once but slacke the raines of his affections to these vanities, and keepe no stiffe hand ouer them, to curbe them in due season; will soone dege∣nerate into an Idle, Proud, Vaineglorious, Vnchast, Deboist, and gracelesse Ruffian: His Amourous, Frizled, Woma∣nish, and Effeminate Haire, and Locke, will draw him on to Idlenesse, Pride, Effeminacy, Wantonnesse, Sensualitie, and Voluptuousnesse, by degrees; and from thence to Incontinency, Whoredome, Deboistnesse, and all Prophannesse, to the eternall wrecke and ruine of his Soule. This the wofull, and lamentable experi nce of thousands in our age can testifie, who by giuing way vnto the outward Culture of their Heads, and Bodies, and yeelding but a little to the sinfull Guises, and Fashions of the Times at first: haue beene at last precipitated into the very sinke, and puddle of all dissolutenesse, and vncleanenesse, to the inextricable losse, and hazard, not onely of their Bodies, Goods, Estates, and Credits: but of their rich, and peerelesse Soules. O therefore let vs looke vnto our Hearts, and Soules betimes, let vs keepe, and fence them against the very Principi s ob∣sta: sero medi∣ ina paratur, Cum mala per long s inualu∣ere moras. O∣uid. de Remed Amoris. l. 1. be∣ginnings, seeds, and first appearances of sinne, and Va∣nitie ; against these Vaine, these Ruffianly, and Womanish Cultures, Frizlings, Lockes, and Fashions: Qui blandi∣en o dulce nu∣triu t m lum, sero recusat ferre, quod su∣b it iugum. Se neca Hyppol. Act. 1. Qui se cupiditati vo∣lentes dedide∣rint oppugnan∣ti, voluntatem resisten i vlte∣rius non habe∣bunt tyrannice dominanti Et ho fit iusto Dei iudicio: vt qui cupiditati resi∣stere nolui∣mus ingressu∣rae, iam resiste∣re nequeamus ingressa, &c. Prosper. De vi∣ta Contempl. lib. 2. c. 15. which if they once get but entertainement, or footing in our af∣fections, will so captiuate, and inthrall vs; that wee shall hardly disposses, or quite eiect them, till they haue made vs slaues, and vassals to a world of grosse, and crying sinnes : which will sinke our Soules at last into the very deepest depthes of Hell without recouery. And is it not now high time, yea, haue we not now great cause, to abandon, and re∣nounce Qui f cit illa ridicula monstruositas, & mira qu ∣dam deformis formositas, ac formosa defor∣mitas? Quid ibi monstruosi Centauri? quid s ms-hom nes? Videas sub vno capite multa corpor , & rursus in vno corpore capita mu ta? Bern. ad Gu Abb tem. Apolog. these Monstrous, Strange, Ridiculous, and mishapen Fashions, and Attires: which transforme our Heads, and bodies into a thousand Antique, and Out∣landish shapes? to disrobe our selues, of all our Proud, and costly Plumes, which bid de iance to the Lord of Hoasts, and cause him to vnsheath his glittering Sword against vs, to our finall ouerthrow, and vtter desolation? and to cut, and cast off all those Lockes, and Emblems of our Vanitie, Pride, Incontinencie, La ciuiousnesse, and grosse Effeminacy, which Prognosticate some eminent, and fatall iudgement to our Land, and Nation? and hasten to accomplish, and draw it downe vpon vs to the full? Hath not the Lord begunne to smite, and ruine vs for these sinnes already? Hath hee not sent a man-eating Pestilence, and d populating Plague among vs, which hath cut off thousands, weeke, by weeke: and is it not now likely to reuiue againe, to sweepe vs all away? hath hee not oft times 2 Kings 10. 32 Vulnus ha∣bent populi plus est quam vita salusque, Quod perit: in totum mundi prosternimur aeuum. Lucan. Phars. l. 7. p. 125 cut vs short, by Sea, and Land, and Ier. 37.7. 2 King. 19.7. Blasted all our great Designes for sundry yeeres; so that they haue prooued all abortiue, and beene more fatall to our selues, then hurtfull to our enemies? hath hee not laid our Confederates, and Associates round about vs, wast, and de∣solate: and bereaued vs of those forraine Props, and Stayes, on which wee did most rely? hath he not spoiled vs of our Name, and ancient Glory, which was Great, and Honourable through∣out the World; and made vs the very Ier. 18 16. & 19.1. & 25 9. Mich. 6.16. Obloquie, His∣sing, Scorne, Reproach, and Deut 28.44. Taile of all the Na∣tions; whereas wee were the Head, and chiefe of Peo∣ple heretofore? hath hee not Isay. 3.2.3 taken away from vs, the mighty Man, and the Man of Warre, the Iudge, and the Prophet, the Prudent, and the Ancient, the Cap∣taine of fiftie, the Honourable man, and the Counseller? hath hee not bereft vs of our Ships, and Marriners by Sea: of our Commanders, and expert Souldiers by Land? hath hee not weakned, and impouerished vs by losses, and ouerthrowes a∣broad: by decay, and losse of trade: Laeta dies po∣pulo rapta est: concordia mü∣do, Nostra pe∣rit. Lucan. Phars. l. 9. p. 173 by Diuisions, Di∣stractions, Pressures, and Discontents at home? hath hee not Rom. 1.18. Haec quo{que} de Coelo vulnera missae pu es. Ausonius Epi∣gram. Ep. 2. reuealed his wrath, and indignation against vs from Heauen, by Isay, 28.2. & 22.6. prodigious Thunders, Stormes, and Tempests, and sundry heauy Iudgements? and may wee not yet truely say, Isay, 5.25. & 9.12, 17, 21. that for all this his anger is not turned away from vs, but his hand is stretched out still? Doe wee not yet dayly feare a Chaos, and Ezra. 9.7. Isay. 34.11. confusion in our Church, and State, and a sodaine surprisall of our King∣dome? doe wee not yet feele, and see the heauy Deut. 28.45 2 King. 22.19. Isay, 24.6. & 34.5. & 43 28 I r. 24.9. curse, and wrath of God, still cleauing to vs, and increasing on vs: yea, working, and contriuing our destruction, more, and more? doe not all the Characters of a dying, and declining State ap∣peare vpon vs? and doeth not euery mans owne Conscience whisper, nay, cry aloud vnto him: that vnlesse God prooue miraculously Good, and Gracious to vs, wee are neere some in∣euitable, and irrecouerable perdition, which will put a finall period to our former happinesse? And 2 King. 5.26 Hag. 1 4. is this then a time, for vs poore dust, and ashes; when as wee are thus inuironed with feares, and dangers, and euen destinated, and designed to destruction: when as Gods Ministers, Threatnings, Word, and Iudgements, doe euen summon vs from Heauen, Isay. 22.12. Zeph. 1.2 3 Ier. 4.8. &. 6.26. & 25.34. to humble and abase our Soules, and Bodies: to wallow in the dust, and to abhorre our selues in Sackcloath, and Ashes : Nonne hoc uum, mon∣stri genus est, esse ali∣quos etiam in morte vitiosos. Quis captiui∣ atem expe∣ctans de Circo cogitat? Quis metuit mor∣tem & ridet? Nos & in me∣tu calamitatis ludimus, & positi in mortis t more ride∣mus. Salu De Gub. Deil. 7. p. 227.236. when as our neckes lye all vpon the blocke, expecting euery moment their last, and fatall blow: to Pranke, and Decke, our Proud, and rotten Carcases? Breuissimis loculis patri¦monium gran de pro ertur, vno lino decies sestertium in∣seritur: Saltus & insulas tener cer ix fert. Graci es aurium cu es calendariu expend nt, & in sinistra per singulos digi os de saccis singulis it. Hae sunt vires ambitionis, tantarum vsurarum subst ntiam vno & muliebri corpusculo baiulare. Tertul. De hab. Mulieb. c. 5. See Clem. Alexand P edag. lib. 2. c 10.12. lib 3. c. 2.3. Vxor tua locupletis do∣mus censum a ribus gerit. Video vniones non singul s ngulis aurib s comparatos: iam enim exerci ae aures oneri serendo sunt: iunguntur inter se, & in uper ali bo∣ is superponuntur? Non satis mu e ris i sani viros subiecerat; nisi bina ac ter patrimonia auribus singulis pependisset. Sen. de ita Beata. c. 17. De Beneficijs. lib. c. . to lauish out our Patrimonies on our Heads, and Backes, and hang whole Manners at our Eares, and Neckes at once? to Frizle, Powder, Nourish, and set out our Haire, and Lockes, in the most Lasciuious, Amourous, Proud, Effeminate, Ruffianly, and Vaine-glorious manner, that the quint scence of our owne, or other mens Vanitie can inuent? to liue in the very ruffe, and height of Pride, and Vanitie? or pur∣posely to sell our selues: yea to educate, and traine vp our chil∣dren, (who should Ephes 6.4. be brought vp in the feare, and nur∣ture of the Lord: as the common custome of our Nobilitie, and Gentrie is;) to Wantonnesse, Idlenesse, Voluptuousnesse, Epicurisme, and all excesse of Sensualitie, Pleasure, Vanitie, Pride, and carnall iolliti ; as if wee tooke delight, and plea∣sure in our owne destruction; or ment wilfully to incurre the very worst, and vttermost of Gods heauiest Iudgements? What, haue wee not ggreuated, and multiplied our iniquities, and sinnes sufficiently already, but that wee must thus intend, and increase them more, and more? are we not yet deepe enough in Gods displeasure, that we thus pro oke, and grieue him further euery day? or doe wee thinke to auocate, or diuert Gods Iudge∣ments, or to mooue him to compassionate vs, by filling vp the measure of our vnmeasurable sinnes against him? or are wee willing, and desirous for to perish, or to bring our selues, and Countrey vnto speedie ruine, that we are now more vile, more Sinfull, Proud, and desperately wicked, Esay .9. proclaiming our Impudency, Vanitie, Idlenesse, Hautinesse, and Sinne, as Sodome did, not labouring once to hide it, though wee expect, yea feele Gods Plagues, and Iudgements on vs euery moment? Alas, (my brethren,) what doe you meane to doe, or which wayes will you turne your selues? will you wilfully cast away Gods Loue, and Fauour: and subiect your selues, to the very vtmost of his wrath, and vengeance? will you still prouoke the Lord to your destruction, euen beyond recouery? will you subiect vs to the Spanish yoake, and bondage? to all the miseries that Rome, that Spaine, that Heauen, or Hell can plot against vs? If this bee your intended resolution; goe on, and take your fill of Sinne, of Pride, and Vanitie: I will not interrupt you. But if you would auoid, diuert, and quite escape that ouer∣running flood, and torrent of Gods Iudgements, (which is like to sweepe vs all away, wee cannot tell how soone,) which our sinnes now call for, and our Hearts presage is neere at hand: if your desire to inioy more Halcyon dayes of Peace, or yeeres of Iubilie, and full prosperitie, which may make your liues a very Paradise, or Heauen vpon Earth. If you expect any further repriuall at the hands of God, or if you would still re∣taine his Presence, Face, and Fauour; his Gospel, and Pro∣tection, Psal. 63.3. which are sweeter, and better th n life it selfe, or all the Riches, Pleasures, and Contentments, that thi World can yeeld you: or if you are now vnwilling for to perish: why then Mal i s∣sabiliter li addi , & peccata pecca∣ti cumula∣mus: & cu maxima nostri p rs ia peri∣erit, id agim vt peream om es. T animorum, el t nta poti peccatorum ca∣cit est, vt cum maxima nostri pars am pe ierit, nul∣lus id agit v ne pereat. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 200.214. doe you multiply, and still increase your sinnes, and post on in those wayes of P ide, and Vanitie, which will certainely depriue vs of Gods Face, and Fauour, and all our Earthly comforts, & cause vs all to perish? Is this the way and m thod, t i ke you, to app ase Gods anger, diuert his Iudgem , his fauour, to rebell, an sinne a∣gainst him mo , a re? to affront, and dare him to his Face, with our bl h Imp de cy: our monstrous Fashions, a d A ires? our Multe quo que eis am ∣torias salu∣tationes impri∣munt, vt vel per terram nu∣mero e ince¦dentes, mere triceos spirit s in incessu scul∣pant. Clem. Alex P ed g. l. 2. c. 11. , Whorish, and Lasciui∣ous g st s ? o r izled, Powdred and Vnman∣ly L ck s, and Haire? or m re then Of whi h see Diodorus Siculus Bibl. Hist. l. 2. Sect. 23. Iustin. hist. lib. 1. Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 12. Sleidan. l. 1 Sardanapalian i i∣rilitie, which In fortis au∣tem viri vul¦tu ullum esse portet signum molliti , sed e{que} vlla parte corporis. Ne{que} ergo in motu, ne{que} in abitu inueniatur v quam mag∣ni animi, & excelsi dedecus. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. e e mes not Christians, o men of Va∣lo r? to pr u ke him with our Cursing, Swearing, Whore∣d s, M rth rs Vsury, Bribery, Couetousnesse, Oppressi∣on, I iusti e, Scurrilitie, Ribaldry, and Heathenish conuersa∣ti ns? to disobey his Word, abuse his M rcies, and Long-suffering towards vs; and to Nos vrimur & secamur: sed nec ferr desectione, nec cauteriorum adu tione sanamur: imò quod grauius est, cura ips deteriores sumus. Cunctos prius est interire quam corrigi: Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 226. l. 6. p. 205. grow Incorrigible, and more Sinfull vnder all his Iudgements, as wee doe ? Are these the meanes to compasse all those Fauours, which wee now expect, or to exempt vs from those heauie Iudgements, which our Hearts so feare? Is this the course to salue, to settle, or reunite our tottering, and diuided State? to secure our Selues, our Church, or Kingdome here at home, or to make vs dread∣full to, or Conquerers ouer all our Foes, abroad? O no, these are the onely wayes to l se our God, our Selues, our Soules, our Church, our Countrey, all Wee haue, or all Wee hope for: these are the Quasi fato quodam i vitia ruimus, & ex vit is in calamitates Zonaras Praefat. ad Annales. onely meanes to heape, and hasten that, yea more, vpon vs then, We feare: these are the A Deo quippe punimur, sed ipsi facimus vt punia∣mur. Nos ergo aduersum nos omnia facimus. Nos calamitatum nostrorum auctores sumus. Nihil, ita{que} nihil est in nos crudelius nobis. Nos, inquam, nos etiam Deo no∣l nte cruciamus. Salu. de Gub. Dei, l. 8. p. 282. courses by which W e haue wilfully cast our Selues into those present miseries, which Wee feare, or suffer, and which our Friends about vs haue drunke of to the full: and shall Wee yet proceede on in them? Haue We not smarted enough already for them? and are Wee yet so strangely stupid, as not to take warning by our former stripes? which Deus cru∣deli vrit, Quos videt inuit s succu∣b isse sibi Ti∣bul l 1. Eleg. . will be doubled, an trebled yet vpon vs, if we still proceed. O therefore, (Christian Readers,) if you haue any sence, or feeling of our present miseries: any apprehention of our future dangers, vn∣der the very thoughts, and feare of which We pine, and lan∣guish: any Bowels of compassion, to your Selues, your Coun∣trey, or Posteritie: any care at all to Remooue, Diuert, or Anticipate those heauie Iudgements, which We feare, or suffer: or to reuerse that fatall Curse of God, which cleaues to all our publike Enterprises, and Designes: any forwardnesse to re∣gaine our Ancient Glory, Victories, and Renowne abroad: or to establish Vnitie, Safetie, Peace, and welfare in our Church, or State at home: or any Cordiall, and strong Desire, to re∣taine Gods Word, his Blessing, Face, and Fauour still among vs, which now withdraw themselues apace, as if they had no pleasure in vs: Let vs now, euen now at last, after so many warnings, and Repriualls: so many dayes of Grace, and Mer∣cie, so many Milde, and Fatherly Chastisements, in the midest of all Mag is i i∣micoru cir∣cu damur ag∣minibus: ho∣stiū plena su t omnia. Hier. Tom 1. Epist. 22. cap. 1. those Enemies, Feares, and Dangers, which hedge vs in on euery side: (though Sopor quip∣pe infunditur, vt perditi subsequ tur: Cum cō∣pleti iniqui bus suis qu ̄ meretur vt pereat; pr i∣dentia tollit r, ne pe∣riturus eu : dat: Salu. De Gub. Dei: l. 6. p. 234. Wee are almost sencelesse of them, perchance, beca se God meanes for to destroy vs: ) abandon all our Brauery, Pride, and Vani∣tie; and all these Cultures, Loue-Lockes, and Disguises, which blemish our Profession, and Arme our God, and all our Enemies against vs, to our iust destruction: If Wee will now lay downe these weapons of Rebellion, which bid defiance to the Lord of Hosts: if Wee will reforme our Heads, and Hearts, Morbid e∣n m capite, ni∣hil sa est est: ne{que} vl∣lu omnin membru of∣ficio suo f ∣gitur, vbi quod est principale non constat: Salu. de Gub. Dei: l. 7. p. 234. which distemper all our other members, with the Flux of sinne; and make them all vnsound: if We wil yet humble our Soules before the Lord for all our sinnes, and turne our Heads, our Hearts, our Hand s, our Eyes, and Feete vnto his Testimonies, without any more d layes: Zeph. 2.3. Ionah 3.8.9.10 it may be there is yet a day of Grace, a time of M rcy, Peace, and Fauour reserued for vs in the brest of God, and wee may yet esc pe those sad, and fatall Iudgements, w ich God now threatens, and we feele, or feare: But if we still walke on, as in a progresse, in the Effeminacy, Pride, and Vanitie of our Liues, or in the stubbornnesse of our hard, and gracelesse Hearts, from euill, to worse, heaping vp sinne, to sinne, with∣out all stinte, or measure, Ad munda∣na gaudia, & temporalia bo∣na multitudo procliuis est. Et quamuis in∣certum, cadu∣cumq, sit quod cupitur, liben∣tius tamen sus∣cipitur labor pro desiderio voluptatis, quā pro amore vir∣tutis: ita cum innumer sunt, qui visi∣bilia concupis¦cant: vix in∣ e iun ur, qui temporalibus terna praepo∣n nt. Leo de Quadrages. Serm. 11. c. 1. as Wee doe: Let other men expect, and hope what good they will; I for my owne part, can Prognosticke nothing, but our finall ruine. For if wee still goe on in sinne, in despite of all Gods Iudgements, or Qui benefi∣ciis non intelli∣gitur, vel pla∣gi intelliga∣tur. Cyprian. Tract. 2. con∣tra Demetria dem. ouer∣comming F uours: God will, he must, proceed in wrath, and vengeance: so that Ier. 15.1.2. Ezech. 14.14.14.18.20. Luke 13.3.5. Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. though Moses, Daniel, Noah, Samuell, Iob, and Abraham, should stand before him in the gappe, to diuert his Indign tion, Wrath, and Iudgements from vs, yet his minde could not be to∣wards vs, but hee will cast vs out of his sight; and send vs out to Death, to Sword, to Famine, and Captiuitie without Redemption, till we perish. O therefore hearken, and Repent betimes, that so iniquitie may not prooue yo r ruine. And if you would bee rescued from Gods Iudge∣ments, (especially from that fatall, and deforming sickenesse of the Poxe: which God hath now certainely sent vpon vs, but especially, vpon our Gentrie, who are most visited, and af∣ licted with it, Isay 3.16.17.24. as hee did vpon the hautie Daughters of Zion, for our excessiue Pride, and ouer-curious decking of our Faces, which steale away our Hearts, our Thoughts, and Time from God, and better things:) or else indeared in his Fauour: then wash, your Heads, your Hands, and Ier. 4.14. Hearts from all their Vanities, Pride, and Wickednesse, that you may be saued: Quid pr desse poter t Antidotum cui superfundi∣tur venenum! Salu. de Gub Dei. l. 5. p. 148. Antidotes will profit nothing, as long as they are besprinkled, with Poyson: all our Wishes, Teares, and Prayers, or the Supplications of others of Gods dearest Children for vs, cannot auail to helpe, to succor, or doe vs any good, as long as they are empoysoned with our sinnes: Psal. 66.18. If wee regard but any iniquitie in our Hearts, (much more when wee practise nothing but Sinne, and all excesse of Pride, and Vanitie in our liues,) the Lord will not heare vs: Isai. 1.15. & 50.3.4 Prou. 1.24. to 33. yea, though wee make many Prayers to him, and adde Fasting to our Prayers, to make them more a∣uaileable; yet, hee will not regard, but quite reiect vs: Mal. 1.10. his Soule shall haue no pleasure in vs. O turne you, turne you, therefore from all the Sinne, and Euill of your do∣ings: from that abundance of Idlenesse, and superfluitie of Pride, and Vanitie which hath ouer pred our Nation: from all those Antique, Effeminate, Meretricii enim pilorum plexus & ca∣tenarum nexu deformes red∣dunt. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 11. Deforming, Strange, and Vnchristian Attires, Fashions, and Disguises, which trans∣forme vs into sundry Monsters, and almost depriue vs of our Naturall, and Humane s apes: that so wee may cloathe our selues with Iesus Christ, Serico & purpura indu∣tae Chris u in∣du re non pos∣sunt. Cypr. De Habitu. Virg. Proiici∣amus ornamē∣ta terren si coelesti optae∣mus. Tertul. de Cultu. Faem. c. 9.10. who will neuer comply, nor suite with such Attires, or those who are deuoted to them. And if we will be Pranking, and Tricking vp our selues, let vs deuote our Thoughts, our paines, and Time, to the inward Culture of our Immortall Soules, which now lye quite neg∣lected, whiles our Hairie excrements are so much adored. These Soules of ours, which now we so much vnderualue, as to preferre the very vainest Vanities of the World before them; are the Spouse, and Loue of Christ: the very Palace, and Temple of the Sacred Trinitie: the very Wealth, and totall Summe of all we haue: O then, let vs cloathe, and de ke these Soules of ours, with the robes of Iesus Christ his Righte∣ousnesse: with Psal. 45.13.14 the cloathing of wrought Gold; the raiment of Needle-Worke ; the transplendent Iewels, and Pearles of Grace, and with the whole Wardrobe, and Cabinet of Heauen; that so wee may euen rauish the very Heart of Christ, Cant. 2.5. & 5.8 and make him sicke of Loue: And if we will needes adorne our bodies too: Prodite vos iaem medica∣mentis & or∣namentis ex∣tructae Aposto∣lorum, sumen∣tes de simplici∣tate candore de pudicitia ruborem; de∣pictae oculos ve∣recundia: &c. Te tul: De Cultu. Faem. c. 9. See Cypriā de hab. Virg. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. cap. 22. l. 3. c. 11. let vs Paint our Faces with the candor of Simplicitie, and Vermilian-blush of Chastitie: and our Eyes with Modestie: let Silence, or Holy conference, bee the ornament of our Lips; the Word of God our Earings, and the Yoake of Christ our Necke-bracelets: Let vs submit our Heads to Christ, and then they are sufficiently, adorned: Let our hands bee busied with the Distaffe, or some other honest im∣ployment, of our generall, or speciall callings: and our Feete shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace: which makes them more rich, and louely, then if they were clad in Gold: Let vs cloathe our selues with the Silke of Honestie, the Laune of Sanctitie, and the Purple of Chastitie: Taliter pigmentatae Deum habebitis ama∣torem: So shall our God bee inamored with vs, and attoned towards vs: so shall his Iudgements bee diuerted, his Fauour regained, his Mercies enlarged, his Gospel continued, our Foes subuerted, our Church reformed, our Kingdome established, our Grieuances redressed, our Feares remooued, our Peace prolonged, and our Soules eternally saued, Isay 2.11. to 18. in that Great, and terrible Day of the Lord, wherein the loftie lookes of Man shall be humbled, and the hautinesse of Men shall bee bowed downe, and the wrath of the Lord of Hosts, shall rest vpon euery Proud, and Loftie person, who is high, and lifted vp, to bring him low, that the Lord a∣lone, may be exalted in that day. Now this Lord, and God of Blessing, Blesse this poore Treatise, to the Soul s of many, which I haue presumed for to publish, not out of any Singular, or Nouellizing Spirit, (as some may chance to thinke; because it treates of such a Subiect; in which none else haue euer trauelled to my know∣ledge:) or out of any Vaine-glorious humour of purcha∣sing applause from others, or venting of my owne conceites: but out of a sincere, and true desire, of confining English-men, and such as beare the name of Christians, to English, Non solum enim pudicos ac tempera ∣res satis e t esse puros, sed etiam adhiben∣da e t opera vt quod extrinse∣cus e t, sit ab omni reprae∣hensione & vituperatione alienum, om∣ni exclus su∣spitionis cau∣sai vt in sum∣mam quandam contrahatur ca titas, vt non simus solum fideles, sed eti∣am videamur fide digni: Clē. Alexand. Pae∣dag lib. 3, c. 11 and true Christian Fashions, and Attires: to stop the ou r-flowing Sinnes, and Monstrous vanities of these our Times, (which farre exceed all former Precedents; and finde either none, or little publike Opposition:) and so, as much as in mee lies, to turne away that blacke, and gloomie Cloude of Wrath, and Ven∣geance, which now hangs houering ouer all our heads, threat∣ning a sodaine Storm of Blood, of Miserie, Ruine, and Desola∣tion to vs, vnlesse, we thorowly, and speedily Repent: In which if I haue erred in any particular, as well I may, because I haue walked in an vntroden p th, and had no foote-steps but mine owne to follow, (though some are so Malicious to report abroad; that my Workes, th y Hos ego ver∣siculos feci, tu∣lit alter hono∣ es, &c. Do∣natus in vita Virgil. Maron. are some others, not mine owne ; because they haue little else to carpe against them:) I hope y good intention shall mitigate my Errors for the present: and my Penne correct th m, if once informed of them, for the future; so that I neede not feare that Schoole-boyes breeching for th m, which some Pedantique Cl rikes threaten to mee; who for all their out-side Pompe, their Doctorated, Barba non facit Philoso∣phum Cael us. Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 5. c. 12. or B a d d-gra itie, de rue the Schoole-boyes lash, Facinu quos inquinat, aequat. Lucan. Phars l. 5. p. 79 Opotet vt vna paena teneat bnoxios, quos similis err r inuenerit im∣plicaetos. Con∣cil. Tollit. 4. Can. 74. per∣chance as w ll as I, who neither regard their causelesse Cen∣sures, Scoffes, and Calumnies, nor yet feare their Threates. If I haue causlesly Vitia car∣pens, scio e offender viti∣osos. Bern ad Gul Abbat. Apologia. stirred vp their Choller, or tongues against Mee, or my Bookes, by gla cing at their Pride, Pluralities, Idlenesse, See Athan ∣si Con tant. 8. Epi tolae, de necessaria E∣piscoporum Residentia: a∣gainst this sinne. Bibl. Pa∣trum. Tom 13 p. 487. to. 491. Nonresid ncie, or Vitious Lines, Volumus delinquere, & nolumus verberari: Salu: Gub. Dei. lib 4. p. 99. which are impatient of the lash, though now perchance they need it: or in that I am a Laicke onely, not a Minister, and yet presume to Write in others Silence: (whereas 1. Pet. 2.5. Reu. 1.6. Nonne & Laici. Sacerdotes sumu ? Scriptum est, nos Sacerdotes Deo & Patri suo ferit: Differentiam inter Ordinem, & plebem con tituit Ecclesiae authoritas. Sed & vbi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laici. Tertul. Exhort ad Castitatem. c 5. euery Christian is in trueth, an holy Priest, to offer vp Spirituall Sacrifices ac∣ceptible vnto God, by Iesus Christ: Leuit. 19.17. to rebuke his neighbour in any wise, and not to suffer sinne vpon him ; (especially, in Dangerous, and sinfull Times, which threaten Desolation, both to Church, and State:) and Phil. 1.27. Iude . to contend earnestly, for the Faith of the Gospel, which was once deliuered to the Saints: as well, as Clergie men; what euer Papist, or others mutter to the contrary:) or in that I haue di∣splayed their Popish, and Arminian Doctrines, Plots, and Pro∣iects to the World, which they would yet keepe vailed till their ends were wrought: or blamed them, Ecce iam pe∣ne nulla est seculi actio, quam non Sacerdotes admini trent. Dei causaem relinquimu , ad terrena negotia vacamus. Ad exteriora negotia delapsi sumu , & aliud ex honore suscipimus, atque aliud ex officio actionis exhibemus. Curis vero secul ribus intenti, aento insensibiliores intus efficimur, quanto ad ea quae foris sunt studiosiores videmur. Greg. Mag. Hom. 17. in Euangelia. for neglecting their Ministrie, and merging themselues in Secular affaires: I onely wish them so much Grace, and Wisedome, as to grow angry, and displeased with themselues, and these their Sinnes, and Errors; that so they may in time reforme them: Malit quilibet improbus ex crare legem, quam emendare mentem: malit praecept odisse quam vitia: Inter haec quid agant quibu loquendi a Chri to officia mandantur? Deo displicent si tacent: hominibus si loquun∣tur. Salu. ad Eccles Cathol. l. 4. p. 470. not with mee; Non aduer∣sum ordinem, sed pro ordine di putare pu∣ andus ero, dū non ordinem in hominibus, sed hominum viti repr hē∣do: quae in ve∣stris laudabilia sunt, laudo et prae ico: si quae repr hendenda sunt, vt emen∣dentur vobis, & aliis amicis meis suadere soleo: Hoc non est detractio: sed attractio. Bern. ad Gul. Abb. Apologia. who beare no mallice to their persons, (much lesse vnto their High, and holy Function, which I honour:) but to their Errors, Sinnes; and Vices, which I onely mention to reclaime them, not defame them: that so those Pastors, Isay 9.16. Ier. 23.14.15. & 50.6. Hosea 4.9. Nullum put , ab aliis magis pr iudicium, quam a Sacerdotibus tolerat Deus; quando eos quos ad aliorum correctionem posuit, dare de se exempla prauitatis cer it, quando ipsi p ccamus, qui compescere peccata debemus. Quanto autem mundus gladio feriatur aspicitis: quibus quotidie percussionibus i tereat populus, videtis. Cuius hoc nisi nostro precipuè peccato agit r? Ecce depopulata vrbes, euersa castr , Eccl siae destructae, in sollitudinem agri redacti sunt. Sed nos pereunt populo authores mortis existimus, qui esse deb imus duces ad vitam. Ex nostro enim peccato populi tur∣ba prostrat est, quia nostra faciente negligentiae ad vitam erudita non est. Greg. Mag. Hom. 17. in Euangelia: Which Homily I would our Non-resi ents and Secular Clergie men would study but a whiles. whose ill examples Vi∣tiate, and cause their Flockes to erre, if not all Christen∣dome for to suffer:) being thorowly reformed, both in Life, and Doctrine: the straying Sheepe, (which now are Posting after sundry Sinnes, and Vanities, and those especially, which I haue here oppugned:) might be more easily, and spee∣dily, recalled from these wayes of Sinne, which are like to lead both them, and vs vnto destruction: and so both Sheepe, and Pastors, our Church, and State; our Zion, and Ierusalem, yet preserued, in despite of all their Enemies: Which exact, and speedy reformation, the God of Mercies grant now vnto vs all, for his Sonne, and Mercies sake, Amen. The vnfained wel-wisher of thy priuate, and the publique welfare. WILLIAM PRYNNE. THE VNLOVE∣LINESSE, OF LOVE-LOCKES. INfinite and many are the sinfull, strange, and mon∣strous Vanities, which this Vnconstant, Vaine, Fan∣tastique, Idle, Proud, Effeminate, and wanton Age of ours, hath Hatched, and Produced in all the parts, and corners of the World; but especially, in this our English climate; which like another Aphric sem∣per aliquid no∣ui affert. Plin. l. 8. Nat. Hist. c. 16. Co lius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 13. c. 13 Munster Cos∣mog. l. 6. c. 46. Affricke, is al∣wayes bringing foorth some New, some Strange, Misshapen, or Prodigious formes, and Fashions, euery moment. Not to insist vpon those Lasciuious, Immodest, Who∣rish, or vngodly Fashions, and Attires, which Metamor∣phise, and Transforme, our Light, and Giddie Females of the Superior and Gentile ranke, into sundry Antique, Horred, and Out-landish shapes, from day, to day: which Fashions, and Attires both Esay. 3.16. to 25 Zeph. 1.8. 1 Tim. 2.9.10. 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. God himselfe, Clem. Alex. Padag. l. 2. c. 10 12. Tertul. de cultu Faem. lib. Cypr de hab Virg. & de In∣stit Virgin. Ba∣sil. Ser. 2. in Diuites & Auaros Ascetica c. 22. Cōment. in 3. Isaiae. Ambr. de Virg. l. 1. l 5. in. Luc. c. 6. Hier. Epist Tom. 1. Ep. 7. c. 3. Ep. 8. c. 5 Ep. 0. c. 2.3 Ep. 47. c. 3. Chrysost. hom. 84 in. Iohā. Fulgen ad Probam. Ep. 3. Greg. Mag. hom. 6. in Euang. Bern. de modo bene viuend. Ser. 9. Concil Gangrense. Can. 21. with sun∣dry Fathers, and See Mr. Perkins Cases of Conscience. li . 3. Sect. . Quae t 3. Mr. Byfields Sermon on 1 Pet. 3.3.4. Mr. Iohn Downhams Christian Warfar. Part. 2. l. 1. c. 6 to 15. Iohan: Fredericus, de Luxu vestium. BB. Hall. in his Righteous Mammon. BB. Babington on the 7. Command. Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses. Moderne Aut ors, haue punctually con∣demned: Nor yet to mention, that Meretricious, Execra∣ble, and Odious Art of Face-painting, (a Vice so rife a∣mong vs,) which Ier. 4.30. 2 Kings 9.30. Math. 5.36. Eze h. 23.40. God himselfe, which Clem Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 10 Tertul. de. Cul∣tu Faem. c. 3. to 9. De Paeniten∣ti c. 10. De velandi Vir∣ginibus c. 13. Cypr de Habit. Virg. Ambr. Hexaem. l. 6. c. 8. de virgin. l 1 Hier E st. Tō. 1. Ep. 7. c 3. Ep. 8. c. 5. Ep. 10. c. 2.3. Ep. 16 c. 2 Ep 23. Aduer∣sus Heluid. c. 9. Basil Com. in cap. 3. Isaiae. & Ep. 1. Chry∣sost. hom. 31. in Mat. & hō. 8. in 1. Tim. 2. Theod. S nct. patrum. Hist. c. 8. Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 4 c. 21. Theo∣phylact. E ar. in 1. Tim. 2. Fathers, which Master Iohn Downham in his Christian Warfar, part. 2. l. 1. c. 14 M . Per ns C s s o Conscien e l. . Sect 3. Quaest. 3. M yer Exposition on 1 Pet. 3.3. Mr St s Anat my of Abuses p. 35. to 4 . Mr. Bolto s Di∣rections or our Walking with God, p. 195 200 . Quo Va is, Sect. 21 and in his righteous Mammon. Moderne Christian Authors, and Pr p. l. Petronius A biter. p. 74. & 135. P in n t. Hist l. 13. c. 1 2, . 3 Pr perti Elegiar: lib 1. Eleg: 2. Quintil. Iastitut. Orat lib. 8. . Xenophon, Memorabilium. lib. 5 p. 846.847. sundry Pagans, haue Sentenced, and Branded; as a meere inuention of the Deuill: as an Vnnaturall, Detestable, Heathenish, Proud, Lasciuious, Whorish, and Infernall practise, peculiar vnto none but audacious Whores, and Stu pets, or persons desperately Wicked: as a Baite, a Snare, or meere allectiue to Inescate, and Inamour others with vs; as an Art that offers violence vnto God himselfe, in obliterating that Naturall, and liuely Image, Forme, and Beautie, which he hath stamped on his Creatures: in Correcting, Changing, and Nullifying of his Worke; and so taxing him for an Imperfect, Bungling, or Vnskilfull Worke∣man: in preferring those artificiall Faces, and Infernall var∣nishes, which Satan hath Portraitured, and set out to Sale; be∣fore that Naturall, and comely Countenance, Face, and Feature, which Gods owne Curious, and neuer-erring Finger hath car∣ued out vnto vs: in changing that into a Counterfeite, False, and fained Picture, or a Rotten, painted Statue, which he hath made, a Reall, Liuely, Rationall, and holy Creature: and as a Pernicious, and Soule-deuouring Euill, which without Repen∣tance, Dammes all such as vse it, to the depthes of Hell, from which there is n Redemption: and causeth God to forget, yea, not to know them here; and to disclaime, and vtterly renounce them in the day of Iudgement: because they want that roy∣all Image, and Superscription, which Hee had stamped on them; which I would our Painted Iezabels, Dames, and Ladyes would consider, in a Deliberate, Cordiall, and Soule-affecting manner, for feare they feele the smart, and terrour of it at the last: Not to insist (I say) on these, or many such like sinnes and vanities of our fe∣male sex, which would requi e a large and ample volume to batter and confound them: I haue resolued for the present, to single out one sinful, shamefull, and vncomely vanitie, with which to grapple; which hath lately sei∣sed on many effeminate, loose, licentiou , singular, fan∣tastique, and vaine-glorious perso s of our masculine, and more noble Sex: to wit, the nourishing and wearing of vnnaturall, shamefull, and vnlouely Lock s, or Loue-lock s, (as they stile them:) which now b gin to grow into a C pit esse citū quod pub¦licū est. Cypr. Epist. l. 2. Ep. 2 common, approoued, and receiued fashion, or vse among vs. These Loue lockes, or E re-lockes, in which too many of our Natio haue of late begun to glory: what euer they may seeme to bee in the eyes, and iudgements of many humorous, singular, ffeminate, ruff inly, vaine-glorious, or time seruing pe sons, who repute and deeme them a very generous, necessary, beautifull, and come∣ly orname t: are yet notwithstanding but so many s d cri i su t Paulinu Epist. 4. ad. S ∣uerum. badges of infamie, effeminacy, vanitie, singularitie, pride, lasciuiousnesse, and shame, in the eyes of God, and in the iudgement of all godly Christians, and Graue or Ciuill men: yea, they are such vnnaturall, sinfull, and vnlawfull ornaments, that it is altogether vnseemely, and vnlawful for any to nourish, vse, or weare them. Lest this should seeme an harsh, a alse, or idle Paradox, to Ruf∣fians, and such fantastique persons as are delighted in them. I will here propound some arguments, and reasons to euince this true, though strange and new Conclusion: That the nourishing, vsing, or wearing of Lockes, or Loue-lockes, is vtterly v see ely, odious, and vnlawfull vnto Christians: and thus I prooue it. First That which had its birth, its sou se, and pedegree fro the very Deuill hims lfe, must needes bee odio s, vnlawfull, and abominable, vnto Christians. But these our Loue-lockes had their birth, their sourse, and pedigree from the very Deuill himselfe. Therefore they must needes bee Odious, Vnlawfull, and Abominable vnto Christians. The Maior must bee yeelded, because no good thing can proceede from him, who is all and onely euill, both in himselfe, and all his actions, as the Deuill is: the Mi∣nor I shall backe and euidence, by the authority of Ter∣tullian, who informes vs: that Alterius esse non possunt nisi Diabol , quae Dei non sunt. Ter ul. de Ido∣lo a ria, c. 18. De Cult F em. cap. 3, 4, 5. all things which are not of God, are certainely the Deuils: But the wearing, and nourishing of these Loue-lockes, is not from God, (no, nor yet from any of his Saints and Children, with whom they were neuer in vse as we can read of;) there∣fore they must needes b e from the Deuill: And that they were so indeed, wee haue the expresse authoritie, of a learn d, la e, and reuerend Historian; who i formes vs in expresse tearmes: Mr. Purchas Pilgrimage. lib. 8. c. 6. Sect. 3. That our sinister, and vnlouely Loue-lockes, had their generation, birth, and pedigree from the Heathenish, and Idolatrous Virginians, who tooke their patterne f their Deuill Ockeus: who vsually appeared to them in e of a man, with a long blacke Locke on the left side of head, hanging downe to his feete: so that if wee will resolue the generation of our Loue-lockes, into their first and true originall; the Virginian D uill Ockeus, will prooue to be the naturall Father, and inuen∣tor of them. And shall we then, who professe our selues Christians; we who haue giuen vp our names to Christ, and so solemnely vowed, and protested vnto God in our very Baptisme: to forsake the Deuill and all his Workes ; turne such prodigious, and incarnate Deuils, as to imi∣tate the very Deuill himselfe, in this his guise and por∣traiture, which wee haue so seriously renounced in our very first initiation, and admittance into the Church of Christ? Certainely, if the Deuill himselfe were the first inuentor of these fantastique and vaineglorious Loue-lockes; this very thing doeth stampe such an vnloue∣linesse, and vnlawfulnesse vpon them, as should cause all such who beare the name, or face of Christians, to ab∣horre them: this is my first argument. Secondly. Admit, that this obiection should chance to faile me, (though I know not how it can well be shifted off:) yet thus I argue in the second place. That which was, and is an Idle, Foolish, Vaine, Ridi∣culous, Effeminate, and Heathenish fashion, vse, and custome, of Idolatrous, Rude, Lasciuious, and Effe∣minate Infidels, and Pagans, must needes bee Sin∣full, and Vnlawfull. But such is the nourishing, and wearing of these Loue-lockes. Therefore they must needes be Sinfull, and Vnlawfull. Th Maior is irrefragable: because God himselfe hath expr sly Commanded all Christians whatsoeuer; Leuit. 1 .30. Deut. 12.29, 30. Ier. 10.2. Mat. 6.7, 8.31, 32. Eph. 2.1, 2 & 4, 17, to 22. Rom. 12. 2 Col. 2.20, 21 22. 1 Pet. 1, 14, 18. & 4, 2 3. 2 King. 17.15 Zeph. 1, 8. not to imitate, vse, or follow, the vaine, vnnaturall, ri∣diculous, Effemi ate, or Heathenish Customes Fashions, Guises, Rites, or Habits of Infidels, Pagans, Wicked, or Worldly men, but vtterly to abandon and disclaime them; because Christ Iesus hath shed his rich and pretious Blood, of purpose to redeeme and free them from them: The Minor I shall euidence by sundry Testimonies: It is storied of the Effeminate, Luxurious, and Heathe∣nish Sybaerites ; Ad impube∣rem vsque at ∣tem capillorū nod s aur re∣uinctos gest nt Athenaeus Dip nos. l 12. c. 6. that it was the common custome of their Citie, for their Youthes and Pages to weare, and nourish Loue-lockes tyed vp in golden Ribbands: Mart. Epig. Ep. . Seneca. Epist. 1 24 Cae∣lius Rhod. An∣tiqu. Lect. l. 15 c. 8 Alex ab A∣lex. l. 5. c. 18. The Ancient Germanes did vse to weare long red Haire tyed vp in a knot, as our Loue-lockes sometimes are: The Heathenish, Bar∣barous, and Bloody Matthias a ichou de Sarmatia Asi∣ana. c. 7. Boem. de Mor. Ge t. l 2 c. 10. Gu gninu Reru Polon. Tom. 2. p. 3 22. Tartars, doe vsually shaue the fore∣part of their Heads to their Crownes, from one Eare to the other, suffering their Haire to grow long on the hinder part of their Heads, like to our Women, of which they make two traces, or Loue-lockes, which they tie vp behinde their eares. The Infidell, and Idolatrous Purcha Pilgr. l. 8, c. 6. Sect. 3. Virginians, doe weare a long Loue-locke on the left side of their Heads (as our Eng∣lish Ru fians doe) in imitation of Ockeus their Deuill-god: whence it was, that a Virginian comming into England, blamed our English men for not wea ing a long locke as they did: affirming the God which wee worship to bee no true God, because hee had no Loue-locke, as their Deuill Ockeus hath. The Peter Mar∣tyr. Indian. Hi∣stor. Decad. 7. cap. 2. p. 252. Heathenish, and Pagan Inhabitants of Du∣harhe doe cut their Haire, leauing onely two curled L ckes hanging downe from th ir Temples, which they ye vp vn∣der their Chinnes: which Eare-lockes, the Author stiles a pestilent custome: Acost. l. 5. Hist. Ind. c. 16. In Mexico there was a Monasterie of young men, who shaued the former part of their Heads, letting the Haire on the h nder part to grow, about the breadth of foure fingers, which they yed vp in trusses The Alex. ab A∣lex. l c. 18. Herodotus lib 4. Sect. 125. Maxyes did vse t pole the lef side of their Heads, (as our Loue-locke wearers doe the right,) suffering the Haire on the right side to grow long, in nature of our Loue-lockes. Alex. ab A∣lex. Ibid. Plu∣ arch. Theseus. Polid. Virgil. De Inuentor. rum, l. 3. c 17 Babington in his Notes on Numbers cap. 6. vers. 4, 5. The Priests of Sybil called Curetes, the AE o∣lians, Arabians, Ionians, Mysians, and Machlians, did vse to pole the forepart of their Heads, lest their Enemies should take hold of their Haire; and so gaine aduantage of them in their Warres : leauing their Haire long behinde. Sto aus de In∣temperantia Serm 6. Fol. 6 . . Musouius in his Booke de Tonsura makes mention of some Pagans, who did not pole all their Head alike, but did cut their Haire somewhat short before, and let it grow long behinde: This (saith hee) though it may seeme to bee some∣what comely, yet it hath much deformitie in it, neither doeth it any whit differ from the culture, and elegancie of Women: for they doe plaite some parts of their Hair ; other parts of it they suffer to hang downe at length, and the rest th y dresse after another fashion that they may seeme more beautifull. In like manner men who are thus polled, bewray that they desire to s eme faire to those whom they study to please whil s they cut away some of their Haire, and compose the rest in such a manner, as may make them seeme more beautifull a∣ ong Women and Children, whose praise they doe affect: which is an Effeminate, Womanish, Voluptuou , and Vn∣manly thing: A worthy censure of a Pagan on these Effe∣minate, and Lasciuious Loue-lockes, which should cause all Christians to abhorre them. And to conclude this proofe: The Purchas Pil∣grimage l. 4. c. 19. Alexand. ab Alex. Gen, Dier. l . c. 18. Gotardu Hist. Ind Orient c . 52 Maffaus Ind. Hist. lib. 6 p. 270. Idola rous Chinians, Persians, and Dacians, though so e of them shaue their Heads full often, yet they leaue a Locke, or Tuft of Haire vpon th ir Crownes about two foote long, that thereby hey may bee more e sily carried into Heauen after their death: A very substantiall and worthy reason for the vse of Loue-lockes, if men might be carried vp to Heauen by them, as these Idola∣ters & Mahometans dreame: whereas in truth, they serue for no other purpose, but to giue the Deuill holdfast, to draw vs by them into Hell: a fitting place for such vaine, Effeminate, ruffianly, Lasciuious, Proud, Singular, and Fantastique persons, as our Loue-locke wearers, for the most part are: You see now by these precedent Hi∣stories; that the nourishing, vse, and wea ing of these vnlouely Loue-lockes, was common among Idolatrous Infidels, and Vaine, Effeminate, Barbarous, Vnciuill, and Lasciuious Pagans, whose Custome, Guise, and Gracelesse fashions, no Christians are to imitate: for my owne part, I neuer heard nor read as yet, that they were euer worne, vsed, or approoued by any Sin∣cere, Sober, Graue, or godly Christians in former ages: Wherefore it must needes bee a shame, if not a sinne for vs who beare the habit and name of Christians, to deui∣ate from the vse and custome of our Countrey, and from the patterne, and practise of the Alienum est a Catholica Ecclesia, & a praedicatione Apostolorum, coma extensa. Vir enim, in∣quit, non debet putrire comā, cum sit imago ac gloria Dei. Epiphan. cont. Haeres. l. 3. Tō. 2. Haer. 0. Saints in former ages, in taking vp these Vaine, Effeminate, Lasciuious, and vnnaturall Loue-lockes, in imitation of these Rude, these Barbarous, Effeminate, Idolatrous, and Gracelesse Pa∣gans, whose Guise, whose Wayes, whose Fashions, Rites, and Customes, no Christians are to follow. Thirdly. If these two arguments will not conuince our Loue-locke wearers, then let them hearken to a third, from which there can be no euasion. That which is contrary to the very Word of God, and Law of Nature, must needes be Euill, Sinfull, Vn∣lawfull, and Abominable. But the nourishing, and wearing of Loue-lockes, is contrary to the Word of God, and Law of Nature. Therefore it must ne es be Euill, Sinfull, Vnlawfull, and Abominable. The Maior no man dares controule, vnlesse hee will Atheistically condemne both God and Nature too: the assumption I shall prooue in both particulars: First I say, that the nourishing, or wearing of Loue-lockes is contrary to the very Word of God: as is manifest by Ezech. 44. 20. compared with Leuit. 29.27, and 21.5. They shall not shaue, nor round, nor make bald their heads, nor suffer their Lockes to grow long, they shall onely pole their Heads, and by the 1. Cor. 11.14. where the Scrip∣ture, and Nature it selfe informe vs: that it is a shame for a man to weare long Haire: Now those who weare, or nourish Loue lockes: they doe not pole their Heads: they weare long Haire; and they suffer their Lockes to grow long: therfore they expressely oppose, and contradict the word of God. If any now reply, that these Scriptures extend not vnto such as nourish Loue-lockes, but to such as nourish all their Haire, suffering it to grow out vnto its full and largest length; as the Epiph. contr. Haeres s, l. 3. Tom. 2. Haer. 80 Massalian heretiques, (who are therefore taxed by Epiphanius: ) the Zenophon: Lacedaem: Res∣pub. Plut rch. Lysand. & Apo¦thegmata. He∣ odoti Clio, p. 33. Stobaeus Ser∣mo 44. Arist. Rhetor: l. 1. c. 9. Boemus de Mor. Gent. l. 3. c. 3. C elius Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 15. c. 8. Lace∣demonians by reason of Lycurgus his Law and direction: who thought, that long Haire would make those that were comely, m r beautifull: and those who were de∣formed, more terrible to their Enemies: the Alex. ab A∣l. 5. c. 18 Poli∣dor. Virgil. de I ue t: rerum l. 3. c. 17. Plin. Nat: hist. l. 7. c. 5 . ancient Romans, till foure hundred fiftie and foure yeeres after the building of Rome: the Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. Lyceans: the Herod. Clio. pag . Platonis Phaedon: Chrysost. Hom. 16. in 1 Cor : 11. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. Ma faeus hist. Indic. l 16. p. 274. Synesius Caluitii Encomium. Argiues, or Grecians, Seneca Epist. 124. C l. Rho∣dig. Antiqu. Lect l 15. c. . Alex. ab Alex∣andr. l b. 5. cap. 18. Germans, Plin. Nat. Hist l. 11 c. 37. Diodor Sic. Bibl. Hist. lib. 5. Sect. 28. Boe∣mus l. 3. c. 22. C elius Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 15. c. 8. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. French men, Boem s l. 3. c. 24. C eli s Rhod. l. 15. c. . P ntingal s, Solinu P ∣lyhist c. 46. ∣lex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 1 . Arabians, Aristot. de Generat. Animalium lib. 5. cap. 30. Athenaus Dipnos lib. 12. c. 8. Seneca Epist. 124. Alex. ab Alexand. . 5. cap. 18. Scythians, Alex. ab Alexand. lib. . ca. 18 Parthians, Dyonis. Hallecarnas. Rom. Antiqu. lib. 7. cap. 1. Cumae∣ans, Solinu Polyhist. cap. 5. Cte ias Excerptae Histor. apud Herodotum. pag. 582. Boemus lib. 2. cap. 8. Indians, Peter Martyr Indian Histor. Decad. 7. cap. 10. pag. 276. Hispanolians, A osta. Indian. H stor. lib. 5. cap. 20 pag. 403. Purchas Pilgrimage lib. 8. cap. 12. Mexican Priests, Matthias a Michou. Sar∣matiae Europ. lib. 2. cap. 3. pag. 479. Plesco ians, Purchas Pilgrimage, lib. 9 c p. 4. Waymeeres, Ta∣citus de Moribus Germanorum. cap. 12. Boemus lib. 3. cap. 15. Byerlincke Chro∣nogr. pag. 18. Sueuians, Herodotus Cli . pag. 79. Boemus lib. 2. cap. 3. Haga∣rens, Aristot. de Ge∣nerat. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 3. Horace Epod. lib. Epod 5. Assyrians, Epiphanius Compend. Doctr de Fide Cathol. pag. 910. Thracians, Alex ab Alex. l. 1. c 18. Seres, Strabo: Gregor. l. 11. Iberi∣ans, A oysi . Nauigatio. c. 65. Basserani, C esias Excerptae hi t. p. 582. Anians, O id. Tri∣st um l. 5. Eleg. 10. Pigmies, Gotardus hist. Indiae Orient. c. 51.52. Maffaeus nd. hist. l. 6. p. 252.270. Purchas Pilgrimage l 4. c. 19. Ginne∣ans, Maffaeus h st. Ind. l. 5. p 228. Chineans, Maf∣faeus Select. Epist. ex Ind a. l. 2. p. 110. Malucchians, Peter Mart. Ind H st. l. 8. Dec. 1. p. 45. Iapanites, ldē Decad. 7. c. 2. p. 251. Cu∣riamans, Caesar ae Bello Gall. l. 5. p 88. Boemus l 3. c 25 Chicoranes, See Pur∣ch s Pilgr. l. 5. c. 8.17. l. 8. c. 4 Plin. Nat. hist. l. 2. c. l. 11. c. 37. Gotardus c. 47. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. Ancient Brittons, and other See Heliodorus AEthiop. hist 2. p. 81 82. Bus quius Famil. Epist Ep. 1. p. 12. Ep. 4. p. 249. Purchas l. 5. c. 5. Di g. La rt l. 4. Carneade p. 251. l. 8 Empedocles p. 517. Idolatrous, Barbarous, and Heathenish Nations of Moderne and Ancient times ; together with some ( n ) par∣ticular men, are Recorded to haue done; and not of those who onely suffer a little part, and parcell of their Haire to grow long, cutting the rest as others doe: To this I answere first; that the same law which pro∣hibites the nourishing of the whole, doeth virtually, nay, positiuely disalow the nourishing of any part: because euery part is actually included in the whole; therefore these Scriptures doe condemne all such, as nourish onely their Loue-lockes, as well as such as suffer all their Haire to grow long: Secondly, I answere; that these Scriptures admit of no apporciament: for they com∣mand men to pole their Heads, not part of their Heades; and not to suffer their Lockes to grow long: in the number of which Lockes, these Loue-lockes are included espe∣cially since this Precept is a vniuersall Negatiue: Loue-lockes, are Lockes: they are long Haire, which is a shame to men that weare it ; therefore they are vndoubtedly in∣cluded within, and so punctually condemned by these Scriptures: Thirdly, the wearing of these Loue-lockes, is as great, (if not a greater) badge of Leuitie. Vani∣tie, Singularitie, and Effeminacy, as the nourishing of all the Haire: therefore both of them are equally con∣demned by the Scriptures: Secondly, as the nourishing and wearing of Loue-lockes, and long Haire, beyond the ordinary, and decent length of the more Ciuill, Graue, Religious, and Sobet ranke of men, is contrary to the Word of God: euen so it is directly contrary to the Law of Nature Mai r est natura, quam patriae. Ambr. Irenaeo, Tom. 1. p. 233 G. which no Custome can controule: Which I prooue, fi st, by the ex∣presse Testimonie of the Scriptures: 1 Cor. 11.14 Doeth not Na∣ture it s lfe teach you (saith the Apostle) that if a Man haue long Haire, it is a shame vnto him? but if a Woman haue long Haire, it is a Glory to her, for it is giuen to her for a couering: the Apostle here informed vs; that the nourishing, and wearing of long Haire in men, is See Chrysost. Hom. 26 in 1 Cor. 11. Ambr. de Officiis l. 1. c. 46. Theo∣phylact. Enar. in 1 Cor. 11. accordingly, Dan. 4 33. contra∣ry to Nature: and hee confirmes this assertion, by these reasons: That (saith he) which euen by the voyce, and verdict of Nature, is a shame to Men ; that which is pro∣perly, and Naturally a Womans glory: and which God, and Nature hath bequeathed vnto Women, for a speciall vse ; to wit, for a See Basil. de Virginitate ver , Tom. 2. p. 150.151. naturall Couering, or Vaile, and for a Badge, or Embleme of their subiection to their Husbands ; must needes be Vnnaturall, and so Vnlawfull vnto Men: But the wearing, and nourishing of long Haire, (and so of Loue-lockes,) euen by the voyce, and verdict of Nature, is a shame to Men; it is the Naturall, and proper Glory of none but Women, to whom God, and Nature haue beque ∣thed it for a speciall vse ; to wit, for a naturall Couering, or Vaile, and for a Badge, or Embleme of subiection to their Husbands: therefore it must needes be Vnnaturall, and so Vnlawfull vnto men, euen by the Apostles Testimo∣ny: Secondly, that which Naturall, and Ciuill men doe loathe, abhorre, and vtterly condemne, euen from the very grounds and principles of Nature, must needes be opposite, and contrary to the Law of Nature: But euen naturall and Ciuill men doe vtterly abhorre, condemne, and loathe the nourishing, and wearing of these Loue-lockes, and Ruffianly, or excessiue long Haire; their very Hearts, and stomackes, doe rise vp in indignation against them, and abhorre the very sight, and thoughts of them, (as euery mans owne experience can sufficiently testifie,) and that from the very grounds, and principle of Nature, which hath stamped, and ingrauen in mens Hearts, a secret antipathie, and dislike against these Loue-lockes, and long Haire in men: Hence was it, Gu gui rerum Polon. Tom. 1. p. 74. that Pope Benedict the ninth enioyned all the Polonians vpon release of Cazimir the first their King, who had entred into Religion; to cut their Haire aboue their Eares, and not to suffer it to grow long: Hence was it, that Zo ara An∣nal um. T . Fol. 174. Theo∣philus the Emperour enacted a Law; that all men should cut their Haire short, and that no Roman should suffer it to grow below his necke, vnder paine of seuere whipping: Hence was it, that M. Speeds Hi∣story of Great Britt. l. 9. c. 4. Numb. 4. p. 442. King Henrie the first, commanded mens long Haire to be cut off (as our Iustices, and Iudges at the Assises oft times doe,) as being against God, and Natures Law: (an Iniunction which would well befit our Ruffianly times:) therefore they must needs be con∣trary to the Law of Nature. Thirdly, the very Law of Nature doeth instigate, and teach all Ciuill, Graue, and Sober men, who liue vnder any Good, and Ciuill gouernment, to weare their Haire of a moderate, and decent length, and to auoid the wea∣ring, and nourishing of these Loue-lockes, and immode∣rate long Haire: What is the reason that our Nation did generally heretofore, and doeth yet for the most part, cut their Haire of a Decent, Graue, and Comely manner, without any reseruation of a Loue-locke; is it not more from the very direction, law, aduise, or dictate of Tenenda no∣bis vita esse, quam natura praescripsit, nec ab illa decli∣nandum. S n. Epist 122. Nature, which doeth secretly informe them of the decency, and fitnesse of it, then from any binding Law, or custome of our Countrey? doubtlesse it is. If then Nature doeth teach men thus to cut their Haire: the nourishing of womanish, and long vnshorne Haire, together with the reseruation of these Effeminate, Fan∣tastique, Ridiculous, and vnciuill Loue-lockes, must needes be contrary to the Law of Nature. Lastly, that which sauours of Leuitie, Vanitie, Pride, Vain glory, Singularitie, Eff minacy, Wantonnesse, Lasciuiousnesse, Licentiousnesse, Selfe-conceitednesse, or the like, must needes bee contrary to the Law of Na∣ture, because Vitia super∣uenerunt, in∣gesta sunt: nulli nos vi∣tio natura cō∣ liat. Seneca Epist. 94. these sinnes and vices are so: But for men to weare long Haire, or Loue-lockes, in any Chri∣stian, or ciuill Common-wealth (as ours is) contrary to the common vse and practise of our Countrey, doeth sauour of all these: therefore it must needes be contrary to the Law of Nature. Now that you may know, that it is contrary to the law of God, and Nature, for men to weare, or nourish Loue-lockes, or extraordinary long H ire: consider but what the Fathe s, and others haue Recorded to this purpose: Constit. Apo∣stol. l. 1. c. 4 Clemens Romanus (if the Booke be his:) enioynes men to pole their Heads, and not to suffer th ir Haire to grow long, least the nourishing, and perfuming of their Haire, should be a meanes to inflame their lusts, and to illaqueate, or inamour Women with them: yea, hee saith xpr sely, that it is Vnlawfull for any Christian, or Man of God, to frizell, or frounce, to pouder or coloure his Haire, to suffer it to grow long, or to fold it together, or tye it vp with an haire∣lace, because it is Effeminate, and contrary to the Law of God. Padag. l. 2. c. 10. l 3. c. 2.3.11. Clemens Alexandrinus, as he doeth vtterly condemne the Fieri non potest, non po∣test inquam fier , vt verum ostendat ani∣mam, qui ca∣put habet a∣dulterinum. Idem Paedag. l 3. c. 3. colouring, poudring, frizeling, curling, and Effeminate, and Meretricious dressing, adorning, and composing of the Haire, both in the male, and female sex: (a vice and fault to rife among vs,) so hee likewise com∣mands men to weare their Haire of a moderate, and decent length, and not to suffer it to grow long, not yet to binde it vp in fillets like women, as the Frankes, and Scythians doe: They saith In dom re gis Diaboli sunt, qui ca∣pillis muliebri∣bus se in fami∣na tra figu∣rant, & digni∣tatem virilem, non sine natu∣rae iniuria de∣honestant. De Ieiun. & Ten∣tat. Serm Tom 2. p. 287. Saint Cyprian, are of the Deuils Court and Pallace, not of Christs: who transforme themselues into women, with womanish Haire, and so deface their m scu∣line dignitie, not without the iniury, and wrong of Nature: a true and terrible speech, sufficient to startle all Effemi∣nate, Hairy, Poudred, Frizled, and excrement-adoring Ruffians. Contr. Har. l. 3. Tom. 2. Haer 80. Epiphanius condem es the Massalian he∣retiques very much, for nourishing their Haire like women; informing them, that long Haire was contrary to the Catho∣lique Church, and Apostoli ue Doctrine; which teach vs, that a man must not weare long Haire, in as much as hee is the Image, and Glory of God: so that he which weareth long Haire, doeth dishonour Christ his Head, and sinnes against the Law of Nature, which teacheth vs; that it is a shame for a man to weare long Haire: Epistola 4. ad Seuerum. Paulinus, De Offic i l. 1. c. 46. De Noe & Arca. lib. cap: 7. & Comment in 1 Cor. 11. Saint Ambrose, and H m. 26. in 1. Cor 11 hom. in Matt. 88. Saint Chrysostome, informes vs, that it is a shame, yea, a great sinne, for a man to weare long Haire at any time, because it is contrary to the order of Nature, and the Law of God; because it is giuen to Women by the consti∣tution of God, and Nature, (which ought not to be violated,) for a couering, and for a ba ge, and token of subiection: whence Chrysostome condemnes such, who thought Coment. in Soph. cap. 1. Tom. . p. 210. it no small part of their Religion to nourish their Haire: Saint Hierome, certifieth, that all such men as doe Effeminately nourish their Haire, and set it out by the Looking glasse; (which is the proper passion and madnesse of Women,) shall surely perish: Yea, Tom. 1. Epist. Ep. 8. c. 10. Ep. 10. c 4. Ep. 1 . c. 5. Ep. 47. c. 3. Com in Ezech. 44. hee condemnes the wearing of long Haire, together with the Colouring, Crisping, Frizling, and Poudring of it, as a sinne and vanitie: and aduiseth men not to shaue nor make bald their Heads, as the Priests, and Worshippers of See Baruch. 6.31. Isis, and S rapis did in former times ; (and as the Popish Monkes and shauelings now:) nor yet to suffer it to grow long, which is proper vnto Souldiers, Barbarians, and riotous persons; but to cut it of a moderate, and decent length: Com. in 1. Cor. 11. Primasius informes vs, that Saint Paul did expressely note, and taxe the Corinthians, for suf∣fering their Haire to grow long: as being a scandalous, and an offensiue thing: In 1 Cor. 11 Enarratio. Theophylact affirmeth, that the man who nouri heth his Haire, is worthy of reproofe, because hee doeth transgresse the Lawes of Nature, and take vpon him the habit, and forme of a Woman, and a signe of subiection, against Gods owne institution; who hath ordained him to be a Prince, and a Ruler: Ad militos Templi Serm . cap. 2. &. 4. S. Bernard doeth expressely con∣demne all such (though they are Souldiers) who weare long Haire; commanding them to cut their Haire, because it is a shame for a man to nourish it: So that by these authori∣ties, to omit See Master Dike of the Deceitfulnesse of Mans heart cap. 17. p 1 5. Bishop Ba∣bingtons Not s on Numbers c. 6. Sect. 2. Sto∣baeus Ser. 6. De Intem∣perantiae. others, the wearing of excessiue long Haire, or Loue-lockes, is directly contrary to the Law of God, and Nature: If you now obiect, Numb. 6.5.18. Iudg. 16.17.19 1 Sam. 1.11. Iosephus Iudaeorum. An∣tiqu. l. 4. c. 4. Polyd. Virg. de Inuentor rerū. l. 8. c. 4. Bishop Babingtons Notes on Nū∣bers 6. that the Nazarites were to nourish their Haire, and not to suffer any rasor to passe vpon their heads, during the time of their vow, or separation: therefore men may weare Loue-lockes, and long Haire: Now I answere first, that the Nazarites had a speciall Command to nourish their Haire; not continually, but till their vowes were out, and then they were to cut it off: but we haue now no such com∣mand, therefore Babingtons Notes on Nū∣bers . Sect. 7.8 we must ot doe it. Secondly, they did nourish their Haire, out of obedience, and holy de∣uotion vnto God: whereas men in our dayes, doe nou∣rish their Haire and Loue-lockes, out of vaine-glory, pride, effeminacy, singularitie, lasciuiousnesse, and such like sinister, and sinfull ends: Thirdly, they during the time of their seperation, did nourish all their Haire, and not one small or little portion of it, as our Loue-locke wearers doe: Fourthly, they onely by the Law of God were to nourish their Haire, and none else: therefore, this example doeth euidently prooue; that all men else, are not to nourish, but to clip and cut their Haire: Fiftly, the nourishing of their Haire was typicall; typi∣fying vnto vs; either Christ himselfe, or the graces, and beauty of Christ: or the Saints, and Church of Christ, as Ambros. de Virgin. lib. 3. de Spir. Sancto. l 2. Pr aemium lib. 10. in E āg. Luca c. 21. Babingtons Note on Nū∣bers, c. 6. Sect. 6 some obserue: therefore wee may, wee must not imitate them, because all types are ceased now Last∣ly, God himselfe commands 1 Cor. 11, 5, 6.7.15. all such as are to pray vn∣to him with vncouered heads, to sheare and cut their Haire: yea, 1 Cor. 11.5, 6 if a Woman will come, and pray to God with her head vncouered (as many doe) shee also is to bee shorne, be∣cause shee is vncouered: But all 1 Cor. 11.4, 7 men are to pray to God with vncouered heads, for as much as they are the Image, and glory of God, and to expresse that holy reuerence, and feare which they owe to him: (especially in the Mat. 21 13. House and place of Prayer, or Presence-chamber of their Lord and God, where most men now a dayes sit couered; as if they owed no reuerence, feare, nor ser∣uice, to the Lord; or as if they came for to out-face him, and not to pray, and stoope vnto him:) Therefore all m n are to cut their Haire, and not to nourish it as the Nazarites did; because it is against the Law of God, and Nature: Loue-lockes, a d excessiue long Haire beyond the ordinary, graue, and decent length, are both against the Lawes of God, and Nature, as I haue already prooued; and will any man then be so vn∣godly, or vnnaturall, as still to weare and nourish them, and not to cut them off? Let Ru ians, and professed Loue-locke weares, now at last consider this; that they transgresse the Lawes of God, and Nature. If then they are, or will bee Christians, as they professe themselues to be, let this Law of God instruct them: if they are but naturall and carnall men, let then this Bonorum vnum proposi∣tum est consen∣tire naturae Seneca Epist. 6. Leges na∣tura euertere magnae est im∣pudentiae, & non solum no∣biscum, sed eti∣ m cum natu∣ra pugnare. Chrysost. hom 26. in 1 Cor. 11. Law of Nature teach them, to cassheere their ruffianly Haire, and Loue-lockes for the time to come, for feare they fight against thems lues & nature ; & so incurre the euerlasting penalty, & censure, both of the Law of God, & Nature, at the last. But it may bee some will here obiect and say; that the Haire, and Loue-lockes which they weare, are supposi∣titious, false, and counterfeit, and not their owne: there∣fore they violate no Law of God, nor Nature, since the long Haire they vse, is but borrowed, and aduenticious, their owne being sh rt enough: perchance, but little or none at all. To this I answere first; that the wearing of counter∣feite, false, and supposititious Haire, is See Bishop Halls Quo va∣dis, Sect. 21. Mr. Bolton in his generall Directions for our comforta∣ble Walking with God, p. 195.20 . ac∣cordingly. vtterly vnlaw∣full, though it bee now so rife and common, both in our Masculine, and Female sex: First, because wee haue no Precept, no Record, no Warrant, nor Example for it in the Scriptures, Psal. 119.9, 105. Gal 6.1 . 1 Iohn 2.6. 2 Tim 2.16.17. 2 Pe . 1 19. which are the onely Rule wee are to walke by: The Idolatrous and Effeminate Ze ph. De Iu it. Cyri. Hi . l. 1. . . Medes, (not any Saints, nor Christians that we can read of,) were the first that vsed this false, and counterfeite Haire: there∣fore Christians may not vse it. Secondly, because God hath giuen euery man & woman such Haire, as is most na∣turall, and sutable vnto them, of purpose that they should weare and vse it, and not contemne it, nor be ashamed of it: those th refore who dislike the quantitie, or qualitie of that Haire, which Gods wisedome hath assigned to them, and there ore purchase the hairie excrements of some other person, to Adorne and Beautifie their Heads with all; must needes incurre Gods Iudgement; because they taxe and censure God, and labour to correct, and change his Worke: Thirdly, because this wearing of false and counterf ite Haire, doeth alway arise rom pride and vaine-glory: in that wee desire to Faemina ca∣nictem. O r∣manis in icit her is, Et me∣lior ro quae∣ritu arte co∣lor Ouid. de Arte Amandi, lib. 3. be more beautif ll, and comly then God hath made vs: or from concupiscence, r vncleann sse, in that we seeke to inescate, and inamour those with this artificiall and acquisite Haire, and beau∣tie, which our owne naturall Haire, and feature would not mooue: or from a vaine, and sinfull leuitie of minde, wherby we desire to take vp, and follow he vaine, abo∣minable, wicked, and worldly guises, fashions, and customes of the times, which Christians must, Rom. 12.2. 1 Pet 1.14.1 . Col. 2.20.22. abominate: or out of a vaine-glorious, and fantastique desire of singulari∣tie, or differencing our selues from others: or out of an intent, or purpose to delude, and cousen others, by per∣swading them by this Hellish wile: that our Haire, and so our Complexions, Constitutions, and Conditions, (which are oft discouered by the Haire,) are not the same they are: or out of a cursed obstinacy, Rebellion, and Disobedience to God, and to his Lawes, or to the Counsell, Aduice, and Admonition of his Saints, and Ministers, whom wee purpose and intend to crosse, to thwart and grieue, by our Rebellious, Gracelesse, Wanton, and Vngodly liues: These I say, or some of these, are the onely true, and proper grounds, and ends, why Men or Women weare this false, and counterfeite Haire; now these are all Vnlawfull, Wicked, and Abo∣minable: therefore, the very wearing of this ascititious Haire, must bee so too: This Clemens Alexandrinus knew full well: whence hee informes vs; Paedag. l. 3. cap. 11. That false and counterfeite Haire, is vtterly to be reiected, and that it is a very wicked thing, to attire the head, with dead and ascititious Haire. For on whom doeth the Elder lay his hands? Whom doeth hee blesse? Not the Man or Woman, who are thus attired; but anothers Haire, and by it, ano∣thers head. If then the Man bee the Womans head, and Christ the Mans: how can it but be a wicked fact for a Wo∣man to weare false Haire, by which shee fals into a double sinne? For they deceiue their Husba ds by their excessi e Haire; and they disgrace the Lord, as much as in ther lies, whiles they are whor shly attired to the deceit of the trueth, and accurse that head, which is truely beautifull ; thus farre Clemens. Tertullian writing against the pride and vaine attires of Women, condemnes their false, and counterfeit Haire among the rest: De C ltu Famin ru p. 4.5. Moreouer ye annex (saith he) I know not what enormities of Periwiges, and counterfeit Haire; sometimes vpon the crowne of the head like an Hat; sometimes behind in the poll: It is a strange thing, that they thus striue against the commandements of the Lord. It is written, that no man can adde to his stature: yet you adde vnto your weight, by adding Bracelets, and Bosses to your neckes: If you are not ashamed of the enormitie, yet be asha∣med of the defilement; lest thou annex to thy Christian and holy head, the excrements, or spoile of some strange, perhaps some vncleane and sinfull head, that is destinated vnto Hell it selfe: wherefore thrust away this bondage of attire from your fore-heads. You labour to seeme beautifull in vaine; in vaine doe you send for the most exquisite Tire-women: God commands you to bee vailed; lest any part of your heads should be seene. Would to God I wretched man could lift vp my head among you in the day of Christs exaltation, to see whether or no you should rise againe, with the same varnish, painting, and head attire, which now you beare; or whether the Angels should take you vp into the Cloudes, to meete Christ Iesus as you are now attired, and set out: If these things be good, and of God now, they would then accompany you, and inioy their places in the Resurrection: but nothing can rise againe, but pure flesh and Spirit; therefore thes things which rise not againe, neither in the flesh, nor spirit, are condemned, because they are not of God. Abstaine from dam∣ned things, for the present: Let God now finde you such, as hee shall finde you then. Tom. 1. E∣pist. Ep. 8. ad Demetriadem, cap. 5.10. Ep. 23. ad. Mar∣cellum. See Chryso t. ho . 8. in 1. Tim. 2. Saint Hierome, and Saint Chrysostome, taxe all such, for Gracelesse, Carnall, and Worldly persons, who paint their faces, who frounce, and curle their Haire, or adorne, attire, and set out their heads with false, and borrowed Haire: De habitu Virgin. ract. Epist. 4. ad Se∣ rum. Saint Cyprian, and Paulinus, also doe the like ; therefore, by the voyce and verdict of the Fathers, concurring with the precedent reason, the wearing of false and counterfeite Haire, ei∣ther in Men or Women, must needes bee sinfull and vn∣lawfull: Fourthly, it must needes be so, because Fieri non po∣test, non potest, inquam, fieri vt ver m o∣stendat ani∣mam qui capu habet adulteri∣num. lem. A∣lexand. P ag. l 3. c. 3. it is impos ible, that hee or shee, should haue a true; a sound, sin∣cere, and vpright heart, who hath a false, a counterfeite, and deceitfull head: A false, a vaine, or proud head, is al∣wayes a presage, resemblance, or concomitant of an hollow, vaine, and hautie heart. Hence was it; Plutarch. Apotheg. that King Philip associating a friend of Antipaters, with his Iudges, perceiuing him afterwards to coloure his Haire, and Beard, remooued him from his place: affirming, that hee could not beleeue, that such a one would prooue Iust, and Faithfull, in the determination of causes, who was so perfi∣dious, and treacherous to his owne Haire: As a proud head, and an humble heart, or a lasciuious, vaine, and meritri∣cious head, and an honest, modest, chast, and sober heart, doe seldome, or neuer goe together: So Nihil sani dicere potest, qui non ani∣mum tantum gerit menda∣cem sed etiam caput. AElian. Variae Hist. l. 7. cap. 20. a false, a counterfeite, an artificiall, or aduenticious Head, or Face, and an Honest, Vpright, Faithfull, Tr e, and gra∣cious Heart, doe seldome (and if I am not much mista∣ken,) neuer meete, in one, and the selfe-same person. Such as the Head is, such is the Heart, there being such a mutuall, and reciprocall intercourse betweene the Head, and the Heart: that a false Heart, will quickly vitiate, and corrupt, an honest, naturall, plaine, and modest Head; and a counterfeite, and artificiall Head, an vpright, true, and humble Heart. Since therefore, the wearing of aduenticious Haire; (which the Lasci∣uious Alteriu cri es humer iactantur v∣troqu , F i∣na procedit densissima cri∣nibu empti . Proque sui ∣lios efficit are su s, N c pu∣d r est emiss pala . Ouid. de Arte A∣mandi. lib. 3. Heathen Poet, doeth much condemne in amourous Women ; though many who would bee deemed chast, and modest Matrons, are not ashamed for to weare it: euen in the very face, and presence of God himselfe, as if they meaned to outbraue him:) i alwayes a badge, or Em∣bleme, if not a cause, of a false, a vaine, a wanton, proud, deceitfull, and immodest Heart; it cannot but be euill, and vtterly vnlawfull vnto such, who practise, or pro∣fesse Religion. Lastly, the Clem. Alex. P dag. lib. . c. 3.11. Tertul. de Cultu F m. cap. 4.5, 6. Cy∣prian. De ha∣bit Virginum lib. Hierom. Epist. Tom. 1. Epist. 8 cap. 5.10. Epist. 7. cap. 5. Epist. 2 . Chryso t. Hom. 8. in 1. Tim. 2. S e Agrippae De vanitate Scient. cap. 71. Master Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses pag. 39.40. Fathers, doe with one consent auerre, the colouring of our owne Haire with an ar∣tificiall dye, (which is now in vse among vs, as well as a∣mong the Strabo Geog. l. 15. Solinu Polyhist. c. 65. Boemus de Mor. Gent. l. 3. cap. 8. Indians, Diodorus Sicul. Biblioth. Hist. l. 5. Sect. 28. French, and Boemus De Mort. Gent l. 3 cap. 26 Plin. Nat Hist. lib. 15. cap 22. lib. 16. cap. 37. Iulii Capitolini Verus. others hereto∣fore:) to bee vtterly vnlawfull, and abominable: because it doeth disapprooue, correct, and change the worke of God: because it is but a meere inuention, worke, and figment of the Deuill: because it sauoureth of pride, lasciuio snesse, effemi∣nacy, vanitie, and selfe-seeking: and doeth as much as in it lies oppose, nay, thwart, and falsifie the very Wordes of Christ: who informeth vs, Mat. 5 36. Si quis capillos flauos cerus∣sa eleuisset, albi apparerent, sed non reuera albi essent. Platonis Lysis. that wee cannot so much as make one Haire of our head, white, or bl cke, with all our fa s and artificiall dyes, which will Caduc sunt, quaecunque fucata sunt: nec fiduciam praebent possidentibus stabilem, quae posses∣sionis non habent veritatem. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. Epist. 2. Donato. quickly fade and lose their luster, because they are but false and counterfeite. Now those who weare false Haire, or Pe iwigges, Bishop Halls Quo vadis: cap. 21. or frizled, and powdred bushes of borrowed excrement, as if they were ashamed of the head, of Gods making, and proud of the tire-womans: whether it be to follow the fa∣shion, or out of dislike of their owne naturall Haire; or out of pride, lasciuiousnesse, vanitie of mind, affectionate beautie, or the like: or else out of a d sire to couer, and conceale their baldnesse, (for which Caluitii Encomium. Synesius, Moriae Encomium. pag. 50. E∣rasmus, and the Mentiris fictos vnguentis, Phoebe, capillos, Et tegitur pictis sordida calua co∣mis. Tonsorem capiti non est adhibere necessum. Rodere te melius spongia Ph ebe po∣test: Ma tial. Epigram. lib. 6. pag. 38. Poet ieere, and vtterly condemne them: ) doe offer as great violence, and iniurie to the worke, and Wisedome of God, and to this speech of Christ, as those that colour, powder, paint, or dye their Haire: there∣fore they must needes offend God in it: and so by conse∣quence, the wearing of false, and coun erfeite Haire, or Loue lockes, must needes bee euill. But admit that it were Lawfull, either for men or women, to weare this borrowed, false, or apposititious Haire, which I can neuer grant: yet for men to weare it of an excessi e length, must needes bee euill: As men who weare false Haire, or Periwigs, doe commonly affirme, lurat capil∣los esse, quos e∣mit, suos Fa¦bula, nu quid, Paule, peierat? Mar al. Epig. lib. 6. Epig. 10. and sweare them to be their owne, (pe haps, vpon this euasion, that they haue paid well for them:) and would ha e all men deeme th m for their naturall, and natiue Haire; so they ought to weare them of the same proportion, length, and fashion, as if they were their proper Haire, w thout the reseruation of a Locke: because the rules for naturall must regulate, an square out the length of ar∣tificia l Haire. So that a man must neitheir weare a na∣turall, no artificiall, borrowed, or aduenticious Locke, because it is contrary to the Word of God, and Law of Nature: which is my third, but not my meanest argu∣ment, against these Loue-lockes. Fourthly. That which is an ordinary, and common Badge, or Embleme of Effeminacy, Pride, Vaine-glory, La∣sciuiousnesse, Inciuilitie, Licentiousnesse, and De∣boistnesse: must needes be Odious, Vnseemely, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians. But the wearing and nourishing of these Loue-lockes, is an ordinary, and common Badge, or Embleme of Effeminacy, Pride, Vaine-glory, Lasciuiousnesse, Inciuilitie, Licentiousnesse, and Deboistnesse. Therefore it must needes be Odious, Vnseemely, and Vn∣lawfull vnto Christians. The Maior is irrefragable, because Christians are 1 Thes. .22 to abstaine from the very appearance, and shadowes: much more from the characters, badges, and f uites of Euill. The Minor, I shall backe and fortifie: not onely by the authoritie of Com s su∣peruacuas cu∣rare, vel in∣faeliciū est, vel iniust ru : Nam quid ex talibus expe∣ctendum aut suspicandum, nisivt l sciui ille rnatus sa∣minas prateri∣untes inuitet, aut al enis matrimonii insidietur? Basil. De Le∣gend. lib. Gen∣til. Oratio. Saint Basil, Constit. Apo∣stol. l. 1. c. 4 Clemens Roma∣nus, Tom. 1. Ep c. 10. Ep. 10. c. 4 & 19. c. 5. Cō∣ment. in E∣zech 44. & in Zoph. 1. Saint Heirom, De Ieiu . et Tentat. Ser. Saint Cyprian, Paedag. l. 2. c. 10 l. 3. c. 2.3.11 Clemens Alexandrinus, De Cultu. Fae . cap. 4.5. Tertullian, and Enar in. 1. Cor. 11. Theophylact: who taxe and censure such as weare long Haire, for Effeminate, Proud, Vaine-glorious, Lasciuious, Vnchast, Intemperate, Deboist, and Riotous persons; because their very Haire discouer, and proclaime them to be such: But likewise by the testimonie of Athenaeus, Dipnos. l. 12. c. 6.7.9. 0. who obserueth this as a badge of effeminacy in the Sybarites, Iapiges, Samians, and Colophonians, that they wore long Haire, and that they suf∣fered their Pages, and Children to weare Lockes, which they tyed vp in golden ribbands: by the suffrage of Fortem vo∣cemus, cuius orrentes comae maduer nar∣do? Hercules Furens. Se∣neca the Tragedian: who au rreth; that none can stile him a valiant man, whose long staring Haire is bedewed with spicknar: and by the practise of Aristodemus the Ty∣rant: Dionis. Hal∣licarnas. Rom. Antiqu. l. 7 c. 1 who when he would Effeminate the Cumaeans, for feare they should rebell against him: enioyned them to nou∣rish their Haire, and to bind it vp in trusses or fi ets like Women. Long haeire then (much more the nourishing of a Frizled, Poudred, and fantastique Loue-locke) must needs be an Effeminati omnes fucato com nitore gaudent: ac palam quidam j qui in lupa∣ ari prae tant: quasi hoc max∣ime modo mu∣liebre genus imitari pos∣sint. Nos ve∣ro aedolescentē Pathicorum modo mulie∣bria appetentē, capillis signifi∣cam s. Syne∣sius: Caluitij En omium. Embleme, and Ensigne of Effeminacy, Lasciuious∣nesse, and Vaine-glory. And doeth not our owne ex∣perience testifie as much? What Wise, what Graue, what Religious, or Iudicious man among vs is there; but when hee beholds a man that weares a Locke, will presently repute, and deeme him, either an Eff minate, Lasciuious, or Wanton person: or a Proud, a Singular, Humourous, Fantastique, or Vaine-glorious Spirit: or a Deboist, a Riotous, Licentious, and Prodiall Ruf∣fian; or a Summo apud imperitos co∣ma in praeti est. Ibid. vaine, a shallow pated, a giddy-headed, or new-fangled Nouice: euen from this very ground, be∣cause he weares a Locke: Most that weare these Lockes, are notoriously knowne to bee such as these: wherefore men vpon the very first view deeme them such; because their Lockes describe, discipher, and proclaime them to be such. The Minor therefore must bee granted, and the conclusion too. Fiftly. That which is Odious, Non p rtet solum a vetitis absti ere, sed etiam a co ∣cessis, quando fuerit Scan∣dalum. Chry∣ost. Hom. 26 n 1 Cor. 12. i Scandalous, Offensi e, and of ill report among the Best, the Holiest, the Wisest, Grauest, and Ciuiler sort of Men, Int r st t p rfectionis & l res, & m l pariter p tes deui ∣re. In alter conscienti , i alter fa consulis. Pu t b licer (ets alia for∣tasse liceat) quicquid ale fuer t cole∣ratum. Bern. de Considerat. l. 3. c. 4. t needes bee Euill, Sinfull, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians: witnesse Rom. 12.17. 1. Cor. 10.32, 33. Phil. 2.15, 16. and chap. 4.8. which are expre e in point. But such is the nourishing, and wearing of Loue-locke, as experience testifieth: for the Best, the Holiest, the Wisest, Gra est, and Ci iler sort of Men, both young and old: as they condemne it in their practise, in that they weare, and vse no Lockes as others doe; so they reiect, and censure, Loue-lockes in their Iudgements, as Vaine, Effeminate, Odious, Vnciuill, Fantastique, Lasciuious, Vnna∣turall, Licentious, Humourous, and vndecent Va∣nities, which suite not well with Ciuill Men, much lesse with Christians. Therefore they must needes be Euill, Sinfull, and Vnlaw∣full vnto Christians. Sixtly. That which in its very best acception, is but a meere Ridiculous, Foolish, Childish, and Fantastique toy, or Vanitie; must needes bee Euill, Sinfull, Vnlaw∣full, and Vnseemely vnto Christians. But the nourishing, and wearing of Loue-lockes, in its very best acceptation, is but a meere Nihil aliu s nt, qua d ∣liram t i ∣consider t le∣uitati : Lact. De Fals Sapi∣entia. cap. 2 . Ri∣diculous, Foolish, Childish, and Fantastique toy, or Vanitie. Therefore it ust needes be Eui , Sinfull, V lawful, and Vnseemely vnto Christians. The Maior is without controule; because God him∣selfe enioynes vs: Psal. 4.2. Psal. 119.37. Prou. 30.8. not to delight in vanitie; 1 Sam. 12.2 Isay 55.2. not to follow after vaine things, which cannot profit, nor doe vs good in our latter end; Ps. 24.3.4. not to lift vp our hearts vnto va∣nitie, for they which doe so, shall neuer ascend into the hill of the Lord. For the trueth of the Minor, I appeale not one∣ly to the voyce, and verdict, of all Ci ill, Graue, Reli∣gious, wise, and sober men; who deeme these Loue-lockes, Foolish, and Fantastique toyes, and Vanities; but likewise to the Consciences, and Iudgements of Firmum est genus proba∣tionis, quod e∣tiam ab ad∣uersario su∣mit r; vt ve∣ritas etiam ab ipsis veritatis inimicis pro∣betur. Te tul. de Trinit. lib. such as weare these Loue-lockes, and are most of all deuoted, & inclined to them: who when they are deman∣ded, why they nourish them; can yeeld no other true, or solid ground, or reason for it, but only this, which is far worse then none at all: that it is only the Leuitie, & Va∣nitie of their mindes: or the Foolish, and Fantastique custome, Humour, and fashion of the Times, and no∣thing else, that mooues them to it. So that these Loue-lockes, euen in the eyes, and Iudgements of such as doe adore them most, are but idle toyes, & foolish vanities: and therefore Christians may, nay, must not vse them. Seuenthly. That which is a badge, a note, or Ensigne, of wil∣full, and affected singularitie: a violation of the de∣cent, laudable, and receiued fashion, guise, and custome of our Countrey: and a kinde of breach of ciuill societie among men: must needes bee odious, vnseemely, See Bishop Halls Contem∣plations l. 15. Hanun and Dauids Am∣bassadors, ac∣cordingly. Vnlawfull, and vnwarrantable. But the wearing, and nourishing of Loue-lockes, is a badge, a note, or Ensigne, of wilfull, and affected singularitie: a violation of the decent, laudable, and receiued fashion, guise, and custome of our Countrey: and a kinde of breach of ciuill societie among Men. Therefore it must needes bee Odious, Vnseemely, Vnlaw∣full, and Vnwarrantable. The Maior is warranted, not onely by the grounds of State, and Pollicie: which condemne all innouations, and factious singularitie, as well in habits, fashions, man∣ners, and attiers, as in Lawes, and Gouernment: and deeme the Co suetudi∣ es patriae ni∣hil minus quā leges obseruan∣dae sunt. Sto∣baeus. S r. 39. ancient Customes, Guises, and F shions of a Countrey, as obseruable, and vn iolable, as the very funda∣mentall Lawes, and Statutes of it: but likewise by the rules of Christianitie, and Religion: which condemne all 1 Thes. 2.15. singularitie, strangenesse, and contrarietie, not onely in Ier. .19. Leuit. 18.30. Deut. 12.29.30. Manners, but in Zeph. 1. . Isay. 3.1 , to 2 . Aparell, Leuit. 1 .27 & 21. . 2 Sā. 10.4, 5.1. Cor. 11.14. Haire, and Isai. 3.16.17 Gestures too ; enioyning all Christians: though not Rom. 12.2. Eph . 2.2. & 4 17.18.19. Col. 2 20.21.22. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. to conforme themselues, to the Carnall, Idl , Si full, Vaine, Lasciuious, Proud, and Want on Fashions of the world, 1 Pet. 1.14.18. Reu. 13.3.4 from which Christ Iesus hath Redeemed them: Yet as much as in them lye , Rom. 12, 15. to 19. & 15.5 6. 1 Cor. 1.10. Eph. 4.3. Iam. 3 14. to 18. to liue louingly, and pea eably with all men; endeauouring to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit in the bond of Loue ; 1 Cor. 10.32 33. 1 im. 2.2 Rom. 13.1.7, 8. 1 Tim. .12.13. to 17. & 3.8.16. Iustin Martyr. Apolog. 1. & 2 Tertul. Apolog. Adu. Gent. by confining themselues to the lau∣dable, ancient, decent, comely, and receiued fashions, and custome of the State, and Countrey where they liue; as farre f orth, as they are consonant, and not repugnant to the Law of God, or Nature. The Minor is most cleare and euident, by its owne light: For is not this a Badge, a Note, or Ensigne of Wilfull, Factious, and Affected ingularitie, (and so of Pride, and Selfe-conceit, Prosper. A∣quit. De vita Contempl. l. 3. cap. 2 3.8. which are the Nurse, and Mother of it: ) for some few particular, or priuate Guiddy, Braine-sicke, Humourous, Vaine-glori∣ous, and Fantastique Spirits, to introduce a new-fangled Guise and Fashion, of nourishing and wearing Loue-lockes, without any publike warrant, or allowance; contrary to the Manner, Custome, Vse, and Tonsure of our owne, or other Ciuill, Graue, Religious, Wise, and P udent Na ions: that so they may d ff rence, distinguish, and diuide themselues from others of the common ranke and Cut, Pudet os Nationis suae, quod non Germani aut Galli sint procreati, ita Patriam cap llo transferunt. Tertul De Cultu F em. cap 4. as if they were ashamed of their natiue Countrey: or as if C r frater tib dicor ex be∣ris, & Cel is genitus, Tagique ciuis? An vultu similes videmm esse? Tu flexa ni∣ti us, coma vagaris: Hispanus ego contumax capill s. Martial. Epigram. lib. 10. Epigram. 58. they were descended from some other Nation, or Goue n d by some other Customes, Lawes, or Constitutions, then others of their Countrey-men, Fellowes, Kinred, Neighbours, and Companions are? Certainely, if this bee not Af∣fected, Grosse, and Wilfull Singularitie, there is no such thing as Singularitie, or breach of Ciuill societie in the World. This Martiall, and Tertullian knew: whence, they condemne such for Singular, and Fan∣tastique persons, who varied from the cut and Tonsure of their Countrey, as their authorities in the Margent te∣stifie: Suetonii Nero Sect. 51. See Doctor Hackwels A∣pologie. l. 4. c. 9. Sect. 1. It was noted as a point of Shamelesnesse, and Singularitie in Nero, though an Emperour; that hee often∣times wore his Haire combed backeward into his poll, in an affected, and ouer curious manner, after the Greeke fashion: If this were Effeminacy, and Singularitie in a Roman Emperour, much more are Loue-lockes, in our French-English Subiects. I haue read of some Di othi hi¦storia Gall. l. 5 p. 424. Humourous, and Singular persons in France, who came at last to be stiled Secta Rasorum, or the Sect of Shauelings: because they shaued off one side of their Beardes ; 2 Sam. 10.4.5. as Hanun shaued off one halfe of the Beardes of Dauids messengers in contempt, and scorne:) that so they might be knowne, and differenced from other men: and may not our Loue-locke weares, Pars Maxil∣larum tonsa est tibi, pars tibi rasa est: pars vulsa est: vnum quis putet esse caput. Martial. Epigr. l. 8. E∣pigr 46. who pole one side of their heads, and let the other grow long of purpose to discriminate themselues from others; bee stiled a Sect, and Faction as well as they? Herodotus lib 4 Sect. 124. Alexand ab Alex. Gen. Di∣ rum. l 5 c. 18 The Maxyes, are taxed, and noted by Historians, as a Singu∣lar, Fantastique, and Auerse kinde of people: for polling the left side of their heads onely, and letting the right side grow long, and bushie, contrary to the fashion of all other Nations: and may not our fickle, and vnconstant Englishmen, who pole the right side of their heads, and l t the left grow out into Ruffianly, and ffeminate Loue-lockes, con∣trary to the Guise, and Fashion of their Countrey, in∣curre the selfe-same censure? vndoubtedly they may. If a man should seriously propound this question, to any of our Loue-locke Ruffians: what are the proper, true, and genuine grounds, or motiues, that induce and mooue them for to weare these Lockes, contrary to the practise, and custome of their Countrey, and of the Ciuiler, Gra∣uer, and more Religious sort of men? their Hearts, and Consciences, could giue no other answere, but onely this: that Pride, and Singul ritie, are the onely grounds, and causes of it: Causa praeci∣pua mihi vid ∣tur uiu ma∣li, vitae comu∣nis fastidium. Non portet i facer quod po∣pulus. Res sor∣d da est tri∣tae ac vulgari via viuere. Seneca. Epist. 122. Rusticum pu∣tatur omn quod vulgare, quod aturale est. Hierom. Tom. 1. Epi t. 22. c. 13. The reason why they loathe that na∣tur ll plaine and common cut, which euery man obserues, and chuse this new one of th ir owne; is onely this: because they would bee singular, and somewhat different from the v lger Crue: or because they would imitate some Fren∣chefied, or outlandish Mounseir, who hath nothing else to make him famous, (I should say infamous,) but an Effeminate, Ruffianly, Vgly, and d formed Locke. And is not this a sure Badge, and Character, of Singularitie, and Auersnesse: is it not a kinde of breach, of ciuill so∣cietie; and a violation of the Guise, the Fashion, and Laud ble, Dec n , and app ooued custome of our Coun∣trey, Bishop Halls Contemplati∣ons, lib. 15. Hanun and Dauids Am∣bassadors, ac∣cordingly. from which we ought not for to vary, without some grand, or weighty cause:) to contemne the ciuill Cut, and ancient Tonsure of our Countrey, as if wee were asha∣med of, or dis ontented with it; and to follow this new-fangled, Horret ca∣p llis vt Mari∣nus, asperi Echinus, aut currens per. Horace. Epo∣don. lib Epod. 5 Horred, Strange, Mishapen, Womanish, and Outlandish Guise, and Fashion, which doeth in a manner seperate, and diuide vs from the communitie and body of our proper Nation, as if wee had no harmonie, nor communion with it; or were no limbes, nor mem∣bers of it? vndoubtedly it is. Wherefore, wee may iustly say of all our impudent, Ruffianly, and shameles e Loue-locke fosterers, (who are Odious, and blame-wor∣thy, euen in this respect, Turpis est omnis p rs suo vniuerso non congruens. Au∣gust. Confess. lib. 3. cap. 8. that they suite not with that whole, of which they doe professe themselues a part, ) as Saint Paul did of the Iewes in a different case: 1 Thess. 2.15. that they please not God, and are contrary to all men: Their very Lockes are Badges of Humourous, Nulla peior est consue udo aut ipsis reb spubli∣cis, aut famil is, quam si vnusquisque semper pro sua libidine vi at. Dionys. Halicar. Rom. Antiqu. l. 5. Sect. 10. Licentious, Pernicious, and wilfull Singularitie: they are breaches of ciuill societie, and infringments of the Tonsure, Guise, and Fashions, of our Countrey: therefore they must needes bee Euill, Sinfull, and Vnlawfull vanities, which we should all renounce. Eghtly. That which serues for no Necessary, Laudable, Pro∣fitable, nor Decent vse at all: that which brings in no Glory at all to God, nor good, or profit vnto Men in any kinde: must needes be Euill, Vaine, and vtterly Vnlawfull vnto Christians; the end and scope of all whose actions, should bee the praise and glory of God, and their owne, or others good. 1. Cor. 11.30, 31, 32. 1. Pet. 4.11. But the nourishing, or wearing of Loue-lockes, doeth serue Quid tibi nunc olles prodest coluis∣se capillo , Sa∣peque mut ta dispos isse co∣ma Quid fuco splendente comas redi i∣re, quid illas Artificis docta subsecuisse ma∣nu? Tibullus Eleg. l. 1. El. 8. Quid iuuat or∣ ato procedere vita capillo? Aut quid O∣rentea crines perfundere myrrha? Te{que} peregrini ven∣dere uneri∣bus? Natura∣que decus mer∣cato perdere cultu? Pro. pert Eleg. l. 1. El. 2 for no N ce sary, Laudable, Profitable, nor Decent vse at all, that can bee thought of. It brings no Glory at all to God, nor no good to those that weare them: they are mee e superfluous, vnusefull, and vnnecessary vanities in their very best accepti∣on: there is no good, no vse, nor profit in them, that euer I could heare of. Therefore it must needes be Euill, Vaine, and vtterly Vn∣lawfull vnto Christians. Ninthly. That which is an ordinary occasion, or cause of Sinne, and Euill, both to the Wearers, and Spectators, must needes be Odious, Sinfull, and Vnlawfull: witnesse Matth. 6 13. 1. Thes. 5.22. which are full in point. But Loue-lockes are an ordinary occasion, or cause of Sinne, and Euill, both to the Wearers, and Specta∣tors, of them. Therefore they must needes be Odious, Sinfull, and Vnlaw∣full things. The Maior needes no confirmation: the Minor, I shall prooue in two particulars. First, that Loue-lockes are an occasion, or ordinary cause of Sinne, and Euill, to the Wearers, and that in these respects. First, in that they cause them to Exalt themselues, and to Tri∣umph, and Glory in them, as if they were a Dignitie, Honour, or Aduancement to them: as if they did en∣hance their Valour, Worth, and Bea tie, and make them better then themselues, or others, in their owne retired thoughts: whence, they oft times cause their Hearts to swell with secret pride, in so much, that they doe priui∣ly disdaine, neglect, and vnderualue all such persons who either want them, or condemne them. Secondly, in that they oft ti es cause a prodigall, vaine, and great expence, sufficient to relieue the wants, and miseries of many poore distressed Christians, who starue for want of succour and re iefe. Much is the cost, and great the dis∣bursements, which many lauish out vpon their Haire, and Loue-lockes. So that we c nnot say as Plutarch. Apothegmata. Charillus did; that Haire is the cheapest, and least costly ornament of all other , which made the Lacedemonians for to nourish it, since it is now so costly, and expensiue vnto diuers: How many hundreds are there now among v , whose heads are almost as chargeable, and expensiue to them, as their backes, or bellies? whose Barbars stipend doeth exceede their Ministers? who bestow more cost vpon their Haire, & Loue-lockes, then their Soules? who spend more weekely, quarterly, or monethly on their Hairie excrements, then they bestow Ann ally, on Christs poore members? how many poore Christians would those stipends, and expenses nourish, which many lauish out so largely on their Lockes, and Haire; that all their Charitie, and Bountie, turnes to excrement; being so smothered, hid, or fast intangled in their costly Haire, and Frizled Loue-lockes, that none but such as marshall, and set out their Lockes, can finde them out? this pro∣digall expence therefore, which these Lockes, and long Haire cause, doeth prooue them to be a meanes of Sinne, and Euill to those who weare, and nourish them. Third∣ly, they are such, in that they cause a great mispence, and losse of rich and precious Time. Many are those Peere∣lesse, Precious, Rich, and mo ning Howers, which di∣uers spend from day, to day, in Ordring, Dressing, Com∣bing, Poudring, Platting, (nay, Curling, and Crisping ) of their Haire, and Loue-lockes; Concil. Con∣stantinop. 6. Can. 9. &. 96. which a whole genera Councell: which Isay 3.22.23, 24. 2 King. 9.30. 1 Tim. 29.10. 1 Pet. .3, 4. Scriptures, Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib 3 c. 3.11. Tertul. de Cultu. Faem. c. 4.5, 6. Cypri∣an. de habitu. Virg. Basil de Legendis Lib Gent. Oratio Hierom. Tom 1 Epist. 7 c 5. Ep. 8. c. 5.10. Ep. 22 c. 12. Ep. 2 . Chrysost. Hom. 8. n 1 Tim. 2. Theo∣phyl . n r ra n 1. Tim. 2. Ambros. ∣ren. Tom. 1 p. 3 . B rn de considerati∣one l. 4. c. 6. Fathers, Agrippa de va . S ent c. 71. Mr. Stubs his Anatomy of Abuses, pag 19. to 42. Mar∣l rat. Exposit. in 1 Pet. 3.3. G l taeus de moribus, lib. Sir Thomas Ouerbury in his Character of a Fantastique Coelius Rhod. Antiqu. Lect. l. 15. c. 8. Mo∣derne Christians, yea, Senecae de Breuitate vitae, cap. 12. Stobaeus Serm. 6. Sed tibi nec erro placeat torquere capillos. Forma viris neglecta decet. O d de Arte Amandi. lib. 1. Pagans haue condemned; as a Badge, and cleare Prognosticke of a Meriticious, Proud, Vaine-glorious, False, and sinfull Heart: as an Allectiue Baite, and Prologue, or Ba d, and Pander to Vncleannesse: and as an Effeminate, Vnnaturall, Vaine, Lasciuious, Fan∣tastioue, Proud, Vnchristian, Heathenish, and Gracelesse practise. Much is the time, that many spend betweene the Combe and the Glasse, in Viewing, Ordering, Plat∣ting, Frouncing, Poudring and curling of these goodly Eare-iewels, or else in dallying, and playing with them. Many there are, (I may be bold to speake it,) who spend more time, more thoughts, and paines vpon their Haire, and Loue-lockes, weeke, by weeke, then vpon God him∣selfe, their Soules, or Christian dueties: as if they were borne for no other purpose, but to manure, and adore their Excrements, whiles their Soules lies rotting & vt∣terly neglected, in the very sorded ragges, and dregges of Sin: so that they are an occasion of much ill vnto them, euen in this respect. Fourthly, they are so; in that they commonly incroach so farre vpon their disordred affecti∣ons, that they ouer-affect, and dote so much vpon them at the last; as not to part with them vpon any tearmes; but to bid battell, and defiance vnto all, who shall dislike, or speake against them, or offer any violence, or abuse vnto them: whence it some times comes to passe, that these vn∣louely iewels, are made the ground & cause, of many Fa∣tall, Tragicall, and bloody Duels, Quarrels, and euents, as some late experiments can abundantly testifie. May I not truely say of many, that they are so inamored, and besotted with their Lockes, that they would hazard, and ingage their liues in their quarrell, and defence? that like Maffa i Hist. n . lib. 11. p. 55 .557. Gotardus Hist. Indiae Orient. cap. 54. the Chinians, or Indian Iaponites, they deeme it an insufferable contumely, and capitall offence, for any to touch them, or disorder them, much more to speake against them, or to cut them off, which is almost as much as pre∣sent death; and that they would rather part with their liues, then Lockes? It is French Hi∣sto y. p. 7. storied of one Clotilde, a Queene of France, that she chose rather to haue the heads of young Sonnes cut off, then to suffer them to be pold, or shauen, which would haue beene an indignitie, and dishonour to them: and are there not many now among vs, so farre inamored with their Effeminate, and vnseemely Loue-lockes, that they would rather lose their heads, then them? Vn∣doubtedly there are: so farre doe vanities infatuate, and poss sse mens hearts, when once they suffer their affecti∣ons to runne out vpon them. Fiftly, they are so to them, in that they are the cause of much Effemin cy, Dalli∣ance, Wantonnesse, Lasciuiousnesse, and Vncleannesse in them: Whence, Saint Heirom doeth Tom. 1. Epist 8. cap 10. c. . Epist. 19. c. 5. Epist. 22. c. 2. Epist. 47. c 3. Sea vitare vi∣ros cultum formamque professos, Quique su ponunt in sta∣tione coma . Ou d de Art Amandi. l 3. oft times ad∣monish Women, to auoid, and quite d cline, comatos, cala∣mistratosque iuuenes, such youngsters as wore either long, or frizled Haire: virosque qu bus Feminei contra Apo∣stolum crines: and men of long, and womanish Haire, con∣trary to the Apostles prescript: as being Lustfull, and La∣sciuious persons: Hence was it, that Synesius, Cal∣u t : Enco mium. Painters, and See Tibullus Eleg. l 1. Eleg. 4 & 8. Pro pertius Eleg. lib. 1. Eleg. 2. Petro us p g. 87. Syne∣sius. Caluitis Encomium. Stobaeus Serm. 6. Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10. lib. 3. c. 2.3.11. Clem. Romanus Constitut. Apost. lib. 1. cap. 4. Ouid. de A te Amandi. l. 1.2.3. Poets, when as they would Delineate, Portraiture, Di∣scipher, or set out an Vnchast, Lasciuious, Amorous, or In∣continent person of the Masculine sex, did alwayes paint, de∣scribe, and set him out with long, Effeminate, Womanish Amorous, Curled, or Embroidered Haire: to signifie, that A Comae studi∣osius A lulter sunt. Homerus enim puellarū deceptorem co∣mae nitidioris amantem fa∣cit: quasi ad mul erum cor¦ruptel m co∣ma exornare∣tur: & adul∣ter is pse a∣dulterorum{que} omnium acile princeps, in quem probro∣sum illud co ∣uicium a∣ctaretur. Sine∣s s. Caluitii. Encomium. long or amorous Haire, either in Men or Women, is oft times an incendiary, a prouocation, occasion, or cause of Lust, Effeminacy, Lasci iousnesse, and Vnclean∣nesse in them: whence, your Curtezans & amorous Pictures, (which the Numb. 33. 2 Isay 2.1 . Scriptures, and Concil. Con∣stantinop. 6. Trullo Can. 100. Synodus Augustensis. An. 1548. c. 28 two Councels doe vtter∣ly condemne, though they are now so much in vse among vs,) are alwayes por raitured with Scynesius ib. Hanc decet inflatos laxè i cuisse capil∣los. Ouid. de Arte A man. l. 3 Hai e hanging loose about their Eares, of purpose to prouoke, and stirre vp Lust. Long Haire, and Loue-lockes then (as likewise Frizled Poudred, and ouer-curious Haire,) being oft times an incendiary, and cause of Lust, Lasciuiousnesse, Wantonnesse, Effeminacy, and Vncleannesse, both in the Nullus comatus, qui non etiam & impudicus. Synesius. Caluitli. Encomium. Caeli∣us Rhod. Antiqu. Lect l . c. 8. Owners and Spectators of them, must needes be Euill, and Vnlawfull, euen in this respect. Sixtly, they cannot but bee so; in that they giue offence, distast, and scandall vnto others, to whom they are a griefe, and eye∣sore: now this Mat. 18.6, 7.8. Rom. 14.13 to 23. 1 Cor. 8.7. to 14. & 10 32. 2 Cor. 6.3. See Caluin. Instit. l. . c. 1 . Sect. 11.12.13. giuing of iust offence, and scandall vnto others, is a Sinne: Therefore these Loue-lockes, are an ordinary occasion of Sinne, or cause of Euill, euen to those that weare them. Secondly, they are such to the spectators, & beholders of them; and that in these respects. First, in giuing an ill example to those of the more Effe inate, Fantastique, Singular, Licentious, and Vaine-glorious ranke; who are Inter causa mal rum nostrorum est, quod viuimus ad exempla: nec ratione componimur, sed con∣suetudine abducimur. Seneca. Epist. 123. oft times induced by their ill president, and example, Dociles imitandis turpibus ac pra is om∣nes sumus. Iuuenal. Satyr. 14. In hoc ruentis in deteriora seculi cursum, plures runt qui tribuni vitium mitentur, quam qui militis v rtutem Quintilian Declama∣tio 3. to imitate, and second them in this Effeminate, Lasciui∣ous, Fantastique, Singular, Licentious, Ru ianly, Vnnatu∣rall, and Vaine glorious guise. Hence it is, that most men haue no other Apologie, Plea, nor iustification for the nourishing, and wearing of their Lockes, but onely this: that it is Qu l sun publica Ci i∣tatu studia, tali etiam est priuat rum vita. Qua e∣nim vi squis∣que s lus, aut pud re pr pri , aut ab alio im∣peditu facere veretur: ea ore publico recipia tur, ab eo in su volun a e a i∣ run exemplo & consu tu i∣ne confirma o, faci & a ∣dacim pa ran∣tur. Dionis Hallicarnas. Rom. Antiq lib. 5. Sect. 10 now the vse, and practise of the times: or that such, and such men weare them; and we are but their Ec∣chos, Shadowes, Apes, or counterp nes; and trace but their footsteps: if they would but abandon them, then wee would too, who desire to conforme our selues to heir cut, and fashion: Secondly, they are such, in that they animate, and confirme others, (especially, those of the Female sex,) in their Lasciuious, Eff minate, Singu∣lar, Antique, Vnchristian, and Vaine-glorious Guises, Fashions, and Attires: When Sed vitare viros cultum form mque professos: Qui∣que su s p ∣nunt in stati ∣ne co a . Fa∣mina quid fa∣ciet, cum vi sit leuior ipsa. Quid. de Ar∣te Amandi. lib. 3. Nec tame indignum sit, si vobis cur placendi, C m compt s habeant secula nostra vir s. Idem. De Medic mi e faciei wo en shall see men so Effeminate, Singular, Humourous, and Fantastiquè, to Crisp, to Nourish, Pouder, and adorne their Haire, or nou∣rish Loue-lockes: they presently conclude; that they ay take more libertie, and freedo e to themselues, in these, and such-like Antique, or Apish practises, Fashions, Guises, and Attires, then men may doe: whence, they turne themselues into more shapes, and form s, then See Herodotu E terpe. Sect. 57. Ouid. Metamorph. lib. 4. & Na∣talis Comes Proteus did: into more varietie, and change of Coloures, Dres∣sings, and Attires, See Plinie, Nat. Histor. l. 9. c. 29. then the Polipus hath skinnes, or co∣lours: and into so many Monsters, and wonderments of the World, being constant in nothing, but Inconstant, Vaine, Lasciuious, Gracelesse, Worish, and Vngo ly, Trappings, C ltures, Fashions, and Attires: Isai. 3.16. to 25. Zoph. 1. . Prou. 7.10.16.17. 2 Kings 9.30. 1 Tim 2.9.10. Rom. 12.2. 1 Pet. 3.3.4.5. which all Gracious, Modest, Graue, Religious, Chast, and godly Chri∣stians should abhorre, as the liueries of Satan, and badges of the world. Thirdly, they are such to others; in that they administer occasion to them, to Taxe, and Censure such as weare, and nourish them, for Proud, Effeminate, Fantastique, Singular, Humourous, Vaine-glorious, Li∣centious, Disolute, and Lasciuious persons: because the most that weare them are such; and so to haue perhaps, an vncharitable opinion of them, and to passe an hard, a ash, and heady censure on them, euen Mat 7.1. Ioh 7.24. Rom 14.13. 1 Cor. 4.5. against the rules of Charitie, and Christianitie: which enioyne vs to hope, and iudge the best of all men, v lesse their liues extort the contrary. Fourthly, they are such to others, in that they 2 Pet. 2 7. offend, and grieue, yea, and oft distemper the Soules, of many Deuout, Religious, Gracious, Graue, and ciuill Christians, yea, and of many Sober, Ciuill, Graue, and moderate Carnall men: who vtterly condemne, and disapprooue them in their iudg ments, as well as in their practise. Fiftly, they are such to others, in that they bring a scandall, and imputation, not onely on Religi∣on it selfe, which suites not with such Idle, and Fanta∣stique vanities, or Lasciuious guises: but euen vpon our Mollities paucorū, labes st plurimorum S lu de Guber. D i l. 7. p. 265. whole Nation: which is oft times taxed of Lasciuious∣nesse, Effeminacy, Leuitie, Vanitie, Inconstancy, Guid∣dinesse, Licentiousnesse, Deboistn sse, and the like, by reason of the Vanitie, Ficklenesse, Effeminacy, Wan∣tonn sse, and Licentio snesse of some f w. Since there∣fore Loue-lockes are an Ignosce mi∣li , non facile adducor licitū consentire, quod tot llici∣ a parturit. B r . De Con∣s d. lib 3. c. 4. occasion, and cause of Euill, both to the Owners, and Spectators of them in all these respects, they cannot but be Odious, Euill, Vnseemely, and Vnlawfull vnto Christians. Lastly. That whose maine, whose chiefe, and vtmost end is Euill, Sinfull, Vaine, and Odious: must needes bee Euill, Odious, Vnseemely, and vtterly Vnlawfull vn o Christians. But the maine, the chiefe, and vtmost end of nouri∣shing, and wearing Loue-lockes, is Euill, Sinfull, Vaine, and Odious. Therefore it must needes bee Euill, Odious, Vnseemely, and vtterly Vnlawfull vnto Christians. The Maior being cleere, and euident by its owne ligh , becau e, euery Naturall, Ca e. E hico∣rū. l. 3. c. 1. Morrall, or Spirituall action is denominated from its end, or obiect: I shall en∣deauour to euidence, and make good the Minor, by ex∣ mining, and scaning all those seuerall, Genuine, True, and proper ends, for which men weare, or nourish Loue-lockes; which are one of these: The fi st end and ground, for which men weare and nourish them, is either an Nihil est fa∣cilius quam a∣mictum imit ∣ri alicuius, aut statum, aut otum. Cicero De Oratore lib. 2. Imitation of, or a conformitie to the Vaine, the Wanton, Immodest, and Lasciuious, Guises, and Fa∣shions of the Times; or of some Licenti u , Ruffianly, Lasciuious, Fantastique, Humourous, Effeminate, Proud, Vnconstant, Vaine glorious, or Outl ndi h persons, whose Fashions, and Tonsure wee admire. Now this very end must needes bee Euill; since God himselfe Commands vs, Rom. 12.2. 1 Pet 1.14. not to conforme our selues to the Guise, and Fashion of the World, according to the former Lusts in our igno∣rance: Col. 2.20.21 not to subiect our selues to the Rudiments, Lusts, and Ordinances of Carnall, or Worldly men: Ephes. 2.2. & 4.18. Rom. 13.13, 14. not to walke as the Gentiles doe, in the vanitie of our mindes, according to the course, and fashion of the World: 1 Pet. 4.2. not to liue the rest of our time to the Lusts of men, but to the will of God: M th 6.8. 1 Co . 7.23 not to be the Seruants, Apes, or followers Men: Ephes 5 1. but to bee the followers, and imitators of God, and Christ, as deere Children: 1 Cor. 6.19.20. Reu. 13.3.4. who haue Redeemed vs from off the Earth, and from among the Children of Men: yea, 1 Pet. 1.1 . and from our vaine conuersation, receiued by tradition from our Fathers: (much more from those vpstart, and new-found vanities, to which wee are now embondaged:) to this onely end and purpose: I hn. 2 6. Rom. 14.8. 2 Cor. 5 15. 1 Thes. 5.10. that we should walke as Christ walked, liue as hee liued: liuing no longer to our selues, or to our owne Deceitfull, Vaine, and Sinfull lusts, and Pleasures, but vnto Christ alone: 1 Pet. 2.21. 1 Iohn. 2.6. Christ Iesus is our onely pat∣terne, and example, and by him wee are to regulate, and square our lines and actions. Now Christ him lfe, (or any of his:) did neuer teach vs for to nourish Loue-lockes: they neuer left vs, either Patterne, Prec pt, Wa rant, or Ex ple, of these Lasciuiou , nd Fanta∣stique vanities: they are but Moderne, and new-inu n∣ted Toyes, and Vanities, with which the Church, and Saints of God, in former ages were not at all acquain∣ted. Why then shall wee who dare professe our selues to bee the S ruants, Followers, Children, and Sonnes of Christ, & of his Church: addict our selues to these vaine, Lasciuious, Licentious, Effeminate, and Vnchristian guises of the World? What haue Christians to doe, or intermedle, with the Fantastique, Immodest, Spiritualis homo omne o∣pus suum trina quadam consi∣deratione pra∣ueniet. Primū quidem an li∣ceat: deinde an deceat; proin∣de an expediat. Bern. de Con∣siderat. l. 3. c. . Vn∣seemely, and Vngodly Fashions, Pompes, Non quod in seculo sumus Deo exi ∣min, se siquid de secul scele∣ribu , & cri∣ inibus al i∣gerimus er∣ ul. De Spe∣ctac. lib or Coultures of the World, which they haue vtterly renounced in their Baptisme? What Warrant, or Example, haue they in the Scripture, to Adore, Admire, or take vp, these Ruf∣fianly, Vaine, and Foolish Trappings, Lockes, and Guises, which few, but the very scumme of men Ap∣pla d, and Magnifie? Alas, whose steps, what patternes, doe we follow in these new-fangled vanities? Doe we imitate, and follow Christ: or such Honestissi∣mum est, maio∣ um vestigia qui, recte si praecesseri . Plin. Epist. l . Ep. 8. Pious, and Re∣ligious Ancestors, which walke, as Iesus walked? Are they Religious, Humble, Chast, Discreet, or Holy men, who set and bend themselues to serue the Lord, in since∣ritie, and trueth of Heart? If so, then shew mee when, and wh re Christ Iesus, or any such as these, did euer nourish, or approo e of Loue-lockes, and then you may safely weare them. But if the persons wee imitate, are onely Idle, Vaine, Effeminate, Lasciuious, Deboist, Vaine-glorious, Proud, Fantastique, Singular, Ruffian∣ly, or Vngodly wretches, who haue no power, nor trueth of Grace within them: who make their will, and fan∣cie, the onely rule by which they walke: (as I feare me, they will prooue all such at last.) If they are such a make no care, nor Conscience, of following Christ, or such are not likely to beare vs company in Heauen: let vs vtterly renounce their Guise, and Fashion, and with∣draw our feete from all their wayes: because the ccho∣ing, and Non mi∣tand nobis illi sunt, qui sub Christi no n ∣ ine Gentilem vitam agunt, & al ud pro∣fessione, aliud conuersatione estantur. Hierom. Tom 1. Epist. 11. c. 2. imitation of such (which is the principall, and primary end of wearing Loue-lockes,) i meere∣ly Sinfull, Vnlawfull, and Vnsee ly, vnto Christians. The second end, or ground, why many weare, and nourish Loue-lockes, is a Proud, a Singular, Fantastique, and Vaine-glorious Humour: or a Desire, that others should take notice of them, for Ruffians, Rorers, Fan∣tastiques, Humourists, Fashion-mongers, or for Effemi∣nate, Lasciuious, Voluptuous, Singular, or Vaine-glo∣rious persons, or men of Vitious, Riotous, and Licenti∣ous liues. Many there are, who nourish them of pur∣pose, to Proclaime, and blaze abroad their Vanitie, Rud∣nesse, and Deboistn sse, to the World: that so Ga d t l ∣datis ire super∣ a comis. Pro∣port Eleg. l. 2. El. 1. they may be admired among Quicquid in∣solitum est in turba notabile est. Seneca controuers. l. 4. Proaem. Paruae leues capiunt ani∣mos, Ouid. de Ar e Amandi lib. 1. the light and vulger sort, or cen∣sured by those of the more Religious, Wise, and Grauer ranke, as Dissolute, Ruffianly, Lic ntious, Rude, Vaine-glorious, and Fantastique persons, since they haue no∣thing else to make them noted, or knowne to the World. Now this very end, (which many of our Loue-locke owners doe intend,) must needes be odious, and abomi∣nable: because it is Isay 3.9. Ier. 8.12. Phil. 3.19. a glorying, and triumphing in those sinnes, and vices, which Ezra. 9.6. Iob. 42.6. Ezech. 21.43. Luke 18.13. should bee their sorrow, griefe, and shaeme: because it is a publishing, and proclaiming of their sinne, with impudence, and shamefulnesse, as Sodom did: which is the very highest pitch, and straine of all iniquitie; Ier 8.12.13 Isai. 3.9.10. and will bring certaine ruine, and Damnation to them at the last. The third cause, or end, why many weare, or nourish Loue-lockes, is an ouer greedy desire of satisfying the Leuitie, Vanitie, and Ficklenesse, of their various, and vnstable Lusts and mindes, which hurry, and post them on to euery new-fangled, Fantastique, or Vaine-glorious guise. Now this being the ground, the cause, and end, why must men nou∣rish Loue lockes, must needes bee Euill, Quid tam be∣stiale, acquo∣mod o ind ∣ce s tibi volun∣tate pro l ge v∣ti, & qui no est ad quem ap∣pelleris volun∣t vt , neglige∣re rationem? Non Mi de∣iecti quam l ∣ti animi est, v ut rationi expertem, non pro ratione sed pro libitu agere, nec Iudic vti, sed appetitu. Bern. de Considerat. l. 3. c. 4 Bruitish, and Vnseemely, because it sauours of Lawlesse, and vnruly Wil∣fulnesse ; which pampers the Vaine, and Sinfull humours, Lusts, and dispositions of our carnall Hearts, which should bee Rom. 8.12.13. & 13.14. Col. 3 5. Mortified, Curbed, and Restrained. The fourth end, or ground, for which men foster Loue-locke is the commemoration of some Mistresse, Whore, or Sweet-heart, (as they stile them,) as being a Character, or sure Testi ony, of their deuoted seruice, and true affection to them: whence they were denominated, and stiled, Loue-lockes ; because th y are but Emblemes, and significations of mens Loue, to such Female, Amorous, and Lasciuious creatures, for w ose sakes they did re∣serue, and cherish them at the first: Now this being th originall, chief , and pro er, end, of wearing Loue-lockes; it mak s them Odi us, Sinfull, and Abomina∣ble; because this nd, and ground is such: For See Argu∣ment 4. who will not censure and condemne all such, for Vaine, Effemi∣nate, Lasciuious, Amorous, Vnchast, or Sensuall persons; who dare to wear , and nourish Loue-lockes, against the Lawes of God, and Nature: and the Mod st, Dece t, Graue, and ciuill onsure, Cut, and Custome of their Countrey; of p rpose for to please, or Humour, a Vaine, Fantastique, Light, or Worish Mistresse, Dame, or Sweete-heart? or to bequeath them at the last to some Impudent, Shamelesse, or Vaine-glorious Harlot, (the Prou. 2.18.19. & 22.14.23.27. onely Gulfe to swallow, and deuoure Soules without Re∣demption: ) to weare them like some Goodly, Rich, or Pretious Iewels in their Eares, as an open Herauld, Badge, or Testimonie, to proclaime those R ciprocall, Amourous, Vnchast, and Lustfull affections, which they bea e one to ano her, to their disgrace, and sham ? D eth this beseeme a Christian, or a Child of God? are these things tolerable in Carnall, Graue, or Ciuill; much more in Honest, Chast, or Gracious p rsons, Pudi tiae Christianae s ¦tis non est esse, verum et vi∣deri. Tertul. de Cultu Fae n, cap. 4. Inter Christia∣num & Gen∣tilem, non fides tantum debet, sed & vita distinguere: & diuersam reli∣g onem ver di¦uersa opera monstr . Hieron. Tom. 1. Epist. 14. c. 2. whose very Culture, Haire, and Tonsure, should ma ifest, and Proclaime their Chastitie vnto the v ew of others? Were there euer s ch patter es, o pr id nts as these, to be found in any age, in Chast, or Mo est men? n any of Gods Saints, or Childr n? or in the Church of God? Certainely, I neuer heard, nor read as yet of any such, and I dare lay, no man else. Wherefore, let those who nourish Loue-lockes for this end, (as many doe,) and yet dare assume the name, or face of Christians to them∣selues, Omne malum aut timore, aut pudore, na¦tura per udit Tertul. Apo∣log adu Gent. euen blush, and hide their eads for s ame, nay vexe, affl ct, and grieue their Hearts, an Soules, at the very remembrance, and thoughts of this, and all those other Vaine, Lasciuious, Odious, Scandal us, Si full, and Vnchristian ends, for which they weare, and cherish Loue-lockes; which conuince the very vse, and wearing of them to be euill. If any now obiect (as many doe) in the defence, and iustification of these Vnlouely, Vaine, and foolish Haire iewels. That they are an Quod solum formae decu est cecidere ca∣pilli, &c. Pe∣troniu p g. 8 Turpis sine rondibus ar∣bor, & sine cri∣ne caput. Ouid. de A te Amā∣d. l. 3. See Apu eius Me∣tamorph. l. 2. p, 02, 103. Ornament, Honour Beautie, Grace, and Credit to them, and hence onely is it, that they nourish them, without any other by respect. I answere, that they are so farre from being any Or∣nament, Beautie, Grace, or Credit to such as owne them, that they are the very Brands, and Badges of their Infamie, and Shame: and that by the vnerring verdict, both of God and Nature, who expressely informe vs: 1 Cor. 11.14 that if a man haue long Haire, it is so farre from be∣ing a Grace, or Ornament, that it is a shame vnto him: Coma aemi∣nedecus, vir dedecus: Pauli∣nus Epist. 4. ad Seuerū. Syne∣s s Caluitii. Enc mi . Ab ose Prī∣masius, Theo∣doret, & The∣ophylact. Cō∣mēt. in 1 Cor. 11 4. See Ar∣gument 4 with which the Fathers, and Sto a De Intemperantia Serm. 6. Athae∣neus Dipnos. l. 12. c. 5.7, 9, 10. others doe concurre. Who dares then bee so impudently bold, or shamelessely wicked, as to estimate, or repute that for an Ornament, Grace, or glory: which God and Nature, together with the Fathers, and all Godly, Graue, and Holy men, re∣pute, and stile a shame? Loue-lockes, and long Haire, be∣yond the Sober Ciuill, Moderate, and Decent length, of the more Religious, Graue, and Sober sort of men, are a very infamie, and shame to men ; if Fathers, Christians, God, or Nature, may bee credited: therefore, they are not, they cannot, bee an Ornament, Beautie, Grace, or Credit to them; at least in the eyes of God, and Holy men, (to whom they should endeauoure to approue them∣selues: what euer they, or other Vaine, or Gracelesse per∣sons doe pretend. But if men should slight this Graue, & weighty Testimonie, both of Fathers, God, and Nature, as a meere vntrueth. I would demand this question of any Ruffian, or Vaine-glorious Gallant, who vaunts, and triumphes, in the length, and largenesse of his Locke, and thinkes himselfe much Honoured, Beautified, and Adorned by it: Whether that which euery Page, or Foote-boy, e ery Groome, or Coach-driuer, euery loy∣tering Rog e, or Cheating Rooke: euery R gged, and Raggamuffin Souldier: euery Nasty, or strange-sented Fre ch-man: euery Runnagado, Light-footed, or False-handed Irish-man: or euery Sorded, Base, Deboi t, and Rascall person weares: that which euery Scullian, Pea∣sant, Cobler, Tinker: nay, euery Rogue, and Begger, which post from Goale, to Goale, or Dore, to Dore: that which euery Man, or Woman in the World, may haue as well as hee: can bee any extraordinary Honour, Credit, Ornament, or Beautie to him? Certainely, that which euer ordinary, Base, and Infamous Varlet weares: that Vsu etiam praetios dege∣ erant, quorū utem difficili possessi eoru grat per un∣ ti . Ambr. De Elia & Ie∣iun. c 9. which auery Man or Woman, is capable of, as well as any man; can bee no Ornament, Beautie, Grace, or Credit vnto any. Hence was it, French Hi∣story p. 7. See Caeliu Rhodig. An iqu. Lect. lib. 15. c. 8. that Clodion the hairy, King of France, desiring to be Respected, Honoured and Renouned for his long Haire; inacted a Law: that none but Kings, and their Children, with the Princes of the Blood, should weare long Haire, in token of command: which Law was long obserued in France: Else, his long Haire had beene no speciall Ornament, nor Grace vnto him, if euery one might haue worne it. Now there is not the basest Peasant, Rogue, or Varlet in the World, but may weare as Long, as Great, as Faire, and Rich a Lou -locke, as the greatest Gallant, or the proudest Ruffian: yea, wee see that Foote-boyes, Lacquies, Coach-men, Seruing-men, (yea, Rogues that ride to Tiburne, and the very roth, and sc mme of Men,) haue taken vp this Roguish guise, and Fashion, and haue it most in vse, and admira∣tion; and can these Lockes then be any ornament, Grace, or Credit, vnto men of Place, of Birth, and Worth; since such vile, base, and infamous persons weare, and take them vp in vse? and since there is none so meane, so base, or poore, but may as well, and freely nourish, and reserue a Loue-locke, as the very best, and proudest Gallant? Certainely, if Loue-lockes, and long Haire, were such rich, and pretious ornaments, or Beautifull, Iewels, as our Sect of Loue-locke wearers deeme them: then euery Woman in the World, (vnlesse it bee such Audacious, Impudent, Shamelesse, and Mannish Vira∣goes, who 1 Cor. 11.5.6.15. clip, and cut their Haire, against the Lawes of God, and Nature: ) then all those Barbarians, and Hea∣then Nations, who nourish all their Haire, and neuer cut it till their deaths: yea, euery Quid capil∣lum ingenti di∣ligentia comi Cum illum vel effuderi mor Parthorum, vel Geman r n do vinxer vel vt Scyth solent spar ∣ri : i quol ∣be equ de i∣or actabit iub , horrebi in Le ce ∣nice formosi r. Seneca Epist. 124. long-tailed Horse, the Haire of whose mane, and taile, are of a far longer and larger sise, then the greatest Ruffians Loue-locke: ) should be farre more Honourable, Generous and comely, then the most ouer-growne, Hairie, or deboi test Ruffian, who is most proud and hautie of his Loue-locke; because they tran∣scend him in the length of Haire. Since therefore Loue-lockes, and long Haire, are common vnto beasts, as well as men, since euery Man, or Woman may weare them if they please, as well as any: and since they are so ri e and frequent among the baser, looser, and deboister sort of men: I may infallibly conclude; that they adde no or∣nament, beautie, credit, grace, or luster vnto any, but infamie, deformitie, shame, and disrespect, especially a∣mong the better, grauer, and religious ranke of Christi∣ans: which should cause all men of worth and credit, for euer to discard them. Secondly, if men will weare their Haire for ornament, and comelinesse sake, let them nourish it of a moderate, Ordinary, Ciuill, Graue, and decent length, which is the most Tu i enil decu ser nec pul hrior ille, n long fuerit quam breuiore com . Martial. Epig. l. 9. Epig. 14. beautifull, and co ∣ly weare of all others. It See Synesiu Caluiti E co∣mium, accor∣dingly. was a meere mistake, and error in Lycurgus, who Plutarch. Li∣sander. & La∣con: Institut. Arist. Rhet. l. 1. c. 9. Zenophon La∣ced m. Respub: Boemus de Mor. Gent. l. 3. c. 13. taught the Lacede onian young m n to nourish their Haire at the full length, because if they were Beautifull, it would make th m more Amiable and comely: if Deformed, more Terrible to their Enemies: For that ce tainely, must be ost Beautifull, and Co e∣ly, that is most sui able to Nature, to the condition of our Sex, the custo e of our Countrey: and which d eth most Adorne, Commend, and Beautifie vs in the eyes of God, and of the Bes , th Wisest, and Greatest part of Men: Now short Haire, or Haire of a Moderate, Or∣dinary, Graue, and Decent length, is most suitable, and proportionable to Nature, to the condition of our Sex, and custome of our Countrey: (to all which long Haire is contrary and aue se,) and it doeth most Adorne, Com∣mend, and Beautifie vs in the sight of God, and of the Best, the Wisest, the Grauest, and greatest part of Men, who approoue it as the best and comeliest weare, both in their Iudgements, and their Practise; when as they Discant a te Coepiscopi tui c matulos pue∣ro comptos adolescentes secum non ha∣bere. Bern. de Consid l. 3. c. 6 condemne long Haire, and Loue-lockes, both in their Iudgements, and their Practise too, as Vnnaturall, Wo∣mannish, Hatefull, and Vndec nt vanities; which more deforme Men, then adorne them: Crinium co∣piae vires mi∣ uit, & quasi e corpore exu∣git. Philip. Lo∣uicerus Tur∣cic. hist. l. 2. c 3. as things which eneruate, and exh ust their strength and Spirits: and make them not more Ter ible, but more Contemptible to their Enemie : who oft times take aduantage by their Haire to foile them, and to cut their throates, Synesius. Calu tii Enco∣mium. Alex. ab Alex Gen: Dier. l. 5. c. 18. Plutarch. The∣sius. Polydor. Virg. De In∣uent. rerum. l. 3. c. 11. as Histories doe relate ; Whence, the Abantes, the Macedonians, and o∣thers whose Haire had beene an occasion of their ouerthrow in Warre; were forced to pole, and shaue their heads before, least their Enemies should take aduantage, or holdfast by their Haire, and so put them to the worst, as they had done in former times. Loue-lockes then, or excessiue long Haire, are neither a Grace, nor Ornament to the Beau∣tifull, but rather a Deformitie, Disgrace, and Shame: they make men not more Terrible, but more Contemp∣tible to their Enemies, who will slight, and scorne them as Effeminate, Sloathfull, and Vnmanly persons, and take aduantage by them: contrary, to that receiued max∣ime of Lycurgus: (which Pag ns may, Obiect. 2. though Christi∣ans ought not to admire, Answ. 1. because they haue surer rule and patterne for to walke by:) so that this first pretence is meerely vaine. If any obi ct in the second place; that they nourish, (yea, Frizle, Curle, Colour, Crispe, Adorne, and Frounce) their Haire, and Loue-lockes of purpose to augment, or to set out their Beautie: that so they may appeare more Amiable, and Comely, both in their owne, and others eyes: which end they hope is Laudable, Good, and Iustifiable. I answere first; that this pretence is no wayes war∣rantable: For if wee Rom. 5.8. must not doe euill in any kinde, that so good may come of it: much lesse, may wee Curle, Die or ouer-curiously decke our Haire, or Loue-lockes, of purpose to improoue, illustrate, or set out our Beau∣tie ; which in its very best acceptation, Isay. 40.6.7. Anceps forma bonum morta∣libus exigui donum breue temporis, v velox celeri pede laberis. Res est form fugax. Seneca Hyppolitu Act. 2. Form bonum fragile est, quantū{que} accedit ad an∣nos, Fit minor, & spati car∣pitur i sa su , &c. Ouid. de Arte Amand , l. 2. Qualis est ista pul hritu∣do quam leui febricula per∣dit, & rugos senectu ita dis∣solu t, vt nec fuisse putetur? Bern. de Ordi∣ne vitae. Col. 11 15. M. is but a brit∣tle, momentany, fading, and inferior good. Wee all know, that the acquiring, intending, and enhancing of com∣linesse, and externall beautie, is made the common in∣gredient; nay, the dayly Apologie, Patronage, Plea, and Iustification of many enormious, and sinfull practi∣ses. Whence is it, that diuers iustifie, and approone the vnnaturall execrable, mereticious, and infernall varni∣shing of their Faces: together with their immodest, strange, lasciuious, vnchristian, and antique habits, fa∣shions, and attires, See Pag. 1.2 which God, which Fathers, which Moderne Diuines, and Christian Authors; nay, Infidels, and Pagans haue sentenced, and doomed to the pit of Hell? is it not from this conclusion; that they eleuate, and enhaunce their Beautie, and make them more Louely in their owne, and others eyes? Whence is it, that our Immodest, Impudent, and Mulieres faeminam ex ∣erunt, & viro∣rum licentiam aequauerunt. Non mu at foeminarū na∣tura sed vit est. Sen. Ep. 95. mannish Viragoes, or au∣dacious Men-women, doe vnnaturally clip, and cut their Haire; wearing their Lockes, and Fore-tops (as they stile them,) in an odious, and shamelesse manner, as if Ex f minis mutari in ma∣res non est fa∣bulosum. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 4. Omnia unc immuta∣ it luxus: ho∣mines patiun∣tur muliebria, et faeminae pr ∣ter naturam viros agunt. Clem. Alex. Pedag. l. 3. c. 3. Paeminae virili abitu veste u ata, eru∣bescunt esse quod nat sunt rines ampu∣ ant. Hierom. Tom. 1. Ep. 12. Al which may be well apply∣ed to our times they were really transformed, and transubstantiated into Males, by a stupendious metamorphosis: is it not f om this Apologie, Plea, and Iustification, that they doe it onely for Ornament, and Beautie sake? Now bec use I am fallen vpon this vile, and odious practise of our women, which is now so much in vse: I will giue you an Histo∣ricall list of sundry women in former times, who haue Polled their Heads, and cut their Haire vpon sundry grounds and reasons: but none of them out of Pride, or Fashion-following as our Viragoes doe. Some there were, who did cut their Haire by reason of some Religi∣ous, Idolatrous, or Superstitious order, or profession, wh ch they had taken vpon them. Witnesse, the Plin. Nat. ist. l. 16. c. 44. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 12. Ve∣stall Virgines among the Romans; who vpon their initiation into that Superstitious, and retired Order, did shaue their Heads, and hanged the Haire shorne off as an holy thing, vpon a Lote-tree neere vnto the Altar of the Goddesse Lucina; from whence it was called, Lotus capillata, or the Hairy Lote-tree: Witnesse, Acosta. hist. Indiae l. 5. c. 15. Purchas Pilg. l. . cap. 12. a Monastery of Reli∣gio s Virgines in Mexico, who had their Haire cut: Witnesse, Ludou. Al∣mida. Epist. ad Soci. Iesu Ann. 1565. Maffaeus Select. Epist. ex India. l. 4. p. 170 Monicha the daughter of Sanctius a Iapa∣nite; who being conuerted to the faith of Christ, did cut her Haire: which among the Iapanites, is a badge of a reti∣red, and Religious life, free from all wordly affaires: and witnesse, the Hierom. Tō. 1. Epist 43. c. 3 Ancient Nunnes in Egypt, who vpon their entrance into their holy Orders, did vse to cut their Haire: This custome it seemes became some-what or∣din ry among Religious persons: and therefore the Surius. Tom 1. Conc p. 373. Gratian. Di∣stinct. 30. Councell of Gangra in the yeere of our Lord, 324. Canon 17. to preuent this irreligious, vnnaturall, and vngodly practise, inacted: That if any woman should cut her Haire, vnder a supposed pretence of Pietie, and Re∣ligion, which God had giuen her for a naturall vaile, and for a remembrance of her subiection, that shee should bee ac∣cursed, as an infringer of the precept of subiection: Other women haue cut their Haire in case of necessitie, for the defence, and safegard of their Countrey: Strabo. eog. l. 17. Plutar. de Aere al eno: Cael. Rhod. An∣tiq. lect. l. 18. c. 12 Zonar. A nal Tom. 2. f. 80. Purchas Pil. l. 6. c. 8. In the last Carthaginian Warres, the Carthaginian Women in case of necessitie for want of other matter, did cut their Haire, (their Femenine glory,) to make Ropes, and Cordes for their Ships, and Engins: The Iulius capi¦tolinus in vi Maxim. Lactā De Falsa Re∣lig. l. 1. c. 20. C el. Rhod. Ant. Lect l. 18 c. 12 Roman Matrons, when as Rome was Sacked by the Gaules, and the Capitoll like to bee surprised, did the like, vpon the like necessitie: whence the Romans erected a Temple afterwards to bald Venus. When ul Capit l, Maximin s e Balbinus: pag. 272.302.307. Aquilea was hardly besieged by Maximinus, their women for want of other Materialls, did cut their Haire to make Bow-strings: So did the Zonaras A ∣nal. Tom. 2. Fol. 105. Bizantian women likewise, when as their Citie was beseiged by Seue∣rus: For which act of theirs, they are all renowned to posteritie; it being in case of absolute necessitie for the needfull defence both of their Libertie, Liues, and Countrey. Other women haue there beene, who haue cut their Haire from the practise, vse, and custome of their Countrey: Thus did the Epiphan lib. 2. contr. Heres. Cōpend. Doctr. Eccles. Cathol. pag. 910. Seres, Strabo. Geo∣gr. l. 11 Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 18. Tapyri, and Irish-women vse to clip their Haire, when as their men did cherish it: Among the S linus P ∣lyhist. cap. 27. Plin. Nat. hist. lib. 6. c. 13. Arimphaeans, both men and women were polled: Pet. Martyr. Indian Hist. Decad. 3. c. 4. In the Region of Quicuri, the wo∣men did vsually defalke, and clip their Haire: The Purchas Pil. l. 9. cap. 5. Bra∣silian women, when as their Husbands went any long iourney, did vse to cut their Haire: Plutarchi. Lycurgus. Boemus de Mor. Gent. l. 3. c. 13 Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 2. c. 5. When any woman was to bee Married among the Ancient Lacedemonians, their custome was, to cut her Haire close to the skinne: In Opme Chronogr. pag. 391. Bilbaum there is this custome; that the women poll themselues vntill they are Married, and then they let their Haire grow out at length: In Lucian. de Dea Syria. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 11. c. 24. Trezaene, the girles before their Marri∣age did cut their Haire, and dedicated it to Hyppolit s: Io∣han. Miletii. Epist. De Reliqu is & Sacrific. Vet: Borussorum. Among the Ancient Russians, after any Marriage was celebrated, the Bride being ready to bee brought to her bed, had her Haire cut of, whiles she was dauncing: Purcha Pilgr. l. 9. c 2. The Che∣riberensean women, when they are to bee Married, are polled before vnto the eye-browes, but remaine bushie behinde. All these recited women haue thus vnnaturally cut their Haire, fro the very practise, vse, and custome of their Countrey: But what saith Saint Ambrose in the like case: Iraeneo Epist. Tom. 1. pag. 233. G. Maior est natura quam patria: the law of na∣ture 1 Cor. 11.6.14.15. which prohibets women for to cut their Haire, ) is stronger then the custome of any Cou trey, which allowes them for to cut it: so that this custome cannot excuse, nor iusti ie those who vse, and pr ctise it. Other women there are, who haue cut their Haire of purpose to consecrate it to some Deuill-god, or Goddesse: Cael. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 22. cap. 2. Alex. ab Alex∣ ndro. l 5. cap. 18. In Sicyonia all the women did shaue off their Haire, in honour of the Goddesse of Health; and then consecrate it vn∣to her for a Sacrifice. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 1 . cap. 44. Alex. ab Alexandro. lib. 5. cap. 12. The Vestall Virgines, did vsually cut their Haire to consecrate it to the Goddesse Lucina: In Lucian De Dea Syria. Cae . Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 11. c. 24. Trezaene, the Girls did cut their Haire to consecrate it to Hyppolitus: a fit Sacrifice for these Heathen Idoles. Others there are, who haue vsually cut their Haire, in token of griefe, and sorrow, at the death and obsequies of their Husbands, Friends, Children. rinces, and the like. The Platoni Phaedon. Cael. Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 7. cap. 23. Alex. ab Alexandro l 3. cap. 7. Busbe quius Epist Eccles. Epist. 1. pag. 22. Graecian women, when as their Husbands, or neare Friends died, did vse to cut their Haire, in token of griefe, and sorrow for their deaths, casting it into the fire; wherein their Husbands, and Friends were burned, or else hanging it ouer their Graues, and Tombes. Zonar. An∣nal. Tom. 3. fol. 143. Thus did Theoph no shaue her selfe, vpon the death of Stauratius her Husband: Deutr. 21.11, 12, 13. Hierom. Tom. 2. Epist. 84. Paulinus Epist 4. Seuero If an Israelite, or Iew had taken any Captiue woman, that was beautifull, which he desired to take vnto him for his wife; he was thon to bring her home into his house: and there she must shaue her head, and pare her nailes, and there remaine a full moneth, to bewaile her Father, and her Mother. Alex. ab Alexandro. lib. 3. cap. 7. The Rom n, German, Milesian, AEthiopian, and Mace∣donian women, when as their Sonnes, their Brothers, Husbands, or great men died, did vse to cut their Haire in token of griefe, and sorrow. When Suetonii Ca∣ligula. cap. 5. Germanicus died, certaine barba∣rous Kings did so lament his death, that they polled their wiues in testimony of their Heauinesse and Sorrow for him. Pur has Pil. l. 4. cap. 10. When the Prince of Chubdan dieth, his wiues in blacke with sh uen ea s continually m urne Alex. ab Al xand o. l. 3. cap. 7. The ersians when as any great man died, did v e to shaue their wi s, to expresse their griefe and mourning: Pur has Pil. l. 5. cap. 10. Am ng the Cana∣rij, when as the Husband dieth, his wi e cutteth off her Haire. The Athenaeus: Dipn . l. 12. cap. 8. Scythians, and Herodotus. lib. 6. Milesians receiuing a great, and publike ouerthrow, did shaue the heads of euery per on through∣out their Countrey and Nation , in token of their sorrow. Ludouic. Patricius. l. 5. cap. 7. Purchas Pil. l. 5. cap. 10. In Malaber, when as the King dieth and is buried, they all shaue their heads: Purchas Pil. lib. 1. cap. 7. And so in Fl rida, when as the King dieth, both men and women cut off halfe their Haire, to expresse and testifie their griefe, and mourning. An vnnatu∣rall, impudent, and shamelesse griefe, and sorrow, that is testified by such vnnaturall, mannish, and shamefull ex∣pressions. Other women are there, who haue had their Haire shorne off by way of punishment, an co rection, for some notorious crime. The Tacitus de Moribus Germ ca. 6. Boemus De Mor. Gent. lib. 3. cap. 12. Munsters Geo. lib. 3 cap. 13. Al x. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 4. cap. 1. Ancient Germans, when as they tooke their wiues in Adultery, did vse to cut off their Haire first, then did they strip them naked, and whip them through the Village where they liued, and so put them a∣way. Zonaras An∣nal. Tom 3. sol. 141.155.165. Mary the wife of Constantine, the sonne of Irene; the wife of Constantine, the sonne of Leo; the wife of Ar∣gyrus, and the sister of Zoe the Empresse were thus p lled, and then Diuorced, and punished for their incontin ncy, and such like offences: Purchas Pil. l. 5. c. 5 & 9. In Bengala, and so likewise among the Indian Bramanes, if women refused to bee burned with their Husbands, they had their heads p lled, and their Haire cut off, as a seuere, and infamous punishment; and they were euer after reputed dishonest women. Among the Alex. ab Alexandro. l. 3. cap. 5. Pur∣chas Pil. l. 9. cap. 1. French Hist. in the l fe of Clodion the Hairie. p. 7.8. Indians, French, and T nians, those who were guiltie of the greatest crimes, were to haue their Haire cut off, which was reputed the most infamous, seuere, and heauy punishment of all others: Which testifies, that it is the most infamous, vnnaturall, and shamefull ing, that can b fall a woman, (not a grace, or ornament,) to cut or clip her Haire. You haue now heard a large Historicall Narration of women who haue cut their Haire in whole, or part, for sundry ends and purposes, against the very order, law, and rule of God, and nature, which none can violate, or transgresse, without apparant losse, and hazard to their soules: But Nec vsquam inuenta est, aut inuenire po∣test, quae noua∣culae caput sub∣miserit, praet r∣quam in gr ui aut inauspicato euētu: si vllam vsquam eius∣modi tempus tulit, mihi cer∣tè ne{que} auditū, e{que} visum vn∣quam. Synesius Caluitii En∣comium. neuer could I read, or heare of any, that were so strange∣ly Impudent, Immodest, Mannish, and Vnnaturally wicked; as to clip and cut their Haire, against the or∣dinance of God, and Nature, the light and testimonie of their owne Consciences; the custome of their Coun∣trey, and the opinion, and practise of the Church, and Saints of God from age to age, of purpose to inhance, illustrate, or set out their beautie; but onely our auda∣cious, brazen-faced, shamelesse, (if not vnchast, and whorish,) English Hermophrodites, or Man-women Monsters; whose prodigious, and blushlesse impudency, bids battell and defiance vnto Heauen it selfe, and dares the Lord to smite, or to controule them: Certainely, God himselfe hath testified, 1 Cor. 10.5.6.15. that it is an vnnaturall, vile, and shamelesse thing, for women to poll their heads, or cut their Haire: therefore they may not clip, nor cut it as they doe, to set out their beautie, or rather to pro∣claime their shamelesse impudency, to the publike view. If they may not doe it, out of a pretence of Religion, or De otion towards God: as the Councell of Gangra hath resolued; much lesse may they vse it out of Lasci∣uiousnesse, Pride, Wantonnesse: or any affectation of Comlinesse, and Beautie. But to returne againe vnto our purpose from whence wee haue somewhat, (though not impertinently) digressed. As women may not clip their Haire, (no nor Paint their Faces, nor weare im∣modest apparell, or attires:) out of a pretence of com∣linesse, and beautie; no more ought men to nourish, crispe, or frizell it, for this end and purpose. First, be∣cause it sauours of Effeminacie, and womanish inuirili∣tie: an odious, vnnatural, and 1 Cor. 6.9.10 Gal. 5.19.21. Ephes. 4.19. Rom. 13.13. Isay 14.16.17 filthy sinne, which damnes mens Soules to Hell, without repentance: which Nihil est ne∣qui aut tur∣piu effaeminae∣t viro. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5 makes men odious and loathsome vnto others, and M l tē Chri∣sti verum ni∣ il molle decet. Ambr. Enar. i Psal. 3 . misbeseemes all Christians. It is a great Viris nihil magis pudor esse oportet quam si mulie∣bre aliquid in se habere vide∣antur : Salu. De. Gub. Dei. l. 5. p. 264. disparagement and shame to men ; especially, to Christians, to be Effeminate and womanish in any thing: much more in the ouer-curious, delicate, and vaine-glorious culture, frizling, colouring, poudring, or adorning of their Haire, which sauoureth of nothing but Effeminacy. The Isay 3.24. 1 Tim. 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3. Scriptures, and Fa∣thers condemne this Broydering, and curious Dressing, and setting out of the Haire, euen in women themselues, as an Effe∣minate, and vnseemely thing: Basil. Com. in Isai. 3. Clē. Alex. Pedag. l. 2 c. 8.12. l. 3. c. 3 11. Tertul. de Cultu. Fam. c. 3, 4, 5, 6. Cypr. De habit. Virg a Amb. de Vir∣gin. l. 3. Chrys. Hō. 8. in 1. Tim. 2. Hier. Ep. 7 c. 1. Ep. 8. c. 9, 10. Epist. 22. c. 12. Epist. 23. The ∣philact, Theo∣doret, & Pri∣masiu in 1 Tim. 2 Sec A∣grip. De Van. Scient. cap. 71. Athaeneu Dip∣nos. l. 12. c. 7, 9, 10, accordingly. if in women, is it not much more so in men? The sixt generall Councell of Constan∣tinople inacted: Can 9 & 96. Surius Con il. Tom 2. That no man should walke abroad with curled Haire vnder paine of Excommunication: not onely be∣cause it was a pompe and vanitie of the world, which Chri∣stians haue renounced in their Baptisme, and a meere baite to inamor, and inescate others: but likewise because it was a adge and character of effeminacie: Ca∣pillis artificiosis & intortis crinibus incedere, perd ti, andr gyni, effeminati{que} homi∣nis est. Eum qui vir est pecti, tonderi, crines componentem ad speculum, genasq, radi, velli, ac deglabari, quomodo non est plane muliebre? certe nisi quis eos nudos viderit muliere esse putauerit, &c. Clem. Alex Paedag. l. 1 c. 10 l. 3. c. 2, . Clemens Alexan∣drinus condemnes all such, for androginous, and effeminate persons, who Curle, and Crispe their Haire like women: See Letter (C) & Hierom. Ep. 8. c. 10. Ep 10. c. . Ep. 19 c. 5. Ep. 47. c. 3. Tertullian, Chrysostome, Cyprian, Hierom, and o∣thers doe the like: Quam deforme est virum facere muliebria: Ergo & pariunt, ergo par iant qui crispant coronam si∣cut faeminae. Irenaeo. Ep. Tom. 1. p. 2 3. What a deformed thing is it (saith Ambrose,) for a man to doe any womanish thing? There∣fore let those men who Curle their Crownes like women, be∣get, and bring foorth Children as women doe: D i homines{que} male derint has bellua hu∣mano effigie, compto faeminarum ad mollitiem capillo: De Rem. Vtr. F rt. l. Dial. 20. Let God and men (saith Petrarch,) hate those beastes in the shapes of men, who set out or Crispe their Haire after an womanish effeminacie: De Moribus Lib. Galataeus, De Van. Scient. c. 63, 64, 69, 71. Agrippa, De Instit. Cyri. lib. 8. Zenophon, De Breu. vitae: c. 12. Nat Hist l. 7. c. 31. Controues. l. 1. Prooem. Seneca the Philosopher, Fortem voce∣mus cuius horrentes comae manduere n rdo? Hercules Furens. Seneca the Tragedian, Nec tamen i dignum si vobis cura plae∣ endi, Cum comptos habe∣ant secula no∣stra viros: De Medicam. Fac. Ouid, Pectere t olim, sed nec turbare caepil∣los: Splendida sit nolo, sordidae nolo cutis Nec tibi mitrarum, nec sic tibi bar∣ba reo um. No∣lo virum nimi∣um, Pannice, nole parum. E∣pigr. l. 2. Epig. 29. Martiall, and others, cond mne this Froun∣cing, Frizeling, Colouring Powdring, and ouer-curious dressing of the Haire, as an effeminate, womanish, and vn∣manly thing: which misbeseemes, disgraceth, and de∣formeth man and woman: therefore we must not vse it to set out our Beautie, because it fauours of effeminacie; a sinne which God, which Man, which Nature, doe ab∣horre Secondly, as it relisheth of effeminacy, and in∣uirilitie; so likewise, it tasteth of Leuitie, Vanitie, Pride, Vaineglory, Impudency, Incontinency, Lasciuiousnesse, Carnallitie, Selfe-pleasing, Selfe-seeking, Idlenesse, Voluptuousnesse, neglect of God, and better things: as the Fathers, and others doe abundantly testifie: Few there are either of the Male, or Female sexe, who are oc∣cupied, and taken vp in the Frizeling, Frouncing, Co∣louring, Powdring, or nice Composing of their Haire, but Leuoris au∣tem & glabri∣ iei, si in viros quidē, est mu∣lierculae: si in faemina autē, adulterae: v∣trun{que} autem est a nostra re∣publica longis∣sime alienan∣dum. Clem. A∣lex. Paedag. l 3. c. 3. Quid ex talibus expec. tandum est, qui comas superuacuas curant, nisi vt lasciuus ille ornatu faeminas praetereuntes inui∣ et, aut alienis matrimoniis insidietur? Basil. de Legend lib. Gentil. O at. Incontinent, Vaineglorious, Proud, Sloathfull, Carnall, or Luxurious persons: who are altogether pro∣digall, and carelesse of the Beautie, Culture, and Salua∣tion of their Soules: who are Negligent, and Sloathfull in God Seruice, and in the practise of all Holy dueties: who Quid? Illos ociosos vocaes quibus apud tonsorem multae horae transiguntur? Dum de singulis capillis in consilium itur, &c. Sen: de Breu. Vitae c. 12. play away their time in earnest, and spend their precious liues in foolish vanities; as if they were borne for no other purpose, but to Eate, to Drinke, to Play, to Sleepe, or to ina our, and set out their bodies: who onely seeke to please themselues, and others; to Pam∣per, Cherish, and set out their Proud, their Lustfull, and Rebellious Flesh: (which should be mortified, and kept vnder, by the substraction of all these outward cultures, and Vnchristian attires, which feed and strengthen it:) such who haue Capilli in orti, fuci, tinctu∣rae, & colores illiti, animam intinsecus aegrotare significant. Clem. Al x. Paedag. lib. . cap. 2. Vnsound, Vnchast, and Gracelesse Hearts ; and would be easily induced to Vittae permul∣tae differenti ac curi s , & super c n capillorum pli∣caturae, et cri∣ ium in um ∣rabiles figur & praeci s speculorum structur qui bu se comp ∣nunt, sunt faeminarum qua omnem p ∣dorem exuer ̄t, quas qui re∣trices v c ∣rit is non ab∣ rra erit. Ib. prostitute their bodies to the lusts of others, or to inescate others with them∣selues: this Authors, and experience doeth plentifully witnesse: Therefore we may not vse these Effeminate, Gracelesse, and Vnchristian arts, of purpose to procure or inlarge our Beautie, because it sauoureth of so many sinnes, and is practised by few or none, but Gracelesse, Proud, Cult f cit mulieres mer ∣tric s, vir s autem a dr ∣gynos effami∣natos & adul∣teros Clem. A∣lex. Pae l. 3. c. 2. Vnchast, Effeminate, and Sinfull persons : and because it is but a doing of euill, that good may come of it. Secondly, I answere; that mans perfect, true, and re∣all Beautie, doeth not consist in the Faire, Cleare, or comely Superficies, Delicacy, and tendernesse of the Skinne, or Face; nor yet in the curious, nice, and arti∣ficiall Embroyderies, Curlings, Textures, Colourings, Powdrings, or compositions of the Haire, as most men vainely deeme: but Qvi sanos habent culos solam animi pulchritudinē in homine dili∣gunt & vene∣rentur. Bern. de Ordine Vi∣tae. c. 1115. m. Non caduci corporis pulchritudo vel morbo peritura vel senio, se nullis obnoxia casi∣bus, opinio onorum nunquam moritura meritorum, hominibus est decors: Ambr. de Virgin. l 1 Tom. 4 p 220 G. Pulchritudo optima est pulchritudo nimae; quando fuerit anima ornata sancto sp ritu, iustitia, prudentia, fortitudi e, temperantia, bonorum amore et pudore, quo nullus color nitidior vnquam visus est. Clem. Alex Paedag l. 3 c. 11 See cap. 2, 3. in the inward Endowments, Or∣naments, Trappings, Vertues, and Graces of the Minde, and Soule, in which the Excellency, Essence, and Happi∣nesse of men consist: This is the onely Comelinesse, and Beautie, which makes vs Amiable, Beautifull, and Re∣splendent in the sight of God, of Men, and Angels: this is the onely culture, and 1 Sam. 16, 6, 7. Isay 57.15. & 62.1, 3, 4 Ps. 16.3. Ps. 45, 11. Clē. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 2, 3, 4 Beautie which the Lord re∣spects: this is the Isay 53.2, 3 Clē. Alex. P dag. l. 3. c. 1. onely Beautie which Christ Iesus had on Earth, who had no outward forme, or artificiall, or exotique ornaments, to make him amiable: this is the chiefe Psal. 45, 6, to 15. Reu. 12.1. & 3.5, 18, & 7, 9 14. Eph. 5.27. Cant. 4 to 16. and onely Beautie, and Glory, which the Saints, and Church of God admire, and partake of both here, and here∣after ; though carnall men abhorre and loath it as the great st deformitie. If therefore we would bee truely beautifull, and louely both with God, with Men, and Angels; if wee would extend our Beauties, and im∣prooue them to the vttermost, so as Cant. 4, 9. T liter pig∣mentatae Deū abebit is ama∣t rem. Tert. de Cultu. F em. c. 7 to inamour, and r uish God, and Christ himselfe: let vs then disclaime these Diabolicall, Worldly, and Vnchristian culture , Quanto am plius corpus fo∣r s propter va∣n m gloriam mponitur at∣que ornatur, tanto interius anima foed ∣tur ac sordida∣tur. Bern. De modo Viuendi Serm. 9. Qui rnatum corpo∣re vestis affe∣ctat, animam suam virtutū splendore despo∣liat. Fulgent. Epist. 3. ad Pro∣bam. Noli ac∣ iperecincinnos corporalium capillorum. Nō illa orna∣ment se cri∣mina sunt, le∣ ocinia formae, non pracepta virtutis. Amb. de Virg: l. 3. T. 4. p. 232. E. which Defile, Pollute, Detu pate, and deforme our Soules, and make vs odious, and vncomely in the eyes of God, the Saints, and blessed Angels: and decke our Soules with the very Psal. 29.2. Ps. 96.9. & 110.3. Beauties of Holinesse, with the Psal. 45.13.14. Iob. 28.16, 17, 18. Embroidered, Rich, and precious ornaments, Dia∣monds, Attires, and Pearles of Grace: let vs bee all Glo∣rious, and Beautifull within ; that so wee may bee fit Spouses for God, and Christ to loue and match with, and may Dan. 12, 3. Math. 13, 43. shine as Starres, and as the brightnesse of the firmament in Gods heauenly Kingdome for euermore: This is a Beautie that Sickenesse, Time, and Age cannot de∣cay: this Beautie will sticke by vs, and continue with vs for all eternitie: yea, it is such a comelinesse as will Non deformitate corporis animus fo datur, sed pul∣chritudine animi corpus ornatur. Senec. Epist. 66. Naturae decus mores exornant boni. Stobaeus Ser. 65. supply, conceale, adorne, and grace all corporall deformi∣ties, and take them cleane away: whereas Nihil pulchritudo iuuat cum quis mentē non bonam habet. Eurip. Oedipo. all corporall, and externall Beauty, is but meere deformitie, where this is absent: O then let vs prise this Beautie most, without which wee are deformed, vgly, and vnlouely in Gods sight, let vs admire, seeke, and purchase it with greatest care: so shall we bee abundantly beautifull, and euery way amiable, and comely, though we haue no artificiall trappings, nor externall crispings, cultures, or attires to adorne our Bodies, Heads, and Faces, or to enlarge our externall Beautie, which is not worth the seeking. Thirdly, I answere; that Vnumquod{que} animal in suo genere ac specie pulcherrimum est: quod si de altero in alterum tranferatur, nihil impeditius ad vtilitatem, nihil deformius ad as∣pectum videri necesse est. Lactant. de Opific. Dei cap. 7. Rectiora decentioraque sunt nia quae vis & habitus naturae inxit, quam quae expressit conatus artis. Cla ke de Aulico. lib. 4. euery thing is most amia∣ble, beautifull, and comely in that naturall feature, comeli∣nesse, and proportion, which God himselfe hath stamped, and engrauen on it. Nothing is properly, and truely beauti∣full, and comely in it selfe, but that whose Varnish, Glosse, and Beautie flowes, and springs from God him∣selfe; who is the onely fountaine, and spring of Beau∣tie: All acquisite, externall, exotique, and artificiall varnishes, cultures, dressings, and attires, which any wayes change, sophisticate, or alter that naturall fea∣ture, forme, and comelinesse, which the prudent, and vnerring hand of God hath wrought, and formed in vs: transforming vs into another hue, or plight, then God hath giuen vs: is so farre from adding comelinesse, or luster to vs, that Propriam perdunt pul∣chritudinem qui externam inducunt. Clē. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 2. Mulieres si sunt pulchr , sufficit naturae: non co tendat ars contra na∣turam: Sin au∣tem sunt natu∣ra turpes, ex iis quae sibi ap∣plicant, quod non habent ar∣guunt. Id. Pae∣dag. l. 2 c. 12. Sordidat laua∣tio ist , non ab∣luit, nec emen∣dat membra, sed maculat. Cypr. de hab. Virg. Simplex & uda veri∣t satis orna∣ta per se est: i ∣ oque ornamē∣tis extrinsecus fucata corrum∣pitur, non e∣mendatur. La∣ctan. de Falsa Sap. c. 1. Color arte compositus inquinat corpus, non mutat. Con t formam quicquid consumitur artis. Petronius: pag. 74.154. it doeth more deturpate, and deforme vs; ecclipsing, obfuscating, and deprauing that naturall, and liuely Portraiture and Beautie, which the curious Pen∣cell of God himselfe hath drawne, Limmed, and engrauen on vs. Hence was it, Math. 6.28.29. See Chrysost. Hom. 23. in Math. that Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of the Lillies of the Field: because their array, and Beautie was naturall; His, but acquisite, and artificiall. If therefore we would be truely beauti∣full, let vs content our selues with that naturall Beautie, Haire, and Feature, which God himselfe hath bequea∣thed to vs, as being most suitable, and conuenient for vs. Doubtlesse, if God had euer thought, that Crisped, Frounced, Powdered, or artificiall, acquisite, and em∣broidered Haire had beene most for his glory, or for our Beautie, Good, and Comelinesse: See Clem. Alexan. Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10. lib. 3. cap. 2, 3, 11. Ter∣ ul. de habitu Muliebri cap. 5. Decultu Faem. cap. 4.5. Cypr. de Habitu Virgin: ac ordingly. himselfe would out of his infinite wisedome and goodnesse haue assigned vs such naturall Haire as this, which we affect and seeke ; else hee could not haue beene so Wise, so Good, so perfect, and exact a God, so exquisite, and skilfull a Creator as we all repute him. Since he therefore, being Wisedome, Goodnesse, Knowledge, and Beautie it selfe hath de∣signed such naturall, and vnadorned, or vncrisped Haire vnto vs as is most comely, proper, and behoofull for vs: Let vs not murmure, nor finde fault with him, nor call his Art, his Wisedome, his Goodnesse, and Discreti∣on into question: Manus Deo inferunt, quā∣ o illud quod ille ormaeuit, re ormare & transfigura e contendunt: quia opus Dei est omne quod nascitur; Di∣aboli quodcū{que} mutatur. Quod ornari te pu∣t as, quod put as comi, im∣pugnatio est ist a diuini ope∣ri , praeuarica∣ti e t verita∣tis: Et tute impune existi∣mas laturam tam improbae temeritatis au∣daciam, Dei artificis offen∣sam? Cypr. de hab Virg. In Dominum de∣linquunt qui cutem medica∣minibus vnguunt, genus rubore m culant, oculos fuligine collinunt, capillos crispant, & croco vertunt, displicet nimirum illis plastica Dei: in ipsis redarguunt, reprehen∣dunt artificem omnium. Repraehendunt enim cum emendant, cum adijciunt, a Dia∣b lo artifice sumentes additamenta ista: qui indubit te huiusmodi ingenia concin∣ auit vt in nobis quodamodo manus Deo in erret. Quod nascitur, opus Dei est: Er∣go quod fi git r Diabol negotium est. Diuino peri Satani ingenia superducere, quam scele e est? Tertul. de Cultu. Faeminar. cap. 3. Let vs not offer violence and force to him, in labouring to correct, to alter, perfect, or amend his worke ; or to Nemo ducem sequitur naturam: Viuitur arte. Factus homo est operis, nunc opus ipse sui. O en: Epigram. Pars vlt. lib. 2. Epigram. 76 new-moulde, or make our selues, as if wee were more wise then ee: Matth 5.36. cap. 10.30. Luke 21.18. But since wee cannot make so much as one Haire white or blacke, when as God who num∣bers all our Haires, hath giuen it another tincture, let vs rest contented with that lot and portion, with that na∣turall Haire, and Comelinesse which God hath giuen vs, Nu quid bruta mutant speciem suam? Cur nos mutare desideramus? Am∣bros. Irenae . Tom. 1. pag. 233. F. Clem. Alexand. Paedag. lib. 3. cap. 2.3.11. as all other creatures doe, who neuer seeke to change their Haire or Plumes, as men and women doe: for feare wee prooue farre worse the beasts, spurnning against our wise and great Creator, and saying to him with those presumptuous Pot-sheards in the Scripture: Isay 45.9. Rom. 9.20. why hast thou made vs thus? to the wracke and ruine of our soules. That Beauti, Haire, and forme, is best and comelie , which God, which Grace, and Nature, (not children, loose and wanton persons) deeme most beautifull and comely: But God, and Grace, and Nature, deeme our naturall Beautie, Haire, and feature best and comeliest: and none but Children, Licentious, Vaine, Lasciuious, and gracelesse persons vnderualue them, preferring these artificiall Curlings, Powdrings, Colourings, Embroide∣rings, and dres ings of the Head, the Haire, and Face before them. Therefore these naturall must needes bee best and comeliest: If therefore we would bee beauti∣full, and lo ely in good earnest, let vs rest contented with Natures wa d-robe, not adding art or culture to it: for feare wee offer violence vnto God himselfe, and put the Deuills varnish on his worke and Image. Fourthly, I answere; that an Effeminate, Womanish, and No e t or∣namentum vi∣rile cōci itas Seneca. Epist. 115. Vt orm cura non om∣nino negligen∣da, ita nimi anxiè curari parum viro dignum. Eras. de Educa . Pu∣erorum, p. 23. affected sprucenesse, or concinnitie, (especially, in Haire and excrements, the lowest and most inferiour parts, if parts of man,) is no Ornament, Grace, nor Comelinesse, but rather a deformitie, and disrespect to men: as being vnsuitable to their Magnanimous, Masculine, and Heroicke sexe. Fo ma viros neglect a decet. Ouid. de Art. Amandi. lib. 1. Pulchritudo neglect a magis quā affecta a a viros exornat. Bernard. de Ordine Vitae. Col. 1116. G. A neglected, naturall, an vnaf∣fected Beautie, Face, and Comelinesse, doeth most adorne, commend, and set out men: The onely meanes therefore for men to enhance, illustrate, and set out their Beautie, is to neglect it, not to seeke it, at least but in a moderate, carelesse, remisse, and vnaffected manner: so that this pretence of seeking Beautie, is but false and vaine. Fiftly, though 1 Sam. 16.12. Iob 42.15. Lam. 1.6. naturall Beautie be a gift of God, not wholy to bee slighted, because Gratior est pulchro veniens a corpore virtus. Virgil. AEnead. l. . S n Epist. 66. See B rn. de Ordine vitae. Co. 1115.1116 accordingly. it addes some luster to our Gifts, and Graces, being regulated and a tended with Chastitie, Modestie, M ekenesse, and Humilitie: No e t p l∣chritudo vera quae vitiorum habeat de o mitatem: Ambros. l. 5. in Luke 6. Tom. 3. p. 8. . Pulchrum ornatum mali more speiu caeno collinunt. Nequicquam exor ata est benè qua mo ata est malè. Plaut. Mostellaria. Act. 1. pag. 29. as our vices (on the other side,) doe staine obfuscate, and ble∣mish both it, and all externall cultures, and attires else: yet a Studious, Curious, Inordinate, and eager Affection of Beautie, (especially, by Effeminate, and Vnchristian Cul∣tures, Fashions, and Attires,) must needes bee Sin ull, and Abominable: yea, farre worse then Drunkennesse, and excesse of Wine ; if E riosum qui∣dem esse & vinosum, etsi sint magna vitia, non tamen tanta, quantum e t nimium sui ornandi studium. Ib. Paedag. l. 3. c. 2. Clemens Alexandrinus may bee cre∣dited: and that for these ensuing reasons: First, because See the Au∣thors quoted Pag. 1. & 2. Non de in∣tegra conscien∣tia v nit stu∣dium placendi per decorem, guem natura liter inuitato∣rem libidinis scim s. Tertul. De Cultu. Fae∣min cap. 2. Or∣namentorum insignia & le∣nocinia fuco∣rum, non nisi prostitutis & impudicis fa∣minis cōgruit: & nullarum ferè praeciosior cultus est, quā quarum pudor vilis est. Cyprian. De habi u. Virgin. Non est mulieris, sed meretricis illud nimium sui or∣nandi studium. Clem. Alex. Paed. l. 3. c. 2. it proceedes most commonly, from an Adulterous, Vn∣chast, an lastfull Heart, or Meretricious, and Whorish affecti∣on: For if it bee true of naturall Beautie, Rara est concordia formae at{que} pudicitiae: Iuuen. Sat. 10. Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae. Ouid. Epist. 1 5. Inter formam cor∣poris & animae ca titatem lis propè perpetua est. Rarissime forma pudicitiae con unctae est. Rar admodum orma insignis et honestas vno sub lare habitant. Petr. De Remed. vtr. Fort. l, 1. Dial. 65. l. 2. Dial. 1. that it is sel∣dome accompanied, or attended with Chastiti , and Continen∣cie: that it is Dignitas formae possidentibus grauis, appet n∣tibus exitiosa coniunctis periculosa, rentationibus exposita, scandalis circundata. Ter∣tul. De Cultu. Faem. cap 3. Fall t enim multos orma sine arte decens. Ouid. de Remed. Amor. l. 1 Forma castis damno mori us esse solet. Forma est gratior, sed gibbus est tuti∣or: Forma paucis ad vtilitatem, multis ad perniciem, nullis ad salutem veram{que} glo∣riam data est. Multos forma fecit adulteros, castum nullum. Petrarch. de Remed vtr. Fort. l. 1. Dial . & 6 l. 2. Dial. 1. Multis species eximia corporis pernici m attulit, & ipsis quo possident, & s qui specta t. Possessori so icitudinem, metum, suspitio∣nem, n iteriam peccan li, libi nis fomentum ac copi affert: S pudicus esse cu∣pit, oc ipso miser est: quod formosus: i impudicus est qui forma praecellit, quid tan∣dem debet suo bono, nisi vt facilius oreat? Eras de Rat. Con r. Epist. p. 43. commonly a baite, a snare, a Baud, a Pander, and strong alectiue vnto all incontinency: much more must it bee true of artificiall, and affe ted comelinesse, Le∣nocinia formae nunquam non prostituto corpori coniuncta & debita sunt. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 3. c. 3. See cap. 2. & 11. the badge and ensign of a common Harlot, or an Incontinent, and Lasciuious person: Non hab t cas itatem veram, quae intuentibus parat illecebram nec idem seruat Christo, quae populo magis quaerat placere quam span∣so. Fulgent. Epist. 3. ad Probam. Non computari iam potest inter puellas & virgines Christi, quaesic viui vt possit adam ri: Cypr. D Hab. Virg. He, or she, can neuer bee a chast and vndefiled virgine in the sight of God, who desires to bee a∣miable in the eyes of men: For though they doe not al∣wayes actually prostitute their bodies to the lusts of o∣thers, as most that doe affect an accurate, excessiue, or ar∣tificiall Beautie, in Crisping and adorning of their Haire and Faces doe: yet since they inamor and inescate others, and kindle a fire and flame of concupisence, and vnchast affecti∣ons in the hearts of many, who cast their eyes vpon them, by these meretricious cultures, and ouer-studious, and affected Countenances, Dressings, and Attires, which seeme to set their bodies out to sale; they cannot but bee guiltie of Quid alteri periculo sum ? Quid lli alteri co ∣cupiscentiam imp rt m ? quam si domi∣n ampliando legem a facto stupri non dis∣cernit in p na, nescio an im∣p e abea qui licui fuerit caus perditio∣nis. Perit enim ille si l in t ∣ f a si co ∣cupierit, et ad∣misit iam i animo quod co cupiuit, & fact es tu gl ∣diu illi; vt culpa vaces, ab inuidia non liberaueris. Ex∣pinga nos vt alteri pere∣ant, vbi est er∣go, diliges proximum tuum sicut eipsum? Tertul. de cultu Faem. c. 2. Si tu te sumptu∣osius comes & perpublicum nombiliter inceda , oculos i te iuuentutis illici , suspiri adolescentum post te trab , concupiscendi libidinem nutria , peccandi fomenta suc∣cendas, vt & ipsa non pereas, al os tamen perdas, & velut gladium te & venenu videntibus praebea , excusari non potes quasi mente casta sis ac pudica. Cypr. de habit. Virg. incontinencie in themselues, because they thus occasion it in others. Those who haue continent and chast affections, as they deeme this corporall, and out-side Vbi pudicitia, ibi vacua pulchritudo. Tertul. de Cult. Faem. cap. 2. Beautie a needelesse and superfluous thing: so they are so farre from seeking, or affecting it: that like that chast and beautifull Va∣ler. Maximus l. 6. cap. 1. Petrach. De Remed. vtr Fort. l. 2. Dial. 1. Erasm. De Rat. Con∣scrib Epist pag. 43. Pagan, they would rather Cum & nostra & aliorum causa versatur i studio pericu∣losissimum decoris iam non tantum conficta & elaborat libid nis suggestum recusa ∣dum est, sed etiam natur is speciositatis oblitterandum dissimulatione & incuri . Sancta faemina sit naturaliter speciosa, non adeò sit occasioni. Certe, si fuerit, non ig∣norare, sed etiam impedire se debet. T rtul. de Cult. Faem. c. 2.3. obscure, neglect, and quite deface their naturall Beauties, by inflicting wounds and scarres vpon their faces, to make them more deformed, for feare least others should be infatuated and insnared with them: then any wayes Curle, Crispe, Adorne, Embroider, or set out their Haire, and Faces, to their owne, or others preiu∣dice. See B.C. Beautie is no helpe nor furtherance, but a great impediment vnto chastitie: therefore this studious affecta∣tion of it, and inquirie after it, proceeds not from a con∣tinent or chast affection, but from a Lasciuious, Lust∣full, and Adulterous Heart: and so it cannot but be euill. Secondly, it must needes bee euill, because it flowes as from an Effeminate, and Vnchast, so likewise from a Proud, Vaineglorious, Carnall, Worldly, and selfe-seek∣ing Spirit, which aymes not at Gods glory, nor at its owne, or others good and welfare: There are none who seeke an artificiall Comelinesse, or transcendent Beautie, by altering, Colouring, Crisping, or adorning of their Heads, or Haire, or by any such like meanes, but doe it out of an inward, and secret Fa∣stus inest pulchris, sequitur{que} superbia formam. Ouid. Fast. l. 1. Forma quotaquae{que} super∣bit. d De Arte amandi. l. 3. Mulieres formosae plerun{que} superb Clerke De Aulico. l. 4. p. 244. Maximinu o etiam uit superbior, quo pulchitudine orat conspicuor. Op. merus Chronogr. p. 254. pride of Heart, of purpose to be proud, and blesse themselues, (as fond Cael. Rhod. Ant. Lect l. 26. cap. 21. Nar∣cissus did of old, and many idle Christians now, who make their Haire, and Face their Idoles:) in their owne Beauties, Skinnes, and Shadowes: and to Deifie, or A∣dore themselues, their Haire, their Heads, and Faces, like so many pettie Gods: Or else they doe it to winne re∣spect and praise, from Carnall, Gracelesse, and iniudicious persons, by seeming more Beautifull, and Louely to their sensuall eyes, then in themselues they are. Or out of a In. hoc cog∣noscimus quod seculum dili∣gim s, quia praeciosa vesti∣menta ama∣mus. Qui s e culum non di∣ligit pulchri∣tud nem corpo∣ris non quaerit. Bernard. de modo bene vi∣uendi Serm. 6. Worldly, Carnall, and selfe-seeking Heart, to please them∣selues, & others: to conforme themselues vnto the guise, and sinfull customes of the World, and Times, which Christians haue renounced in their Baptisme: or to pamper, humour, satisfie, and set out their proud, and sinfull flesh, Rom. 8.13. & 13.13. Gal. 5.24. Col. 3.5. which should bee Mortified, and Crucified, with all the inordinate Lusts, Affections, and Desires of it Or else they vse it out a meere Fantastique, Singular, and Vaineglorious Humour, as In his Cha∣racter of a Phantastique. Sir Thomas Ouerbury, hath well obserued: who makes this, the very Character of a Phantastique, or improuident young Gallant: to study by the discretion of his Barber, to Frizle like a Baboone: three such (saith he,) would keepe three of the nimblest Barbers in the Towne from weauing Net-garters: for when they haue to doe with him, they haue many Irons in the fire. These are the proper, true, and onely rootes, the ends, and springs from which this search, this labour, and iniquirie after Beautie, Fairenesse, or Complexion flowes: these are the maine and chiefest reasons, for which our Men, or Women Nouris , Colour, Frizle, Powder, or set out their Haire: Now these are Sinfull, Odious, and Vn∣lawfull. Therefore we must not Nourish, Curle, Powder, Colour, Embroider, or set out our Haire, of purpose to Diuulge, Enhance, or blaze our Beautie, (which in trueth, In sola ani∣ma pulchritu∣do & turpitu∣do apparent & ideò is solus vere pulcher est, qui est vir∣tute praeditus. Clem. Alexan. Pae ag. l. 2. c 12. Pulchritudo tua sit bona vita. Stude it aque placere Christo, non prae∣ciosis vestibus, sed bonis moribus: non pulchritudine carnis, sed pulchritudine mentis Bernard. De Mod. Bene viuendi: Serm 9. Illis ampla satis f rma pudicitia. Tibullus: Elig. l. 1. Elig 2. consists in Grace, in Holinesse, and in a well-spent Life, and not in Haire, in Face, in Skinne, or Super∣ficies,) as this obiection, or vaine excuse pretends: Gods glory, our owne, and others reall, true, and spiri∣tuall good, should bee the end, and ayme of all our acti∣ons: Let vs alwayes eye, intend, and minde this blessed end in all our wayes; and then wee shall not seeke for corporall, f eeting, nor externall Beautie, which betrayes, and wrackes the Soules of many, but brings no solid, true, nor reall good to any. You haue heard and seene now Christian Readers, the birth and pedigree; the beginning, growth, and end: together with the vnlawfulnesse, vanitie, effeminacy, and vndecency of Loue-lockes: You see how they thwart the Lawes of God, and Nature, and the Tonsure, Cut, and custome of our Countrey: you haue heard and read, what vncontrouleable, and conuincing arguments haue beene produced, to prooue them to be Odious, Lasciui∣ous, Vncomely, and Vnlawfull, Toyes, and Vanities; which bring no glory at all to God, nor Ornament, Grace, or good to Men in any kinde: to bee such infalli∣ble Characters of Leuitie, Vanitie, Lasciuiousnesse, Pride, Effeminacy, and Vaineglory, as misbeseeme not onely Gracious, and holy Christians, but likewise the more Temperate, and Ciuill sort of carnall Men: to bee things of ill report among the Grauest, Best, and Wisest ranke of Christians, Non despici∣at quid de se vnusquisque, & maximè vir bonus sen∣tiat. Nam ne∣gligere b no∣rum iudici vel arrogan∣tiae, vel disso∣lutionis est. Ambr. De. Of∣ficijs lib. 1. cap. 47. whose iudgements ought not to b slighted: You haue h ard and seene what the Fathers, and Mo∣derne Authors haue concluded of extraordinary long Haire, and so of Loue-lockes; how they haue passed a doome, and sentence of condemnation on them: For of trueth, De Sacerdoti Barbis. fol. 17. saith Iohn Valerian, a great Clearke of Italy,) to nourish the bushes, or the Haire, is the fashion of Women; or else of such men, as liue delicately, and vnchast: for the long Haired people were euer esteemed both of the Greekes, and Latines for a token of foule lust, and filthie liuing: And for my owne part, I neuer heard as yet of any Laudable, Honest, Lawfull, Iust, or sound Apologie, or Iustificati∣on, that might, or could be pleaded for them; but onely these absurd pretences, which I haue here refuted, and defeated. I beseech you therefore by that homage, due∣tie, and respect which you owe to God, and Nature; and by that reuerence and submission, which you yeeld vnto the opinions and iudgements of the Fathers, and the Best, the Wisest, Grauest, Holiest, and most iudici∣ous Christians: by that conformitie, and regularitie, you owe vnto the Ancient, Laudable, and decent Habit, Fashion, Tonsure, Guise, and custome of your owne Countrey, and Nation, of whose Cut, and Tonsure, you See Mr. Per∣kins his Cases of Conscience. lib. 3. Sect. 3. Quest. 3. See Page 27. ought not, you neede not bee ashamed: by the loue and care you beare vnto your Names, and Credits, a∣mong the Best, and Wiser sort; and by the good, and happinesse you wish vnto your Soules at last, which Loue-lockes will inuolue, and merge in sinne: by that sacred Vow, and Couenant, which you haue solemnely made to God, and Sealed, or Subscribed in your very Baptisme: Euen to forsake the Deuill and all his Workes, the Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinfull Lusts of the Flesh : (in all which these Loue-lockes haue their part, and share:) and by that Ioy, and Heauen∣ly consolation, which you hope, and long for at your Deaths; when all the Powdring, Curling, Cost, and Time, which you haue vainely, and prodigally cast away vpon your Haire, and Loue-lockes, will prooue but Gall, but Horror, Shame, yea, Anguish, Griefe, and Bitter∣nesse to your Soules: that you would now at last aban∣don, and vtterly renounce the nourishing, vse, and wea∣ring of these Lasciuious, Singular, Vaineglorious, Vnna∣turall, and Vnlouely Loue-Locke, (which God, and Na∣ture, which all Good, all Holy, Graue, and ciuill Men, both now, and heretofore; as also the Vse, and Ancient practise of our Countrey doe condemne:) together with that Lasciuious, Odious, Effeminate, and Vnchristian Frizling, Colouring, Platting, Frouncing, or Delicate, and curious Composition, and Videte n Fragrātia ca∣pitis faetorem vit praestet. Diog. Laert. l. 6. Diogenes. Powdring of the Haire, which oft times make mens liues to stinke ; and doe now so farre ingrosse the thoughts of many, both of our Male, and Female sexe: that they can finde no spare, nor lea∣sure time, to Dresse, Adorne, or Beautifie, their Vgly, Filthy, Naked, Poore, and vnadorned Cu tuam p ci fi reb i pi ∣gu & a ∣n , quam p st pauc s dies ve mes d uo∣raturi sun i sepulc o: ani∣m ver t ∣am no ad ∣nas, b ni p ∣rib , qua De & A geli praesenta ∣da est in c li ? Quare tuam vil p ∣dis, & i c ∣nem praponi Domi am au∣cillari, & au∣cillam d mina∣ri, mag a ∣sio st. Bernard. Meditat. c. 3. Soules, (which lye Rotting, and stinking in the dregg s of Sinne, as if they were things of nought:) that so, you may with all humble∣nesse, and sinceritie of Heart, and minde, and all low∣linesse, and feruency of Spirit, euen set, and bend your selues to seeke, and serue the Lord vnfainedly in all things: and demeane your selues in such a Gracious, Modest, Humble, Holy, Blamelesse, Exemplary, Deuout, and Christian manner, as may Adorne the Gospel of Ie∣sus Christ, and Beautifie that outward profession, and practise of Religion, which you haue formerly tainted, and defamed by your Vaine, Lasciuious, Proud, Luxuri∣ous, Ruffianly, Gracelesse, and Vnchristian conuersati∣on: It was a receiued vse and custome heretofore, for men in times of Griefe, of Sorrow, and Affliction, to poll their Heads, and cut their Haire, as Athena Dipnos. l. 12. c. . Herodoti Cli . p. 33. Pla∣tonis Phado . Homer . Iliad. lib. 23 Diodo∣rus Sic: Bibl. Hist: l. 1. Sect. 84. Suetonii Caeligula. Sect. 5. Apulei : De Aure Asino. l. 29 Bede. Eccles. Hist. Angl. l. 4. cap. 19. Boemus l. 1. c. 5. Alex ab Alex l 3. c. 7. Coelius R od Antiqu. Lect. l. 7. c. 23. l 17. c. 21. Polydor. Virgil. De Inuentor. Rer. l. 6. c. 9. Purchas Pilgr. l. 5. c 9.10. Ludouicus Pa∣triciu l. 5. c. 7. Authors, and the Iob. 1.20. Isay. 7.20. & 15.2 Ier. 7.29. & 16 48.37. Ezech. 7.1 . & 27.31. Amos 8.10. Mich. 1.16. Scriptures testifie: Beloued, these times wherein wee liue, which way soeuer we turne our selues, are times of Griefe, of Sorrow, Misery, Trouble, and Affliction; which sommon vs to Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning, to Bald∣nesse, and Sackcloth: Let vs therefore take occasion from the present time, to clip, cut off, cashere, and vt∣terly relinquish, our Vaine, our Rus ianly, Singular, Effe∣minate, and vncomely Loue-Lockes, and excessiue Haire; together with all false, or borrowed excrements, or artificiall Crispings, wreathings, Colourings, Pow∣drings, and ouer-curious Cultures, and Compositions of our Haire; (which See Page. 49. God himselfe, which Councells, Fathers, and Moderne Diuines; yea, Pagan Authors haue condemned:) that so we may with broken Hearts, and contrite Spirits, vnfainedly abase our Soules before the Lord, to diuert those Fatall, Heauy, Sad, and dolefull Iudgements, which are now approaching toward vs, and euen ready for to seise, and prey vpon vs for our many sinnes: whereof our Pride, our Vanitie, our Wan∣tonnesse, and Effeminacy in Haire, and Apparell, are not the least. If we refuse this counsell and aduice, which the vicinitie, and neeren sse of Gods Iudgements, doe euen force, and pr sse vpon our Hearts: and still proceed, to Nourish, Decke, set out, and Crispe our Haire, and Loue-Lockes, Cur decoras quod mox foe∣dandum est? Cur depingis quod necesse est conculcari? Quid ibi va∣lent venustae formae, vbi pul∣uere maculan∣tur assiduo? Bern. ad Gul: Abbatem: A∣pologia. or our corruptible, base, and crazie bodies, which will bee turned into dust and ashes, and troden vnder foot ere long: spending more time, more thoughts, and cost vpon them, then vpon our Soules, which is the case of many: If wee intrude, and thrust our selues into the very House, and presence of our Glorious, Great, and holy God, so Frounced, Curled, Powdred, Perfeumed, Painted, and Adorned, as if we came to Church of pur∣pose to out-face, and dare the Lord: to Daunce, and not to Pray: to Feast, and not to Fast: to Laugh, and not to Weepe: Spectatum veniunt, veni∣unt spectentur vt ipsa. Ouid. de Arte Aman∣di. lib. 1. Quid pu in his omnibus queri∣tur? P niten∣tium compun∣ctio, an intuē∣tium admira∣tio? Bernard. ad Gul. Abb. Apolog. to See, and to bee Seene, and not to Heare: to shew our Selues, our Cloathes, our Iewels, our Haire, our Beautie, our Pride, our Vanitie, and Effeminacie vnto men: but not our Hearts, our Pietie, our Deuotion, our Humilitie, and Repentance vnto God, as Chrys. Hom. 8. in 1 Tim. 2. Theophylact: in 1 Tim. 2. the Fa∣thers phrase it: If we place our Pietie, and Deuotion in our Cloathes, and Haire, and thinke our selues Eo creditur sanctior quo coloratior. Ber∣nard. ad Gul. Abb. Apolog. Holiest, when our Cloathes, and Haire sit neatest: If we Se pie sacrifi∣casse opinātur, si cutem lauerint. Lanctantius de Iustitia. l. 5. c. 20. thinke we haue done God good seruice, when wee haue but washed our Skinnes, and tricked vp our Heads and Haire, to come and shew our selues in the Church, about the latter end of Prayers or Sermon, of purpose to Dum orantium in se retor∣quent aspectum, impediunt & affectum. Et magis mi antur pulchrae, quam veneran∣tur sacra. Bern. ad Gul. Abb. Apol. Col. 10 c 3. Qui ad Ecclesiam non venit impieta tis reu est, qui sic venit sacrilegii. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 8 p. 284. draw the Eyes, and Hearts of others after vs, and so to withdraw them quite from God: Ociosa sedēt depictae ad spe∣ctaculum. Clē. Alex. Paedag. lib. 3. c. 2.11. If wee take more care and paines to adorne our Heads, and Faces, for the view of others, then to pre∣pare, and fit our Hearts, and Soules by Prayer, and Me∣ditation for God, and for his Ordinances; as alas, too many Idolatrous, and selfe-seeking Christians doe in these our dayes, who adore no other Deitie, but their Haire, their Heads, their Faces, Cloathes, and borrowed Beautie: Wee haue then no other hope but this; that God will loathe our persons, and our Prayers too: and Quo tò di∣utiu Deu n expectat, vt ∣mendam , tanto districti∣u iudicabit, s neglexeri Bernard. Me∣dita . cap. . powre out the very dregges, and fulnesse of his wrath, and fury on vs, to our finall ruine. Let this then, cause vs to renounce, abhorre and loathe these Sinfull, Odious, Vnchri∣stian, Lasciuious, and vnlouely Vanities. BERNARDI. Meditationes, cap. 11. Omnia quae ad vsum vitae accepimus, ad vsum culpae conuer∣timus: Quapropter iustum est, vt qui in cunctis pec∣cauimus, in cunctis feriamur. FINIS.