The sweete thoughts of death, and eternity. Written by Sieur de la Serre Douces pensées de la mort. English La Serre, M. de (Jean-Puget), ca. 1600-1665. The sweete thoughts of death, and eternity. Written by Sieur de la Serre Douces pensées de la mort. English La Serre, M. de (Jean-Puget), ca. 1600-1665. Hawkins, Henry, 1571?-1646. Of the svveet Thoughtes of Death. CHAP. I. T HERE are no sweeter Thoughtes, then those of Death. Spirits being ray∣sed to the knowledge of Diuine thinges, do euer occupy themselues in co∣unting the tyme of their banishment in this strange Land, where we sigh vnder the burden of our Euils. Sla∣ues liue not, but of the hope to see themsel∣ues at liberty: their prisons and their irons are obiects, both of horrour and dread, which put their soules vpon the racke. The Sun shines not for them at all, and all the sundry pleasures agreable to their senses changing their nature, serue but to afflict them. So as in their captiuity, they breath the ayre of a dying lyfe, whose moments last for ages. We are those slaues so enchai∣ned within the prison of our bodies, as exi∣led from the paradise of our delights, where the first innocency of our parents, had esta∣blished vs a Mansion: so true it is, their dis∣obedience hath changed our bodies into pri∣sons, and the delightes of our Soules into thraldome. What feelings then, may we haue in this seruile condition, whereunto we are brought, but those of an extreme dolour, and bitter sorrow, to see our selues depriued of the Soueraygne God, where Soules do find the accomplishment of their rest? The harts being holily enamoured, speake so sweet a language both of sighes & sobbs, in the absence of that they loue, as if the Angels were touched with enuy, they would desire to learne it, to make therof a new Canticle of glory in their Eternity. Of all the dolours that may tyrannize a soule, such as know what it is to loue, find not a more intollerable, then that of the absence of the Subiect with they loue perfectly indeed. And if it be true, that af∣fections draw their force from their merit, what should our loue be towards this Saui∣our, whose perfection so wholy adorable, cannot brooke comparison but with thēsel∣ues. And how be it this great God be infinit∣ly louely, yet would he needs be borrowing a hart of nature, to resent the draughts of our loue, & to dye on the Crosse of their woun∣dings. What excesse of goodnes? How may they resist the sweet strokes of his mercy? He espouses our Condition, for to suffer all the miseryes therof; (sinne and ignorance on∣ly remayning without power agaynst his person) in so much as dying, he changed the countenance of death, and makes it so be∣autifull, as generous harts at this tyme, sigh not, but in expectation of their last sigh, since euen the selfsame moments that lead vs to the Tombe, conduct vs also to immor∣tality. The paynes which my Sauiour hath suf∣fered on Mount Caluary, haue beene fruit∣full to bring forth diuers punishments, in fauour of the infinite number of Martyrs, who loued not life, but to ressent it's death. His Nayles haue forged them others of that sort. His Thornes haue thence produced new Thornes; and the forme of his Crosse hath made them to inuent some others of the lyke; and the turning vpside downe of his, hath serued S. Peter for a Couch to dye in. For ioy rather, then of payne, I would say, that all the deadly instruments of the passion of my Redeemer haue beene the prepara∣tiues of the Triumph, that a million of sou∣les haue carryed away in their Martyrdom. The Scourges haue been for S. Bartholomew, the Nayles for S. Andrew, the Sword for S. Paul, the wounds for S. Francis, and the Crosse serues on earth, for a new subiect of Enuy, for the whole world togeather, since that euery one can pretend no better then to this glory to sacrifice his life, vpon the same Aultar, where the Authour of life hath beene immolated. O how the amourous plaintes of that great Apostle make all to resound with a sweet melody! Me thinkes the sweet accēts of his cryes do euē rauish my Spirit through mine eares. The tyme of my lyfe is too long (sayd he in the strength of his Passion) I am troubled to reckon vp the moments of it's durance. When shall it be, that I shall liue forth of my selfe, to go to liue in him, whom I loue much better then my selfe? Quite contrary to those guilty Soules, who stand discoursing of death as of a losse, where he desires it for recompence: So as the Sun had neuer a fayre day for him, and Nature so beautifull in its diuersities, and so fruitfull to bring forth so many wonders, was bar∣ren for his contentment; in so much as the obiects of his pleasures was quite without the world: and yet through a Miracle wor∣thy of him, he liued, and dyed of Loue at once. O sweet Life! But yet more happy death! The Swan after she hath measured diuers tymes, the humide spaces of the ban∣ckes, euen tyred out with lyuing, calles for death vnto her succour, with accents of melody, so sweet and so pittifull withall, as that it cannot choose but then, euen yield to the assaults of Compassion. This bird be∣ing richly dressed vp with innocency, pro∣claymes the truth of her Death to Forrests, to Champaygnes, and to Rockes by the sad accents of her tunefull notes, whose har∣mony doth rauish all those, that haue sen∣se of feeling in them, and giues them a de∣sire to dy with her. This Diuine Apostle, dying on the shore of his teares, represents to vs this bird. For being now weary to liue so long tyme absented from his lyfe, he sends vp his amourous sighs to Heauen∣wards, & with a voyce full of allurements, cryes out, how he desires to abandon his body, for to go, to behould the God of his Soule. The harmony of his cryes, so pow∣erfully attracts the harts vnto him, as all those who are able to heare but the Eccho of it, and to perceyue i'ts sweetnesse, doe borrow wings of al sides to fly out of them∣selues, while the Earth is in contempt with them. You Soules of the world, I inuite you heere to hearken to this Consort of Musike, where the Angells hold their part; but you must purify your senses, if you wilbe rauished with Pleasure, and Ioy. What Pleasure it is to thinke of Death. CHAP. II. A TRAVAILLER strayed from his way, and puzled in the full of the night, within a thicke forrest, finds himselfe on a sud∣den brought into streights, through a thou∣sand assaults of feare, wherwith his Soule is strooken. He casts his eyes on euery side, but sees nothing but shadowes of horrour which presage the sun-set of his life. The noyse of the impetuous winds that puts a garboyle into the boughes, beate so rough∣ly on his eares, as he breathes but in a dead∣ly feare, more intollerable well nigh then death. His imagination being troubled, lets him see in dreame, in the midst of the dark∣nes, as many precipices, as the steppes he makes on his way. In so much as he belie∣ues euery momēt he is buryed quick in some pit or other, with the whole burden of his e∣uils. The feare of being deuoured by the sa∣uage beasts, makes him to apprehend a new punishment, whose dolour redoubles euer∣more, through the sensible apparence of some euident danger. The heauens & earth being hid alike from his eyes within obscu∣rity, for remedy represent to him despaire, & in effect, his Iudgement being now stupid with terror, hath not the liberty of discourse but to conclude vpon his losse, al things the while cōtributing to his most disaduantage. Himselfe sees not himselfe awhit, as if al∣ready he were quite besides himselfe; & the little sense he hath left him, serues him but to suffer euils, which in their excesse do rob him of his speach. Thus brought to this extremity, where death is more present with him then life, since he wholy dyes and liues but to halfes; he lifts now at last his eyes to Heauen∣wards, where he discryes a ray of light to disclose through the birth of the Aurora, which serues him as a Beakon or Watch to∣wer to remit him into the path of his way which he had lost. The day by little & little makes the shadowes of death, with enui∣rone him, to vanish out of sight, & with the hope of lyuing, affoards him the contentmēt to behold the precipices which he hath es∣caped: in so much as he arriues to the places of his desires with a great deale more plea∣sure then he felt paine. Let vs now say, We are these Trauay∣lours, wandering in the thicke Forrest of this world, during the darknes of Synne, which enwraps vs one euery side. The winds of temptations bluster without cease in our eares; euery stepp we seeme to make forwards, leads vs into the Tombe, since we dye euery houre; and the abysses are al∣wayes open to swallow vs vp, as culpa∣ble of a thousand sortes of crimes. Being brought to this estate, the Heauen hides it selfe from our eyes, as not able to pretend awhit for it's glory: So as being oppressed with diuers disasters, we breath the ayre of a lyfe, full of annoyes, and of vnsufferable afflictions. The light of Eternity, which shines to vs in the port of the Sepulcher, is this good∣ly Aurora, whose day disperses the shadowes of our night for euer. What contentment to arriue at this port amidst so many stornes? What happinesse to enioy the brightnes of a Sun, which is not subiect to Eclypses, af∣ter so many tedious nights? We are all Pil∣grimes, who continually trauayle, from this world into the other. The darknes of sinne is the shadow of our bodies, since they accompany vs without cease. What incom∣parable felicity, to go forth of our selues, to find out that day which should illumine vs eternally? What may we desire in Slauery, but Liberty? In darknes, but light? and in Trauayle, but Rest? This earth is a prison, let vs neuer thinke then, but to recouer our liberty. This vnlucky dwelling is a place of obscurity, let vs gape after the light. This fatall Mansion, is fertile onely but with thornes and troubles, let vs get forth of it's bounds, to fynd the true tranquillity: and according as we shall approach to the good of death, so shall we distance our selues frō the euils of lyfe. O sweet death where our miseries termine themselues▪ O cruell life, where our disa∣sters take their begining! O welcome death where our annoyes do find their sepulcher! O dread life where our dolours find their cradle! The most afflicted draw al their cō∣solation from the hope of death. Are we not of this number, as subiect to all the disgraces of Lot, and to the cruell lawes of Fortune? With what sweeter hope may we mitigate our paynes, then with that of a speedy brea∣king the chaynes of our captiuity? If we dyed not euery houre, there would be no contentment to liue. For what likelyhood is there that a trauailour should take any pleasure to stop in the midst of his way, du∣ring the tyme of a storme? Now the world is neuer without tempests: What remedy were it to make a stop at a flash of lighte∣ning, or a cracke of Thunder, in the midst of the way of our life? Being pressed with a storme, and encom∣passed with Rockes, shall we not be sēding our desires before hand to the port, with this griefe, for not hauing wings to fly more swiftly thither? So as if the ship of our life, cannot land but at the shore of the sepulcher, is it not at this port whither we are to aspire euery moment, to put vs in the Lee from Shipwrackes, whereof so many wise Pilots haue runne hazard? I haue no feare but of old age, said Zenon, For of all euils, that of life is the most intollerable. In effect, if we thinke on the diuers torments, that pull a∣way our life, by little and little from vs, we should be of Socrates his opinion, who of all the momēts of our life, prizeth none but the last. O happy moment▪ & irkesome to those that go before! I am troubled (said Dauid ) in the house of men: when shall I arriue into that of my Lord ? He was alwaies going thither, but the way seemed so long and tedious to him, as he sighed continually after the end of his iourney. All things tend to their Center; the Stones being raysed from the earth, do borrow wings to their weighty nature, to descend downe beneath, where they alwayes haue their looke. The Riuers, though insensi∣ble are touched with this amourous curio∣sity to reuisite continually their Mother. And the Piramidall flames of fire do witnes they burne, but with desire of ioyning thē∣selues with their first beginning. And how∣beit their endeauours are vnprofitable, yet haue they neuer other scope. The Heauen is our Center; with what more violent passi∣ons may we be quickned then with that of being rauisht from our selues, to ioyne as A∣tomes to their vnity, & as rayes to the body of their light? Those Torches of the night whose number is infinite, and beauty incō∣parable, not so gallātly shew vs their twin∣ckling baytes, but to enthrall vs with their wonders. They shine not to vs, but to shew vs the way of their Azure vaults, as being the only place of our repose. And it seemes the galloping course of the Sunne, goes not so turning the great globe of the Heauens▪ but to shew the way from aloft vnto the In∣habitants of the Earth. If some one had the gift of prophecy, & that it were foretold vs, in a certaine tyme set downe, that we were to possesse an ample fortune, be it of goods or greatnesse, all transitory a like; were it not credible, the day of this attendance would be to vs of a long put-off? How many sighes, as wit∣nesses of our languours, should we be sen∣ding forth, before this felicity so promised? The greatest dolour we could possibly suf∣fer, would be but of impatience; for through force of passionately desiring this good, all sorts of euils would be insensible to vs. The Sunne that posts so swift would then go sluggishly, and its diligence could not stay vs a whit, from accusing it of slouth, as often as we gazed vpon Heauen. Let vs now consider, the mystery of this Proposition, and say, that our Sauiour and the King of Prophets hath giuen vs this assurance from his mouth, that the last in∣stant of our lyfe shalbe the first of our im∣mortality; and so on the day of our death, should we possesse an infinite number of felicityes, be they in immortall goods, be they in the greatnesses of nature it selfe. From what sweet disquietnesses, might we seeme to be exempt in the expectation of this happines? The holy Soules who breath in this world the ayre of grace, liue not, but of the ioy they haue of continually dying. With how many sighes of loue, and lan∣guour, smite they Heauen at all houres? All the fayre dayes the Sun affoards them to their eyes▪ seeme to be so sad & lowring, as hardly do they marke the differēce between the light and darknes, because they loue but the eternall dayes, which are to shine to the birth of their felicity. And this is the day of death, where ceasing to be men, we begin to be as Angels. S. Frauncis wounded on all sides with a thousand darts of loue, sighes in the pre∣sence of his Mayster, for griefe that he can∣not dye of his wounds. He contemplates the wounds of his Redeemer, and his loo∣kes haue this Diuine vertue with them, as o make his soule to ressent the smart. And through the force of his sweet torments, the amorous passion wherewith he is taken ma∣kes him to ressent the dolours of his May∣ster, in so much as the markes thereof them∣selues are imprinted in his stigmatized Body hen it is, that soowning with ioy, extasied with pleasure, and rauished with a thousand orts of felicityes wholy Diuine, he seque∣sters himselfe from the earth, to approach vnto Heauen. He feeles himselfe to dye of loue, without being able notwithstanding to loose his lyfe: for though his wounds be mortall, since all termine at the hart, yet their cause is immortall. So as dying in his lyfe, and liuing in his death, he dyes, he ly∣ues, without dying, and without lyuing. Of dying, what apparence, since he is sunke in the spring of lyfe? Of lyuing who would belieue it? Let vs then say, that if he dye, it is of a Death a thousand tymes more sweet then lyfe; and if he liue, it is of a lyfe of extasy, which feeles nothing of the hu∣mane. This sweet Saint, seeing himselfe vnder the wound of the bloud of his Maister, be∣lieued verily he should make shipwracke, through force of desiring the same, in so goodly a sea, whose tempests were so much the more gratefull to him, as loue serued it selfe of his sighes, to driue away the storme. And in truth, how could he loose himselfe in the presence of his Sauiour, whose Crosse serues him, as well for a watch-tower, as for a Hauen in the midst of the torments, which his wounds haue caused to grow in him? He would feygne haue found some rocke, within this sea of loue; but the Pi∣lot who steeres the ship of his life, is a Port of assurance for all the world; since he cō∣mands the winds and tempests. What pleasure needs must this great Saint take, to see himselfe thus smitten with the selfe same woūds of his Maister? The Crosse fayles him; howsoeuer yet he hath it in the hart. The Crowne of Thornes he misseth; but what say I? he weares it in his Soule. But then at least, he seemes not to be de∣priued, but of Nayles and Gaule? I de∣ceiue my selfe. For as for the nayles he ca∣ryes the markes thereof, as well in hands, feet, as side; and for gaule, the tongue ta∣kes very greedily the sweet bitternes therof. O great Saint thrice happy! Tel vs the plea∣sure which is to dye, since you dy so sweet∣ly in the extasies of your felicities? How irksome needs must life be to you, and the earth be in contempt with you, in this trās∣portation of ioy, wherunto you are ray∣sed? S. Stephen hath beheld the Heauens ope∣ned; and you his hart, who hath created them. S. Paul hath seene so admirable things as might not be tould; and you felt such de∣licious as cannot be expressed. S. Peter hath beene dazeled through a beame of glory; & you by one of loue, whose light hauing pierced your darksome body, hath made it transparent to the eyes of all the world: so communicating it's diuine qualityes there∣into, as the markes therof remayne eternal. S. Iohn hath slept vpon the bosome of his Maister; and by a sweet transport your hart got through, and sought, within the bo∣some of his hart, your most assured repo∣se. This same disciple hath beene a witnesse of his torments; and you participant of his paynes, with this glory yet moreouer, of bearing as well the wounds in the Soule as the markes on the body. So as your fauours are so deare, as none dare enuy them for fear of presumption, though otherwise they be most worthy of enuy. I wonder the thoughts of Death should be displeasing, since we dye with pleasure in the life we lead. There are none so blind in the knowledge of themselues, that know not how they dy euery houre; were it not iust then, that we should thinke vpon that which we are continually a doing? And wherefore shall we not take pleasure at this thought, if it be the most profitable & sweet that we are able to conceiue? It is impos∣sible to thinke of death, but we must needs be thinking of Eternall life which succeds the same: or rather say we, It is impossible to thinke of the Soueraigne God, and not to thinke of the imaginary euill of death. And where shall we be finding of thoughts both sweeter and deerer, then those of our Soueraigne Good? So as if, for the raysing of our spirits thither, we are to passe into the imaginations and idea's of death; the light of the Sunne which shal serue vs for obiect, shall disperse all those vayne shaddowes, which subsist not but through a false opiniō. The starre of the day, neuer shewes more bewtifull thē when it hath escaped, through flight, from a shole of clouds which do hide its light. Those obscure clouds, so strongly relieue the flash of its light, as thence it ap∣peares to be radiant in excesse. The like may we say of our Reason, being as the Sunne of our life, that from the tyme it escapes from all these vayne shadowes of feare and dread, which do veyle its brightnes; it appeares so shining, as it serues for a torch to passe very confidently withall, from this life to the o∣ther. The Will loues but the Good; it is the Needle that is alwayes a pointing at this Pole. It is the Iron, which incessantly fol∣lowes this Adamant, as its only obiect: In such sort, as we are not capable of loue, but to purchase the good which is presented vn∣to vs, be it false, imaginary, or true. And therin is iudgement giuen vs to know the difference, that is from the one, and the o∣thers. Now, that life is a false good, there may no doubt be made, since it hath no other foundation in it, then misfortunes & my∣series. That it is an imaginary good, we are enforced to belieue, whiles its pleasures are but of fancyes and dreames. But that death is a true good, we are to hould for certaine, since it is the end of the terme of our exile, of our captiuity, of our sufferances. For we cannot enter into glory but by the gate of the tombe, where being reduced to our no∣thing, we returne to our first beginning. Sweet then are the thoughtes, which make the life fastidious and death pleasing; & yet more sweet the desires, that termine all our hopes in Heauen. Such as know not the Art of dying well & diliciously, are vnwor∣thy to liue. Impatience in the expectation of death, is more sensible to a holy Soule, then the greatest pleasures to a man of the world. We cannot loue life, but in cherish∣ing the fatall accidents, that are inseparable from it, which made Terence to say, That he lo∣ued not any thing, of all that which was in him, but the hope of a speedy dying. In effect, there is no greater consolarion in life, then that of death. For were it im∣mortall, with all the encombrances that cleaue vnto it, of all the conditours that are found in nature, that same of man would prooue to be the most vnfortunate. The af∣flicted loue not, but by the sweet expecta∣tion of death, and the others of the hope of a second life, with reason imagining with themselues, that if on earth they be touched with some pleasure, they shalbe one day ac∣complished in Heauen with al desirable de∣lights. And through the good of our death it is, that we possesse the soueraigne good of eternall life. It is the entry of our felicity, & the passage from the false and imaginary, to the true and alwayes permanent. He is yet vnborne, whose hart being glutted with al sorts of contentments, hath neuer gaped af∣ter new pleasures. There is not a Soule in the world, how happy soeuer it thinke it selfe, that points not its pretensions beyond that same which it possesseth. We hold it good to be rich, our desires are alwayes in chase of Good. We are raysed to the top of the greatest digni∣ties; we build new Thrones in our imagina∣tion, not finding on earth scope inough to satisfy our Ambition withall. In so much as mā hath alwaies vnrest in the repose, which he hath once proposed to himselfe; which makes vs sensibly to perceiue, that the obiect of our desires, is forth of nature; and that if we sigh in the midst of our felicityes, it can be but of the hope we haue to possesse some greater then they. We haue lyued long inough then, in Tantalus his Hel, where we are continually a thirst, without being euer able to drinke. We must be vsing of some violence with our selues, and go couragiou∣sly before death, since it is that which with∣houldes this second life from vs, wherein abides the accomplishment of our happines. To dye, is but to cast into the wynd the last sigh of our miseries. To dye, is but to make a partition of our selues, commending the body to the Earth, & the Soule vnto Hea∣uen. To dye, is but to bid a last adieu to the world, preferring the company of Angels before that of men. To dye, is to be no more vnhappy. To dye, is to despoyle vs of our in∣firmities, and to reuest vs with a nature ex∣empt from sufferances. O sweet death, since it leades vs to the spring of life! O sweet death, since it giues vs the Eternity of glory in exchange of a moment of dolour! O sweet death, since it makes vs to reuiue for euer, in a felicity immortall! O yee Soules of the world, thinke then alwayes of death, if you will tast with plea∣sure, the sweetnes of life. For it shalbe euen in this last moment, where you shal receiue the Crowne of all the others; you may sigh long inough in your chaynes, you are neuer like to be delyuered thence, if death come not to breake the gates of your prison. Go before it then, and carry in your counte∣nance the desire of meeting it, rather then a feare to be touched with it. We should suf∣fer with a good cheere, that same which we must of necessity endure. What say I endure? Were it a payne, to approach to the end of ones euils? Were it a payne to become for e∣uer exempt from their sufferances? Let vs rather say, a Contentment, since thereby do we get forth of sadnes, to enter into ioy. Let vs call it a Happines, since so we do a∣bandone the dwelling of misfortunes, to liue eternally in that of the felicities of Hea∣uen. That there is no contentment in the world, but to thinke of Death. CHAP. III. D EATH hath it's delights, as well as Lyfe. Iob was neuer more happy, nor more content then at such tyme, as he saw himselfe vpon the Throne of his dunghill, oppressed vnder the burden of his miseries. He dyed so deliciously in the depth of his dolours, as he would haue suf∣fered alwayes, and haue dyed incessantly in that manner. His wounds serued him as a mirrour to his loue. For in looking there∣into, he became amourous of himselfe; but yet loued he not himselfe, but to dye con∣tinually: so pleasing was death vnto him, therby to obey him who had imposed that law vpon him. Loue changes the nature of things. From the tyme that a Soule is chast∣ly taken with this passion, it neuer suffers for the subiect which it loues. The paynes and torments therof are changing the name & quality within the hart. They are Roses rather then Thornes. For if it sigh, it is of ioy and not of payne: if it be necessary to dy, to conserue this louely cause of its life, it is no death to it, but a meere rap of contentment which seuers it from it selfe, in fauour of another selfe, which its loues more then it selfe: In such wise, as it begins to liue con∣tent, from the point it begins to dye in; or rather to take its flight, towards the obiect it hath proposed to it selfe, of the full per∣fection of its loue. From this goodly verity, do I draw this lyke consequence. That the hearts wounded with diuine loue do neuer sigh in their torments, but of the apprehension they haue of their short durance: & Death, which to vs seemes so foule and deformed, vpon the sudden, changing it's countenan∣ce, in their respect appeares a thousand ty∣mes more beautifull then lyfe. Whence it is, that they are alwayes thinking thereon, to to be alwayes content; since it is the point where their paynes do termine, & where their felicityes begin. The most pleasing thoughtes, which our spirit can tell which way to conceyue, can haue no other obiect then that of contentment, of profit, and of vertue; in so much as they are the three sorts of goods whereto our will is tyed. Now, where shall we find more plea∣sure then in the thought of death, since it is the great day of our Fortune, where we take possession of the delights of Heauen? Where more profit, then in the selfe same thought; since the soueraygne good, which is promised to vs, is the But, the End, and Obiect thereof? And where more vertue, then to thinke alwayes of Death; whilest with the armes of these sweet thoughts we triumph ouer vice? I belieue it is impossible to tast pleasures without thinking of death, in regard these delights are continually a flying away, and incessantly dy with vs: in such wise, that if we cannot ressent the con∣tentments but within their fruit, & in run∣ning alwayes after them; they are rather dis∣pleasures, then pleasures, and therefore we hold there are no greater delights, thē those of thinking of Death, as being the only meane to make them eternall. When I resent vnto my selfe S. Laurence extended vpon the deuouring flames, but yet more burned with the fire of his loue, then with that of his punishment, how he cryes out with a cheerefull voyce, in the midst of the heates which consume him, to be turned on the other side, as if he thought he should not dye, but by halfes, being so but halfe burned; I do feele my selfe raui∣shed with the same iumps of ioy, that trans∣ported him. Death is so welcome to him, as he deliciously roles his body on the coles, as if they were very beds of Roses. So as if he be touched with any payne at all, it is for not suffering it; for that his life being all of loue, finds its element in the fire that consumes it, and therefore he sighes of glad∣nes in the height of his torments. In effect, how shall he expire admidst those heats, if his hart be all aflame already, & his Soule of Fire? For if he were to be turned into ashes, the stronger must needs preuayle. So as he cannot be consumed, but through the fire of his loue. O sweet encounter! O wel∣come combat! And yet more deere the Tri∣umph! Death assayles him with flames, it assaults him with heats, but the fire where∣with he is holily burned, triumphes, & re∣duceth him to ashes, so to render them as cō∣secrated. This great Martyr neuer tasted in his life more sweet pleasures thē that of fee∣ling himselfe to dy vpon this bed of flames, because resenting death, he felt the delights of immortall life, wherof he made himselfe a crowne. Kings, Princes, and all those who are ray∣sed to some great fortune, confesse it to be a great pleasure to dy, since they dy euery ho∣re so sweetly amidst their greatnesses. I say, so sweetly, for their spirits and their senses are so strongly occupyed with their continuall ioyes, as the Clocke which keepes accompt of the houres of our lyfe, may sound long inough its 24. houres a day, and they heed it no more, then if they were starke deafe. And the night full of horrour, which re∣presents to vs the same of the Sepulcher, cā∣not fright them any more, then if they were quite blind. Needs must the charmes of their pleasures be strong, to make them insensi∣ble to that which toucheth them so neere. S. Augustin sayd, how the greatnesses of the world, aspersed a kind of leprosy on the sou∣le, which euen benummed all the senses of the greatest Potentats of the earth. In effect, all their sighes, all their actions do but car∣ry the countenance of Death with them, & yet perceyue they no whit therof. A strange thing! To liue, and not to thinke of lyfe at any tyme, or rather of Death, since to liue and dy is but one thing! It is yet true not∣withstanding, that we dye without euer thinking of death; wherin do we spoile our selues of the sweetest contentments of lyfe, because our whole felicity consists in dying well; and the meanes to incurre a glori∣ous death is alwaies to thinke of the miseries of lyfe, to the end to be encouraged through hope, to possesse the eternall glory which is promised vnto vs. We do naturally loue our selues with so strong affections, that all the powers of the world, are not able to burst the chaynes thereof. But what more mighty proofes may we affoard of this verity, then that of thinking continually of Death, since the same is the day of our Triumph? When shall I begin to liue not to dye for euer? sayth the Royall Pro∣phet. Our lyfe is a continuall combat, and the day of our Death is that of our Victorie. All the Martyrs though they were in the thickest of the fight, and alwaies in the acti∣on of defending themselues, yet in this warre of the world, thought themselues ve∣ry happy to find the occasion, where they might make to appeare the last endeauours of their courage in the midst of torments; for that they found in Death the crowne of im∣mortall lyfe. O sweet lyfe, and cruell the attendāce! As often as we carry our thoughtes beyond nature, and euen to Heauen, our spirit remaines wholy satisfyed therewith, because that in this diuine pitch, where it sees it selfe eleuated aboue it selfe, it be∣gins to liue the lyfe of Angells. The earth is in contempt with it, and when the chay∣nes of it's body fall off in their first conditi∣on, it suffers their tyranny through con∣straint. So that, if it be permitted vs at all moments to abādon the world in thought, to haue thereby some feeling of heauenly delights; should we be our enemies so farre, as to contemne these diuine pleasu∣res, in groueling without cease in our mi∣seryes, while the only meanes to be tou∣ched with it, is to thinke on Death; since there is no other way in lyfe, to fynd the fe∣licity we seeke for? We may piously say that the Virgin pu∣rest, & most holy liued on earth a lyfe litle differing from that lyfe which is liued in Heauen; her spirit all diuine intertayned it selfe alwayes with the Angels, or rather with God himself; while she had the glory of bearing him within her sacred wombe, or in her armes; In so much as her life was a voluntary Death, all of loue, seeing that through loue, she tooke no pleasure but to dye, so to possesse more perfectly the onely obiect of her lyfe. She prized not her dayes but in the expectation of their last night, as knowing its darknes was to produce the brightnes of an eternal day, wherof herselfe had beene the Aurora. O how sweet would it be, to be able to liue in that sort, for to dye deliciously! It is not a life truly immortall to be alwayes thinking of death, if death af∣ford vs immortality? How fastidious is the life of the world, the Prophet cryes? Let vs now then be ioyning our voyce to his cryes, and say, that death only is to be wished for. All the holy Soules, which in imitation of my Sauiour, haue adorned thēselues with thor∣nes, haue been turning the face to the tomb∣wards, there to gather Roses. With death it is, where they termine their dearest hopes. So as if they liue content, it is not but through the sweet hope which they haue to dye. O yee prophane Spirits, who sacrifice not but to voluptuousnes, pull off the hood of passion that thus blinds you, to destroy those aultars of Idolatry, whereon you im∣molate your selues, without thinking of it, for punishment of your crymes. If you will know the true pleasure indeed, it consists of thinking of Death, as of the Spring that pro∣duceth our delights. Our Crownes are at the end of their cariere, nor shall we euer come to possesse the Soueraygne God, to which we aspire with so much feruour and vnrest, but by the way of Death. When shall I cease to lyue with men, sayth Dauid? He is e∣uen troubled amidst the greatnesses of the earth. His Scepter and his Crowne are so contemptible to him, as he would willing∣ly change his Throne with the dunghill of Iob, on condition to dye with his constan∣cy. To liue, is no more then to be seque∣stred from that which one loues: and after God, what may we loue? After him what may we desire? So as, if now these holy af∣fections & these diuine wishes cannot looke on glory, but in passing by the Sepulcher, let vs thinke continually on Death, as of the way we take, & which we are yet to make. This is the onely meane to render vs con∣tent, for that these thoughtes are inseparable from the eternall felicity which is promi∣sed vs. That it belongeth but only to good Spirits, to thinke continually of Death. CHAP. IIII. S VCH as know the Art of fa∣miliarizing death with life, through continual remēbrance of their end, do neuer change the countenance in any perils. They looke to resume both their bloud, and life at once, with the same eyes they behold the things which are agreable to them: so as they remayne inuincible in their miseryes, through the knowledge they haue of their condition. Wounds neuer hurt their soules, and all the maladies wherewith they may be touched, afflict but their body only. Their good Spirit habituated with the ordinary encounter of a thousand sad accidents inse∣parable from life, tasts their bitternes in its turne, and feeles their thornes without any murmuring. The end of all actions ought to be the first ayme of the iudgement that con∣ceiues them, if it will shun the griefe of ha∣uing done them. So as from the tyme that we are capable of reason, are we to serue our selues of it, to consider the necessity of our mortall and transitory condition; that the continuall obiect of our end, may serue as a condition & meanes to arriue happily the∣reunto. The wiser sort are those, who repent at least, for that which they haue done; & true wisedome consists in not cōmitting folly. And what more great may a man admit, thē that, to neuer thinke of death, since it is the end where all our actions receiue their prize or payne? Remember thou Death (the Wisemā sayth) and thou shalt neuer syn. O glorious re∣membrāce, who raisest vs to so high a degree of honour, as neuer to offend God, which is the only perfection of the Soule, next to the knowing him, and louing him withall! O glorious remembrance, which changest our frayle and guilty Nature into one which is wholy innocent! O glorious remembrance that makest vs deliciously to breath the ayre of Grace, since they liue in the estate to dye euery hower, for to liue eternally! O glo∣rious remembrance, which on earth makest vs the inhabitants of Heauen? O glorious re∣membrance, where the Spirit finds both its Good, and repose. When I represent to my selfe the pittiful estate of our Condition, I am afrayd of my selfe: for disasters and miseryes do so attend vs at the heeles, as there is almost no medium betweene dying and lyuing. We sigh with∣out cease, the whole ayre we breath, & our very being that so tumbles alwayes towards its end, wisheth not, but its not being, whi∣ther euery instant leades it without inter∣mission. What better thoughtes may we now conceiue, then of these verities; since it is too true, that we are borne vnhappy, for to liue miserable, vntill the point of dying? And the only meane to change this misery into happines, is euery moment to thinke vpon it, for feare of falling euer into neglect, or forgetfulnes of our selues. There are feeble Spirits, who dare not carry their thoughts vnto the end of the ca∣riere of their life; they euen faynt in the mid way; their shadow affrights them; they fe∣are euery thing they imagine, without con∣sidering the obiect of their feare subsists not but in their fancy only, and how by that meanes, to become ingenious to torment themselues. To feare death, is to feare that which is not, since it is but a mere priuatiō; and to haue a further feare of the thought is to fly the shadow of his shadow which is nothing. Wherein these Spirits do but feed their owne weaknes, liuing in death, and dying in their life, without dreaming once of Death. But what goodly matter (will they say, so to mayntaine their errour) for one to thinke of that, which naturally all the world abhors? Is it not to be miserable inough to be borne, and to lyue, & dye in myseries, without one be burying his spirit before his Body, through the continual me∣mory of his end? It is euen as much, as to make ones selfe vnhappy before hand, so to dreame of the euils, which we cānot auoyd. It is inough to endure thē constantly, when they arriue, without going to meet with thē, as if it could euer arriue too late. Feeble apparences of Reason! Admit that Nature abhorres Death, as the ruine of this strait vniō of the body with the soule, know we not also how this nature, blind in all its passions, and brutish in all its feelings, takes alwayes the false good for the true, not be∣ing able to worke, but by the Senses, which as materiall, take its part? To belieue now that our miseryes augment, by this thought, that we lyue & dye miserable, were much; while on the cōtrary we do blunt the point of their thornes, in so thinking of them, in regard this continuall consideration of our misfortunes in this life, makes vs to take the way of vertue, for the attayning one day, the glory, and felicity of the other. To ima∣gine it also to be a griefe, to dreame assidu∣ously of Death, as of an ineuitable euill, is a meere imaginatiō which cannot subsist, but within it selfe. For we are neuer to thinke of Death, but as of a necessary good, rather then of an infallible euill, since otherwise, it i nothing of it selfe. We should only repre∣sent to our selues that we are to change both condition and life; and how this change, can be no wayes made, but at the end of our course▪ whither we are continually running and that without pause awhit. Our being of it selfe destroyes it selfe, by little and litle, withall things els of the world besides. It is a funerall Torch burning by a Sepulcher, that shines as long as the wax of our body lasts, while euen the least blast of disaster is able to extinguish it for euer. For howbeit the earth be large and spacious, yet hath it noe voyd place, in its whole extent, but where to point euery one his Tombe; euen as nature, which though fruitfull of it selfe to produce many wonders, yet finds an im∣potency withall to engender twice its ly∣uing workes. The Fables informe vs well, how Euri∣dice was delyuered from her chaines in Hell but not from her prison; she had the power to approach vnto the bounds of the dismall place of her captiuity, but not to set her selfe at liberty. So as if the Poets, within the Em∣pire which they haue established to them∣selues, haue religiously held this inuiolable law, of not to be able to dye twice; with what respect ought we to adore the truth so knowne to euery one, and so sensible to all the world? And the knowledge which we haue thereof, should vncessantly draw our pirits, to these thoughtes, to the end they sstray not, in the labyrinths of sin, which is the only Death of the Soule. When I represent to my selfe the faces, which these men of the world do make when they are spoken to of Death, I haue much ado to belieue, they are capable of rea∣son, since they faile thereof, in the consi∣deration of this important verity, that they are but meere putrefaction, and a little dust, ready to be cast into the wind in the twin∣ckling of an eye: That walke they where they will, they but trample their Tombe vnderfoote, since the earth seemes to chalēge its earth whereof they are moulded and fra∣med. They shut their eares to the discourses that are made to them of Death, which they are one day to incurre; and open them to hearken to the Clocke, whose houres & mi∣nutes insensibly cōduct them into the Sepul∣cher, whither willingly they would neuer go. In so much, as howbeit they are hasting euery moment to death, yet they dare not be casting their eyes on the way they hould, as if the sight could forward their paces: wher∣in truly, I can not abide, nor excuse their pusillanimity, since the danger whereinto they put themselues, produceth an irrepara∣ble domage. This same is an infallible maxime, That such as neuer dreame of death, do neuer thin∣ke of God, forasmuch as one cannot come at him, but by Death onely. On the other-side, not to thinke euer of the end, which should crowne our workes, were as much, as to contemne the meanes of our Saluation and so to forget our Sauiour who with his proper lyfe, hath ransomed ours. The eye cannot see at one and the selfe same tyme two different obiects, in distance one from the other. The lyke may we say, of the Spirit, though it's powers be diuerse, yet can it not fasten its affections vpon two subiects at once, vnequall and seue∣rall one from the other. If it loue the E∣arth, then is Heauen in contempt with it: if it haue an extreme passion of selfe-loue to its lyfe, the discourses of death are dreadfull to it. And by how much it sequesters it selfe from thoughtes of its end, the lesse approa∣cheth it to God through those very thoghts. Lord, I will thinke of my last dayes (sayd the Prophet) for to remember thee. This great King and great Saint withall, did belieue the me∣mory of Death was inseparable from that of his Mayster, since dye he needs must one day himselfe. O sweet Death, and yet more sweet the remembrance, if it be true, that it power∣fully resists agaynst all manner of vice! We cannot know good spirits, but throgh good actions, & there is none better in lyfe, then then of preparing ones selfe for death. What∣soeuer we can do which is admirable indeed looseth the whole admiration, if it haue not relatiō therunto, nor may a man be thought to haue lyued, but to dy rather, who thinkes not euer of this sweet necessity, whereof the law dispenseth with no man. The greatest perfection consists, for one to know him∣selfe, so as the Spirit cannot make its Emi∣nency appeare, but by beholding it selfe in its nature, created to render the continuall homage of respect to its Creatour. And be∣ing abased in this necessary submission, it should consider that its immortality boūds vpon eyther an eternall payne, or els on a lyke glory, and that it is not at all, but to be happy for euer, or eternally vnhappy. Vpon these considerations, it may found the veri∣ty of its glory, since it could not tell how to purchase eyther a iuster, or a greater then that of knowing well it selfe. For as then, its diuine thoughts make it to take it's flight towards the place of its origin, not prizing the earth, but to purchase there the merit of Crownes, which it pretends to possesse in Heauen. Among the infinite number of errours, which make the greatest part of the world to be guilty of crime, this same is one of the most common of al; To esteeme (forsooth) those extremely, who are eloquent, be it of the tongue or pen, and to put them in the rancke of the more excellent Spirits: As those also, who through a thousand sleights, being al very criminal, cā tell how to amasse a great deale of riches to ariue to the highest dignityes. Thus do the spirits of the world, and are so esteemed by such as they. But I answere with the Prophet, how all their wisedome is folly before God. The good spirits indeed are alwaies adhering to good, and there is no other in lyfe, then that, to be allwayes thinking of death, for to learne to dy well. Since in this apprentiship only, are comprized all the sciences of the world. Eloquennce hath saued neyther Cicero, nor Demosthenes. Riches haue vndone Cresus ; & greatnesses haue thrown Belus King of Cy∣prus out of his Throne, into a dunghill. To what purpose serues it, to know how to talke well, if we speake not of things more necessary, and more important of our salua∣uation? To what end serues it to be rich, since we must needs be a dying miserable? On the other side, there is no other riches then that of Vertue; and I had much rather possesse one aboue, then the crownes of all the Kings of the World below. What plea∣sure may a man take to behold himselfe ray∣sed to Thrones, since he must needs in a moment, be descending into the Sepulcher? What is become of all those, who haue beene mounting the degrees of Fortune, & beene seene on the top of most eminent dignities? Disastres, or time which changes all things, haue let them fall into the Tombe; so as there remaynes no more of thē, but the bare remembrance, that sometymes▪ they haue beene. Consider we then, and boldly let vs say, how it belongs to good Spirits only, to be euery houre: thinking of Death, since we dy euery hower▪ That these thoughtes are the most sublime, where with a good soule may entertaine it selfe: That of al the wayes which may lead vs to Heauen, there is none more assured, then that of continually thin∣king of the last instant, which must iustify or condemne all the other of our life; for that our actiōs take their Rule frō these though∣tes to receiue the price of them. All the rest is but vanity, and meere folly. Out of these thoughtes, there is no good; Out of these thoughtes, there is no repose. Who thinks not of death, thinks of nothing since al seeme to termine at this last moment The most happy are miserable, if this thoght make not vp the greatest part of their hap∣pines. And the richest are in great necessity, if they dreame not of that, of their mortall condition. Whatsoeuer is said, if Death be not the obiect of the whole discourse, they are but words of smoke, that turne into wynd. Whatsoeuer is done, if Death be not the obiect of the actions, all the effects are vnprofitable. In fine, all glory, all good, all repose, & all the contentment of the world, consists in thinking alwayes of Death; since these thoughtes are the only meanes to at∣teyne the eternall felicity, wherto they ter∣mine. And a generous Spirit cannot giue forth more pregnant proofes of its goodnes▪ then in thinking on the Death of the body, whiles euen of this moment depends the life of the soule. How those spirits that thinke continually of Death, are eleuated aboue all the Great∣nesse of the Earth. CHAP. V. I T is impossible to know the world without contemning it since the disastres and miseryes, wherewith it is stuft, are the continuall obiects of this knowledge. And from the point that our iudgment hath bro∣ken the visards of the false and imaginary goods, which vnder the maske of their goodly apparences deceyue our will, it sud∣denly abhors in them, that very same which passionately heertofore it seemed to cherish. Whence it happens that we can neuer enter into knowledg of the world, but we acquit our selues of it at the same time throgh a sor∣row, for not hauing despised it sooner; since all its goods are but in apparence onely, and its euils in effect. So as, if it be a Tree we may boldly say, that miseryes are the leaues therof, misfortunes the branches, and death the fruit. And it is vnder the shadow of this vnhappy Tree, where our forefathers haue built our first tombe. Man may seeme to disguise himselfe, if he will, vnder the richest ornaments of Grea∣nes, & with the fayrest liueries of Fortune. Well may he trample Scepters and Crow∣nes vnderfoot, in the proudest condition, whereto Nature and Lot might haue ray∣sed him vp. He is yet the same; I meane a peece of corruption, shut vp in a skin of flesh, whereof the wormes haue taken pos∣session already from the momēt of his birth. Let him measure as long as he will a thou∣sand tymes a day, the ample spaces of the world, with this proud ambition, to make a conquest of them all; yet he must be fayne to let them fall, if he would find the true measures of them without compasse, enclo∣sed all within seauen foot of earth, which shall marke out his Tombe. If he assemble with the same ambition, all the Thrones of Kings, for to make them serue as Aultars, whereof himselfe shall be the Idol; he shall not choose but lend his eares to the Oracles of sweet Necessity, though cruel for him: for he must dy, and consequently serue one day as a victime vpon those very Aultars, where they shall be yielding of Sacrifices to his, person. Let him bestow Empires, as fauours, Kingdomes for presents, and whole Citties for the least recompence, and then when he returnes into himselfe, for to know what he wants, he shall find, that he needs no more, but a peece of a sheet to shrowd (with all his miseryes) the horrour of his infection and corruption. Let the Sunne neuer rise, but to giue light to his triumphes, if he ioyne not o his victories those other of his passions, e shall celebrate but his owne ouerthrow, nd triumph on himselfe without thinking of it. Let the heauens be rayning on his head as many felicityes, as there are disasters on earth; all his happynes concludes with Death, while by the way of his prosperities, he goes on euery moment to the Sepulcher▪ In fine, although through his great possessiō of goods, he know not what to desire, not what to looke for; yet shall I not forbeare ere the lesse to put him in the rancke of the most miserable of the world, if vertue be not the richest of his treasures. For not changing his condition awhit, in the accomplishmēt of his greatnesses, and of all his delightes, he is alwayes the same, a little ashes, a little dust a little earth. And howbeit of the ashes of the wood of Libanum, of the dust of Azure, or of some more noble or fertile earrh; yet is al but meere putrefaction, and the crust of all these goodly apparences is full of infection. I esteeme him very happy, great & rich, who contents himselfe, with the meriting of these greatnesses, these felicities, and these riches: for the glorious contempt which he makes of thē, for being abused in the know∣ledge of himselfe, he beholds all the world beneath him, and desires but the continuatiō of his repose; since in the only thought of Death, he possesseth al the goods of life. The great Monarkes of the world seeke the intē∣tions of lyuing happy in their greatnesses; & he, the meane of dying content in his mise∣ries: they are alwayes in care, to extend the bounds of their Empire; & he pleaseth him∣selfe to bound his ambition, with what he possesseth, since he wants not any thing for his voyage. They make a masse of riches; & he takes glory in pouerty, knowing that the richest are robbed at the end of the course of ife, and that we go forth of the world, in ike manner as we enter into it, with the first habit of those miseries, which we haue in∣herited from our parents. In such sort as hinking perpetually of Death, in the way where it is to approach euery moment, he casts not his eyes vpon greatnesses, but to haue pitty on those who possesse them. He contemplates not the fauours of Fortune, but to publish the inconstancy thereof. So f he regard Thrones, it is but to measure he depth of the precipices that enuiron thē, since all crownes for him are made both of tare and thornes. And the Scepters as light as reedes, giue him not any other Enuy hen that of trampling them vnderfoot, in∣steed of holding them in his hands, since hey are the markes of a glory of smoake, which resolues into nothing, to returne to its first beginning. There is no doubt, but such as thinke cōti∣nually of Death, are raysed aboue all the greatnesses of the earth, because Eternity is the obiect of their thoughtes. So as if they desire greatnesses, they wish they may be e∣ternall: if they enuy Treasures, they marke the possession of them beyond Nature, to the end Inconstancy of tyme may not be∣reaue them of them. They haue no ambi∣tiō for this vayne glory of the world, which the least mischance may change into infa∣my; nor for these Crownes, which a litle wind of disgrace, makes to fal from the head. All their glory is to thinke of death, for to be able to attayne at the last instant of lyfe, the Crowne of immortality, wherein con∣sists the perfection of all felicityes possible to be desired. Greatnesses are of the same nature, with those who possesse thē, they are but smoke, they are but wind; for we see thē to vanish away in the twinckling of an eye, with their subiect. So as if they seeme to subsist, notwithstanding in their continuall flight they are changing the countenance euery houre. To be great aboue the common sort of men, in honours and in riches onely, i to be miserable, if the true greatnes of man consist in meriting all, and possessing no∣thing. In so much, as he who thinkes o Death in despising the felicityes of this life, makes himselfe to be worthy of the glory of the other; and in these only thoughtes is he raised so aboue himself, as if he were capable of vanity, he would not know himself. For from the tyme, that he ioynes the thoughts of Death, to the verity of his mortall con∣dition, he tasts before hand in the midest of his course, the sweetnes of the goods, which he pretends to receyue at the end. I would say, that the sensible imaginations which he hath of dying cōtinually (as there is nothing more certayne then it) makes him to tread vnder foote, all the greatnesses of the earth, since that his soule directs his lookes vnto Heauen, In effect, were it not as much, as to offēd a Prince, to offer him at sea, the Crowne of a Kingdome, in the midst of stormes and tempests, wherewith his ship were misera∣bly tossed? or els at such tyme, as he were seene to be taken with a mortall disease? For he might answere very pertinently, they should attend him, to make him those offers on the shore, or when he were recouered of his health. Now, we seeme to represent this Prince, since like vnto him, do we floate v∣pon this sea of this world, where the Ship of our life, is incessantly tossed with diuers misfortunes. Fortune comes to present vs in the fury of this tempest both Scepters and Crownes; would it not be accounted rash now for vs, to receiue them at her hands, in this pittifull estate whereinto we are redu∣ced, & not to hope for a calme or cessation, for feare of seeing our hopes quite buryed with our life, in a cruel shipwracke, whose danger euen followes vs as neere, as the sha∣dow doth the body? So as if she make vs the same offers, during the mortal malady whe∣rewith we are seised from the moment of our natiuity (since we begin to dy, from the instant that we begin to liue) were it not a folly to accept them? And for vs to answere her, and to wish her to expect till we come vpon the shore, is a vayne attendance; while there is no other port, in the sea of life, then that of the tombe: and to attend also for the cure of this contagious malady; which we haue taken of our parents, were to expect that same, which shall neuer come to passe. So as indeed we should be throwing al these Crownes at her head, and make vse of the Scepter, she presents vs with, as of a staffe to be auendged of her for her perfidiousnes, & to testify to her that our constancy scornes her leuity; and that our contentment & re∣pose, depends not awhit of the rowling of her wheele, if we learne euery day to liue forth of her Empire. Let vs conclude then and say, that spirits that know wel the art of thinking of Death do marke out the thrones of their glory in heauen, not being able to find any thing on Earth, that were worthy of their greatnes. Hence it is, they take such pleasure, to dy without cease and to increase their content∣ment yet further, that they alwayes are thin∣king vpon it. O sweet remembrance of death, a thousand times more sweet then all the delights of life! O cruell forgetfulnes of this necessity, a thousand tymes more cruell, then all the paynes of the world! O sweet memory of our end, where begins our only felicity! O glorious obliuion of our mortal conditiō, the only cause of our disasters! Let vs not liue then, but to thinke on the de∣light of Death; & let vs not dye but to con∣temne the pleasure of lyfe: let vs forget all, but the remembrance of Death. Let vs loue nothing, but its thoughtes: and neuer es∣steeme, but the only actions which haue re∣lation to this last, since this is that alone, whence we are to receyue eyther price, or payne. A Contemplation vpon the Tombe of A∣lexander the Great. CHAP. VI. O ALL yee Great Kings, Loe I heere sommon you to appe∣are about this Tombe, to be∣hould therein the wormes, the corruption and infection of the greatest, the happyest, the mightiest, & the most dreadfull Monarch of the world; & to say all in a word, of Great Alexander ; whose Valour could neuer admit comparison; whose Victories haue had no other bounds, then those of the Vniuerse; and whose Tri∣umphes, haue had all the Heauens for wit∣nes, all the Earth for Spoyles, for slaues all Mortalls, for Trumpet Renowne, & For∣tune for Guide. Descend then, from your thrones vpon this dunghill, where lyes the companion of your glory, and your great∣nesses. Behould and contemplate this Pour∣trait of your selues drawne to the lyfe, after the originall of your miseries. Cyrus, approach you vnto this vnlucky place, vpon your Chariot al of massy gould, and come attended with that magnificent pompe, which made all the world idola∣trous in admiration of it; that the infinite number of your subiects, may be an infinite number of witnesses, to conuince you of va∣nity and folly, in behoulding this Victori∣ous Prince heere beseiged by all sorts of mi∣seryes, with in a litle hole, which serues as bounds and limirs to his power. Cōsider, how this great Taker of Townes is surprized himselfe by the wormes; how this Triumphant souldier is defeated by thē, & how this Inuincible captaine, hath beene vanquished by death, and brought into this deplorable estate, wherein you see him. Are you not ashamed to be seated in that glitte∣ring Chariot; since needs you must descend thence to enter into this dismall dwelling, where the wormes attend your corruption? This great number of subiects, which enui∣ron you on all sides, to set forth your glory, is a troup of the miserable. For they dye in following you; and on which side soeuer you go. Tyme conducts you all togeather into the Tombe. Impose your lawes vpon al the people of the Earth, yet needs must you receiue those same of Death. Build you as long as you wil a thousand proud Pallaces in your Em∣pire, you cānot hold them but in fee-farme though you be the proprietary thereof, be∣cause euery moment you are at the point of departing. Well may you decke your selfe vp with the richest robes of vanity, and play the God heere beneath, with Crowne on the head and scepter in the hand; yet looke what you are, consider what you are like to be, & contemplate your miseries at leysure, in the mirour of this sepulcher. To day you loure on Heauen with an arrogant eye; and to morrow you shal be seene metamorpho∣zed into a stinking peece of earth. To day you make your selfe adored of such as haue no iudgment, but in the eyes only; and to morrow shall you be sacrificed in the sight of all the world for expiatiō of your crimes, and hardly shall be found a handfull of your ashes, so true it is, that you are nothing. Xerxes, descend you a little, from the top of that mountayne of annoyes, where they sad thoughtes do hould you besieged with∣in this Vale of disasters and of miseryes, to behold therein, the pittifull ouerthrow of the proudest Conquerour of the world. Spare your teares, to mourne vpon his Tombe, if you will but acquit your selfe of the iustest homage, you may yield to his memory. You weep before hand, for the Death of your souldiers, in foreseeing their end, with that of the world. What will you say now of the death of this great Captayne who for a last glory, after so many trium∣phes is deuoured of wormes and metamor∣phosed into a stuffe al of corruption, encom∣passed all with horrour and amazement. So as if you will needs be satisfying your selfe, afford your teares for your owne proper harmes, since you are to incurre the same lot, without respect, eyther of your great∣nes, or power. All your armyes are not of force inough to warrant you from Death: you must bow your necke vnder the yoke of this necessity, whose rules are without ex∣ceptiō, whose law dispenseth not with any. Alexander is dead, Cyrus his predecessour hath dyed also, after a thousand other Kings who haue gone before him, and you runne now after them: but to me it seemes, you carry too great a port of Greatnes with you. The earth wherof you are moulded & fra∣med, demaunds but her earth; you must quit your selfe of all, and your scepter and crowne shall not be taken for more, at that last instant, then as sheephookes: for that if we be different in the manner of liuing, we are yet all equall in the necessity of dying. Now therfore, it is a vanity to say, you are of the race of Gods. Come & see heere, the place of your first begining, for as you are borne of corruption, so you returne to pu∣trefaction. If you doubt thereof as yet, ap∣proach with your infected flesh to these rot∣ten bones, & with your clay to these ashes: If they differ in ought, it can be but in cou∣lour only. Tell me, to what end serue all those Sta∣tues of your resemblance, which you caused to be erected on the lands of your Empire, since tyme destroyes & ruines the original? Thinke you, belike, they dare not medle with those pourtraits, which are but vayne shadowes of a body of smoke? You trouble your selfe too much, to make it credulous to the world, that you are immortall, as if this beliefe could affoard you immortality. If you haue but neuer so litle knowledge in you, know you not your owne misfortu∣nes? If you haue sense, haue you no feeling of your miseries? I know well you are a King, but a King of the dead, since al those to whome you giue the law, do receyue it from Tyme, which makes them to dye eue∣ry houre. Admit you be the chiefe of men, yet if they be miserable all of them together, as subiect to a thousand sorts of accidents; may we not well say, that you are the vn∣happyest of them all. You play the omni∣potent, when you are set vpon your Thro∣ne of snow, not considering the while, that within your Pallace, as well as without, you are but a heap of dust, which euery lit∣le blast of wind, may scatter on the ground to dissolue it into nothing. Apelles, thou took'st a pride to be called the Paynter of Alexander ; come then, and see the subiect of thy glory, if thy heart serue thee to endure the horrour of it. This same, is that Alexander, whose Maiesty so dazeled thee heertofore, and whose stench at this ty∣me so infects the whole world. I mistrust thy audacious pensill to be able to represent the greatnes of his miseryes to the lyfe. Dost thou remember him at such tyme as thou drewest him, armed at all points, vpon his Bucephalus, euen vpon the point of his for∣cible retayning the last crowne of his Tri∣umphes, not hauing ought to conquer els besides? And sometymes agayne sitting on his Throne with the Crowne of a Conque∣rour on his head, and with the Scepter of the Empire of the world in his hand? Durst thou maintayne now, these ashes are the draughts of thy originall? if thou wilt saue thy credit from reproach, do thou imitate Thymantes, draw the curteyne ouer Alexan∣ders face, that he may not be knowne, so is he no more himselfe. And thou Lisyppus, who employed so oft, hast made vse of such rich materials to man∣taine this great Monarch on foot; these rot∣ten bones, which make vp this Carkasse which thou seest, haue beene the subiect, both of thy glory, and thy labours. If it be true, that water eates into the stone, then weep thou freely on thy owne workes, to destroy them thy selfe, since their obiect is buryed, while tyme prepares their Sepul∣cher. Cesar, Mark-Antony, Pompey, Annibal, and Scipio, step you a little aside from the way of your Triumphs, to come, and see as you passe, the miserable spoyles of this great King alwayes victorious, of this great Monarke alwayes triumphant. Approach you vnto his Tombe, behold, contemplate, & smell the horrible corruption; would you say this carkasse heere that stinkes so abhominably, were the body of that inuincible Alexander? whose valour hath despoyled the earth of its Laurelles, and who being not able yet, to bound his ambition, with the compasse of one world, goes seeking him another; how∣soeuer in digging the earth, he hath found but the place of this Sepulcher, where he is buryed with all his greatnesses. All those gallant Courtiers, that followed him, are changed into wormes, and are nothing els but meere putrefaction; and their proud Pallaces into this litle trench; and all their ornaments into these spiders webbes, which encompasse him round. Cast your eyes vpon these images of hor∣rour: This is the draught of him, who stiled himselfe the sonne of Iupiter-Ammon, & who exacted Aultars from men, to make himself adored. Iudge you now of the perfection of this Idol. Go your wayes into all places, where your ambition guides you, conquer all, triumph vpon all, and for a last victory make Fortune herselfe as your Tributary, that the rouling of her wheele may receaue its motion from that of your wills; al these Victoryes, and all these Triumphes, accom∣panied with all the glory of the world, shal not warrant you awhit from Death: nor shall all the perfumes of Arabia exempt your flesh from putrefaction. Cesar, dispute no more with Mark-An∣tony about the Empire of the earth: Nature would haue you to take vp this difference betweene you, since neyther of you both cā iustly pretend, but to seauen foot thereof. And if you can hardly belieue it, measure you the spaces of Alexanders Tombe, who hath worne the Crowne vpon his head, which you desire. This is the onely meane to finish your quarrell, rather then to quenh your fury, in the bloud of your subiects. Ce∣sar, play not the proud man so, in the midst of thy felicityes; it is now a long while, sin∣ce that death hath stood waiting vpon thee, vnder the Throne where thou sittest in the Senate, for to let thee know, and perceaue at once, that he mockes at thy greatnesses, and contemnes thy power, by drowning thy lyfe within thy bloud. Stoope a little to the pitch of thy vanity Mark-Anthony, there is no likelyhood at all thou shouldst euer be triumphing ouer thin enemy, since thou canst not so much as van∣quish thy passions, which is the best victory that we can possibly obteyne of our selues. Thou shalt euen loose the Empire of all the Earth, where thou shalt find so shamefull a Tombe, as they shall not dare to speake of thy lyfe, by reason of thy Death. Anniball, thou gloriest much in entring in Triumph, within thy proud Citty of Car∣thage, after so many, and so great victories, which rayse thee to the highest Throne of Honour; but takst not heed the while, that if thou leadest thine enemies in triumph, vi∣ces seeme to triumph vpon thy soule, fitter that miseries do the like with thy body. And againe, if Fortune fauour thee to day as king, she will dregg thee to morrow as a slaue. To day the Lawrels grow on thy head, and to morrow thorns shal grow beneath thy feet▪ to let thee see that nothing is certaine in the world, but change, since it changes euery houre, in making all things else, to change their countenance withall. I do euen flout at thy vanity; for the witnesses of thy glory, & very Carthage it selfe, which is the theatre therof, shal follow soone after the course of of thy ruine. Pompey, flatter not thy selfe thus in thy prosperities, the very same Sunne, which hath seene them grow vp, shall see them wither ere long. It is true that all the world euen trembles at thine armes. Renowne hath no voyce, but to publish thy valour; but how then? knowest thou not, how the self same fate which affords thee Crownes & Scepters, takes them away againe when it pleaseth? Victory pursues thee euery where, both on sea and land; but this is but for a while. After the moment of thy birth, death aymes at thy head, to pull off all the Law∣rells thence, wherewith thou hast so often crowned it; and knowing that the sea hath no rockes for thee, it hath scored out thy Se∣pulcher already on the shore. Weepe, weepe you great Kings, at the sight of these miseries, or rather at the feeling of your owne. If the greatest of the world, be nought but corruption, what shall be∣come of you? If this inuincible Monarch, who had so many markes of immortality with him, be the prey of wormes, & sport of the winds, what shalbe your lot? Where∣to may Fortune seeme to reserue you? Go to then, I graunt you, whatsoeuer you can possibly demaund; I affoard your ambition an age of lyfe, an Empire of a new world, & a happy successe to all your desires. What shall become of you after all this, since this long lyfe, this glorious Empire, & all your felicityes togeather must haue an end, with this world? As often, as you shall issue forth of your condition, for to enter into the forgetfulnes of your selfe, you do send your thoughtes into this tombe; and you shall suddenly return from this wandering. Do not flatter your selfe; your Crowne is but of earth, as the head that weares it. Your Scepter is but a sticke of wood, subiect to corruption, as your hand is that holdes it: and the rest of your ornaments are but a worke of wormes, wherof you are the prey. Iudge you then, whether your vanity, can subsist any long tyme, vpon such feeble foū∣dations, or no. You are accustomed lykely, at such time as you build some proud pallace or other, to go a walking in the compasse thereof, ta∣king pleasure to admire the goodly scitua∣tion, where you haue destined the place of your dwelling: do you the like with your tombe, go visit euery day the solitary place where you are to lodge for so long a tyme; and this wil be the onely meane, to make death euen as sweet vnto you, as life it selfe; and to bury your pride, your vanity, and al your vices together, before your body; ac∣cording to the saying of the Wiseman, for he that thinkes continually of death, shall neuer stray from the way of vertue. He that thinkes alwayes of Death, is the Richest of the world. CHAP. VII. I MERVAILE much, that Ci∣cero should put this Truth into Paradox; That he (forsooth) is the richest, who is most cōtent, whi∣les there is nothing more certaine then it. For the Soule hath no other riches, more properly her owne, nor more in affect, then that of contentment. In what condition soeuer, where a man finds himselfe with re∣pose of Spirit, may he well be said to be per∣fectly rich. True treasures are not of gould of siluer, or of other things of like valew, but rather of good actions, since by their price one may buy Eternity. Besides whose fruition, what may we desire? Besides whose glory, what may we pretend? With∣all the riches of the world, we can buy no more, then the world it selfe. Alas, what good in the possession thereof, if it be wholy stuffed with euils? See we not euery momēt how it quite destroyes it selfe, and that it runnes without cease, to its end, as the Sūne to its West? The richest are ordinarily, the most vn∣fortunate of all others: for that hauing by lot of nature, some little Empire on earth, they fall absolutely to attribute the Soue∣raignity thereof to thēselues; & in the vayne thoughts of their greatnesses, seeme neuer to sigh but for them, nay they euen dy with them. O dreadfull Death! He then may be only said to be rich, who makes profession to follow vertue; his way being bordered with Thornes, represents to vs that same of Death, whose Roses are at the end of the course, to crowne our labours withall. In so much as we cannot loue vertue, but with the continuall thoughts of Death; since to see its Body, we had need to seuer our selues from the shadowes of the Earth. We much admire some feeble ray of its image only, vnder the obscure veyle of our mortall con∣dition; but that only in idaea, and as it were in a dreame. We had need to awake yet once more, and come to be reborne from our a∣shes againe, as the Phenix, in the presence of the great Sunne of Iustice. I would say, that we must needs dy one day, for to reuiue eternally in the accomplishment of all the felicities of Heauen. Alexander hath no greater a treasure, then that of his hopes. The ayme or scope of his Fortune was alwayes vpon the future; and what goods soeuer he possessed, he e∣uery day yet attended for more, as if he had some intelligence with Chance, to receiue from its prodigall hand, all the effects of his desires. The merchants, that go in pursuite of riches vpon the Ocean, liue not but of the hope of their mercinary cōquest. How miserable soeuer they find themselues, on the way of their nauigation, they so mainly for∣get themselues, in the sweet thoughts of their expectation, as they thinke them∣selues the richest of the world; and they wil sooner be loosing their lyfe, in the midst of the rockes, then the beliefe they haue thereof. So much their imaginary hope see∣mes to carry them away. Let vs say then, more boldly, and with more reason, that such as termine all their hopes to the Eternity, as to the onely ob∣iect, which is able to quench the thirst of our soules, still increasing more and more, may be sayd before hand, to be the richest of the Earth. For their hope, is not that of Alexander, whose vowes were addressed to Fortune ; & much lesse, that other of those old Martiners, as changeable as the sea that gui∣des them; but another quite different, that for foundation hath but Vertue, and in the hope of possessing one day the treasures of Heauen, they take the paynes to purchase them, through the continuall meditation of Death, as the onely lesson that teacheth vs to liue well. They passe deliciously their tyme in the expectation of their last day on earth, and like to those merchants, stand counting all the houres of their voyage, with impatient desire to see out of hand, the very last of them, so to be alwayes perfectly happy. And howbeit this voyage be long, and troublesome, yet they esteeme thēselues so rich withall, as they, would not change their hopes, for all the gold of the world. In effect, we must needs confesse, that the only hope of glory, ioyned with vertues is the only good of life, for the atteyning one day, of the possession of them; where a holy soule may find the full accomplishmēt of its desires. But it is yet to be considered that this hope, and all these vertues can haue no surer foundation, then that of the conti∣nuall thoughtes of Death, since all our good doth absolutely depend of this last houre, wherein the important sentence of our life, or Death is to be signified vnto vs. Hence it is, that mā being holily rich, heapes vp good workes, during the course of his life, as di∣uine Treasures, to enrich his soule with all the eternall felicities, which may accomplish it with glory and contentment. He liues al∣wayes contēnt and rich at once, in this plea∣sing thought (forsooth), that he will neuer seeme to dye, vntill such tyme as he be quite dead. Whence it happens that he tramples vnderfoot very generously all sorts of grea∣nesses and riches, through the knowledge he hath of those, which his spirit possesseth without euer being touched with other enuy, then to finish readily his voyage, to make exchange for Death, with a life ex∣empt from Death. So as we may wel main∣teyne, that he, who is alwaies thinking of Death, is the richest in the world; seeing that euen such thoughts only, may make him to purchase the treasure of Eternity, wherein consists our soueraigne Good. A Contemplation vpon the Tombe of Cre∣sus. CHAP. VIII. Y OV Rich-men of the world, who know no other God, then Gold and Siluer, come and see the trea∣sures, which the greatest King of the Earth hath carryed with him, into the Tombe. And this is the mighty King Cresus, to whome the mines serued him for a Coffer the Indyes for a Cabinet, and the Ocean for a new riuer of Pactolus, where he vainely en∣deauoured to quench the thirst of his guilty auarice, and of his most haughty ambition. Represent vnto your memory his passed greatnesses, and behould now his present miseries. If you thinke of the riches of his life all of roses, consider the pouerty of his Death all of thornes. If you remember the magni∣ficences of his Court, turne the lease at the same tyme, to see the horrours of this his dis∣mall solitude. If you muse yet on the rich or∣naments of his golden Pallace, see & con∣template through your teares, the corruptiō which is inclosed with him in the Tombe. If you haue seene him seated on the highest top of greatnesses, behold him now with the same eye abased on the dunghill of misery. He hath liued, he hath reigned as an Idoll within the Temple of Fortune, on the prou∣dest Altar of Vanity, but the torch of his life, is put out, the date of his reigne is expired, the Temple of his glory is demolished, the Aultar of his Empire is destroyed, and this carkasse which you see, is the Idol that serues as a prey vnto the wormes. Gobrias, do thou cause thy selfe, to be drawne heere by thy Lyons, on thy Chariot of massy Gold, before thou dyest. The dece∣iptfull glasses of thy goodly Mirrours, hide from thine eyes, the truth of thy defects, & let thee see, but the guilded case of thy rich apparences. On the other side, they but re∣present to thee by halfes, while this Sepul∣cher shal depaynt them forth to thee at large with the same draught, and with the selfe same lineaments, which Nature hath markt vpon thy body, from the moment of thy birth. In comming hither, to visit this place thou shalt not stray awhit out of thy way, since euery moment of Tyme, directs thy steps vnto the Sepulcher. Enter a little into the knowledge of thy selfe, and reuert from thy wandering. Thou reposest for the most, vpon a Couch all of gold: And what plea∣sure takest thou the while, to passe some nights vpon this bed of Flowers, since thou must lodge so long a tyme, vpon a clod of earth, wherof thou art framed & moulded? thou takest al thy repasts vpō a siluer Table, thou seest this carkasse, wherof thou art the originall, how it serues for a table & meate all at once for the wormes to feed on? Why dost thou prize so much thy treasures? Be∣hould to what estate is he brought, who hath possessed all those of the World. At his birth he had for portion, all the good of the earth▪ and in dying he hath inherited all the miseries of nature. Imagine that which he hath had, and see what is left him. He hath purchased al, & yet possesseth nothing, nor canst thou auoyd his lot, whilest thou holdest the same way of his life: hence it is, that I point thee out thy sepulcher all ready within his Tombe. Policrates, come see the coffer of the Trea∣sures of Cresus, to glut thy couetous appetite with all; his rotten bones I meane (whose marrow the wormes deuoure) the stench of this prey couered with a linnen sheet, new∣ly weft together with the infection. Behold now all, which this mighty King was able to saue from the Shipwracke of his lyfe and riches al together. These are the lamentable relickes, as well of his Maiesty, as of his gre∣atnesses; and thou runst into danger of the same rockes, so sayling in a lyke sea, if thou change not the Pylot. Take profit then frō the domage of another, & mayster thy bru∣tish passions, that prepare for thine enemies, the triumph of thy lyfe. And thou Lucullus, come and visit the Se∣pulcher of this great Prince, before thou vn∣peoplest the ayre of birds, the land of sauage beasts, and the sea of fishes, if thou wilt see displayed the vanity of thy enterprises. Thou takest a glory, while thy life lasts, to afford entertainement to all the world: Be∣hould awhile, how thou art like to be in∣treated after thy death. Cause thy tables to be furnished with meats, the most delicious that are, yet of necessity must all the com∣pany, serue one day as a last course for the wormes. Let thy festiuall dayes, hould out for a whole yeare together, the Sun which shines vpon thee, will not fayle to conduct al thy bāquetting ghests into the Sepulcher; In such sort, as looke how the tyme deuou∣res it selfe, so likewise doest thou seeme to deuoure thy life by little and little, with the same food that doth nourish and mainteyne it. What reckoning canst thou make of al the glory of thy prodigious magnificences, if it haue no other foundation with it, then that of corruption? For al the proud preparations of thy Feasts do metamorphoze themselues into infection, with thy miserable subiects, which haue caused the expence. You mercinary Soules, who are not capable of loue but for your treasures, nor of passion but to make you Idolaters of them, you stand counting your Crownes euery day, and you keep no account by order, of a wise foresight of the small tyme which is left you to enioy the same. To what end serues you your Booke of accompts, where you reckon vp the summes which are due vnto you; if you want vnderstāding to cal∣culate that which you owe to your consci∣ence, whose interests termine themselues, eyther to your losse or safety? You vnbury the gould and siluer out of the earth, not considering the while, that you are going to occupy their place in the same earth. You buy with their money, the pleasures of your lyfe, and you sell those of your death: for lyuing in delightes, you dye in torments. Know you not that whatsoeuer is on earth, is but Earth? Wherefore tye you then your affections so to that, which you cannot loue without hating your selfe? what will you do, when you dye, with your treasures? I doubt very much you wil leaue them to your children; but yet the crymes which you haue com∣mitted in procuring thē, shall stil be abiding with you: so as, to make your Heires passe deliciously this life, you shall loose the eter∣nal, which is promised vs. You damne your selues, for them, as you were not borne, but for others. Quit the world, before it quit you, & bid an eternall adieu to its vanityes. Cresus was all gould, as you are, and now is he all dust. The flash of his riches, did dazle all the world, except Solon, who discoue∣ring his miseries, in the midest of his great∣nesses, maintayned him to be poore with all his treasure. Go you sometymes, before your death, and imagine the houre which you breath in to be your last, and then con∣sult with the Oracle of your iudgement, for to know the good which you would haue done, before this cruell separation of your selfe from your selfe. And after it shall haue taught you your duty, suffer not your selfe to be ouertaken by the sundry disasters, which euery moment may be taking away your lyfe. Serue your selfe of your Riches, without glewing your affection to them. Since you are the mayster of them, suffer them not to be your mayster. You haue found them in the earth, and there let them rest for you, nor let any one be fetching thē forth. Wel may you be hiding them in your coffers, for a tyme, but the day of Death discouers all, & it is in your hands to make vp the last accompt, eyther of the profit, or domage, which they shall peraduēture haue caused to you. You might haue purchased Heauen with your almes; where it may be you haue rather bought euē Hell with your prodigalities. You might haue built Tem∣ples to the glory of him, who hath bestow∣ed them on you; & you haue offered them in sacrifices, vpon the Aultar of your passi∣ons, to the Idols of your soules. Will you neuer open your eyes to disco∣uer the precipices, which encompasse you round? Will you be alwayes cruell to your selues, to the preferring of the mansion of the earth, before that of heauen; the delights of the world, before those of Eternity; and the vayne riches of heere beneath, before the treasures of the eternall glory? Imagine you that before you were borne you were no∣thing; that being borne, you haue but qui∣ckened a peece of corruption, whose life cō∣ceales the infection, and whose Death be∣wrayes the same. Say now then you Rich men as Cresus, shall I terme you miserable with Solon, since Death takes all away from you, saue only the sorrow of hauing liued so ill a life? That he who thinkes alwaies of Death, is the wisest of the world. CHAP. IX. V ERITY is the obiect of all Sciences. And of all verityes there is none more knowne, nor is more sensible then that of our mortall condition, since we dye continually without cease. In so much as the best science of the world con∣sists in the knowledge of ones self. The dis∣asters and miseries that befal vs euery houre, are goodly schooles for vs to become lear∣ned. As for me, I hould, that the onely meditation of death, instructs vs in all that which is necessary for vs to know. Who doubtes, but that he who thinkes alwayes of his end, is a great Deuine; if all the good∣ly Maximes of this diuine science, termine at the eternall life, which followes death? That he is a Philosopher, we must needs be∣lieue; for if Philosophy learne vs the art of reasoning, we can serue our selues of rea∣son, no wayes better, then to be alwayes a thinking of death, and the contemp of lyfe. That he be an Astrologer, is a meere necessi∣ty, because, throgh the mouing of his lyfe, he vnderstands that same of the stars, which shine vpon him; imagining with himselfe, that as he goes by litle and litle, to finish his course in the Tombe; so lykewise the Sun approches to the end of its lucid race, where it is to fynd at last its vtmost. That he is a Mathematician, the resem∣blances are too playne, since that according to the measure of the knowledge he hath of himselfe, he can measure the height, depth, and breadth of all things, being of the same nature with him. That he should be ignorāt of Arithmetick, it were not credible; for since he can tell how to compt all the moments of his life, he must needs be very skilfull in numbers. I should thinke, he had skil in mu∣sike too, since he puts his passions in accord, to charme his spirit with their sweet harmo∣ny. He must of necessity be a great Phisitian since he busyes his soule so, in the chiefe health of his innocency, to attaine immorta∣lity, in musing alwayes vpon Death. So as with reason might we hould him, to be the wisest of the world: and the wisest that are to authorize my saying, may well be glad to imitate him. Aristotle, thou hast ill imployed thy tyme to stand so much in discourse of the world, without knowing the miseries thereof. For if thou hadst had the knowledge of them, why hadst thou not followed the example of Alexander, in seeking forth a new one, not for to conquer it, as he, but for to liue in, eternally happy? And as his valour had put the conceipt into his head, so might thy spirit haue giuen thee the same proiect. It is playne therefore, thou hast spoken of the Earth with the language of heauen, and of heauen with the language of the earth. Thou hast made an Anatomy of nature, discour∣sing with iudgemēt, of all the second causes which do make the springs of the whole to moue. Thou hast gyuen the definition of al things, but only of thy self; as if thou couldst not haue remembred them all, but with forgetting thy selfe. Thou wast busyed much in counting the nūber of the heauens, without assigning thy place there put aloft. Thou hast noted the diuers motions of the Sunne; thou hast spoken of it's Eclypses, without once informing thy selfe of the cause, which hath giuen it the being, and light. Thou hast discourst very aptly of the re∣uolution of ages, and of the continuall vi∣cissitude of tyme; without taking any heed to the perpetuall inconstancy of thy life. Thou hast maintayned, that whatsoeuer subsists in the world, runnes post to it's ru∣ine; and yet, as if thou perceiuedst not thy self to runne awhit towards the Tōbe with the rest of created things, thou hast spoken not a word of this second life, wherein abi∣des the perfection of all our happines. Thou hast yielded the Sunne to be eclypsed. Thou hast afforded the Moone to take diuers coū∣tenāces vpon her. Thou hast giuen leaue to Serpents to be changing their skin, and to the Phenix to reuiue of it's ashes; and cruell to thy selfe the while, thou hast taken away the hope from thee of euer arising againe. Thy spirit hath beene like to a torch, which consumes it selfe to giue others light. For thou labourest to discouer to men all the goodlyest secrets of nature; and hast volun∣tarily hidden from thy selfe, the secrets of thine owne saluation. Thou hast lent Ari∣adnes threed to an infinite number of spirits who were intangled in the labyrinth of the world, without once being able, to get forth thy selfe, though the knowledge of its causes and effects: & thou hast euen dam∣ned thy selfe. Fooles, speake not but of thy Prudence, and wise men of thy Folly. It had beene a great deale better for thee, thou hadst possest all the Vertues, then to speake so of them, without them, & in their absence. Thou madst profession to teach mē the language of reason, and thou hast neuer beene speaking with thy selfe thereof, therby to bring thee, into the contempt of the earth and desire of heauen. Thy light hath dazeled thee, thine armes haue vanquished thee, & the greatnes of thy Spirit hath made thee miserable. For with endeauouring to merit Crownes, thou hast raysed thy selfe aboue all the Empires of the world, to make thy selfe to be adored; & that thy Example might serue as a law vnto others, thou hast beene the first Idolatour of thy selfe, Thou wouldst not belieue that there was one God in heauen, because thou saidst thy self to be a God on earth. Thou wouldst not speake of the other lyfe, as knowing wel, that he who distributes the good, & the euill to ech one, should seeme to prepare there a Hell for thee to punish thy arrogācy. So as if it were once affoarded thee, to re-be∣gin thy course againe, thou wouldst doubt∣les forget the vanity of all thy learning, to be thinking continually of Death, whiles these only thoughts do learne vs all manner of sciences. The glory which is left thee, for hauing spoken of the world, is shut vp in the world, and though it should last as long as it, yet shall it alwayes dye with it. Thy reputation is reuereneed on earth, and thou art trod on vnder foot in Hell. Men do ho∣nour thy name, and the deuils torment thy soule. Behold all the recompence of thy tra∣uailes. Let vs say boldly then, that he who is alwayes thinking of Death is ignorant of nothing; and that, for to be esteemed wise, he should liue with his thoughts, as the on∣ly obiect of the glory we hope for, and of the felicity we attend euery houre. Plato, to what purpose serues thee, that faire Renowne, which thou hast caused to suruiue thy ashes? They speake euery one of thee, but if they fetch any argument of thy wisedome, they conclude vpon thy fol∣ly, while Death dishonours thy lyfe. We may compare thee to Hanniball ; for after he had triumphed ouer others, he let himselfe be vanquished by himselfe, hauing receyued a law from his passions, & a seruitude from his vices. In lyke māner may we say of thee, that thou hadst couragiously triumphed o∣uer all thy popular errours, which are thy chiefe domesticke enemies: after, I say, thou hadst left thy goodly actions, for so many examples of morall vertues; thou buryedst the richest Crowne, within thy Sepulcher, and that which surmounts all tyme, and the inconstancy thereof: for at thy Death, thou adoredst many Gods, as repenting thee of the opinions, yea of the beliefe thou hadst in the course of thy lyfe. Thou tookest a great deale of paynes to procure the surname of Deuine, through thy diuine thoughtes; but in the highest of thy soaring pitch, thy spirit, as an illegitimate yong Eagle, not being able to endure the splendour of the sun of faith, was cast down headlong from the top of the heauens to the lowest of the earth, where dying alwayes in punishments, and reuiuing euery momēt in their dolours, it shall liue for euer in eter∣nall paynes. Let vs say then agayne once more, that all sciences are but meere vanity, except such as teach vs to liue well, and dy happily. And that after this manner, who thinkes continually of Death, is the wisest of the world. A Contemplation vpon the Tombe of Sa∣lomon. CHAP. X. R ETVRNE yet once agayne O great Queene of Saba, to be∣hold this wise Salomon, & come attended with your magnifi∣cent trayne, that euen the selfe same subiects, who were the witnesses of your ioy, may be the same likewise of your sadnes, in this cruell change, both of tyme & fortune. You haue passed through many a sea, and happily beene quit of a thousand dangers on the land, for to visit this great Monarke, as the onely Abridgement of the wonders of the world. Put your selfe once more into the perils of the same rockes, and into a new danger of so long a voyage, to see the setting of this Sun, the ashes of this Phonix; I would say the Tombe, and cor∣ruption of this incomparable, of this in∣imitable, of this mighty King of Sages. What metamorphosis? The splendour of his Riches, had once dazeled your eyes, & now the horrour of his pouerty, doth begg euen teares of your compassion. Heereto∣fore you cōtemplated his power with asto∣nishment; and now see into what plight of feeblenes haue miseries brought him. You admired the greatnes of his Empire▪ & that likewise of his spirit, ioyned with the per∣fection of his wisedome; but now consider how all these goodly qualityes haue not beene able, to exempt him from the Sepul∣cher, where he serues as a prey vnto the worms. You haue adored him on the The∣ater of his Vanities at such tyme as he repre∣sented the personage of the greatest King that euer wore a Crowne; and turning the leafe, within the twinckling of an eye, is this very King, no more then a loathsome car∣kasse, whome horrour & amazement hold in pledge, vntill such tyme, as he be con∣uerted into dust; which he hath beene in∣deed, but that is all. And hardly dare we now maintaine him to be he, since that in seeking him out, within himselfe, is he not to be found: So vanisheth the glory of the world, all flyes into the Tombe. Solon, since thou hast borne the surname of all the seauen Sages of Greece, come & vi∣sit this tombe, of the wisest of the world, of this incomparable Salomon. He was great of birth, great in happines, great in power, great in riches, & most great in knowledge; But behold now, how his rich cradle is chā∣ged into this poore Sepulcher; How his fe∣licity, hath taken the visage of misfortune; How his power is bounded in the impotēcy thou seest him in. He is not great but in mi∣series, he is not rich but in wormes, and in the knowledge of the follies which he hath wrought. Among so many goodly lawes which thou hast gyuen to the Athenians, re∣member thy selfe of that, which nature hath imposed vpon thee, to dy at all howers, vn∣til such tyme, as thou be quite dead. Thou dost in vayne command thy bones to be cast into diuers places after thy Death; for if they putrify not all at once, ech one of thē shall produce a stench from the marrow, in the place, where it shalbe buryed. Thou must necessarily follow the lot of this great Sage, since you are brothers both of the same condition. Thou hast taught others long inough; learne thou that, which as yet thou knowest not. Thou teachest all the world to liue; learne thou thy selfe to dy well. Thy knowledge is but vanity. For though thy precepts be engrauen in marble and brasse▪ time which deuoures all things, shall deface the remembrance of them, to so bury thy glory. If thou lyuest not for thy soule, rather then thy body, they will scarce belieue thou hast lyued at all. Periander, come & behould thy Compa∣nion of renowne, so as if thou knowest him not, in the estate he is brought into, touch but thy owne miseries with thy finger, and thou shalt playnly discouer on their face, all the draughts of his resemblāce. He hath been King as wel as thou, as good, as wise. And if thou bearst the Surname of Tyrant aboue him and that he hath not beene a Tyrant of his people; yet the vanities of his life haue beene so. He is dead howsoeuer; and at the very same tyme, wherein truly thou behold'st his putrified bones, the fire of thy life hath brought thee by little and little, into ashes, neere vnto his ashes. If thou tracest the same way with him, thou shalt put the truth of thy saluation into doubt. I would haue thee be a Tyrant also, but that only against thy selfe, to be cruell to thy passions, nor euer to pardon thy faults; otherwise reason shall be depriuing thee of the Surname of a Sage, which thy folly hath giuen thee. Pittacus, be thou a partner likewise, to behold the miseries of thy like, and if thou wilt learne thy good spirit wisedome, em∣ploy thy reason, and eloquence to chase a∣way vices from thy country, rather then the Tirant though thy force and courage. Thou sayest, we ought to foresee the accidents a∣farre of, which may happen to vs, for to be able to suffer them, with the more constan∣cy, when they light: why thinkst thou not then, alwayes of this accident, inseparable from Death, which pursues vs neerer then a shadow the body; not for the suffering of the paynes with the greater constancy, but rather with more profit, that Death might make thee a successour of a more happy life? Behould in this tombe, the image of all thy errours. See wherein consists the glory of the world, and this vayne renowne, wherof thou becōmest an idolater. If this great Sage haue beene so taxed, how shalt thou be a∣ble to auoyd the blame and shame at once? I leaue thee to thinke and meditate vpon it. Bias, come and behould through curiosity the ashes of the wisest of the world, to iudge whether there be any difference betweene them, and those of the most fooles. I know well, that the horrour of the tombe will not astonish thee awhit, since thou hast seene thy country sackt already with a dry eye, and thy children dead before thee. But in these actions it is not, where thou art to make the force of thy spirit to appeare. Af∣ter thou hadst lost all, thou oughtst to haue saued thy selfe to be rich for euer. Thou be∣lieuest, thy vertue should appeare, with saying, that thou carryest all thou hast a∣bout thee, and hadst saued all thy goods from the fire of thy towne, wherein thou mistakest thy selfe. For thou wert puffed greatly with thy vanity, and charged with the weighty burden of thy vayne scien∣ces. Thou knowest all that, which we ought to be ignorant of, to become well skilled in the knowledge of true vertue in∣deed. And to let thee say playnely thine owne folly, so it is, that the precepts of thy wise∣dome haue neuer yet saued any one of those that obserued the same. Thou preachest vertue, and adorest but a false image therof▪ wisedome consists not but in alwayes thin∣king of death; and thou hast nothing more deare, then lyfe in the blindnesse, wherein thou art. Misfortune robs thee euery houre of a part of thy self, through continuall losse of that, which thou louest most, and thou art insensible of all these attempts. But heer∣in thou letst thy vanity appeare, rather then any vertue at all, since thou referrest not the effects of thy patience to the absolute cause, which giues thee grace thereunto. Thou Enemy to thy selfe, thou pullest the wings of thy spirit, that it may not fly aboue thy nature to know the Authour thereof. Con∣sider the glory that shall rest, and be left for thee. The stone of this tombe which thou seest shall wayte vpon thy flesh to couer it with all, in corruption and infection; and if thou will be reputed wise, thinke continu∣ally vpon this verity. Thales, thou must be a party lykewise, for to come and see, the mayster of the Sages, in this poore little lodging, which nature hath prepared him from his birth. He hath beene farre more wise then thou, but yet with all his knowledge, he hath hardly byn able to fynd the way of his saluation. He knew so perfectly, the effects of all the se∣conde causes, as he forgot oftentymes to yield due homage vnto the first and soue∣raygne cause, onely adorable. Take thou thy profit then, from the exāple of his losse. Thou studyest vaynly to marke the courses of tyme, consider rather, how it pulls thee by litle and litle into the Sepulcher. Why breakest thou thy braynes, to know from whence the winds proceed, since thou oughtst to feare that of vanity, for it threatnes thee with shipwracke? Thou further notest sundry motions of the starres, it sufficeth thee, that that of the Sea be fauo∣rable to thee, to shun the rockes of that o∣ther of the world, wherto nature hath made thee to embarke thy selfe. Thou makest les∣sons to thy schollers vpon thunder, it is but a very curiosity of thine; thou shouldest not seeke for shelters, but for the thunders of di∣uine Iustice, which shal shortly punish thee for thy foolish errours. If thou wilt be wise indeed, forget thou all what thou knowest, nor do thou euer remember but this verity, that thou art of Earth, and soone shalt thou return into Earth agayne, as this great King whose ashes thou beholdest, enuironed with horrour and infection. Go now, and make a lesson to thy schollers, of that which thou hast seene, and then shalt thou deserue the surname of a Sage. Chilon, step thou a little, out of thy way, to come and see the ruines of this Colossus heere of Greatnesse, whose vnmeasurable height astonished all the world. This is the King Solomon, the wonder of all the Monarkes of the earth. Demaūd of him now what he hath done with his crowne, with his Scepter, with his Treasures, with his Courtiers, with his slaues, and where now his pleasures are. And if he answere thee not a word, make the same demaunds of thine owne spirit, and it shall answere for him, that all is vanished like smoke, that all is slid away like waues, that all is rouled thence like a torrēt, that al is melt a way like snow; & that al these shadowes haue pursued their bodyes, into the ruine where thou seest it. Thou oughtst to haue engraued this precept which thou gauest forth of Nosce teipsum, on thy hart rather, then on the Temple of A∣pollo. For this knowledge is not compatible with thine errours. Thou hast giuen forth this second Precept, Of neuer coueting too much, wherein truly, thou art not culpable at all, since thou desiredst not inough. Thou assignest all thy pretensions on the earth, as if thou wert borne but for it; it seemes the Sunne neuer rises, but to conuince thee of ingratitude, since for the goodnes of its ef∣fects, thou neuer didst homage to the cause from whence hath it receiued the being and the light it hath. If it had as many tongues as beames, it would haue published at once, both his glory, and thy forgetfulnes. Con∣fesse then the errour of it, if thou wouldst haue men iustly to attribute wisedome to thee. Ceobulus, come thou in thy turne lyke∣wise, to visit the King of Sages, not in his Pallace, but in the litle house, which the harbingers of death haue appointed for him. Thou bestowest thy tyme but ill; for thou shouldest be making of verses, and thou art full of them thy selfe, to wit, of wormes. So as if thou loue thy Poesy so much, make verses on thy wormes, describe thy miseries, and neuer speake but of thy misfortunes; o∣therwise, shalt thou loose the Surname thou hast of a Sage. Thou seest well how the science thou professest, teacheth not but va∣nity, & how all the world is the great mai∣ster of it. True wisedome consists in posses∣sing all the vertues, and thou yet liuest in the hope of atteyning the first, which is to know ones selfe. Salomon was wiser then thou art, and yet with all his knowledge, and wisedome both, was he taxed of folly. He hath beene the greatest of the world, & this little trench which thou seest contey∣neth all his greatnesses. The lands of his Empire are comprised within this litle hil∣locke of earth, whereinto he is reduced: if thou wilt forgo thy vanity, behould som∣what neere, his miseries, and thou shal learn all the Sciences of the world in the medita∣tion of his nothing. You Sages of the world if you establish the foundation of your glo∣ry on your prudence, all is but vanity. Be∣hold, contemplate, and publish freely the truth you know; I for my part will not learne other science then that of liuing wel, since this is the science of the Eternity, which hath for obiect an immortall glory. A Contemplation vpon the Tombe of He∣lena. CHAP. XI. R ETVRNE thou, O Mena∣laus, with thy Army, to the conquest of this fayre Helena, to triumph now at last vpon her vtmost spoyles. Imagine the Tombe wherein she is enclosed, to be the the proud Troy, which deteynes her from thee. Marshall thy Army about her Se∣pulcher, and let the valiantest of thy sol∣diers, well armed against the horrour and affrightes of all the infections of the world, giue the first onset to this fortresse of mise∣ryes. There is no need to reduce her into ashes, since she is wholy full of ashes now. Encourage then thy Captains to the assaults. Thou hast now, no more to deale with an infinite number of men, but rather with an infinite number of wormes, as owners, & possessors of the subiect of thy victory. But me thinkes some new Achilles, or some Aiax hath already demolished the rampiers of this litle Troy, wherein thy Helena is capti∣ued. Approach then, braue Menalaus, with napkin at thy nose, teares in thine eyes, sighs in thy mouth, and plaintes in thy soule, to behold the Idoll of thy passions, and the ob∣iect of the triumphes. Behold this fayre Helena, whome the greatest Monarks of the world haue adored. Behold this fayre Helena, whome Theseus tooke away, and Paris rauished as a thrall of her perfections. Behold this fayre He∣lena, who hath peopled Greece with wid∣dowes and Orphans. Behold his fayre Helena, who hath drowned a good part of the earth with a deluge of bloud. Behold this fayre Hele∣na, the wonder of all the wonders in the world, the shame of ages past, the despayre of such as are to come, & the miracle of her present age. Behold this fayre Helena, whome Paynters neuer durst to represent, nor haue Poets beene able euer to prayse inough. Be∣hold this fayre Helena, whome no man hath admired but with Idolatry. Behold this fayre Helena, whose merits haue armed the one part of the world agaynst the other, as if for er alone they would haue vtterly destroied the Vniuerse. Behold at last this fayre Helena, whose lyfe hath cost a million of deathes: behold this stinking carcasse which heere you see, this heape of putrifyed bones, and this lump of infection full of wormes. Commaund thy imagination, to repre∣sent her vnto thee, in that estate she was in at such tyme as thou adoredst her on the Throne of her graces, for to acknowledge sensibly the differēce. Demand of her head, what is become of that fayre golden hayre of hers, so alwayes curled, where Loue had wrought a thousand Labyrinths, to make a thousand of the freest Soules to wāderin? Her hayre, I say, whose flash dazeled the eyes, and whose wreathes captiued harts? Where is that Alabaster brow, where Ma∣iesties appeared in troupes, as alwaies ready to impose new lawes of respect to mortals? Where are her eyes, which you termed The eyes of Loue, since he had not beene blind, but for her sake? Or rather those two fayre stars eclipsed, from whence thou receiuedst both the good and the euill influences of thy life? say we yet more, those two fayre Suns, ar∣riued now at their last West, whose splen∣dour euer blinded the whole world? What is become of them? we can hardly discerne the dreadfull ruines of their being. Where may that godly feature be, whose flowers alwayes spread and disclosed, the winter re∣uerēced much? Where is that mouth of Co∣ral, whose voyce was an oracle of good & euill fortunes? Where is that necke of Iuory, that snowy bosome, and all the other parts of that body, where Nature had imployed the last endeauours of her power? I see no∣thing but wormes. I smell nothing but a stinke. All is vanished quite away. The flesh of that Maiesticall brow, lets her hy∣deous bones appeare. Those fayre eyes shew forth the holes, where the wormes haue built their Sepulcher. The flowers of this visage are changed into thornes: and this mouth sometimes of Corall is now become a sinke of Infection. And for the rest of the parts of the body being al of the same nature with the whole, we may know the peece by the patterne. Menalaus, behold the subiect of thy affe∣ction, of thy pleasures, of thy paynes, and of thy triumphes. Behold her, whome thou so deerely louedst, so highly reuerencedst, & or whome thou hast a thousand tymes put hy Scepter, thy Crowne, yea all Greece in daunger, with thy life, and honour. Be∣hold thy vanity discouered, consider thy hame, contemplate thy folly. This heape of Ashes hath made thee to reduce into ashes the proudest Citty of the world. This stin∣king Carkasse hath been conuinced in dying for putting a Million of men to death. This Colossus of miseries, full of infection, hath changed the most flourishing Empire of the world into a meere dunghil. Muster vp thine Army about this Sepulcher, that thy Cap∣taynes and Souldiers may lament with thee thy folly, bewayling the tyme they haue im∣ployed for the conquest of this heape of stin∣king earth. So as, if the Ghosts, wherewith she hath peopled Hell, were able to breake their prisons, they would bring a new warre vpon thee, as the partner of all the crymes, which they haue committed, in fol∣lowing thee. I attend you, Dames, neere vnto this Tombe, to make the Anatomy of your be∣auties, of your sweets, of your allurements, of your charmes, of your baites, of your wā∣tonesse, and of all your vanities together. It is tyme for me to vnmask your Spirit, to let you manifestly see the truth of your mise∣ryes. You make a shew to all the world of your body, painted and washed euery day with the bathes of a thousand distilled wa∣ters, and I will shew you the infection and putrefaction which is within. You say that a woman is then faire, when she hath a good body, with a handsome garbe, the haire fla∣xen and naturally curled, a soft skin, and as white as snow, a large and polished brow, the eyes blew or black, and pretty bigg, the chyn short and somewhat forked, & the rest of the parts of the body equally proportio∣ned one to the other. But this is nothing yet. This goodly peece must needes be accom∣panyed with some Graces, to be quickened with Maiesty. Her flaxen and curled haire had need to be trimly dressed; her skyn how soft soeuer, should be nourished in water like a fish, for to cōserue it in its bewty & lustre. The brow had need be taught, to hide its pleights and wrinckles, to appeare alwayes most polite. Those fayre eyes must learne the art of charming harts; & to haue this se∣cret industry with them, to wound in their sweetnes, and to kill in their choller. That little mouth of Roses should be alwayes sounding in the cares the sweetest harmony of eloquence, for to calme the harshest Spi∣rits. In fine, ech part of the body is to learne its lesson of quaintnesse, and the spirit that animates the same to teach it euery day some vanity or other, and some new instructions to win loue withall, or rather folly, as if there were not fooles inough in the world. Besides, this fayre peece had yet need to be decked vp with the richest habits that may be found, to giue lyfe to her grauity. This gallant hayre had need to be wreathed with chaynes of pearle, and diamonds, to allure the eyes more sweetly in admiration of them, and harts vnto their loue. This delicate skin should be heightened through the shaddow of a fly. This paynted visage should be daubed anew with a huge num∣ber of trumperyes, and instruments of vani∣ty, be it in Rebato's of all fashions, in Pendants for the eares of all colours, in Carcanets of di∣uers inuentiōs, & in Veyles of different stuffes. This body thus quickened with folly, ra∣ther then with reason, should be euery day tricked vp with new habits, to the end, the eyes might not be so soone weary to cō∣template the vanityes of them. In fine, she should haue a magnificent traine with her, of Horses, Caroches, and Lakeys, to main∣tayne the greatnesse of her house. But let vs now breake the crust of these wily bayts, that blind our spirits so, and charme our reason, for to make vs run into our ouerthrow. This rich peece is but a fa∣got, or a bundle of putrifyed bones, of ner∣ues, and of sinewes full of infections, and whose Cemeter serues for a theater to let vs see the miseries of them. Those frizled loc∣kes are but the excrements of nature, en∣graffed in a soyle full of lice. That delicate skyn is but a peece of parchment pasted vpō bloud. Her frayle beauty, but that of flo∣wers, subiect to the parching of the sunne & the scorcching of fire: one dropp of the se∣rene, and the onely alteration of the pulse, and but one night of vnrest only, are inough to ruine it quite. That large & polite Brow is notable to saue it selfe from the assaults of the wrinckes, which from moment to mo∣ment take vp the place, whatsoeuer resistāce be made against them. Those faire eyes are but as waterish holes, subiect to 60. seue∣rall maladies, all different; being so many mischiefes disposing to their ruine: a little Rheume makes them so ghastly, as they are constrayned to hide them, for feare they make vs not afraid. That Nose and mouth are two sincks of corruption, from whence infections issue at all moments. And for the rest of the parts of her body, being all of the same stuffe, one may wel iudge of the whole peece by a patterne only. On the other side, the action that animate this peece is but a breath of wind, which fils vp the sayles of our Arrogancy in this sea of the world, where vanity serues for Pilot, to hazard vs in the Shipwracke. Those flaxen lockes in vayne are tricket so on the face, through an art of nicenesse; the inuention is as guilty, as the matter frayle and contemp∣tible. Let her wash her delicate skyn day by day, the selfe same water that nourisheth, doth putrify it no lesse; for according as the sleight therof makes her apparence to seeme yong anew, nature causeth the being to wax ould. That smooth Brow to no purpose hides its furrowes so, whiles Age discouers them by little and little. If those eyes haue the skill to charme the harts, yet haue they not the tricke to charme their miseries. I graunt that little mouth of Roses, for a tyme may yield oracles of Eloquēce; yet we must cōsider that as the words are formed of ayre, so into ayre agayne do they resolue; their glory is but wind, and their harmony but smoake. In fine let the spirits which quickē these fayre bodyes, know all the lessons of vanity and quaintnesse that are, may it not be said yet, that the art is blacke, and as per∣nicious as the instructions are. As for the habits, which decke vp this rich Peece, they are but the workemanship of wormes, since they haue wrought the silke. Those pearles & Diamonds so encha∣sed in the hayre, are of the treasures of the Indies, where the Riches of Vertue are vn∣knowne: but they are as so many subiects of contempt to holy Soules, who know that Heauen is not bought with the gold of the earth. And for all these toyes, that serue thus for ornaments to women, they are but as so many veyles, to shroud their defects with all, while they are so full of them. Let them shew themselues as beautifull as they will, yet will I count more imperfections in their bodyes, then they haue hayres on their heads. They appeare not abroad till Noone, to shew that they employ one halfe of the day, for to hide the halfe of their mi∣seryes; and during the small tyme they are seene abroade in, if we looke neere into all their actions, they giue forth a great deale more pitty then loue. One shalbe alwayes holding a napkin in her hand, for to voyed a part of the corruption which she hath in her. Another shalbe forced in company to step aside vnto the chimney, to spit forth at her pleasure, the infection she holds in her breast. There she shalbe houlding her muffe vpō her cheeke swolne with Rheume for to couer the ill grace it hath. Heere will she neuer pull of her gloues, for feare of dis∣couering the itch of her hands. Behold the lesser defects of women, whiles of discretion, I conceale the greater, but I belieue in vayne, since all the world beholds thē wel inough; so as if they would yet see more sensible verityes of their mi∣serable condition, let them approach to this Tombe. You Courtiers, I coniure you, by the po∣wer of those Beauties, which you haue a∣dored so much, to come hither and behould their ruine. What say I? nay horrour, infe∣ction and putrefaction rather. Theseus, send thou hither thy ghost to this body, where thou hadst lodged so long a tyme both thy hart and soule. Behold this faire Helena, whome thou hadst stolne away with the pe∣rill of thy life, as idolatrous of her imaginary perfections. Search now in her, the baytes that charmed thee so, the charmes that ra∣uisht thee, the bewty that made thee such a thrall, and all those sweetnesses which haue forged the chaynes of thy seruitude. Those bayts now haue no more force, but to allure the wormes; those charmes haue no more power, but to conserue the infection; and those bewties and sweetnesses changing the nature, do afford amazements, rather then any whit of Loue. But yet me thinks, thou art well reuenged. For this cruell Tyrant, who had reduced thee so by little and little into ashes, is euen now but ashes her selfe. This mercylesse woman who would seeme to loue no man, is hated of all the world. This proud Dame, who made her selfe ado∣red, serues as a victime to the wormes, and sport to the winds. Yesterday her bewty did please thee so much, as thou hadst no eyes, but to admire her; & to day is her foulenesse so hideous, as thou hast no contempt but for her. Yesterday thou sighedst for her loue, & to day the same hart euen sighes for her mi∣seryes. Yesterday her perfections did rauish thy soule, to make them adored; and to day her defects extort thy teares, and sighes, to bewayle in their fashion their ruine. Looke then, see heere that which thou hast loued so much, and that which thou hatest so mayne∣ly. See heere, what thou hast admired with astonishment, & that which thou abhorrest with so much reason; what cruell change is this from thy selfe, with thy selfe? or rather from the subiect of thy loue, with the same subiect it selfe? Shall I dare to say, that this stinking Carkasse heere is the fayre Helena ? That this heape of rotten bones are the sad spoyles of her perfectiōs? And that this little Ashes, is the dolefull head of that wonder of the world? Paris, Returne thou from Hell, into the earth agayne, for to see the cause of thy disa∣stres. Approach to this Sepulcher, and con∣template the infection & corruption neere at hand, with thou hast adored vnder the name of Helena. How many tymes hast thou beene kneeling before this carkasse, & before these rotten bones? How many mischiefes hast thou run into? How many perils hast thou escaped? How many seas hast thou crossed ouer? How many euils hast thou suf∣fered, for to possesse this heape of wormes? Thou verily belieuedst, thou hadst all the riches of the world in thy ship, whiles thou hadst thy Helena therein. The Coffer is opē, behold now wherein consist thy treasures. Art thou not ashamed for hauing so made loue to this heape of Ashes? and for hauing sighed so, a thousand, & a thousand tymes after this stinking Earth? Thus the glory of the world doth passe away, all flyes into the Tombe. Your Courtiers, come, yield you a last homage of visit, to this Idol of your passi∣ons. I haue heard indeed the Persians heerto∣fore, haue adored the Sun, and that there haue beene other Paynims, who in their brutishnes haue adord likewise diuers sorts of beasts; but I haue neuer seene a more pro∣digious thing, then now at this day, while they adore euen Clay, Corruption, and In∣fection. There is nothing more certayne▪ then that in adoring women, they become Idolatours of their putrefaction; since their body is a sacke of worms. Behold the good∣ly subiect of your watchings, of your trou∣bles, of your extrauagancies. How is it pos∣sible, this heape of ashes heere should affoard you such ill dayes, and so long nights? That this sinke of infection should make you shed so many teares, and send so many sighes into the wind? Are you not iealous, trow you, that the wormes should possesse this subiect of your affection? Can your wayward cou∣rages ere endure these wormes should be ta∣king their Fees thereof in your presence, & to your scorne? For they glut themselues of the one part of what you haue adored, and for the other, they make a dunghill of it. These are no Fables, these. Looke, & smell your selues, all is but misery and stench. So passeth the glory of the world away. I inuite you, my Dames, to a feast, which the corruption of Helena's body makes vnto the wormes, in the presence of Heauen & Earth. This Tombe which you see, is the Hall, where the banquet is prepared; come you hither in troupes, attyred all in the ri∣chest Ornaments you haue, as you would go vnto a wedding-feast. I licence you her∣in, to bring a glasse with you hanging at your girdle, for to admire with an dolatrous eye, the good Graces you haue. And if you affoard any whir of intermission at all, cast but your eyes awhile, vpon this stinking carcasse heere, since it is the body of your shadow, and the originall of your liuing pourtraicts. You now see inough, that you are but ashes, but earth, but clay, but meere putrefaction and infection; and yet suffer neuertheles your selues to called Goddesses; and to heape yet more cryme vpon crime, you accept the Sacrifices. I haue not seene, nor read of so prodigious Metamorphoses, that euen very Clay should be raised vpon a Throne, and the wormes and corruption should be meriting of titles of immortall glory. You suffer them to be kneeling be∣fore you, and feare not the while, least the wind of your vanities be carrying away the dust, whereof you are framed. You walke vpon cloth of gold, and after your death, are the beasts trampling vnder foote your stin∣king earth. You suffer them to kneele be∣fore you: Alas! what a sight to humble o∣nes selfe, before a dunghill! Decke vp, and adorne your carkasse as long as you please, the stench at last shall discouer the miseries thereof, to the sight of all the world. This handfull of ashes, which you see heere, is the beautifull Helena, whose allurements charmed harts, and whose charmes did ra∣uish soules. And yet notwithstanding is there left no more of her, then the meere in∣fection, which was bred with her. I do euen laugh at all your vanities, my Dames, & mocke at those who admire thē so. When as your bewties do assaile me, I breake the very crust of them, & approching to the corruption which is within, it makes me hate them more, then euer any man had loued them heretofore. I take pleasure som∣tyme to behold your sweetnesses, your allu∣rements, your nyceties; but it is only to be touched with compassion of your miseries. For whatsoeuer is the frailest in the world, is not so frayle as your nature is; whatsoeuer is more variable heere beneath, is not so changeable as your being is. I dare hardly eye you any long tyme, for feare, least euen while I looke vpon you, you vanish from my eyes, since you dye euery hower. Flatter not your selues, my Dames, be∣fore your Glasse; your body is euen iust of the same nature, with the shaddow which you see therin. You are indeed nothing. But if you force me to say, you are somthing, you are a meere dunghill couered with snow, a sinke of infection enuironed with flowers, a rich coffer full of wormes, and in a word, an abridgement of all the miseryes of the world. You Courtiers take a pride, forsooth, for hauing caryed away a thousand Fauours frō the hands of Ladies, either through the force of your spirit, or thorugh the charms of your subtilties. One bragges for hauing enthral∣led a Lady with the chaynes of her owne hayre. Another for inueagling a new Mi∣stresse in his loue, through letters written with his owne hād. There, one more perfect thē the rest shalbe publishing his triumphes. Heere another more happy yet, shal auouch al his passiōs to haue beene crowned. There shal not faile some one that wil be ordinarily busiyng his spirit with these vaine thoughts that he was euen borne into the world, to tempt the pudicity of Ladyes, so louely he is. But let vs pul the wings of this proud one, & make these bodyes of earth to walke vpon the earth, who rayse their Spirits vpon Thrones of smoke, belieuing they do well. Thou, that vauntest thy selfe for enthral∣ling thy mistresse with her owne chaynes; what glory it is, whiles the hayre, which so charily thou keepest within a box of muske, are but the rootes of lice, which shall putrify in sight, and thou shalt sent them anone, in despight of al thy powders & perfumes. So as if thou wilt needs haue me call those wre∣athes of excremēts, so full of infection, by the name of chaynes, they are euen the chaynes which the Deuill put into thy hands, to help thee to draw that body, which thou hast idolatrized into Hel; but takest not heed the while, that in drawing it thither, they draw thee; and haling it thither, they hale thee also. Behould a trimme peece of Glory to be proud off. Thou that hast yet more secret tyes of Friendship, with a Lady, written with her hand, and with her bloud; if thou thinkst so, thou art rich indeed, if thy treasure consist in a peece of paper, bespotted ouer, & blurred with blacke or red: yet to heare thee speake of this fauour of hers, they would verily say, thou possessedst the Empire of the world. An intolerable vanity the while. For admit that all the fayrest Ladies of the world had signed to thee with their guilty and cor∣rupt bloud, that they loued thee perfectly indeed, on which side wouldest thou find thy glory in these assurances? In so promi∣sing their loue to thee, they but promise thee to get thee damned, since a loue so vn∣lawfull as that, leades soules into Hell. And And dost thou make any reckoning of these promises then, poore soule? All the testimo∣nyes of their passions do witnes thy folly a∣gaynst thy selfe; and takest thou pleasure to blind thy selfe, with their hood, not to see the precipices that beset thee round? Thou imaginest it strayght to be a great honour to be fauoured of Ladyes: represent to thy selfe, what a glory it were, for thee, that a peece of Clay being quickened with lyfe, should seeme to be beloued of a Dunghill. Whiles thou becommest thus an Idolatour of a beautifull body, thou euen adorest the wormes, the infection and corruption it selfe, where with it is stuffed. What a crime is this? And thou Companion of vanity, and folly at once, that so vauntest thy selfe to haue dispeopled the earth of Myrrhes to crowne thy amourous triumphes withall, tell me what is become of this glory, and of this contentment, which thou see∣mest to exalt so much? I graunt, thou hast trampled on flowers: But where art thou now? If therein thou hast found the way of roses, thou shalt enter anone into that of Thornes. For this is the order and course of things in the world, that Pleasure begets Sorrow. Eyther thy delighs are past, or present: if past, thou art already in the Hell of their priuation; if present, thou art lyke∣wise in another Hell of their cryme, and of the apprehension to loose them. In so much as which way soeuer thou admirest thy for∣tune, if it be a body, misfortune is the sha∣dow. What glory doest thou thinke thou hast gotten by the victory of thy guilty en∣terprises? Thou hast peopled Hell with an infinite number of soules. Are not these ve∣ry glorious actions trow you? Thou hast lent thy cunning to the euill spirits, to de∣ceyue thy neyghbours, as if he were not deceaued inough with his owne deceypts; and yet still thou braggst thereof, thereby o heape cryme vpon cryme. I summon you, Courtiers, to appeare in hought and imagination, vpon the thorny bed, where you shall cast forth to the winds his breath of life, and to represent withal to your self before hand once a day the horrour & amazement you shall then haue of your elfe, when you shalbe calling to mind, the essons of the vanity and folly, which you haue giuen to an infinite number of feeble pirits, whose companions in losse you haue uer beene. Put off the tyme to this last ho∣wer, to make your accompt of the fauours which you haue euer receiued from Ladyes, if you wil know the true price of them. Thē euen then it is, when you shall feele very liuely, the assaults of your guilty consciēce; the crust of your pleasures shalbe broken, & you shall playnely see, what lyes within. Your spirit vnmasked of the veyle of your passions, shall sensibly discerne the truth of its passed offences, but there is no more re∣turne to be had vnto life, to do pennance in, for them. You must go further thē sorrows. What sorrow soeuer I am able to expresse, is no part of that which you shall suffer. All torments whatsoeuer being ioyned together haue not gal inough to comprehēd the least part of the bitternes of that cruell Adieu, which is then to be made to the world. Thē it is, I say, that you shall sigh, but not of loue. Then it is, that you shall play the extasyed and dead person, not in presence of your Mistresse, but before your crucified Iudge▪ Your tongue so eloquent before, shalbe then struck dumbe, in punishment of your too much speach. So as of force, shall you court Death in your fashion, and according to the sad humour which shall then possesse you. You must of necessity be playing your part in this last momēt vpon the theater of you bed. I would be loath for my part to troubl the Reader, with the faces which you shal make: it sufficeth that you imagine the one part, and that you doubt not of the rest. Thinke thē of death, you Courtiers, since the Eternity both of glory & payne, depends of a moment. O sweet, and dreadfull moment! And you, my Dames, you belieue you haue conquered an Empire straight, as soone as you haue once subiected any spirit to you power: to what end do you study so, euery day, since you learne ech moment but vani∣ty, and new lessons of nicenes, be it for actiō or grace sake; but therein what thinke you to do? Your purpose is to wound harts, & you vndoe soules; for when you make a mā passionately in loue with you, you do euen make him a Foole. You cannot be taking a∣way his hart, without depriuing him of rea∣son. And to what extrauagancies is he not subiect the while, during the reigne of his passion, I would say, of his folly? You are al which he loues, and very often all which he adores; what cry me? I should thinke it rather to please you, then to saue himselfe. If he looke vpon the Sun, he is but to make comparison betweene the light of your eyes and that of this bewtifull starre, which I le∣aue to you to imagine how farre frō truth▪ He seemes to maynteyne very impudently, in scorne of all created things, that you are the only wonder of the world, and the very abridgemēt of al that nature hath euer made bewtifull; which yet no man belieues but he, and you. If he carry vp his thoughtes to Heauen, he compares you to the Angells, with these words, That you haue all the quali∣ties of them. Iudge now without passiō, whe∣ther these termes of Idolatry do not fully, & wholy passe sentence, to conuince him with a thousand sorts of crymes. And yet do you take pleasure to make the Deuill more po∣tent then he is, for to cause others to be dam∣ned. Returne then agayne vnto your selfe, and consider how you ought to render an accoumpt one day of all those spirits, whose Reason you haue made to wan∣der in the labyrinth of your charmes. For she that on earth, shall haue subiected the most, shalbe the greatest slaue in Hell. What glory take you to ioyne your char∣mes with those of the Diuels, thereby to draw both bodyes and soules vnto them? I attend you at this last moment of your lyfe where your definitiue sentence is to be pro∣nounced. Thinke you alwayes of this mo∣ment, if there be yet remayning in you, but neuer so litle sparke of loue for your selues. When you shall once haue enthralled all the Kings of the earth; there would yet be a great deale more shame, then honour in it, since all those Kings were no more then meere corruption and infection. Thinke of your selues, my Dames, you are to day no more the same you were yesterday. Tyme which deuours all thinges, defaceth ech moment the fayrest lineaments of your face, nor shall it euer cease to ruine your beauties, vntill such tyme as you be wholy reduced to ashes. So passeth away the glory of the world, all flyes into the Tombe. That of all the Lawes, which Nature hath imposed vpon vs, that same of Dying is the sweetest. CHAP. XII. F ROM the tyme that our first Father had violated the sacred Lawes, which God had impo∣sed vpon him; Nature, as alte∣ring her nature, would ac∣knowledge him no more for her child. A∣none she rayseth a tumult against him, with all created things. The Heauen armes it selfe with thunders to punish his arrogancy. The Sunne hides himselfe vnder the veyle of his Eclypses, to depriue him of his light. The Moone his sister, defending his quarrell, re∣solues with her selfe to be often changing her countenance, towards him, to signify vnto him the displeasure she tooke thereat. The Starres being orherwise innocent of na∣ture, became malignant of a sudden, to po∣wre on his head their naughty influences. The Ayre keeping intelligence with the E∣arth, exhales her vapours, and hauing chan∣ged them into poyson, infects therewith the body of that miserable wretch. The Birdes take part with them, they whet their beakes, & clawes to giue some assault or other. The Earth prepares the mine of its abysses, for to swallow him vp, if the dread & horrour of its trembling, were not sufficient to take a∣way his life. The sauage beasts stand grin∣ding their teeth to deuoure him. The Sea makes an heape of an infinite number of roc∣kes to engulfe him in their waues. But this is nothing yet; Nature is so set on reuenge against him, as she puts on his fellowes to destroy their pourtraite, I meane to combat with the shadow of their body, in causing them to quench the fire of their rage, with their proper bloud. In so much as man hath no greater enemy then man himselfe. Let vs go forward. To continue these euils, do miseries, en∣ter into the world, accompanyed with their sad disastres, and followed with despayre, griefe, sadnes, folly, rage, and a thousand passions besides, which do cleane vnto the senses, for to seize vpon soules. This poore Adam sees himselfe to be besieged on al sidess if he looke vp to Heauen, the flash of the lightenings there euen dazles and astoni∣shes him quite; the dreadfull noyse of thun∣der makes him to wish himselfe to be deafe; he knowes not what to resolue vpon, since he hath now as many enemyes as he had vassals before. Adam may well cry mercy for his syn; what pardon soeuer he obteyne thereof, yet will nature neuer seeme to par∣don him for it. Whence it is, that in com∣passe also of these ages of redemption it self, wherein we breath the ayre of grace, we do sigh that same of miseryes. So as if there be nothing more certayne, according to the experience of our sense, then that the Earth is a Galley, wherein we are slaues; that it is the prison, wherin we are enchained, and the place assigned vs to suffer the paynes of our crymes in; can there possibly be found any soules so cuell to themselues, and such enemyes to their owne repose, as not to be continually sighing after their liberty, after the end of their punishments, and the be∣ginning of an eternall lyfe full of pleasures? What would become of vs, if our lyfe endu∣red for euer, with its miseryes? if it should neuer haue an end with our euill? & that it had no bounds, or limits, no more then we? For then should I be condemning the laughter of Democritus, and allowing of the continuall teares of his companion, since the season would be alwayes, to be alwaies weeping and neuer to laugh. Then would it be, that cryes and plaints would serue vs for pastimes, and teares & sighes, should neuer abandon eyther our eyes, or harts. But we are not so brought to this extre∣mity of vnhappines; The Heauens being touched with compassion of our euills, and of the greatnes of our miseryes, in giuing vs a cradle for them to be borne in, haue af∣foarded vs a Sepulcher also for to bury them in. O happy Tombe, that reduceth to ashes the subiect of our flames! O happy Tombe, where the wormes make an end to deuoure the rest of our miseryes! O happy Tombe, where our soules do recouer their liberty, & where our bodyes do fynd the end, and terme of of paynes! O happy Tombe, where we are re∣duced to corruption, to arise in glory! O happy Tombe, where death euen dyes with vs, and where lyfe reuiues with our selues for an Eternity! O happy Tombe, where we ren∣der to the earth, the earth of our body, to put our soules in possession of the inheritan∣ce of heauen! O happy Tombe, where we passe from death, to lyfe; from sadnes, to ioy; from infamy, to glory; from payne, to re∣pose; and from this vale of teares, vnto the mansion of delights. From the tyme that the children of Israel had tasted in the desart the sweetnes of the heauenly Manna ; the most delicious meates of the earth, were growne to be contemp∣tible to them; their harts euen chāging their nature, fell incessantly gaping after this ce∣lestiall food. So likewise may I say, that from the instant, wherein a holy Soule is once fed with the food of the grace which is found in an innocent lyfe; the world is an obiect of horrour and amazement vnto it; its thoughts & desires creep not on the earth any more; if it sigh, it is but after its last sigh; if it complayne, it is only for the long terme of its banishmēt in this vale of miseryes. The hope of dying serues it as a cōfort in its tro∣bles, and solace in its paynes; it lyues in the prison of its body, as slaues in the prison of their crimes, with a necessary constancy, alwayes attending on the last houre therof, and this last moment where begins the eter∣nity of glory. Me thinkes the sentence of death, which the diuine iustice pronounced once to our first Parents, in that earthly Paradise, was much in their fauour, agaynst the euills, wherewith their lyfe was fraught. For if God had made the same to be immortall with all mischifes which succeeded their of∣fence, of all created things had man beene found to be the miserablest of them, and most worthy of compassion; but the same Goodnes, which moued the Creatour to effect this goodly worke, did euen moue him likewise to conserue the same. His sen∣tence was of death, but in the rigour of his iustice, he let his merry to appeare at the same tyme, since from the payne of death we passe to the delights of a permanent and immortall lyfe. In so much as this sweet cō∣solation, is inseparable from our tormēts, for they shal one day finish. O sweet End, since thou breakst the chaynes of our captiuity! O sweet End, since thou makest vs to reuiue, neuer for to dy! O sweet End, since thou putst an end to all our sufferances! O sweet End, since we dye to reuiue for euer! How Worldlings dye deliciously without euer think ng thereof. CHAP. XIII. W E must needes confesse how the soules of the world, are so dee∣pely taken, with the sleepe of their pleasures, as they are euen drowned in their blindnes, without feare of the precipices, that en∣compasse them round. Ioy transports them, gladnes rauishes them, rest charmes them, hope comforts them, riches moderats their feare, health fortyfies their courage, & all the vanityes nurse them, and bring them vp in the forgetfulnesse of themselues, so, as they may neuer be able to vse any vi∣olence, for to breake the chaynes of their captiuity. A pittifull thing, how they ne∣uer consider the while, that this ioy wher∣with they are so carryed away, euē vanishes quite lyke a flash of lightening; that this gladnesse wherewith they are rauished, de∣stroyes it selfe, with its owne violence, in running incessantly vnto its end; That the repose which charmes them, cōcludes with an eternall vnrest; that the hope which cō∣forts them, quite changes it selfe by litle & litle into despayre; That these riches which do moderate their feare, during their lyfe, augments it at their death; that the health which strengthens their courage, whiles the calme and tranquility of their fortune lasts, doth bread them a thousand stormes throgh the absence thereof, where they run dan∣ger of ship wracke. And finally that all those vanityes, which serue them as a Nurse, and Schoole mistresse to trayne them vp in vi∣ces, are as so many bad Pylots which make a traffike of their losse and ruine. When I image with my selfe, the blind∣nesse whereto the men of this world are brought, I cannot chuse but be moued with compassion for them. Is it not a strang thing and worthy of pitty, that they runne as fast as euer they can vnto Death, without cease, without intermission, without fetching of their breath, and without euer taking any heed of the way they hold, as if they liued insensible in all their senses? The Sunne, which riseth euery morning, sets euery eue∣ning, for to let them see, how the light of their life, should haue at last, a last setting as well as it. The Age, which makes them hoary, and which keepes reckoning of their yeares, through the accōpt of the wrinckles which it causeth to grow on their face, prea∣cheth nought els, but the necessity of their departure. All their Actions termine not a whit, but to the ruine of the body, from whence they fetch their motion, since e∣uery action of it selfe still tendes to its end. How can they chuse but thinke of death, if all the subiects which are found in Nature, do euen cary the very lineaments thereof in the face? The Sunne dyes in running his ra∣ce. The Moone dyes in her perpetuall in∣constancy. The ayre dyes with its corupti∣on. The birds seeke death in flying. The brute beasts in running, and the fishes in swimming in the water. The seasons dye, in springing againe as well as the trees. The flowers dye, with the day that hath seene them blow forth. The earth dyes in the or∣der of tyme, since her yeares are counted. The Sea sinckes it selfe by litle and litle in∣to its proper abysses. The fyre consumes it selfe in its heat; and Nature it selfe that ser∣ues for a second cause, in the generation of all things, destroyes it selfe, by litle and litle with them. I speake nothing of men, since they haue nothing more proper then Death. What meanes, trow you, to forget this sweet ne∣cessity of dying, whose law very happily dispenseth with none? yet for all that, do not doubt but there are many in the world, who would neuer be dying: but this were a childi h language of theirs, so farre from reason, and common sense, as one had need to declare himselfe to be a starke foole, for to excuse himself of the errour, or rather of the cryme. We do all waies contemne the good vnknowne; and as we naturally lyue in the apprehension of loosing that which we possesse, we cleaue to the present; so true it is that all things do escape vs, and fly away frō vs. What a life were it for vs to lyue eternal∣ly in the miserable condition, wherein we are borne? What a life would it be, to be al∣wayes breathing in sighes, in mourning, & in playnts? What a life were it to dy neuer, and to suffer without cease, since miseryes and paynes are the miserable accidents of our bodies? it would euen be a liuing death, or rather a dying life, a thousand times more cruell and intollerable then death it selfe. Happy then, yea thrice happy is that last in∣stant, which makes vs get forth of the Em∣pire of tyme! most pleasing is the moment, which leades vs into the Eternity! O sweet agony, ful of extasy and rauishment! O glo∣rious Ioseph, guide now my pen in this faire labyrinth of death, wherein it is wande∣ring, to touch at some thing of your last rauishments, when as you gaue vp your soule on the lips of himselfe that created them. Lyfe hath nothing so delicious as your death: you dy in the armes of the mo∣ther of lyfe, and of lyfe it selfe. And shall I say, that is a death? You amorously expire on the mouth of your Redeemer, that is to say, on the gate of Paradise; what ioy! The pen fals out of my hand, as if it were sensible of these incomparable pleasures, wherwith the end of your holy lyfe was crowned, but I hope to recouer it agayne very short∣ly, for to speake more worthily thereof, if these secret Vowes, which I haue already offered you, may be gratefull to you. Let vs say then confidently, that of all the acti∣ons of lyfe, the last of death, is the welcom∣est of al, to such as haue lyued well; and it is permitted to all the world to liue well. Goodly Considerations vpon this important verity ; That whatsoeuer we do, we dye euery houre without cease. CHAP. XIIII. T HE inhabitants of Nylus are so accustomed to heare the dread∣ ull noyse of its waters alwayes roaring, as they haue no eares to feele the incōmodity therof. Let vs say the same in a diuers sense, of men in the world, that they are so habituated to this sweet feeling of dying, without cease, as they perceiue not thēselues to dy awhit. They breath, in dying, the aire of the Death which they sigh forth, without thinking e∣uer of Death. A strange thing to liue conti∣nually in Death, and to dy euery day in life without once dreaming of the necessity of their end, whither they run alwaies! They do nothing els but dy, and they haue no care but to liue. For if they speake, the ayre wher∣of they forme their words, causeth the lights to dye, which is the Clocke of life, the respi∣rations the minutes; these minutes are coū∣ted, and one succeding to the other, the lasts strikes the houre of Death. If they eate, the very food that nourishes them, doth putrify in their bodyes, as in a dunghill, in signe that they are full of corruption; and this infectiō by little and little ruines the infected vessel wherein it is enclosed. If they sleepe, they exteriourly carry the countenance of death, which they hide within. In fine there is no action, wherein they may be any wayes employed, which is not a Symbole of De∣ath. If the foolish errours of these men of the world, concluded not in an irreparable do∣mage, they would afford as much pleasure as they moue pitty. For one gets into his Caroch, with purpose to goe to some faire house of his in the Country, without consi∣dering the while, how that very way of his walke, is euen the same of Death, whither Tyme, which is the Coachman, leades him insensibly with all his company. So as if they go not to lye, for this dayes iourney, at the lodging of the Tombe, it is put of for the morrow after. Another embarkes himselfe in a Pinnace for to sayle into the Indyes, & himselfe is a Pinnace the while, embarked in the sea of the world, from the moment of his birth, sayling without cease, at the pleasure of the wind, wherewith age doth replenish the sayles, and that without once being able to land, but in the hauen of the Tombe. This Gallant heere shalbe going in post, to see his Mistresse, and he hath no other obiect in all his course, then to arriue as soone as he can, to the place where she lodgeth. Foole as he is, he considers not the while, how that e∣uery step he puts forward on his way, he ap∣proacheth the nerer to the Tombe, whither he runs with full speed, vpon the same Post-horses he takes to compasse his amourous desires. Another there, wil be going more ea∣sily in a Litter, and with lesse incommodity for feare the heate or cold may seeme to pre∣iudice his health; but let him go as easily as he will, yet Death will not fayle to lead his mules in such sort, as he shall but passe o∣nely by his howses of pleasure, so to go for∣wards in his way directly to the Tombe, what digression soeuer he seemes to make, to put it off. Thinke on this truth, my Dames, du∣ring the calme and tranquility of your for∣tune; the spring tyme of your lyfe, will not alwayes last: euen as the seasons of the yeare succeed ech other, so those of age pursue one another. But as we see often how the in∣temperance of the ayre, causeth the winter to arriue in the midst of sommer; take heed the intemperance of your humours, produce not the winter of death in the midst of the spring tyme of your lyfe. In vayne do you set forth all your deceiptfull markes of im∣motality, the time scornes them, and I laugh at them. For if to day you be something, to¦morrow are you lyke to be nothing: So pas∣seth away the glory of the world, all flyes into the Tombe. The Tombe of the pleasures of the Sight. CHAP. XV. L ET all the fayrest Obiects, which are in Nature appeare in my presence, to behold ech one in its turne, the foundation of their Sepulcher. Let the Hea∣uen shew forth, open to view, its serene countenance; the Sun his liuely brightnes; the Moone her siluer day; the starres their twinckling sparkes; the Ayre its fayre na∣kednes; The birds their warblings, & their richest robes of plumages, enamelled with euery sort of colours; The Trees the orna∣ment of their blossomes, and the decking of their fruits; the Meadowes the tapestry of their greenes; and Mountaynes the mossy stuffe, wherewith they couer their crumpt backes; the forrests their thicke branches; the sauadge beasts, the extrauagant beauty which Nature hath impressed in their brutish kind, through the diuersity of the formes which they represent; the Earth, the inside of its coffers, replenished with all sorts of ri∣ches; the Riuers, the Christall of their stre∣ames; the Fountaynes, the liquid glasses of their waters; the Sea its huge waterish mā∣tle; & the fishes, the infinite number of their figures, wholy different. Let the world yet giue forth new wonders, and beauty exhi∣bit to our view its fayrest lyuing pictures; yet all those obiects, taken altogether, are no more then a little dust, enclosed in the crust of artificiousnes, which Tyme quite ruines, by little and little. Thou man of the world, who seest but only by thine eyes, in cherishing thy life so with the pleasures of the sight, admire yet once in thine Idea, the obiects, whose beauty heeretofore thou hast adored; then represēt to thy selfe according to the argument thou canst draw from the nature of their being, what is become of them, or what are they like to be. If it be some proud pallace, wher∣in the order, the riches, the magnificence, & the industry of the workeman be in dispute about glory, to know who shall carry away the prize; consider that Tyme destroyes it at all howers, and that it shall neuer giue o∣uer, till it see the ruines of it. If the charmes of Art do charme the sight, in admiration of the fayrest colours, laid on a rich subiect, think but a little of the fraylty of those accidents. For all the beautifullest colours that are, do fetch their birrh from that of flowers. And can we see any thing more changeable, or of so small a date as they? So as if the allurements of the beauties of Nature, do rauish thy soule by thy eyes▪ defēd thy self forth with through the know∣ledge thou hast of their misery; since in effect the fayrest Lady in the world, is but a masse of flesh, which corrupts euery moment, vn∣till such tyme, as it be wholy formed to cor∣ruption, and this corruption into wormes. As for all other things whatsoeuer which thou mayest haue seene, being no whit more noble then it, thou Mayst well be iudging of their defects by the consequence. In so much as whatsoeuer the Heauēs, haue glit∣tering, the Earth rare, Nature gay, & Art more admirable, if thou seruest thy selfe of the touchstone of thy iudgement, to know the matter which supports the image, thou shalt soone find all to be no more then dust; and so mayest feare least it happen to fly in thine eyes, to make thee blind, if thou loo∣kest but too neere vpon it. The Tombe of the Pleasures, of the Sense of Hearing. CHAP. XVI. Y OV Soules of the world, who suffer your liberty to be taken a∣way through your eares, with the deceiptful charmes of Syrens: You I say, who sigh for ioy, for delectation, and extasy, amidst the pleasures of a sweet har∣mony, eyther of voyces or instruments, lēd your guilty eares to heare the reasons, which seeme to condemne your errours. I doubt not a whit, but the purling of a siluer brook, the sweet running murmur of a fountayne, the pretty warbling of birds, and the amou∣rous accents of a delicate voyce, ioyned with the sweet allurements of the melody of a Lute, are of force inough to captiue your spirits vnder the empire of a thousād sorts of delights. But yet returne a little from this wandering of yours; Content your selfe, with the losse of liberty, and saue your rea∣son to repayre your domage. At such tyme as you stand listening to the humming noyse of this riuer, & to the mur∣mur of this fountayne, imagine this truth the while, That all passeth away, that all slides a∣long like to the waues. Their language prea∣cheth nought els. Those birds euen call for death, at the sound of their chaunting like the Swan. And if the harmony of a voice, or Lute so charme you, cōsider awhile how the pleasure of this melody is formed of the ayre, and that in the same instant, it resolues into ayre agayne, so as the delights euen dy in their birth. You let your eares be tickled with the charmes of Eloquēce; imagine you that since it is true, that as neither Cicero, nor Demosthenes were exempt from the Tombe, or corruption, with al their fayre elocution, so shall you neuer be able to perswade death with al your gallant discourses, to prolong the terme of your life, but a moment. True Eloquence consists in preaching Vertue, and true Harmony to hould reason alwayes at accord with the Will, for to desire no∣thing but what is iust. The Tombe of the other Pleasures, that are affected to the Senses. CHAP. XVII. O PEN your eyes, you world∣lings, to discouer playnly the truth of your crymes: You take your pleasures to cherish dain∣tily your bodyes, as if you knew not their miseryes. But why say I, your pleasures? Can you take any content∣ment, to stuffe your putrified body, with a new matter of corruption? Whatsoeuer you eat is a symbole of Death, & so shall you dy in eating. You do nothing but heape dung vpon dung, & add but infectiō to infection. I graunt that your life, passeth euer its dayes in continuall banquetting. But I would fayne haue you let me see the pleasure which is left you of all this good cheere at the latter course. Is this a contentment, trow you, to haue the Belly stuffed with a thousand or∣dures, to put your spirit on the racke with the stinking fume of meates, not well con∣cocted, which arise vp in the brayne? Is it well with you to haue the head drousy, the pulse distempered, the spirit benummed, & reason astray? Behold heere a part of the delights which succeed your delights, and you haue no care but to pamper your bodyes, as if you lyued but onely for them, not considering the meane while, how the same very food, which affoards them lyfe, euen brings them to death. Inebriate your selfe with these brutish pleasures, and by the example of the new Epicures, haue no passion but to con∣serue them; yet of necessity, must the ima∣ginary paradise of your lyfe, conclude in a true Hell on the day of your death. For all these roses shalbe changed into thornes in that last moment. Glut you, and crumme your bodies for to satiate the wormes with∣all. But this is nothing as yet. Your sou∣les being the companions of your euills, must needs be euerlastingly punished in an eternity of paynes. O dreadfull Eternity! It seemes in a fashion, that those men of the world may well be excusing their vanity, that causes them to carry both amber and muske about them, since they are all full of of infection and corruption, which makes me belieue, that they feare, least men come to sent the stench of their miseries, & so en∣gage them, or rather inforce them to serue themselues of this cunning. In effect, all these odours, and these perfumes smell so strong of earth, as we cannot loue the smoke without runing into danger of the fire. So as those who tye their spirit to these vayne idea's of pleasures▪ are in loue with shadows and despise the bodyes. They smell very well, that smell not ill; and such as habi∣tuate their bodyes to Perfumes, can neuer endure the stinke of the mortuary Torches, which shall encompasse their b d, at the houre of death. I speake to you, my Ladyes, who doe so passionately affect these foolish vanityes. I remit you euer to the instant of Death, for to receyue the iudgement of your actions, full of shame and reproach. Deale you so, as your soule may sauour well, rather then the body; since the one may euery moment be cited to the presence of God, and the o∣ther serues as a prey for the worms. It were better your teeth should sauour il, then your actions; for those are subiect to corruption, and these heere shall liue eternally, eyther in payne or glory. I leaue you to thinke of these important verityes. For the pleasures of Touching, being of the selfe same nature with the rest, and hauing no more solid foundatiō then they; we may draw the consequence of the same argumēt with them, and conclude; how this ima∣ginary pleasure cannot seeeme to cleaue but to weaker spirits, who loue only the earth; because its obiect is so vile and base, as we had need to abase our selues, to obserue its aymes. Let vs resume the ayres of our for∣mer discourses, and say that the pleasures of the world, do not subsist in the world, but through the name onely, which is giuen them. For in effect they are nothing but a dreame, & the shadow of a shadow, whose body we neuer possesse. Such as loue them are not capable of loue, since they fix their affections on the pourtraicts onely of ima∣gination, and of the Idea's which the wind defaceth euery moment. True contentmēt consists in thinking alwayes of death. And this is the onely pleasure of lyfe, since it ter∣mines in the delights of Eternity. How he who hath imposed the Law of Death vpon vs, hath suffered al the paynes ther∣of together. CHAP. XVIII. I NOTE an excesse of loue in the History of that great King who being touched with a ge∣nerous desire, to banish vice for euer from his Kingdome, & to bring in Vertue, there to reigne in peace; among an infinite number of Lawes, which he imposed on his subiects, the payne of pul∣ling out the eyes, was decreed for his puni∣shment that should violate the most impor∣tant of thē. The ill lucke was, that his only Sonne, should fall the first into that cryme. What shall he do? And what shal he resolue vpon? For to quit himselfe from the assaults both of loue and pitty, which nature gaue him, euery moment he could not do; since the halfe of his bloud, takes away fury from the other halfe. What likelihood for one to arme himselfe against himselfe, to excite his arme to vengeance, to destroy his body? He hath no loue but for the guilty, & how shall he haue passion to destroy him? He sees not but by his eyes, and how shall he be able to see him blind? In fine, he sits not on his Throne, but to keepe him the place; & how shall he possibly mount this throne to prononce the sentence of his punishment? Of necessity yet the errour must be punished if he wil not soyle the splendour of his iusti∣ce, which is the richest ornament of his Crowne, and the onely vertue that makes him worthy of his Empire. Nature assayles him powerfully, Loue giues him a thousand batteryes, and euen Pitty often wrings the weapons from his hands; and yet Reason for all that, seemes to carry away the victory. There is no re∣medy, but needs must he yield to Nature, Loue, and Pitty; but yet finds he a way to make Iustice triumph in satisfying the law. He puls out one of his sonnes eyes, for one halfe of the punishment, and causes another to be pluckt forth from himselfe, for to finish the chasticement. What excesse of Goodnes. Let vs draw now the mysticall Allegory from this history, and say, That our Redee∣mer represents this iust King, at such tyme, as in the terrestrial Paradise, he imposed this law of obedience vnder paine of death vpon man, being the Sonne of his hands, as the noblest worke of his Creation. This man being the first borne, becomes lykewyse at that same very tyme the first guilty in con∣temning the commaundements of his Soue∣raygne: He eats that fatall Apple, or rather opens with his murderous teeth that vnluc∣ky box of Pandora, stuffed with all manner of euills. The punishment euen followes his offence so neere, as he instantly incurres the payne of death. But what a prodigy of loue! The Creator being touched with the miseryes of his creature, takes away the ri∣gour of the law, without destroying it quite or infringing the same: I meane, that he seuers death from death in causing the guil∣ty to arise agayne from his ashes, for to liue eternally. And the meanes, wherof he ser∣ues himselfe, is to dye with him, and in the Chalice of his passion to drinke all the bit∣ternes of death, for to chāge the nature ther∣of. In such sort, as this way of death con∣ducts vs now to eternall lyfe. O sweet Death, a thousand tymes more ple∣sing thē whatsoeuer is most pleasing in the world! O sweet Death, a hundred, and a hun∣dred tymes more delicious, then all the plea∣sures vnited together! O sweet Death, where the body finds repose, the spirit contentmēt, & the soule its whole felicity! O sweet Death, the only hope of the afflicted, the sole con∣solation of the wisest, and the last remedy for all the euils of the world! O sweet Death, and a thousand tymes more admirable, then his goodnes that imposed the law, since through the same very Goodnes, he would needs be suffering the paine it selfe, for to take away the payne. Who durst refuse to drinke, in his turne, in the Chalice where God himselfe hath quenched his thirst? Let vs go thē very holily to Death; for to go cheerefully thi∣ther, is to make loue and vertue lead vs into the sepulcher, if we meane to find therein a second cradle, where we may be reborne anew, neuer to dye any more. I cannot forget that goodly Custome of the Egyptians, that when as a Sonne be∣ing armed with fury, should passe to that extremity of cruelty, as to take away the life from him, who had giuen him the same, he incurred this sweet punishment withall, to be shut vp for three whole dayes in prison togeather with the body, whose Parricide he was: & I should thinke, that such as had im∣posed the law, had this beliefe, that the ter∣rible and dreadfull obiect of the cryme, was a torment of force inough for the guilty, to extort the last teares from his eyes, & the vt∣most playntes from his soule. For in effect Nature neuer belyes it selfe, it is alwayes it selfe, it may well affoard some intermission of loue & of pitty, but yet at last, it snatches the hart from the bowels, through a violēce worthy of it selfe. Let vs see now the backside of this Med∣dall, so to draw forth the mistery, out of this moral verity. We represent to day, this guil∣ty sonne, since we haue put our Redeemer to Death, who is the common Father of our soules. The punishment, which the law of his Iustice, hath now imposed vpon vs, it to looke cōtinually on this Tree of the Crosse, whereon our crymes haue made him to ex∣pire, for to repayre their enormity withall! O sweet punishment! For spilling the bloud of him, who hath filled our veynes, the law exacts no more of vs then teares! For hauing nayled him on the Crosse, Iustice enioynes vs no other payne, then that of nayling our eyes on the same pillar wherupon he is nay∣led! For hauing crowned him with thorns, he would haue vs to trample vnder foote, the roses of our pleasures! In fine, for putting him to Death, he demaundes no more at our hands, but sighes and teares for to testify our sorrow for the same! Who could refuse to af∣ford him this pitty, or loue, who for our loue hath had such pitty vpon vs? His hart hath beene melt to teares of bloud, vpon the Aul∣tar of the Crosse; and shall we not drowne our selues, in the sea of our teares, being so prest with the storme of our sighs & plaints; Shall we suffer the rockes to vpbrayed vs of insensibility? The Sunne hath beene dark∣ned at the sight of our cryme, and shall not we wax pale for sorrow, of committing the same? The Moone had beene hiding her selfe for shame, and shall not our countenāce awhit be couered therewith? The earth hath quaked, and shall not our hearts seeme to tremble for feare? The veyle of the Temple hath beene rent in twayne, and shall our bo∣wels remayne entire? In fine, Nature hath suffered, and shall we be exempt from suffe∣ring, at the sight of our Redeemer nayled v∣pon the Crosse? Weepe, weep you mine eyes, all the water of your humide springes; powre you forth boldly the last teare on this Crosse, where my Sauiour hath spilt the last drop of his bloud. Do you imitate the Sunne, in your little course, drowne your selues within the sea of your teares, if you would, like to him be arising againe from your West, and shine without him in the East of an eternall light. And thou my hart, vnty thy selfe a little, frō all the feelings of the pleasures of the world, since the only roses of true contentment, are found amidst the thornes of the Crosse. The whole felicity concludes in this point, of neuer hauing any other, then that of carying the crosse. This is the ladder of Iacob, which serues vs to mount vp to Heauen with all. This is the brazen Serpent, that cures our soules from the poyson of the vanities of the world. Without the Crosse there is no plea∣sure, nor repose in the world. He that caryes the crosse with him, may well say, more cō∣fidently then Bias did, that he caryes all his riches about him. For therein alone are com∣prized all the treasures of the world; therein consists the accomplishmēt of our happines. O deere Crosse, the only wish of my soule! O deere Crosse, the sweet obiect of mine eyes! O deere Crosse, in which alone I put my hope! O deere Crosse, vpon which alone, do I esta∣blish the foundation of all my felicities! O deere Crosse, where my wishes find their end, & my enuy, its vtmost limits! O deere Crosse, deere Instrument of my victory, and rich Crowne of my tryumph! I pretend to no∣thing els in the world, but the Crosse, I abā∣don al for it. For as I reuiue not but through it only, so will I dy with it, and deliciouly expire vpon its couch. And this is the only meanes to be vnsensible of Death. You Soules of the World, I present you with the Crosse, as with a new Arke of Noe, to warrant you frō the deluge of the diuine Iustice, and that deadfull day of iudgment. Can you refuse to kisse the wood, wherupō you haue nayled your Sauiour? Behold the wonder! He hath exchanged your cruelty into loue. For he hath affoarded you the in∣uention, to nayle his hands, that he might haue alwayes his armes so stretched forth to imbrace you withall. The like may I say, that he caused his Feet to be so nayled, to at∣tend you at all houres, since euery houre is he ready, in his will, to pardon you. O pro∣digy of goodnes! O miracle of Loue! Lord graunt I beseech thee, I become not vngra∣tefull, for so many fauours done me! Teach my hart a language, wholy diuine, to thāke you diuinely for them; whiles I can offer you no more, for a whole acknowledgemēt of al, then the only griefe of not hauing any thing worthy of you. The pleasure which is found in Liuing wel, for to Dye content. CHAP. XIX. I T is impossible to expresse, the pleasures of a holy Soule, its contentments are not to be so called, its sweetnesse hath ano∣ther name, its extasyes & raui∣shments cannot be comprehended, but by the selfe same hart which feeles them. For not to lye, it hath ioyes wholy of Heauene it tasts the delights most deuine, and with a like grace, it carries its terrestriall Paradise with it. If its thoughts seeme to touch vpon earth, it is but only for its contempt, for anon they take their flight to heauen-wards, as the onely obiect, which they do ayme at at all tymes. In fine, as they are immortall, they neuer regard but the Eternity. The paynes it endures, haue no bitternes with them, but only in name, the miseries do euen change their quality in its presence, as if they awed its courage. If misfortune chance to light vpon it, with some sad accident or o∣ther, it receiues it as a present from Heauen, rather thē as any disgrace of fortune. If death seeme to snatch away from it, what most it Ioues, it payes nature the teares it owes it, and at the same very tyme, satisfyes reason through generous actions with its constan∣cy. If it loose all the goods which it had for portion on earth, it complaynes not awhit, but of it selfe, while its offences seeme to deserue a great chastizement. On the other side, as it placeth not its affe∣ction on the riches of the world, fortune can take away nothing from it, but what it is willing to loose; because it hath no∣thing proper, but the hope of possessing one ay the richest treasures, in a Land which is wholy scituated out of the Empie of Time, and inconstancy thereof. Let it thunder, let the sea mount vp to the Heauens, vpon the backe of its waues; let the warres dispeople townes, and all the disasters of the world make al together an Army to set vpon it, yet remaynes it firme, and stable as a rocke in the midst of this Sea▪ & if it feare any thing, it is but the feare of offending God. O sweet feare! more noble then all the courages of the world! Thus liues it content amids the broyles, whereof the world is so full. Thus liues it most happily amids the sad accidents which land euery houre on the shore of the world. Thus enioyes it a sweet repose amids the troubles, and continuall tribulations of Mortals. It loues not health, but to employ its lyfe in the seruice of him, who hath be∣stowed it vpon it. If it laugh, it is for the ioy it hath, that it neuer had any such be∣neath, since the Redeemer had neuer beene gathering but thornes: and if it weep, it is for the griefe of its proper miseryes, rather then for those of its body, being very soli∣citous to conserue entiere, and without ble∣mish the image and semblance of its Crea∣tour, whose impression it had receyued on the first day of its being. In fine, it is capable, neyther of pleasure nor yet of sadnes, but for the onely interests of its saluation, whose thoughts are euer pre∣sent with it. And is not this a sweet lyfe? So as if Time strike the houre of its retrayt from its first disposition to death, it deduceth a last, for to yield vp it selfe into the hands of him that created it. In vaine doth euill seeke to afflict its senses, the light of its constancy would be alwayes appearing through the shadowes of its sad countenance. To what condition soeuer had it beene raysed vnto▪ it takes no care to quit the greatnesses, be∣cause it had neuer tyed its affections there∣unto. The Sun may well arise, and sett a∣gayne; yet she beholds it alwayes with the selfe same eye. Its East and West are equall to it, though they be different, attending without anxiety, the West of the torch of its lyfe. The labour which it hath, to pre∣pare it selfe for death, is not very great, since still it hath lyued in this preparation. Not∣withstanding as we cannot employ all our tyme in so important a busines, it deliciou∣sly spends the remaynder of its lyfe therein: It smyles to behold all the world to weep about its bed, and being not able to speake any more to cōplaine of their plaints, it sighs to heare them sigh. For it suffers, not but what it sees others to suffer. All the griefe is in the body, and if it seeme a litle, to reflect vpon it, it is but a griefe of loue, with sighing in expectation of its last sigh, for to behold the onely obiect of its good. Let the wyfe cry, the children pull their hayre, and the neerest of its kyn be carying on their visage the sadnes, which they haue in their hart; let the best friends be partners of this condolement, and euery one in his fashion complayn of the disaster so befalne him; yet she alone stands praysing the hea∣uens for it, and blesseth the day, and houre now ready to produce this last moment, where the eternity of its glory should begin Well may death seeme to make its visage pale, but not the hart, for loe it appeares in these last extremes more refulgent then e∣uer, lyke a cādle which is ready to go forth; it hath the voyce of a dying Swan, which is able to charme all the dolours that enui∣rone it round. The Diuells are astonished to behold it so deuoyd of astonishment; the force of its inuincible courage▪ doth so wea∣ken their power, as they are constrayned to pretend nothing, to triumph at. In such sort, as with the armes of Vertue, it caryes away the crowne vnto the end of the race, euen dying with the desire it hath to dye, rather then of sorrow, for not lyuing long inough. Thus through force of the sighes of loue, it sends forth at last, through a last push of loue, the last sigh from the bowels, and so flyes away vpon its wings, vnto the fel∣lowship of the Angels into Heauen, where its holy thoughtes had now along tyme e∣stablished their dwelling. O sweet dwel∣ling! O happy death, which conducts vs thither! O welcome dwelling, and most de∣licious, the moment which affoards the E∣ternity thereof. The Picture of the Life and Death of a sin∣full Soule. CHAP. XX. O F all the miserable conditions, wherto a man may be reduced, that same of lyuing in Mortall Sin, is the most vnhappy and vnfortunate. The Slaues in the Galleyes are a great deale more happy, then such a one. For their bondage is limited to a terme; and that of sin to a payne of an eter∣nall seruitude. It is impossible, a guilty man should liue content, in the midst of all the pleasures of the world, for his cryme is his hangman and torture. If he be present at bā∣quets, the remembrance of his offences is mingling of some aloes in his delicious meates. If he quench his thirst with the sweetest nectar in the world, the same very thought wilbe distilling a droppe of gaule into his Cuppe. If he walk into some good∣ly garden, the imaginatiō of his faults being alwayes present with him, makes him to feele the Thornes of the Roses he admires. If he go a hunting, the Torturer of his guil∣ty conscience runs after him. Let him goe where he wil through the world, his cryme is his shadow, which followes him through∣out. Whatsoeuer he doth, he is euer ready to thinke of what shal become of him, & what fortune soeuer he possesseth, it is neuer great inough to put his spirit in repose. The least accident that happens to him brings him to Deathes doore, because that finding himself to be guilty, he lyues alwais on the poynt of paying for his cryme. If it rayne, he imagins straight the Heauens are prepared to powre a new deluge vpon him, for to punish him with. If it thunder, he perswades himself presently, that the lighte∣ning hath no other ayme, then to light on his guilty head. If the weather be fayre, he sees a sommer without, & a winter within; for his brutish passions produce a continual tempest in his soule. If fortune present him with Scepters, he regards them, but as one apprehending thē shortly to be taken away from him, since he deserues them not. In fine he wanders in vaine, in the labyrinth of all vanityes, and returnes to himselfe agayne at all tymes, to confesse of force, that he is the most wretched of the world, in the most of all his greatnesses. If he be taken with a sicknes, behold him on the racke; there are not Priests inough to be found, nor Religions to confesse him, & yet knowes he not what to say. For the nū∣ber of his offences, are without number, and his troubled memory, can but only represēt to him, the least part of them. The disease seemes to presse him hard in the meane tyme & his paynes do put him anew on the racke. Of all whatsoeuer is represented vnto him, there is nothing likes him so much, as the Phisitian doth; but he is now in the point to try his last remedy, after he hath turned ouer all his old Bookes. The Doctours are assembled togeather about his bed, but it is only to bid him Adieu, in a language which he vnderstands not. Behold all the comfort they giue him; in so much as to see the Phi∣sitians so assembled about him, and set by his bed in chayres of Grauity, one would say, they were the Princes of the Senate, that come to pronounce the sentence of Death vpon this guilty wretch. He hearkens atten∣tiuely to them, without hearing them. For the feare he hath of vnderstanding all which they say, makes him euen deafe to the halfe. The Syncopes, are the Hangmen, which present themselues to him, for to execute this cruell sentence of Death. Then the hope of his curing, begins to leaue him. Behold him yet once againe in the strongest pangs of his agony. He would confesse the euil he hath done, and that which he endures doth hinder him from it. He would recount the history of his life, but the dolours of his pre∣sent Death, will not permit him to do it. His hart through its vehement sighes, his eyes through their forced teares, and his Soule by its necessary sighes, do pray his tongue, ech one in its fashion, to disclose their crymes; but the same cannot speake, the rigour of a thousand punishmēts makes it to be dumbe. On the other side, his spirit in the dis∣order wherein it finds it selfe, can haue no o∣ther thoughts then those of sorrow, for eter∣nally abandoning that, which it loues so deerly. He knowes not how to expresse a last farewell to his pleasures. Whatsoeuer re∣presents it selfe to his eyes are so many ob∣iects, that renew his payne. If he take heed vnto the beames of the Sun, with peere into his chamber window for to take their leaue of his eyes; he remembers immediately all the pleasures he hath taken through help of their fayre light, in a thousand and a thou∣sand places, where it hath beene a witnes of those errors of his. If the weather be foule he thinkes vpon that tyme, which he hath ill spent, imagining withall, that the Hea∣uens being touched with compassion of his disasters, do euen weepe before hand, and bewayle the losse they endure of his Soule. It seemes to him, that the sound of the bells doth call him to the tombe, and that of the Trumpets vnto iudgement. He sees no∣thing about him, that astonishes him not. He heares nothing that affrights him not. He feeles nothing but his miseryes: his tō∣gue is all of gaule, & wheresoeuer he layes his hand vpon himselfe, he touches but the dunghill of his corruption. If his spirit seeme to returne to him agai∣ne, by intermission of the traunce wherein he is, he quite forgets the hope of good, through the ill he hath committed, not be∣ing able to dispose his soule to any repentā∣ce. The sight of his friends importunes him, that of his children afflicts him, and the pre∣sence of his wyfe serues him as a new addi∣tion to his sorrow. They behold him not but weeping, & he is neuer strooken with other noyse, then with that of the cryes and plaints of his domestickes. The Phisitian goes his wayes out of the chamber, to giue place to the Cōfessour. And the one know∣ing not how to cure the body, the other hath difficulty to heale the soule, by reason of the despayre wherein he is entangled. Iudge now to what estate must he needs be brought. His speach; that fayles him by litle and litle. His sight is dimme, with his iudgement, and all his other senses receyue the first assaults of Death. They present him with the Crosse, but in vayne, for if his thoughtes be free, he thinkes but of that which he beares of force. They may cry lōg inough to him to recommend himselfe vn∣to God, the deafnes he hath had before to his holy inspirations doth astonish him now also at this houre. How many deaths endures he, before his death? How many dolorous sighs casts he forth into the ayre, before the breathing his last? All the punishments of the world, cannot equall that which he endures. For passing out of one litle Hel of paines, he en∣ters into a new, which shall not haue end but with eternity? What good then would he not willingly haue wrought? But his wishes are as so many new subiects of griefe in this impotency, whence he is neuer to see himselfe deliuered. Into what amaze∣ment is he brought? The Sunne denyes him its light, so as if he behold his misfortu∣nes, it is but onely by the light of the mor∣tuary Torches, which giue him light, but to conduct him to the tombe. O how the Houre of these last extreames, drawes forth in length! Ech moment of his lyfe snatches out the hart from his bosome eue∣ry moment, without putting him to death. On which side soeuer he turnes himselfe, both horrour and despaire beset him round. He caryes Death in his soule, for that which he is to incurre; Death on his body, for that which he now endures; Death in his senses, since they dye by little, and little: in so much as all his life is but a liuing Death, that con∣sumes him slowly to reduce him into ashes. Being now brought to these streights, the wicked spirits imploy the last endeauors of their power for to carry away the victory, after so many conflicts had. What meanes of resistance where there is no pulse, no motiō no voyce, no tongue? His spirit is now in ex¦tremes, as well as his life; and his hart being hardened, is now ready to send forth its last sigh in its insensibility, as if it dyed in dying. His eyes are now no more eyes, for they see no more. His eares may no more be called so for they heare not awhit; and all the other senses, as parts, precede the ruine of their whole. The Soule only resists the cruell assaults of Death, in beholding its enemyes in continuall expectation of their prey; but the hower presseth, it must surrender. O cruel necessity! In fine, for to finish this bloudy Tragedy, the Deuils carry it away to Hell, for recompence of the seruices, which it had yealded to them. And this is the lamentable end of synfull Soule. You Soules of the world, who liue not but throgh the life of your pleasures, behold the fearefull Death, where the life termines. And since the heauens, the earth, the elemēts & whatsoeuer els in nature moues & chan∣ges without cease, do you thinke to find any constancy, and stability in your delights? Know you not, that with the very same action wherewith you runne along, withall your contentments, you run vnto your Death? and that during the tyme it selfe, that Tyme affoards them vnto you, he takes euen them away from you? We loose euery houre what we possesse, what care soeuer we take in conseruing the same. My Ladyes, Keep well your gallāt beauties from the burning of the Sunne. If that of the Sunne, or of the fire, be not able to marre them, yet that of Age and Tyme doth ruine them; notwith∣standing all the industry of Vanity, which you haue to employ about them. Put your fayre Bodyes into the racke of another body of iron, to conserue the proportion therof; yet tyme but derides your inuentions. For it assayles you within, and you defend your selues but without only. You haue dared the Heauens inough, with an arrogant eye; you must needs be stooping with the head now at last, for to looke on the earth, whence you are formed. You must needs bow the necke to the yoke of your miseryes, and resume a∣gayne the first forme of your corruption. In going to dauncing, to feasts, and to walke abroad, you go to Death. In vayne do you command your Coachman then to cary you to such a place, since Tyme, as I haue said, conducts him also that caryes you thither. In so much, as on which side soeuer, you turne your selues, you approach vnto the tombe. After you haue tasted all the pleasures of the world, what shalbe left you of all, but a griefe of the offences in the soule, the sad re∣membrance of their priuation in the memo∣ry, & this sadnes in the hart, for hauing made it to sigh so after your ruine? I doubt very much, least death do astonish you; but if you neuer do thinke vpon it, it will astonish you a great deale worse, when you shall see it indeed. If to liue and dy, be but one and the selfe same thing, make the Thought of death▪ while you liue, so familiar to your selfe, that you neuer thinke of any other thing, since you neuer do other thing but dy. So as if to feare it, and neuer to thinke of it, do make its visage the lesse hideous, I would counsayle you, to banish this Thought out of your spi∣rit, but so, as you be in good estate. But on the contrary, the forgetfulnes you haue of it, makes it so dreadfull vnto you, at the least remembrance therof that comes into your mynd, as you seeme almost to be in danger of dying, by the only feare of dying. I can∣not abide the weaknes of those spirits, who apprehend an euill so much, which they cā∣not auoyd; whereas the euill of the feare which they haue, is often tymes a great deale more bitter, then that which they feare. But the only meane to be cured of this feare, is to liue alwayes in that of God. For the strōgest apprehension of Death proceeds from the great number of the Offences, which one hath committed in his life. A good man feares rather to liue too long then to dy too soone, because he hopes for the recompence of his trauayles, at the end of his course; whiles the wicked can attend but for the chastizement of his sins. So as for to banish this feare from our soule, we had need to haue banished the offences thence. The innocēt hath no feare, but for the iudge¦ment of God, & this feare is inseparable frō his loue; he feares him not but through loue, so as this very feare produceth contētment, and banisheth sadnes in the meane tyme. I leaue you this truth to meditate vpon, that a life of Roses brings forth a death of Thornes. Let vs say now for Conclusion of this worke, that if one will auoyd this man∣ner of Death, he must alwayes be thinking of Death. There is nothing more sweet, then these thoughts, nothing more welcome thē this remembrance. Without the thoughts of Death, there is no pleasure in life: without the thoughts of Death, there is no comfort in anoyes: without the thoughtes of Death, there is no remedy for our euils. In fyne, to finish all, he who is alwayes thinking of Death, doth thinke continually of the mea∣nes of attaining eternal life. O sweet thogh∣tes! I would not haue my spirit, to be ca∣pable of a thought, but onely to thinke eue∣ry moment of death, since it is the onely good, the onely contentment, and the only Repose of lyfe. A goodly Consideration, and very important both for lyfe, and death. CHAP. XXI. I SHOVLD thinke there were no greater pleasures in the world, then to contemne thē all at once; since in effect, the best spirits do neuer find repose, but in the contempt thereof. I know well, there are certayne chast Pleasures, which we cannot misse; but as the soule hath its senses affected lyke vnto the body, we are to hinder our spirit, from mixing its feelings, with those of Nature, euer feeble and frayle, therby not to tast its delights too deliciously. Our iudgement hath beene gi∣uen vs as a Torch, to guide our steps by our actions, and our thoughtes, in this sea of the world, wherein we are as Slaues in the Galley of our bodyes; and the pleasures we seeke therein are the rockes, where we find our shipwracke. I know well also, that we are to be strongly armed for to defend our selues, while our proper senses do so warre vpon vs. But in this manner of com∣bat, the excesse of payne, produceth the excesse of glory, let vs breake the crust to see this verity discouered. The greatest Saynts, and the wisest men haue beene forced to confesse, after a thou∣sand proofes of experience, that we can not tast any manner of contentment, without the grace of God. Thou Couetous man, in vayne thou rests thy vn-rests on the coffers of thy treasures. I deny thee to be held con∣tent, for if thou reasonest, euen reason con∣demnes thee. If thou seruest thy selfe of thy iudgement to be able to do it; what argu∣ment soeuer thou makest, it but fully con∣cludes agaynst thy opinions. So as thou cāst neuer enter into the knowledg of thy vayne pleasures, without departing from that of thy selfe. In a word, thou canst not be a man and be content togeather, in thy miserable condition; since reason, and thy contentmēt can neuer subsist in one subiect. Thou Am∣bitious man, I would lend thee wings for to fly to the heauens of fortune; & it seemes to me already, that I see thee seated in her throne; but looke what greatnes soeuer thou possessest, thou dar'st not say for al that, thou wert well content, for feare the truth should happē to bely thee. And knowest thou not, how Ambition, and Repose do alwayes breake fellowship, the one with the other? That Pleasure and Feare cannot couple to∣gether? and that desires as well as hopes do make the soule to be thirsty? Represent to thy selfe then, the disquietnes which thou findst in thy greatnesses, since thy Ambition cannot limit its ayme within their fruition. How the pleasures of thy possessiōs are mixt with the feare of their short durance; & that by vehemently wishing more & more, thou makst thy selfe vnhappy. In such sort as thou maiest not dare, to cal thy selfe happy, with∣out flattering thy selfe, or rather without blushing for shame. You Courtiers, let me see the pictures of your felicities, & bring to light what seemes most to afford it the lustre and splendour it hath. I graunt that in the midst of the spring tyme of your life, loue and fortune, with a prodigall hand, haue bestowed vpon you what they had most rare, & beautifull with them; yet would you dare to maynteyne with al this, that you are content during the reigne of your Empire. Whereas if any one haue the boldnes to perswade weake spirits thereunto, let him truly recount vs the hi∣story of his pleasures. I know that he will streight be shewing vs some Roses, but I know withall, that he wilbe hiding the Thornes vnder their leaues, as frayle as his contentments, though they were of the flo∣wers of a restles remembrance, gathered in the sad memory of things past; since delights are of the same nature, alwayes dying, and subiect to receiue their tombe, frō the very same day they first sprong vp. As for the pre∣sents of Fortune, if she giue them with one hand, she takes them away agayne with the other. So as, her fauorites are ordinarily the most vnhappy of all, because that in snatching away the goods from thē agayne which she hath once bestowed vpon them, she dragges them often along, for to bury thē vnder their ruines. And will you call that a pleasure? My Dames, you have but one fayre wed∣ding day in all your lyfe, whose feast you do secretly celebrate in your impatiēt desire and longing hope: but will you cōfesse me the truth, that it is but a day of rayne & tem∣pest? For you cast forth a thousand sighes to the winds, and powre out as many teares, being so moued through the farewell you giue to your selues, whiles you giue your selues to another, without knowing, for the most part, your owner: which yet were nothing, if the clauses of your contract did not signe you out, the death both of the one and the other, & the incertainty also, who shalbe the first. For you must confesse, that if you loue your selues perfectly indeed, you dye euery houre, of the apprehension you haue of an euill, which neyther the one nor the other can tell which way to auoyd. I will not speake a whit of the accidents and miseryes without number, which are inse∣parable to this cōdition; I leaue the know∣ledge therof to those, who haue had the ex∣perience. But I pray you to confesse freely, if you be content with the felicities that re∣mayne to you, or no? Thou Couetous man, returne then to thy selfe, after thou hast pulled off the hood of thy blindnes, for to publish, how the sole treasure of Grace can enrich the soule, with all sorts of contentments; and that with out this good, are all goods false. Thou Ambi∣tious man, the deuine Iustice now puts thee on the racke, to make thee cōfesse this truth, that in the onely possession of Grace, are comprehended all the desirable greatnesses that are, since he that possesseth it, is the greatnest of the world. You Courtiers, all the Fauours which you seeke for, are but wind and smoke. It is tyme now to ac∣knowledge your vanity, and to bid a last adieu vnto the world. The Kings & Prin∣ces, whome you court so, are euen as mise∣rable as your selues, since they can afford you but transitory goods. Alas! for a handful of earth, will you relinquish the pretensions you haue to heauen? If you will bestow your tyme well, then court you an omnipo∣tent King, as our God is, whose Fauours haue no price, whose Graces are infinite, & whose Goods are eternall, as his Glory is, wherewith he crownes our labours. Know you not, that his Almighty hand stayes, and mooues agayne, when he plea∣seth the wheele of fortune? How this blind Goddesse receiues frō his prouidence, what∣soeuer she giues, and that she so serues, but as a channell to conuay both disasters & pro∣sperities into the Earth? So as if your hart do sometymes fetch sighes of loue, after those obiects of dust, do you then command your spirits not to stand so gazing on the be∣auty of a riuer, that glides away incessantly like its waues. For whatsoeuer may be seene faire in Nature, is but a feeble ray, and a first Idea of the purest of this soueraigne and ado∣rable Essence, wherein consists the accom∣plishmēt of al perfection, as the onely inex∣staustible spring, from whence they issue, without spring or begining. Represent vnto your selues, that whatsoeuer seemes so fayre to day, shalbe changing the countenance to morrow. In so much as for to find a perma∣ment beauty, and of louely qualityes indeed that might alwayes abide in its purity, we had need to acquit our selues of the worlds circuit or bounds, & to carry our thoughtes into Eternity, as to an only mansion where all things are eternall. This is the lesson of that great Prophet, when he cryed, Lord, when shall I be able to quench my thirst in the spring of thy eternall plea∣sures ? In vaine do you seeke for a foūtaine of delights, to quench the thirst of your hart withal; for what greedines soeuer you haue to drinke, after you haue drunke, you shall find your selues more a thirst then euer; and the reason is good, which is, that the water of this fountaine, retaynes the nature of the soyle that produceth the same; whence it is, that all the goods of the world are not able to satiate the Ambition of one holy Soule, as being created to the possession of infinite goods. After one cōtentment had, they sigh anone after another, and so after another and another, without cease. Our spirit being quickened with a deuine obiect, points al∣waies its lookes, beyond what it possesseth, it permits it self sweetly to be drawn like the iron, by its deuine Adamant, for to vnite it selfe vnto it, as to its end, whither it tends without cease or intermission. In effect what would become of vs, if our desires & hopes were buryed in the tombe? Such as know what it is to liue, liue not but of the hope of a sweeter life, & in this sweet hope do find nothing that is worthy of them, but the contempt they make of all things. O generous contempt of the world, wherein consists our whole glory! You Courtiers, I leaue you to thinke v∣pon it, vntill such tyme as you be disposed to put it in practise, for to exercise withall your more hidden and secret vertues. My Dames, you will permit me to tell you the truth. The fayrest day of your life, is that of Death. This is that nuptiall day of your Soule with its Creatour, a day of pleasure, rather then of teares, since therein do you bid an eternall Adieu vnto the world, and to all its myseries. A day of gladnes, rather then of sighes, since you giue your selues through loue to him, who of his goodnes hath afforded you al things. In the expecta∣tion of this happy day it is, that the fayrest dayes should be tedious to you. Neuer cast your eyes vpon your glasse, but to count the wrinckles, which age makes to grow by little and little on your brow, as so many presaging markes of Death approaching. Represent vnto your selues sometimes, how all the pleasures which you haue had are passed, that those you now enioy do passe, and that those which you are lyke to tast, shall also passe away; & then imagine with your selues in what lamentable case shall you find your selues, at the end of the course of your lyfe, with all the Thornes of your withered Roses? with how many as∣saults of griefe, shall you haue your hart thē battered? With how many alarmes the soule affrighted? and with how many tortures shall the one, & the other be rackt? Performe betymes what good soeuer you would wil∣lingly haue had done at this last houre, and take you away their power, and liberty from vpbrading you one day, for the euill, whose paines you shal carry in that last day. It seemes, as you lyued not, but to repent you at your death, for hauing lyued so ill, not considering the while, that slow re∣pentances are ordinarily changed into des∣payre. I bewayle you, my Dames, as often as I thinke of the infinite number of the vanities which do busy your spirit. How much time you bestow euery day in trimming vp that dunghill of your body, as if your guilty in∣dustry, were able to driue away the mise∣ryes from thence? You do all what you can to make your selfe beloued: and know you not that nothing is more louely then Ver∣tue? Do you then purchase them altogea∣ther, so to make you beloued of al the world and not onely for a day, but euen for euer. The beauty wherof you make such accompt is a fadyng quality that subsists not, but in its continuall change; it flyes along with you into the Tombe, but it passeth more swiftly then you; for it euen gets before you by the halfe way. When you are arriued but to the midday of your lyfe, is it come to its full West. When you enter into your Au∣tumne, it arriues to its Winter, where it finds its ruine. Alas! that for a small num∣ber of daies, you will stād so much to please men, and be displeasing of God for a whole Eternity? O dreadfull Eternity! how pro∣found are thy Abysses! My Dames, as often as this guilty desire shall possesse you to offend God, in your foolish vanityes, thinke a little of the Eter∣nity of the payne, which is to attend your crymes. For one moment of false, and ima∣ginary pleasure, you put your selues in daū∣ger of suffering eternally an infinite number of true euils indeed. What expect you of the world? It aboūds but with miseryes. What looke you for of Fortune▪ She is prodigall, but only in misfortunes. All Riches are but of earth, all Greatnesses of smoke, and all Honours of wind, & as for the louely qua∣lityes, which are affected to the body, they euen dy with it. In so much as Vertue only, I tell you agayne, is exempt from Death. You neuer thinke but of taking your plea∣sures, without considering the while, that in passing away the tyme so, you suffer to slide away in hast, the small remaynder of life that is left you. In louing life as you do, you should be striuing to prolōg your dayes and on the contrary you seeke digressions to passe them ouer, without taking any heed therto, as if you went to slowly vnto death, and that the way to the Tombe appeared too tardy and tedious to you: wherein truly you take pleasure to deceiue your selues. Do not so flatter your selues, my Dames, you must needs dy, there is nothing in you that dyes not euery howre. Your fayre gol∣den hayre, which you dayly so put vnto the torture of the iron, doth euen dy by little & little with you. For in changing its appa∣rence, it becomes of the colour of Death. The wrinckles of age do soyle the polished glasse of your brow, for to marre its beauty and grace. Your fayre Eyes, which I will heere terme two Sunnes, for to please you, do run like to the Sunne, without cease vnto their last West, whither Death conducts thē through the help of their proper light. The Lyllies of your Cheekes, do wither euery houre, and the Gilliflowers of your lips do fade euery moment. The Iuory of your teeth corrupts with the breath of tyme, and of age. The snow of your Necke melts, and all the louely qualityes of your spirit, wax old in their continuall decay. I admit you to be more beautifull then Helena; Helena is no more, she is euen passed away like a flower, and you are iust in the same way of her ruine. Her charmes did ra∣uish the whole world, & your bayts subdue the best part of mortalls: but as all is dead with her, so all dyes with you. The tyme of her Empyre is expired, that of your Raigne runnes alwayes away. She hath beene, she hath liued, they haue admired her with asto∣nishment, they haue honoured her with sa∣crifices, but all the Temples of her glory are demolished, all the Aultars are ruined, all the Idolatours are reduced to ashes, & scar∣cely remaynes there any memory of these things, since euen the very age, which hath seene them, is buryed with them in the a∣bysses of the passed. You must dye, my Dames, and all those graces, wherewith you captiue Spirits, shall neuer obtayne any fauour of Death. You must dye, and all those enticements, wherewith you rauish spirits, haue not allurements i∣nough for to violate the lawes of nature. You must dye, and all those charmes, where with you captiue soules, haue not the po∣wer to charme death in its fury. You must dye and all those pretty graces that make you so admirable, cannot exempt you from the Tombe, nor corruption. You must dye, and all your perfections together cannot hinder the houre of your death for a moment only. You must dye, and to speake more playnely to you, your golden hayre must needs pe∣rish; your eyes so cleere & fayre must needs make a part of the dunghill of your body. The delicate skin of your face, must needs discouer its putrifyed bones, and all your beautyes togeather by changing the coun∣tenance, shalbe taking the forme of dust, since you are nothing but dust: Nor do I feare yet to lye, since in effect you are no∣thing. You must dye, & all your rare Coulises serue but onely to consume you; all your Phisitians haue no medicine for to cure the malady of your mortall condition. You must dye, and therefore are you carefull of your health in vayne, since age pardons not any; yea you dye liuing, and do you what possi∣bly you can do, the terme of your lyfe is al∣wayes slyding. You must dye, nor do all the moments of the day tell you of any other thing. The houres continually strike this verity in your eares, & the Sun neuer sets, without telling you, in its fashion, how it only foreruns the time of the setting of your lyfe. We must dye, I say, at last; for we dye with out cease; and after so many sighes of mise∣ryes, we must cast forth to the wind, the last of our mishaps. We must dye ; the sentence is giuen, the execution is made, and the same continues euery day, before our eyes, whēce they are so accustomed to weep. We must dye, but since there is nothing more certayne, we must alwayes be in disposition to dy at all houres, since we dye euery moment. We must dye, but we are to reuiue eternally in glory, since we are created, but for it only. We must dye, but we must be reborne agayne from our corruption, for not to dye for euer. Let vs dy boldly then, since needs we must, but let vs dye in innocency, for to shun the death of death. We must dye, but we must rise agayne before that soueraygne Iudge, who is to giue vs the recompence of our tra∣uayles, or els to impose the payne of our crimes vpon vs. We must dye, but it is but for once, and of that onely moment depends our whole vnhappines, or felicity. We must dye, but we must yield accompt of the lyfe past, to receyue the guerdon, or paine which is due thereto for euer. We must dy, and to de∣lyuer vs happily from the daunger of this sweet necessity, must we liue well. You must dye, you Soules of the world ; ech one seemes to cary his tombe with him. Laugh you al∣wayes, sing continually, be you euery day at your banquets, and take your sports in a continuall chase of diuers pleasures, after all which notwithstāding must you needs dy, and in this cruell separation of you frō your selues, your laughings chāge to teares, your songs of gladnes into lamentable cryes of sorrowes, and all your banquets, & pleasu∣res into bitter plaints, which torment your hart, and put your soule vpon the racke. There might be some manner of satisfa∣ction perhaps, to heare the discourses which men of the world do hould, if their blind∣nes the while do not afford mattter of com∣passion. One takes paynes to recount al the pleasures he hath taken, during his life; ano∣ther keepes account of the good fortunes he hath had, a third assures vs that he hath pos∣sessed heertofore a great number of treasures; & a fourth endeauours to perswade as many as will belieue him, that he hath beene on the top of the greatest dignityes. What dis∣courses of smoke are these? For he that hath tasted so many contentments, hath nothing left him, but the sad remembrance of the ha∣uing once had the possession of them. Ano∣ther, who yet now thinkes on the good for∣tunes which once he hath had, makes him∣selfe a new vnhappy, through the memory of his passed felicities. He that casts his eyes on the ashes of his riches, insensibly consu∣mes himselfe, in the selfe same fire that con∣sumed them. And another that reares vp his head aloft, for to behold through his teares, the place from whence he fell, euen looseth the force for euer to rise againe, notwithstā∣ding that it be good for him, to sleepe often, so to be a framing of these dreames. For euē as all those pleasures, and goods are slid, & vanished away, with the things that seemed the most durable; so all the contentment, & all the goods which may any wayes apper∣taine vnto vs, shall fly away; and the worst is, that we run after them, for to signe out our Tombe in their Sepulcher. Salomon hath had so many pleasures; Cresus passessed so much riches; Alexander receiued so great honours, & Helena so many prayses for her incomparable beauty. But Salomon is no more but dust, with all his riches; Alexan∣der, but earth with all his honours; nor He∣lena any more then corruption, with all her graces. Trust you not then to your pleasures, you great Kings, for their Roses shall wi∣ther, and their Thornes endure for euer. Put not your hopes in Riches, since they are of earth as well as you. Despise you Honours since all glory is due to Vertue only. And you, my Dames, employ from hence-forth all your cares and labours, to decke your Soules, rather then your bodyes, if you wil haue Angels enamoured, and men to be e∣mulous, of you. For so euery one shal striue for glory, to imitate you in this glorious enterprize. This is the counsayle I giue you; and with it, will I finish my Booke. The end of the svveet Thou∣ghtes of Death. THOVGHTES OF Eternity. The Triumph of Death. O HOW sweet is it, to thinke continually on eternall things! All flies away before our eyes, & in the course of their fight by little and little, lyfe escapes away from vs. The Sunne doth well to rise euery day anew; the moments of its Reigne are mea∣sured within the order of Nature; It must of necessity follow the decay of time, wher∣of it is the dyall; and after it hath presided to all the vnhappy accidents heere beneath, it lends the light of its torch at last to its proper ruine. Though the stars of the night appeare thicke in the Heauens, with the same aspect, alwayes glittering in wonders, yet can they not choose but wax old; euery instant robbes them of somewhat of their durance, since they shine within Tyme, for not to shine within Eternity. Though the heauens, being quickned by the soueraigne Intelligēce of the Primum mobile, renew their paces euery yeare within the round spaces of their Circles, their turnings yet are coun∣ted; and though they returne agayne by the same way, they incessantly approach to the point that is to termine their Course. The Fire which entertaynes it selfe in its Globe, insensibly deuoures it selfe; for that Region of its dwelling is a part of the bo∣dy which consumes it selfe. The Ayre, that takes vp all, yet can not fill vp the voyd∣nesse of the Tombe which the last instant of tyme prepareth for it. Though the Phoe∣nix-King of its subiects find a second Cra∣dle within its first Sepulcher, yet at last an∣other selfe, shall aryse againe from its Ashes, though yet vnlike, since it shal not haue the same power to communicate the same ver∣tue to the Species of its of spring. So as it shall dye at last through sorrow of its ste∣rility. Though the Serpent shift the skinne neuer so much, yet doth its Prudence ex∣tend no further, whiles Age fals a laughing at its cunning, in deuouring vp its being. The Trees that do euery yeare waxe young agayne, continually grow old. The Spring, the Summer, and the Autumne, are of force indeed to make them change the countenance, but not their Nature: and the Brookes affrighted with this continual vicissitude, go flying into the bosome of their Mother, belieuing they are shrowded but in vayne: for the Ocean carryes their Wracke within the valley of its waues. The Seasons growing from the end of one ano∣ther, as the day from the end of night, shalbe disioyned, and seuered by a new Season, which with it shall bury all the others. The fayrest mayster-peeces of Art, forasmuch as they are layed vpon the ground, pay co∣tinuall homage to the ruine of Tyme, as he that presides within his Empire: witnesse those wonders of the world, which subsist no more then in the memory of men, for a signe onely of what the famous Athens, the triumphant Carthage, the proud Troy haue beene heeretofore, they are now buryed so deep in their ruine, as one can hardly belieue they haue euer beene. They go seeking thē in historyes, but the memory of their raigne is so ould, as they are no otherwise found, then in Fables only. Let vs speake of diuers People rather thē of Townes. That great world of men which the Earth hath borne a thousand tymes on its bosome, and the Sea vpon its waues, was drowned at last in the riuer of Xerxes teares, for which he prepared a tombe an hundred yeares before. The Kings haue followed their subiects in this common shipwrack, & all the Pourtraits of Apelles, and the Statues of Lysippus, & of Phidias haue runne like hazard with them by this inuiolable necessity, that the shadow euer followes the body. Well might Alexander cause himself to be surnamed Immortall, but yet purchast not Immortality. He tooke the paynes to seeke out another world, and in the midst of his Triumphes had need of no more, then seauen foote of earth to be buried in. Cyrus would fayne haue it belieued, that he was Inuincible, yet could Death know wel how to find the defect of his Armes, like as that of Achilles. Nero would needs be ado∣red; but he was sacrificed in punishmēt of his crime. Cresus the richest of all men carried nothing into his Tōbe, but this only griefe of hauing had so much Treasure, & so little Vertue; his riches exempted him not whit from the euils wherof our life is full, and at the end of his terme he dyed as others, with the Pouerty incident thereunto. Cesar, Pyr∣hus and Pompey, who had so many markes of Immortality, had the worse sort of Death, since they al three were vnhappily cōstray∣ned to render their lyues to the assaultes of a most precipitous Death. The which doth let vs see very sensibly, how things that seeme to vs most durable▪ do vanish as light∣ning, after they haue giuen vs some admi∣ration of their being. The wise men, as well as the valiant (all slaues of one and the selfe same fortune) haue payed the same Tribute to nature. Pla∣to, Socrates & Aristotle may well cause a talke of them, but that is all; for with their lear∣ning they haue yet beene ignorant of the Truth. They haue loued their memory a great deale more then themselus, following a false opinion for to please that of others, wherewith they were puffed vp in all their Actions. They are passed away notwith∣standing, and their diuine Spirits haue ne∣uer beene able to obtaine this dispensation of the Destinies to cōmunicate their diui∣nity to bodies which they haue viuified: so as there is nothing left of them, but a little dust▪ which the aire and wind haue shared betweene them. The seauen Sages of Greece are dead with the reputation of their worldly wisedome, which is a Folly before God. They were meere Idolatours of their wordly Prudēce, which is a Vertue of the phantasy, more worthy of blame, then prayse, when it hath but Vanity for the obiect. As many Philosophers as haue studied to seeke the knowledge of naturall things, without lif∣ting the eye a little higher, haue let their life runne into a blindnes of malice, and haue left nothing behind them but a sad remem∣brance of their pernicious errours. Let vs speake of those meruailous works wherin Nature takes pleasure to giue forth the more excellent essayes of her power; I would say, of those beauties of the world, which rauish hearts before they haue meanes to present them to them: As of a Helena, of a Cleopatra, of a Lucretia, of a Penelope, and of a Portia. All these beauties truely were ado∣rable in the East, euen as the Persians Sunne; but in the South the feruour of their Sacri∣ficers began to extinguish; and in the West they destroyed the very Aultars that were e∣rected to their glory. Their Baytes, their Charmes, & their Attractions following in their Nature the course of Roses, haue lasted but a day of the Spring, they haue vanished with the Subiect wherunto they were tyed, nor doth there remaine any more of them, then a meere astonishment of their shorte durance. Thus it is, that the best things run readily to their end: Time deuoures all, and his greedines is so great, as it cannot be satisfi∣ed but with deuouring it selfe. Who were able to number the men to whome the Sunne hath lent its light since the birth of the world, and by that meanes keepe accompt of the proud Citties, of the magnificent Pallaces, whereof Art hath gi∣uen the Inuention to men, to the shame of Nature: the imagination is too seely to reach vnto this But. And yet how great soeuer the Name therof be, the shadowes of their bo∣dies appeare no more to the light of our daies; the steps of their foundations, and the memory of their being are buried within the Abysses of Tyme, and nothing but Vertue can be said to be exempt from Death. All things of the world hauing learned of Na∣ture the language of change, neuer speake in their fashion, but of their continuall vicissi∣tude. The Sunne running from his South to its West, seemes to preach in its lāguage no∣thing els vnto vs, but this cruell necessity. which constraynes it to fly repose, and to cōmence without cease, to warpe the light∣some webbe of dayes, and length of Ages. I admire the Ideas of that Philosopher, whiles he would mantayne that all created thinges do find their beginning within the conca∣uity of the Moone, without doubt the in∣constancy of this Starre afforded him those thoughtes, since euery thing subsisting heer beneath, is subiect to a continuall flow and ebbe. The Heauens tell vs, in running round their circles, how they pull all with them. The Starres illumine not the night, but to the comming of the last, which is to extin∣guish their light. The Elements, as opposits, reygne not but within the tyme of the truce which nature afforded them, since the ruine of the Chaos; and their emnity therefore is yet so great, as they are not pleased but with destructiō of all the workes they do. If they demaund the Rockes & Forests what they are doing, they will answere, they are a counting their yeares, since they can do no∣thing but grow old. The fayrest Springes, and the youngest Brookes publish aloud with the language of their warbles, and of their sweet murmur, that euery thing in the world inseparably pursues the paces of its Course; yea the Earth it selfe which is im∣moueable, as the Center where all conclu∣des, being not able to stirre, to fly far from it selfe, lets it selfe to be deuoured by the O∣cean, the Ocean by Tyme, and Tyme by the soueraygne decrees which from all Eter∣nity haue limited its durance. S. Augustine endeauouring to seeke out the soueraigne God within Nature, demaū∣ded of the Sunne, if it were God; and this Starre let him see, that it borrowed its light from another Sun without Eclypse, which shined within the Bower of Eternity. He made the like demaūd of the Moone, whose visage, alwayes inconstant, made answere for it, and assured this holy Personage, that it had nothing diuine, but light, within it, which yet it held in homage of the Torch of day. He enquired of the Heauens the selfe same thing, but their motion incompatible with an essence purely diuine, put him out of doubt. How many are there seene of these feeble spirits who seeke the soueraygne God with∣in Greatnesses? but what likelyhood is there to find it there? Thrones and Empires sub∣sist not, but in the spaces which Fortune af∣fords them; her bowle serues them as a foū∣dation. Alas! what stability can we esta∣blish in their being? Crownes haue nothing goodly in them but the name only; nor rich but apparence: for if they knew how much they weighed▪ and if the number of cares & thornes which are mingled with the Ru∣bies & Pearles wherwith they are enriched could be seene, the most vnhappy would be trampling them vnderfoot to auoyd the en∣counter of new misfortunes. Kings and Princes are well the greatest of the Earth, but yet not the happiest; for that their Great∣nes markes their ruyne in their Eminency, and the Lawes of the world persuade vs to belieue, that great Misfortunes are tyed to great Powers. Whence it is that great Monarches do ne∣uer seeme to resent little dolours, nor suffer any thing with feeble displeasures. The least storme with comes vpon them, is a kind of ship wracke to their resentments; all their wounds all mortall, they cannot fall but in∣to precipices; and the crosses of their For∣tune make them to keep company with Iob on the dungill. Let them tread Cloth of Gould vnder their feet, as Tiberius did; let them satiate their hunger with pearles as did Marke-Antony ; let them metamorphize the feelings of their Pallaces lyke to a starry Heauen, as Belus King of Cyprus ; and with the help of Art let them hold the seasons at their becke for their contentments, as Sarda∣napalus : notwithstanding needs must these Magnificences, and these Pleasures vanish before them in an instant, to let them see the weakenes of their Nature, since the incon∣stancy of Time is annexed to all that which subsists heere beneath. In such sort, as their Greatnesses, and delights do insensibly glide away with life; & though their reigne hath beene ful of flowers, the remembrance ther∣of brings forth but thornes. If Kings establish the foundation of their greatnesses vpon their Crownes, let them cast their eyes vpon their figures, round & euer mouing, and thereby shall they know the instability thereof. And then besids, it is no great matter to be able to commaund a world of people, if they make their lawes absolute, through force of Reason, rather then that of Tyranny. There is a great deale more honour to merit a Crowne then to possesse it, which made Thales Melesinus say that a vertuous man enuoyed all the riches of the world, if vertue be the greatest trea∣sure of it. So that if they trust in their Scep∣ters to defend themselues from the strokes of Fortune, they consider not the while she is able inough to snatch them out of their hands, and cruell inough to metamorphize them into a sheephooke, and to reduce them to such a state, as shall moue Pitty rather then Enuy. What vanity were it for one to haue a Scepter in the hand, and a Crowne vpon the head, if with all these markes of Greatnesses he approches to the Tombe, to bury vp the Glory of it? What pleasure to see the greatest part of the world to be vnder him, if they haue altogether the self same way of Death? The great ones run as swift as the little, in this carriere, where Miseries & Misfortunes accompany our steps. How is it possible, that man which is but dust & ashes, can find assurance in Greatnesses? Ah! What say you then, is it not well knowne that dust and a∣shes are so much the more subiect to be car∣ried away with the wind, as they are set in a higher place? The Mountaines are alwaies enuironed with precipices, and thunders neuer turne their faces, but to the highest tops. So as, they who apprehend a Fall, should clip the winges of their Ambition, for not to fly too high. But if one would seeke for Greatnesses, it were necessary to be in vertue. The Magnificences of Darius his Army serued but as a funerall pompe to his Death. The Preparations to his Triumph were the instruments of his Ouerthrow. In so much as the Lawrels of his Hopes crow∣ned him not, but in the Tombe, in signe that in dying he had vanquished all the mi∣shaps of his life. So do we see the Glory of the world to fly before our eyes with such swiftnes, as we can hardly follow it, throgh the amazement wherein she hath left vs. I admire the last thoughts of Celadine ▪ when as he ordayned, that after his Death they should cause his shirt to be shewed to the whole Army, and that he who carried it should cry aloud, Behould heere that which the greatest of the world seems to carry from the world. This valiant Captaine knew the verity of his miseries by the vigill of his Shipwracke, seeing that of all his Treasures he could car∣ry away with him but the valew of a Shirt. This is the share of the greatest Kings. Na∣ture thinks good to afford them Scepters in the cradle, & she must rob thē in the Sepul∣cher. And howbeit they are borne as little Gods on Earth, yet sticke they not to dye like other men; so as if they differ in the mā∣ner of lyuing, they are all equall in the ne∣cessity of dying. S. Lewis would rest vpon a bed of Ashes before his Death, to let vs see, that he was but Ashes; yet is it to be considered that the beliefe which he had, proceeded from the di∣uine Fire wherwith he was inflamed; and resenting in that manner the diuine flames, by little and little he went consuming of his life; he would become ashes vpon ashes, both throgh loue and humility. Dauid did charge himselfe with a sacke of Ashes, to diminish the flash of his Greatnesses, and the trouble that possessed him. The knowledge of him∣selfe perswaded him, to serue himselfe with this cūning, shewing forth without, what was within. His Flesh couered his ashes for to couer his defects, and he would haue his Ashes to couer his flesh, for to discouer the miseries of his Nature. When I consider how the greatest of the Earth, are of Earth, and that all their Riches, and all their Greatnesses may not be had but in flying towards the Center of their ruine, where they finish with them; I cry out, as that Philosopher did, how the world is a Body of smoke, which the Ayre of Tyme disperseth by little and litle: for the eyes be∣hould, quite through their teares, the conti∣nuall decay of the best obiects, and they can hardly be knowne within their inconstan∣cy, so different are they from themselues. It is a pleasure to read the Histories of Ages past, because all the wonders which appeare vpon the Theather of their Reigne, are but dreames, and vayne Idea's that subsist not but by the opinion of those that will lend credit vnto them. It were in vayne to seeke Rome at this day within Rome, when scarce can be found within the Temple of memo∣ry, that of the ruine of its Aultars. Tyber on∣ly which is alwayes a flying, hath remay∣ned stable, and permanent. The golden Pallace of Nero, the Stoues of Diocletiant, he Bathes of Antoninus, the Sephizone of Se∣uerus, the Colossus of Iulius, and the Amphi∣theater of Pompey ; all these proud wonders haue not beene able to resist the encounters of a first Age; and the second hath caused the day of their ruine to spring with it. So as the Labourers, the works, & their proprietaries haue followed the lot of the decay, which was naturall to them. If they enquire what are become of those magnificences of Cyrus, those pōps of Mark-Antony, those prosperities of Alexander, & those greatnesses of Darius ; I shall answere with that Philosopher, that they haue passed away like a waue without leauing any signe of their being behind thē. Philip, that great King of Macedon, gaue in charge to one of his Pages to awake him e∣uery morning, with the sweet harmony of this discourse, forsooth, To remember that he was man, & by consequence subiect to death. This Generous Prince was afraid to be da∣zeled by the flash of Fortune, and to forget himselfe in the presence of his Greatnesses, which therfore made him to impose this law vpon himselfe, of musing euery day on the Miseries of his condition, for feare least for∣getfulnes should conuince him of this vani∣ty, which ordinarily is annexed vnto great prosperities. He set open his eares to the soūd of this verity, that he, and al his Greatnesses were nothing els but dust, and that the cruel necessity of dying was continually occupi∣ed in building him his Tombe, to bury there with him both his Glory, & his For∣tune. Remember, that you are Man, said the Page to him, or to say better (least yet the name of Man may seeme to flatter you) that you are a little Corruptiō shut vp within a skin of flesh, quickened with a little breath of life, whose light may be extinguished with the least wind; you are, notwithstan∣ding all that, the greatest of Men, but yet are not your Greatnesses exempt from Death, nor the Miseries that forerunne its ariuall. Remember that you are man, and that your Scepter and your Crowne shal not ransome you from the Tombe. Remember that you are man, subiect to a great deale more disasters, then the Heauen hath Starres, and the sea Rockes. Remember that you are man, that is to say, the shutle-cocke of Fortune, & brought into so deplorable an estate, as you can af∣ford but matter of Pitty in consideration of your Miseries. Remember that you are man, to serue as pasture one day to the wormes, and as matter to the ayre and wynd for to play with your dust, as with a subiect pro∣per to their sports. Remember that you are man, yet a slaue of this soueraigne, and absolute power, whose Scepter and Crowne you hold in homage, not knowing the limits of the tyme of your Reigne. Remember that you are man ; it may be for an instant, or els for an houre, or yet for a day; the which should make this remembrance alwaies present to you, how your condition is mortall & tran∣sitory. You are man, dying without cease, and running without intermission towards the Tombe, withal things of the world. This great King was affraid to wander within the Labyrinth of his Greatnesses, & this feare of his was founded vpon the rea∣son of humane weakenes, wherewith we are all borne. He saw himselfe raysed vpon the highest Throne of Fortune, with the power to commaund a world of people as tributaries all of his Authority? His Armes alwayes victorious found no resistance but in sight of Humility. His enemies enuious of his good hap would change both their ha∣tred and their enuy into admiration. So as being accomplished with the sweetest pro∣sperities which are found in life, he feared with reason the shifting of the wheele, and iustly apprehended the turning of the Me∣dall; as he was most cunning in the know∣ledge of the maximes of the world, which had taught him by experience, how Tem∣pests attend a calme vpon the waters, & on the land griefes do succeed contentments. Hence it was, that he tooke such pleasure in the acmonishment of the Page, when as e∣uery morning he so made him, to remem∣ber that he was Man, & that it was tyme to rise, to looke into the accidents wherewith our life is full. This great Prince is dead in musing vpon Death, and he that aduertised him so, pursued full neere the paces of his course. The King, the Scepter, the Crowne, the Riches, the Greatnesses, the kingdome and all his subiects together are vanished frō our eyes, and are slid into the Abysses of Tyme, where things that seemed most du∣rable to vs, are quite buryed. Nabuchodonozor led the Princes of Ierusa∣lem as prisoners into Babylon, but the Iay∣lour, the Prisoners, and the Prison it selfe are ingulfed within the nothing. The Empe∣rour Maximilian caused his Coffin to be carri∣ed before him, taking much pleasure to be∣hould the house, where he was to make so long soiourning. Away then with all these vayne Greatnesses of the world, since they so post away like a Torrent, since they melt like snow, and since they passe like a light∣ning. All those, who now are their Idola∣tours, shal one day sacrifice themselues with griefe, for hauing runne so long tyme after those vayne shadowes: for as many as loue them, loue not themselues; all those who gape after them are enemies of their proper senses, forcing by an extreme Tyranny their wil to run the way of precipices. The staires that serue to mount vp by, haue the same vse in descending; so as from the highest top of Thrones & Empires, there is seene no other way then that of the fall. By those waies of Greatnes they mount not vp to heauen: the glory of the Earth shuts vp its course within the earth; whence it comes that the Palmes & Lawrels, which Honor doth prodigally share to men, do fade & wither, how greene soeuer, in the same soyle where they began to spring. Well may they reckon vp the Crownes which Alexander. purchased with his com∣bats, but not let vs see their matter, since all is dead with him. They speake much of Sci∣pio's triumphs, but that is all▪ for tyme hath imposed silēce to the Oracles of al the Muses that published his renown. Let them bring forth hardly if they can, vpon the Theater of the world the happyest Monarch of the Ages past If Hanniball appeare the first, they shall seeme to represent him, but as after ha∣uing beene Conquerour of a world of men, he was vanquished by his owne vices, and consequētly reduced to such a point of infa∣my & misfortune at once, as they talk rather of his defeats then of his triumphs. If Pompey appeare after him, they shal cōsider how his disasters defaced the lustre of his first prospe∣rities. If Cesar come in his rancke, they shall marke how the Thornes of his death did wither the Roses of his lyfe. The great Pyr∣rhus cannot appeare but ouerwhelmed with the burden of his misfortunes, through the blow of a stone, or rather by a heape of earth in signe that his greatnesses; and his Tro∣pheys were to be buried in the earth by a re∣lation of the nature of this Element, with that of his Glory. Nero may heere appeare with splendour during those fiue yeares of his raygne, but so remēbred, as that hauing caused his Statues to be adored, he was trā∣pled vnder foot in punishment of this va∣nity. Parmenides enioyed a calme of lyfe, but he found rockes and tempests in his Death by the poyson that was gyuen him. Pelosidas was happy in his Spring, in his Summer, & in his Antumne, but the Winter of his old age made him resent a great deale of more miseries, then he had tasted pleasures in his younger yeares. Marke-Antony was raysed to so high a degree of Honour, as he stood in competēcy with his brother-in-Law about the Crowne of the whole world at once; & yet notwithstanding his miseries made him an homicide of himselfe, through a stroke of despaire. Maximus came to the Empire from the lowest degree of a seruile condition, but from the tyme that he was on the ridge of Greatnesse, did Fortune make him to descēd so low, by the same degrees he mounted vp with, as his Misfortunes had no relation with his Prosperities. Thus passeth the glory of the world, leauing a great deale more a∣stonishment behind, then euer it afforded admiration. If a great Architect should seeme to per∣swade vs to belieue, that our dwelling house were on the point of falling, and that we were in daunger to be buried in its ruines; I would imagine with my selfe, we should lyue alwaies in payne, to auoyd the effects of his presages, seeking with all sollicitude the meanes to eschew those perils. So as if I turne the Meddall, it wil appeare, this totte∣ring, and ruinous house to be nothing els, then that of the world, & wherof that great Architect, who hath layd the first foundati∣ons, hath affoarded vs the truth of this assu∣rance, that it shall fall to ruine very soone. The Heauen, and the Earth shall passe away. What solidity then can we establish heere beneath in this soyle, as well of Pouerty as of Infa∣my, since it shakes vnder our feet through its continuall vitissitude? The ruines thereof appeare without cease before our eyes, & in the course of its deficiency, our life pursues the same way. And neuertheles with what blindnes do we fall a sleep, in the ship of our deliciousnes, not considering how it floats vpon the stormy sea of the world, as abundant in shipwrackes as the land of Mis∣haps. We must neuer turne away our eyes from the obiect of Inconstancy, since it is naturall to all that which hath subsistence heere beneath. The Monarchy began with the Assyrians ; It passed to the Persians ; from the Persians to the Macedonians ; from the Macedonians to the Romanes, and at this day the Empire is in Germany. In so much, as after that this so famous, and illustrious a Crowne, shall haue run through the foure corners of the earth, it shall resolue into earth, following the course of those that shal haue possessed the title, eyther by right of hazard, or by the right of Birth. So as, if Heauē & Earth do passe, whatsoeuer shall beare the image of the creation, is cōprized with∣in this reuolution of Ages, where all con∣cludes in a last end. There is nothing so great in the world, as the Hart which con∣temnes all Greatnesses. Tyme, as Mayster of all which is in Nature, lets forth Crow∣nes and Scepters to Kings; to some for a day, to others for a moneth, to some others for a yeare, and to others for more; but af∣ter the terme is expired, it giues no more dayes; one succeds in the place of another▪ vnder one and the selfe same Law of con∣dition. Let the infinite number of Kings heere present themselues that haue raygned vpon Earth; and if euery one hath had his Crowne, it may likewise be sayd, that ech hath had his Tombe. Then seeke not Greatnesses, my Soule, but in vertue, and in the glorious contempt of things of the Earth. Thou seest how Mag∣nificences haue not charmes but for a day, their glittering fadeth with their light, and what foundation soeuer they haue, they carry in their being the Necessity of their ruine. To what end shouldst thou raise thy Ambition vpon Thrones, if they be States of vnhappines, and inconstancy? Enuy not Kings, their Crownes, nor Scepters, since it is the title of a transitory glory. Felicity cō∣sists not, for to rule with Empire, but rather to find repose of life in the condition wher∣in he is borne. And what more sweet re∣pose can one looke for, then that of desiring nothing in the world? This is a pleasing paine to be alwayes in vnrest, to find that so∣ueraigne good which we seeke for; I would say that Eternity, where delightes are dura∣ble in their excesse. When thou shouldst be exalted aboue all the Greatnes of the Earth; what happines, and what contentement would be left thee, since the Tyme of their possession glides without respit, with the pleasures where with they are quickned: In such sort as if at the rising of the sunne thou receyuest Sacrifices in homage, at the setting thou shalt find thy selfe stript by Fortune, or by Death. Fixe not thy thoughts then, but on the obiects which hould touch with Tyme; nor seeke thou euer to runne after things that fly away. Thy immortall nature cannot eye but Eternity; sigh then inces∣santly after its Glory, if thou wilt one day haue it in possession. There be some who seeke their repose, & all their pleasure in Riches, as if Gould had this Vertue to eternize their contentments. Set not thy hart vpon things of the world, saith the Apostle. When the Poets would speake of Riches, they put before vs the Gould of the riuers of Hebrus, and Paectolus, to let vs see how they fly away from our eyes, as the waters. Put case a man should possesse all the trea∣sures of the earth, yet should he not seeme to be richer awhit for all that, since he were but the guardian, and not the owner of those treasures. Riches consist not in pos∣sessing much, but rather in contenting ones selfe with a little. Cresus could neuer satisfy his couetous desire during his life, which induced his enemies to fill his Body with the gould wherewith he could not fill his Soule. What Folly to seeke Eternity in Ri∣ches, where is ordinarily found but Death. This very man heere made accompt to stuffe his Coffers with Gould & Syluer, & knew at last, that his Treasures were so many fa∣tall Instruments that serued for nothing but to take away his life; so as being deceiued in his hopes, he became sollicitous to con∣serue very charily the meanes of his losse, & of his ruine. He therfore that goes to seeke for the Riches of the East, puts himselfe to the mercy of the waues; and in seeking the repose of his life approaches so neere to Death, as he is distant from it no more than the thicknes of the shipboard. What fee∣blenesse of humane Spirit, to put in ha∣zard whatsoeuer one holdes most deere on Earth, for the purchase of a little Earth! I had rather a great deale be Iob on the dun∣ghill, then Cresus on the woodpile; for the one flouted at Fortune in his miseries, and the other had recourse to Solon, to re∣pent himselfe for not hauing followed the way of Pouerty, rather then that of Riches, since the latter led him to De∣ath. Crates the Theban considering that he flo∣ted without cease within this vast sea of the world, despised Riches, for feare to suffer Shipwracke with so heauy a fraight. The Wheele may well run about, but can ne∣uer get forth of the lymits of its Circle: so lykewise man may well trauayle, & runne ouer the world to heape vp treasures, but he fetches the turne only of the Circle of his lyfe the while; of necessity most the Ship be landing at this last port of the Sepulcher, where he finds himselfe as poore, as when he entred into the cradle. I know not for whome the Richman trauayles, for before the iourney of his trauayle be finished, his dayes are runne out, and being on the point to reape the fruite of his passed paines, death gathers those of the repose of his lyfe. The Mercinary soules who lend forth their con∣science to Interest, insteed of their Money▪ sell, as in told Coyne, the portion they pre∣tend in Heauen, for a little Earth. Blind as they be, they spin the web of their capti∣uity, & forge the Armes which are one day to reuenge the enormity of their crymes. A∣bused soules! they consider not how all the Gould of the world is yet now in the world howbeit the greatest part therof hath beene possessed by an infinite number of Mor∣tals, and so shall leaue them behind them as others, how rich soeuer they be now, with∣out carrying ought els into the Tombe, but griefe for not hauing made so good vse of them, as they should. To what point of misery, was reduced the impious Richman of the Ghospell in a moment, after he had possessed an infinite number of Treasures? He behoulds himself in estate of begging a drop of water for to quench his thirst. To what end serued all his pleasures past, but to augment his present paynes? He employed his Riches to pur∣chase Hell, and all his goods to gayne the euill he endures. O humane Folly! To put ones selfe in hazard to loose Eternity for en∣ioying of a fading Treasure! Good is not good, but as permanent; and yet looke they after transitory delights, that subsist not but in flying. Demaund they of Cyrus, what hath he done with all his Riches, & he will answere, he hath left them in the soyle that brought them forth. Xerxes hath enioyed thē as well as he, and as he, so hath he borne no part thereof into his Sepulcher. They may cause monuments to be built to their Me∣mory, but Tyme that deuoures all, hath wrought new Tombes, for their Tombes; in such fort, as if yet there be memory of their death, it is but onely by reason of their lyfe. They make a question, which of the two was more rich, eyther Alexander or Dio∣genes, the one whose Ambition could not be bounded with the whole extent of the Earth; and the other whose desire & hopes were shut vp in the space of his Tub. For me, I do hould with Diogenes, since he is the richest who is best content. I could neuer yet imagine the pleasure which Caligula tooke to wallow vpō Gold; for if the lustre of that mettall, contented his eyes, he might haue beheld himselfe a far of, since the eye requires a distance propor∣tioned to the force, or feeblenes of its loo∣kes; but deceaued as he was, he considered not the while how this Gould, & He, diffe∣red not awhit, but only in colour, since they were both of Earth: And in effect they can not authorize its pleasure, but through the relatiō which was there of the nature of the one, with that of the other. The Poets re∣present to vs how the Goulden fleece was guarded by a Dragon, lyke as the Goulden Aples of Hesperides ; and the Morall which may be gathered from these Fables, is no∣thing els but the danger, and payne which is inseparable from the conquest of Trea∣sures. The Historians obserue, that in all the Countries where this mettall abounds, the inhabitants are so poore, as they haue scarse a ragge of linnen to couer their nakednesse withall. What may we imagine in contem∣plation of this Verity, but that all the Gould of the Earth cannot tell how to enrich a mā while the riches of the world are borne and dye in a pouerty worthy of compassion? Then seeke not, my Soule, other Riches, then those of Eternity. Thou canst not tell how to buy heauen withall the gold of the earth; and without the enioying of its feli∣cities, all goods are counterfait, & al Sweet∣nesses but full of Bitternes. Imagine thee now to lyue vnder the Reigne of a goulden Age, and that through an excesse of Fortune thou treadest vnder foot all the Pearles of the Ocean, and all the goulden haruest of the Indies. And not to loose thy selfe in this imagination, consider the estate of this feli∣city, & tast in conceyt, a part of the pleasures which thou wert to possesse, if effects should answere to thy thoughts, and then boldly confesse with the Wiseman, how all these transitory goodes are treasures of Vanity, & that in the iust pretensions thou hast to an Eternall glory, all these atomes of Greatnes can serue thee no more, but for obiect of thy contempt. Suppose thou wert the absolute Mistresse of the world, what good couldst thou hope for in the fruition therof, if all be replete with euils? Crimes haue Temples there, & Vices haue Aultars. All the Idolls are of goulden Calues, and such as make professiō to follow Vertue, are within the order of a malady of a contagious Spirit, according to the common opinion. So as, through a Law of Tyme, the most laudable Actions are subiect to reproaches. Leaue then all the goods of the Earth to the Earth, since thou art not borne for them, & seeke as a pledge in the sweet thoughtes of Eternity, for the accomplishmēt of thy delightes. The world is not able to satiate thy desires, since it hath nothing in it, that is not transitory. And howbeit, it be susteyned in its inconstancy, it leaues not to wax old in changing, & to ruine it selfe by little and little, in ruyning all things. Thinke neuer then but of Eterni∣ty. Speake not but of Eternity. Let thy de∣sires, and thy Hopes regard but Eternity. Let alwayes Eternity be in thy memory, & the contēpt of the world within thy hart. If thou beest capabel of Hatred, be it but for the Earth; and if thou beest capable of Loue, be it but for Heauen, since it is the mansion of Eternity. There are others who seeke their content∣ment in magnificent Pallaces as if they were shelters of proofe, against disasters and mis∣fortunes. Charles the VIII. tooke pleasure to build very proud Fabrikes, as belieuing it may be, to close his eyes in dying, through the Splendour of their wonders; but his lot, an Enemy of his hopes, snatched away his last breath, being sound of health, vpon a straw bed, and in place encompassed round with Misery. Heliogabalus likewise was dece∣ued of his purpose, for being on the point when the enormity of his Crymes had pas∣sed sentence of his Death on behalfe of the Gods, he shuts himselfe in the fairest hall of his Pallace, and prepares for his Enemies all the Richest instruments of Death he could recouer, as thinking to sweeten the bitter∣nes thereof with so goodly armes: but his fo∣resight was vnprofitable, for the Gods per∣mitted, that as he had tasted the sweetest ple∣asures of life, he should feele in Death the cruelst dolours. Hermenides had, to much pur∣pose surely, caused very stately Pallaces to be erected in the dominion of his Empire, since he was to dy in his Charriot, as in a rouling House that should conduct him to his Tombe. That famous Temple of Salo∣mon was twice ruined by the Assyrians, then reedified by the Iewes, and againe was rui∣ned by the Romanes. And after that Traian had caused that Magnificient Bridge to be built vpō Danubius, the waues neuer left roa∣ring vntill such tyme as they had buried in their bosome the last marke of its being. These Piramids of Egypt which with their sharp points seemed to outface the Heauens haue beene quite ouerthrowne by tyme, within such an Abysse of ruine, as they put them now in the rancke of dreames, and fa∣bles. Besides, it seemes in all these magnificēt Fabrikes how Art & Nature contribute but a backewardnes. The Stones and Tymber are made to be dragged by force, and if they lend but eares to the pushes of this cōstraint, they shall marke how the waggons that beare them, and the Engines which susteine them, seeme to grone vnder the burthen, as if they complayned of their Folly. I esteeme a farre greater pleasure to dy vnder the roofe of a Cottage, then vnder the fret-worke see∣ling of a Pallace, because in that they cannot be touched with griefe to abandō the dwel∣ling, and in this place, the Riches they ad∣mire therein, seeme to make vs very sensible of the priuation. To what end serued the great Buildings which the Queene Semira∣mis caused to be erected on the face of the E∣arth, but for matter of shame and confusion in their Ruine? The Queene of Saba had a whole towne for her House, and after her Death, both she, and all her Greatnesses were enclosed within a little space of a Cu∣bits breadth. What folly to go about to build vpon a Territory, where one lodges not but in passing as a Pilgrime? From the tyme we are borne, if we were but capable of Action we should be occupied in making our Se∣pulcher, since Tyme seemes to lead vs there∣unto unto with an incredible swiftnes. So as if the infirmity of building do seize & possesse vs, let vs build Temples to the Glory of him who prepares the Eternity. What is become of that proud Babylon, is it not credible that its onely ruine eterni∣zed the name? The Locrians built a Tem∣ple to the Sun, but the Moone its Sister be∣ing iealous of this Glory, obteyned of the Destines the sentence of it ruine; for du∣ring the raygne of the Night, the Ayre, and wind did satiate, their hūger with its Ashes. When I thinke of this dreadfull vicissitude of Tyme, which alters all things, vnto the point of making vs quite to loose the remē∣brance of them, I contemne whatsoeuer is presented to my eyes, and make no recko∣ning thereof, since so in a moment the fay∣rest obiects change the face. If your first Father were now risen agayne, he would quite forget the world, for a thousand tymes in an age hath it changed the countenance. Let vs loue the change then in this incon∣stant and transitory lyfe, and let euery one follow his lot without constraynt & with∣out tyranny in the way of vertue, for to ar∣riue at this pleasing habitation of Eternity. Man makes greatly to appeare both his vanity, and his Pride in these Buildings, where he would seeme to establish, if he could, the foundation of some shelter, that might be of proofe agaynst the stormes of death. But the crime of his vnknowledge∣ment is so enormous a thing, as seemes to pull on his head the thunders of Heauen. Learne thou Earth (sayth Wisedome, speaking of man) to put thy selfe vnder foot, it is thy pro∣perty so to be trampled on: for if thou flewest in the Ayre▪ it could be but as dust, so as thine Arrogancy cannot subsist but in folly. If man would consi∣der without cease to what point he is redu∣ced, his spirit would not be able to conceiue but thoughtes of Humility. Before his birth he was nothing; after his birth, he is so smal as we dare not speake it, for in a word is he nothing but a dunghill, couered ouer with snow, where the disposition of corruption prepares a food, and nourishment for the wormes: whereof then should he seeme to wax proud, whose end is pouerty and cor∣ruption? So as if he take any vanity at the Suns rising for the Greatnes he possesseth, at the setting of this Starre, we shall all be e∣quall. Marke attentiuely (sayth S. Iohn Chryso∣stome ) the sepulchers of Dead men, & seeke round about for some signes of their passed Greatnesses. For if those Tombes do send forth any flash of Magnificēce to thine Eyes, conuey thy Thoughtes thereinto, and thou shalt find but corruption. Their ioy is ex∣tinct with their life, their pleasures past ouer with their dayes, and all their riches are abi∣ding in their Coffers, for to publish their fol∣ly touching the vnprofitable care they haue had in heaping them together. They haue left their Pallaces at the first terme of their possessiō without so much leasure only as to accompt with their Host. Earth, that art but Earth, in thy natiuity, Earth in thy lyfe, in Earth the end! wherfore art thou proud, since thou art but flesh in apparence, & pu∣trifaction in effect? I commend greatly the custome of those of the Molucca's, who build not their houses but for the tyme only they imagine to lyue, and so dying oblige their children to do the same. Arpilaus King of the Medes had caused a very stately Pallace to be built, where he would end his dayes: but from the instant that Tyme had strooke the houre of his retrait, his enemyes entred into this Pallace, and cast him forth of the window. Cleophon the Lydian dyed ouer∣whelmed with the ruines of his house, and Iulianus notes how he had no other tombe. Rid thy selfe, my Soule, from these vayne ambitions, so to lodge in Pallaces, knowing how the worms in pledge do harbour with in the house of thy body. Thou beholdest so many goodly Edifices, whose Gould and Marble seeme to defye Tyme, as not able to destroy them, yet within an age they abate their pride and with easy paces begin to fol∣low the way of their ruine, reteyning som∣thing of the nature of those workemen. Iob had a farre better grace vpon his dunghill, then on a Throne, for what spectacle was it to put ashes & corruptiō vpon cloth of gold? Leaue these pallaces to men of the world, who blind with a brutish ignorāce do esta∣blish the foūdation of their pleasures in thē. Thou knowest, that death enters euery where, and since thy God dyed in a desert Mountayne, wherein the excesse of his Mi∣sery he had not a drop of water to quench his thirst, shut thine eyes to the glistering of those guilded feelings, and suffer not this foule reproach at any tyme to expire vpon flowers, whiles thy Sauiour gaue vp the ghost on thorns. Do thou follow him then in his glorious actiōs, & build thee a Tem∣ple within thy selfe, where ech moment of thy lyfe thou mayst addresse to him vowes thou art to make for Eternity; since the goodly Pallaces of his dwelling are of proof against the inconstancy of the world. If the imagination could attract to it selfe all the obiects in distance from it, to repre∣sent them in an instant before thy eyes; how many mischiefes should we behould? How many Deathes, and how many dying liues? They hould, there is no vacuity in nature, I will easily belieue it, since miseries seeme to take vp all. This is the accident, so insepa∣rable to man, and which accompanies him to his Graue. Euery one hath his dolours affected in like sort as his pleasures are, but some ripen as they put forth, and others ga∣ther strength in their feeblenes, to eternize their durance. How dreadfull would this Theater of the world seeme to be, if one should behold all the Tragedies which are acted therin. Phirra quenches her fury with her fathers bloud. Eumenides is reuenged of her mother through poyson. Curtius buryes his brother within his cradle. Pernesius plucks out the eyes of his sister Etna. And Symocles, being an enemy to his race, sets the Pallace on fire where his parents were assembled; and I should thinke the fire of his choller was the first sparke of that consuming fire. Nero seekes nourishment, for to satisfy his cruelty in the bowels of his mother; but God permitted the Executioners should hold the place of delinquēts on the day of their death, when they gaue vp their lyfe to the assaults of a thousand dolours, a great deale more cruell then Death it selfe. Consider all these dismall accidents, my Soule, which happen euery moment. One is consumed with fire, as Pliny, another is hanged, as Polycrates ; heere one is cast downe headlong, as Lycurgus ; there was another burned with a thunder-bolt, like Esculapius. There haue some been drowned in the sea, as Marcus Marcellus. Curtius was swallowed vp in a bottomeles pit. Eschyllus the Philoso∣pher had his head crushed with a Tortesse shell▪ Cesar was slaine by such as he tooke to be his friends. Cicero's head was cut off vpon the boot of his caroch. Euripides was deuored by dogs. Cleopatra died with the sting of a serpent, or rather with that of her despaire. Socrates is poysoned; Aristo dieth of famine; Seneca through the point of a launcet. Cold tooke away the lyfe from Neocles; Tarquinius Priscus was strangled with a fish-bone; Lucia the daughter of Aurelius dyes with the point of a needle. Elacea drownes her lyfe in the ice of a glasse of water. Anacreon is choked with swallowing but the kernell of a raysin. And Fabius the Pretour suffered shipwracke in a messe of Milke, and the encounter with a little hayre was the Rocke he fell vpon. So∣phocles and Diagoras dyed of ioy, and Philemon with too much laughing, as well as Zeuxis. Fabius Maximus dyed in the field, as Lepidus. I will nor make vse of the examples of our ages, since they are so fresh; and it sufficeth that their memory is as sad as odious. Thou seest then, my Soule, how death disportes himselfe with Crownes; Thou seest how he tramples Scepters vnder foot, & how in the presse of the world, his Sith spareth not any one. Such a one to day ly∣nes Contented, who to morrow shall dye Miserable. One moment onely seuers vs from death and mishap, there is no other respit betweene lyuing and dying, then that of an instant, which makes me verily to be∣lieue, that Being, and not Being in man dif∣fer not awhit, since he lyues not but dying, and moues not but to bound his actions in the Tombe whither he postes without stop. Earth! Who art but Earth! Earth within the cradle. Earth in the course of lyfe, and Earth in the end! Stay a while, and if Time which leades thee will not suffer it, consider in so hasting to the funerall, how the Earth goes to ioyne with Earth, and that what∣soeuer is in the world, doth follow step by step, to resume its first forme in the dust. They would faine haue made Iob belieue on his dunghill that he had lost all, and that in his losse he was brought to the last point of misery; but I imagine the contrary, for he sitting on his dunghill, was found to be in his proper heritage: and by how much dee∣per he was buryed in corruption, so much was he the forwarder in the possession of himselfe, if it be true, that man is nought but mire and durt. Let Kings make a shew of their Great∣nesses, eyther in feasts, as Lucullus, or in apparrell, as Tiberius, or be it in other sorts of Magnificences, all their instruments of glory, are of Earth, and vanish into smoke as well as they. If the ashes of Kings and Subiects were mingled together, it were im∣possible to distinguish the one from the o∣ther, since they are all of the same Nature, and al carrying the face of a like forme. The greatest Monarches are men for Death. This flash of life which so dazels the eyes of sub∣iects, fades away like the beauty of the rose at the setting of the Sunne. How many Kings haue there beene in the world since the birth thereof, and yet were it impossible to find out the least marke of their Tombes, whiles some are buryed in the Ocean, as Ler∣tius ; others in the flames, as Hermasonus ; some heere in gulfes, as Lentellinus ; & others there in the ample spaces of the aire, where their dust is scattered, as that of Pauzenas King of the Locrians. And of all together can there hardly be griped an handfull of dust: so true it is, they are turned to their nothing. Ah! how now, my Soule, wilt thou see buried with a dry eye, whatsoeuer Nature hath more faire, the Earth more rich, & Art more precious? Wilt thou see dye euery mo∣ment the subiects of thy Loue, or rather a part of thy selfe, through the alliance thou hast made with the body, without abating thy vanity, and humbling thy arrogancy? What expects thou in the world, if all its goods be false, and euills true? There is no assurance to be found but in Death, nor con∣solation to be had, but constantly to suffer its Misery. Honours, they are all of smoke, Glory of wind, Greatnesses of Snow; and riches of Water, sliding from one to another without being possessed of any. Repose is not to be had but in imagination, & plea∣sure but in a dreame. The Thornes spring continually, and the Roses blow without cease. Sweetnes makes but its passage only heere, and bitternes his whole abode. If this soyle do bring forth flowers, they are but of Cares; if it beare fruit, they are but Peares of Anguish. Teares are heere continuall, because the anoyes are alwayes present. Ioy is not seene but running, and sadnes makes heere a full stop. It is a place where Piety is ba∣nished as well as Iustice; and where Vices reigne, and Vertue is made a thrall. Where the fires of Concupiscence do burne, and where those of Luxury reduce the chastest harts into Ashes: whence it comes, that that great Saint demaunded wings to carry him into the desert. Hope is heere vncertayn, & despayre assured. Happines appeareth but as a lightning, and Misfortunes establish their dwelling, with Empire. They can de∣sire nothing heere, but in doubt of successe: they can expect nothing, but with feare to loose their tyme. Felicityes, euen while they are possessed, do free themselues by lit∣le and litle from this seruitude of being tyed to vs: So as if they destroy not themselues in their sublimity, time snatches them from vs at all houres, and leades vs away with them. What is the world but a denne of Theeues? but an Army of Mutiners? but a myre of Swyne; a Galley of Slaues? A lake of Basiliskes? and therfore the Prophet sayth; shall I neuer leaue a place so foule, so filthy, and so full of treasons and deceipts? Needs then, my Soule, must thou lift vp thine eyes to Heauen, since the Earth is meerly barren of thy contentments. Thou seekest the Soueraigne good, and it hath but springs of Euill. Thou seekest Eternity, and whatsoeuer is therein, is but vnconstancy. Change thy thoughtes; the treasures which thou seekest for, are not heere beneath, since this is the ordinary mansion of Pouerty and Misery. The obiects heere most frequent, are but Tombes; nor do we euer open our eyes but to see them layd open. Our eares are tou∣ched with no other sound then with that of Sights and Playnts. The sents of our putri∣faction occupy the smelling; and the gaule of a nourishment, dipt in our sweat, vnfor∣tunately feeds the tast of our tongue. So as turne we which way soeuer we will, the gulfes, the rockes, the fires, the punishmens, and mischiefes follow vs, as neere as the shaddow doth the body. Consider attentiuely, my Soule, the im∣portance of these verities, and make thy pro∣fit of anothers harme. Represent to thee, the horrour and amazement whereto the world was reduced with all those meruailes, at such tyme as the Sunne withdrew from it his light. All those proud buildings so en∣riched with Brasse & Marble, those famous Temples, where Art is alwayes in dispute with Nature striuing to set forth their works▪ appeare to be no more, but Collossus's of shaddowes, that strike thine eyes aswel with astonishment, as with terrour, during the reigne of darkenes; and imagine how the pourtraite of this horrour, drawes before hād its being from the Originall, since in the lat∣ter day the world shall take vpon it the vi∣sage of horrour, of terrour, and of ruine. Re∣present vnto thy self besids, in order of these verityes, how the shadowes which couer but halfe of the earth by respits, shall very shortly be filling vp the space of the whole Circle, according to the decree which hath beene made thereof before all ages. In so much, my Soule, as since the day must end at last, quenching its torch within the most ancient waters of the Ocean, seeke betymes another Sun aboue all the Heauens, that may not be subiect to Eclypses; and whose light being alwayes in the East, may make thy happines to shine within his splendour, not for a day, for a yeare, or for an age, but for an Eternity. O sweet Eternity, with how many de∣lights enchauntest thou our spirits, while we addresse our thoughtes to thee. They may not tast thy baytes, and not be rauished from themselues with incomparable contentmēts. We wander, I confesse, whiles we seeke thee, but thy Labyrinthes are so delicious, as we are alwayes in feare to get forth therof. The harts which are taken with thy loue, with∣out knowing thee, sigh after thy pleasurs; & howbeit they haue neuer tasted its sweetnes∣ses, but by way of Idaea, yet find they no re∣pose, but in hope to possesse them one day. O sweet Eternity! what feelings of ioy and happines dost thou breed in Soules created for thy glory! How tedious is the way of this mortall and transitory life, to them that liue in expectation of thy pleasures! They resemble the Marriner being tossed with stormes & tempests, who through teares, measures with his eyes a thousand tymes, in a moment, the humide spaces of the waues for to discouer the Port he aspires vnto: for they sayling in like māner in this Sea of the world, and continually dashed with tēpests of misfortunes, do coūt the houres, the dayes and the moneths of their annoyes, in the long pretension of landing at the port of the Tombe, to be reborne, from very Ashes, in the mansion of thy glory. O sweet Eternity, what sensible repasts haue thy contentmentes with them! The more I thinke vpon thee, and the more I would be thinking of thee, my Spirit, rapt in this diuine Eleuation, is so violently pul∣led from it selfe, as it liues of no other food, then that of thy diuine thoughtes! O how happy is he, who establisheth in thee, for an Essay, the foundation of his felicity! My Soule, if thou wilt be content in the midst of thy pleasures, thinke of Eternity. The onely imagination of its delights, shalbe stronger then thine annoyes. What griefe soeuer thou endurest, imagine with thy selfe, how it is but for a tyme, and that the ioy of Eternity can neuer end. The Fastings the Hayrecloth, and al the sufferances of an austere life can neuer shake thy constancy, if thy desires haue Eternity for obiect. What accident soeuer stayes thee, in the way of thy pilgrimage, lift vp thine eyes to Heauē for to contemplate the Beauty of the mansiō whither thou aspirest. Thou seest, how for the purchase of a little glory of the world men expose their liues to a thousand dāgers, and to possesse one day that same of Eternity wilt thou not hazard thy body, which is nought els, but corruption, to the mercy of torments and paynes? Consider, my Soule, the instability of all created things, and put not thy trust in the earth, since the waters, snow, & sandes are the foundations therof. As often as the meruailes of the world attract thee insensi∣bly to their admiration, breake but the crust of those goodly apparences, and thou shalt see within, how it is but a Schoole of Va∣nity, a Faire of Toyes, a Theater of Tra∣gedies, a labyrinth of Errours, a Prison of darknes, a Way beset with Thornes, and a sea full of stormes and tempests. That it is but a barren Land, a stony Feild, a greenish Meadow whose flowers do shroud Serpēts, a Riuer of teares, a mountaine of annoyan∣ces, a vale of Miseries, a sweet Poyson, a Fable, a dreame, an Hospitall of febricitāts where euery one suffers in his fashiō. Their repose is full of anguishes, and their vnrest is replenished with despaire. Their trauels are without fruit, and their Ioyes are but counterfet; where no content is found aboue a day, & all the rest of the life is nothing els but wretchednes. So as if the euils where∣with it is propled, could be counted, they would surpasse in number the atomes of Democritus, who could reckon the maladies of the body, the passions of the Soule, and al the dolours wherwith our life is touched. Now then, if it be true that we dye euery moment, is not euery moment, I pray, a Death to vs? Let vs go then, my soule, to God, since he cals vs; the Sunne lends vs not its light but to shew vs the way to him. The Star∣res shine not in heauen, but to let vs see the pathes, & trackes therof. So as if the Moone do hide her self frō our eyes by Interstitions it cannot be but of choler, as sensible of the contempt we shew of her light. Let vs go to this holy Land of Promise, and passe the Red Sea of sufferance and punishments, in exāple of our Sauiour, who with no other reason, then that of his Loue, would pur∣chase, through his bloud, the Glory he at∣teyned to. The world can afford vs but Death, Death but a Tombe, and the Tombe but an infinite number of wormes, which shalbe fed with our carcasse. They runne af∣ter the world, & the world is nought but misery; they do loue then to be miserable. What blindnes, my Soule, to sigh after our mishaps, & passionately to cherish the sub∣iect of our losse? Let vs go to this Eternity where the delights, euer present, raigne with in the Order of a continuall moment. Let vs get forth of this mouing circle, and breake the chaynes of this shameful seruitude, whe∣rein to Syn hath brought vs. Away with the world, since whatsoeuer is in it, is but myre and dust; it is but smoke to the eyes, putrifaction to the nostrills, the noyse of thunder and tempests to the eares, thornes to the hands, & smart to our fee∣ling. All those who put any trust there∣in are vtterly deceyued. All those who fol∣low it, are absolutely lost. All those that honour it, are wholy despised, and all those who sacrifice to its Idols, shalbe one day sa∣crificed themselues, in expiation of their cri∣mes. Besides, we see, how all that know it, do abandon it, for if it promise a Scepter, it reaches vs a Shephooke. Thrones are sea∣ted on the brimme of a precipice; nor doth it euer affoard vs any good turne, but as the vigill of some misfortune. Away then with the world, and all that is within it, since all its wōders now are but dust. What∣soeuer it hath more rare, is but Earth; what∣soeuer it hath more fayre, is but wind. Eue∣ry King is no more, but a heape of Worms, where Horrour, Terrour, and Infection astonish and offend the senses that approch vnto it. Corruption (sayth the Wiseman, speaking of man) vaunt thou as much as thou wilt, behould thy selfe brought vnto the first nothing of thy first Being. Let vs not liue, my Soule, but for Eter∣nity, since it is the true spring of lyfe. Out of Eternity is there no repose; out of Eter∣nity, no pleasure; out of Eternity, all hope is vayne. Who thinkes not of Eternity, thinkes of nothing, since out of Eternity all things are false. Let vs behould but Eter∣nity my Soule, as the onely obiect of glo∣ry. All flyes away except Eternity: it is it alone, which is able to satiate our de∣fires, and termine our hopes. I will no o∣ther comfort in all my annoyes, then that of Eternity. I will no other solace in all my miseryes, then that of Eternity. Af∣ter it, do I desire nothing, after it do I loo∣ke for nothing▪ I lyue not but for it, and my hart sighes not, but after it. All dis∣courses are displeasing to me except those of Eternity. It is the But, and end of all my actions; it is the obiect of my thoughtes. I labour, but to gather its fruits; al my vigils point at the pretensions of its Crownes. My eyes contemne all the obiects, except those that conuey my spirits to its sweet Idea's, as to the only Paradise I find in this world. Whatsoeuer I do, I iudge my selfe vnprofi∣table, if I refer not my actions to this diuine cause; whatsoeuer I thinke, whatsoeuer I say, and whatsoeuer I imagine, all is but va∣nity, if those thoughtes, if those words, & those imaginatiōs rely not, in some fashion, on Eternity. In fine, my Soule, if thou wilt tast on Earth, the delightes of Heauen, thinke continually of Eternity, for in it only it is, where the accomplishment of all true contentments doth consist. The Glory of Paradise. A ATER that rich Salo∣mon had a thousand ty∣mes contented his Eyes in admiration of the fai∣rest obiects, which are found in Nature; That his Eares euer charmed with a sweet Harmony, had deliciously ta∣sted in their fashion, the most sensible repasts they are affected to; That his Mouth had re∣lished the most delicate meates, where the Tongue finds the perfection of its delight: after, I say, he had quenched the thirst of his desires in the sea of all contentments of the world, and satisfied the appetite of his sen∣ses, in the accomplishment of the purest de∣licacies, he cries out aloud, That all was full of vanity. The Pompe of these magnificences may well represent themselues to his remē∣brance, but he cryes out before it, That it is but vanity. His riches, his Greatnesses, his Tri∣umphes, & all his pleasures, serued him as a subiect within knowledge of their Nature, for to exclayme very confidently, that all was full of vanity. What pleasures now af∣ter these delights may mortalls tast? What Riches may they now possesse, after these Treasures? To what Greatnes may they aspire, which is not comprized within that of his Empire? To what sort of prospe∣rities may they pretend, which is not lesse then his happines? And yet neuertheles af∣ter a long possession of honours & delights, which were inseparable to his soueraigne & absolute power, he publisheth this truth, that all is full of smoke, and wind, and that nothing is sure heere beneath, but death, nor present, but miseries. Soules of the world, what thinke you of, that you reason not somtimes in your selues to discouer the weaknes of the foundation, whereon your hopes are piched? You loue your pleasures; but if it be true, that know∣ledge should alwayes precede Loue, why know you not the nature of the Obiect, be∣fore it predominate the power of your affe∣ctions? Agayne, you loue not thinges at any tyme, but to possesse them. Ah what! & know you not, the delights of the world do passe before our eyes, as a lightning, & that in their excesse, they incessantly find their ruyne? you thinke your selfe content to day because nothing afflicts you; do you cal that pleasure to runne after pleasure? for it is im∣possible for you to possesse that imaginary contentment, but in running after it, since it flyes so away without resting. Let them represent to themselues the greatest contēt∣ments that may be receyued in the world, & at the same tyme, let all the diuers Spirits, who haue tasted the vayne Sweetnesses ap∣peare, to tell vs in secret, what remaines to them thereof. Thou Miser, tell vs I pray thee, what pleasure hast thou to shut vp thy goulden Earth, within thy coffers, to lend it to the interest of thy conscience, and to make it dayly to increase through thy guilty cares, and thy fruitles watches? If the vaine Glory to be accōpted rich, possessed thee, thou hast beene neuer so, but in opinion, and appa∣rence only, since in the state whereunto age now bringes thee, all the Riches thou hast heaped togeather, and which yet thou art gathering, are fruits whereof thou hast but the flowers, by reason of their frailty. Thou mayest carry the key of thy Coffers long inough; thou art but the keeper of thy trea∣sures, and as a meere Depositarian thereof; for thy auarice lets thee frō disposing them, and consequently to gyue forth thy selfe to be the true owner of them. If thou couldst haue any moment of cessation in thy folly, I would demaund the reason of thy actions, to know where thy hopes do bound, and what glory is the But therof? It may be thou wouldst dye rich: what feeblenes? knowest thou not, thou hast need but of a sheet on∣ly for to couer thy Miseryes withall. Hast thou heaped vp money in thy Cabinets, with purpose to erect thee some stately Mo∣nument after thy death? Foole as thou art, thou hast past all thy lyfe without conside∣ring where thy Soule shall lodge after thy death; and thou studiest now to prepare a house for thy body, or rather for the worms, which shall gnaw the same, as if putrifactiō were some rare and precious thing. If thou hast a desire to leaue thy chil∣dren rich, true Riches consist not but in Ver∣tue onely, & with its sweet liquour, ough∣test thou to milch their infancy, & to murse them continually with its diuine nourish∣ment. Suppose through excesse of happi∣nes thou gainst the whole world (a sport of Fortune) and by a blow of a sad mischance, whereto thy vices shall haue smoothed the way, thou loose thy Soule in the last mo∣ment of thy lyfe, what glory past, what-domage present? The Reigne of thy Great∣nesses shall finish so; and that of thy paynes shall then begin. Verily thou shalt haue pos∣sest all the goodes of the earth, but in truth likwise shalt thou feele therfore all the euills within the order of a diuine Iustice, which shall make thy dolours eternal. Be thou cō∣uinced thē by reason not to follow the way of a lyfe, the most vnhappy that euer yet quickned the body, and confesse with me how there hath beene but one Matthew A∣postle, whom this vast sea of the world hath saued from the shipwracke, whereinto the weight of gold & siluer went about to en∣gage him. Bias despoyled himselfe indeed of all his Riches, but not of all his errours. Laertius Neuola puts ouer the right of Maio∣rity to his brother, and consequently his ri∣chest pretensiōs; but in despising one good he imbraced not the other. Consider I pray to what point of pouerty was the Richman brought vnto in an instant, since of all his Riches, there was not left him meanes to buy a drop of could water, to quench his thirst. Confesse then, Miser, thy pleasures to be false, and how they subsist not in thy spirit, but through a deceiptful opiniō that blindes thee, to cast thee into a pricipice. The keeper of a Vineyard that resembles thee, without imitatiō of thee, is a great deale more happy then thou art, for after he hath stirred the earth, he gathers at the end of his daies-worke, in the repose a sweet sleepe, the fruit of his paines; and thou on the contrary, the thornes of thy thornes, since an eternal tor∣ment succeds the dolours of thy dying life. So as Couetous men in seeking of gould & siluer, in the bowells of the earth, find hell without piercing into it, which is the Cēter therof. Thou proud and ambitious Man, tell vs, I pray thee, what are thy pleasures? I know well how thy Spirit full of vanity pitches thy hopes vpon the highest Throne of Fortune, & that blind in the knowledge of thy faults, thou findst no glory, which is not far beneath thy merit. But wherin con∣sists thy Contentment, if it be to expect Thrones, and attend to Crownes? Did one euer see a feebler pleasure, since the nature of it is nothing els but wind and smoke? Thou tramplest the Earth with a disdainfull foot, as if thou hadst reasons inough to persuade vs, that it were not thy Mother. Thou out-facest the heauens with an arrogant looke, and the force of thy ashes is dispersed in the aire, not being able to fly any higher, A∣gaine, thou makest no doubt, that if the Hea∣uens haue found thunder to punish the in∣solency of the Angels, it were like to want new punishments to chastize the vanity of men? It may be thou flatterest thy selfe with this vaine beliefe, that being raysed aboue the common sort, thou hast beene formed in some new kind of mould, and that thou art so dispensed with, in this law, condemning vs to the sufferance of all manner of paines. Returne I pray thee, from this wande∣ring, and open thine eyes to consider thy ruine. Thy Pride, and thy Arrogancy are the plumes of the Peacocke, sustayned by two foundations of Misery, figured by the feet of this Foule. Carry thy head as high as thou wilt, it must necessarily fall of its pride in declining to the Earth. And if thou letst thy selfe be dazeled with the glittering of thy sumptuous Apparell, this verity con∣uinceth thee of folly, since all thou wearest, is but the worke of wormes: nor do I won∣der now, that they deuoure vs so, after de∣ath, for it is but to pay themselues for the paynes they haue taken, in laying the web, wherewith we couer our nakednes. So as, if thou regardest thy selfe neere, thou shalt see how the wormes of thy apparell, couer those of thy body; & that therefore thy Ar∣rogancy hath no other foundation, then that of thy corruption. And vpon this assurance tell me now, what are the delights of thy vanity? And you great Monarkes, who find the Earth too little to bound, within its spaces, the extent of your Empire, do you, I pray, make vs participant of your Contentments, and tell vs something of the Sweetnesses which you tast, during the raigne of your absolute powers. It is a pleasure, you will say, to commaund a world of people, & to impose thē lawes after your owne humour. A feeble Pleasure! Whiles it proceeds, but from a Soueraignty which subiects the spirit of him that commaunds; because indeed he ought to correspond with the actions of his Subiects. You do what you will your selfe. It is true; but that is not the way to content your selfe, if your deeds be not exempt frō reproch. If they feare you, it is but for the knowledge they haue of your Tyranny. If they loue you, to what end serues the affec∣tiō of your subiects, while you seeme not to merit the same? You go into al places wher∣soeuer your desires call you, without euer meeting with resistance in your designes: but why follow you not the path of vertue? Displeasures rather then delights attend you at the end of the Carriere. I know well how Greatnesses, Riches, and all Magni∣ficences are alwayes in pledge with you; but therein ought you to consider the while how the glory which enuirons you, seemes to fetch the same course which the Sunne doth, and how it flyes away without cease towards its West, whence it shall neuer rise agayne. Be it so, that your lookes seeme to astonish the stoutest, and that they fauour the more happy. Those lookes in their ster∣nesse, cannot wound but the culpable, no-engage in their sweetnes, but spirits which feed of smoke. There is no doubt but your power is ad∣mired, but not enuyed of the wiser, because the greatnes of your might, concludes very ordinarily in vanity. We must confesse that the honour, & life of men are in your hāds. But you must needs confesse withall, that your heades also, are beneath the Sword, which is fastened to the feeling of Heauen, or rather suspended in the ayre by a little threed, and how the least of your crymes may pul vpon you the chastisement therof. So as, if you take pleasure to bath you in the bloud of Innoēccy, as an Otho, or a Caligula, the diuine Iustice prepares your last bath in your proper bloud, where your Soule suffers Shipwracke with your body. What then are your delights? In what garden do you gather their flowers? Verily you haue all things at your wish, but what pleasure is it to wish for transitory goods, whose priuatiō causeth a great deale more sorrow, then the fruition afforded contentment? If your Crownes, and Scepters are agreable to you during life, they will cause a horrour at your Death; for that you ought to giue accompt of your swaying them. You are but Lieu∣tenants onely in the Land of God, during the tyme of your Reigne. The hower ap∣proaches wherein you are to iustify the So∣ueraigne actions of all the moments of your life, to know (in truth) in what fashion you haue disposed of the Greatnesses, and of the Treasures, whereof you were no more then meere Depositarians. Do you now then referre all your pleasures to this last in∣stant, and you shall know how the way is a great deale more thorny, then that of a low condition, and voyd of Enuy. Tell vs I pray thee, Lucullus, what are be∣come of the delights of thy proud Feasts? I admit, that the prodigality of thy Magnifi∣cences, hath vnpeopled the ayre of Birds, and the sea of fishes, and that Art hath expo∣sed to view, as in a stall, her last inuentions, to glut the appetite of thy foolishnes. Where are now those contentments? Where is this Pompe, where is this lustre, where are the Pallaces of these banquets, where are the Cupps of Gould, where the Meate, where the Cookes, where are the Stewards, where the Guesse, and the wayters of thy Feasts? All is slid away without their memory. And if the Historyes ( Lucullus ) do yet remember thee, it is but onely to represent thy folly to Posterity. What contentment may they take in feasts, if the sweet wines wherwith they satiate their hunger, be chaunged to corruption? They take pleasure to deuour their pleasure, like as in the Chase they find contentment in running after their sports. The hony which they put into the mouth, becomes bitter in the stomacke: for what incōmodities seeme they not to suffer who haue filled their belly withall the sortes of Meats? And to what shame and infamy sub∣mit they not themselues, while they drown their reason in wine, their honour, and their conscience all at once? is it not to be cruell to ones selfe to precipitate his paces to the Tomb-wards, as if we dyed not soone in∣ough? Againe, for whome take we the paines to treat our bodyes so, if not for the wormes, since the flesh is destined to them? All the fat which we gather, is but for them, for the small tyme we lyue is not to be put into ac∣compt. Why, consider they not how euery Banquet, hath its last course, & euery wed∣ding-day its morrow; and that the ioy of these feasts seemes to passe away, as swift as the day, which lends them light? What a goodly custome was it among the Pagans to serue in at the last course of their Bāquets, an Anatomy vpon the table, in signe how the wormes were shortly to reduce the bo∣dies of the inuited to that estate? How many are there now adayes, who in the blindnes of Epicurisme put all their Gallantry in ma∣king of good Cheere? But what excesse of Bestiality the while to take such pleasure to pamper the body on the way of death, whi∣ther it runs posting without cease? I graunt thou hast drowned to day thy Troubles in thy Glasses, and hast glutted thine appetite with meats the most delicious of the world: what shalbe left thee therof to morrow, but gaule in the mouth frō the surfet of thy riot? I say, but bitternes in thy hart, & repentance in thy soule? Thy Crosses renew againe more strong then euer, by reason of the pri∣uation of thy delighs. Thou must begin a∣gaine to morrow to sooth thy sensuality, and the day following the same tormēts which thou hast suffered now already, shall succeed thy ioy. So as when all the lyfe should be a feast, the last seruice thereof were alwaies to be feared, since a life of Roses brings forth a death of Thornes. Cramme then thy body withall sorts of meats, as long as thou wilt, he that shall haue fasted the while, shalbe a great deale more content then thou, vpon the last day of thy Banquets. So as, if thou hast the aduantage to be fatter then he, the wormes shall fare the better for it, in thy graue. You sensles Soules that loue but the plea∣sures of the Table, I aduertise you betimes that the Feast is ended, and the Company brooke vp: ech one is retired with himselfe. But there is now another manner of news, which is, that many of your Cōpanions are dead; one, as Ninus, with too much drinke; another with feeding ouer much, as Messina. He there hath fetched an eternall sleepe, as Bogrias ; & he heere hath cut his wiues throat in his wine, as Thessalius. To what end thinke you? They are the last seruices which mis∣fortune presents at the last Course of your feasts, the poyson whereof is couered with sugar; take you heed then, & play not with such formidable Enemies. It is all that you can do to eschew the dangers in the world, with the light you haue of Reason; and you are drowning the same in your Banquets, without feare of suffering Shipwracke with it. Away with these Pleasures of smoke, which fill not the body, but with new matter of putrifaction, I abhor you, & de∣test you with a hatred which shall neuer dy. Since my God hath put Thornes on his head, why should not I be putting them in my hart? I will from henceforth quench my Thirst within his Chalice, and gather the fruits of my nourishment in his desarts. My Sauiour hath fasted all his life, and shall I pamper my selfe euery moment? Let death come vpon me, rather then such a wish. I loue thee, my Soule too well, to preferre the pleasures of my Body before thy cōtentmēt. Take then thy pleasure in the Thoughtes of Eternity, since for thy entertaynement they are able to produce the true Nectar of Hea∣uen, and the purest wine of the Earth. And you, profane Spirits, who sacrifice not but to Voluptuousnesse, confesse you now, that Lazarus was a great deale more happy in his Misery, then was the impious Richman in his Treasure. The one dyed of Famine in the world, and the other dyes of Thirst in Hell. Agayne, what a thing were it that all wedding-feasts should be held on the Sea, where the least tempest might tro∣ble the solemnityes, & metamorphize them into a funerall pompe? And yet neuerthe∣les is it true, that the soules of the world giue themselues to banquet vpon the current of the water of this life, where rockes are so frequent, and shipwracks so ordinary. One drinkes a dying, to the health of another who drownes in his glasse some moments of his life; and so all, Companions of the same lot approch without cease to the Tōbe which Tyme prepares them. O how sweet it is (said that Poet) to banquet at the Ta∣ble of the Goddes, because in that of men, the last seruice is alwayes full of Alöes. But I shall say after him, what contentments without comparison, receyue they at the Angels Table? It is not there where the soule is replenished with this imaginary sweet wyne, nor with these bitter sweet∣nesses of the world. The food of its nourish∣ment is so diuine, as through a secret vertue it contents the appetite without cloying it euer. Sigh then, my Soule, after this Celestiall Manna, alwaies fruitful in pleasures, so sweet as desire and hope are alike vnprofitable in their possession, if what they possesse in thē may be imagined to be agreable to them: nor suffer any more thy body (since thy rea∣son may mayster its senses) to heap on its dunghill, corruption vpon corruption, in the midst of its banquets and Feasts, where they prepare but a rich haruest for the wor∣mes. If thy body be a hungry, let it feed as that of Iob, with the sighes of its Misery. If it be a thirst, let it be quenching its thirst with the humide vapour of its teares, as that of Heraclitus. And if it reuolt, let them put it in chaynes and fetters, for so if it dy in tor∣ments it shall be resuscited anew in Glory. Sardanapalus, appeare thou with thy Ghost heere, to represent in Idaa, those imaginary pleasures which thou hast taken in thy lu∣xuries. O it would be a trimme sight to see thee by thy lasciuious Elincea, disguised in a womans habit, hauing a distaffe by thy side and a spindle in thy hand; what are become of those allurements which so charmed thy Spirit? What are become of those charmes that so rauished thy soule? What are become of those extasies, which so made thee to liue besides thy self? those imaginary Sweet∣nesses, those delicious imaginations, those agreable deceipts, and those agreements of obiects where thy senses found the accom∣plishment of their repose? Blind as thou art, thou cōsiderest not awhit, that Time seemes to bury thy pleasures in their Cradle, and euen in their birth; how they runne Post to their end through a Law of necessity, fetched from their violence. The profane fire wher∣with thou wast burned, hath reduced thy hart into Ashes, with thy body; and the di∣uine Iustice hath metamorphized the ima∣ginary paradise of thy life into a true Hell, where Cruelty shall punish thee without cease for the cryme of thy lust. I confesse that the Sunne hath lent thee its light during an Age, for thee to tast very greedily the plea∣sures & sweetnesses of transitory goods. But that age is past, the sweetnesses vanished, thy pleasures at an end, and all thy goods, as false, haue left thee dying but only this griefe, to haue belieued them to be true. Brutish Soules, who sigh without cease after the like passions, breake but the crust of your pleasures, and cry you out with Sa∣lomon, how the delights of the world are full of smoke, and that all is vanity. He lodged within his Pallace 360. Concubines, or ra∣ther so many Mischiefes, which haue put the saluation of his soule in doubt. I wonder not awhit that they hoodwincke Loue, so to blind our reason, for it were impossible our harts should so sigh at all houres after those images of dust, but in the blindnes where∣to the powers of our soule are reduced. O how a Louer esteemes himself happy to pos∣sesse the fauours of his mistresse! He pre∣ferres this good before all those of the earth besides. And in the Violence of his passion, would he giue▪ as Adam, the whole Para∣dise for an Apple, his Crowne for a glasse of water, I would say, that which he pre∣tends, for a litle smoke. He giues the name of Goddesse to his Dame, as if this title of Ho∣nour could be compatible with the Surna∣me she beares of Miserable. He adores not∣withstanding this Victime, and offers In∣cense to it vpon the same Aultar, where it is to be sacrificed. His senses in their bru∣tishnes make their God of it; and his spirits touched with the same error authorize their Idolatry, without considering this Idoll to be a worke of Art, couered with a crust of Playster, full of putrifaction, and which without intermissiō resums the first forme of Earth, in running to its end. Would they not say now, this louer were a true Ixion who imbraceth but the Clouds? for in the midst of his pleasures, death changes his Body into a shadow full of dread and horrour. He be∣lieues he houlds in his Armes this same I∣doll, dressed vp with those goodly colours, which drew his eyes so in admiratiō of her, & he sees no more of her then the ruines of the pourtraite, where the wormes begin al∣ready to take their fees. Away with these pleasurs of the flesh, since all flesh is but hay, & that death serues not himselfe of his Sith, but to make a haruest of it, which he carryes to the Sepulcher. What Glory is there in the possession of all the women in the world, if the fayrest that euer yet haue beene, are now but ashes in the Tombe? All the flow∣ers in their features are faded as those of the Meadowes, and the one and other haue la∣sted but a Spring. Soules of the world, de∣maund of your Eyes, what are become of those obiects, which so often they haue ad∣mired? Aske your Eares to know, where are those sweet Harmonies, which haue charmed them so deliciously? make you the same demaund of all your other Senses, and they shall altogeather answere you in their manner, how their pleasures are vanished in an instant, as the flash of a lightening; and that they find nothing durable in the world, but griefe for the priuation of the things which they loued. Admit you haue all sorts of pleasures at a wish; for how long tyme are they like to last? It may be a mo∣ment, it may be an houre; and would you for a little number of instants, be reigning so long in your vices? Thou seest then, my Soule, how false is the Good of Greatnesse; and that of Riches how imaginary it is. How the pleasures of Banquets, full of Alôes, dye in their spring, and the delights of the flesh haue no other foundation then that of corruptiō. It is now tyme, my Soule, that I let thee see sensibly this difference that is betweene the con∣tentments of the Earth, and those of Hea∣uen, to the end, that in the knowledge of their nature, the one so contrary to the o∣ther, thou maist shunne those pleasures that fly away, & sigh for loue after the delights of Eternity. There is this difference ( S. Au∣gustine notes) betweene eternall & transito∣ry things, that before we possesse the tran∣sitory goods, we passionately desire them; and from the tyme we enioy them, we fall sensibly to mislike them. On the contrry, the desire of eternall things we neuer thinke of; yet from the tyme we possesse them, we are not capable of loue, but for them. Con∣sider a little, you Mortals, what this is but an age of pleasures, whose last moment seemes to make vs forget all the others that went before; in such wise, as there rests but a vayne Idaea of the Tyme past. Search you somwhat curiously withîn the memory of ages, into that of daies, which haue runne away, coūt their houres if you will, and you shall con∣fesse, that it seemes to you to be but yester∣day, since our first Father was chased out of the terrestriall Paradise; so true it is, that Tyme passeth, and swiftly glideth away. The Sage Roman sayd; That if to these long yeares we adde a great number of o∣thers, and of all together make vp a Raigne of a life, the most happy that euer yet hath beene seene, if we needs most destine a last day, to performe the funerals of all the o∣thers, and vpon that day a certaine houre, and in this houre the last moment; a great part of our life will go way in doing ill, the greater in doing nothing, and the whole in doing otherwise then our duty required. There is alwaies a thirst of the delights of the world, and though we seeme to quench the same in its puddle springs, yet is it but for a moment; for the heat wilbe renewing againe, and the desire of drinking will presse vs then more then euer. Vntye thy self thē, my Soule, from all the feelings of the Earth, and with a pitch, full of loue, eleuate thy Thoughtes to this sweet obiect of Eternity. If thou aspirest to Greatnesses, represent to thy selfe how the happy spirits trample vn∣derfoot both the Sun and Moone, and all those Starres of the Night, whose infinite number astonish our senses. S. Paul was but lifted to the third Heauen, and yet neuer∣theles could he not expresse, in his language, the Meruayles which he admired. And S. Peter on the Mount Thabor, being dazeled through the glittering of one sole Ray, most confidently demaunds permission of his Mayster, to build in the same place three Tabernacles, hauing now quite forgot the Earth, as if it had neuer beene. Alas, O great Saint, with what exta∣sies of ioy shouldest thou be accomplished in this diuine Bower of Eternall felicityes, if one feeble reflection of light, so rauished thee from thy self, as made thee breath so de∣liciously, in a lyfe replenished with clarity, as thou didst put in obliuion the darknes of the world where thou madest thy abode? What might thy Glory by now? To what point of happines might we seeme to ter∣mine it? Thou possessest the body, whose Shadow thou hast adored; thou behouldst vncouered that diuine Essence, whose Splē∣dor makes the Cherubims to bow the head, for not being able to endure the sweet vio∣lences of its clarity. Iudge with what fee∣ling I reuerence thy felicity, if the onely throughts I haue of them do make me happy only before hand. The Kings of the world, my Soule, establish the foundation of their Greatnesses vpō the large spaces of the earth, and all the earth togeather is but a poynt in comparison of Heauen. And therefore the onely obiect they haue in their combats & triumphes, is no other then that of the Cō∣quest of this little point. Get forth then, my Soule, of its Circum∣ference, since thou art able to aspire to the possession, not of the world (for it is but misery) but of a mansion whose extent may not be measured, and whose delights are e∣ternall. Wouldst thou haue Thrones? The Emperiall Heauen shall be thy foot-stoole. Wouldst thou haue Crownes? The same of immortall Glory shall enuiron thy head. Wouldst thou Scepters? Thou shalt haue alwayes in thy hand a soueraigne power, which shall make thy desires vnprofitable, not knowing what to desire out of thy po∣wer. Hast thou a desire to haue treasures? Glory and Riches are in the howse of our Lord: And not this trāsitory glory of the world which chaunges into smoke, but another wholy diuine, that depends not a whit vpon Tyme, and which reaches beyond all ages. Not those riches of the Ocean, nor those of the Land, which are vnprofitable in their ver∣tue, & full of weaknes in their power; but of Riches that haue no price, and which make thee owner of the Soueraigne Good, wher all sorts of felicityes are comprehended. If thou be delighted with Banquets, heare the Prophet what he sayes; Lord, one day a∣lone affoards more contentment in thy house, then a whole age in the feasts of the world. The diuine food wherewith the happy Spirits are fed hath not in it selfe only these sweetnesses in quality, but it nature. So as, this is a vertue essentiall to it, continually to produce what soeuer they way imagine in its chiefe perfe∣ction. We reioyce in thee, O Lord, in remem∣bring thy breasts, a great deale more sweet then wine. They write of Assuerus, that he raigned in in Asia, ouer one hundred & twenty seauen Prouinces, and that he made a Banquet in his Citty of Susa, which lasted an hundred and fourescore dayes, where he set forth with Prodigality, all the Magnificences which Art and Nature, with common ac∣cord could furnish him, at the price of infinit riches. But the end of this Feast did blemish the Glory of its beginning and continuance, for that all the pleasures which dye, are not considerable in their Birth, nor in the course of their Reigne. Hence it is, my Soule, that the only delights of these Banquets, which the King of Kings prepares for thee, are worthy of thy desires, since they shall last for an Eternity. Those there haue begunne vpon Earth, for to finish one day; and these heere shall beginne in Heauen for neuer to haue end. Some are borne, and dye in Tym ; and others are borne in Eternity to endure therein as long as it. Wouldst thou lodge in Pallaces? The Rich house of our Lord shalbe the habitation of the iust. But what house do you belieue it is? Represent vnto thy self, that when they enter into the Pallace of some Great Prince, they find the particular seates of all his Subiects, before that of his dwelling. The like is it in this stately Pal∣lace of the Vniuerse, which this Almighty King hath built with a word only, where al his Creatures make their aboad, as in certaine Tenemēts which he hath destined to them. The Ayre serues them for a Cage, the Sea for a Fishpoole, the Forrests for a parke, the Champaignes for orchards, the Mountayns for their Towers, and the diuers Villages are as sundry places of pleasure, which Kings & Princes hold as tenants of Time. Walke then boldly, my Soule, within this vast Pallace of the world, since it is the place of thy dwelling. The starry Heauen is the feeling thereof; the Moone the torch of the night, and the Sunne that of the day: the birds learne not to sing of nature, but to charme thine eares, through the sweet har∣mony of their warbling. The Sunne, the Au∣rora, and the Zephyrus take paines ech one in its turne to cultiuate the Earth, for to helpe it, in the shouting forth of its delicate Flo∣wers, from whome beautifull Iris hath robd the pourtaite of their colours for to dresse vp her Arke, whence it is that thine eyes con∣tinually admire it. The trees euer stooping vnder the burden of their fruits, grow not but for thy delight. The woods, they peo∣ple their trunkes with leaues, of purpose to make thee tast the pleasures of their shades, in the chiefest of the heats. And the Rockes though vnsensible, contribute to the per∣fection of thy contentmēt a thousand good∣ly fountaynes, which with the murmur of their purling, fetch sleepe into thy eyes, for to charme sometymes the annoyes of thy life. The Meadowes do neuer seeme to pre∣sent themselues to thee, but with the coun∣tenance of Hope, knowing well how it comforts the whole world; & its Champai∣gnes, as witty to deceiue thee, do hide their treasures vnder goulden Cases, to the end to dazle thine eyes through the glittering of so goodly a shew. And now, my Soule, if in this Pallace where the Subiects of him who hath built the same, do soiourne, thou seest but won∣ders euery where; to what degree of admi∣ration shalt thou be raysed, when passing further, thou discouerest the dwelling of the soueraigne Maister? Thou needst but mount vp an eleauen steps onely to behold the spa∣ciousnes of the place where is assembled all his Court. Go then faire and softly, because vpon euery step thou shalt be discouering of new subiects of wonder, and astonishment at once. The first step is the Heauen of the Moone, whereby passing only, thou shalt admire the clarity wherewith it is adorned, to giue light to all those that mount, which is noted in the Pallaces of great men, where the Stayer-cases are made very light-some. The Moone presids in the midst of its Hea∣uen, and within its Circle is it alwayes waxing and wayning, where the diuine Philosopher Plato hath established the spring of the Idaea's of all the things heere beneath; and then consider how in the space of this, degree might a thousand worlds be built. The second Stayre is the Heauen of Mer∣cury. The third, the Heauen of Venus. The fourth that of the Sunne (names which the Astrologers assigne vnto the Heauens.) Cō∣template heere at leasure, this Stare of the day, whose benigne influences do make the earth so fruitfull, & whose light giues pride to colours, and consequently the vertue to all beautifull things to become admirable. It was this very Sunne which Iosue arrested in the midst of its Course, and which the Persi∣ans heeretofore haue adored, not conside∣ring the while it was subiect to Eclypses, & how it borrowed its light, and all its other essentiall qualities from a soueraigne & ab∣solute Cause, which had giuen it the Be∣ing. The fifth Stayre is the Heauen of Mars. The sixth of Iupiter, and the seauenth of Sa∣turne. They eight Stayre is the Firmament, The ninth the Primum mobile. Stay heere a little, my Soule, vpon this Step, for to lis∣ten as you passe along to the sweet Harmo∣ny of the mouing of the Heauens, and of al that is in nature; for by the swindge of this Heauen, as with a Mayster-wheele, are all the springs of the world moued, and are no otherwise capable of action then through its mouing. But the motion is so melodious through continuance, & through the iustnes of the correspondency of all the parts with their ground, as Plato that great Philopher was not touched with any other desire, thē that of hearing this Harmony. The tenth Staire is the Cristalline Hea∣uen. Heere it is, my Soule, where thy fee∣ling, and thy thoughts are to be attentiue. This tenth Step is beyond the limits of the world. Thou beginst but now, to enter in∣to the Mansion of the Glory of thy Lord, mingle respect heere amidst thy ioy, & ioine humility with thy contentments. Thou beholdst thy self now illumined with ano∣ther light, then that of the Sunne & Moone not suffering intermission in its durance. It shines alwayes, and thou maiest know in the neere admiration of its diuine Clarity, the price of the delights it communicats to thee. Let vs finish our voyage, and mount we now to the Emperiall Heauen, whi∣ther S. Paul was rapt, & where he saw won∣ders, which had no name; where he tasted Sweetnesses, whose Idaea's are incomprehē∣sible; and where he felt pleasures, whereof his very Senses could not talke, euen when they had the vse of speach. But thou mayest yet cry with S. Stephen, how thou seest the Hea∣uens open: for now behold thee vpon the last step, and at the gate of that great Emperiall Heauen. It is not permitted thee, my Soule, to enter into a place so holy and sacred; do thou only admire by order, the Porch with∣out, and the infinite greatnes of the miracu∣lous wonders there, whence all the Saints, incessantly publish the Glory of the Omni∣potent who hath wrought them. Contem∣plate the perfect Beauty of the Angels, ech one in his Hierarchy, that of the Archan∣gels, that of Powers, that of the Vertues, that of the Principalities, that of the Dominati∣ons, and that of the Seraphims, with this Astonishment to behold how in clarity they surpasse the Sunne. Admire all the happy Spirits, ech one seated in the Throne of Glory which he hath merited, the Virgins, the Confessours, the Martyrs, the Apostles, the Prophets, and the Patriarches, being ray∣sed all to the degrees of Felicity, which they haue purchased. Represent vnto thy selfe besides, the in∣comparable happines, wherewith the Im∣maculate Virgin Mother of our Sauiour, is accomplished. Cast thine eyes vpon her Throne, and euen rauished in astonishment of her Greatnesses, publish with confidence how they are without comparison, and that the Sun, the Moone, and all the Starres are of a matter to vile, and profane for her to tread vpon. And if thou wilt be casting thy view vpon the Tabernacle of thy God, do thou shroud it from the flash of his rayes, vnder the Robe of the Cherubims; and be∣ing rauished as they, in the dazeling where they breath accomplished withal sorts of fe∣licityes, adore the diuine Obiect of their Glory. And while thine eyes, shalbe tasting, in their fashion, the delights which are foūd in the admiration of things perfectly fayre, lend thine eares to that sweet harmony, wherwith al those happy Spirits make vp a Consort in singing without cease, Holy, Ho∣ly, Holy is our Lord; the Heauens, and Earth are filled with the maiesty of his Glory. O diuine melody! How powerfull are thy streynes, since through our thoughtes they make thēselues so sensible to our harts! With how many different pleasures, and all perfectly extreme, art thou rauished now, my Soule! With what rauishments of Ioy art thou transported besides thy selfe? In what sweet extasies art thou not wādering? After what sort of goods, canst thou seeme to aspire vnto? Thou beholdest all Great∣nesses in their Thrones, Riches in their my∣nes, Glory in its Element, and the Vertues in their Empire. Thou tastest the true Con∣tentments, in their purity, after a manner so diuine, as thou possessest all without de∣siring any thing; & yet neuertheles not all, since the obiect of thy delights is infinite; which makes thee tast new Sweetnesses, not in the order of increase of pleasure, but in that of the accomplishment of the rest, as being alwayes perfectly content. Nor yet is this all, my Soule, to make thee admire, in Idaea, the Meruailles of all these diuine obiects of glory, and of felicity. It behoues me now to represent vnto thee besides, the strayte vnion that ioynes the happy Spirit with his soueraigne Good, I would say, the Soule with God. But how may it be done? God cannot produce a Spe∣cies, or an Image of himselfe, which is able to represent him, in regard the Species and the Image are alwayes more pure, & more simple then is the Obiect whence they pro∣ceed. Now, what Species, or Image may be purer, and more spirituall then God? Besi∣des that, all the Species, and all the Images are so determined in the forme of the thing they represent, as they cannot seeme to re∣present another. And it is true, that God is not a thing determinate, because it hath not a particular Being, separated from others; in such sort, as he eminently conteynes ech thing, as the Apostle saith, Portans omnia verbo virtutis sue. There is no Species, which is able to determine this God indeterminate; there is no Image created, or produced that can represent this God increated. Hence it is that God cānot vnite himself to the Soule through a Species or Image, as we do other things. The Deuines say, that God vnites himselfe to the Soule, per se, really; & they call this vnion, per modum species. But for to cleere the obscurity, which is in all this my∣stery, you must note, that when as God vni∣tes himselfe to the Soule, he eleuates the same to a being which is supernaturall and diuine. In so much, as it resēbles God him∣selfe; not so, as it looseth its proper Essence, but within the perfectiō wherto it is eleua∣ted, it deriues from the Obiect which cōmu∣nicates to it, al the glory that it possesseth, relatiōs to his similitude; in such sort as in re∣garding this happy Soule, they behold God. Moreouer, it may be said more cleerely. that God vnites himself to the Soule in such manner, as the Fire, is vnited to the Iron: & forasmuch as the Fire; as agent, is more no∣ble then the Iron, it conuertes the Iron into its semblance, with so much perfection, as one would say, the Iron had chaunged its proper forme into that of the Fire; yet not∣withstanding the Iron looseth not awhit of its essence. Now this vnion of Fire with Iron is a reall vnion, per se, and not through Species, nor through Image. So God who is called the ( Deus noster ignis consumens est ) is vnited to our Soule, per se, really, and receyuing the same into himselfe, reduceth it to a being supernaturall, and deified; in so much as it seemes to be no more a Soule but God himselfe. A verity, which S. Iohn publisheth when he saith, we shalbe like vnto him. From the Tyme, that a Soule is vnited with God, he illumines it with a light of glory, to the end it may see him, and contē∣plate him at its pleasure, and with him all things which are in him, formally and eminen∣tly (to vse the termes of the Schoole-men,) in so much, as it is ignorāt of nothing with∣in the perfection of its wisedome. O admirable Science! Then shall it be, when it shall cleerely see within the Abysses of diuine secrets, that which God did before he created the world. How he produced e∣ternally another himselfe, without multi∣plication of Deities, and how betweene the producent, and the person produced, pro∣ceeds an eternall loue of him who engenders and of him who is engendred, which is this adorable Trine-vnity. It shal see besides how this God, being engēdred Eternally in him∣selfe without mother, might be borne once on earth of the most glorious Virgin with∣out Father. With what Prouidence he go∣uernes all things; with what Goodnes he created Man; & with what Loue he redee∣med him. How he iustifies inuisibly with∣out forcing the liberty; How the works of his Iustice accord with those of his mercy; How he saues through his grace; How he leaues them reprobate without fault; How his infallible Science agrees without the Contingency of things; How the Predesti∣nate may damne himselfe, and the Repro∣bate be saued, though the Science of God remayne alwaies infallible, and immutable as it is. The verity of all these secrets shalbe represented to its eyes, more cleere then the Sunne. O what Science, my Soule, or rather what incomparable felicity proceeds from all these sundry pleasures? When shall this be, that thou cryest out with the Queene of Saba, speaking to thy Lord, in lyke manner as she spake vnto Salomon: What wisedome is thine, O great King, what glory, and what magnificence admire they in thy Kingdome? What Citty is this same, reple∣nished with so many goods; what delicious meates and what precious wines, do they tast at the table of thy banquets? What lustre of greatnes appeares, in all those, that at∣tend vpon thee? Renowne may well pu∣blish thy prayses in all places of the Earth, if al the Heauēs together are not large inough to conteyne the rumour of them. O happy Spirits, who reigne in the mansion of this immortall glory! I wonder not awhit, at your so trampling vnder foot the Crownes and Scepters of the world, in iust pretension to the felicity you possesse. What fires, what torments, and what new punishments, would not one suffer for to purchase this so∣ueraygne good, where repose is so durable? Gibbets, Hangmen, & all the instruments of Death, are as so many Trophies of the glory, which succeeds shame and payne. O how these diuine words of S. Augustin, do cause a sweet melody to resound, while he sayes; Let the deuills prepare me from henceforth as many ambushes as they will; let them addresse the last assaults of their power to encounter me; let fastings macerate my body; let Sackcloth and Cilices torment my flesh; let tribulations op∣presse me vnder their weight; let the long vigills shorten my lyfe; let him there giue affronts of his contempt, and heere of his cruelties; let cold freeze the bloud within my veynes; let the scorching of the Sun tanne me; let its parching reduce me into ashes; let aches cleane my head in peeces; let my hart re∣uolt agaynst my Soule, my visage loose its colour, & all the parts of my body stoope to their ruine; let me yield my lyfe to the suffering of diuers torments: let my dayes slide away in weeping & continuull teares; and let the wormes, in fine, take hould of my flesh, and the corruption of my bones: All this would be nothing to me, so I might enioy Eternall Repose in the day of Tribulation. I will belieue it, O great Saint: for what is it to endure al the euils of the world with∣in Tyme, for to possesse all desirable goods in the bower of Eternity! O sweet residen∣ce, where Ioy eternally endures, and where delights are immortall! Where nothing is seene but God; where they know nothing but God! If they thinke, it is of God; if they desire, it is God himselfe. And howbeit the harts do there sigh without cease for loue, those sighes proceed not, but from the con∣tentments of fruition, where Loue alwaies remaines in its perfection. Let Antiquity vaunt as much as it will of the Temple of Thessaly, of the Orchards of Adonis, of the Gardens of Hesperides, of the pleasures of the fortunate Ilands: Let Poets chaunt the plea∣sures of their Elizean fields, and let humane Imagination assemble in one subiect what∣soeuer is more beautiful and delicious in na∣ture, & they shall find in effect that all is but a vayne Idaea, in comparison of the immor∣tall pleasure of this Seat of Glory. Let them imagine a Quire of Syrens, and let them ioy∣ne therto in Consort both the harpe of Or∣pheus, and the voyce of Amphion ; Let Apollo and the Muses likewise be there to beare a part: all this melody of these consorts were but an ircksome noyse of Windes & Thun∣ders in competency of the diuine harmony of Angels. Let them make a Perfume of all what Sweets soeuer that Arabia & Saba hath had; let the Sea cōtribute therto all its Amber, and the flowers all their Balme ; such a perfu∣me notwithstanding would be but a stench & infection, in regard of the diuine odours, which are enclosed in the Emperialll Hea∣uen. O how S. Paul had reason to dye of loue, rather then griefe, in his prolongation to reuiew the felicity which he admired in his rauishment! I desire to dye in my self, for to go to liue in him, whom I loue a great deale more then my selfe, sayd he, at all seasons. O sweet death, to dye of Loue, but yet the lyfe more sweet, that makes this Loue eternall! Me thinkes the sad accēts of that great King Dauid strike nine eares, when he cryed out aloud, This life to me is tedious in the absence of my Lord. This Prince possessed the goods of the Earth in aboundance, and Greatnesses and Pleasures equally enuironed the Throne of his abso∣lute Power: in such sort, as he had all things to his harts content. But yet for all that, he could not choose but be trobled in the midst of the delights of his Court, since so we see his hart to send vp sighs of Sorrow vnto Heauen, to liue so long a tyme on Earth. What sayst thou now, my Soule, of the Greatnesses & Magnificences of this diuine Pallace, where Honour, Glory, and all the Maiesties together expose to view whatso∣euer els they haue more precious and more rare: where Beauty appeares in its Throne in company of its graces, of its sweetnesses, of its baytes, of its allurements, and of its charmes; where, with power alwayes ado∣rable it attracts the eyes to its admiration; & through a vertue, borne with it, subdues their lookes to the empire of its perfections. In such sort, as the eyes cannot loue but its obiect after admiring it, they are so taken with the meruailes, wherwith it abounds: where Goodnes exercising its soueraigne power forges new chaines of loue to attract the harts vnto it; and after hauing made a conquest of them, it nourisheth them with a food so delicious, as they neuer breath but of ioy, transporting them wholy in the accō∣plishment of their felicity. In such sort, my Soule, as all the pleasures together being e∣leuated in their first purity are there found to be collected in their origē, to the end the Spi∣rit might neuer be troubled to seek its desires. Consider the difference that is betweene the Contentments of the Earth, and those of heauen; I would say, those of the Pallace where Creatures make their aboad, and of those where the Omnipotēt lodgeth. Thou hast seene within this first Pallace, the Mea∣dowes enamelled with flowers, the Cham∣paygnes couered with rich haruests, and the Valleys peopled with a thousand broo∣kes; but these spring vp at the peeping of the Aurora, and wither at its setting. These haruests fetching their being from corrup∣tion, returne in an instant to their first be∣ginning, after they haue runne daunger, to serue as a prey to tempests, and disport to the winds. And these Brookes, feeble in their vertue, may well moderate the ardour of a vehement thirst, but not quench it wholy, since the fire thereof alwayes renewes from its ashes. On the contrary, within this cele∣stiall house, the Lyllies wherewith the Vir∣gins are crowned, and the Roses which the Martyrs weare equally on their head, re∣mayne alwayes disclosed as if they grew continually. The haruests there are eternall, & in behoulding them, their diuine nature hath this property, that it satiates the Soule through the eyes, after so perfect a manner▪ as it is rauished in its repose. The Fountay∣nes are of bottomlesse Springs of all the im∣mortall delights that may fall vnder the knowledge of the vnderstanding; & how∣beit they quench not thirst, yet haue they power to do it: but to make their sweet∣nesses more sensible, they entertayne the drougth within their Soules, without dis∣quietnes, to the end, that being allwayes a dry with a thirst of loue full of pleasure, they may alwayes drinke, that so without cease they may rest contented. Within that first Pallace the chaunting of the Birds did charme thine eares; and with∣in this heere the sweet musicke of the Angels rauisheth Spirits. Within that terrestriall dwelling, the Spring, the Summer, & Au∣tunme were incessantly occupied in produ∣cing thy pleasures, & in this celestial bower an Eternity accomplisheth thee, withall the goods wherto imaginatiō may attain. There beneath had you diuers houses of pleasure for to walke in; and heere on high, the first thought of a desire is able to build a num∣ber without number, within the spaces of the Heauens, with a perfection of an incō∣parable Beauty. So as if thou be delighted with the Courts of the Kings and Princes of the world, to behold the Greatnesses that attend vpon them, turne away with a trice the eyes of thy memory from those little Brookes of a transitory Honour, & admire this inexhaustible Ocean of the immortall Glory of the Heauens, where all the happy Soules are engulfed, without suffering ship∣wrack. Be thou the Eccho then, my Soule, of those diuine words of the Prophet Dauid, when he cryed out so, in the extremity of his languor; Euen as the Hart desires the currēt of the liuing waters; so, O Lord, is my soule a thirst after you, as being the only fountaine, where I may quench the same. Thou must needs, my Soule, surrender to the Assaults of this verity, so sensible, as there is nothing to be desired besides this so∣ueraigne good, whose allurements make our harts to sigh at all howers; How beauti∣full are your Eternall Pauillions? and how excee∣dingly am I enamoured with them (saith the same Prophet?) My soule faints, and I am rapt in ex∣tasy, when I thinke, I shall one day see my liuing God face to face. O incomparable felicity! o be able to cōtemplate the adorable perfecti∣ons of an Omnipotent! To behould with∣out wincking, the diuine Beauty of him, who hath created all the goodly things that are! To liue alwaies with him, and in him∣selfe! Not to breath but the aire of his Grace and not to sigh, but that of his Loue! Shall I afford the names of pleasures to these con∣tentments, whiles all the delights of the world are as sensible dolours, in comparisō of them? For if it be true, that a flash of a feeble Ray, should cause our eyes to weepe in their dazeling, for the temerity they haue had to regard very stedfastly its light; is it not credible, that the least reflexion of the diuine brightnes of the Heauens, should make vs blind, in punishment, for glauncing on an obiect so infinitely raysed aboue our Power? In so much as whatsoeuer is in E∣ternity can admit no comparison, with that which is cōprehended in Tyme▪ The Feli∣cities of Paradise cannot be represented in any fashion, because the Spirit cannot so much as carry its thoughtes to the first degre of their diuine habitation. Hence it is that S. Paul cryed out, That the eye hath neuer seene the Glory which God hath prepared for the iust. What∣soeuer Saints haue said heerof may not be ta∣ken for so much, as a meere delineation of its Image. And when the Angels should euen descend frō the Heauens to speake to vs ther∣of, whatsoeuer they were able to say, were not the least portiō of that w ch it is. It is wel knowne that Beautitude cōsists in beholding God, and that in his vision, the Soule doth find its soueraigne good; yet for al that, were this as good, as to say nothing: for howbeit one may imagine a thing sweet, agreeable and perfectly delicious in the contemplatiō of this diuine Essence; yet were it impossible this good imagined, should haue any man∣ner of relation with the Soueraigne, which is inseparable to this Glory. Let vs search within the power of Nature, the extreme pleasures, which it hath produced in the world hitherto from our Natiuity, and their Flowers shalbe changed at the same tyme into thornes, if but compared to those plants of Felicity which grow in the Hea∣uens. Gold, Pearles, the Zephyrus, the Aurora, the Sunne, the Roses, Amber, Muske, the Voyce & Beauty, with all the strang allurements that Art can produce, for to charme our senses with, & to rauish our Spirits, are but meere Chimera's, and vaine shadowes of a body of pleasure, formed through dreames, in equa∣lity, to the least obiect of contentmēt which they receiue in Paradise. Which makes me repeate againe those sweet words with S. Paul, When shall it be, Lord, that I dy to my selfe, for to go liue in you? And with that great other Prophet; I languish, o Lord, in expectation to see you in the mansion of your Eternall glory. What Contentment, my Soule, to see God! If the only thought of this good so ra∣uish vs with ioy; what delights must the Hope produce, and with what felicities are they not accomplished in its possession? The Spirit is alwaies in extasy, the Soule in ra∣uishment, and the senses in a perfect satiety of their appetits. Dissolue then, O Lord, this soule from my body, for I dye alwaies through sorrow of not dying soone inough, for to go to liue with you. When as those two faithfull Messengers brought equally betweene their shoulders that same goodly bunch of Grapes from the land of Promise, the fruit so mightily encou∣raged the people of Israell to the Conquest thereof, which had produced the same, that all fell a sighing in expectation of the last Triumph. Let vs turne the Medall, and say that S. Stephen and S. Paul are those two fai∣thfull Messengers of this land of Promise, since both of them haue tasted of the fruit, & haue brought to Mortals the happy newes thereof. So as if in effect we would behold another Grape, let vs mount with S. Peter vp to the Mounth Thabor, where our Sauiour made the Apparition, through the splendour of the Glory which enuironed him. And it is to be noted they were two to bring this fruit, since there were two Natures vnited to one Person only. So as, my Soule, if cu∣riosity and doubt transport thy Senses to be∣hold the body of those beautifull Shadowes of Glory which I represent to thee; harkē to S. Stephen, while he assures thee that he saw the Heauens open. Lend thine eare to the discourses of S. Paul, when he saith, How all which he had felt of sweets and pleasures in that bower of felicity, cannot be expressed, because it cannot be comprehended. The desire which S. Peter had to build three Tabernacles vpon this mountayne all of light, enforceth thee to giue credit, and belieue through this shew of fruit, that the soyle that beares it, abounds in wonders. And that thus we are to passe the Red-sea of torments and of paynes, within the Arke of the Crosse of our Sauiour, for to land at the Port of all those felicities. They are put to sale, my Soule; so as if thou shouldest say to me, what shold be giuen to buy the same; demaund them of thy Creatour, since he it is that first set price vpon them, on the moūt Caluary. The money for them, is Patience in aduersity, Humility in Greatnesses, Cha∣stity in presence of prophane obiects, and finally the Exercise of all vertues together, in the world, where Vice so absolutely rei∣gneth. And if thou wilt buy thē with that Money which is most currant, and wherof God himselfe made vse, thou art to take thee to the Scourges, the Nayles, the Thornes, and the Gaul, and by a definitiue sentence to condemne thy lyfe to the sufferance of a thousand euills. But let it not trouble thee awhit to pro∣nounce this Sentence agaynst thy selfe: for if thou cast thy selfe into the burning for∣nace of diuine loue, thou shalt find the three Innocents there, in cōpany with the sonne of God, where for to sing forth his glory, thou shalt beare thy part. If thou cast thy selfe into the Sea of thy teares, Ionas shalbe affording thee roome within his little Ora∣tory, for the publish togeather the diuine meruailes of the Omnipotent. If thou cru∣cifiest all thy Passions, S. Peter wil lend thee another halfe of his Crosse, to participate of his Triumph; so as in the extremest dolours, shalt thou be tasting the extremest delight. What may happen to thee in thy sufferāces worse then Death? Ah, what is more glo∣rious then to suffer and dy for loue! And af∣ter God, what may we loue besides him? What may we desire, since his diuine pre∣sence very perfectly fils vs, aswell with hap∣pines as with Glory? If we must needs be stoned, as S. Stephen was, what ioy to haue our Soule enforced to go forth of the body with the strokes of flints, that those very stones might serue as Stayres to mount vp to Heauen by? If we be to be laied on the gridiron as S. Laurence was, shall we seeme to complaine against the fire, for reducing vs to ashes, while we are but ashes ourselues? And then a Hart which is truly amourous, doth burne of it selfe; in such wise, as the flames of the world, cannot but help it to dy readily, which is all it desires. If we be drawne in peeces with foure horses, as S. Hyppolitus was, are they not sweet streynes of pleasure, ra∣ther then of payne, for to haue the life snat∣ched away with the armes and legs, for the Glory of him who hath created the Soule of that body? And besides, what an honour was it to S. Hyppolitus to see his Spirit carried on a triumphant Chariot, so drawne with foure horses to the Pallace of Eternity? If one should be fleaed with S. Bartholomew, what a happines, trow you, would it be to him, who liuing but of the loue of God, shold behould this amorous life, by a thousand wounds, to abandon Nature it selfe? & after hauing made of his bloud a Sea of loue, to fynd on its waters the port of Eternall ioy? If they throw vs downe headlong, from a pinnacle of the Temple, as S. Iames was, how sweet a thing to be oppressed vnder the weight of this Crosse! Should we haue so little courage amidst so many companiōs, who with their bloud haue tracked vs out the way of glory. The Pagans who euen buryed their ho∣pes in their Tombe; not pretending other good, then that of a vayne Renowne, haue let vs see some kind of magnanimity in their actions; for whatsoeuer horrour and amazement Death may haue with it, yet could it not daunt them awhit, till the last shocke of its assaults. Mutius vanquished the fire with one hand, which vanquished all things in seeing it deuoured with its flames, without being moued with it. Rutilius foūd his country in his exile. Socrates drunke vp a glasse of poyson to the health of his Spi∣rit, for to giue testimony to his friends, that he was not sicke of the feare of death. And Cato, he made of his bosome a sheath for his poynard. Ah! and what! Shall all these Soules of the world haue offered such glori∣ous triumphs to vertue without knowing it; and we trample its Aultars, and profane its Temples, after we haue adored them? for though all be impossible to base Spirits, yet a generous hart can do all. What a shame were it for thee, my Soule, to fly those pe∣rils that giue Crownes? cāst thou not bold∣ly thrust thy selfe pell-mell into a throng of ten thousand crucified, fifty thousand be∣headed, an hundred thousand rent with Scourges, two hundred thousand ouer∣whelmed, & murderd with seuerall punish∣ments, wherein cruelty exercised its tyran∣ny? Of a million of poore Hermits, and of Religious who haue happily yielded vp their life to the rigorous austerities of a num∣ber without number of dolours? And final∣ly of two Millions of holy Soules, all sa∣crificed on the Aultar of the Crosse? Darest thou go to Paradise, by a way all strewed with roses, knowing thy Sauiour to haue passed by that of Thornes? What a shame is it for thee, to be in Paradise alone without hauing suffered a litle euil for him, who should bestow so much good vpon thee? What wonder shines in this diuine Thought, that he who hath created the world, should haue suffered all the euills therof for recompence? He hath made the Thornes to grow, for to crowne his head withall. He hath formed in the Earth the mines of Iron, for to forge the nayles; and with the liberal hād of his Prouidence, hath he watered the trees, which furnished the Iewes with those stakes wherunto he was tyed; and at the same tyme fed, & protected the false witnesses that accused him, the Iud∣ges that condemned him, and the Executio∣ners who tormented him. It is true, in the order of his iustice, he condemned Adam to death, and in the order of his loue he exe∣cutes the Sentence vpon his owne lyfe. He would haue miseries to reigne in the world but it was but for himselfe, since he hath suf∣fered them altogether. So as, my Soule, if in the extremity of thy Sorrowes, the feeblenes of thy courage should make thee to let fal some complaint, turne thy face to the Crosse-ward to admire the glory which is inseparable to it. One cannot go from one extreme to another, without passing through the midst; I would say, that from the Paradise of the Earth, we cannot ascend to that of Heauen, without passing through the fire, which is that midst where we are necessarily to be purified, lik as gould in the fornace. But since the gene∣rous are more animated through Hope of Recompence, then feare of payne; be thou touched, my Soule, with the sweet feelings of the felicity which is promised vs, rather then with the rigour of the Flames which are prepared. Thou wouldst yield to Loue rather then to Force, to the end thy desires be not mercinary. And represent to thy selfe that as the punishments of the guilty are e∣ternal, so are likewise the ioyes of the blessed immortall. After the tasting of a thousand yeares of pleasures, they haue not yet begun; after an hūdred thousand yeares of rest, they find thēselues in the first moment according to our manner of speaking. After a hundred thousands of millions of yeares of content∣ments of ioy & felicity, they are alwaies in the first point of their happines, with so per∣fect a ioy of the knowledge, as they do no∣thing but reioyce in those delights. In so much, as euen as long as God shalbe God, shall the Glory last, where the happy Spirits are filled with al sorts of pleasures, and con∣sequently for euer. O Eternity, how profound are thy Abysses! The Imagination cannot sinke its plummet into the bottome of thē, but is alwaies grie∣ued to haue so ill employed its Tyme. After it hath thought all its life on the meruailes, or rather on the miracles, which are enclo∣sed within thy labyrinthes, it dies in the im∣potency of approaching to the entry. This Dedalus hath no thred, this Carriere hath no stop, this Circumference hath no Center, nor this Line a point. Eternity termines to God alone, & God alone to Eternity. O in∣comprehensible Mystery, that a God should recompence a sigh of Loue, with an infinite loue! one moment of paine with an Eterni∣ty of Glory! For hauing tasted neuer so little of the vinegre of his Chalice, to quench our thirst for euer, in the torrent of these diuine Sweetnesses! For hauing shed one teare of repentance, to make vs liue eternally in ioy and smiles! For hauing fasted one instant, to satiate vs for euer with meats the most deli∣cious, which are found in Heauen. And fi∣nally, to recompence one night of trauaile, with a day of eternall Repose. Thinke neuer, my Soule, but vpon this Eternity? What pleasures soeuer thou tasts in the world, represent to thy selfe they shall one day finish, and that in their end all the Thorns of their Roses shall assemble to ma∣ke thee feele the sorrow of their priuation; if thou wouldest haue content, be it not but for Eternity; it is to dye continually, for to lyue with men, and it is to liue allwayes to lyue with God. It were to be vnfortunate to be happy on Earth, since the true way of felicity is Heauen. Felicity is as immortall as immortality it selfe, and whither Tyme cannot reach to, because it is out of Tyme. In such wise, my Soule, as thou shouldst learne to speake this diuine lāguage of the Angels, whose Eccho the Prophet is, when he saith, I languish, O Lord, in the expectation of seeing you in the mansion of your glory. Let this Languor deuoure thee, to the end, that dying of loue for thy God, who is soueraignely louely, thou maiest go to liue for him, since this is the only Spring of life. Of the Infernall Paynes. T HE Great King Eze∣chias was brought to such a point of feare and asto∣nishment, when the Pro∣phet assured him he shold dye the morrow after, as that if his lot had reserued him for shipwracke, he had now runne that danger in the Sea of his teares. That fatall Sentēce tooke away his lyfe before he dyed; for from the moment that the same was once pronounced vnto him, he breathed but the ayre of Approaches to an ineuitable death, where all Sorrowes heaped togea∣ther in one what they had of bitter or rigo∣rous, to torment anew his afflicted Spirit. This poore Prince had but Sighes & Teares to defend himselfe withall agaynst the bat∣teries of a soueraigne Will. He plaines, but of himselfe; he cryes but onely to moue Pitty; he armes his hand with fury against his bosome, and with redoubled blowes smites his breast, belieuing he layd hard on his hart the while, as complice of the cry∣mes, whose punishment he carryed. What shall he do? the night steales away insensi∣bly, and the light which shall succeed his darknesses, is not to shine, but to shew him the way to the Tombe. Sleepe hath already taken its leaue of his eyes, for feare of being drowned in his continuall teares. Repose abandons his spirit in feare of Death which possesseth him. In so much as being reduced into a last point of Sufferance, he apprehēds that euery sigh which he casts to the wind, is to be the last of his life. The remembrance of his faults so forcibly aggrauates the pu∣nishment, as he dares not thinke of them, but with the sorrow of heauing comitted them: a Sorrow indeed, so powerfull, as disar∣med the diuine Iustice of its Thunders. This great King lifts vp his hart through Feare deiected, & constraines it to seeke for hope in that midst of despaire. He humbly cōfesseth the truth of those crymes, but with the same tongue wherewith he publisheth them, he protests before his God, & his Iudge to commit them no more; and for assurance beseeches the same God, and the same Iudge to cast downe his eyes into the depth of his Soule, to see the feelings therof; in so much as he was heard. Isay the Prophet receaues commaundement to reuoke the Sentence of his Death, to prolong the terme of his life, and to make the Sunne turne backe for some part of its way. O admirable Goodnesse! The whole course of the Vniuerse is chaun∣ged, rather thē to refuse a mans request who promiseth to God to chaūge the course of his life! But what difference betweene the Sen∣tence which the Prophet pronounceth on the behalfe of God to a guilty King, & that which God himselfe shal pronounce on that great day of his Iustice to the criminal Sou∣les? They are both verily two Sentences of Death; but the one is signified in Time by a lyuing man, to a man that is liuing yet; & the other is proclaymed out of Time by a God, to Spirits which are criminall, & incapable of repentance. Besides, we see how the first Sentence was reuoked through grace, while the other remaines inuiolable by Reason. Mercy moderates the rigour of that there, & Iustice augmēts the paine of this heere with an Eternity! O most dreadfull Sentence! There was with the Persians a certaine Prison, whence the guilty were neuer to go forth, which they called by the name of Lethe, as who would seeme thereby to represent a place of Obliuion, & where the Thoughts of men do neuer approach. This Prison may well be compared to that of Hell, from whence the Thralls do neuer get forth, nor where the happy Spirits do neuer descend in thought. It is a place of forgetfulnes, since God remembers not the wicked Soules, but to cause them only to be tortured by the in∣struments of his Iustice: They haue no other dwelling then that of their sepulchers, cryeth out the Psalmist; which is as much to say, as they shalbe buried eternally in the tombe of Hel; or as S. Augustine saith, they shalbe full of life in the midst of their torments, in being al∣waies renewed againe amidst their paynes, without euer dying. O cruell life! Seing it is more vnsupportable then Death! Let the most afflicted Soules appeare, forsooth, vpon the Theater of their Martyrings; let Iultius recount at large the history of his sufferāces. Let Persindas represent to vs sensibly the cru∣elty of his punishment, at the light of the Sunne, where he is exposed al couered with honey to the mercy of the Flies. Let Lepidus Crassus communicate with vs through Con∣tagion, a part of his euill at such tyme as they straitly bound his body to a carkasse, to the end the stench might serue as a Torturer to tyrannize his lyfe to death. Let Phocinas the Locrian, shew vs clerely by the light of the Fire which consumed him, the torments wherewith he was tyrannized, in feeling himselfe by little and little reduced into Ashes. Let Pamindus the Philosopher expresse to vs, in the Amazement of his mortall si∣lence which the punishment of his tongue cut out had brought him to some feeble do∣lour of his smart. Let Lysander buryed in the brasen Bull by the Tyrant of Syracusa make vs to heare the sad accents of his cryes for to publish with the language of his plaints, the truth of his torments. Let Lelius Cooles dis∣couer in his countenance, the terrour and the anguish of his hart, vpon the Cliffes of the Sea, from whence he was cast downe headlong. Let Martius Neuola mixing the wind of his sighs with those that enkindled the flames which consumed him, conueigh to our eares the sad harmony of his last groa∣nes. Let Virgilia the wife of Lertius the Romā, relate to vs at leasure the traunces of Mar∣tyring of a hart impoysoned by the cūning Enemy, who by litle and litle extinguished her in a long course of yeares, to make her sensible by degrees of all the rigors of death. Let Emilia represent to vs, in her despayre, the anguishes of a dying Soule, amidst the presse of her disastres. Let the wyfe of Bru∣tus send to our eyes the smoake of the bur∣ning coales, that consumed her bowels, to let vs feele the heat wherewith she was bur∣ned. Let Messina, before she pluckt out the Hart from her bosome, partake vs with her torments, where through a Sentence of her fury, she condemned her self in making the one part of her Body to serue as a Hangmā to destroy the other. Let Eugenia making a halter of the silke of her Harpe, giue vs some testimony of the dolour of her precipitous Death. Let Cleopatrae infect the Ayre with the Poyson, which deuoured her life, for to make vs Companions of her euils. All these kinds of Martyrings, these Tor∣tures, these dolours, these vncouth tormēts and these euils without example, and these tyrannies exercised by men, more cruell thē Tygres and Beares, can admit no compari∣son with the least paine of the damned. The Thornes of these sufferances, are Roses; and the bitternes of these anguishes is but hony. One moment of the paines in hell is more intollerable then an Age of Afflictions in this world. Let them lend their eares to the lamentable cryes of Ampilaus King of the Pyroti, when as being fastened to his rich Couch with the rude chaines of a thousand dolours procured through a Sciatica, his tor∣ments pluckt out the hart from his bosome without snatching away the life, and with a cruell encounter drew his Soule to his lips without suffering it to go forth. To bewaile the rage whereto his euill had brought him, makes him to throw out fire by the eyes, ra∣ther then to power out water; to complaine with Sighes, of the excesse of his sufferances, learnes him a language so dreadfull, as the noyse of Thunder is not more terrible thē that of his voyce, made hoarse with the force of crying. They do well to decke his bed with the richest ornaments that may be found, to bring him rest, while his body is a Bush of Thornes, wherewith his Soule is straytly hedged in: In such sort, as the points of its thornes do afford him a thousād prickes of dolour & martyrings, whose very thought is full of horrour. They may cast their lookes of pitty on him long inough, while Cruelty, which incessantly butchers him, makes them so feeble in his succour, as he alwaies breaths in the death of his paines without being able euer to dye. But turne we the Medall, and lend the eare of our imagination to the warnings of of that great King Pharao, bound in hell on a bedd of deuouring flames, which burne without consuming him, and which con∣sume him, without reducing him to ashes. What inequality of euills, and what diffe∣rence of cryes? The one in tyme feeles very piercing dolours vpon a couch of Thornes, and the other suffers a thousand paynes, all eternall, vpon a bed of fire. He there yields vp his miserable lyfe, to the last shocke of a cruell torment; and he heere reuiuing all∣wayes of his Ashes amidst his punishment, lyues not but to dye in his sufferances of a death eternally lyuing. The former com∣forts himselfe with the hope of a Tombe, & the latter finds increase of his torments, in the despayre of euer seeing an end. Let them thinke a litle on the sensible tormēts, wher∣with Tegonus, that great Prince of Almaine was afflicted, when as his hart serued be∣fore hand as a Coffin for the worms, which gnawed him without cease to deuoure his lyfe. A punishment as cruell as prodigious: this was a lyuing death, gliding in his bo∣som, where it forged darts of incomparable dolour for to martyr him withal. He wants for nothing in the midst of his Greatnesses, and yet wants he all, since all fayles him of his content. His subiects are about him to receyue his Commaundements, but he knowes not what to commaund them for his succour. The remedyes they offer him are vnprofitable in the ignorance of his mala∣dy; for the skilfullest Phisitians of them vn∣derstand not the cause therof, which makes thē ingenious without thinking of it, to af∣flict him a new, in steeping his mouth with a thousand sorts of bitternesses. He cryes out in the extremity of his languours, but ech one by his eyes makes answere to his ton∣gue, in weeping at the noyse of his sobs and his complaynts. And after hauing suffered as many deaths as he sent forth sighes, he payed at last the tribute which he owed to Nature. Cast yet the view of your imagination vpon the backside of the Medall, to heare the cryes, a great deale more hideous, of ano∣ther Prince abiding in Hell, being touched with the malady of a worme which gnawes him eternally, without deuouring him. He sees all his Subiects about him, as culpable as he, but in the astonishment they are in, they answere him but by the eyes only, as vnable to succour him, or to helpe themsel∣ues. The Deuils are his Phisitians, who not knowing the meanes to cure him, inuental sorts of punishmēts to tyrannize his Soule. But what difference of paynes? That Prince of the world findes this consolation in his afflictions, that after the wormes shall haue deuoured his Hart, his life shall haue an end with the end of their prey, and consequent∣ly his punishment. And on the contrary this Prince of Hell, finds alwaies the begining of his euills in the end of his paines. The worme that gnawes him, is immortall like as the prey which it deuoures: In so much, as his dolours remaine extreme in their excesse. The one turning his Face to the Tomb∣wards, beholds there his sufferance buryed with him, and the other sees himselfe bury∣ed yet lyuing within a tombe of Fire, which through a cruell property entertaines that which it burnes, to the end it may neuer wāt matter. What may be imagined more insuppor∣table, then the torment wherewith Charles King of Nauarre dyed of? The Phisitians knowing he had a very little life left him in the body, employed this vayne deuice for his comfort, forsooth, to sow him vp in a sheet steept in Aqua-vitae, of purpose to pro∣long his life; but the ill lucke was, that the seruant who had sowed him therein, burnt the end of his threed insteed of cutting it a∣sunder, where to say better, he burnt the whole sheet, and the King that was shut within. Represent we to our selues now the fearefull cryes of this vnhappy Prince, who being enchayned in a straite Prison all of Fyre, casts forth the last sighes of his life, in the Flames, quickened with so excessiue an heate as they may not be compared but to chose of the Fornace. They come to his Suc∣cour, but Death at that instant, touched with pitty, preuents the helpe they could afford, in finishing his euils with the end of his life. But looke we yet still in the backeside of this Madall, vpon the torments and cruelty which a new King suffers in the midst of Hel, being fast enchayned within a burning prison, where he alwayes burnes without euer dying. What difference of Torments! The one is left to the mercy of deuouring flames, being watered with a water which increaseth the heat; imploying in vayne for his Succour, the endeauour of his voyce; & the other enuironed with despaire, endures the paine of eternall Fire, which burnes him without taking away his life. You see very sensibly, O you soules of the world, how the payne which one suffers in this vale of teares, cannot be compared, how cruell soeuer, with the least dolours of the dāned. I I graunt the Stone, or Grauell, the wind∣cholicke, the Sciatica, and a thousand other Maladies besides, deliuer you into a restles combat of punishments, and torments, yet their sharpest fits, their piercing points, their gaul, and their rigours are true pleasures, ioyes, and rauishments of Spirit, in compa∣rison of the sufferings of Soules eternally criminall. Let Lucius Fabius maintayne as long as he will, in the discourse of his miseryes, how the last day of his lyfe had lasted three Monthes, he lyuing the while without be∣ing able once to close the ey-lids at the ap∣proch of sleep. Let Theocrates, publishing his vnhappines, vaunt contentiously in the presence of the most afflicted Soule, how he had lodged thirty six yeares in a bed, in cō∣pany with a thousand sorts of payne, which visited him one after another. Let the vn∣fortunate Caricles, trayling without cease the durt of his body, through that of the streets of Athens, for the space of sixty yeares, moue cōpassion in the harts of those, which neuer had it, in consideration of his Misery; yet is the lamentable history of al these euils a ve∣ry Canticle of ioy and gladnes, in compari∣son of the sufferances of the damned. For if Fabius haue watched three monthes in the world, Cain neuer sleeps in hell: if Theocrates haue passed his Thorny life in a like couch, & that he neuer came forth to re-enter into the Tombet; it is fifteene hundred yeares or more since the Richman hath lodged in a bed of flames, in the midst of Hell, with∣out hope that the ice of death shall euer slake the heate of its fires. Let Caricles trayle his li∣uing carkasse, in the diuers wayes, which lead him to the Tombe, he finds yet a Port after so many stormes; but Pharao may be dragged long inough, by the deuils in Hel, ere there be any death, or sepulcher for him, which may afford him an end to his paines. So as the difference is so great betweene the euills of the one, and the punishment of the other, as one cannot thinke of it, but with a profound astonishment: How profound, O Lord, are the Abysses of thy Iustice ! You Soules of the world, pul off the veyle that blinds you so; Breake you the rackes of your Passions, that with-hould you in your vices. To what purpose, thinke you, is a moment of pleasure, while it robs you of eternal glory, and brings you forth a Hel of dolours? A little shiuering of a Feauer makes you to quake for feare. A fit of Heate makes you to breath the aire of a burning life, & to sigh at once with the ardour which consumes you quite. Alas! What would you do in Hell, where the Cold of Ice, where the Heat of the flames shal by turnes tormēt you eternally? One glasse of a potion, one little twitch with a launcent, two nightes without sleepe, within a bed very softly made, brings you to the last gaspe. Ah! What shall it be in those darkesome places, where a gaul, more bitter then gaul, shalbe alwaies in your mouth! Where a thousand strokes of the launcets of fire shall pierce you, not in the veyne, but to the hart, with a wound alwayes bloudy, and euer new, for to eter∣nize the payne thereof; where a perpetuall vnrest shall banish rest for euer from your spirit, and sleepe from your eyes. There was a great Personage of our tyme who had so great a horrour of Medicines, that al the euils whose dolours he had proued were a great deale lesse sensible to him then their bitternes; In so much, as after he had tasted the gaule thereof diuers tymes, this cō∣ceipt came into his mynd, that when there should be no other punishment in Hell then that of taking continually medicines, it would be insufferable. But I should thinke that if all the gaule, and all the bitternes of the Earth were put together in a vessell, one would take that liquour for imaginary Nectar, in comparison of the puddle, & salt waters, whereof the damned are made to drinke. Bethinke your selues, profane Spi∣rits, who establish in the world the founda∣tion of your repose. Open your eyes to be∣hould the disastres which enuiron you. You seeke a Paradise on Earth, but you find not in it, any other Center then Hell. What pre∣tend you? Pleasures can accompany you no further thē the Tombe, you must quit their company wirh life. Now what a griefe hath one in dying to abandon the seat of delights for to enter into that of torments? Admit, one had passed very pleasantly a hundred yeares of life, at the last moment of that tyme, what satisfaction remaines him thereof, since by the law of diuine Iustice, it must necessarily ensue, that euery one in his turne shalbe gathering the thornes of all his Roses? Euery ioy hath its sadnes, euery for∣tune its crosses: so likewise may we boldly say, that euery pleasure hath its payne. If we let our first life runne out in content∣ments, the latter shal become immortall in punishments. This is an inuiolable decree pronounced by God himselfe, vpon the Mount of Caluary, that he who will not fol∣low the way which he hath taken vpō him▪ for to go to Heauen, shall neuer enter ther∣in. Flatter not your selues, you Princes of the Earth, who being raysed vpon Thrones of snow and smoke, forget your selues so much in your Greatnesses, as you become Idolatours of your good Fortune. If you be borne puissant, consider how your power is of glasse, and that with all your Treasures you shall not be able to purchase a moment of assured life. All the aduantage you haue a∣boue others, is to be able to hide your faults with the more artificiousnes, vnder your sumptuous habit; but vpon the vncertaine day of your Death, shall you make demon∣stration of your misery; and the Corruption which you carry within, must necessarily appeare without. Thinke you that the Em∣pire which you haue heere beneath, extends any further then the Sepulcher? Euen as at your birth you were wrapped in Clouts; so likewise dying, wil they be foulding you in a sheete, how rich soeuer you be. And your Diademe shall remaine in your Pallace for to Crowne others withall, in the selfe same way where they are to follow you, since they likewise are continually to dye. But this is not all, you are also to passe the examine of your life before a soueraigne Iudge, and dreadfull in his Iustice. You shal haue no other succour thē that of your wor∣kes. If they be good, their recompence is prepared; and if they be naught, then pay∣nes attend them. In what amazement, and in what terrour is a Soule brought vnto be∣fore the face of his God, whiles his crymes accuse him, and condemne him to euerla∣sting fires? O how the Iudgements of God are different frō those of men, cryes that great Saint! You delicate Soules, whome a little griefe makes to looke pale with feare, astonish∣ment and feeblenes, what will you do in Hell, where euills are in their excesse, with∣out finding any end in them? The noyse of a fly troubles you, and that of a Caroch hin∣ders you from sleepe. Ah! What shall that be in those darcksome places, where the dreadfull cryes of the Torturers, and of the guilty shall continually strike your eares? If you passe but one might only in the world without a winke of sleep, you fall to com∣playning after you haue fetched a thousand & a thousand sighes, in expectation of day; & there below, within those obscure dwel∣lings, the darcknesses are eternall, like as the disorders and disquietnesses are. One winters day killes you quite with∣in the goodly prisons of your chambers, & a summers-day within that of your Halles, built of proofe agaynst the heate of the sun for to auoyd alike, the incommodityes both of cold and heate; And in Hell shall you alwayes burne, if the cold of ice doe not giue you some respites to the tormentes of your fires, and by that meanes one punish∣mēt come to succeed another. Hēce it is that the Prophet cryes; Lord haue pitty vpon me, in the day of thy Iustice. O day full of horrour & amazement! Where the liuing flames, after they haue deuoured the world, shall pro∣secute the guilty Soules in the deepest A∣bysses, for to exercise the Iustice of the Om∣nipotent! What vnprofitable cryes, what vaine lamēts! They may sigh long inough, for the voyce of their repentance shalbe so feeble, as it shall not be able euer to cōuey its accēts to the cares of God. But what disor∣der also of a iust cruelty? The innocent shall curse the guilty Father, and shall reioyce in his torments, as in so many effects of the diuine Iustice; for the punishments of the damned make a part of the felicity of the happy Spirits, reioycing in the Iustice of God, as well as in his Mercy. The cryes of the accursed Soules, O Lord, are as so many Canticles of thy Glory, since they publish incessantly the truth of thy Iustice. O impious Soules, in your voluntary blindnes! Why will you not suffer your rea∣son to see how the pleasures you tast in this world, do bring the consequence of the e∣uills, which you suffer in the other? When will you confesse, that the hope which ma∣kes you to imbrace with so much affection the future, is vayne and deceiptfull, & that it hath for foundation of its promises, but the argument of your Misfortunes. You run after imaginary goods; & in the end of your Carriers, you shall find but true euils. Since repose seemes as naturally sweet vnto vs, why haue we not the Eternity therof? Our lyfe is a new Hell of annoyes and disquiet∣nes, and yet neuertheles within the Hell of this life, we build to our selues another Hel, to lyue there eternally. What a prodigy of cruelty do we seeme to exercise agaynst our selues, for to sell an immortall felicity, for a moment of pleasures? So as if the ioy which is promised vs, hath not baites which are powerfull inough to attract vs to it, let the payne which followes the offence, pu∣rify our desires, & iustify all our enterprises. O, how S. Augustine makes, on this sub∣iect, a sweet harmony to resound in our ea∣res, when he sayth; I loue thee not, Lord, for the feare I haue of thy Hell, nor for the hope of thy Pa∣radise, but rather for the loue of thy selfe. How many mercinary Soules do we see in the world, who haue no other obiect in their actions, thē that of Glory, or that of Payne; & in a word who loue not God, but for his Paradise, nor feare him awhit but for his hel. What affectiō? As if vertue had not Charmes inough to make it selfe beloued without the helpe of recompence, and of paine? Alas, Lord! what manner of respects would the wicked affoard you in this world, if you could be without Paradise, or if you had not a Hell, for to exercise your Iustice in? since with all your felicities, & your punish∣ments, they so deepely forget the Greatnesse of your infinite Glory, and your equall po∣wer, as to liue without yeilding to your di∣uine Maiesty, but the least homage of thoght. Who as if they were Gods themselues on e∣arth, regard not Heauen, but to looke on the Starres. My Soule, Loue then thy God, for his owne sake, since he is perfectly louely; nor euer thinke of his Paradise, but in thinking of him, since he is thy soueraigne Good. Fe∣are him in like manner, without musing on the Thunders of his Iustice, with an amou∣rous feare, which hath for obiect, but Hu∣mility, and Respect. So as, if in this world the Good be alwaies good, content thy selfe with the satisfaction, which is inseparable to it. For Vertue hath this proper to it, that of it selfe, it recompenceth those who put its precepts in practice; euen as Vice incessan∣tly racks and tortures those, who follow it. All laudable actions produce in generous harts, certaine feelings of ioy, so extreme, as when Renowne shall haue no Laurels nor Palmes for to crowne them with, yet he that is the Authour of them, shal not cō∣playne thereof, since he hath beene already rewarded for it, euen before he lookt for a∣ny certaine recompence at all. And the cō∣trary is noted in pernicious & criminall ef∣fects. Payne can hardly be seuered from the Offendour, nor the Hangman from the Guilty. A secret torment glides in his en∣trailes, and himselfe serues as a Hangman a∣gainst himselfe, for to tyrannize vpon him∣selfe: So true it is, that diuine Vertue of it selfe communicates the good of its Nature, and Vice the euill. But let vs not go forth of Hell with our thoughts, for not to enter thereinto in effect. Flatter not your selues so; my Dames, as to thinke that Hell belonges not to you; it is for the guilty. Iudge your selues without passion, whether you be exempt frō cryme or no, since at all tymes, & at euery moment you offend God diuers wayes. If you will mount vp to Heauen after your Death, first descend into Hell during your life, and re∣present to your selues liuely the deplorable estate, whereto the miserable are reduced; I meane those Soules, which haue lodged heretofore in as beautifull bodyes, as yours are; and pursue you with your thoughts the toilesome occupations whereunto they are eternally condemned. You rise in the mor∣ning to take a liquour all of Amber for its sweetnes, and of Pearles for its price; and going forth of your bed, you enter into your sumptuous Cabinet, where your faire Mir∣rour attends you, to represent you as faire as euer. There it is, where you consider at lea∣sure the dumbe▪ Oracles of its deceiptfull Glasse, of purpose to learne of it some new secret or other in fauour of your Beauty, be it to shadow it with a little fly, or with some tresse of hayre, disheueled in disorder on your cheekes, & vpon your brow, least the wrinkles cause not a feare in your Thralls. What new charmes, what graces neuer seene before, do you borrow from the care you take, to cultiuate the Flowers of your face of Earth? You passe ouer at your pleasure three hou∣res of tyme, and a full whole day if the hu∣mour take you, to teach your eye with what grace, how, and with what force it should cast its looke, for to wound the hart withall; with what smiles, and with what proportion, you should open the mouth, to let the doble rowes of your pearles appeare, or rather to speak truly, of your rotten teeth, which incessantly deuoure the pleasures of your life. You shamefully lay open your bo∣some, all of Snow, which melts with the glaunce of the eye; and by a meanes which you haue taught it, you make it sigh with pauses, for to moue the rocky harts with its sweet pulses. What crime so playne to make the whole world guilty? For the furthering of these errours, you dresse vp your body, all of dust & earth, with the richeh Ornamēts, and then it is, that imitating the Peacocke, you waxe proud of the beauty of your plu∣mes, without casting your eyes the while v∣pon the miseries which serue you as foūda∣tion. What turnings & windings of Vanity do you fetch before your glasse? But which way soeuer you turne, if you open the eyes of your spirit, you shall see the corruption w ch you couer vnder a fraile skin, bedawbed al ouer with a plaister. Issuing forth of your Pallace, you go to visit the Temples to pro∣fane them, for insteed of adoring God, who hath guided your steppes thither, you make your Vassals to adore you there, & through a guilty power snatch away the vowes, and sacrifices which belong to their Creatour. You are now returned againe into your Pallace, you count the number of your cō∣quests; your naughty Genius alwayes in ac∣tion to deceiue you, persuads you to belieue that your eyes worke the same miracles, which the Thunders do, since they wound the harts, without any feeling of the bo∣dyes; and in this beliefe you commit a thou∣sād crimes of vanity. In the meane while a Page comes to call you to the Table, where all the delicious meates are serued in, by or∣der, before you. And during the repast, af∣ter an eloquent Parasite shall haue charmed your Spirit, with the melody of prayses, which you deserue not, a Musike of instru∣ments charmes your eares with new allu∣rements of Sweetnes. They present in the plates of your latter course, the sweetest spoyles of the foure Seasons. And while of custome the Musitians are tuning the Mo∣tect of your Perfections▪ you sollicitously enquire of some one of yours, what manner of weather it is? If it chāce to rayne, you shut your selfe vp after dinner within your Cabi∣net of pleasure, for to heare in particular the sweet voyce of a Page, whome you cause to sing the Ayre which best agrees with your passion. The rayne is blowne ouer, and the Caroch attends you at the gate of your Pal∣lace, for you to walke abroad, in the compa∣ny of those who are most agreable to you, into the Forrests and Parkes, whose wayes are bordered with flowers, and enriched al along with cleere fountaynes, where the water appears so limpide, as persuades harts with the dumbe language of their purling, to quench in their siluer streames the thirst they feele. In the meane tyme the Sun is set, to cause freshnes to arise from the humide imbraces of its deere Thetis ; and then it is, when the Aire powres on the plants, the drops of the sweate, which the heate of the Sun hath caused in it, during the tyme of its course, whiles the Birds fall a bathing thēselues, in singing in the litle waters of this dew. The night comes slowly on, and its returne seemes to bring you a thousand pleasures; for during the repose of its reigne, an infinite number of sunnes, whereof art is the wor∣keman, hung vpon the seeling of your chā∣ber, illumine its obiects for to make the be∣auty therof appeare. What idle discourses are there broght forth in iest? The flatterers play anew their parts in the presēce of your blind Spirit, and in their Comedyes they repre∣sent to you, the fabulous History of your Actes, worthy of prayse, with warrant of their credit, but full of reproch according to the truth. The Tyme notwithstanding is slipt away, they call you to Supper, where the appetite is contented with deli∣cious meates, whose sweetnes art seemes to vary diuers wayes. After the repast, you re∣turne to your Cabinet, or rather into your terrestriall Paradise, where the Musike at∣tends you, for to charme the senses of your eare, since those of the eyes, of the smell, & of the tongue haue beene satisfyed already. The Clocke which euer wakes, doth ad∣monish you, without thinking of it, how the night is slid away for to fetch vs day a∣gayne, which sweetly constraynes you to passe from the repose of your waking to that of sleep, for to giue more liberty to your spi∣rit to entertayne it selfe with dreames. But then to bring you a sleepe more sweetly, you still cause delicious Musike to be soun∣ded euen to your bed. The Damosells bring in your bags, & prepare your night-stuffe, which attends you at your glasse, where before you vndresse your selfe, you admire anew the Sweetnesses, the Graces, the Moles, the Charmes, the Allurements & the curiosity of your Beauty, & with an Idola∣trous eye, you often cōtemplate the imagi∣nary perfections of your face. Thē glaūcing your eyes on the very same eyes, you loue them now more then euer, in remēbraūce of the new cōquests they haue made that day: your cheeks of lilyes & roses, your necke of iuory, your snowy bosom, & alabaster hāds; these are the foolish termes of your seruants which haue part in this affection, as hauing contributed their power to the achieuemēt of these conquests. And then do you culti∣uate yet more, according to your custome, by a guilty care, those Roses and those Lil∣lyes of your feature, that they wither not in the absence of the Sun, I would say, during the Ecclypse of that of your Eyes, whose sweet influences make them to blow forth. At last they lay you on a bed most reful∣gent, all gorgeous in riches, and whereon it seemes, as if the happy Arabia had powred forth a part of its odours; and to attract the sleepe more sweetly into your eyes, you cause to be sent for some pleasing Musike of a Voyce, which rauishes your senses with so much sweetnes, as they dye with ioy, with∣out dying notwithstanding. Are not these great pleasures, trow you, if they could last? I speake to Soules who seeke their Paradise on Earth. But the common calamity so pre∣uailes, as these delights euē dy in their birth, & their priuation affords them a great deale more torments then doth their presence pro∣duce sweetnesses. Let vs cast now our eyes at the last, on the backside of this Medall, & consider the cruel Metamorphosis of these contentments, in the intollerable punishments which Eter∣nally torment a damned Soule. Let vs be∣hould the cruell exercise of its paynfull pro∣gresse in Hell. You must take no great heed to the terms of Day, of Mattins, of Euening, or Morning-calles, whereof I serue my selfe in this ensuing description, for that I am forced thereunto, to keepe some order in my discourse. The deuils in the morning then, come to awake this damned Soule, howbeit indeed, she sleepeth not a wincke through the dreadfull noyse of their howlings. These are the Chambermaydes which fetch her out of her bed all of fire, for to conduct her into a Cabinet all of Ice, not of Myrrors, for she durst not haue lookt thereinto, for feare of the feare of her selfe, so hideous and dreadful she is. These wicked Spirits do help to dresse her after they haue made her take a draught of Sulphure within a rotten Vessell, where the worms do breed in sholes. One combes her head, and that with a combe of iron with sharp points which makes the bloud to follow. Another colors her cheekes with the red of Spayne with a pensill of fire. He there washes her face with puddle water, & scal∣ding hot withall; and he heere puts on a robe of liuing coales on her backe; and in this equipage a new Deuill more hideous then death presents himselfe to her, & serues her as an Vsher to conduct her to a burning Chariot, to conuey her not to a Temple, but to the foote of a dreadfull Aultar, where she is cruely sacrificed without loosing her life. They lead her afterwards in the same cha∣riot into a dismall Pallace, where she finds the tables couered, and set with all sorts of poysonous and contagious Serpents, wher∣with they feast her. All that dinner while a hideous noyse of howlings, and dreadful cryes, serues for the Musike to charme her eares withall. After repast is she brought backe agayne to her Cabinet, where all the obiects of horrour, and amazement are as∣sembled togeather for to afflict the sense of her sight. And after that, a Deuill sings her an Ayre, whose ditty is the Sentence of her condemnation, and this verity the bur∣den of it, How the paynes she endures shall be e∣ternall. What a Song? The tyme of her wal∣king approaches, they bring then the fyery Chariot before the gate of her darkesome Pallace. She mounts into it, and thence rage despayre, fury and cruelty draw her into an obscure forrest of Cypres, where the Ow∣les and Rauens do screech incessantly; so as she heares but the noyse of death, not being able to procure death. She is now returned, she finds the same Table spread agayne, and with the like Cates, whereof she feeds of force, to the noyse of a like Musike to that of dinner. Being risen from Table, the Deuill that hath the charge to wayte vpon her, co∣mes againe into her Cabinet and sings her likewise the same Canzonet of her dreadful Sentence, with the selfe same burden as be∣fore, How the paynes which she endures shalbe eter∣nall. In the meane tyme they bring her to a bed of thornes, whereinto they cast her at such tyme as she was wont to take her rest in the world; and thus passeth she ouer the night in these torments, without euer seing any end thereof. Is not this a fearefull life? Behould, my Dames, the exercise of those who haue imitated you in your pleasures. Behold the employments of their whole progresse. These are no fables I tell you, for like as the noise of the swindge of the world doth hinder you from hearing the sweet har∣mony of the motions of the Heauens; so the selfe same noyse seemes to hinder you like∣wise from vnderstanding the hideous cryes of a Cain, of a Pharao, of an impious Richmā, and of a thousand of others your like, who haue hitherto after so lōg a tyme beene bur∣ning in Hell, and so shall burne for euer, without hope to see any end of their panes. That depends now on you, my Dames, to chuse to you one of these two liues heere. If you be tasting of hony in your youth, you shall haue but bitternes in your old age. If you gather the Roses in your spring, the Thornes shalbe reserued for your winter. Chuse hardly, behold your selues expressed as Vlisses at the entrance of two wayes, far dif∣ferent the one from the other. That of Ver∣tue is stwowed with Nettles, and couered with Stones, & that of Vice is enamelled with flowers, and bordered with brookes, whose sweet murmur inuites you to fol∣low the traces of their course. So as if you would needs know, where both these ways do termine themselues; the one in eternall Death, and the other in Life. And herein the example of an infinite number, which haue beene saued by the one, & lost by the other may seeme to put you out of doubt. All the Saints, & in word, all those who are in Pa∣radise haue held the first, & al the dāned haue wretchedly followed the other. Demaund you of the Rich-man what way he tooke? he will answere you, that he hath alwayes walked vpon Flowers, & that he neuer met with Thornes, till the arriuall at his Se∣pulcher. Make you the same demaund of La∣zarus, & you shall heare of him, that he hath neuer trod but vpon the Earth, all couered with bryars, nettles, and sharpe stones, and that euen at the end of his trauailes he found the beginning of his glory. Thinke not, my Dames, to be gathering of the Flowers in this world, and then to be reaping of the Fruits in the other. All things are created in a Species of Contraries, which serues as a Ciment to hould them togea∣ther. The faire weather of your life seemes to menace Rayne at your Death, and God graunt it be not a Floud of vnprofitable tea∣res, where without thinking thereof, you find not your Shipwracke. The calme of your daies presages the storm of your nights, and take heed you find not some rocke in the tyme of the tempest. I must needs con∣fesse, how the Poets haue hid very excellent verities vnder the veyle of their Fables; that Cerberus with three heades, whome they fi∣gure to vs in hell, is nothing els but the de∣uill, who as a Monster of many heades eter∣nally deuours the damned. Their Ryuer of Cocytus, or Phlegeton, demonstrates to vs the tormēts of death. The lake of Auernus where troubles and sadnes inhabite, what els may it seeme to represent vnto vs, then the dis∣mall dwelling of the wicked Spirits? The great Famine they faigne of Tantalus, lets vs cleerely to behould the scarcity and penury of all goods which the damned haue. The Vultur of Titius which incessantly preyes on the hart without deuouring it, doth figure nought els, then the worme of vnprofitable Repentance, which gnawes without end those vnhappy Spirits. The wheele wherin Ixion is tortured, as likewise the Pitchers which the Danaides filled in vayne, are as so many witnesses of the Eternity of paynes of the damned Soules; which lets vs see how euen those who establish their true Paradise in this world, haue built thē without thin∣king of a Hell in the other, where they are euerlastingly punished. O cruell Eternity! What torments dost thou truly comprehend in thy long durance there beneath in Hell, where a million of ages in punishments cānot forme a first mo∣ment of some end! After one hath endured and suffered an infinite nūber of paynes, du∣ring as many years as there hath been instāts in the Tyme since the birth of the world, may he not wel affirme, that he had liued in those torments, but for the space of an houre only, if he were to liue alwayes in dying, & alwaies to dye liuing, in Hell, without re∣lease or respit? My Dames, I speake to you, because you haue the Spirit wādering in va∣nity. If you sigh for anguish in expectation of a Day, vpon a bed of roses, with what im∣patience will you be rackt in Hell, during those Eternal Nights? You shun the breath of the fire, and the burning of the Sun, as the enemyes of your beauty; why feare you not rather the tanning, and burning of the eternall flames? Let me dye rather, sayd Nero's wyfe, then to become foule and wrinckled. Would you be conseruing your beauty which is so deare vnto you, for a few dayes, and liue without it eternally in Hel? If you could but behould the foulnes & de∣formity of one damned Soule, the onely re∣membrance of the horrour, and amazemēt of that obiect, would be an intollerable pu∣nishment to you. If Nature haue not a stronger tye of loue then that wherewith it hath enchayned vs with our selfe, is it possible, my Dames, that you can exercise such a cruelty against your selues, as not to wish to liue cōtent, but in the world, where your pleasures are like to dye with you? If Hell affright you not for its punishmēts sake, let the Eternity ther∣of breed a terrour in you, to be vnhappy for euer. To be in the cōpany of deuils for euer, doth not the thought thereof only seeme to astonish you, since there is nothing more true then it? If nature, as a Step-dame, hath denyed you the fortitude of men, at least it hath giuen you the force of a Spirit, for to know your errours. Loue not your beauty but to please the Angels, rather then men, since it is a diuine quality, whose admiratiō appertaynes to them. To burne alwayes! Alas. Seeme you not to resent, in reading the lamentable history of the punishments of Fire wherewith the damned are tormē∣ted, some little sparkle of its flames, through a strong apprehension of incurring one day those paynes? I speake heere to Thee, who readest these verities, to bethinke thy selfe of this singular grace, which God seemes to vouchsafe, in permitting this same Booke to fall into thy hands, so to discouer this sē∣tence, which I haue signifyed to thee on the behalfe of God; That if you change not your life, you shalbe damned eternally. O cruell Eternity! O My Soule, thinke alwayes of this Eter∣nity, what torments soeuer thou sufferest in this world, say thou alwayes with Iob, My euils shall one day haue an end. O how happy was this man to be exposed on the dunghill of al the miseries of the world, as on a moū∣taine, where tuning the Harpe of his fee∣lings, and of his passions, to the Key of his Humility, & of his Patience, he sung the glory of his Lord in the midst of his infamy. What canst thou suffer heere beneath, more cruell then the paynes of the damned? And yet if thou shouldst euen suffer a part of their punishments, without the priuation of grace, thou shouldst be happy, because those euils would termine one day, to the fruitiō of thy soueraigne good. Then trample thou the thornes vnder thy feet, giue thy selfe in prey to dolours & sufferances, nor haue thou euer any other consolation then that of Iob, in saying without cease, My euills heere shall one day finish. The Houre of Death. W E MVST DYE: This is a law of necessity▪ whereof himselfe who made the same, would not be exempted. We must dye: This is a sen∣tence pronounced, now for these six thousand yeares, in the Pallace of the Terrestriall Paradise, by an omnipo∣tent God, whose infinite Iustice hath not spared his proper Sonne. We must dy : All such as hitherto haue beene, haue passed this way; those who now are, do hold the same; & they who are not as yet in appro∣ching to the Cradle, do approch to the Se∣pulcher. We must dy: But we know not the hower, the day, the moneth, nor the yeare: we know not the place, nor the manner of the Death, whose paynes we are to suffer. We must dy. Since we hould the life but as borrowed of him that created the same. We must dye, it is an euil that hath no remedy; al our children must dy, as our Fathers did, after they had shewed them the way, which our Grandfathers had tracked for vs. We must dy at last, since we dy euery hower, because the aire which we breath, being none of ours, we cannot serue our selues of it, but as others do in passing on till to morrow. We must dye, since that all which is in vs conti∣nually tends to death, without release or in∣termission. The very fetchings of our breath are counted, as well as our steps. In so much as all our actions are not wrought, but for a certaine terme, whence Tyme conducts vs by litle and litle to death. We must dy: This is a verity which experience proclaymes to all the world; and to the end no man may euer doubt thereof, the Sonne of God hath signed the Sentence with his bloud on the mount of Caluary. You must dye great Monarkes, what mar∣kes of immortality soeuer you haue. Be you as eloquent as you will, Demostenes is dead; be you neuer so valiant, Alexander is layd in his Tombe: If you haue force for your inheritance, Sampson is buryed vnder the ru∣ines of the Temple which he demolished. If you be faire, Absalom is reduced into Ashes. If rich, Cresus is no more of the world; if wise, Salomon is now not lyuing; if happy, Dauid is expired in the midst of his felicities. In fine, what quality soeuer you haue, it is alwayes inseparable from the mortall con∣dition wherein you are borne. You must dy and appeare in this fatall Couch, not with your gorgeous Attire, nor Royall Mantles, but rather with shirts, well steept in a cold sweate, where your liues are to run ship∣wracke. To cary your Crownes vpon your heads, they are so feeble, as they cannot en∣dure the weight. To hold your Scepters in your hands, candles rather would beseeme you better, to affoard you light to find the Sepulcher. Your Subiects are already assem∣bled about your beds, to see anew this ve∣rity, that you are all equall in the necessity of dying. Those Titles of Maiesty, which they affoard you, haue no more grace with them amidst your miseries. Me thinkes, in truth, it is very much to call you Men, since you begin to be no more so. It is euen iust now that you are to dy, the day is come, the hower approches, death is already on the way to your Pallace, you may do well if you please to put your Soul∣diers in Centinell, for to stop him in the en∣try. Behold how he knockes at your Cham∣ber doore, you must necessarily vouchsafe for to speake vnto him, since he comes on the behalfe of God, to signify the sentence of death vnto you. I doubt me that you haue the Spirit much occupyed, in the appre∣hension of your present affayres, and that you would willingly put of the accompt to some other day, but that may not be; Tyme hath strooke the houre, which is to beare sway at the end of your daies. What sighes, what sobs, what plaints cast you forth to the wind? the remēbrance of your Greatnesses past torments you now, while your guilty consciences put your soules on the Racke, like as the dolours already haue put your bodies. For to cast your eyes vpō the guilded Seelings, were to increase the horrour of the Sepulcher which they pre∣pare you. To behould likewise your Cour∣tiers who stand about you, the displeasure you find to leaue them, makes you to turne your view another way. Whereas it were better to set your eyes on the approches of Death, and in the feeling of your present Miseryes, to publish in dying this verity, that you are but ashes, durt, & corruption. Diogenes was walking one day in a cer∣taine Churchyard, where he entertayned his sad thoughts in the meditatiō of death, at what tyme Alexander surprized him by a suddaine approch, & demaunds of him what he was doing in so dismal & solitary a place? I am busied, said the Philosopher, in seeking out the bones of Philip your Father, amidst so great a number of these you see heere, but the payne which I take is vnprofitable, be∣cause they are all equall. This Answere is full of Mysteries, for it seemes to represent vs to the life, this Verity, That the greatest Kings of the world differ not awhit, but in goods and greatnesses only, from the wret∣chedst that are, since in the Tombe they re∣semble ech other so much, as it were impos∣sible to marke any difference betweene them. But me thinkes, the houre is already spent, and that Death knockes harder now at the Chamber doore then before. Behold how he enters in, carrying his Sithe in the one hand, & an Hower-glasse in the other, to let vs see that if he mow the hay of your life with his Sithe, the sand of the Hower-glasse which he carries, being taken for the Foundation of your vaine-glory, is euen now run out; so as if there remaine any little behind, it is but only to giue you leasure, to open your mouth, for to cast forth the last breath in this last moment. O fearefull momēt, wheron depends the Eternity of Glory, or the Eternity of paine! This is that last breth which condemnes, or iustifies all those who haue gone before. O fearfull moment, wherin is pronounced the Sentence of our second life or Death! O fearefull moment, since it pre∣sides the birth of our wretchednes, or of our felicity! O fearefull moment, wherein all our good, or euill consists! O fearful moment, wherein Paradise is offered, or Hell affor∣ded! O fearefull moment, wherin we are made companions for euer of the Angels, or of the deuils! O fearfull moment, where the Soule before God, findes the Eternall recompēce of its good deeds, or euerlasting paynes of its crimes! O fearefull moment! what ioyes, what sor∣rowes, what pleasures, and what dolours doest thou comprize in thy short durance! As often as I thinke on thee, I do tremble with feare, for this moment is a great deale more dreadfull, then death it selfe. This only moment is it, my Soule, whereupon the Eternity depends. Imploy thou all those of thy life vpon the thoughts of this last. Thou approchest vnto it euery hower, euery in∣stant robs thee of somewhat of thy former life. Whatsoeuer thou doest, thy body doth nothing but dye, & from its transitory life, depēds thy eternall life, for out of the Earth canst thou merit nothing for Heauen. Thinke thou alwayes on this last moment, where Crownes and Punishments are pre∣pared; Crownes of an infinite glory; Pu∣nishments of a dolour immortall. All thy actions shall there be receiuing their price or paine: Price of Paradise, or payne of Hell. Hence it is that the Prophet cries; I shall re∣member the day of my death for to liue eternally. Cast your eyes now vpon those Kings, extended dead vpon their rich Couches. What say I, those Kings? can Maiesty & cor∣ruption be compatible together? What ap∣parence of beliefe, in beholding them to be such, that they are Kings▪ since all their Royall qualities are dead with them? Would not a man say, they were heapes of Earth, so raysed aboue the Earth, where the worms are beginning to take their fees? Approach to this fatall couch, you proud Spirits, who measure the globe of the Earth through this vayne beliefe, that you merit the Empire of it, and in your imagination contemplate the while those that possesse them in effect, and you shall behold them quite through teares laied stretched at your feet, without pulse, & without motion. Their Maiesties are full of horrour, and miseryes in their turne haue ta∣ken hold of their owne, since they are all borne mortall, and consequently miserable; what strange Metamorphosis from Colos∣sus's of Greatnesses, quickened with a lyfe full of splendour and of glory, to be chaun∣ged in an instant into an heape of durt, whose putrifaction infectes the whole world? You Monarkes, Kings, Princes, be you Idolatours of your Greatnesses as much as you please, I attend you at the end of your Carriere, to let you see on the backside of the Medall, that you are but corruption; & if you doubt thereof, let him that suruiues another, approch to his Tombe, & he shall sensibly know, that there is nothing more true in the world. Thou miser, approch to this mournfull Couch, there is place inough for thee. Thou needs must dye, the houre is strooke; but tell me, how much gold and siluer dost thou leaue in thy coffers, and to what end serue they but to purchase thee Hell? Thou must yield an accompt of thy extortions and oppressions. Death comes to summon thee on the behalfe of God, to ap∣peare within an houre before the Tribunal of his Iustice, to heare thy sentence of death pronounced by his owne mouth. What wouldest thou not giue to prolong, yea but a day onely, the terme of thy departure? But all thy treasures cannot buy thee a mo∣ment of lyfe, thou must dye. O cruell necessity, and yet more cruell the dolour, which now seemes to martyr thy soule! Thou must dye; Thou maiest weep long inough, for death is blind; thou maiest cry as fast as thou wilt, while he is deafe; for to hope that the Greatnes of thy miseryes may mooue him to Pitty, he nei∣ther hath hart, nor bowels; & if he liue not∣withstanding, it is for nothing but to en∣force al the world to dy. Thy houre is come thou must dye; Alas! How many deaths dost thou suffer, ere thou loosest thy lyfe. Thou leauest thy children rich, it is true; but dyest miserable thy selfe, in the state of damnation. Behold thee well recompenced for the paynes thou hast taken, in heaping so much wealth, forsooth, to loose thy soule! Cruell to thy selfe! Thou hast not lyued, but for others. Infidell! thou hast betrayed thy selfe. Murderer! thou hast snatched a∣way thy lyfe, with an vnnaturall hand, im∣ploying thy care to fil thy coffers with gold and thy soule with crymes. You Misers, if you read the history of these Verities, deriue your profit frō the domage of others, & for the auoyding of these pier∣cing griefes, and the intollerable dolours of this last momēt of life, imploy all the others to thoughtes of the Eternity of glory, or of Payne. And imitating the Prophet, say with him: Lord I wil remēber me of the day of death, for to liue eternally. You must appeare, my Dames, ech one in her turn in this lamētable couch. The watch which Death seems to cary in his hand, hath strooke the hower already of the departure of the fairest. She must needs dye, but assist, I pray, at this sad spectacle. Me thinkes I see her now farre different from that which she was wont to be. Alas! What a chaunge! I seeke for the Maiesties which I haue sometymes seene in her brow, and I find nothing els but horrour, and amaze∣ment there. I demaund of her eyes, what is euen become of them, for they are buryed so deepe in her head, as they but loose sight of them who seeke for them. Her cheekes as sticht one to the other, do hinder her from opening the mouth, in such sort as her tōgue can speake no more then a sad language of sighes, to call vpon Pitty, to contemplate her miseryes withall. Her armes very care∣lesly stretched forth, euen dy with their fee∣blenes; In fine her body of Earth deuoures by little and little the flesh that couers it. Who would say now, seeing this Dame in the state whereunto she is brought, that she was the other day the fayrest of the Cit∣ty? Her company was a duncing with her at such a tyme, where all the Gallants that were there, fell a striuing to court her most. One valued the Gold of her hayre; another the Iuory of her teeth. This heere, admired the snow of her bosome; and he there, the alabaster of her hands. The casts of her eyes did wound many of them, and the allure∣ments of her graces, increased yet the num∣ber. The more indifferēt to loue, would be∣come great Maisters thereof, with the sight of her perfections: and yet neuertheles is it true (a strange thing) that her hayre heer∣tofore of gold, and now staring as it were, hath lost its lustre; that her teeth of Iuory are become blacke with the blast of death; that the snow of her bosome is dissolued; that the alabaster of her hands is faded; that the species of her eyes are dulled, so as if they wound as yet, they are but the woūds of Pitty. That her graces are without grace, and that in fine all those, who admired the same heertofore, come to repent themselues, and such as had loued her when tyme was, are now displeased with themselues, for ha∣uing euer so much as dreamed of her. What cruell Metamorphosis, my Dames! If you cannot giue credit to the faithfull re∣port, which I make you of these verityes, cast but your eyes vpon this doleful Couch, and you shall see a lyuing image of your self, or rather a dying of one, now brought to the last extremes. You make such accompt of your charmes, behold them in the Tōbe; you prize your bayts so much, contemplate the same in ruine; you cherish your Sweet∣nesses so dearly, consider their feeblenes; you make a shew of your deliciousnes and your alluremēts, behold to what passe they are now brought. Vaunt you of the Roses of your face, as much as you please, they are no more but Thornes. If you lay forth to view the whitenes of your delicate com∣plexion, see you not how pale now dolour harh made it for to take away its beauty? All those lockes so curled in nets of loue; all those eye-browes so carefully elaborate with a trembling hand; that face so washed and plaistered ouer with a secret art; those paynted lips; that necke so erected through force of endeauour; those curious actions, those smiles, those Vn-voluntaries of hers, and all those agreable fashions are vanished now in an instant, and horrour and dread∣fulnesse possesse their place. Alas! how the pourtraite of this Dame▪ which I see there hanging at her beds head, is differēt far from its originall? The shadow of that body moues to loue, the body of this shadow to pitty. The allurements of this liueles image are all full of charmes, and the draughts of this beauty yet liuing, wounds with feare, insteed of loue. The hower in the meane tyme seemes to passe away, and she must dy. Alas! what dolours do they feele in this cruell departure? From what payne are they exempt? This poore Dame beholds her selfe abandoned of all the world and which is worse of the Phisitians them∣selues. She sees not but by the light of mor∣tuary torches, which are lighted round a∣bout her bed. A confused noyse of sighes & plaints doth smite her eares; Her owne sa∣uour begins to infect her, and her feeling is exercised with the sufferance of a thousand sorts of paynes, and all very different in thē∣selues. Whatsoeuer she beholds afflicts her, because all the obiects which are represen∣ted to her, do carry the image of her doleful∣nes with them. Her Parents & her Friends are about her indeed, but they are as so many executioners that put her hart vpō the racke by reason of the griefe she feeles to forgoe them for euer. Her only Brother comes to her, to giue her a kisse, all bedēwed with teares, and his moaning plaints do euen plucke out the hart from her bosome, as knowing them to be the very last. Her Father oppressed with sorrow comes to bid her the last Adieu, but all of sighes, in regard her euill now growne to extremes, seemes to put him to silence; in so much as his teares and sighes are feigne to speake for him to his dying daughter; who makes him answere in the same language, both of the eyes & hart, without being able to let fall a word. Her mother hath her eyes glued vpon her pale and diffigured counte∣nance; and in this dumbe action of hers, whereto an excesse of dolour hath brought her, she suffers a great deale more payne to see her dye, then she had pangs before to bring her forth. And so in order al those that loued her, and whome she dearely loued, came in, to yield her this last duty of visit. But howbeit they premeditated somewhat to say vnto her, their tongues became mute at their approch, and their eyes made supply of discourse in their fashion. For what me∣anes is there to speake in a dolefull place, where Death goes imposing an eternall si∣lence? The Priest approacheth to the bed, with a Crucifix in his hand, which he pre∣sents to this foule sicke wretch: she takes it with a trembling hād, knowing it to be the Crosse, whereupon the Omnipotent Iudge was nayled. If she cast her eyes vpon his Crowne of Thornes, she drawes them into her hart, by her lookes, in remembring the roses, which she had deliciously troad vn∣der her feet during her lyfe: But there is now no more tyme to be carying the same into the soule, because her senses, as halfe dead, are vnsensible of their prickings. If she reguard the visage of this her Sa∣uiour all couered with comtempt, she sinc∣kes downe with the confusion of the out∣rages, that she hath done to herself, remem∣bring the guilty care which she hath taken, in playstering her face of earth, and ruyning in that manner with a sacrilegious hand the sacred workmanship of heauen, and of Na∣ture; and for hauing imployed the better part of her tyme in these errours, to the dis∣paragement of her soule, as if the same were corruptible like the body. The torments which her God, and her Iudge hath suf∣fered for her vpon this Crosse which she holds in her hand, and which she neuer had borne in her hart, do shamefully vpbrayd her now, for the delights of her lyfe. Then falls she a sighing at it, but her sighs of wind are taken but for wind; she weepes thereat, but her teares of water, are taken but for a litle water, since she cannot wipe away the blot of her crymes, because their spring de∣riues not from the hart; and that her teares proceed from the feare of present death, ra∣ther then from a sorrow of lyfe past. There need no other witnesses to con∣demne her withall, then the wounds of her Sauiour; for as he had suffered all the paines of the world, so she had tasted all the plea∣sures. Alas! if she could but turne backe a∣gaine, and returne to the midst of the course of her life; if her words might haue the same vertue, which those of Iosue had, for to cō∣maund the Sunne to returne backe agayne to its East, to affoard her leasure to do pe∣naunce in; is it not credible, my Dames, but that she would be dipping the bread of her nourishment, within the water of her teares, for to bewayle her sins? But that is in vayne to desire the returne of life, since she must dy and the houre is already strook. Alas! how many liuing deathes deuoure this poore body, before her life be snatched away at last? What strange torment seemes to racke her soule? she dyes with sorrow, for not be∣ing able to liue any longer, and notwith∣standing euery moment of life is to her an age of dolour. She is so engulfed in tormēts, as she imagines, that all the afflictions in the Earth, are assembled in her Chamber, or ra∣ther in her Soule, since now she is brought into extremes, through the force of anguish. Sorrow for the past, apprehension of the future, horrour of the Sepulcher, and the vncertainty she is in of her saluatiō, do hould her spirit continually on the racke. That little which she sees, is but to bid Adieu to the light; that little which she vn∣derstands, is for her last: and being thus brought into this extremity, now it is when the diuel lets her see to the life, the pourtrait of all the offences which she hath euer com∣mitted, to the end the enormity of them be∣ing ioyned with their number, might make her to turne her face to despaire. To make yet an exact Confession, all her Spirits are in disorder, and the powers of her Soule so feeble, as they can serue but for resentment of her euills. She would fayne speake, but a mortall stuttering with-holdes her tongue halfe tyed; and on the other side the smart of the payne which she suffers, is so sharpe, as she cannot open the mouth but to cry. A dolour without cease torments her continu∣ally: her dying life is wandring euery mo∣ment, in the punishments she is in, & when she finds her selfe, it is but to loose her selfe agayne in her syncopes, which are the fore∣runners of her Death. The eyes bolt out of her head, as if they had this knowledge, that they were vnprofitable vnto her; her mouth awry, and halfe open, giues passage, by the eye, vnto her bowells, to behold the tor∣ments she is in. It is now tyme, my Dames, you present her with a Mirrour, for to em∣ploy her last reguards, on the sad contem∣plation of the dreadfull ruines of her beauty; what faces makes she the while? her hideous looke affrights not only little children, but euen likewise the most couragious. Behold your selues, my Dames, with∣in this glasse, if you will but apparantly see the faults which are hiddē vnder your own, from point to point, or rather vnder the Spanish white, wherewith you are payn∣ted. Behold into what estate are reduced your alluremēts, your charmes, your sweet∣nesses, and your bayts, which you so put in the rancke of adorable things. These are no Fables, no Illusions, nor Enchantements, these; you haue seen the other day this foule dying wretch, with a lustre of beauty, that dazeled all the world, who to day seemes to mooue you to pitty, and horrour at once. Marke well all her actions, but quickned with dolour and dread: these are the true e∣xamples of those, which you shall one day suffer, it may be to morrow, or euen to day who knowes? And then, dare you waxe so proud of your beauty as you do, while the crust thereof is now thus broken as you see, in the presence of so many persons, who haue seene, how the inside was all, but full of corruption? In this meane while, the sicke person dyes by litle and litle. It is now tyme, to make the funerall of those fayre eyes, since their light is thus extinct. The Priest may cry in her eares long inough, for death hath taken vp his lodging there, and euery one knowes that she is deafe. Her hands, & her feet are without motion, as well as without heat; the hart seemes to beate as yet, but it is onely to bid Adieu to the Soule, which is now a departing; and to tell you whither▪ I leaue you to thinke. Such a life, such a death. Let me only say, That the Iudgements of God are far different from those of men. Approach then, to this corpes, you profane Spirits, & through a sensible sorrow of hauing euer heertofore adored its Beautyes, participate with its death. Behold its hayre, which once you termed golden, and wherwith Loue v∣sed to serue himselfe, to tye the Freest; the lustre now is vanished from it, the beauty is defaced, nor can it serue for ought, but to mooue pitty. That brow heertofore so full of Maiesty in your eyes, and where the Gra∣ces appeared in troupes (these are your ter∣mes is now become an obiect of hate, & cō∣tempt. Those eyes which you called, your Sunns, resemble now two Torches newly put out, whose stinke driues away as many as approch vnto them. The Roses of those cheekes are changed into Thornes; the coral lips are now of alabaster; the iuory neck is now of earth; the bosom now is no more of snow, but all of ashes; & finally this whole beautifull body, is flesh no more, but euen durt. And if you will not belieue me, ap∣proach neerer, & you shall resent the infe∣ction▪ thereof. Behould, O you Courtiers the Idoll of your Passions. What a shame is it now for you, to haue adored this carkasse, so full of wormes and putrifaction? You made of its presence, during its lyfe, an imaginary Pa∣radise, and now you would make it a true Hell. Heertofore you could not liue with∣out seeing her dayly, and at this time, you euen dye, with the onely beholding her. It is not yet three dayes, since you kissed the picture with an action of Idolatry, & now at this present, you dare not to cast your eyes vpon the originall, so dreadfull and formi∣dable it is. Represēt vnto you then, for your satisfaction▪ that all the fayrest Dames of the world shalbe reduced one day to this pite∣ous estate; and that all their graces, which are borrowed of Art, accompany them no more, then as a day of the Spring; in so much as if they waxe old, they passe the most part of their age out of themselues. For without dissēbling with the tymes, a Dame when she is growne in yeares, is fayre no more, she liues no longer in the world, they put her in the ranke of things which are past, & whose memory is lost. Looke when a beautifull face comes to your view, and make you at that instant an Anatomy of it: if you cast your eyes vpō her faire eyes, represent to your selfe in that mo∣ment, how they are subiect to 63. diseases, all different one from another, and that one drop of defluxion produceth a contagion in those who behold thē. Her nose which you iudg so curious, is as a Siluer box ful of oint∣ments, for one cannot defend himselfe frō the infectiō which issueth thence, but with Muske and Ciuet. Her mouth is ordinarily infected, with the corruption of her teeth. If the Hands of this faire body seeme to ple∣ase you, know you not how she steepes thē euery day in lye, for to make them white; I would say, that she is fayne to wash them e∣uery moment to take away the spots & foul∣nes of them. In fine, whatsoeuer you see of this beautifull body, is but playster, & what appeares not otherwise, but mere corruptiō. Dresse then, and tricke vp your selues, you Dames, as long as you please; yet shall you not change, for all that, the nature you are of. If you charme the world through your false allurements, the world charmes you with its vayne promises. Do not flatter your selues, you are but clay, infection, and cor∣ruption. So as, if neuertheles you enforce any loue, it is but through imposture; for that, couering your face with a new visage, it is easy to deceiue those who haue no iud∣gement but in the eyes. If then you would leaue of Vanity, muse alwaies vpon Death, since you may happen dy at any houre, be it in banquetting, be it in walking. Go whi∣ther you wil, your paces conduct you to the Tombe. And at such tyme, as you stand be∣fore your Glasse, in the action of washing your face, imagine how it shall putrify one day, and perhaps to morrow, and that al the care you take, to make it white, will not hinder the wormes frō deuouring the same. Yet after you haue imployed about it, a whole phiall of sweet water, shed at least one salt teare of sorrow for your sins, to wash your most enormous Soule. What a shame is it then, for you to trick & trimme vp your body so euery day, wherof the wormes haue already taken possession, and to abandon your soule on the dunghill of your Miseryes, whereunto your crymes haue brought you? Hearken to the Hower that euen now strickes: what know you, whether if shalbe your last? do you find your selfe, trow you, in a good estate, to present your selfe before a dreadful Iudge, who hath so many Hells to punish the guilty? Your companion is dead already, and you take no heed, but euen run after her, euery moment without cease, or without any respit. How then is it possible, that you can runne so to Death, in the estate of damnation, wherein you are? Rather imitate the Parthians who in flying, triumphed of their enemyes. And weepe for sorrow of your life, in running to Death; and sigh in way of repentance to the last gaspe. Imitate also that great Per∣sonage who caused himselfe to be paynted on a B ere, with his face bare, his hands ioy∣ned together, euen in the very same posture wherein he was to be layd forth after his Death, and euery morning would he go to make his prayer before this picture; which succeeded so happily with him, as he dyed without any trouble, or disquietnes. Syrs, I haue represented to you in the be∣ginning of my Booke, how there is nothing assured in this world; the which, me thinkes should oblige you first to lift vp your eyes to Heauen, for to see the Eternity of the glory which is there promised vnto you; and then as all dazeled, to cast them downe agayne, with the helpe of your imagination, into Hel, whose punishments also in part I haue described to you. Then returning to your self, consider how these felicities, and Eter∣nall paines depend on a moment; and this is the moment of Death, whereunto you approach euery houre. Repose your selfe then, euery day, for a quarter of an houre, vpon this dolefull Couch, where this late beautiful Dame hath expired; & diuert your Spirit in this tyme of grace, to thinke vpon that, which you would then be thinking of, when you shall come to be tyed thereunto with the chaynes of dolour & anguish. And these be the true Thoughtes of Eternity. FINIS.