Canticl. 2. 13. arise my love my fair one and come away it be the parable of eat not thy heart which parable although in itself it be obscure yet by the sunshine of friendship the mist of obscurity be disperse and the true meaning of the author thus plain to be discern that those which want friend to reveal secret or open themselves unto be devourer of their own heart so great a enemy to man be this his secret hatred or aversation to society that it cause he to degenerate degenerate to participate of the nature of savage beast to become a cannibal a murderer not of other but of himself if affliction shall aim at i and I fall in company a friend may raise i again but woe unto Eccles. 4. 10. he that be alone woe unto he that be give over unto himself for he fall and there be not a second to lift he up the proverb say one man be deem none mean life be death where man do live alone misery it look merry so long as it may repair to such as will afford it mercy for it ease a grieve heart to see his friend pity he who in pity do partake with he and therefore not unfit do the roman call friend I will here show you two notable example of the use of friend and trial of friendship the first betwixt jonathan and David who soul be knit together with the band of amity jonathan you may see in the first of Samuel 19 2. will not keep his own father counsel when it be against David his friend but reveal the plot to David Saul my father go about to slay thou yea and he wrought so for he in his absence that he bring he again into the presence of Saul his father as in time past verse 7. second observe what will have become of the man sick of the palsy in the 5. of saint Luke gospel and 18. verse if he have have no friend he be too feeble of himself to crowd into the house yea his friend though man of ability yet at first can find no way to help he but at last although it be through the tyle they find way to let down here I can omit a three example and that of Tiberius Caesar with who Sejanus have ascend to that height of friendship that they two be reckon as a pair of friend and the whole senate do dedicate a altar to friendship as to a goddess in respect of the great and entire friendship betwixt these two so dear and precious be true friendship that when a man can find comfort in any other cordial whatsoever than this be a cordial comfort to he that he have a friend will ease his heart by take part with he a man may Francis lord verulam take Sarza to open the liver steel to open the spleen flower of sulphur for the lung Castoreum for the brain but no receipt open the heart but a true friend to who a man may bold impart whatsoever lie upon the heart to oppress it we now see of what use a good friend be and what need there be of he but I confess it be a difficult thing for we in this deceitful time to find out such a friend but what if such a friend shall come and proffer we this kindness as with jonathan to knit his soul to the soul of we that be david the belove of the lord will we not accept of this friend-like proffer so it be that Christ have proffer himself and have promise that if we will unite ourselves with he in this league of amity that although we have so high offend his father and by our invention pluck his wrath upon our head yet he will undertake to satisfy his justice appease this his wrath and avert his ire although by our deprave nature we have deprive ourselves of his presence yet he will plead so well for we that we shall again be admit into his presence as in time past it be the speech of a emperor as I take it upon his deathbed that he have Severus have all thing and now will give all thing to be find in Christ now we have on the contrary Christ free offer himself and use all mean possible to win we unto himself invite we to the participation of his treasure and because we shall know that we be not friend in the mean rank or degree of friendship he be please not only to distinguish but also to dignify we by a more near dear and familiar title as his sister his spouse Cantic. 5. 1. such as without who he will neither eat or drink but if he have eat they must do so too I have eat my honeycomb with my honey I have drink my wine with my milk eat o friend yea drink abundant o belove cantic 5. 1. yea to say more we be such friend as without who he will not live but because he live we shall live also John 14. 19 no marvel then if he do so often invite we since we be so near contract to rise up out of this dungeon of misery and to lie down with he in his palace of mercy no less than twice in this one chapter be we invite by himself first in the ten verse my belove speak and say unto i rise up my love my fair one and come away and again in this thirteen verse arise my love my fair one and come away which word be the word of that wise and lovely king Solomon invite his new spouse to come with he from the place she then do reside in to his princely palace in jerusalem but in the mystery behold a great a wise and far more lovely than Solomon be here say saint Bernard no less love than love itself here be Christ the true bridegroom courteous invite his spouse the church that be every true believer say saint Paul to forsake the world and the flesh which as Aquin. say fit may be term and the hellish den of devilish lion and mighty monntaine of bloody leopard Canti. 4. 5. these will Christ have his spouse to forsake and come and live with he in his heavenly jerusalem or abide with he on his holy mountain psal 15. 1. in the word there be these part Text. 1. a taxation 2. a compellation 3. a invitation 1. 2. 3. first a taxation arise here may some cozen conceit opinonist begin to cavil in this sort will CHRIST allow his church no ease to which I answer he will and do soleme charge those that have to do with the church not to disturb the quietness thereof as Cantic. 2. 7. I charge you oh daughter of jerusalem by the roe and by the hind of the field that you stir not up nor waken my love until she please but yet he will not allow she to take her ease in wickedness nor yet to be lull in the silken cradle of security but when he see this than he call to she to arise and come away arise my love my fair one etc. here can I not give anger its proper definition because I can term it a passion in he who be not subject to any but it be rather here a calm resolution in God to punish or prevent sin in we it be not with God as it be with diverse of we who after we be once angry will scarce ever be please again but in he be rather complete fulfil that ancient and true miner eurip. (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) proverb by how much the great by so much the soon please for we be never so soon sorrowful for offend he but he be assoon merciful to forgive we but because the anger of God be here express in one word I dare not stay to spend many in the exposition of the same but only let we hence observe that although his anger be contain in one word yet his love be not full express but in many my love my fair one etc. although his anger last but a while yet his love endure for ever my love my fair one etc. let we here take notice how God be please to dignify his church and honour she with those familiar title and term of love and fair-one she be lovely and fair because she be he many be the pledge of his sincere affection towards she by which she become lovely and fair 7. love token 11. these the pledge of his love or affection be of three sort 1. either Hugo s. 2. or 3. or the gift of nature be memory reason and will wherewith we excel brute beast the gift of grace be faith hope and charity with which we overcome the devil the gift of glory eternal and true happiness dr. rawlinson happy and eternal truth true and happy eternity whereby we be make equal with the angel or as the same author say in another place in token of his love he give she 1. a brooch upon her breast 2. a ring upon her finger 3. a royal dowry for her inheritance 1. 2. 3. in dote the brooch say he be reason the mother of discourse the ring to grace her hand be good-worke and the recompense of both be her inheritance of a kingdom these thing I believe objection he do and will bestow on those who he please thus to unite unto himself but how can I which be but a finite creature be thus unite to a infinite creator I answer out of baudwins word that be when Christ become incarnate than thou become incorporate that be when Christ take upon he thy human nature than do he impart unto thou his divine see then that use God be thus please to unite and appropriate we unto himself let not we prove false or disloyal unto he by run a whore after strange god and so be lead away by our own invention this we do when we prefer the pleasure of the world before the love of God and therefore it please the holy-ghost in scripture to call we adulterer when we thus set our affection upon the world or any thing therein you adulterer and adulteress james 4. know you not that the amity of this world be enmity with God let we know we must not set up our rest here con lib. 4. metr 1 if we enter with ourselves into serious contemplation we shall find this to prove but a place of desolation and therefore we ought to be more sensible and careful of our own on Ambrose lib. virg. since thou have the liberty of wing why do thou clog thyself with the care of this world what be there in the world that shall thus delude we if we be to day in as high promotion as Haman be with king ahasuerus may we not have as sudden a fall if we have great store of wealth riches have wing and fly away say the poet and on the contrary if we have Christ with he we shall have all thing Ambrose love not therefore this world 1 joh. 2. 15 nor the thing that be in this world we count it not a slight fault for a woman to set her love and affection upon another man when she be contract or marry to a husband yea we count it a indignity and dishonour and the reason be because God have so dignify and please so to honour that estate in which they be unite and yet this be but a type of the union betwixt Christ and his church in these respect have God please to honour that estate 1. Paeraldus sum 2. 3. 4. i. it be God himself that first do institute it gen. 2. 28. there it be evident that God himself bring they first together second it be institute in paradise and it be worthy our observation and it make great to the honour of marriage to consider that this alone be institute in paradise for from hence may we note the happiness of those that marry in the lord for they be not only marry one to another but Christ be marry unto they three it be in the time of man innocence the happy time that ever man enjoy or live in when God with all the rest of his creature be at peace with he before there need any reconciliation because there be never any disagreement four it be the first order that God do institute after man creation and as it be the first that God the father do institute so do Christ God the son please to grace and dignify it with the first miracle that ever he wrought on earth which be at a marriage in Cana of Galilee where he turn the water into wine John 2. 6. thus high do God please to esteem of the contract which pass betwixt man and woman as thus to dignify it where he himself be but a guest and shall we think he will less esteem of that contract where he himself be bridegroom since it have please he out of his love use so to honour we let not we be want in our love and respect again towards he let not the consideration of this his infinite love to we cause we to slack our love to he because it come so far short of his for he know what we be able to do and expect no more Ambrose God look that willingness shall usher in all our obedience let we therefore willing love he again because he have love we first it be one of the plague and torture wherewith that cruel tyrant Mezentius do use to murder man quinetia^ to tie the live and dead together and cast they both into a dungeon there to continue till they be both in one case by this cruel tyranisme be figure unto we those match or marriage where love be want which often happen by these occasion first when marriage be without the consent of either of the party requisite and therefore for as Catullus say second when the party be too hasty and so rash adventure before affection on both side be settle we have a old say which be very certain for this affect dispatch be one of the most dangerous enemy to serious business that can be it be like to that which the physician call praedigestion Homer m. Tullius or hasty digestion which be sure to fill the body full of crudity and secret seed of disease (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) be it not reason that we shall when we must in three when the dowry be rather marry then the wife with a I have thou for this thing and not for thyself now in this spiritual marriage none of these consent be want first here be the consent of God the father who give his only beget son etc. he be willing that Christ who so entire love we shall unite we unto himself second there be the consent of Christ our bridegroom who give himself etc. now there want none but our consent which if we respect our own good we can deny I remember conclude upon necessity give this advice now I have already show you the lineage of this our spiritual bridegroom that he be the only beget son of God second here be not in he a ovet-hastie rashness for although he love we rather than his life as sufficient he have witness by his death yet he move our affection towards himself by degree three he sue not for the dowry for alas what have we poor miserable soul that may move he to set his love or affection upon I can see no reason of his love but his love itself his mere good will be the only cause and all he look for again be our good will neither Bamard do he seek for any thing else neither have we any thing else to give he it be answer by one of the old philosopher in Laertius be ask when a young man shall marry (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not as yet when a old man (@) (@) (@) (@) (@) not at all but let we contrariwise learn to remember our creator in the day of our youth old or young let we know it be now time yea and high time to give consent upon so reasonable condition yea it be now a case of necessity either we must yield to be espouse to Christ who do dear love we or else we must be contract to the devil who do deadly loathe we let we now judge whether it be better to be belove of a friend or loathe of a fiend justin say that this our antagonist the devil be God ape and indeed this word ape do very well agree with he in this respect even as the ape by kindness kill her whelp with too much love and lull in her arm so will not Satan then deny we help when as his help may yield we great harm his love be their death whoever they be he once come to hug or embrace not much unlike to Ammon who after he have once deflower his sister Tamar he hate she ever after and we shall find that what show of love soever this our enemy have make to we before yet his hatred after will be far great Dionysius the elder note very well when see his mother very old and overstriken in year desirous to marry a young stripling that although it be in her power to violate the law of Syracuse yet not to violate the law of nature so let i tell you that although it may seem easy in your conceit to violate the law of man yet shall it not be easy to violate the law of God by who edict it stand decree that either we must be his spouse or the devil harlot with the one we shall find treasure incomparable with the other trouble intolerable of the one we shall find a precious treasure of the other a pernicious traitor we can desire no more than the first if we refuse the last and we can deserve no less than the last if we refuse the first I believe not that we can just tax Olimpias the mother of Alexander for banish a noble woman of Macedonia from her court because she prefer wealth before virtue in marry a rich fool no more can we tax God of injustice if he banish we from his princely palace where we shall have be crown if we have espouse he the king of heaven if we neglect he become harlot to that old spiritual fornicator the devil before mention my love and fair one etc. hence let we take notice that we be his and no other my belove be i and I be he verse 16. yea if we right consider it we be more his then our own and therefore we shall have always a great care to please he then to please ourselves hence also may we observe the happiness of true believer above other they alone shall participate of this his extraordinary love whereas other shall be exclude this heavenly paradise as harlot not worthy to be receive but rather to receive their portion with the devil and his angel for ever my love etc. here we see he please to speak in the singular number to let we understand that he have but one love but one true church as therefore he will admit of no other no more ought we there shall be but one shepherd and one sheep-fold we read of none but wicked Lamech before the flood that have more wife than one and he jovinnian call a monster because he make two rib of one yea and another observe that the name of his second wife do signify a shadow because that she be not a wife but the shadow of a wife so in like manner there be but one catholic church the roman some think no better than lamech second wife but the shadow of a wife but admit her Christ spouse yet she have many foul fault in she much levity and wantonness which God amend but because this will deprive i of my intend discourse I therefore leave it and come again to the same word before handle my love and fair one etc. here be both a likely portion and a lovely proportion she be both lovely and beautiful here be his love express to his church in many more word then his anger which last but a while but this his love shall endure for ever she be not now his sister only but his spouse also not only his spouse but also his love and not his love alone but his fair-one fair first in respect of her beauty second in respect of her order cant. 4. 1. behold thou be fair my love behold thou be fair first in respect of her beauty the inward gift of grace do shine more bright in she her image which be before by nature deface be now again revive Christ in her do now behold her former perfection and therefore when he have reckon her beautiful part in particular as thy that be zeal and knowledge jun eye be like the dove etc. * they two breast be as two young roe that be twin feed among the lily he conclude in the seven vers. of the four chap. thou be all fair my love and there be no spot in thou second in respect of order which be the beauty of every thing for where no order be there be deformity and where order be observe there be comeliness if you hear but a eloquent oration will you not judge the beauty the beauty thereof rather to consist in the curious compose or knit together of those rhetorical flower they in the flower or sentence themselves it be so in every society a army mix together be a confuse multitude but in their order a beautiful company it be report of the queen of sheba that come so far to see Solomon that when she behold the sit of his servant and the attendance of his minister and their apparel and his cupbearer etc. there be no more spirit in she 1 King 10. 4 5. she be ravish here with the very order and decency of he that be but a type of Christ and his church than who order nothing be more beautiful wherein every one affect not supremacy but some bare one office and some another some apostle some prophet some worker of miracle some hear some read some preach some pray every one do something in their order thus have mix her beauty with order you see in what a beautiful order the church remain last immutatione come away we ought not now to tarry when God call it be the king of heaven that call we who be ready to run into the mouth of the devour lion let we therefore run hasty towards he and cry he mercy that we have be so long disobedient and have so long stop our ear at his call let we now run and carry with we Singulttm in gutture in fancy groan in our breast sigh in our throat tear in our eye let there no long be need for he to cry how long will I but you will not but let we now have to meet he who come not to lead we out of prison to the place of execution but to a place of joy inexpressible to the promise paradise which as he be willing so also be he able to bestow upon we there be but three kingdom heaven earth and hell and he be lord and master of they all first he be lord of to reward we with second he be lord of to rule and govern it and three he be lord of to vanquish it and this be that lordly bridegroom betwixt who and we the covenant be draw in baptism and have oft since be seal and confirm in the lord supper let we therefore hasten with this our princely bridgeroome unto our coronation which although it can be comepleate finish till our soul shall have forsake these earthly tabernacle yet then shall we without molestation enjoy that unite peace with God in piety and with ourselves in security although we shall nevermore enjoy the communion of his affliction yet shall we evermore enjoy the union of his affection in the mean time let we labour and endeavour since he have be so love to we daily to increase our love again towards he this our love to he must be express 1. Cord 2. first in the heart there true love out to be found that it may endure so long as the heart do which be but second by the body be here mean all outward respect and reverence we have give he our soul and shall we deny he our body he have give himself both to we and for we and shall we keep back any thing from he he have not only promise we a crown hereafter but have crown we here Ezech. 16. 12. he have set a jewel on our forehead and earring in thy ear and a beautiful crown upon thy Head in time of peace a crown of white-rose of innocency in persecution a crown compose of the re-rose of martyrdom now we be crown here if we desire to be crown hereafter we must arise out of this haven of misery and arrive at the heaven of mercy and then shall there not be need for this our lordly bridegroom to call again the three time arise my love my fair one and come away