Heavens glory, seeke it. Earts [sic] vanitie, flye it. Hells horror, fere it Rowlands, Samuel, 1570?-1630? Heavens glory, seeke it. Earts [sic] vanitie, flye it. Hells horror, fere it Rowlands, Samuel, 1570?-1630? Sparke, Michael, d. 1653, attributed name. יהוה HEAVENS GLORY, SEEKE IT. EARTS VANITIE, FLYE IT. HELLS HORROR, FERE IT. LONDON, printed for Michaell Sparke. A o . 1628. To the Reader. T HE present carelesse security of all men in generall, is like vnto our first Parents neg∣lect of Gods sacred commande∣ment in Paradice, when the sedu∣cing Serpent no sooner p rswaded euill, but it was inctantly put in practise: You shall dye (said God) was heard, but you shall not dye (said the Diuell) was beleeued. Our eares are daily acquainted with the threatnings of Gods de∣nounced against sinners, and yet that sinne, that broad way-path and highway to hell, is attempted with a delectation and pleasure so craftie and subtill are the baits and lures of the deceiuer, and so void of spirituall wisedome is the soule-murdering sinner. But if due consideration were had of the wages of sinne, and the reward of vnrighteousnesse, and to what bitternesse it will turne in the end, it would make vs lesse bold to sinne, and more fearefull to of∣fend, if we would take into our company for a daily consort, the pale memory of death, and where∣to he summoneth vs after this life. Death it selfe is very fearefull, but much more terrible, in regard of the iudgement it warneth vs vnto. Imagine to see a sinner lye on his departing bed, burde∣ned and tyred with the grieuous and heauie load of all his former trespasses, goared with the sting and pricke of a festered consci∣ence, feeling the crampe of death wresting at his heart strings, ready to make the ruthfull di∣uorce betweene soule and body, panting for breath, and swim∣ming in a cold and fatall sweat, wearied with strugling against the deadly pangs: Oh how much would he giue for an houre of re∣pentance! at what rate would he value a daies contrition! Then worlds would be worthlesse, in respect of a little respite, a short truce would seeme more precious than the treasures of Empires, nothing would be so much estee∣med as a moment of time, which non by moneths and yeeres is la∣uishly spent. How inconsolable were his case, his friends being fled, his sences frighted, his thoughts a∣mazed, his memorie decaied, his whole minde agast, and no part able to performe that it should, but onely his guiltie conscience pestered with sinne, continually vpbraiding him with bitter accusations? what would hee thinke then (stripped out of this mortall weed, and turned both out of the seruice and house roome of this world) hee must passe before a most seuere Iudge, carrying in his owne conscience his enditement written, and a perfect register of all his mis∣deeds: when hee should see the Iudge prepared to passe the sen∣tence against him, and the same to be his Vmpire, whom by so many offences he hath made his enemie: When not onely the de∣uils, but euen the Angels, should plead against him, and himselfe maugre his will, bee his owne sharpest appeacher: What were to be done in these dreadfull exi∣gents? When hee saw that gastly dungeon and huge gulfe of hell, breaking out with fearefull flames, the weeping, houling, and gnashing of teeth, the rage of all those hellish monsters, the horrour of the place, the rigour of the paine, the terrour of the company, and the eternitie of all those punishments. Would you thinke them wise that would daily in so weighty matters, and idlely play away the time allot∣ted them to preuent these in∣tollerable calamities? Would you then account it secure, to nurse in your bosome so many vgly Serpents as sinnes are, or to foster in your soule so many malicious accusers, as mortall faults are? Would you not then thinke one life too little to repent for so many iniquities, euerie one whereof, were enough to cast you into those euerlasting and vnspeakeable torments? Why then doe we not (at the least) deuote that small remnant of these our latter dayes, to the ma∣king an attonement with God, that our consciences may be free from this eternall danger? Who would relie the euerlasting affaires of the life to come, vpon the gliding, slipperinesse; and running streame of our vncertaine life? It is a preposterous pollicie (in any wise conceit) to fight against God till our weapons be blunted, our forces consumed, our limmes impotent, and our breath spent; and then when we fall for faint∣nesse, and haue fought our selues almost dead, to presume on his mercy. It were a strange peece of Art, and a very exorbitant course, while the Ship is sound, the Pylot well, the Marriners strong, the gale fauourable, and the Sea calme, to lye idle at rode: and when the Ship leakes, the Pylot were sicke, the Marriners faint, the stormes boysterous, and the Sea turmoyled with surges, to launch forth for a voyage into a farre Country: yet such is the skill of our euening re∣penters, who though in the sound∣nesse of health, and in the perfect vse of reason, they cannot resolue to weigh the ankers that withhold them from God, neuerthelesse, feed themselues with a strong per∣swasion, that when their sences are astonied, their wits distracted, their vnderstanding dusked, and both body and minde racked and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortall sicknesse, then will they thnke of the weightiest matters, and become Saints, when they are scarse able to behaue themselues like reasonable crea∣tures? being then presumed to be lesse then men: for how can he that is assaulted with an vnsetled conscience, distrained with the wringing fits of his dying flesh, maimed in all his abilities, and circled in with so many encom∣brances, be thought of due discre∣tion to dispose of his chiefest iewell, which is his soule? No, no, they that will loyter in seed time, and begin then to sowe when others begin to reape: they that will riot out their health, and cast their accounts when they can scarsely speake: they that will slumber out the day, and enter their iourney when the light doth faile them, let them blame their owne folly, if they dye in debt, and eternall beggerie, and fall headlong into the lapse of end∣lesse perdition. Great cause haue wee then to haue an hourely watchfull care ouer our soule, being so dangerous assaulted and enuironed: most in∣stantly entreating the diuine Ma∣iesty to be our assured defence, and let vs passe the day in mourning, the night in watching and wee∣ping, and our whole time in plain∣full lamenting, falling downe vp∣on the ground humbled in sack∣cloath and ashes, hauing lost the garment of Christ, that hee may receiue what the persecuting ene∣my would haue spoyled, euery short sigh will not be sufficient satisfa∣ction, nor euery knocke a warrant to get in. Many shall cry Lord, Lord, and shall not be accepted: the foolish Virgins did knocke, but were not admitted: Iudas had some sorrow, and yet died despe∣rate. Foreslow not (saith the holy Ghost) to be conuerted vnto God, and make not a daily lingering of thy repaire vnto him: for thou shalt finde the suddennesse of his wrath and reuenge not slacke to destroy sinners. For which cause, let no man soiourne long in sinfull securitie, or post ouer his repen∣tance vntill feare enforce him to it, but let vs frame our premises as we would finde our conclusion, endeauouring to liue as we are de∣sirous to dye: let vs not offer the maine cr p to the Diuell, and set God to gleane the reproofe of his haruest: let vs not gorge the Di∣uell with our fairest fruits, and turne God to the filthy sc aps of his leauings: but let vs truely de∣dicate both soule and body to his seruice, whose right they are, and whose seruice they owe; that so in the euening of our life we may re∣tire to a Christian rest, closing vp the day of our life with a cleare sunne-set, that leauing all dark∣nesse behinde vs, we may carry in our consciences the light of grace: and so escaping the horrour of an eternall night, passe from a mor∣tall day, to an euerlasting morrow, Thine in Christ Iesus, Samuell Rowland. STrike saile, poore soule, in sins tempestuous tide, That runst to ruine and eternall wracke: Thy course from heauen is exceeding wide, Hels gulfe thou ent rest, if grace guide not backe: Sathan is Pilot in this nauigation, The Ocean, Vanity, The Rocke, damnation. Warre with the Dragon, and his whole alliance, Renounce his league intends thy vtter losse; Take in sinnes flag of truce, set out defiance, Display Christs ensigne with the bloudy crosse: Against a Faith proofe armed Christian Knight, The hellish coward dares not mannage fight. Resist him then, if thou wilt victor be, For so he flies, and is disanimate; His fiery darts can haue no force at thee, The shield of faith doth all their points rebate: He conquers none to his infernall den, But yeelding slaues, that wage not fight like men. Those in the dungeon of eternall darke, He hath enthralled euerlasting date, Branded with Reprobations cole-blacke marke, Within the neuer∣opening ramd vp g e: Where Diues rates one drop of water more Than any crowne that euer Monarch wore. Where furies haunt the hart∣torne wretch, despaire, Where clamours cease not, teeth are euer gnashing, Where wrath and vengeance sit in horrors chaire, Where quenchlesse flames of sulphur fire be flashing, Where damned soules blaspheme God in despight, Where vtter darknesse stands remou'd from light. Where pla ues in iron, torments compasse round, Where anguish rores in neuer stinted sorrow, Where woe, woe, woe, is euery voices sound, Where night eternall neuer yeelds to morrow: Where damned tortures dreadful shall perseuer, So long as God is God, so long is euer. WHo loues this life, from loue his loue doth erre, And chusing drosse, rich treasure doth denie, Leauing the pearle, Christs connsels to preferre, With selling all we haue, the same to buy: O happy soule, that doth disburse a summe, To gaine a kingdome in the life to come. Such trafficke may be termed heauenly thrift, Such venter hath no hazard to disswade Immortall purchase, with a mortall gift, The greatest gaine that euer Merchant made: To get a crowne where Saints and Angels sing, For laying out a base and earthly thing. To taste the ioyes no humane knowledge knowes, To heare the tunes of the coelest▪ all quires, T'attaine heau'ns sweet and mildest calme repose, To see Gods face the summe of good desires: Which by his glorious Saints is howerly eyde, Yet sight with seeing, neuer satisfide. God as he is, sight beyond estimate, VVhich Angel, tongues are vntaught to discouer, VVhose splendor doth The heauen illustrate, Vnto which sight each sight becomes a louer: VVhom all the glorious court of heauen land, VVith praises of eternities appla d. There where no teares are to interpret griefes, Nor any sighes, heart d lours to expound, There where no treasure is surpris'd by theeues, Nor any voice that speakes with sorrowes sound. No vse of passions, no distempered thought, No spot of sinne, no deed of error wrought. The natiue home of pilgrime soules abode, Rest's habitation, ioyes true residence, Ierusalem's new Citie built by God, Form'd by the hands of his owne excellence; VVith gold pau'd streets, the wals of precious stone, VVhere all sound praise to him sits on the throne. HEAVENS Glory, Earths Va ∣nitie, and Hels Torments. Of the Glory of the bles∣ sed Saints in Heauen. T O the end there might want nothing to stirre vp our mindes to ver∣tue, after the paines which Al∣mighty God threateneth to the wicked, he doth also set before vs the reward of the good: which is, that glory and euerla∣sting life which the blessed Saints doe enjoy in heauen, whereby hee doth very mighti∣ly allure vs to the loue of the same. But what manner of thing this reward, and what this life is, there is no tongue, nei∣ther of Angels nor of nen, that is sufficient to expresse it. How∣beit, that wee may haue some kinde of auour and knowledge thereof, I intend here to re∣hearse euen word for word, what S. Augustine saith in one of his meditations, speaking of the life euerlasting (ensuing this transito ie time) and of the joyes of the blessed Saints in heauen. O life (saith he) prepa∣red by Almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a secure life, a qui t life, a beautifull life, a cleane life, a chast life, a holy life; a life that knoweth on death, a life without sadnesse, without labour, without griefe, without trouble, without cor∣ruption, without feare, without variety, without alteration; a life replenished with all beautie and dignity; where there is nei∣ther enemy that can offend, nor delight that can annoy, where loue is perfect, and no feare at all, where the day is euerlasting, and the spirit of all is one; where Almighty God is seene face to face, who is the onely meate whereupon they feed without loathsomenesse: it de∣lighteth mee to consider thy brightnesse, and thy treasures doe reioyce my longing heart. The more I consider thee, the more I am striken in loue with thee. The great desire I haue of thee, doth wonderfully delight me, and no lesse pleasure is it to me, to keepe thee in my remem∣brance. O life most happy, O kingdome truely blessed, wher∣in there is no death nor nd, neither yet succession of time, where the day continuing euer∣more without night, knoweth not any mutation; where the victorious conqueror beeing ioyned with those euerlasting quires of Angels; and hauing his head crowned with a gar∣land of glory, singeth vnto Al mighty God one of the songs of Syon. Oh happy, yea, and most happy should my soule be, if when the race of this my pil∣grimage is ended, I might bee worthy to see thy glory, thy blessednesse, thy beautie, the wals and gates of thy Citie, thy streets, thy lodgings, thy noble Citizens, and thine omnipotent King in his most glorious Ma∣iestie. The stones of thy wals are precious, thy gates are ador∣ned with bright pearles, thy streets are of very fine excel∣lent gold, in which there ne∣uer faile perpetuall praises; thy houses are paved with rich stones, wrought throughout with Zaphirs, and couered aboue with massie gold, where no vncleane thing may enter, neither doth any abide there that is defiled. Faire and beauti∣full in thy delights art thou O Ierusalem our mother, none of those things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great diuersitie betweene thy things and the things that wee doe continually see in this life. In thee is neuer seene neither darkenesse nor night, neither yet any change of time. The light that shineth in thee, com∣meth neither of lampes, nor of Sunne or Moone, nor yet of bright glittering Starres, but God that proceedeth of God, and the light that commeth of light, is he that giueth clearenes vnto thee. Euen the very King of Kings himselfe keepeth con∣tinuall residence in the middest of thee, compassed about with his officers and seruants. There doe the Angels in their orders and quires sing a most sweete & melodious harmonie. There is celebrated a perpetuall solem∣nitie and feast with every one of them that cōmeth thither, after his departure out of this pilgri∣mage. There be the orders of Prophets; there is the famous company of the Apostles; there is the inuincible army of Mar∣tyrs; there is the most reuerent assembly of confessors; there are the true and perfect religi∣ous persons; there are the holy Virgines, which haue ouer∣come both the pleasures of the world, and the frailtie of their owne nature; there are the young men and young women, more ancient in vertue than in yeares; there are the sheepe and little lambes that haue escaped from the wolues, and from the deceitfull snares of this life, and therefore doe now keepe a per∣petuall feast, each one in his place, all alike in ioy, though different in degree. There Cha∣ritie raigneth in her full per∣fection, for vnto them God is all in all, whom they behold without end, in whose loue they be all continually inflamed, whom they doe alwayes loue, and in louing doe praise, and in praising, doe loue, and all their exercises consist in praises, without wearinesse, and with∣out trauell. O happie were I, yea, and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall bee loosed out of the prison of this wret∣ched body, I might be thought worthy to heare those songs of that heauenly melodie, sung in the praise of the euerlasting King, by all the Citizens of that so noble Citie. Happie were I, and very happie, if I might obtaine a roome among the Chaplaines of that Chap∣pell, and wait for my turne also to sing my Halleluia. If I might bee neare to my King, my God, my Lord, and see him in his glory, euen as hee hath promised mee, when he said: O Father, this is my last determinate will, that all those that thou hast giuen vnto me, may me with me, aad see the glory which I had with thee before the world was cre∣ated. Hetherto are the words of S. Augustine. Now tell mee (Christian brother) what a day of glorious shine shall that bee vnto thee (if thou lead thy life in Gods feare) when after the course of this pilgrimage, thou shalt passe from death to im∣mortallity; and in that passage, when others shall beginne to feare, thou shalt beginne to re∣ioyce, and lift vp thy head, be∣cause the day of thy deliuerance is at hand. Come forth a little (saith S. Ierome vnto the Vir∣gine Eustochia ) out of the prison of this body, and when thou art before the gate of this Ta∣bernacle, set before thy eyes the reward that thou hopest to haue for thy present labours. Tell me, what a day shall that bee, when our Lord himselfe with all his Saints, shall come and meete thee in the way, say∣ing vnto thee: Arise and make hast O my beloued, my delight, and my Turtle doue, for now the Win∣ter is past, and the tempestuous waters are ceased, the flowers doe beginne to appeare in our land. Cant. 2. How great ioy shall thy soule then receiue, when it shall be at that time presented before the Throne of the most blessed Trinity, by the hands of the ho∣ly Angels, and when shall bee declared thy good workes, and what crosses, tribulations, and iniuries thou hast suffered for Gods sake. Acts 9. S. Luke wri∣teth, That when holy Tabitha, the great almes giuer, was dead, all the widdowes and poore folke came about the Apostle S. Peter, shewing vnto him the garments which shee had giuen them: wherewith the Apostle being moued, made his prayer vnto Almighty God for that so mercifull a woman, and by his prayers he raised her againe to life. Now what a gladnesse will it be to thy soule, when in the middest of those blessed spi∣rits thou shalt be placed, with remembrance of thy almes deeds, thy prayers and fastings, the innocency of thy life, thy suffering of wrongs and iniu∣ries, thy patience in afflictions, thy temperance in diet, with all other vertues and good workes that thou hast done in all thy life. O how great ioy shalt thou receiue at that time for all the good deeds that thou hast wrought; how clearely then shalt thou vnderstand the value and the excellencie of vertue. There the obedient man shall talke of victories; there vertue shall receiue her reward, and the good honoured according to their merite. Moreouer, what a pleasure will it bee vnto thee, when thou shalt see thy selfe to bee in that sure hauen, and shalt looke back vpon the course of thy nauiga∣tion which thou hast sailed here in this life: when thou shalt re∣member the tempests wherein thou hast been tossed, the straits through which thou hast passed, and the dangers of theeues and pyrats, from whom thou hast escaped. There is the place where they shall sing the song of the Prophet, which saith, Had it not beene that our Lord had beene mine helper, it could not be but my soule had gone into hell. Especially, when from thence thou shalt behold so many sins as are committed every houre in the world, so many soules as doe descend euery day into hell, and how it hath plea∣sed Almighty God, that among such a multitude of damned persons, thou shouldst be of the number of his elect, and one of those to whom he would grant such exceeding great felicity and glory. Besides all this, what a goodly sight will it bee to see those seats filled vp, and the Ci∣tie builded, and the wals of that noble Ierusalem repaired again? With what chearefull embra∣cings shall the whole court of heauen entertaine them, behol∣ding them when the come loa∣den with the spoiles of their vanquished enemies? The e shall those valiant men and wo∣men enter with triumph, which haue together with the world conquered the weakenesse of their owne fraile nature. There shall they enter which haue suf∣fered martyrdome for Christs sake, with double triumph ouer the fl sh and the world, ador∣ned with all coelestiall glory. There shall also daily enter ma∣ny young men and children, which haue vanquished the ten∣dernesse of their young yeares with discretion and vertue. Oh, how sweet and sauorie shall the fruit of vertue then be, although for a time before her roots see∣med very bitter: sweete is the cold euening after the hote sunnie day; sweete is the foun∣taine to the weary thirstie tra∣uail r; sweet is rest and sleepe to the tired seruant: but much more sweet is it to the Saints in heauen to enioy peace after warre, security after perill, eter∣nall rest after their paines, and trauels: for then are the warres at an end, then need they no more to goe all armed, both on the right side and on the left. The children of Israel went forth armed towards the land of Promise, but after that the land was conquered, they laid downe their speares, and cast a∣way their armour, and forget∣ting all feare aud turmoile of warre, each one vnder the shad∣dow of his pavillion & harbour enioyed the fruit of their sweet peace. Now may the watching Prophet come downe from his standing, that did watch and fix his feete vpon the place of the Sentinell: There is no more feare of inuasion by the terrible armies of the bloody enemies: there is no place for the subtill crafts of the lurking viper: there cannot ariue the deadly sight of the venomous Baseliske, nor yet shall the hissing of the anci∣ent Serpent be heard there; but onely the soft breathing ayre of the holy Ghost, wherein is be∣holden the glory of Almighty God. This is the region of all peace, the place of security, situ∣ated aboue all the Elements, whether the cloudes and stor∣mie winds of the darke ayre cannot come. O what glorious things haue beene spoken of thee, O Citie of God. Blessed are they (saith holy Tobias ) that loue thee, and enioy thy peace. O my soule praise our Lord, for he hath deliuered Ierusalem his Citie from all her troubles. Happy shall I be, if the remnant of my posterity might come to see the clearenesse of Ierusalem: her gates shall be wrought with Zaphirs and Emeraulds, and all the circuit of her wals shall bee built with precious stones, her streets shall bee paued with white and polished marble, and in all parts of her territories shal bee sung Halleluia. O ioyfull countrey! O sweete glory! O blessed companie! who shall be those so fortunate and happy that are elected for thee? It see∣meth a presumption to desire thee, and yet I will not liue without the desire of thee. O ye sonnes of Adam, a race of m n, miserably blinded and de∣ceiued. O ye scattered sheepe, wandring out of your right way, if this be your sheep-coat, whether goe you backeward? What meane you? Why suf∣fer you such an excellent bene∣fit to be wilfully lost for not ta∣king so little paines? What wise man would not desire, that all labour & paine of the world were imposed vnto him? that all sorrowes, afflictions, and di∣seases were euen poured vpon him as thicke as haile; that persecutions, tribulations, and griefes, with one to molest him, another to disquiet him, yea, that all creatures in the world did conspire against him, being scorned and made a laughing stocke of all men; and that his whole life were conuerted into weepings and lamentations; so that in the next life hee might finde repose in the heauenly harbor of eternall consolation, and bee thought meet to haue a place among that blessed peo∣ple, which are adorned and beautified with such inestima∣ble glory. And thou, O foo∣lish louer of this miserable world, go thy way, seek as long as thou wilt for honors & pro∣motions, build sumptuons hou∣ses & pallaces, purchase lands & possessions, inlarge thy territo∣ries & dominions, yeā, cōmand if thou wilt the whole world, yet shalt thou neuer bee so great as the least of all the seruants of Almighty God, who shall re∣ceiue that treasure which this world cannot giue, and shall en∣ioy that felicity, which shall endure for euermore, when thou with thy pompe and ri∣ches, shall beare the rich glut∣ton company, whose buriall is in the deepe vault of hell: but the deuout spirituall man shall bee carried by the holy Angels with poore Lazarus into Abra∣hams bosome, a place of perpe∣tuall rest, ioy, sollace, and eter∣nall happinesse. Of the benefits which our Lord promiseth to giue in this present life, to such as liue a iust and godly life. P Eradventure thou wilt now say, that all these things before rehear∣sed, be rewards & punishments onely for the life to come: and that thou desirest to see some∣thing in this present life, because our minds are wont to be mo∣ued very much with the sight of things present. To satisfie thee herein, I will also explaine vnto thee what may answere thy desire. For although our Lord do reserue the best wine, and the delicate dishes of most delight, vntill the end of the banket, yet he suffereth not his friends to bee vtterly destitute of meate and drinke in this tedi∣ous voyage: for hee knoweth very well, that they could not otherwise hold out in their iourney. And therefore when he said vnto Abraham, Feare not Abraham, for I am thy de∣fender, and thy reward shall be exceeding great: By these words he promised two things, the one for the time present, that was, to bee his safegard and defence in all such things as may happen in this life; and the other for the time to come, and that is, the reward of glory which is reserued for the next life. But how great the first pro∣mise is, and how many kinds of benefits and fauours are there∣in included, no man is able to vnderstand, but onely he, that hath with great diligence read the holy Scriptures, wherein no one thing is more often repea∣ted and set forth, than the great∣nesse of the fauours, benefits, and priuiledges, which Almigh∣ty God promiseth vnto his friends in this life. Hearken what Salomon saith in the third chapter of his Prouerbs, as touching this matter. Blessed is that man that findeth wisdome, for it is better to haue it, than all the treasures of Siluer and Gold, be they neuer so excellent and pre∣cious: and it is more worth than all the riches of the world, and whatsoeuer mans heart is able to desire, is not comparable vnto it. The length of daies are at her right hand, and riches and glo∣rie at her left. Her waies be plea∣sant, and all her passages he quiet; she is a tree of life to all those that haue obtained her; and hee that shall haue her in continuall pos∣session, shall be blessed. Keepe therefore (O my sonne) the lawes of Almightie God, and his coun∣sell, for they shall he as life to thy so le, and sweetnesse to thy taste hen sha thou walke safely in sies, and thy eet shall not finde any stumbling blockes. If thou sleep, thou shalt haue no cause to feare: and if thou take thy rest, thy sleepe shall be quiet. This is the sweetnesse and quietnesse of the way of the godly, but the wayes of the wicked are farre different, as the holy Scrip∣ture doth declare vnto vs. The paths and wayes of the wicked (saith Ecclesiasticus ) are full of brambles, and at the end of their iourney are prepared for them, hell, darknesse, and pains. Doest thou thinke it then a good exchange, to forsake the wayes of Almighty God, for the waies of the world, sith there is so great difference betweene the one and the other, not one∣ly in the end of the way, but also in all the steps of the same? What madnesse can be greater, than to choose one torment, to gaine another by; rather than with one rest to gaine another rest? And that thou maist more clearely perceiue the excellen∣cy of this rest, and what a num∣ber of benefits are presently in∣cident thereunto, I beseech thee harken attentiuely euen what Almighty God himselfe hath promised by his Prophet Esay, to the obseruers of his law, in a manner with these words, as diuers interpreters doe ex∣pound them. When thou shalt doe (saith hee) such and such things, which I haue comman∣ded thee to doe, there shall forthwith appeare vnto thee the dawning of the cleare day (that is, the sonne of iustice) which shall driue away all the darkenesse of thy errours and miseries, and then shalt thou begin to enioy true and perfit saluation. Now these are the benefits which Almighty God hath promised to his seruants. And albeit some of them be for the time to come, yet are some of them to be presently receiued in this life: as, that new light and shining from heauen; that safety and abundance of all good things; that assured confidence and trust in the al∣mighty God; that diuine assi∣stance in all our Prayers and Pe∣titions made vnto him; that peace and tranquility of consci∣ence; that protection and pro∣uidence of Almighty God. All these are the gracious gifts and fauours which Almighty God hath promised to his seruants in this life. They all are the works of his mercy, effects of his grace, testimonies of his loue, and blessings, which he of his father∣ly prouidence extendeth. To be short, all these benefits doe the godly inioy both in this present life, and in the life to come: and of all these are the vngodly depriued, both in the one life, and in the other. Whereby thou maist easily per∣ceiue, what difference there is betweene the one sort and the other, seeing the one is so rich in graces, and the other so poore and needy: For if thou ponder well Gods promised blessings, and consider the state and condition of the good and the wicked, thou shalt find, that the one sort is highly in the fa∣uour of Almighty God, and the other deepely in his dis∣pleasure: the one be his friends, and the other his enemies: the one be in light, and the other in darkenesse: the one doe enioy the company of An∣gels, and the other the fil∣thy pleasures and delights of Swine: the one are truely free, and Lords ouer them∣selues, and the other are be∣come bondslaues vnto Sathan, and vnto their owne lusts and appetites. The one are ioy∣full with the witnesse of a good conscience, and the other (ex∣cept they bee vtterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worme of conscience, euer∣more gnawing on them: the one in tribulation, stand sted∣fastly in their proper place; and the other, like light chaffe, are carried vp and downe with e∣uery blast of winde: the one stand secure and firme with the anker of hope, and the other are vnstable, & evermore yeel∣ding vnto the assaults of for∣tune: the prayers of the one are acceptable & liking vnto God, and the praiers of the other are abhorred and accursed: the death of the one is quiet, peace∣able, and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the o∣ther, is vnquiet, painefull, and troubled with a thousand frights and terrours: To con∣clude, the one liue like children vnder the protection and de∣fence of Almighty God, and sleepe sweetly vnder the shad∣dow of his pastorall proui∣dence; and the other being ex∣cluded from this kinde of pro∣uidence, wander abroad as strai∣ed sheepe, without their sheep∣heard and Master, lying wide open to all the perils, dangers, and assaults of the world. See∣ing then, that a vertuous life is accompanied with all these benefits, what is the cause that should withdraw thee, and perswade thee not to embrace such a precious trea∣sure? what art thou able to al∣ledge for excuse of thy great negligence? To say that this is not true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as Gods word doth a ouch the certaintie hereof. To say that these are but small benefits, thou canst not, for so much as they doe exceede all that mans heart can desire. To say that thou art an enemy vn∣to thy selfe, and that thou doest not desire these benefits, can∣not be, considering that a man is euen naturally a friend to himselfe, & the will of man hath euer an eye to his owne benefit, which is the very obiect or mark that his desire shooteth at. To say that thou hast no vnderstan∣ding, nor taste of these benefits, it wil not serue to discharge thine offence, for somuch as thou hast the faith and beleefe there∣of, though thou hast not the taste, for the taste is lost through sinne, but not the faith: and the faith is a witnesse more certaine, moresecure, and better to be tru∣sted, than all other experiences and witnesses in the world. Why doest thou not then dis∣credit all other witnesses with this one assured testimony? Why doest thou not rather giue credit vnto faith, than to thine owne opinion and iudgement? O that thou woul∣dest make a resolute determi∣nation, to submit thy selfe into the hands of Almighty God, and to put thy whole trust assu∣redly in him. How soone shouldest thou then see all these Prophesies fulfilled in thee: then shouldest thou see the ex∣cellency of these diuine trea∣sures: then shouldest thou see how starke blinde the louers of this world are, that seeke not after this high treasure: then shouldest thou see vpon what good ground our Sauiour inui∣teth vs to this kinde of life, say∣ing; Come vnto me all yee that trauell, and are loaden, and I will refresh you; take my yoake vpon you, and you shall finde rest for your soules: for my yoake is sweet, and my burden is light. Almigh∣tie God is no deceiuer, nor false promiser, neither yet is he a great boaster of such things as he promiseth. Why dost thou then shrinke backe? why dost thou refuse peace and true qui∣etnesse? why dost thou refuse the gentle offers and sweet cal∣lings of thy Pastor? how darest thou despise and banish away vertue from thee, which hath such prerogatiues and priui∣ledges as these be: and withall, confirmed and signed euen with the hand of Almighty God? The Queene of Saba heard far lesse things than these of Salomon, and yet she trauelled from the vttermost parts of the world, to try the truth of those things that she had heard. And why doest not thou then (hearing such notable, yea, and so cer∣taine news of vertue) aduenture to take a little paines to try the truth and sequell thereof? O deare Christian brother, put thy trust in Almighty God and in his word, and commit thy selfe most boldly without all feare into his armes, and vnloose from thy hands those trifling knots that haue hitherto decei∣ued thee, and thou shalt finde, that the merits of vertue doe farre excell her fame: and that all which is spoken in praise of her, is nothing in comparison of that which she is indeede. That a man ought not to deferre his Repentance and Con∣uersion vnto God, from day to day; considering he hath so many debts to discharge, by reason of the offences committed in his sinfull life al∣ready past. N Ow then, if on the one side there be so many and so great respects, that doe binde vs to change our sinfull life; and on the otherside, we haue not any sufficient ex∣cuse why we should not make this exchange. How long wilt thou tarry, vntill thou fully re∣solue to doe it? Turne thine eyes a little, and looke backe vp∣on thy life past, and consider, that at this present (of what age soeuer thou be) it is high time, or rather, the time well nigh past to begin to discharge some part of thy old debts. Consider, that thou which art a Christian regenerated in the water of ho∣ly Baptisme, which doest ac∣knowledge Almighty God for thy father, and the Catholike Church for thy mother, whom she hath nourished with the milke of the Gospel, to wit, with the doctrine of the Apostles and Euangelists: consider (I say) that all this notwithstan∣ding, thou hast liued euen as loosely & dissolutely, as if thou hadst beene a meere Infidell, that had neuer any knowledge of Almighty God. And if thou doe denie this, then tell mee what kinde of sin is there which thou hast not committed? What tree is there forbidden that thou hast not beholden with thine eyes? What greene meddow is there, in which thou hast not (at the least in desire) feasted thy letcherous lust? what thing hath beene set be∣fore thine eyes, that thou hast not wantonly desired? What appetite hast thou left vnexecu∣ted, notwithstanding that thou didst beleeue in Almighty God, and that thou wert a Christian? what wouldest thou haue done more, if thou hadst not had any faith at all? If thou hadst not looked for any other life? If thou hadst not feared the d eadfull day of iudgement? What hath all thy former life e ne, but a web of sinnes, a sinke of vices, a way full of brambles and thornes, and a f o∣ward disobedience of God? with whom hast thou hitherto liued, but onely with thine appetite, with thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this transitory world? These haue beene thy gods, these haue beene thine idols, whom thou hast serued, and whose lawes thou hast diligently obeyed Make thine account with the Almighty God, with his lawes: and with his obedience, and perad nture thou shalt finde, that thou hast esteemed him no more, than if he had beene a go of wood, o stone. For it is certaine, that there be many Christians, which beleeuing that there is a God, are induced to sinne with such facilitie, as though they beleeued, that there were no God at all: and doe offend no whit the lesse, though they beleeue that there is a God, then they would doe, if they beleeued there were none at all. What greater iniu∣rie, what greater despight can bee done, than so to con∣temne his diuine maiestie? Finally, thou beleeuing all such things as Christs Church doth b leeue, hast notwithstan∣ding so led thy life, as if thou wert perswaded, that the be∣leefe of Christians were the greatest fables or lies in the world. And if the multitude of thy sinnes past, and the faculty thou hast vsed in committing of them, doe not make thee afraid, why doest thou not feare at the least the Majesty and omnipo∣tencie of hi , against whom thou hast sinned? Lift vp thine eyes, and consider the infinit greatnesse and omnipotencie of the Lord, whom the powers of heauen no adore, before whose Maiesty the whole compasse of the wide world lyeth pro∣strate; in whose presence, all things created, are no more than chaffe carried away with the winde. Consider also with thy s lfe how vnseemely it is, that such a vile worme as thou art, should haue audacity so ma∣ny times to offend and prouoke the wrath of so great a maiesty. Consider the wonderfull and most ter ible seue ity f his iu∣stice and what horrible punish∣ments he hath vsed from time to time in the world against sinne; and that not onely vpon particular persons, but also vp∣on Cities, Nations, Kingdomes and Prouinces, yea, vpon the v∣niuersall World: And not one∣ly in earth, but also in heauen; and not onely vpon strangers sinners, but euen vpon his owne most innocent sonne, our sweet Sauiour Iesus Christ, when he tooke vpon him to sa∣tisfie for the debt that we owed. And if this seuerity was vsed vpon greene and innocent wood, and that for the sinnes of others; what then will he doe vpon dry and withered wood, and against those that are loden with their owne sinnes? Now, what thing can bee thought more vnreasonable, then that such a fraile wretch as thou art, should be so saucie and mala∣pert, as to mocke with so migh∣tie a Lord, whose hand is so heauie, that in case hee should strike but one stroke vpon thee, hee would at one blow driue thee downe headlong into the deepe bottomelesse pit of hell, without remedy. Consider like∣wise the great patience of this our mercifull Lord, who hath expected thy repentance so long, euen from the time that thou didst first offend him: and thinke, that if after so long pa∣tience and tarrying for thee, thou shalt still continue thy leaud and sinfull life, abusing thus his mercy, and proucking him to further indignation and wrath, hee will then bend his bowe and shake his sword, and raine downe vpon thee euen sharpe arrowes of euerlasting wrath and death. Consider also the profoundnesse of his deepe iudgments, wherof we read, and see daily so great wonders. We see how Salomon himselfe, after his so great wisdome, and after those three thousand parables and most profound mysteries vttered by him, was forsaken by Almighty God, and suffered to fall d wn and adore Ido's. We see how one of those seuen first Deacons of the Primitiue Church, which were full of the holy Ghost, became not onely an hereticke, but also an arch hereticke and a father of here∣sies. We see daily many starres fall downe from heauen vnto earth, with miserable fals, and to wallow themselues in the durt, and to eat the meat of swine, which sate before at Gods owne table, and were fed with the very bread of Angels. If then the iust and righteous for some secret pride or negli∣gence, or else for some ingrati∣tude of theirs) be thus iustly for∣saken of Almighty God, after they haue bestowed so many yeares in his seruice. What maiest thou looke for, that hast done in a manner nothing else in all thy life time, but onely heaped sinnes vpon sinnes, and hast thereby offended almigh∣ty God most grieuously? Now, if thou hast liued after this sort, were it not reason that thou shouldst now at the length giue ouer, and cease heaping sinne vpon sinne, and debt vp∣on debt, and begin to pacifie the wrath of Almighty God, and to disburden thy sinfull soule? Were it not meet, that that time which thou hast hi∣therto giuen to the world, to thy flesh, and to the Diuell, should suffice? and that thou shouldest bestow some little time of that which remaineth, to serue him, who hath giuen thee all that thou hast? Were it not a point of wisedome, after so long time, and so many great iniuries, to feare the most ter∣rible iustice of Almighty God, who the more patiently he suf∣fereth sinners, the more hee doth afterwards punish them with seueritie & iustice? Were it not meet for thee to eare thy long continuance so many yeares in sinne, and in the is∣pleasure of Almighty God, pro∣curing there by against thee such a mighty aduersary as he is, and prouoking him of a mercifull louing father to become thy se∣uere terrible iudge and enemy? Were ir not meet to feare, least that the force of euill custome may in continuance of time be turned into nature; and that thy long vicious vsuall manner of committing sinne, may make of a vice, a necessity, or little lesse? Why art thou not afraid, least by little and little thou maiest cast thy selfe downe head long into the deep pit of a reprobate sence, whereinto after that a man is once falne, hee neuer maketh account of any sinne, be it neuer so great. The Patriarke Iacob said vnto Laban his father in law: These foureteene yeares haue I serued thee, and looking to thine af∣faires, now it is time that I should looke to mine owne, and begin to attend vnto the af∣faires of mine owne houshold. Wherefore if thou hast likewise bestowed so many yeares in the seruice of this world, and of this fraile transitory life, were it not good reason, that thou shoul∣dest now begin to make some prouision for the saluation of thy soule, and for the euerla∣sting life to come? There is nothing more short, nor more transitory then the life of man; and therefore prouiding so carefully as thou doest for all such things as be necessarie for this life, which is so short, why doest thou not prouide like∣wise somewhat for the life that is to come? which life shall endure for euer and euer. A Sigh. HEnce lazie sleepe, tbou sonne of sullen night, That with soft-breathing Spels keeps sorrowes vnder Thy charmes; cheares vp the spirits with delight, And laps the Sences in Lethaean stumber; Packe and e gone: for my sad soule knowes well, Care best accordeth with a gloomie Cell. And what more darke then my sin-clouded Soule? Where yet the Sunne of Sapience neuer shone; But still in Errors vgly c ue did roule, Where nought keepes concord but discordant mone: Leaue me I say, and giue me leaue to tell, That to my Soule, my selfeha's not done well. Good man! (if good there liues one) Thou that art So farre thrust from the worlds imperiouseyes; Helpe me to act this penitentiall part: I meane, No coyner of new Niceties, Nor wodden Worshipper: Giue me him than That's a God-louing, and good-liuing man, To be my partner in this Tragedie; Whose scenes run bleeding through the wounded Acts, Heart-strucke by Sinne and Satans fallacie, And poyson'd by my selfe-committed facts: Send me thy prayers, if not thy presence found, To stop the Ore-face of this streaming wound. Steere me (sweet Sauiour) while I safe haue past The stormie Euroclydons of Despaire, Till happily I haue arriu'd at last, To touch at Thee, my Soules sole-sauing stayre: Tow vp my sin-frought Soule, sunke downe below, And long lien weltring midst the waues of wo. New rig me vp, lest wallowing I orewhelme; Thy Mercy be my Main-mast; And for Sayles My Sighs; thy Truth, my tackling; Faith, my Helme: My ballast, Loue; Hope, Anchor that ne're failes: Then in Heau'ns hauen calme Peace me arriue, Where once enharbor'd, I shall richly thrine. Woes me! how long ha's Pride besotted me? Proposing to im Reason my good parts, My nimble Wit, my quicke procliuitie To Apprehension; and in high desarts How many stood beneath me: I (vaine foole) Thus fob'd by Satans steights, ore-slipt my Soule: Who in darke Error downe embodied lies, Blacke as the Star-lesse Night; and hideously Impuritie with rustie wings crosse flies Betwixt the Sunne of Righteousnesse and me; Whil'st (Bat-like) beats my Soule her leather sayles Gainst the soft Ayre; and rising, fals and failes. Must I for each vnsyllabled close Thought Render account? O wit fi'lde Conference! Cal'd in is thy protection then, deare bought: How was my brow o'rehatcht with Impudence? To let whole worlds of words my cheekes vp-swell, The least of whom would ding me downe to Hell. O wretched Impes then of mans impious race! Who'l breath out Blasphemies to make a Iest; And call wit flashing the sole punctuall grace Of genuine knowledge: But amongst the rest, Iudge in what case are those wit-hucksters in, That hourely practise this soule sinking sinne? O may my tongue be euer riuetted Fast to my roofe, but when it speakes Gods praise: May not one vocall sound by breath be fed, But when it carols out celestiall Layes; Let not one tone through my tongues hatches flye, But what beares with't heau'ns glories harmonie. Helpe (Lord of power) my feeble-ioynted praiers To clamber th'azure Mountaines throwne aboue me; And keepe a seat for me there mongst th se haires, Apportion'd out to such as truely loue thee: Admit them in thine eares a resting roome, Vntill to thee and them, my soule shall come. Meane while, moyst ey'd Repentance here below Shall, Inmate wise be Tenant to my minde: For Prayers, without true Penitence, doe show, "Like meats vnseason'd, or like Bils vnsign'd; "Or corne on tops of Cottages that growes, "Which (vselesse) no man either reapes or sowes. O how my Soule's surpriz'd with shallow feares? When, thinking to leane on Lifes broken staffe; And counting to mine age large summes of yeares, I heare the sweet and sacred Psalmograph, Compare Life to a Flowre, a Puffe, a Span; Who's Monarch now, next minute's not a Man. Must I needs dye? why surfet on Pleasure? Must Ineeds dye? why swim I in Delight? Must I needs dye? why squint I after Treasure? Must I needs dye? why liue I not aright? Must I needs dye? why liue I then in sin? Thrice better for me I had neuer bin. Fountaine of breathing Dust? such grace me giue, That I in life, prepare in dust to lye; Let me be dying still whiles I doe liue; That I may blisfull liue, when I shall dye: For in Christs Schoole this Paradox learne I; Who dies before he dies, shall neuer die. If I must die, then after must begin The life of Ioy or Torment, without end; The life of Torment purchas'd is by sinne; The life of Ioy, by life that learnes t'amend: Why should I then prophane, sweare, curse, lust, lie, If I but thinke on this; That I must die? Why should I quaffe to more then Nature can? Sith more drinke I gaine more losse is mine: For may I not be tearm'd a bestiall man, To drowne my Reason in a cup of wine? Yea tenfold worse: Thus monster made at least: God made me Man, I make my selfe a Beast. How swelt I with hard trauell through the Dale That leads to Prophanations irkesome cell? But freeze, by softly pacing vp the skale, Where burning zeale, and her bright sisters dwell: Thus sweat I in the shadow, shake i'th shine, And by free choice, from good to ill decline. Sweet Sauiour cleanse my leprous loath some soule In that depurpled Fount, which forth thy side Gurgling, did twixt two Lilly-mountaines roule, To rinse Mans tainted Race, Sin▪ soylifide: Wash it more white then the triumphant Swan, That rides o'th siluer brest of Eridan. Suffer my prayers harmony to rise Into thine eares, while th' Angels beare a part: Accept my Sig s, as smelling Sacrifice, Sent from the Altar of my bleeding heart; Vpto thy nostrils, sweet as th'Oyle of Aaron, Or th'odoriferous Rose of flowrie Sharon. The Hart ne're long'd more for the purling brookes; Nor did the lust full Goate with more pursuit, After the blossom'd Tritifolie looke, Then do's my panting Soule, t'enioy the fruit Of thy Life-water; which if I attaine To taste of once, I ne're shall thirst againe, Euen as the chapped ground in Summers heat, Cals to the clouds, and gapes at euery showre: Whose thirstie Casma's greedily intreat, As tho they would th' whole house of heau'n deuour; So do's my riuen Soule, beparcht with sin, Yawne wide, to let mayst drops of Mercie in. Earths vanitie. V Anitie of vanities, and all is but vanitie, saith the wisest Preacher that euer wrote: One generation passeth, and another commeth, and all is but vexation of spirit. Which diuine theorem, that we may the better perceiue, let vs set our selues to the serious meditation of it: for the more we search, the more we shall see all things to be vanity, nothing constant, nothing for our eter∣nall good, but our soules salua∣tion. Mans life on arth doth no sooner begin, but his ap∣proacheth, his death hasteneth. Some come vpon the stage of this world but to haue a brea∣thing, and are presently gone: others stay a while longer, it may be a day, perhaps a weeke, perhaps a month, peraduenture a yeare, or it may be some few yeares: but alas! the lon∣ger they stay, the greater their griefe, care, feare, and anxietie of minde. Euen in the infancie of age man is oft times left as M ses sometime was, in the flouds of misery; but as age in∣creaseth, sorrow increaseth, be∣cause sinne increaseth: when youth runnes most at randome, and thinketh it selfe most safe, it is then hemm'd in with grea∣test dangers; then the rash∣foole-hardy minde of man hur∣rieth him headlong to hell, ex∣cept the irresistible power of Gods preuenting grace doth speedily stay him; then his wits are euen intoxicated with a frenzie of iniquity, and wholly bent vpon riotousnesse, rash∣nesse, luxury, iollitie, superflui∣ty and excesse in carnall plea∣sures. Hee then deuoteth his time, and addicteth himselfe to all manner of euill, drinking, dancing, reuelling, swaggering, swearing, whoring, gaming, quarelling, fighting; and in the meane while neuer thinkes on heauen, nor feareth hell. His head is frought with vanities, his heart with fallacies, where∣by his soule is brought into a labyrinth of inextricable mise∣ries. So great is the temerity of his vnaduised minde, that no consideration of Gods iudge∣ments, either past, or present, or to come, can set a stop to his wickednesse. His youthful∣nesse damps at no bogges, quag∣mires, hils, or mountaines; but wingeth him ouer all impedi∣ments, mounts him ouer all mo∣tiues that might way-lay his sinnes. He sticks not to offend his maker, to recrucifie his re∣deemer, to resist (shall I say his sanctifier, no, but) the Spirit whom God hath giuen to be his sanctifier: and if hee so carry himselfe toward th se, no mer∣uaile that he derideth his Tutor, scornes the Minister (like the little children that mock'd Eli∣sha ) oppresseth his poore bro∣ther (as Pharaoh did the Israe∣lites: ) spareth not Infants (no more then Herod did) regardeth not parents (no more then Ho∣phin and Phinius did.) Let the mother direct him, the father correct him, his ancients in∣struct him, alas! all is in vaine: youth makes men head-strong, selfe-conceited, and proud, so that they swell with an ouer∣weening opinion of their owne worth; they thinke themselues the onely wits of the time, the onely men of the world, more fit to teach others then to learn themselues, more able to giue then to take aduice. If they goe on a while in their lewd cour∣ses without the restraining and renewing Grace of God, they get a habit of euill, are hardned through the custome of sinne, none may resist them, none compare with them, no law of God or man can restraine them; They take counsel together against Psa. 2. 2, 3 the Lord, and against his annoin∣ted, saying, Let vs breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from vs. Whereupon of∣tentimes (the ripenesse of sinne being hastened by outragious∣nesse of sinning) God suddenly N quities vitae non sinit esse senew. cuts them off, in their intempe∣rancy, luxury quarrels, and dis∣orders; which shewes their vainnesse to be meere vanity. Suppose they grow as great as Tamberlaine, yet a Gunne, Pike Arrow; nay, a Fly, Flea, or Gnat; a dram, nay, a drop of poyson, proues them to be vaine men: one of these silly creatures may send him presently to his crea∣tour to receiue his final doome. Yet alas! what doe these most minde? The bum-basted silken Gallants of our time, that come forth like a May morning, deck∣ed with all the glory of Art; the Epicurean Cormerants, the gus∣ling and tipling tosse-pots, the dainty painting Dames, the de∣licate mincing Ladies, the sweet-singing Syrens, the dan∣cing Damsels, the finicall youths, the couzening Shop∣keeper, the crafty Crafts-man: I say, what doe all these, but set their minds vpon vanitie? vp∣on glory, honour, pride, drosse, and such like trash, which weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary proue lighter then vanity? Doe we not sometime see more spent vpon one suite in Law then would keepe a poore Country towne with the inha∣bitants for a whole yeare? See wee not more spent vpon one suite of apparell, for one proud carkasse, then would build a Free-schoole? So that the cloathes on many a Gallants backe exceeds his Rent-day. See we not more spent vpon a Feast to satisfie the curiosity of a few, then would satisfie the necessity of a hundred poore wretches almost famished to death? See wee not more drunke in a Tauerne at one it∣ting by a small company, then would serue a troope of sturdy Souldiers in the field? Many goe daily to the Tauern, where they sticke not to spend their twelue pence, who would grudge to giue one penny, nay, one farthing to a hungry beg∣ger. Againe, is there not now more spent vpon a Ladies fea∣ther, then would pay a meane mans tythes? Is there not more spent vpon one paire of sleeues then would cloath sixe bodies? and more spent at a Whitsun∣ale, then would keepe the poore of the Parish for a yeare? Haue wee not amongst our Gentry, some of the female sexe, who will spend more vpon a Glasse and a pot of complexion, then they will giue a whole yeare at their gate? they must be men∣ders of that which God makes, makers of that which God marres, turning themselues (like the Camelion) into all shapes, though neuer so grisly and vg∣ly; and being neuer well till they be most ill, neuer (as they conceit) in fashion, till indeede they be out of all fashion. If this be not a vanity of vanities, who can tell what is vanity? Euery man is an eye-witnesse of this vanity, the more is the pittie that it should be so common: your Lady, the Merchants wife, the trades mans wife, nay, all of all sorts are a degree aboue their estate. Your Gallant is no man, vnlesse his haire be of the womans fashion, dangling and wauing ouer his shoulders; your woman no body, except (contrary to the modesty of her sexe) shee be halfe (at least) of the mans fashion: shee jets, she cuts, she rides, shee sweares, she games, shee smoakes, shee drinkes, and what not that is e∣uill? She is in the vniuersall portraiture of her behauiour, as well as in her accoutrements, more then halfe a man; the man on the other side, no lesse wo∣manish. Wee may well admire and exclaime with the Poet, O tempora! O mores! O the times! O the manners of these times! O quantum est in rebus mane! O how great a nothing is there in all things! What a vanity of va∣nity hath ouerspread the age we liue in? Were our forefathers now aliue to be spectators of this vanity, it would strike them into amazement. In their dayes the Pike, the Speare, the Sword, the Bowe, the Arrow, Musket and Calieuer, with the warlike Horse, were the obiect of exer∣cise and recreation: Now the Pot, the Pipe, Dice and Cards, and such like vanities, indeede worse then the quintescence of the extreamest vanity. We are now all for ease, wee must lye soft, fare deliciously, goe sump∣tuously, drinke Wine in bowles, carowse healths, till health be quite drunke away; nay, wee must kneele to our drinke, when we will not kneele to him that gaue vs our drinke▪ we doe ho∣mage to that which takes away the vse of our legges, nay, of our braines, our hearts, wits, sence, eason, when we refuse homage to him that gaue vs all these. O vaine man that dost thus forget thy God▪ and abuse thy selfe! why dost thou thus suffer thy selfe to be swallowed vp in the gulfe of vanity, which hath no bottome but misery? Why sufferest thou the Diuell thus to take thee on the hip, that he may cast thee downe into the Abisse of hell? Art thou so bewitched with that which will haue an end, a sudden end, a wretched end? Thy hony will proue Gall in the end, and thy Wine Vinegar. In these faire roses of vanity the Diuell hides his pins, that shall pricke thee, when thou lookest to be re∣freshed with their sweet smels. These vanities wee purchase at no easie rate; it is with the pro∣curement of punishment, anrd losse of happinesse: As the bi d that accepts of the Fowlers meat buyes it full dearely, with the losse of her owne life: so when we accept these vanities from the Diuell, it is with the losse of better things, in price a∣boue the whole world. In these contracts with Satan, we make Esau's pe niworth, sell heauen for a messe of pottage; Claucus exchange, Gold for Copper. Now thou art pompering thy corruptible flesh; but let pale death step in, and clap thee on the shoulder, wher's thy mirth, wher's thy felicity? thy volup∣tuous vanity doth presently ex∣pire. There is a banquet set be∣fore thee, in which are all varie∣ties of delicacies, but alas! eue∣ry one poysoned: darest thou touch or taste any one of them? by sin thou poysonest all those outward blessings of God, which in themselues are wholesome and good: and wilt thou ingur∣gitate that which is poyson to thy soule? Tell me when all is done, two or three hundred yeares hence, what thou wilt be the better for all thy dainties, more then the poore man that neuer tasted them? Nay, how much better in the day of triall, and at the houre of death? Then all thy pride, pompe, and plea∣sure shall be turned into squa∣led deformity, & irrecouerable calamity; then vanity sh wes it selfe in the proper colours, then death, and knell, and hell doe all conspire to aggrauate thy sor∣row; yea, then hell begins to come to thee before thou come to it; thy eyes sleepe not, thy senses rest not, thy perplexed heart burnes within thee, thy wounded conscience bleeds within thee; thou seest nothing but terror, thou feelest nothing but horror; thou thinkest thy self to be haunted with sprights, ghosts, and hellish furies, sting∣ing thee with Adders, pursuing thee with Torches and fire∣brand. That saying of the Hea∣then man is then, if no before, verified: Suae quemque exagitant suriae; euery man is tormented with his owne fury, which is his conscience. Besides thy wife, children, or other friends ( o the exasperating of thy griefe) doe stand about thee weeping, as loath to part from thee: whereas thy sinnes follow thee, and will follow thee, doe what thou canst; hell gapes before thee with a wide mouth as rea∣dy to deuoure thee, destruction on both sides attends thee: backe thou canst not goe, for a dead corps followes thee so neere that thou canst not part from it, it is tied vnto thee with an indissolueable knot; besides, conscience followes thee, and cries out against thee, and will not leaue thee; continually it presents thee with the dreadfull spectacle of thy doleful and wo∣full sinnes. If this were now seriously considered, how would it make thy heart to ake with grieuing, thy eyes to swell with weeping, thy hands to be al∣wayes lifted vp, thy knees euer bended? How wouldest thou striue to subdue thy flesh to the spirit, sensuality to reason, reason to faith, and faith to the seruice of God? But thou dost not now consider this, that thy sinne is so fast linkt to thy conscience, that at the last (albeit not before) it will pull and hale thee, and rack and prick thy conscience, which will accuse, conuict, & condemn thee: all thy vanities, all thy iniquities, will then pursue thee like so many furious ghosts. Then ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth shalt thou be iudged, thou euill seruant: thy owne mouth shall confesse that thou hast followed nothing but va∣nity: What a vanity was it for me to make earth my heauen, and so to admire & euen adore this earth, that it is a hell to for∣sake it? What a wofull bargain haue I made to sell my soule for vanity? I was borne in vanity, I haue liued in vanity, and it is my feare that I shall dye in va∣nity. Oh how griefe followeth griefe? my heart is terrified, my thoughts hurried, my consci∣ence tortured, I fry in anguish I freeze in paine, I stand agast and know not which way to turne me▪ my friends must for∣sake me, my oes will deride me, my earthly ioyes and comforts (I should call them vanities) haue betraid me. Indeede my friends may goe with me to the graue, but there they must leaue me; my riches, pleasures, and such like vanities vanish before; but my sinnes and conscience will neuer leaue me; the diuell will still pursue me: hee that tempts me now to sinne, will then torment me for sinning, vntill I cry out with Cain, My punishment is greater then I can beare. A horse is but a vaine thing to saue a man, said the sweet singer of Israel: so say I, all earthly things are too vaine to saue a man, to make him blessed, I appeale to the conscience of euery man, if thou hast tried the pleasures of vanity (and who hath not?) whether thou maist not take vp the words of Saint Rom. 6. 12. Paul, What fruit haue I of those things, whereof I am now asha∣med? Shame, and griefe, and guilt, and punishment are the fruit of vanity: enough I thinke to rend our hearts from affect∣ing of it. Thinke vpon this thou that art in the trace of vanity, that thou maist make a retreat; loose no more time herein (for thou hast already lost too much) redeeme the time, because the dayes are euill; and why are they euill, but because they are vaine? Whatsoeuer is without the circumference of euill, is about the sphere of vanity. Re∣solue therefore with thy selfe that all things earthly, worldly, carnall, sinfull, are vaine: the fashion of this world passeth away, faith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 3. The fashion, , a word very emphaticall: it signifies first an accidentall and externall figure without substance; se∣condly, the habit, vesture or cloathing of a thing. Saint Paul vseth this word to debase the world, by intimating vnto vs, that the world is cloathed with a vesture, that is, wearing and wasting, the fashion of it lasteth but for a time, it is ready euery houre to put on a new fashion: againe, by intimating vnto vs, that the world is without any substantiall forme, like vnto shewes and shadowes, that vanish in the representation. Saint Luke cals all Agrippa's pompe but a fancie: Dauid cals the yeares of a man but a tale, Psal. 90. 9. We spend our yeares as a tale that is told. As a tale, nay, as a thought (for so much the originall word doth import) and how many thoughts may a man haue in an houre? Nothing is more chang∣able then a vesture, nothing more fugitiue then a shadow, nothing more fickle then a fan∣cie, nothing more swift then thought. What a disproportion therefore is it for the immortall soule of a man to be fastened vnto things which are of such a variable nature? What a folly for vs to preferre those which are but momentary (for so I may more truely cal them then tem∣porall) vnto those things which are indeede eternall? Glasses are in great vse amongst vs, yet▪ be∣cause of their brittlenesse who esteemes them precious? We smell to flowers, because they are sweet; but because they are fading▪ we regard them there∣after. It were well if we would deale thus with all other vani∣ties, viz. regard them as they are: vse the creatures we may, but not abuse them; serue our selues of them, but not serue them; inioy them, but not ouer∣ioy in them. Now because examples are are very effectuall, whether we vse them by way of dehortation, or whether by way of exhorta∣tion, let me propound one or two in this matter whereof I am treating, that by them thou maist be beaten off from the va∣nities and iniquities of this pre∣sent euill world. When Alex∣ander in the height of his glory kept * a Parliament of the whole Conuen∣tum ter∣rarum orbi . world, himselfe was summoned by death to appeare in another world. It was a wonderfull president of the vanity and va∣riety of humane condition (saith the Historian) to see mighty Iustin. l. 2. Zerxes flote and flye away in a small vessel, who before wanted Sea-roome for his Ships. When Belshazzar was laughing and Dan. 5. quaffing with his Princes and Concubines, carowsing healths in the sacred Vessels; deaths se∣cretary, the hand-writing on the wall, told him he was weighed in the ballance, and his King∣dome was finished. And before him his father Nebuchadnezzar (at that time the greatest Mo∣narch in the world) as he was strouting in his Galleries, and boasting of his owne power and honour, a voyce from heauen told him that his Kingdome was departed from him, that he Dan. 4. should be driuen from amongst men, that he should haue his dwelling with the Beasts of the field, &c. And the sentence was fulfilled on him the same houre. So Zedekiah was a liuely specta∣cle 2 Kin. 25 of this worlds vanity and misery, who of a potent King became a miserable captiue, saw his children slaine before his face, after that had, his eyes put out, and died miserably in pri∣son. I had almost forgotten Sa∣lomon, the wisest King that euer Eccl. . was, hauing giuen himselfe to take pleasure in pleasant things, hauing made great workes, built goodly Houses, planted Vine∣yards, Gardens, and Orchards, and planted in them trees of all fruit, & hauing gathered siluer and gold, and the chiefe trea∣sures of Kings and Prouinces, being now full of wisedome, and schooled with experience, he is licensed to giue his sen∣tence of the whole world, and euery man knowes what his censure was: Vanity of vani∣ties, Eccl. 1. . vanity of vanities, all is va∣nity. This wise King trauelled all the world ouer, and the fur∣ther he went the more vanity he did see, and the neerer he looked, the greater it seemed, till at last he could see nothing but vanity. Wouldst thou know what is to be seene, or heard, or had in this vast Vniuerse? Vani∣ty saith Salomon, yea vanity of vanities; and what else? Vani∣ty of vanities. And wh else? All is vanity. Nothing beneath the Moone that hath not a tinc∣ture of vanity. Nay, the Moone it self, the Sunne▪ all the Planets, all the Starres, the whole body of the Heauens, is become sub∣iect to Vanitie. The creature is subiect vnto Vanity, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. 20. that is, the whole frame of the world, con∣sisting of the coelestiall and ele∣mentary region, the visible hea∣uens with all their goodly fur∣niture of Starres and of coelesti all bodies, and the earth with her ornaments, and the other elements. The heauens shall pe∣rish, Psal. 10 . . and they shall waxe old as doth a garment, and the Lord shall change hem as a vesture and they shall be changed. As a garment the older it wax th, the lesse comely it is, the lesse able to warme him that weares it: so the materiall heauens by conti∣nuance of yeares decrease in beauty and vertue. The neerer the Sunne drawes to the end of his daily course, the lesse is his strength; in the eu ning we feele the Sunne to decay in his heat, and he waxeth alway the weaker. Now if those superi∣our bodies, then much more things inferiour and sublunary, are included within the com∣passe of vanity. But it was my purpose, when I first set vpon this subiect, so ample and large, to be so much the more short▪ euery vnderstanding can of it selfe discourse, where such plenty of matter is offered. I haue there∣fore (according to the modell of that gift which God hath giuen me) contriued a great pi∣cture in a little ring, set forth the great vanity of this world in a little Map. Let vs now learne the lesson of Saint Iohn, the beloued Dis∣ciple of Christ, who wrote so much of loue, doth yet dehort vs from louing the world, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. Loue not the world, neither the things that are in the world. Why not the world? for three reasons: 1. If any man loue the world, the loue of the father is not in him. 2. All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but is of the world. 3. The world passeth away, and the lust thereof: that is, it is vaine and vanishing, yea in the ab∣stract Vanity. For these reasons we must not suffer our hearts to cleaue to the best things in the world, as if h ppinesse were to be sound in them. Follow the counsell of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 7. 31. Vse this world as though thou vsed it not, f the fashion of this world go th a∣way. Vse the things of this world as helpes to thee in thy trauell to heauen-ward, but let them not steale away thy heart from better things, from God, and Christ, and heauen, and peace of conscience, and ioy in the holy Ghost: these must de light the heart of a Christian, who was redeemed, not with cor∣ruptible 1 Pet. 1. 19. things, as siluer and gold, but with the precious bloud of Ie∣sus Christ, in comparison of whom all the things of the world must seeme losse and drosse, and dung, and whatsoe∣uer is most despitable in the eyes of m n. If riches increase, set not thy heart vpon them: no treasure, no pleasure, no honor, nor gold, nor plate, nor iewels, Ps. 62. 10 nor house, nor land, nor appa∣rell, nor friends, must steale a∣way thy heart. We must be affected to these things, as The∣odoricke In bonis us tacet, in ma is i∣det, in v∣trisque Philoso∣ph . the good King of A∣quitaine was with his play; * In good casts he was silent, in ill mer∣ry, in neither angry, in both a Philosopher, or a wise man. We must not make these a riuall vn∣to God, we must not leane vpon these by our confidence: for they are a reed that shall quick∣ly breake, and the shiuers will run into our hand. Death is the most terrible of all things that are terrible, said the Philosopher Aristotle: it is terrible both to man and beast, but most terrible to a wicked man that is worse then a beast, when he remembers his sinfull life past, the complexion of his flesh, the palenesse of his face, the dissolution of his members, the rottennesse of his bones, the obscurenesse of his graue, the solitarinesse of his sepulcher, the gnawing of wormes, and the like. But alas (albeit these are terrible, yet) these are nothing without the consideration of sin, which is the sting of death, the strength and victory of the graue. Thinke vpon thy sinnes, whereof thou art guilty, and for which thou must dye, as the condemned malefactor that af∣ter sentence pronounced, is hur∣ried to the fatall place of execu∣tion, to suffer deserued punish∣ment. Remember, yea againe and againe. I say, remember, how miserably, how violently, how sodainly, others haue suf∣fered death, that were guilty of those sins which are more pre∣dominant in thee then they were in them. Art thou a thiefe? which thou maist be, though thou we t neuer attached for theft by the lawes of m n; for couetousnesse is a Pick▪ purse before God: read and remem∣ber how Achan dyed, Iosh. 7. Art thou a whoremaster? which thou maist be as well in thy minde as in thy body: then 1 Sam. ▪ read and remember how Hophni and Phineas dyed, how Zimri Num. 25 8. and Cosbi were slain in the very act of their vncleannesse. And Iezabel an impudent strumpet dyed a sodaine and shamefull death. Art thou a blasphemous swearer that dost rend & grinde the sacred name of God be∣tweene thy teeth? Remember him vnder the Law that was stoned to death for his blasphe∣my. Art thou an Idolatrous impe of the Popish Church, that dost leaue our Lord to worship our Lady, and giue that honour to S ints, nay, to stockes and stones, which is proper to God alone? call to minde how Sen∣nacharih was slaine in the midst Is 37. vlt of his Idolatry. Art thou an intempe ate drunkard, that dost s crifice thy time and state, nay, oule and body vnto Bacchus, rising ea ly to drinke strong drinke, and sitting vp l te till W ne infl ne thee? thinke Dan. 5. vlt. vpon Belshazzar that was slaine in the midst of his cups, whilst he was drinking in that Wine, which the swords of his ins l∣ting enemies drew out of him together with his l test blood▪ Art thou a couetous V rer, that dost let out thy mony to men, thy time to Mamon, and thy soule to Satan, that like a common Hackney jade wilt not beare thy debtors one houre past thy day? or art thou a gri∣ping oppressor, that dost racke thy poore tenants, and exact vpon thy neighbour, to gaine a little transitory trash? Remem∣ber Nabal, and remember that Miser in the Gospell, who being Luk. 12. asleep in security, and dreaming of enlarged barns and plentifull haruests, was sodainly erest of all, and being awaked vpon the hearing of his Soule-knell perceiued himself to be for euer wretched. Consider whether these and the like sinners, that haue made their souls the slaues of vanity, haue not in the end made themselues the slaues of misery. Haue they prospered, or haue they perished? if they haue prospered, then follow them; if perished (as indeede they haue) then in the feare of God retire out of their paths, lest thou be speedily cut off, hauing no information of the danger, till thy owne eyes ama∣zed with the sodainnes behold it in the shape of ineuitable damnation. Be thou warned by their examples; for God hath punished sinne in them, to preuent sinne in thee: Vt ex∣empla Cyprian ser. ▪ d Laps. sint omnium, tormenta paucorum; that the torments of some few may be terrours vnto all: like as thunderbolts fall (Paucorum periculo, sed omnium metu) to the hurt but of few, though not without the horror of all. That ship which sees another ship sinke before her, lookes about her, puls do ne her saile, turneth he c se, and escapes the san s, which else would swallow her vp as they done the other. When the earth swallowed vp Corah and his confederates, all Israel that were round about them, fled at the cry of them, for they said, Lest the earth swallow vs vp also, Num. 16. 34. The Bird will not light on the lime bush, nor into the net, if she see ano∣ther insnared before her; the Ho se will not follow another, whom he sees to sticke fast in the mire: oh be not lesse wise then bird or beast, nor more br tish then Horle and Mule that hath no vnderstanding. If thou st another fall into the fire, thou wilt not willingly fol∣low him; then follow not sinners to the fire of h ll, lest thou be constrain d at last, when it shall be too late, to bewaile thy fol∣ly: to c y out with those that haue mispent their time in va∣nity, Oh that now I might dye the death of the righteous! oh Thus ran cis Spi ra crie out, after he had renoū ced the profession of true pietie, for the posses∣sion of earths va∣nity. that I might not d e at all! oh that I might f ele in my consci∣ence the least hope of pardon, which is as vnpossible as to vn∣lade all the water in the vast Ocean with a spoone! Oh that God would giue mee the least dram of grace, which is as im∣possible as for the least graine of Mustardseed to fill the whole earth! preuent this betimes, which thou maist doe, by aban∣doning the vanity of the world; and so liue, that wheresoeuer or howsoeuer thou dyest, whether abroad or at home, by day or by night, sl eping or waking, whether as d in death or a deli∣berate death, thou maist willing∣ly commend thy spirit vnto the hands of God s vnto the hands of a faithfull creator; and maist say with the Bride, Come Lord Iesu, euen so, come Lord Iesu, come Reu 22. quickly: my heart is prepared to enter into thy rest, receiue me into the armes of thy mer∣cy, entertaine mee into thy owne kingdome, that leauing the vanity of this world, I may with thy glorified Angels and blessed Saints, enioy that e∣uerlasting felicity of a better world, which neuer shall haue an end. Adew therefore vain world, with all worldly delights what∣soeuer: and now solitary soule begin to take thy sola in bet∣ter things. And to proue the world vaine, and consequently thy selfe vaine, behold these shapes, read th se Verses, and in order open the leaues that are folded vp. Herein, as in a mir∣rour, behold thy owne estate, read, and consider what thou readest, that thou maist know and see thy owne vanity. Here thou shalt see what thou wert, what thou art, and what thou shalt be. Dust thou wert, dust thou art, and vnto dust thou shalt returne: dust in thy crea∣tion, dust in thy constitution, dust in thy dissolution. I. THough long it were since Adam was, Yet seemes he here to be; A blessed creature once he was, Now naked as you see: Whose wife was cause of all my care, To say I may be bold: Turne backe the leaues, and then you may My picture there behold, II. To thinke vpon the workes of God, All worldly men may wonder: But thinking on thy sinnes O man, Thy heart may burst asunder: The sinner sits and sweetly sings, And so his heart beguiles, Till I come with my bitter stings, And turne to griefe his smiles. III. Muse not to gaze vpon my shape, Whose nakednesse you see; By flattering and deceitfull words, The Diuell deceiued me: Let me example be to all, That once from God doe range: Turne backe the leaues, and then behold Another sight as strange. IV. Had Adam and Eue neuer beene As there you saw their shape, I neuer had deceiued them, Nor they ere made debate: But turne, behold where both doe stand And lay the fault on me: Turne backe the vpper and nether erests, There each of them you see. I. III. Here we doe stand in perfect state, All formed as we were; But what the Serpent did by hate, Shall sodainely appeare: Then here behold how both doe stand, And where the fault did lye: Th'almighty power did so command, That once we all must dye. II. IV. See what comes of wicked deed, As all men well doe know; And for the same God hath decreed That we should liue in woe: The dust it was my daily food, Vnto it we must turne; And darknesse is my chiefe abode, In sorrow so we mourne. Of the punishments which the Lord threat∣ neth vnto such as liue a sinfull life. O Ne of the principall meanes that our Lord hath vsed oftentimes to bridle the hearts of men, and to draw them vnto the obedi∣ence of his commandements, hath beene, to s t before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishments that are prepared for such persons as be rebels and transgressours of his Law. For although the hope of the rewards that are promised vnto the good in the life to come, may moue vs very much here∣unto: yet are we commonly more moued with things that beirkesome vnto vs, than with such as be pleasant: euen as we see by daily experience, that we are vexed more with an iniury done vnto vs, than delighted with any honour; and we are more troubled with sicknesse, than comforted with health: and so by the discommodity of sicknesse, we come to vnderstand the commodity of health, as by a thing so much the bet∣ter perceiued, by how much more it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our Lord in times past vse this meane more than any other, as it appeareth most clearely by the writings of the Prophets, which are euery where full of dreadfull sayings and threatnings, wherewith our Lord pretendeth to put a terrour into the hearts of men, and so to bridle and subdue them vnder the obedience of his Law. And for this end he com∣manded the Prophet Ieremie, That he should take a white booke, and write in the same all the threatnings and calamities which hee had reuealed vnto him, euen from the first day he began to talke with him, vntill that present houre, and that he should read the same in the pre∣sence of all the people, to see if peraduenture they would be moued therewith vnto repen∣tance, and to change their for∣mer life, to the end, that he might also change the determi∣nation of his wrath, which he had purposed to execute vpon them. And the holy Scripture saith, That when the Prophet had done according as he was commanded by almighty God, and had read all those threat∣nings in the presence of the people, and of the Rulers; there arose such a feare and terrour amongst them, that they were all astonished, and as it were bestraughted of their wits, look∣ing one in anothers face, for the exceeding great fear which they had conceiued of those words. This was one of the principall means which almighty God v∣sed with men in the time of the Law written, and so he did also in the time of the Law of grace: in which, the holy Apostle saith, That as there is reuealed a iustice, whereby God maketh men iust, so is there also reuea∣led an indignation and wrath, whereby he punisheth the vn∣iust: for which cause, S. Iohn Baptist (the glorious forerunner of our Sauiour Christ) was sent with this commission and em∣bassage, to preach vnto the world That the axe was now put to the root of the tree and that euery tree that brought no forth good fruit, should be cut downe and cast into the fire. Hee said moreouer, That there was ano∣ther come into the world, more mighty than hee, that carried in his hand a fanne, to winnow and cleanse therewith his floore, and that he would put vp the corne into his garner, but the chaffe he will burne in a fire that should ne∣uer be quenched. This was the preaching and embassage which the holy fore-runner of our Sauiour Iesus Christ brought into the world. And so great was the thunder of these words, and the terrour which entered into mens hearts, so dreadfull, that there ran vnto him of all estates and conditions of men, euen of the very Pharisees and Publicans, yea, and Souldiours also (which of all others are wont to be most dissolute, and to haue the least care of their consciences) and each of them demanded for himselfe particu∣larly of that holy man, what he should doe to attaine vnto sal∣uation, and to escape those ter∣rible threatnings which he had denounced vnto them, so great was the feare they had concei∣ued of them. And this is that (deare Chri∣stian brother) which I doe at this present (in the behalfe of Almighty God) deliuer vnto thee, although not with such feruency of spirit and like holi∣nesse of life, yet that which im∣porteth more in this case, with the same truth and certainty; for so much as the faith and Gospell which Saint Iohn Bap∣tist then preached, is euen the same now taught. Now, if thou be desirous to vnderstand in few words, how great the punishment is, that al∣mighty God hath threatned in his holy Scriptures to the wick∣ed, that which may most briefly and most to the purpose be spo∣ken in this matter, is this: That like as the reward of the good is anvniuersall good thing, euen so the punishment of the wick∣ed is an vniuersall euill, which comprehendeth in it al the euils that are. For the better vnder∣standing whereof, it is to be no∣ted, That all the euils of this life are particular euils, and there∣fore doe not torment all our sences generally, but onely one, or some of them. As taking an example of the diseases of our body; we see, that one hath a disease in his eyes, another in his eares: one is sicke in the heart, another in the stomacke, some other in his he d. And so diuers men are diseased in diuers parts of the body, howbeit, in such wise, that none of all these diseases be generally through∣out all the members of the bo∣by, but particular to some one of them. And yet for all this, we see what griefe onely one of these diseases may put vs vnto, and how painefull a night the ficke man hath in any one of these infirmities, yea, although it be nothing else but a little ach in one tooth. Now let vs put the case, that there were some one man sicke of such an vni∣uersall disease, that he had no part of his body, neither any one joynt or sence free from his proper paine, but that at one time and instant hee suffered most exceeding sharpe torment in his head, in his eyes, and eares, in his teeth, and stomack, in his liuer and heart: and to be short, in all the rest of his mem∣bers and joints of his body, and that he lay after this sort stret∣ching himselfe in his bed, being pained with these greefes and torments, euery member of his body hauing his particular tor∣ment and griefe: Hee (I say) hat should lye thus pained and afflicted, how great torment an g iefe of minde and body (thinke ye) should he sustaine? Oh, what thing could any man imagine more miserable, and more worthy of compassion? Surely, if thou shouldest see but a d gge to be so tormented and ri ued in the street, his very paines would moue thy heart to take pitty vpon him. Now this is that (my deare Christian brother, if any comparison may be made betweene them) which is suffered in that most cursed and horrible place of hell, and not onely during for the space of one night, but euerlastingly, for euer and euer. For like as the wicked men haue offended Almighty God with all their members and sences, and haue made armour of them all to serue sinne, euen so will he or∣daine, that they shall be there tormented euery one of them with his proper torment. There shall the wanton vn∣chaste eyes be tormented with the terrible sight of Diuels: the eareswith the confusion of such horrible cries and lamentations which shall there be heard: the nose with the intollerable stinke of that vgly, filthy, and loath∣some place: the taste, with a most rauenous hunger and thirst: the touching, and all the members of the body with ex∣treame burning fire. The ima∣gination shall be tormented by the conceiuing of griefes pre∣sent: the memo y, by calling to minde the pleasures past: the vnderstanding, by considering what benefits are lost, and what endlesse miseries are to come. This multitude of punish∣ments the holy Scripture signi∣fieth vnto vs, when it saith, Mat. 15. Psal. 10. That in hell there shall be hunger, thirst, wee∣ping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged, spirits crea∣ted for reuengement, serpents, wormes, scorpions, hammers, wormewood, water of gall, the spi∣rit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are sig¦nifi d vnto vs (as in a figure) the multitude and dreadfull terrour of the most horrible torments and paines that be in that cursed place. There shall be likewise darknesse inward and outward, both of body and soule, farre more obscure than the darke∣nesse of Aegypt, which was to be felt euen with hands, Exod. 20. Th re shall be fire also, not as this fire here, that tormenteth a little, and shortly endeth, but such a fire as that place requi∣reth, which tormenteth excee∣dingly, and shall neuer make an end of that tormenting. This being true, what greater won∣der can there be, than that they which beleeue and confesse this for truth, should liue with such most strange negligence and carelesnesse as they doe? What trauell and paines would not a man willingly take to escape euen one onely day, yea, one houre, the very least of these torments? and wherefore doe they not then, to escape the euerlastingnesse of so great paines and horrible torments, endure so little a trauell, as to follow the exercise of vertue. Surely, the consideration of this matter were able to make any sinfull soule to feare and trem∣ble, in case it were deepely re∣garded. And if amongst so great num∣ber of paines, there were any manner hope of end or release, it would be some kinde of com∣fort: but alas it is not so, for there the gates are fast shut vp from all expectation of any manner of ease or hope. In all kinde of paines and calamities that be in this world, there is alwayes some gap lying open, whereby the patient may receiue some kind of comfort: sometimes reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, some∣times the hearing that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes (at the least) the hope of an end may cheare him▪ onely in these most horrible paines and miseries that be in hell, all the wayes are shut vp in such sort, and all the hauens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot hope for remedy on any side, neither of heauen, nor of earth, neither of the time past, or pre∣sent, or of the time to come, or of any other meanes. The dam∣ned soules thinke, that all men are shooting darts at them, and that all creatures haue conspired against them, & that euen they themselues are cruell against themselues. This is that distresse whereof the sinners doe lament by the Prophet, saying: The sorrowes of hell haue compassed me round about, and the snares of death haue besieged me: For on which side so u r they looke or turne their eyes, they doe con∣tinually behold occasions of sorrow and griefe, and none at all of any ease or comfort. The wise Virgins (saith the Euange list) that stood ready prepared at the gate of the Bridegrome, entred in, and the gate was forthwith locked fast. O locking euerla∣sting, O enclosure immortal, O gate of all goodnesse, which shal neuer an more be opened a∣gaine. As if he had said more plainly, the gate of pardon, of mercy, of comfort, of grace, o intercession, of hope, and of all other goodnesse, is shut vp for euer and euer. Six dayes and no more was Manna to be ga∣thered, but the seuenth day, which was the Sa bath day was there none to be found: and therefore shall he fast for euer, that hath not in due me made his prouision aforehand. The slugg rd (saith he wise man) will not till his ground for feare of cold, and therefore shall he beg his bread in summer, and no man shall giue him to eat. And in another place he saith: He that gathereth in summer, is a wise sonne, but he that giueth himselfe to sleeping at that season, is the sonne of confusion. For what confusion can be greater then that which that miserable coue∣tous rich man suffereth, who with a few cr ms of bread that fell from his table, might haue purchased to himselfe abun∣dance of euerlasting felicitie, and glory in the kingdome of heauen? But because he would not giue so small a thing, he came to such an extreame ne∣cessity that he begged (yea, and shall for euer beg in vaine) one∣ly one drop of water, and shall neuer obtaine it. Who is not moued with that request of that vnfortunate damned person, who cried, O father Abraham haue compassion on me, and send downe Lazarus vnto me, that he may dip the tip of his finger in wa∣ter, and touch my tongue, for these horrible flames doe torment me exceedingly. What smaller request could there be desired than this? He durst not request so much as one cup of water, neither that Lazarus should put his ▪ whole hand into the water, nor yet (which is more to be wondered at) did he request so much as the whole finger, but onely the tip of it, that it might but touch his tongue; and yet euen this alone would not be granted vnto him. Whereby thou maiest perceiue, how fast the gate of all consolation is shut vp, and how vniuersall that interdict d excommuni∣cation is, that i there laid vpon the damned, si h this rich Glut∣ton could not obtaine so much as this small request. So that wheresoeuer the damned per∣sons doe turne their eyes, and on which sid soeuer they stretch their hands, they shall nor finde any manner of com∣fort▪ e it neuer so small. And as he that is in the S a choaked, and almost drowned vnder the water, not finding any st y whereupon to t his fo t, stretcheth forth his hands often∣times on euery side in vain (be∣cause all that he graspeth after, is thin and liquid water, which deceiues him) euen so shall it fare with the damned persons, when they shall be drowned in that deepe Sea of so many mi∣series, where they shall striue and struggle alwaies with death, without finding any succour or place of stay, whereupon they may rest themselues. Now this is one of the greatest paines wherewith they be tormented in that cursed place: for if th se torments should haue their con∣tinuance limited but for a cer∣taine time, though it were for a thousand, yea▪ a hundred thou∣sand millions of yeares, yet euen this would be some little com∣fort vnto them, for nothing is perfectly great, in case it haue an end: But alas, they haue not so much as this poore and mise∣rable comfort: but contrariwise, their paines are equall in conti∣nuance with the eternity of al∣mighty God, and the l sting of their misery with the eternity of Gods glory. As long as al∣mighty God shall liue, so long shall they dye: and when al∣mighty God shall cease to be God, then shall they also cease to be as they are. O deadly life, O immortall death▪ I know not whether I may truely tearme thee, either life or death: for if thou be life, why dost thou kil? And if thou be death▪ why doest thou endure? Wherefore I will call thee neither the one, nor the other, for so much as in both of them there is contained something that is good: as in life there is rest, and in death there is an end (which is a great comfort to the afflicted) but thou hast neither rest nor end. What art thou then? Marry, thou art the worst of life, and the worst of death; for of death thou hast the torment, without any end, and of life thou hast the continuance without any rest. O bitter composition, O vnsauory purgation of our Lords cup! of the which, all the sin∣ners of the earth shall drinke their part. Now in this continuance in this eternity, I would wish that thou (my deare Christian bro∣ther) wouldst fixe the eyes of thy consideration a little while: and that as the cleane beast cheweth the cud, euen so thou wouldest weigh this point within thy selfe with great deli∣beration. And to the intent thou maiest doe it the better, consider a little the paines that a sicke man abideth in one euill night, especially if he be vexed with any vehement griefe, or sharpe disease. Marke how oft he tumbleth and toss th in his bed, what disquietnesse he hath, how long & tedious one night seemeth vnto him, how du ly he counteth all the houres of the clocke, and how long he deemeth each houre of them to be, how he passeth the time in wishing for the dawning of the day; which notwithstanding, is like to helpe him little towards the curing of his disease. If this then be accounted so great a torment, what torment shall that be (thinke you) in that e∣uerlasting night in hell, which hath no morning, nor so much as any hope of any dawning of the day: O darknesse most ob∣scure! O night euerlasting! O night accu sed euen by the mouth of almighty God and all his Saints! That one shall wish for light, and shall neuer see it, neither shall the bright∣nesse of the morning arise any more. Consider then what a kinde of torment shall that be, to liue euerlastingly in such a night as this is, lying not in a soft bed (as the sicke man doth) but in a hot burning furnace, fe∣ming out such terrible raging flames. What shoulders shall be able to abide those horrible heats. If it seeme to vs as a thing intollerable to haue onely some part of our feet standing vpon a pan of burning coales, for the space of repeating the Lords prayer, What shall it be (thinke you) to stand body and soule burning in the midst of those e∣uerlasting hot raging fires in hell, in comparison of which, the fires of this world are but painted fires. Is there any wit or iudgement in this world? Haue men their right sences? doe they vnderstand what these words import? or are they per∣aduenture perswaded, that these are onely the fables of Poets? or doe they thinke, that this ap∣pertaineth not to them, or else that it was onely ment for o∣thers? None of all this can they say, for so much as our faith assureth vs most certainly herein. And our Sauiour Christ himselfe, who is euerlasting truth, crieth out in his Gospell, saying, Heauen and earth shall faile, b t my word shall not faile. Of this misery there follow∣eth another as great as it, which is, that the paines are alwayes continuing in one like degree, without any manner of inter∣mission, or decreasing. All man∣ner of things that are vnder the cope of heauen, doe moue and turn round about with the same heauen, and doe neuer stand still at one state or being, but are continually either ascending or descending. The sea and the riuers haue their ebbing and flowing, the times, the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdomes, are euermore in continuall motion. There is no feauer so feruent, that doth not decline, neither griefe so sharp, but that after it is much aug∣mented, it doth forthwith de∣crease. To be sho't, all the tri∣bulations and miseries are by little and little worne away with time, and as the common saying is, Nothing is sooner dried vp than teares. Onely that paine in hell is alwayes greene, onely that feauer neuer decreaseth, onely that extremity of hear knoweth not what is either eue∣ning or morning. In the time of Noahs flood, almighty God rained forty dayes and forty nights, continually without ceasing vpon the earth, and this sufficed to drowne the whole world. But in that place of torment in hell, there shall raine euerlasting vengeance, and darts of furie vpon that cursed land, without euer ceasing so much as one onely minute or moment. Now what torment can be greater and more to be abhor∣red, than continually to suffer after one like manner, without any kinde of alteration or change? Though a meat be neuer so delicate, yet in case we feed continually thereupon, it will in very short time be very loathsome vnto vs: for no meat can be more precious and deli cate than that Manna was, which almighty God sent down vnto the children of Israel in the Desart, and yet because they did eat continually thereof, it made them to loath it, yea, and prouoked them to vomit it vp againe. The way that is all plaine (they say) wea ieth more than any other, because alwayes the variety (yea, euen in punish∣ment) is a kinde of comfort. Tell me then, if things that be pleasant and sauory, when they be alwayes after one manner, are an occasion of loathsome∣nesse and paine: what kinde of loathsomenesse will that be which shall be caused by those most horrible paines and tor∣ments in hell, which doe con∣tinue euerlastingly after one like sort? What will the dam∣ned and cursed creatures think, when they shall there see them∣selues so vtterly abhorred and forsaken of almighty God, that he will not so much as with the remission of any one sinne, mi∣tigate somwhat their torments. And so great shall the fury and rage be which they shall there conceiue against him, that they shall neuer cease continually to curse and blaspheme his holy name. Vnto all these paines, there is also added the paine of that euerlasting consumer, to wit, the worme of conscience, whereof the holy Scripture maketh so oftentimes mention, saying, Their worme shall neuer dye, and their fire shall neuer be quenched. This worme is a fu∣rious raging despight and bitter repentance, without any fruit, which the wicked shall alwayes haue in hell, by calling to their remembrance the opportunity and time they had whiles they were in this world, to escape those most grieuous and horri∣ble torments, and how they would not vse the benefit there∣of. And therefore when the miserable sinner seeth himselfe thus to be tormented and vex∣ed on euery side, and doth call to minde how many dayes and yeeres he hath spent idly in va∣nities, pastimes, and pleasures; and how oftentimes he was ad∣uertised of this perill, and how little regard he tooke thereof: What shall he thinke? What anguish and sorrow shall there be in his heart? Hast thou not read in the Gospell, that there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? The famine of Aegypt endurd onely seuen yeares, but that in hell shall en∣dure euerlastingly. In Aegypt they found a remedy, though with great difficulty & charge; but for this, there shall neuer a ny remedy be found. Theirs was redeemed with money and cattell, but this can neuer be re∣deemed with any manner of ex∣change. This punishment can∣not be pardoned, this p ine cannot be exchanged, this sen∣tence cannot be reuoked. Oh, if thou knewest and wouldest consider, how euery one con∣demned to hell, shall there re∣maine tormenting and renting himselfe, weeping and wailing, and saying; O miserable and vnfortunate wretch that I am, what times and opportunities haue I suffered to passe invaine? A time there was, when with one cup of cold water I might haue purchased to my selfe a crowne of glory, and when also with such necessary workes of mercy in relieuing the poore, I might haue gained life euerla∣sting. Wherefore did I not looke before me? How was I blinded with things present? How did I let passe the fruitfull yeares of abundance, and did not enrich my selfe? If I had beene brought vp amongst In∣fidels and Pagans, and had be∣leeued that there had beene no∣thing else but onely to be born, and to dye, then might I haue had some kinde of excuse, and might haue said, I knew not what was commanded or pro∣hibited me: but for so much as I haue liued amongst Christians, and was my selfe one of them professed, and held it for an ar∣ticle of my beleefe, that the houre should come when I should giue vp an account after what order I had spent my life: forsomuch also as it was daily cried out vnto me by the conti∣nuall preaching and teaching of Gods Embassadours (whose aduertisements many follow∣ing, made preparation in time, and laboured earnestly for the prouision of good workes:) forasmuch I say as I made light of all these examples, and per∣swaded my selfe very fondly, that heauen was prepared for me, though I tooke no paines for it at all: what deserue I that haue thus led my life? O ye in∣fernall furies, come and rent me in peeces, and deuoure these my bowels, for so haue I iustly de∣serued, I haue deserued eternall famishment, seeing I would not prouide for my selfe while I had time. I deserue not to reap, because I haue not sowne; I am worthy to be destitute, because I haue not laid vp in store; I deserue that my request should now be denied me, sith when the poore made request vnto me, I refused to releeue them: I haue deserued to sigh and la∣ment so long as God shall be God; I haue deserued, that this worme of conscience shal gnaw mine entrails for euer and euer, by representing vnto mee the little pleasure that I haue en∣ioyed, and the great felicitie which I haue lost, and how far greater that was which I might haue gained, by forgoing that little which I would not forgoe. This is that immortall worme that shall neuer dye, but shal lye there euerlastingly gnawing at the entrailes of the wicked, which is one of the most terri∣ble paines that can possibly be imagined. Peraduenture thou art now perswaded (good Reader) that there can be added no more vn∣to this, than hath beene said. But surely the mighty arme of God wanteth not force to cha∣stice his enemies more & more: for all these paines that are hi∣therto rehearsed, are such as doe appertaine generally to all the damned: but besides these ge∣nerall paines, there are also other particular paines, which each one of the damned shall there suffer in diuers sorts, ac∣cording to the quality of his sinne. And so according to this proportion, the hauty and proud shall there be abased and brought low to their great con∣fusion. The couetous shall be driuen to great necessity: the glutton shall rage with conti∣nuall hunger and thirst. The lecherous shall burne in the ve∣ry same flames which they themselues haue enkindled. And those that haue al their life time hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall liue there in continuall lamentation and sor∣row. But because examples are of very great force to moue our hearts, I will bring onely one for this purpose, wherby some∣what of this matter may the better be perceiued. It is writ∣ten of a certaine holy man, that he saw the paines (in spirit) of a licentious and worldly man in this sort. First he saw how the diuels that were present at the houre of his death, when hee yeelded vp his ghost, snatched away his soule with great reioy∣cing, and made a present there∣of to the prince of darkenesse, who was then sitting in a chaire of fire, expecting the comming of this present. Immediately af∣ter that it was presented before him, he arose vp out of his seat, and said vnto the damned soule, that he would giue him the pre∣heminence of that honourable seat, because he had beene a man of honour, ann was alwayes ve∣ry much affected to the same. Incontinently after that he was placed therein, crying and la∣menting in that honourable tor∣ment, there appeared before him two other most ougly di∣uels, and offered him a cup full of most bitter and stinking liquor, and made him to drinke and carouse it vp all, perforce; saying, It is meet, sithence thou hast beene a louer of precious wines and bankets, that thou shouldest likewise proue of this our wine, whereof all we doe vse to drinke in these parts. Immediately after this there came other two, with two fiery trumpets, and setting them at his eares, began to blow into them flames of fire, saying, This melody haue we reserued for thee, vnderstanding that in the world thou wast very much delighted with minstrelcie and wanton songs: and sodainly he espied other diuels, loaden with vipers and serpents, the which they threw vpon the breast and bellies of that miserable sinner, saying vnto him, that forsomuch as he had beene greatly delight∣ed with the wanton embracings and lecherous lusts of women, he should now sollace himselfe with these refreshings, instead of those licentious delights and pleasures, which he had enioy∣ed in the world. After this sort (as the Prophet Esay saith in the 47. chapter) when the sinner is punished, there is giuen measure for measure, to the end, that in such a great variety and propor∣tion of punishments, the order and wisedome of Gods iustice, might the more manifestly ap∣peare. This vision hath almighty God shewed in spirit to this ho∣ly man for aduertisement and instruction, not that in hel these things are altogether so mate∣rially done, but that by them we might vnderstand in some man∣ner the varietie and multitude of the paines which be there appointed for the damned. Whereof, I know not how some of the Pagans haue had a certaine knowledge: for a Poet speaking of this multitude of paines, affirmed, That although he had a hundred mouthes, and as many tongues, with a voyce as strong as yron, yet were they not able onely to expresse the names of them. A Poet he was that spake this, but truely therin he spake more like a Prophet or an Euangelist than a Poet. Now then, if all this euill shall most assuredly come to passe, what man is he, that seeing all this so certainly with the eyes of his faith, will not turne ouer the leafe, and begin to prouide for himselfe against that time? Where is the iudgement of m n now become? Where is their wits? yea, where is at least their selfe-loue, which seeketh euer∣more for his owne profit, and is much affraid of any losse? May it be thought that men are be∣come beasts, that prouide onely for the time present? Or haue they peraduenture so dimmed their eye-sight, that they cannot looke before them? Hearken (saith Esay ) O yee deafe and ye blinde, open your eyes that you may see; Who is blinde but my seruant? And who is deafe but yee, vnto whom I haue sent my messengers? And who is blind, but he that suffereth himselfe to be sold for a slaue? Thou that seest so many things, wilt thou not suffer thy selfe to see this? Thou that hast thine ears open, wilt thou not giue eare hereun∣to? If thou beleeue not this, how art thou then a Christian? If thou beleeue it, and doest not prouide for it, how canst thou be thought a reasonable man? Aristotle saith, That this is the difference betweene opinion and imagination, that an imagi∣nation alone is not sufficient to cause a feare, but an opinion is: for if I doe imagine that a house may fall vpon mee, it is not enough to make me afraid, vn∣lesse I beleeue or haue an opi∣nion it will be so indeede: for then it is sufficient to make me afraid. And hereof commeth the feare that murderers al∣wayes haue, by reason of the suspition they conceiue, that their enemies doe lye in wait for them. If then the opinion and onely suspition of danger is able to cause the greatest cou∣rage to feare, how is it that the certainty and beleefe of so ma∣ny and so great terrible miseries (which are farre more sure than any opinion) doth not make thee to feare. If thou perceiuest, that for these many yeares past thou hast led a licentious and sinfull life, and that at the last, according to present iustice, thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: if al∣so there appeare by probable coniecture, that there is no more likelihood of thy amend∣ment for ensuing years to come, than there was in those already past, how happeneth it, that run∣ning headlong into so manifest a danger, thou art not at all a∣fraid? Especially, considering the sinfull state wherein thou liuest, and the horrible paines and torments which doe attend for thee, and the time which thou hast lost, and the endlesse repentance which thou shalt haue therefore in the most hor∣rible torments of hell. Assured∣ly, it goes beyond the compasse of all common sence & conceit of humane reason, to consider, That there should be such neg∣ligent, wilfull, grosse, & carelesse blindnesse, able to enter and take such deepe rooting in the soule of man. The Conclusion of all the Premises. I F now all this be so, I beseech thee euen for the bitter passi∣on of our sweet Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, to remember thy selfe, and con∣sider that thou art a Christian, and that thou beleeuest assu∣redly for a most vndoubted truth, whatsoeuer the true faith instructeth thee. This faith telleth thee, that thou hast a iudge aboue that seeth all the steps and motions of thy life: and that certainly there shall a day come, when he will require an account of thee, euen for euery idle word. This faith teacheth thee, That a man is not altogether at an end when he dieth but that after this tempo∣rall life, there remaineth ano∣ther euerlasting life; and that the soules dye not with the bodies, but that whiles the body remaineth in the graue, vntill the generall day of iudge∣ment, the soule shall enter into another new country, and into a new world, where it shall haue such habitation and company, as the faith and workes were which it had in this life. This faith telleth thee also, that both the reward of vertue, and the punishment of vice, is a thing so wonderfull, that although the whole world were full of bookes, and all creatures were writers, yet should they all be wearied, and the world come to an end, before they should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is comprehended in each one of these points. This faith infor∣meth thee also, that the debts and duties which we owe to al∣mighty God, are so great, that albeit a man had so many liues as there be sands in the Sea, yet would they not suffice, if they were al employed in his seruice. And this faith likewise telleth thee, that vertue is such an ex∣cellent treasure, that all the trea∣sures of the world, and all that mans heart can desire, are in no sort comparable vnto it. Wherefore, if there be so many and so great respects that doe inuite vs vnto vertue, how commeth it to passe, that there be so few louers and followers of the same? If men be moued with gaine & commodity, what greater cōmodity can there be than to attain life euerlasting? If they be moued with feare of pu∣nishment, what greater punish∣ment can be found, than the most horrible euerlasting dreadfull torments in the lake of fire and brimstone, to continue euer world without end? If that bonds of debts and benefits; what debts are greater than these which we owe vnto al∣mighty God, as well for that he is which he is, as also for that which we haue receiued of him? If the feare of perils doe moue vs, what greater perill can there be than death, the houre there∣of being so vncertaine, and the account so strait? If thou be moued with peace, liberty, qui∣etnesse of minde, and with a pleasant life, (which are things that all the world desires) it is certaine, that all these are found much better in the life that is gouerned by vertue and reason, than in that life which is ruled by the affections and passions of the minde, forsomuch as man is a reasonable creature, and no beast. Howbeit, in case thou account all this as not sufficient to moue thee thereunto, yet let it sussice thee to consider fur∣ther, that euen almighty God so abased himselfe for thy sake, that he descended from heauen vnto the earth, and became man, and whereas hee created the whole world in sixe dayes, he bestowed three and thirty yeares about thy redemption; yea, and was also contented for the same to loose his life. Al∣mighty God dyed, that sinne should dye; and yet for all this doe we endeauour, that sinne might liue in our hearts, not∣withstanding that our Lord purposed to take away the life of sinne with his owne death. If this matter were to be discus∣sed with reason, surely this al∣ready spoken might suffice to preuaile with any reasonable creature: for not onely in be∣holding almighty God vpon the crosse, but whethersoeuer we doe turne our eyes, we shall finde, that euery thing crieth out to vs, and calleth vpon vs to receiue this so excellent a bene∣fit: for there is not a thing crea∣ted in the world (if wee duely consider it) but doth inuite vs to the loue and seruice of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, insomuch, that looke how many creatures there be in the world, so many preachers there are, so many bookes, so many voices, and so many reasons, which doe all call vs vnto almighty God. And how is it possible then, that so many callings as these are, so many promises, so ma∣ny threatnings, and so many prouocations, should not suffice to bring vs vnto him? What might almighty God haue done more than he hath done, or pro∣mised more greater blessings than hee hath promised, or threatned more grieuous and horrible torments than he hath threatned to draw vs vnto him, and to plucke vs away from sinne? And yet all this not∣withstanding, how commeth it to passe, that there is so great (I will not say arrogancy, but) bewitching of men, that doe be∣leeue these things to be certain∣ly true, and yet be not afraid to continue all the dayes of their life in the committing of deadly sinnes? yea, to goe to bed in deadly sinne, and to rise vp a∣gaine in deadly sinne, and to embrue themselues in euery kinde of loathsome, detestable, and odious sin, euen as though all their whole endeauours in∣tended by the practise of sinne, to resist all grace and fauour in the sight of God? And this is done in such sort, so without feare, so without scruple of minde, so without breaking of one ho s sleepe, and without the refraining of any one deli∣cate morsell of meat for the same, as if all that they belee∣ued were dreames, and old wiues tales, and as if all that the holy Euangelists haue written, were meere fiction and fables. But tell me thou that art such a desperate wilfull rebell against thy Creator and Redeemer, which by thy detestable life and dissolute conuersation, doest euidence thy selfe to be a fire∣brand, prepared to burne in those euerlasting and reuenging horrible fires of hell. What wouldest thou haue done more than thou hast done, in case thou haddest beene perswaded, that all were meere lyes which thou hast beleeued? For al∣though that for feare of incur∣ring the danger of the princes lawes, and the execution of their force vpon thee, thou hast somewhat brideled thine appe∣tites; yet doth it not appeare, that for any feare of Almighty God, thou hast refrained thy will in any one thing, neither from carnall pleasures, not from backbiting and slandering thy neighbours, nor yet from ful∣filling thine inordinate lusts and desires, in case thine ability serued thee thereunto. Oh, what doth the worme of thy consci∣ence say vnto thee, whiles thou art in such a fond securitie and confidence, continuing in such a dissolute and wicked life as thou doest? Where is now be∣come the vnderstanding, iudge∣ment, and reason, which thou hast of a man? Why art thou not afraid of so horrible, so cer∣taine, and so assured perils and dangers? If there were a dish of meat set before thee, & some man (albeit he were a lyer) should say vnto thee, refraine to touch and eat thereof, for it is poysoned; durst thou once ad∣uenture to stretch out thy hand, to take a taste thereof, though the meat were neuer so sauorie and delicate, and he neuer so great a lyer that should beare thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Euangelists, yea, if Almighty God himselfe doe cry out vnto thee, and say, Take heede thou miserable man, for death is in that kind of meat, and death doth lye lurking in that glutto∣nous morsell, which the diuell hath set before thee? How da∣rest thou reach for euerlasting death with thine owne hands, and drinke thine owne damna∣tion. Where is the applying of thy wits thy iudgement, and the discourse and reason which thou l st of a spirituall man? Where is their light, where is their force? Sith that none of them do bridle thee any whit from thy common vsuall vices. Oh thou wretched and care∣lesse creature, bewitched by the common enemy Satan, adi dg∣ed to euerlasting darknesse, both inward and outward, and so doest goe from one darknesse to the other. Thou art blinde to see thine owne misery, in∣sensible to vnderstand thine owne perdition, and harder than any Adamant, to feele the hammer of Gods word. Oh, a thousand times most miserable thou art, worthy to be l men∣ted with none other teares, than with those whe with thy dam∣nation was lamented, when it was said, Luke 19. Oh, that thou knewest this day the peace, quiet∣nesse, and treasures, which Al mighty God hath offered vnto thee, that doe now lye hidden from thine eyes. Oh miserable is the day of thy natiuitie, and much more miserable the day of thy death: forsomuch, as that shall be the beginning of thine euer∣lasting damnation. Oh, how much better had it beene for thee, neuer to haue beene born, if thou shalt be damned in the horrible pit of hell for euer, where the torments are perpe∣tually durable. How much better had it beene for thee ne∣uer to haue beene baptised, not yet to haue receiued the Chri∣stian faith, if through the abu∣sing thereof by thy wicked life, thy damnation shall thereby be the greater? For if the light of reason onely sufficeth to make the Heathen Phylosophers in∣excuseable, because they know∣ing God in some degree, did not glorisie him nor serue him (as the Apostle saith in the first to the Romans ) how much lesse shall hee be excused, that hath receiued the light of faith, and the water of Baptisme, yea, and the holy Sacrament of the body and bloud of our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, hearing daily the doctrine of the Gospell, if hee doe nothing more than those P gan Phylosophers haue done. Now, what other thing may we inferre of the premisses, but briefly to conclude, That there is none other vnderstanding, none other wisedome, none o∣ther counsell in the world, but that setting aside all the impedi∣ments and combersome dan∣gerous wayes of this life, wee follow that onely true and cer∣taine way, where by true peace and euerlasting life is obtained. Hereunto are we called by rea∣son, by wisedome, by law, by heauen, by earth, by hell, and by the life, death, iustice, and mercy of Almighty God. Hereunto are we also very nota ly i ui∣ted by the holy Ghost, peaking by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus in the sixt chapter, in this : My sonne harken o instruction euen from the first yeares of thy youth, and in thy latter dayes thou shalt enioy the sweet fruit of wisdome: Approach vnto it, as one that p we h and soweth, and with patience ex∣pect the fruitful ncrease which it shall yeeld vnto thee. The paines that thou sh lt take, shall be but little, and the benefits that thou shalt speedily enioy▪ shall be great. My sonne hearken to my words, and neglect not this my counsell which I shall giue thee, put thy feet willingly into her fetters, and thy necke into her chaines: bow downe thy shoulders, and carry her vpon thee, and be not displeased with her bonds: approach neere vnto her with all thy heart, and follow her wayes with all thy strength, seeke for her with all thy diligence, and she will make her selfe knowne vnto thee, and after that thou hast found her, neuer forsake her: for by her shalt thou finde rest in thy latter dayes, and that which before did seeme so pain∣full vnto thee, will afterwards become very pleasant. Her fet∣ters shall be a defence of thy strength, and a foundation of vertue, and her chaine shall be a robe of glory: for in her is the beauty of life, and her bonds are the bonds of health. Hether∣to Ecclesiasticus. Whereby thou maiest vnderstand in some de∣gree, how great the beauty, the delights, the liberty, and riches of true wisdome are, which is vertue it selfe, and the know∣ledge of Almighty God, wher∣of we doe intreat. But if all this be insufficient to mollifie our stony hearts, lift vp thine eyes, and fix thy thoughts con∣stantly to behold our omnipo∣tent God in his mercy and loue towards sinners vpon his dying crosse, where he made full sa∣tisfaction for thy sinnes. There shalt thou behold him in this for e▪ his feet nailed fast, look∣ing for thee; his rmes spread abroad to receiue thee, and his head bowing downe, to giue th e, as to no er prodigall sonne, n w k ss of p ace and att ment. From thence hee calleth thee if thou wouldest eare▪ with so many callings and cries as there be wounds in his whole body. Hearken thou therefore vnto these voyces, and consider well with thy s lfe, that if his prayer he not heard that hearkeneth not vnto the cries of the poore, how much lesse shall he be hea d, that ma∣keth himselfe deafe to such cries as these, being the most merci∣full cryings of our louing saui∣our, and intended for our soules saluation. Who is he that hath not cause to resolue himselfe who ly into teares to weepe and bew ile his manifold offen∣ces? Who is he that can lament, and will not lament at this? vnlesse he be such a one as seeth not, nor careth not what great shipwracke, waste, and hauocke he maketh of all the riches and treasures of his soule. FINIS. Godly Christi∣an PRAYERS. A houshold Prayer for pri∣uate Families in the Morning. M Ost mighty and glori∣ous God, the onely Craator and Gouer∣nour of heauen and earth, and all things therein contained, we miserable sinners here met together by thy grace, doe in thy feare prostrate our selues before thy throne of Ma∣iesty and glory, desiring in some measure to shew our vnfained thankfulnesse, for thy innume∣rable mercies multiplied vpon vs from the first houre of our birth, yea before our birth, and before time was. Before the foundations of the world were laid, thou out of thy free loue and meere mercy, didst elect vs to eternall life, when thou didst reiect others. Thou didst cre∣ate vs after thine owne image, engrauing vpon vs the chara∣cters of spirituall wisedome, righteousnesse, and true holi∣nesse; when it was in thy power to haue made vs like vnto the beasts that perish; yea, to haue equalled vs to the basest of thy creatures. And when through our owne default we lost that dignity, thou dist so pittie vs as to send from thine owne bo∣some thine onely begotten Son to recouer it for vs, and to re∣store it to vs, and that with no lesse price then his owne heart∣bloud. Besides, it hath pleased thee continually to spread the wings of thy gracious protecti∣on ouer vs, to ward and guard vs by thy prouidence, to open thy hand and to replenish vs with good things, to continue our life, health, strength, food, raiment, peace, and liberty, to this very houre. Thou hast e∣uen loaded vs with thy benefits, if we had hearts rightly to con∣sider it; thou renewest thy mer∣cy toward vs euery morning; and the night past hast giuen vs a testimony of thy loue: For whereas, for the sinnes com∣mitted the day before, thou mightest euen in the dead of sleepe haue giuen vs a sodaine call out of this world, and so presently haue brought vs to that great account which wee must make before thee, thou vouchsafest yet to spare vs, yea (which is more) to refresh vs with comfortable rest, to pre∣serue vs from all dangers that might haue befallen our soules or bodies, and to bring vs in safety to the beginning of this day. Heauenly father, grant that we may not be vnmindfull of thy manifold mercies, but that wee may often thinke of them, and speake of them to thy glory; and that the considera∣tion thereof may stirre vs vp to deuote all the powers of our soules, and members of our bodies to thy seruice. Forgiue vs our former vnthankfulnesse for thy mercies, and our seueral abuses of them, yea pardon all our sinnes past, we most hum∣bly beseech thee, for thy owne mercies sake, and for thy sonnes merits. Our sinnes are great and grieuous, for in sinne we were borne, and euer since haue we gone on in a course of sinne and rebellion against thee, we doe daily breake thy holy pre∣cepts, and that against the light of our owne knowledge, albeit we know that thou art our Cre∣atour, who hast made vs; our Redeemer, who hast bought vs with the precious bloud of thy onely begotten Sonne; and our Comforter, who bestowest vpon vs all things needfull for our being and well-being, for this life and for a better life. Yea euen thee, thee (O Lord) haue we presumed to offend, that hast beene thus abundantly mercifull vnto vs. For this our vnthankefulnesse and wicked∣nesse, enter not into iudgement with vs, wee most humbly be∣seech thee from the bottome of our hearts; but haue mercy vpon vs, haue mercy vpon vs, most mercifull Father, and in mercy wash away all our sinnes with the bloud of Iesus Christ, that so they may neuer be laid to our charge, nor haue power to rise vp in iudgement against vs. Pierce our hearts with a feeling of our sinnes, that wee may mourne for them, as wee ought to doe; make vs to loath and abhorre them, that we may leaue and auoid them, that we may be watchfull against all occasions of sinne, and circum∣spect ouer our owne wayes. Poure thy spirit and put thy grace into our hearts, that there∣by we may be inabled for thy seruice, and both in body and soule may glorifie thee heere, that wee may be glorified of thee and with thee hereafter. And as a speciall meanes to keepe vs in subiection before thee, worke in vs, holy Father, a continuall and effectuall re∣membrance of this earths vani∣ty, of our owne mortality, of that great and terrible iudge∣ment to come; of the paines of hell, and ioyes of heauen which follow after; O let the remem∣brance of these things be a spur to prouoke vs vnto vertue, and a bridle to hold vs in from gal∣lopping after vice and wicked∣nesse. We know not ow soone thou wilt set a period to our liues, and call for our soules to appeare before thee, whether this day or not before the eue∣ning; O prepare vs therefore for the houre of death, that we may then neither feare nor faint, but may with ioy yeeld vp our soules into thy mercifull hands, and doe thou, O Father of mercy, receiue them. Let thy mercifull eye looke vpon vs this day, shield vs from the tempta∣tions of the diuell, and grant vs the custody of thy holy Angels, to defend vs in all our wayes: enable vs with diligence and conscience to discharge the du∣ties of our callings, and crowne all our endeauours with thy blessing: without thy blessing all mans labour is but vaine, doe thou therefore blesse vs in our seuerall places; oh prosper thou our handy-worke. Prouide for vs all things which thou knowest to be needful for euery one of vs this day. Giue vs a sanctified vse of thy creatures, a godly iealousie ouer ourselues, a continual remembrance of thy omniscience, and omnipresence, that we may labour to approue our very thoughts vnto thee; weane vs from the loue of this world, and rauish our soules with the loue of our home and thine euerlasting Kingdome. Defend the vniuersall Church, the Churches of this Land es∣pecially, our gracious King Charles, our illustrious Queene Mary, together with Prince Pa∣latine Electour, the Princesse Elizabeth his wife, and their Princely issue; crowne them with thy graces here, and with thy glory hereafter. Be with the Magistracie and Ministerie of the Realme, make thy Gos∣pell to flourish amongst vs by the labors of those whom thou hast appointed to this great ser∣uice. Comfort thine afflicted seruants, in what place or case soeuer they be; giue vs a fel∣low feeling of their miseries, and wisedome to prepare our selues against the euill day. Heare vs in these things, and grant what else thou knowest needfull for vs, not for our wor∣thinesse, but for thy Sons sake, our alone Sauiour, in whose name and words, we conclude our imperfect prayers, saying: Our Father, &c. A houshold Prayer for pri∣uate Families in the Euening. O Glorious God, in Iesus Christ our gra∣cious Father, wee wretched creatures by nature, but by thy grace thy seruants and children, doe here make bold to appeare before thee in the humility of our soules, to performe some part of that dutie which wee owe vnto thee. And first we offer vnto thy diuine Maiestie the calues of our lips, the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiuing for thine infinite mercies which thou hast beene pleased to con∣ferre vpon vs out of thy bound∣lesse and endlesse goodnesse. What thou hast done for vs this day, is beyond all that we are able to expresse or conceiue: thou hast preserued vs from all perils and dangers, so that none of those iudgements (which our sinnes haue deserued) haue bin inflicted vpon vs; thou hast inlarged our time and opportu∣nitie to repent; thou hast pro∣uided for our soules and bodies; thou hast bin no way wanting vnto vs, if we had hearts to ac∣knowledge it. Forgiue vs that wee cannot acknowledge thy goodnesse as we ought to doe, and more and more quicken vs in this dutie, that we may with heart and voyce acknowledge thee to be that Father of lights, from whom we doe receiue euery good and perfect gift: ascribing vnto thee the whole glory of all that we enioy, both now and euermore. And grant we pray thee, that our thank∣fulnesse may not be onely ver∣ball, but reall, we labouring in deede and in truth to be dutifull vnto thee that hast bin so boun∣tifull vnto vs▪ Pardon vs for the sinnes of this day, wherein we haue offended thee, whether open or secret, of ignorance or of knowledge, of infirmity or presumption, of omission or commission, in thought, word or deed. The sinnes of this day are enough to plunge vs, soule and body, into the bottomelesse gulfe of perdition. If thou shouldest straightly mark them, what answer shall we be able to make thee, how shall we dare to appeare in thy presence, be∣fore whom all thy creatures feare and tremble? But thy mercy is aboue all thy workes; much more aboue all our works of sinne. In the confidence of thy mercy we come vnto thee, beseeching thee in thy sonne Christ to be reconciled with vs, and to assure vs hereof by the certificate of thine owne blessed spirit. Breake the strength of sinne that would subdue vs more and more; and reare in vs cleane hearts, and renew a right spirit within vs. Increase our faith in the sweet promises of the Gos∣pell, and our repentance from dead workes, our hope of eter∣nall life, our feare of thy name, our zeale for thy glory, our ha∣tred of sinne, our loue of righ∣teousnesse, our contentment in all estates, our patience in ad∣uersitie, our prudence in prospe∣rity: that so being furnished with the endowments of grace here, we may be fitted for the enioyment of glory hereafter. And because the night is now vpon vs, and our bodies desirous of quiet rest, wee pray thee to take vs into thy blessed tuition, and to refresh our wearied bo∣dies with comfortable sleepe. Protect vs and all that doe be∣long vnto vs vnder the shadow of thy wings, defend vs from all euill, both o sinne and punish∣ment: keepe vs from security and carelesnesse, from dulnesse and drows nesse of spirit, from fire and robbery, from the ma∣lice of Satan and all his adhe∣rents, from all perils into which for our sinnes we might iustly fall. Let the sight of the bed minde vs of that last bed, the graue, wherein we are shortly to take vp our lodging, we know not how soone. None of vs here present can certainly tell, whether these eyes of ours once closed vp, shall euer any more open againe in this world: therfore receiue vs, good Lord, receiue vs into the armes of thy mercy, vnto thine almighty protection wee bequeath our selues, soules and bodies, and all that we haue: vpon thy mercy alone we cast our selues both this present night and for euer more. Be mercifull to thy whole Church, continue the flourishing state of the King∣domes, wherin weliue. Decrease in it the number of superstitious Papists and prophane Atheists, and increase in it the number of such as vnfainedly feare thee. Preserue from all dangers and conspiracies our religious King Charles, our gracious Queene Mary, the Prince Palatine of Rhene, with that excellent Lady Elizabeth his wife, and their children. Giue them all such a measure of thy spirit and grace, that they may seeke to aduance thy kingdome on earth, and at last be aduanced to thine euer∣lasting Kingdome in heauen. Endow the right Honorable of our Priuie Counsell with all such graces as may make them fit for so high a place. Stirre vp Magistrates and men in autho∣rity, to endeauour after the fur∣thering of thine honour, and the benefiting of thy people. Make the Ministers able and willing to discharge the duties of their weighty calling with diligence and conscience; water their in∣deauours with the dew of hea∣uen, that daily such as belong vnto life eternall may be added vnto the Church. Comfort, O comfort thine afflicted ser∣uants, wheresoeuer or howsoe∣uer troubled: sweeten their af∣flictions and season their sor∣rowes with the comforts of thy spirit. Giue them all needfull assistance, and in thy owne time a ioyfull deliuerance. And make vs ready for afflictions, that they may not come vpon vs as a snare, but that we may in good measure, like wise Virgins be prepared for the comming of Christ Iesus, the sweet Bride∣groome of our soules. Finally, we pray thee beare with the weakenesse, and coldnesse, and imperfection of our prayers, & to grant our requests, not for our merits, but for thine owne mercies, and for the sake of thy dearely beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, who died to make satis∣faction for vs, & liueth to make intercession for vs, in whose words we shut vp our imperfect prayers, saying, as himselfe hath taught vs. Our Father, &c. O Lord blesse and saue vs, make thy face to shine vpon vs, thy word to instruct vs, thy grace to direct vs, thy Angels to protect vs, thy spirit to comfort and support vs, vnto the end, and in the end, Amen, Amen. A Prayer in time of Warre. O H Lord God of hoasts, in power inuincible, in wisedome vnsearcha∣ble, in mercy incomprehensible; that giuest deliuerance in the time of trouble, and assistance in the day of battell; wee most humbly and heartily beseech thee to saue vs from all those extremities, and in speciall from our enemies, which our sinnes doe threaten to bring vpon vs. Hitherto thou hast pleased to make our Nation a spectacle of thy ineff ble goodnesse, but we deserue to be made a spectacle of thy vnsupportable wrath. Our contempt of thy threat∣nings, our abuse of thy mercies, our neglect of thy iudgements, with infinite other inormities, doe menace the taking away of thy old mercies, and the bring∣ing in of some iudgement. We haue iust cause to feare, O Lord, that our loud and crying sinnes doe call in our enemies vpon vs, and arme them against vs; yea, that they are already prest and prepared to execute thy vengeance. Then open our eyes, we pray thee, that we may see thy Ensigne set vp, thy Ban∣ner displayed, and the euidence of thy approaching sword: open our eares that wee may heare thee blowing of thy trumpet, and giuing the alarum to warre: open our hearts that we may not be secure in so great danger, but may quake and tremble to see thy hand of vengeance be∣fore vs. And howsoeuer by our sinnes we are set in the middest of this danger, yet let the hand of thy mercy (which is as om∣nipotent as that of thy iustice) rescue vs; let thy out-stretched arme deliuer vs. Put vp thy sword into the scabbard; oh bid it rest and be still. Be fauou∣rable and gracious vnto this thy Syon, crowne her with plenty, prosperity, and victory. Let not her enemies reioyce in her sub∣uersion, nor triumph in her destruction. Hide not thy face from her in the day of trouble; stoppe not thine eares at our prayers. Be vnto vs all a horne of saluation, a rocke of safetie, a wall of brasse, a strong tower and fortresse against the face and force of our enemies: diuert their designes, frustrate their enuie, abate their fury, asswage their pride, restraine their power: and in thy name let vs tread them vnder, that maliciously and mischieuously rise vp against vs. Suffer not the light of thy Gospel to be eclip∣sed, nor the splender of thy glory to be obscured; let not thy name be dishonoured, nor thy Sanctuary defiled, nor thy truth slandered: but now and euer defend and deliuer (as thou hast formerly done) this Church and State, from plagne, Pesti∣lence, and aboue all, that most terrible vengeance, the deuou∣ring sword: and that for his sake who hath led captiuity captiue, and like a victorious Conque∣ror hath triumphed ouer all his enemies, euen Iesus Christ, to whom with the Father and holy Ghost, be all ho∣nour and glory, Amen. A Prayer for them that are about the Sicke. H Eare vs, Almighty and most mercifull God and Sauiour, extend thine accustomed goodnesse to this thy seruant, which is grie∣ued with sicknesse; visite him (O Lord) as thou didst Peters wiues mother, and the Captains seruant, restore vnto this sicke body his former health (if it be thy will) or else giue him grace to take this thy visitation pati∣ently, that after this painfull life ended he may dwell with thee in euerlasting life: O Lord, be∣hold we bend our knees, yea the knees of our hearts with vnfained prayers, & lift vp our eyes to the throne of thy mer∣cies seat, to hearken to these our petitions, according to thy promises, therefore, O Lord, grant our requests, we are ga∣thered here together in thy name, in the behalfe of this thy seruant; deliuer him we hum∣bly beseech thee, from these his languishing paines and miseries of sicknesse, and as it hath plea∣sed thee to lay thine hand vpon him; so, O Lord, restore him to his former health; keepe him, O Lord, from fearefull and terrible assaults, and despightful temptations of the diuell, sinne, and hell: deliuer him, O Lord, as thou deliueredst Noah from the raging waues of the flouds; Lot from the destruction of Sa∣dome; Abraham from the feare of the aldeans; the children of Israel from the tyranny of Pha∣raoh; Dauid from the hands of Goliah; the three men from the violence of the fiery furnace in Babylon; Daniel from the mouth of the Lyons; Ionas from the belly of the Whale, and Peter from the prison of Herod: Euen so, O gracious Lord▪ deliuer the soule of this person, both now, and whensoeuer he shall dep rt hence from all perill and dan∣ger, open vnto him at the houre of death the doore of Paradice, the gates of heauen, and the en∣try of euerlasting life, O Lord Iesus Christ forgiue him all his sinnes, and lead him with ioy into the kingdome of thy hea∣uenly Father, euen vnto the bo∣some of Abraham, and appoint him his euerl sting rest that he may reioyce with thee, and all the elect children of God, to whom be all honour glory, power, and domi∣nion, Amen. The sicke persons Prayer. L Ord hearken to my prayer, and giue eare to my humble request, Lord be mercifull vnto me, and giue me grace patiently to beare the crosse, and in the midst of this my sicknesse al∣wayes to say; thy will, O hea∣uenly Father, be done, and not mine; forgiue and forget, most gracious Father▪ all mine iniqui∣ties, blot them out of thy re∣membrance and cast them from thy sight, O Lord, as farre as the East is from the West, the North from the South: they are many and innumerable, let them not rise vp in iudgement against me: neither enter thou into thy narrow iudgement with thy seruant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous before thee, handle me not according to my deserts, deale not with me after my wickednesse, neither reward me aftermine iniquities; O Lord my God looke not into my n∣ormious nor incestious life: I am ashamed of my sinnes, and aske pardon for my faults, euen with a repenting heart and sorrow∣full minde, a bleeding soule, with hidden teares of a true and vnfained▪ repentance for my misdeeds; yea, my wounded breast surcharged with oppres∣sing griefes, doth sigh, groane, and lament vnder the burthen of my heinous crimes: where∣fore, O Lord, wash them away with thy bloud which thou hast shed for my sinnes, and I shall be clean and pure without spot; purge me, O Lord, with those precious drops that distilled from thy tormented heart, and I shall be whiter then the snow, burie mine offences in the se∣pulcher of thy▪ death, and cloath me with the garment of righte∣ousnesse, O Lord, for thine in∣finite goodnesse and mercy s ke eceiue me into thy tuition and fauour; pardon, O Lord, and remit my sins, as thou forgauest Dauid his murther and adultery with Bersheba; Saul his persecu∣tions of thy people; Peter his deniall; Mary Magdalen her las∣ciuious life, and the Publican in the Temple with striking his breast craued thy gracious par∣don: saying, Lord haue mercy vpon me a sinner, and although my sinnes and offences are farre greater, and more grieuous then these; yet, O Lord, thy mercies exceede and are far more com∣passionate then our sinnes ma∣nifold; I iustifie not my selfe, O my God, by the offences of these, but declare thy righteous∣nesse and mercifull clemencies in forgetting and forgiuing our abhominable trespasses and transgressions of thy wil, which though wee are froward, yet thou art gentle, though we are stubborne, yet thou art meeke, and though we run headlong to the pits brinke, and to the gates of hell; yet thou of thy good∣nesse callest vs backe, and re∣mittest all that wee haue done amisse; O Lord, I haue acknow∣ledged my faults that they are best knowne vnto thee: where∣fore, O Lord, I aske forgiuenes for the same, send me the com∣fort of thy holy spirit, that if thou giue me my former health and strength of body, I may amend my life according to thy sacred will, and walke worthi∣ly in thy Lawes and Comman∣dements: if it be thy pleasure to take mee hence out of this transitory life, O Lord, grant that I may rest and liue with thee for euer, world without end O Lord, heaken vnto these my petitions for Iesus Christ his sake, I aske them and all other things which thou shalt thinke meet both for our soules and bodies in the same forme of prayer as hee himselfe hath taught vs, saying: Our Father, &c. A Prayer at the houre of death. O Lord Iesus Christ, which art the onely health of all men liu∣ing, and the euerla∣sting life of them which dye in thy faith; I wretched sinner giue and submit my selfe wholly to thy most blessed will, being sure that the thing cannot perish which is committed vnto thy mercy, I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, to giue me grace that I may now willingly leaue this fraile and wicked flesh in hope of the resurrection, which in better manner shall restore it to me againe, grant me, O Lord God that thou wilt by thy grace make strong my soule against all temptations, and that thou wilt couer and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against the assaults of Satan; I acknow∣ledge, that there is in my selfe no hope of saluation; but all my hope and trust is in thy most mercifull goodnesse, I haue no no merits nor good workes, which I may alleadge before thee; of sinnes and euill works, alas! I see a great heape, but through thy mercy I trust to be of the number of thē to whom thou wilt not impute their sins, but take and impute mee for righteous and iust, and to be the inheritor of euerlasting glory. Thou, O most mercifull Lord, wert borne for my sake, thou didst suffer both hunger and thirst, thou didst preach, teach, pray, and fast for my sake, thou didst all good workes, and suffe∣redst most grieuous pangs and torments for my sake: and fi∣nally, thou gauest thy most pre∣cious body to dye, and thy bles∣sed bloud to be shed on the crosse for my sake: wherefore most mercifull Sauiour, let all these things profit me, which thou hast freely giuen mee, which hast giuen thy selfe for me, let thy bloud cleanse and wash away the spots and foule∣nesse of my sinnes, let thy righ∣teousnesse hide and couer my vnrighteousnesse, let the merits of thy bitter sufferings be a suf∣ficient and propitiatory sacri∣fice, and satisfaction for my sinnes: giue me, O Lord, thy grace, that my faith and beleefe of thy true and grieuous death wauer not in me, but euer be firme and constant, that the hope of thy mercy & life euer∣lasting neuer decay in me, that charitie waxe not cold in me: and finally, that the weaknesse of my flesh be not ouercome with the feare of death; grant me also, O most mercifull Saui∣our, that when death hath shut vp the eyes of my body, yet the eyes of my soule may still be∣hold and looke vpon thee, and that when death hath taken a∣way the vse of my tongue and speech; yet my heart may cry, and say vnto thee, O Lord, into thy hands I giue and com∣mi my soule, Lord Iesus receiue my spirit, and take mee to thy mercies, A∣men. A Prayer for a Woman in time of her trauaile. R Ighteous & holy Lord God, I doe now finde by experience the fruit of my sinne, that I must trauaile in sorrow, and bring forth in paine: and I vnfainedly adore the truth of thy sacred Word, as certifying vnto me, that sor∣row must be in the Euening: so comforting me also against the Morning, that a Childe shall be borne. Willingly I doe desire to submit my selfe in hope into this thy chastisement; and to learne the desert of my sinne, horrible in themselues, that these temporall paines, are fore∣runners of eternall: and yet by thy mercy may be so sanctified vnto me, as not onely to pre∣uent eternal vengeance, but also prepare for eternall comforts, euen to be Saued by bearing of Children. Grant me therefore (gracious Father) true repentance and pardon for my sinnes past, that they may not stand at this time in this my neede betweene mee and thy mercy. Giue mee a comfortable feeling of thy loue in Christ, which may sweeten all other pangs, though neuer so violent or extreame: make me still to lift vp my soule vnto thee, in my greatest agonies, knowing that thou alone must giue a blessing to the ordinary meanes for my safe deliuerance. Lay no more vpon me then I am able to endure; & strengthen my weake body to the bearing of what sorrow soeuer, by which it shall seeme good vnto thee to make triall of me. Grant me to consider that how soeuer it be with me, yet I am alwaies as thine hand, whose mercies faile not, who will be found in the Mount and greatest extremitie, and to whom be∣long the issues of death: so pre∣pare me therefore to death, that I may be fit for life, euen to yeeld fruit aliue vnto the world, and to be renewed and enabled to nourish the same. And when thou hast safely giuen mee the expected fruit of my wombe, make me with a thankfull heart to consecrate both it and my selfe wholly to thy seruice all the dayes of my life, through Iesus Christ mine onely Sa∣uiour and Redee∣mer, Amen. A Thanksgiuing after safe deliuerance. O Blessed for euer be thy great and glorious Name (most deere and louing Father) for thy great mercy to me most weake and sinfull woman. Wonderfull art thou in all thy workes (O Lord) the riches of thy mercies are past finding out: thou hast plunged me with great afflictions, and yet thou hast returned and refreshed me againe: thou hast brought me to the feare of the graue, and yet thou hast raised me vp again to life. O how hast thou shew∣ed thy power in my weaknesse? How hath thy louing kindnesse preuailed against my vnworthi∣nesse? Thou mightest for my sinnes haue left me to perish in mine extremities, but thou hast compassed me about with ioy∣full deliuerance: thou mightest haue made my wombe a graue to burie the dead: or in affoor∣ding life to another, thou migh∣test haue procured my death, but yet thou hast not onely made my wombe a wel-spring of life, but restored life vnto me also, for the cherishing thereof. Marucilous (O Lord) are thy workes, infinite are thy mercies, my soule by present experience knoweth it well. O my soule praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name. My soule praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Thou hast heard my prayers, and looked vpon my sorrow, thou hast redeemed my life from death, and healed mine infirmities, and crowned me with thine euerlasting com∣passions. O giue me, I humbly pray thee, a thankfull heart, not onely now while the memory & sense of thy fauour is fresh before me, but continually euen so long as I haue any being. Grant that I may learne by this liuely euidence of thy pow∣er and mercy, for euer hereafter to depend onely on thee. Quic∣ken me also to all holy duties, that my thankfulnesse may ap∣peare in my pure and Christian carriage. Make me a kind and carefull mother, willing to vndergoe the paine and trouble of education. Let no nicenesse or curiositie hinder mee from those seruices, to whom both nature and reli∣gion hath appointed me▪ let me also be carefull when time re∣quireth, to season the fruit thou hast giuen me, with the sauing knowledge of thee, & thy deere Son, that my desire may mani∣festly appeare to be set for the encrease of thy Kingdome. Vouchsafe so to order my affe∣ctions & to bring them in obe∣dience vnto thee, that if it shold be thy pleasure either now or hereafter to take this Infant frō me, I may as willingly part with it, as thou freely gane it me. And now (O God) perfect in mee that strength which thou hast begun, make me to grow in care to serue thee faithfully, both in the duties of pietie, and in other businesse of my place and calling, that I may be a comfort to my husband, and example to my neighbours, a grace to my profession, and a meanes of glorie to thy Name, through Iesus Christ my Lord and Sauiour, Amen. FINIS. For Christmas day. REmember all that on this morne, Our blessed Sauior Christ was borne; Who issued from a Virgin pure, Our soules from Sathan to secure, And patronise our feeble spirit, That we through him may heauen inherit. For Saint Stephens night. THis blessed time beare in your minde, How that blest Martyr Stephen dy∣ed, In whom was all that good confinde, That might with flesh and bloud abide: In doctrine and example he Taught what to doe, and what to flee: Full of the spirit he would preach, Against opinions false and naught, Confute them too, and boldly teach What Christ himselfe to him had taught; For which at last he lost his breath, Ston'd by the stony hearts to death: Let vs then learn by this blest Martyrs end, To see our oliies, and our liues amend. For Saint Johns day. THis man the word did boldly teach, Saw Christ transformed, and did preach, The glory in that Mount he saw; And by that glory stroue to draw, The soule of man to sinne a thrall, To heauen, to which God send vs all. For Innocents day. THe swords of Herods seruants tooke Such sweet yong things, as with a look Might make a heart of Marble melt, But they nor grace, nor pittie felt; Some from the cradle, some awake, Some sweetly sleeping, some they take Dandled vpon their mothers lap, Some from their armes, some from the pap. For New-yeares day. ALL you that doe the Bell-man heare, The first day of this hopefull yeare; I doe in loue admonish you, To bid your old sins all adue, And walke as Gods iust Law requires, In holy deeds and good desires, Which if to doe youle doe your best, God will in Christ forgiue the rest. For Saint Dauids day. I Am no Welchman, but yet to show The loue I to the Countrey owe, I call this morning, and be seeke Each man prepare him for his Leeke; For as I heare some men say, The first of March is Saint Dauids day; That worthy Britaine, valiant, wise, Withstood his Countries enemies, And caused his Souldiers there to choose Leekes for to know them from his foes; W o brauely fought, and conquest won, And so the custome first begun. Then weare your Leeks, and doe not shame To memorize your worthies name: So noble Britaines all adew, Loue still King Charles, for he loues you. For the 5. of Nouemb. Awake Britaines subiects with one accord, Extoll and praise, and magnifie the Lord, Humble your hearts, and with deuotion sing Praises of thanks to God for our most gracious King; This was the night when in a dark some Cell, Treason was found in earth it hatcht in hell; And had it tooke effect, what would auail'd our sorrow, The traine being laid to haue blowne vs vp o▪ th' morrow? Yet God our guide reueal'd the damned plot, And they themselues destroy'd▪ and we were not. Then let vs not forget him thankes to render, That hath preseru'd and kept our saiths desender. For Good Fryday. ALL you that now in bed doe lye, Know, Iesus Christ this night did dye, Our soules most sinfull for to saue, That we eternall life might haue; His whips, his grones, his crown of thornes, Would make vs weepe, lament, and mourn. For Sunday. LEt labour passe, let prayer be This day the chiefest worke for thee, Thy selfe and seruants more and lesse, This day must let all labour passe. All hale to you that sleepe and rest; Repent, awake, your sinnes detest, Call to your minde the day of doome, For then our Sauiour Christ will come, Accompt to haue be hath decreed, Of euery thought, word, worke, and deede: And as we haue our times here past, So shall our Iudgements be at last. AS darke some night vnto thy thoughts present, What 'tis to want the dayes bright Element, So let thy soule descend through contemplation, Where vtter darknesse keepes her habitation, Where endlesse, easelesse pines remedilesse Attend to torture sinnes curst wilfulnesse: O then remember whilst thou yet hast time To call for mercy for each forepast crime; And with good Dauid wash thy bed with teares, That so repentance may subdue hels feares: Then shall thy soule more purer then the Sunne, Ioy as a Gyant her best race to runne, And in vnspotted robes her selfe addresse To meet her Lord that Sonne of righteousnesse, To whom with God the Father and the Spirit Be all due praise, where all true ioyes inherit. THe Belman like the wakefull morning Cocke, Doth warne you to be vigilant and wise: Looke to your fire, your candle and your locke, Preuent what may through negligence arise; So may you sleepe with peace and wake with ioy, And no mischances shall your state annoy. YOur beds compare vnto the graue, Then thinke what sepulcher you haue. For though you lay you downe to sleepe, The Belman wakes your peace to keepe, And nightly walkes the round about, To see if fire and light be out; But when the morne (dayes light) appeares Be you as ready for your prayers: So shall your labours thriue each day, That you the Belman well may pay. Like to the Seaman is our life, Tost by the waues of sinfull strife, Finding no ground whereon to stand, Vncertaine death is still at hand: If that our liues so vainlesse be, Then all the world is vanitie. THose that liue in wrath and ire, And goe to rest in any sinne, They are worse vnto their house the fire, Or violent theeues that would breake in. Then seeke to shun with all your might, That Hidr as head, that monstrous sin; That God may blesse your goods abroad, And eke also your selues within. SLeepe on in peace, yet waking be, And dread his powerfull Maiestie, Who can translate the irkesome night, From darknesse to that glorious light, Whose radient beames when once they rise, With winged speed the darknesse flyes. THou God that art our helpe at hand, Preserue and keepe our King & land Frem forraigne and domesticke foes, Such as the word and truth depose; And euer prosper those of pittie, That loue the peace of this our Citie. AWake from sleepe, awake from sin, With voyce and heart to call on him, Who from aboue pleas'd to d scend, From Sathans malice to desend Our forfeit soules, to that ich grace Where we may still behold his face. LEt vs repare and God implore, That henceforth we transgres no more And that our ioy be at this tide, That we in him be satisfide; Then shall we all for his deare sake, Be blest asleepe, be blest awake. SIth neither men nor Angels know, When as the dreadful trump shal blow, Nor when our Sauiour Christ shall come To giue the world a wofull doome; Thinke then but what a case you're in, That sleepe in vnrepented sinne: O wake, O wake, O watch and pray, And thinke vpon this dreadfull day. SLeepe not so sound, rest not secure, Marke well my words, of this be sure The waking Virgins past the gate, When those that slept came all too late: Wherefore be watchfull in your center, That you may with the Bridegrome enter. IF wicked impes make day and night, And keepe their candle alwayes light, And all their skill and practise bend, To bring their damned plots to end; Let vs not sleepe, but laud his skill, That frustrates all their proiects still. THe night well spent, the day drawes nigh, Awake from sleepe and sinne de ie, All sluggish sloath expell away, Haue still in minde the iudgement day, When dead shall rise at trumpets call, The graues shall open wide with all. ARise from sinne, awake from sleepe, The earth doth mourne, The heauens weepe; The winds and Seas distempered bin, And all by reason of mans sin: Wherefore arise, ay sleepe aside, And call on God to be your guide, From raging sword and arrowes flight, And from the terrours of the night; From fires flame, from sin and sorrow, God blesse you all, and so good morrow. ALL you which in your beds doe lye, Vnto the Lord ye ought to cry, That he would pardon all your sinnes; And thus the Belmans prayer begins; Lord giue vs grace our sinful life to mend, And at the last to send a ioyfull end: Hauing put out your fire and your light, For to conclude, I bid you all good night. MAns life is like a warfare on the earth, Whose time is spent with troubles, toyles and cares, Subiect to all temptations from his birth: In woe he liues and dyes at vnawares. The surest signe true fortitude to show, Is in his life all vice to ouerthrow. O Harke, O harke my Masters all, To your poore seruants cry and call: And know all you that lye at ease, That our great God may if he please, Depriue you of your vitall breath: Then sleeping thinke your sleep is death. LEt true repentance cleanse your sin, And then your soules cōmend to him, That by his death hath rais'd and cur'd The dead, the blinde, and them assured To giue to them eternall rest, To liue in heauen among the blest. Confesse thy sinnes to God on hie, Who pardons sinners when they cry; Bewray thy faults to him in time, Who will in Christ forgiue thy crime. HE that on the crosse hath dyed, And for our sinnes was crucisied, Be you euer blest in him, And cleane re itted from your sinne: Be it granted as I haue praid, And so the Belman resteth paid. ALL you that in bed doe lye, Harken well to what I cry, Leaue of your sinnes, repentance craue, It is the onely way your soules to saue. REpent in time while ye haue breath, Repentāce commeth not after death: He therefore that will liue for aye, Must leaue his sinnes, and to God pray. O Gracious God and blessed, Preserue all ye that be in bed, So that your quiet rest may take, Vntill the morning that yee wake: Then may ye all with praises sing, To thee O God our heauenly King. REmember man thou art but dust, There is none aliue but dye he must, To day a man, to morrow none, So soone our life is past and gone. Mans life is like a withered flower, Aliue and dead all in an houre, Leaue of thy sins therefore in time, And Christ will rid thee from thy crime. O Mortall man that is made of dust, In worldly riches put not thy trust, Remember how thy time doth passe, Euen like the sand that from the Glasse, Hath spent the time and there remaines, Neuer canst thou call that time againe. SIcke men complaine they cannot sleepe, The Bel-man such a noise doth keepe; Others that doe win at play, Saies he too soone proclaimes the day: Yet to the sicke that drawes short breath, It puts them in the minde of death; And saies the gamster makes good stake, If he for heauen so long would wake; And all this while like silly worme, He doth his office but performe: Then if his duety breed disease, Heele go to bed and none displease. FINIS. printer's or publisher's device