A most excellent treatise containing the way to seek heavens glory, to flie earths vanity, to feare hells horror with Godly prayers and the bell-mans summons. Rowlands, Samuel, 1570?-1630? A most excellent treatise containing the way to seek heavens glory, to flie earths vanity, to feare hells horror with Godly prayers and the bell-mans summons. Rowlands, Samuel, 1570?-1630? The third edition / HEAVENS GLORY, SEEKE IT. EARTS VANITIE, FLYE IT. HELLS HORROR, FERE IT. LONDON, printed for Michaell Sparke. A o . 1638. To the Reader. T HE present carelesse security of all men in generall, is like unto our first Parents neg∣lect of Gods sacred commandement in Paradice, when the seducing Serpent no sooner per∣swaded evill, but it was instantly put in practise: You shall die (said God) was heard, but you shal not die (said the Divell) was beleeved. Our eares are daily acquainted with the threatnings of Gods de∣nounced against sinners, and yet that sinne, that broad way path and high-way to hell, is attempted with a delectation and pleasure, so craftie and subtill are the baits and lures of the deceiver, and so void of spirituall wisedome is the soule-murdering sinner. But if due consideration were had of the wages of sinne, and the reward of unrighteousnesse, and to what bitternesse it will turne in the end, it would make us lesse bold to sinne, and more fearefull to of∣fend, if wee would take into our company for a daily consort, the pale memory of death, and where∣to he summeth us after this life. Death it selfe is very fearefull, but much more terrible, in regard of the judgement it warneth us unto. Imagine to see a sinner lie on his departing bed, burde∣ned and tyred with the grievous and heavie load of all his former trespasses, goared with the sting and pricke of a festered consci∣ence, feeling the crampe of death wresting at his heart strings, ready to make the ruthfull di∣vorce betweene soule and body, panting for breath, and swim∣ming in a cold and fatall sweat, wearied with strugling against the deadly pangs: Oh how much would he give for an houre of re∣pentance! at what rate would he value a daies contrition! Then worlds would bee worthlesse, in respect of a little respite, a short truce would seeme more precious than the treasures of Empires, nothing would bee so much estee∣med as a moment of time, which now by moneths and yeeres is la∣vishly spent. How inconsolable were his case, his friends being fled, his sences frighted, his thoughts a∣mazed, his memorie decaied, his whole minde agast, and no part able to performe that it should, but onely his guiltie conscience pestered with sinne, continually upbraiding him with bitter accusations? what would hee thinke then (stripped out of this mortall weed, and turned both out of the service and house∣roome of this world) hee must passe before a most severe Iudge, carrying in his owne conscience his enditement written, and a perfect register of all his mis∣deeds: when he should see the Iudge prepared to passe the sen∣tence against him, and the same to bee his Vmpire, whom by so many offences he hath made his enemie: VVhen not onely the di∣vels, but even the Angels, should plead against him, and himselfe maugre his will, bee his owne sharpest appeacher: VVhat were to be done in these dreadfull exi∣gents? VVhen hee saw that gastly dungeon and huge gulfe of hell, breaking out with fearefull flames, the weeping, hou ing, and gnashing of teeth, the rage of all those hellish monsters, the horrour of the place, the rigour of the paine, the terrour of the company, and the eternitie of all those punishments. Would you thinke them wise that would daily in so weighty matters, and idlely play away the time allot∣ted them to prevent these in∣tollerable calamities? Would you then account it secure, to nurse in your bosome so many ougly Serpents as sinnes are, or to foster in your soule so many malicious accusers, as mortall faults are? Would you not then thinke one life too little to repent for so many iniquities, everie one whereof were enough to cast you into those everlasting and unspeakeable torments? Why then doe wee not (at the least) devote that small remnant of these our latter dayes, to the ma∣king an attonement with God, that our consciences may be free from this eternall danger? Who would relie the everlasting affaires of the life to come upon the gliding slipperinesse, and running streame of our uncertaine life? It is a preposterous pollicie (in any wise conceit) to fight against God till our weapons bee blunted, our forces consumed, our limmes impotent, and our breath spent; and then when wee fall for faint∣nesse, and have fought our selves almost dead, to presume on his mercy. It were a strange peece of Art, and a very exorbitant course, while the Ship is sound, the Pylot well, the Marriners strong, the gale favourable, and the Sea calme, to lie idle at rode: and when the Ship leakes, the Pylot were sicke, the Marriners faint, the stormes boysterous, and the Sea turmoyled with surges, to launch forth for a voyage into a farre Countrey: yet such is the skill of our evening re∣penters, who though in the sound∣nesse of health, and in the perfect use of reason, they cannot resolve to weigh the ankers that withhold them from God, neverthelesse, feed themselves with a strong per∣swasion, that when their sences are astonied, their wits distracted, their understanding dusked, and both body and minde racked and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortall sicknesse, then will they thinke of the weightiest matters, ad become Saints, when they are scarse able to behave themselves like reasonable crea∣tures? being then presumed to bee lesse then men: for how can he that is assaulted with an unsetled conscience, distrained with the wringing fits of his dying flesh, maimed in all his abilities, and circled in with so many encom∣brances, be thought of due discre∣tion to dispose of his chiefest jewell, which is his soule? No, no, they that will loyter in seed time, and begin then to sow when others begin to reape: they that will riot out their health, and cast their accounts when they can scarsely speake: they that will slumber out the day, and enter their journey when the light doth faile them, let them blame their owne folly, if they die in debt, and eternall beggerie, and fall headlong into the lapse of end∣lesse perdition. Great cause have wee then to have an hourely watchfull care over our soule, being so dangerous assaulted and environed: most in∣stantly entreating the divine Ma∣jesty to be our assured defence, and let us passe the day in mourning, the night in watching and wee∣ping, and our whole time in plaine∣full lamenting, falling downe up∣on the ground humbled in sack∣cloth and ashes, having lost the garment of Christ, that hee may receive what the persecuting ene∣my would have spoyled every short sigh will not bee sufficient satisfa∣ction, nor every knocke a warrant to getin. Many shall cry Lord, Lord, and shall not be accepted: the foolish Virgins did knocke, but were not admitted: Judas had some sorrow, and yet died despe∣rate. Foreslow not (saith the Holy Ghost) to be converted unto God, and make not a daily lingering of thy repaire unto him: for thou shalt finde the suddennesse of his wrath and revenge not slacke to destroy sinners. For which cause, let no man sojourne long in sinfull security, or post over his repen∣tance untill feare enforce him to it, but let us frame our premises as we would finde our conclusion, endeavouring to live as we are de∣sirous to die: let us not offer the maine crop to the Divell, and set God to gleane the reproofe of his harvest: let us not gorge the Di∣vell with our fairest fruits, and turne God to the filthy scraps of his leavings: but let us truly de∣dicate both soule and body to his service, whose right they are, and whose service they owe; that so in the evening of our life we may re∣tire to a Christian rest, closing up the day of our life with a cleare sunne-set, that leaving all dark∣nesse behind us, we may carry in our consciences the light of grace: and so escaping the horrour of an eternall night, passe from a mor∣tall day, to an everlasting morrow. Thine in Christ Jesus, Samuell Rowland. STrike saile, poore soule, in sins tempestuous tide, That runst to ruine and eternall wracke: Thy course from heaven is exceeding wide, Hels gulfe thou ent'rest, if grace guide not backe: Satan is Pilot in this navigation, The Ocean, Vanity, The Rocke, damnation. VVarre with the Dragon, and his whole alliance, Renounce his league, intends thy utter losse; Take in sinnes flag of truce, set out defiance, Display Christs ensigne with the bloudy crosse: Against a Faith-proofe armed Christian Knight, The hellish coward dares not mannage fight. Resist him then, if thou wilt victor be, For so he flies, and is disanimate; His fiery darts can have no force at thee, The shield of faith doth all their points rebate: He conquers none to his infernall den, But yeelding slaves, that wage not fight like men. Those in the dungeon of eternall darke, He hath enthralled everlasting date, Branded with Reprobations cole-blacke marke, Within the never-opening ramd up gate: Where Dives rates one drop of water more Than any crowne that ever Monarch wore. Where furies haunt the heart∣torne wretch, despaire, Where clamours cease not, teeth are ever gnashing, Where wrath and vengeance sit in horrors chaire, Where quenchlesse flames of sulphur fire be flashing, Where damned soules blaspheme God in despight, Where utter darknesse stands remov'd from light. Where plagues inviron, torments compasse round, Where anguish rores in never stinted sorrow, Where woe, woe, woe, is every voices sound, Where night eternall never yeelds tomorrow: VVhere damned tortures dreadfull shall persever, So long as God is God, So long is ever. Heavens Glory. WHo loves this life, from love his love doth erre, And chusing drosse, rich treasure doth denie, Leaving the pearle, Christs counsels to preferre, With selling all we have, the same to buy: O happy soule. that doth disburse a summe, To gaine a kingdome in the life to come. Such trafficke may be tearmed heavenly thrift, Such venter hath no hazard to disswade Immortall purchase, with a mortall gift, The greatest gaine that ever Merchant made: To get a crowne where Saints and Angels sing, For laying out a base and earthly thing. To taste the joyes no humane knowledge knowes, To heare the tunes of the coelestiall quires, T'attaine heav'ns sweet and mildest calme repose, To see Gods face the summe of good desires. Which by his glorious Saints is howerly eyde, Let sight with seeing, never satisfide. Sod as he is, sight beyond estimate, Which Angel tongues are unt aught to discover, Whose splendor doth The heavens illustrate, Vnto which sight each sight becomes a lover: Whom all the glorious court of heaven laud, With praises of eternities applaud. There where no teares are to interpret griefes, For any sighes, heart dolours to expound, There where no treasure is surpris'd by theeves, Nor any voice that speakes with sorrowes sound. No use of passions, no distempered thought, No spot of sinne, no deed of errour wrought. The native home of pilgrime soules abode, Rest's habitation, joyes true residence, Ierusalem's new Citie built by God, Form'd by the hands of his owne excellence; With gold pav'd streets, the wals of precious stone, VVhere all sound praise to him sits on the throne. HEAVENS Glory, EARTHS Va∣nitie, and HELLS Torments. Of the Glory of the blessed Saints in Heaven. T O the end there might want nothing to stirre up our mindes to ver∣ e, after the paines which Al∣mighty God threatneth to the wicked, he doth also set before us the reward of the good: which is, that glory and everla∣sting life which the blessed Saints doe enjoy in Heaven, whereby he doth very mighti∣ly allure us to the love of the same. But what manner of thing this reward; and what this life is, there is no tongue, nei∣ther of Angels nor of men, that is sufficient to expresse it. How∣beit, that wee may have some kinde of savour and knowledge thereof, I intend here to re∣hearse even word for word what S. Augustine saith in one of his meditations, speaking o the life everlasting (ensuing thi transitorie time) and of the joyes of the blessed Saints in Heaven. O life (saith he) prepa∣red by Almighty God for his friends, a blessed life, a secure life, a quiet life, a beautifull life, a cleane life, a chast life, a holy life; a life that knoweth no death, a life without sadnesse, without labour, without griefe, without trouble, without cor∣ruption, without feare, without variety, without alteration; a life replenished with all beautie and dignity; where there is nei∣ther enemy that can offend, nor delight that can annoy, where love is perfect, and no feare at all, where the day is everlasting, and the spirit of all is one; where Almighty God is seene face to face, who is the onely meate whereupon they feed without loathsomenesse: it de∣lighteth mee to consider thy brightnesse, and thy treasures doe rejoyce my longing heart. The more I consider thee, the more I am striken in love with thee. The great desire I have of thee, doth wonderfully delight me, and no lesse pleasure is it to me, to keepe thee in my remem∣brance. O life most happy, O kingdome truly blessed, where∣in there is no death nor end, neither yet succession of time, where the day continuing ever∣more without night, knoweth not any mutation; where the victorious Conqueror being joyned with those everlasting quires of Angels, and having his head crowned with a gar∣land of glory, singeth unto Al∣mighty God one of the songs of Sion. Oh happy, yea, and most happy should my soule be, if when the race of this my pil∣grimage is ended, I might bee worthy to see thy glory, thy blessednesse, thy beauty, the wals and gates of thy Citie, thy streets, thy lodgings, thy noble Citizens, and thine omnipotent King in his most glorious Ma∣jestie. The stones of thy wals are precious, thy gates are ador∣ned with bright pearles, thy streets are of very fine excel∣lent gold, in which there ne∣ver faile perpetuall praises; thy houses are paved with rich stones, wrought throughout with Saphirs, and covered about with massie gold, where no uncleane thing may enter, neither doth any abide there that is defiled. Faire and beauti∣full in thy delights art thou O Ierusalem our mother, none of those things are suffered in thee, that are suffered here. There is great diversitie betweene thy things and the things that wee doe continually see in this life. In thee is never seene neither darkenesse nor night, neither yet any change of time. The light that shineth in thee, com∣meth neither of lampes, nor of Sunne or Moone, nor yet of bright glittering Starres, but God that proceedeth of God, and the light that commeth of light, is he that giveth clearenes unto thee. Even the very King of Kings himselfe keepeth con∣tinuall residence in the middest of thee, compassed about with his officers and servants. There doe the Angels in their orders and Quires sing a most sweere and melodious harmony. There is celebrated a perpetuall solem∣nity and feast with every one of them that cōmeth thither, after his departure out of this pilgri∣mage. There be the orders of Prophets; there is the famous company of the Apostles; there is the invincible army of Mar∣tyrs; there is the most reverent∣assembly of confessors; there are the true and perfect religi∣ous persons; there are the holy Virgins, which have over∣come both the pleasures of the world, and the frailty of their owne nature; there are the young men and young women, more ancient in vertue than in yeares; there are the sheepe and little lambes that have escaped from the Wolves, and from the deceitfull snares of this life, and therefore doe now keepe a per∣petuall feast, each one in his place, all alike in joy, though different in degree. There Cha∣rity raigneth in her full per∣fection, for unto them God is all in all, whom they behold without end, in whose love they bee all continually inflamed, whom they doe alwaies love, and in loving doe praise, and in praising, doe love, and all their exercises consist in praises, without wearinesse, and with∣out travell. O happie were I, yea, and very happy indeed, if at what time I shall bee loosed out of the prison of this wret∣ched body, I might be thought worthy to heare those songs of that heavenly melody, sung in the praise of the everlasting King, by all the Citizens of that so noble Citie. Happie were I, and very happie, if I might obtaine a roome among the Chaplaines of that Chap∣pell, and wait for my turne also to sing my Hallelujah. If I might bee neare to my King, my God, my Lord, and see him in his glory, even as he hath promised me, when he said: O Father, this is my last determi∣nate will, that all those that thou hast given unto me, may be with me, and see the glory which I had with thee before the world was created. Hetherto are the words of S. Augustine. Now tell me (Christian brother) what a day of glorious shine shall that be unto thee (if thou lead thy life in Gods feare) when after the course of this pilgrimage, thou shalt passe from death to im∣mortality; and in that passage, when others shall beginne to feare, thou shalt beginne to re∣joyce, and lift up thy head, be∣cause the day of thy deliverance is at hand. Come forth a little (saith S. Ierome unto the Vir∣gine Eustochia) out of the prison of this body, and when thou art before the gate of this Ta∣bernacle, set before thy eyes the reward that thou hopest to have for thy present labours. Tell me, what a day shall that bee, when our Lord himselfe with all his Saints, shall come and meete thee in the way, say∣ing unto thee: Arise and make hast O my beloved, my delight, and my Turtle dove, for now the VVin∣ter is past, and the tempestuous waters are ceased, the flowers doe beginne to appeare in our land. Cant. 2. How great joy shall thy soule then receive, when it shall be at that time presented before the Throne of the most blessed Trinity, by the hands of the ho∣ly Angels, and when shall be declared thy good workes, and what crosses, tribulations, and injuries thou hast suffered for Gods sake. Acts 9. S. Luke wri∣teth, That when holy Tabitha, the great almes giver was dead, all the Widdowes and poore folke came about the Apostle S. Peter, shewing unto him the garments which shee had given them: wherewith the Apostle being moved, made his prayer unto Almighty God for that so mercifull a woman, and by his prayers he raised her againe to life. Now what a gladnesse will it be to thy soule, when in the middest of those blessed spi∣rits thou shalt bee placed, with remembrance of thy almes∣deeds, thy prayers and fastings, the innocency of thy life, thy suffering of wrongs and inju∣ries, thy patience in afflictions, thy temperance in diet, with all other vertues and good workes that thou hast done in all thy life. O how great joy shalt thou receive at that time for all the good deeds that thou hast wrought; how clearely then shalt thou understand the value and the excellencie of vertue. There the obedient man shall talke of victories; there vertue shall receive her reward, and the good honoured according to their merit. Moreover, vvhat a pleasure vvill it bee unto thee, when thou shalt see thy selfe to bee in that sure haven, and shalt looke back upon the course of thy naviga∣tion which thou hast sailed here in this life: when thou shalt re∣member the tempests wherein thou hast beene tossed, the straits through which thou hast passed, and the dangers of theeves and pyrats, from whom thou hast escaped. There is the place where they shall sing the song of the Prophet, which saith, Had it not beene that our Lord had beene mine helper, it could not be but my soule had gone into hell. Especially, when from thence thou shalt behold so many sins as are committed every houre in the world, so many soules as doe descend every day into hell, and how it hath plea∣sed Almighty God, that among such a multitude of damned persons, thou shouldst be of the number of his elect, and one of those to whom he would grant such exceeding great felicity and glory. Besides all this, what a goodly sight will it bee to see those seats filled up, and the Ci∣tie builded, and the wals of that noble Ierusalem repaired againe? With what chearefull embra∣cings shall the whole court of Heaven entertaine them, behol∣ding them when they come loa∣den with the spoiles of their vanquished enemies? There shall those valiant men and wo∣men enter with triumph, which have together with the world conquered the weakenesse of their owne fraile nature. There shall they enter which have suf∣fered martyrdome for Christs sake, with double triumph over the flesh and the world, ador∣ned with all coelestiall glory. There shall also daily enter ma∣ny young men and children, which have vanquished the ten∣dernesse of their young yeares with discretion and vertue. Oh, how sweet and savorie shall the fruit of vertue then be, although for a time before her roots see∣med very bitter: sweete is the cold evening after the hot sunnie day; sweete is the foun∣taine to the weary thirstie tra∣vailer; sweet is rest and sleepe to the tired servant: but much more sweet is it to the Saints in Heaven to enjoy peace after warre, security after perill, eter∣nall rest after their paines and travels: for then are the warres at an end, then need they no more to goe all armed, both on the right side and on the left. The children of Israel went forth armed towards the land of Promise, but after that the land was conquered, they laid downe their speares, and cast a∣way their armour, and forget∣ting all feare and turmoile of warre, each one under the shad∣dow of his pavillion & harbour enjoyed the fruit of their sweete peace. Now may the watching Prophet come downe from his standing, that did watch and fix his feete upon the place of the Sentinell: There is no more feare of invasion by the terrible armies of the bloody enemies: there is no place for the subtill crafts of the lurking viper: there cannot arive the deadly sight of the venomous Basseliske, nor yet shall the hissing of the anci∣ent Serpent be heard there, but onely the soft breathing ayre of the Holy Ghost; wherein is be∣holden the glory of Almighty God. This is the region of all peace, the place of security, situ∣ated above all the Elements, whether the cloudes and stor∣mie winds of the darke ayre cannot come. O what glorious things have beene spoken of thee, O Citie of God. Blessed are they (saith holy Tobias) that love thee, and enjoy thy peace. O my soule praise our Lord, for he hath delivered Ierusalem his Citie from all her troubles. Happy shall I be, if the remnant of my posterity might come to see the clearenesse of Ierusalem: her gates shall be wrought with Saphirs and Emeraulds, and all the circuit of her wals shall bee built with precious stones, her streets shall bee paved with white and polished marble, and in all parts of her territories shall bee sung Hallelujah. O joyfull countrey! O sweete glory! O blessed company! who shall be those so fortunate and happy that are elected for thee? It see∣meth a presumption to desire thee, and yet I will not live without the desire of thee. O ye sonnes of Adam, a race of men, miserably blinded and de∣ceived. O ye scattered sheepe, wandring out of your right way, if this be your sheep-coat, whether goe you backeward? What meane you? Why suf∣fer you such an excellent bene∣fit to be wilfully lost for not ta∣king so little paines? What wise man would not desire, that all labour & paine of the world were imposed unto him? that all sorrowes, afflictions, and di∣seases were even powred upon him as thicke as haile; that persecutions, tribulations, and griefes, with one to molest him, another to disquiet him, yea, that all creatures in the world did conspire against him, being scorned and made a laughing stocke of all men; and that his whole life were converted into weepings and lamentations; so that in the next life hee might finde repose in the heavenly harbor of eternall consolation, and bee thought meet to have a place among that blessed peo∣ple, which are adorned and beautified with such inestima∣ble glory. And thou, O foo∣lish lover of this miserable world, go thy way, seeke as long as thou wilt for honours and promotions, build sumptuous houses and pallaces, purchase lands and possessions, inlarge thy territories and dominions, yea, command if thou wilt the whole world, yet shalt thou never be so great as the least of all the ser∣vants of Almighty God, who shall receive that treasure which this world cannot give, and shall enjoy that felicity, which shall endure for evermore, when thou with thy pompe and ri∣ches, shall beare the rich glut∣ton company, whose buriall is in the deepe vault of hell: but the devout spirituall man shall bee carried by the holy Angels with poore Lazarus into Abra∣hams bosome, a place of perpe∣tuall rest, joy, solace, and eternall happinesse. Of the benefits which our Lord promiseth to give in this pre∣sent life; to such as live a just and godly life. P Eradventure thou wilt now say, that all these things before rehearsed, bee re∣wards and punishments onely for the life to come: and that thou desirest to see something in this present life, because our mindes are wont to be mo∣ved very much with the sight of things present. To satisfie thee herein, I will also explaine unto thee what may answer thy desire. For although our Lord doe reserve the best wine, and the delicate dishes of most delight, untill the end of the banket, yet he suffereth not his friends to bee utterly destitute of meate and drinke in this tedi∣ous voyage: for hee knoweth very well, that they could not otherwise hold out in their journey. And therefore when he said unto Abraham, Feare not Abraham, for I am thy de∣fender, and thy reward shall be exceeding great: By these words he promised two things, the one for the time present, that was, to be his safeguard and defence in all such things as may happen in this life, and the other for the time to come, and that is, the reward of glory which is reserved for the next life. But how great the first pro∣mise is, and how many kinds of benefits and favours are there∣in included, no man is able to understand, but onely he, that hath with great diligence read the holy Scriptures, wherein no one thing is more often repea∣ted and set forth, than the great∣nesse of the favours, benefits, and priviledges, which Almigh∣ty God promiseth unto his friends in this life. Hearken what Salomon saith in the third Chapter of his Proverbs, as touching this matter. Blessed is that man that findeth wisedome, for it is better to have it, than all the treasures of Silver and Gold, be they never so excellent and pre∣cious: and it is more worth than all the riches of the world, and whatsoever mans heart is able to desire, is not comparable unto it. The length of daies are at her right hand, and riches and glo∣rie at her left. Her waies be plea∣sant, and all her passages bee quiet; shee is a tree of life to all those that have obtained her; and hee that shall have her in continuall pos∣session, shall bee blessed. Keepe therefore (O my sonne) the lawes of Almighty God, and his coun∣sell, for they shall be as life to thy soule, and sweetnesse to thy taste▪ Then shalt theu walke safely in thy waies, and thy feet shall no finde any stumbling blockes. If thou sleep, thou shalt have no cause to feare: and if thou take thy rest, thy sleepe shall bee quiet. This is the sweetnesse and quietnesse of the way of the godly, but the waies of the wicked are farre different, as the holy Scrip∣ture doth declare unto us. The paths and waies of the wicked (saith Ecclesiasticus) are full of brambles, and at the end of their journey are prepared for them hell, darknesse, and paines. Doest thou thinke it then a good exchange, to forsake the waies of Almighty God, for the waies of the world, sith there is so great difference betweene the one and the other, not one∣ly in the end of the way, but also in all the steps of the same? What madnesse can be greater, than to choose one torment to gaine another by; rather than with one rest to gaine another rest? And that thou maist more clearely perceive the excellen∣cy of this rest, and what a num∣ber of benefits are presently in∣cident thereunto, I beseech thee hearken attentively even what Almighty God himselfe hath promised by his Prophet Esay, to the observers of his law, in a manner with these words, as divers interpreters doe ex∣pound them. When thou shalt doe (saith hee) such and such things, which I have comman∣ded thee to doe, there shall forthwith appeare unto thee the dawning of the cleare day (that is, the sonne of justice) which shall drive away all the darkenesse of thy errours and miseries, and then shalt thou begin to enjoy true and perfect salvation. Now these are the benefits which Almighty God hath promised to his servants. And albeit some of them bee for the time to come, yet are some of them to be presently received in this life: as, that new light and shining from heaven; that safety and abundance of all good things; that assured confidence and trust in the Al∣mighty God; that divine assi∣stance in all our Prayers and Pe∣titions made unto him; that peace and tranquility of consci∣ence; that protection and pro∣vidence of Almighty God. All these are the gracious gifts and favours which Almighty God hath promised to his servants in this life. They all are the works of his mercy, effects of his grace, testimonies of his love, and blessings, which he of his father∣ly providence extendeth. To be short, all these benefits doe the godly injoy both in this present life, and in the life to come: and of all these are the ungodly deprived, both in the one life, and in the other. Whereby thou maist easily per∣ceive, what difference there is betweene the one sort and the other, seeing the one is so rich in graces, and the other so poore and needy: For if thou ponder well Gods promised blessings, and consider the state and condition of the good and the wicked, thou shalt find, that the one sort is highly in the fa∣vour of Almighty God, and the other deepely in his dis∣pleasure: the one be his friends, and the other his enemies: the one be in light, and the other in darkenesse: the one doe enjoy the company of An∣gels, and the other the fil∣thy pleasures and delights of Swine: the one are truely free, and Lords over them∣selves, and the other are be∣come bond-slaves unto Satan, and unto their owne lusts and appetites. The one are joy∣full with the witnesse of a good conscience, and the other (ex∣cept they bee utterly blinded) are continually bitten with the worme of conscience, ever∣more gnawing on them: the one in tribulation, stand sted∣fastly in their proper place; and the other, like light chaffe, are carried up and downe with e∣very blast of winde: the one stand secure and firme with the anker of hope, and the other are unstable, and evermore yeel∣ding unto the assaults of for∣tune: the prayers of the one are acceptable and liking unto God, and the prayers of the other are abhorred and accursed: the death of the one is quiet, peace∣able and precious in the sight of God, and the death of the o∣ther, is unquiet, painefull, and troubled with a thousand frights and terrours: To con∣clude, the one live like children under the protection and de∣fence of Almighty God, and sleepe sweetly under the shad∣dow of his pastorall provi∣dence; and the other being ex∣cluded from this kinde of pro∣vidence, wander abroad as strai∣ed sheepe, without their shep∣heard and Master, lying wide open to all the perills, dangers, and assaults of the world. See∣ing then, that a vertuous life is accompanied with all these benefits, what is the cause that should withdraw thee, and perswade thee not to embrace such a precious trea∣sure? what art thou able to al∣ledge for excuse of thy great negligence? To say that this is not true, it cannot be admitted, for so much as Gods word doth avouch the certaintie hereof. To say that these are but small benefits, thou canst not, for so much as they doe exceede all that mans heart can desire. To say that thou art an enemy un∣to thy selfe, and that thou doest not desire these benefits, can∣not be, considering that a man is even naturally a friend to himselfe, & the will of man hath ever an eye to his owne benefit, which is the very object or mark that his desire shooteth at. To say that thou hast no understan∣ding, nor taste of these benefits, it will not serve to discharge thine offence, forsomuch as thou hast the faith and beleefe there∣of, though thou hast not the taste, for the taste is lost through sinne, but not the faith: and the faith is a witnesse more certaine, more secure, & better to be tru∣sted, than all other experiences and witnesses in the world. Why doest thou not then dis∣credit all other witnesses with this one assured testimony? Why doest thou not rather give credit unto faith, than to thine owne opinion and judgement? O that thou woul∣dest make a resolute determi∣nation, to submit thy selfe into the hands of Almighty God, and to put thy whole trust assu∣redly in him How soone shouldest thou then see all these Prophesies fulfilled in thee: then shouldest thou see the ex∣cellency of these divine trea∣sures: then shouldest thou see how starke blinde the lovers of this world are, that seeke not after this high treasure: then shouldest thou see upon what good ground our Saviour invi∣teth us to this kind of life, say∣ing; Come unto me all yee that travell, and are loaden, and I will refresh you; take my yoake upon you, and you shall finde rest for your soules: for my yoake is sweet, and my burden is light. Almigh∣ty God is no deceiver, nor false promiser, neither yet is hee a great boaster of such things as he promiseth. Why dost thou then shrinke backe? why dost thou refuse peace and true qui∣etnesse? why dost thou refuse the gentle offers and sweet cal∣lings of thy Pastor? how darest thou despise and banish away vertue from thee, which hath such prerogatives and privi∣ledges as these be: and withall, confirmed and signed even with the hand of Almighty God? The Queene of Sheba heard far lesse things than these of Salomon, and yet she travelled from the uttermost parts of the world, to try the truth of those things that she had heard. And why doest not thou then (hearing such notable, yea, and so cer∣taine newes of vertue) adventure to take a little paines to try the truth and sequell thereof? O deare Christian brother, put thy trust in Almighty God and in his Word, and commit thy selfe most boldly without all feare into his armes, and unloose from thy hands those trifling knots that have hitherto decei∣ved thee, and thou shalt finde, that the merits of vertue doe farre excell her fame: and that all which is spoken in praise of her, is nothing in comparison of that which she is indeed. That a man ought not to deferre his Repentance and Conversion unto God, from day to day; con∣sidering he hath so many debts to discharge, by reason of the offences committed in his sinfull life al∣ready past. N Ow then, if on the one side there be so many and so great respects, that doe binde us to change our sinfull life; and on the other side, we have not any sufficient excuse why wee should not make this exchange. How long wilt thou tarry, untill thou fully resolve to doe it? Turne thine eyes a little, and look back upon thy life past, and consider, that at this present (of what age soever thou be) it is high time, or rather, the time well nigh past to begin to dis∣charge some part of thy old debts. Consider, that thou which art a Christian regenerated in the water of holy Baptisme, which doest acknowledge Al∣mighty God for thy Father, and the Catholike Church for thy Mother, whom she hath nouri∣shed with the milke of the Gos∣pell, to wit, with the doctrine of the Apostles and Evangelists: consider (I say) that all this not∣withstanding, thou hast lived even as loosely and dissolutely, as if thou hadst beene a meere Infidell, that had never any knowledge of Almighty God. And if thou doe denie this, then tell me what kinde of sin is there which thou hast not commit∣ted? What tree is there forbid∣den that thou hast not beholden with thine eyes? What greene meddow is there, in which thou hast not (at the least in desire) feasted thy letcherous lust? what thing hath beene set be∣fore thine eyes, that thou hast not wantonly desired? What appetite hast thou left unexecu∣ted, notwithstanding that thou didst beleeve in Almighty God, and that thou wert a Christian? What wouldst thou have done more, if thou hadst not had any faith at all? If thou hadst not looked for any other life? If thou hadst not feared the dreadfull day of judgement? What hath all thy former life beene, but a web of sinnes, a sinke of vices, a way full of brambles and thornes, and a fro∣ward disobedience of God? with whom hast thou hitherto lived, but onely with thine appetite, with thy flesh, with thy pride, and with the goods and riches of this transitory world? These have beene thy gods, these have beene thine idols whom thou hast served, and whose lawes thou hast diligently obeyed. Make thine account with the Almighty God, with his lawes, and with his obedience, and peradventure thou shalt finde, that thou hast esteemed him no more, than if he had beene a god of wood, or stone. For it is certaine, that there bee many Christians, which beleeving that there is a God, are induced to sinne with such facility, as though they beleeved, that there were no God at all: and doe offend no whit the lesse, though they beleeve that there is a God, then they would doe, if they beleeved there were none at all. What greater inju∣rie, what greater despight can bee done, than so to con∣temne his divine majestie? Finally, thou beleeving all such things as Christs Church doth beleeve, hast notwithstan∣ding so led thy life, as if thou wert perswaded, that the be∣leefe of Christians were the greatest fables or lies in the world. And if the multitude of thy sinnes past, and the faculty thou hast used in committing of them, doe not make thee afraid, why dost thou not feare at the least the Majesty and omnipo∣tencie of him, against whom thou hast sinned? Lift up thine eyes, and consider the infinite greatnesse and omnipotencie of the Lord, whom the powers of Heaven do adore, before whose Majesty the whole compasse of the wide world lyeth pro∣strate; in whose presence, all things created, are no more than chaffe carried away with the winde. Consider also with thy selfe how unseemely it is, that such a vile worme as thou art, should have audacity so ma∣ny times to offend and provoke the wrath of so great a Majesty. Consider the wonderfull and most terrible severity of his ju∣stice, and what horrible punish∣ments hee hath used from time to time in the world against sinne; and that not onely upon particular persons, but also up∣on Cities, Nations, Kingdomes and Provinces, yea, upon the u∣niversall World: And not one∣ly in earth, but also in Heaven; and not onely upon strangers sinners, but even upon his owne most innocent sonne, our sweet Saviour Jesus Christ, when he tooke upon him to sa∣tisfie for the debt that we owed. And if this severity was used upon greene and innocent wood, and that for the sinnes of others; what then will he doe upon dry and withered wood, and against those that are loden with their owne sinnes? Now, what thing can bee thought more unreasonable, then that such a fraile wretch as thou art, should bee so saucie and mala∣pert, as to mocke with so migh∣tie a Lord, whose hand is so heavie, that in case hee should strike but one stroke upon thee, hee would at one blow drive thee downe headlong into the deepe bottomelesse pit of hell, without remedy. Consider like∣wise the great patience of this our mercifull Lord, who hath expected thy repentance so long, even from the time that thou didst first offend him: and think, that if after so long pa∣tience and tarrying for thee, thou shalt still continue thy leaud and sinfull life, abusing thus his mercy, and provoking him to further indignation and wrath, hee will then bend his bowe, and shake his sword, and raine downe upon thee even sharpe arrowes of everlasting wrath and death. Consider also the profoundnesse of his deepe judgments, wherof we read, and see daily so great wonders. We see how Salomon himselfe, after his so great wisdome, and after those three thousand parables and most profound mysteries uttered by him, was forsaken by Almighty God, and suffered to fall down and adore Idols. Wee see how one of those seven first Deacons of the Primitive Church, which were full of the Holy Ghost, became not onely an hereticke, but also an arch∣hereticke and a father of here∣sies. We see daily many starres fall downe from Heaven unto earth, with miserable fals, and to wallow themselves in the durt, and to eate the meate of swine, which sate before at Gods owne table, and were fed with the very bread of Angels. If then the just and righteous for some secret pride or negli∣gence, or else for some ingrati∣tude of theirs) be thus justly for∣saken of Almighty God, after they have bestowed so many yeares in his service. What maist thou looke for, that hast done in a manner nothing else in all thy life time, but onely heaped sinnes upon sinnes, and hast thereby offended Almigh∣ty God most grievously? Now, if thou hast lived after this sort, were it not reason that thou shouldst now at the length give over, and cease heaping sinne upon sinne, and debt up∣on debt, and begin to pacifie the wrath of Almighty God, and to disburden thy sinnefull soule? Were it not meet, that that time which thou hast hi∣therto given to the world, to thy flesh, and to the Divell, should suffice? and that thou shouldest bestow some little time of that which remaineth, to serve him, who hath given thee all that thou hast? Were it not a point of wisedome, after so long time, and so many great injuries, to feare the most ter∣rible justice of Almighty God, who the more patiently he suf∣fereth sinners, the more hee doth afterwards punish them with severity and justice? Were it not meet for thee to feare thy long continuance so many yeares in sinne, and in the dis∣pleasure of Almighty God, pro∣curing thereby against thee such a mighty adversary as he is, and provoking him of a mercifull loving Father to become thy se∣vere terrible judge and enemy? Were it not meet to feare, least that the force of evill custome may in continuance of time be turned into nature; and that thy long vicious usuall manner of committing sinne, may make of a vice, a necessity, or little lesse? Why art thou not afraid, least by little and little thou maiest cast thy selfe downe head-long into the deep pit of a reprobate sence, whereinto after that a man is once falne, hee never maketh account of any sinne, be it never so great. The Patriarke Iacob said unto Laban his father in law: These fourteene yeares have I served thee, and looking to thine af∣faires, now it is time that I should looke to mine owne, and begin to attend unto the af∣faires of mine owne houshold. Wherefore if thou hast likewise bestowed so many yeares in the service of this world, and of this fraile transitory life, were it not good reason, that thou shoul∣dest now begin to make some provision for the salvation of thy soule, and for the everla∣sting life to come? There is nothing more short, nor more transitory then the life of man; and therefore providing so carefully as thou doest for all such things as be necessarie for this life, which is so short, why doest thou not provide like∣wise somewhat for the life that is to come? which life shall endure for ever and ever. Earths Vanity. A Sigh. HEnce lazie sleepe, thou sonne of sullen night, That with soft-breathing Spels keeps sorrowes under Thy charmes; cheares up the spirits with delight, And laps the Sences in Lethaean slumber; Packe and be gone: for my sad soule knowes well, Care best accordeth with a gloomic Cell. And what more darke then my sin-clouded Soule? Where yet the Sunne of Sapience never shone; But still in Errors ougly cave did roule, Where nought keepes concord but discordant mone: Leave me I say, and give me leave to tell, That to my Soule, my selfe ha's not done well. Good man! (if good there lives one) Thou that art So farre thrust from the worlds imperious eyes; Helpe me to a t this penitentiall part: I meane, No coyner of new Niceties, Nor wodden Worshipper: Give me him than That's a God loving, and good living man, To be my partner in this Tragedie; Whose scenes run bleeding through the wounded Acts, Heart-strucke by Sinne and Satans fallacie, And poyson'd by my selfe-committed facts: Send me thy prayers, if not thy presence found, To stop the Ore-face of this streaming wound. Steere me (sweet Saviour) while I safe have past The stormie Euroclydons of Despaire, Till happily I have arriv'd at last, To touch at Thee, my Soules sole-saving stayre: Tow up my sin-frought Soule, sunke downe below, And long lien weltring midst the waves of wo. New rig me up, lest wallowing Iorewhelme; Thy Mercy be my Main-mast; And for Sayles My Sighs; thy Truth, my tackling; Faith, my Helme: My ballast, Love; Hope, Anchor that ne're failes: Then in Heav'ns haven calme Peace me arrive, Where once enharbor'd, I shall richly thrive. Woes me! how long ha's Pride besotted me? Proposing to dim Reason my good parts, My nimble Wit, my quicke proclivitie To Apprehension; and in high deserts How many stood beneath me: I (vaine foole) Thus fob'd by Satans sleights, ore-slipt my Soule: Who in darke Error downe embodied lies, Blacke as the Star-lesse Night; and hideously Impuritie with rustie wings crosse flies Betwixt the Sunne of Righteousnesse and me; Whil'st (Bat-like) beats my Soule her leather sayles Gainst the soft Ayre; and rising, fals and failes. Must I for each unsyllabled close Thought Render account? O wit-fi'lde Conference! Cal'd in is thy protection then, deare bought: How was my brow o'rehatcht with Impudence? To let whole worlds of words my cheekes up-swell, The least of whom would ding me downe to Hell. O wretched Impes then of mans impious race! Who'l breath out Blasphemies to make a Iest; And call wit flashing the sole punctuall grace Of genuine knowledge: But amongst the rest, Iudge in what case are those wit-hucsters in, That hourely practise this soule sinking sinne? O may my tongue be ever rivetted Fast to my roofe, but when it speakes Gods praise: May not one vocall sound by breath be fed, But when it carols out celestiall Layes; Let not one tone through my tongues hatches flie, But what beares with't heav'ns glories harmonie. Helpe (Lord of power) my feeble joynted praiers To clamber th'azure Mountaines throwne above me; And keepe a seat for me there mongst those haires, Apportion'd out to such as truely love thee: Admit them in thine eares a resting roome, Vntill to thee and them, my soule shall come. Meane while, moyst ey'd Repentance here below Shall Inmate wise be Tenant to my minde: For Prayers, without true Penitence, doe show, "Like meats unseason'd, or like Bils unsign'd; "Or corne on tops of Cottages that growes, "Which (uselesse) no man either reapes or sowes. O how my Soule's surpriz'd with shallow feares? When, thinking to leane on Lifes broken staffe; And counting to mine age large summes of yeares, I heare the sweet and sacred Psalmograph, Compare Life to a Flowre, a Puffe, a Span; Who's Monarch now, next minute's not a Man. Must I needs dye? why surfet I on Pleasure? Must I needs dye? why swim I in Delight? Must I needs dye? why squint I after Treasure? Must I needs dye? why live I not aright? Must I needs dye? why live I then in sin? Thrice better for me I had never bin. Feuntaine of breathing Dust? such grace me give, That I in life, prepare in dust to lye; Let me be dying still whiles I doe live; That I may blisfull live, when I shall dye: For in Christs Schoole this Paradox learne I; Who dies before he dies, shall never die. If I must die, then after must begin The life of Ioy or Torment without end; The life of Torment purchas'd is by sinne; The life of Ioy, by life that learnest' amend: Why should I then prophane, sweare, curse, lust, lie, If I but thinke on this; That I must die? Why should I quaffe to more then Nature can? Sith more drinke I gaine more losse is mine: For may I not be term'd a b stiall man, To drowne my Reason in a cup of wine? Yea tenfold worse: Thus monster made at least: God made me Man, I make my selfe a Beast. How swelt I with hard travell through the Dale That leads to Prophanations irkesome cell? But freeze, by softly pacing up the skale, Where burning zeale, and her bright sisters dwell: Thus sweat I in the shadow, shake i'th shine, And by free choice, from good to ill decline. Sweet Saviour cleanse my leprous loathsome soule In that depurpled Fount, which forth thy side Gurgling, did twixt two Lilly-mountaines roule, To rinse Mans tainted Race, Sin soylifide: Wash it more white than the triumphant Swan, That rides o'th silver brest of Eridan. Suffer my prayers harmony to rise Into thine eares, while th' Angels beare a part: Accept my Sighs, as smelling Sacrifice, Sent from the Altar of my bleeding heart; Vp to thy nostrils, sweet as th' Oyle of Aaron, Or th' odoriferous Rose of flowrie Sharon. The Hart ne're long'd more for the purling brookes; Nor did the lustfull Goate with more pursuit, After the blossom'd Tritisolie looke, Then do's my panting Soule, t'enjoy the fruit Of thy Life-wa er; which if I attaine To taste of once, I ne're shall thirst againe, Even as the chapped ground in Summers heat, Cals to the clouds, and gapes at every showre: Whose thirstie Casma's greedily intreat, As tho they would th' whole house of heav'n deuour; So do's my riven Soule, be parcht with sin, Yawne wide, to let moyst drops of Mercie in. Earths Ʋanitie. V Anitie of vanities, and all is but vanitie, saith the wisest Preacher that ever wrote: One generation passeth and another commeth, and all is but vexation of spirit. Which divine theorem, that we may the better perceive, let us set our selves to the serious meditation of it: for the more we search, the more we shall see all things to be vanity, nothing constant, nothing for our eter∣nall good, but our soules salva∣tion. Mans life on earth doth no sooner begin, but his end ap∣proacheth, his death hasteneth. Some come upon the stage of this world but to have a brea∣thing, and are presently gone: others stay a while longer, it may be a day, perhaps a weeke, perhaps a month, peradventure a yeare, or it may bee some few yeares: but alas! the lon∣ger they stay, the greater their griefe, care, feare, and anxietie of minde. Even in the infancy of age man is oft times left as Moses sometime was, in the flouds of misery; but as age in∣creaseth, sorrow increaseth, be∣cause sinne increaseth: when youth runnes most at randome, and thinketh it selfe most safe, it is then hemm'd in with grea∣test dangers; then the rash∣foole-hardy minde of man hur∣rieth him headlong to hell, ex∣cept the irresistible power of Gods preventing grace doth speedily stay him; then his wits are even intoxicated with a frenzie of iniquity, and wholly bent upon riotousnesse, rash∣nesse, luxury, jollitie, superflui∣ty and excesse in carnall plea∣sures. Hee then devoteth his time and addicteth himselfe to all manner of evill, drinking, dancing, revelling, swaggering, swearing, whoring, gaming, quarreling, fighting; and in the meane while never thinkes on Heaven, nor feareth hell. His head is frought with vanities his heart with fallacies, where by his soule is brought into labyrinth of inextricable mise∣ries. So great is the temerity o his unadvised minde, that n consideration of Gods judge∣ments, either past, or present, or to come, can set a stop to his wickednesse. His youthfull∣nesse damps at no bogges, quag∣mires, hils, or mountaines; but wingeth him over all impedi∣ments, mounts him over all mo∣tives that might way-lay his sinnes. He sticks not to offen his maker, to recrucifie his Re∣deemer, to resist (shall I say his Sanctifier, no, but) the Spirit whom God hath given to be his sanctifier: and if hee so carry himselfe toward these, no mer∣vaile that he derideth his Tutor, scornes the Minister (like the little children that mock'd Eli∣sha) oppresseth his poore bro∣ther (as Pharaoh did the Israe∣lites:) spareth not Infants (no more then Herod did) regardeth not parents, (no more then Hoph∣ni and Phinias did.) Let the mother direct him; the father correct him, his ancients in∣struct him, alas! all is in vaine: youth makes men head-strong, selfe-conceited and proud, so that they swell with an over∣weening opinion of their owne worth; they thinke themselves the onely wits of the time, the onely men of the world, more fit to teach others then to learne themselves, more able to give then to take advice. If they go on a while in their lewd cour∣ses without the restraining and renewing Grace of God, they get a habit of evill, are hardned through the custome of sinne, none may resist them, none compare with them, no law of God or man can restraine them; They take counsell together against Psal. 2. 2, 3. the Lord, and against his annoin∣ted, saying, Let us breake their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Whereupon of∣tentimes (the ripenesse of sinn being hastened by outragious∣nesse Nequi∣ties vi∣tae non sini esse senem. of sinning) God suddenly cuts them off, in their intempe∣rancy, luxury, quarrels, and dis∣orders; which shewes the vainenesse to be meere vanity. Suppose they grow as great as Tamberlaine, yet a Gunne, Pike, Arrow; nay, a Fly, Flea, or Gnat, a dram, nay, a drop of poyson, proves them to bee vaine men: one of these silly creatures may send him presently to his Crea∣tor to receive his finall doome. Yet alas! what doe these most minde? The bum-basted silken Gallants of our time, that come forth like a May morning, deck∣ed with all the glory of Art; the Epicurean Cormerants, the gus∣ ing and tipling tosse-pots, the dainty painting Dames, the de∣dicate mincing Ladies, the sweet-singing Syrens, the dan∣cing Damsels, the finicall youths, the couzening Shop∣keeper, the crafty Crafts-man: I say, what doe all these, but set their minds upon vanitie, up∣on glory, honour, pride, drosse, and such like trash, which weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary prove lighter then vanity? Doe we not sometime see more spent upon one suite in Law then would keepe a poore Country towne with the inha∣bitants for a whole yeare? See wee not more spent upon one suite of apparell, for one proud carkasse, then would build Free-schoole? So that the cloathes on many a Gallant backe exceeds his Rent-day See wee not more spent upon Feast to satisfie the curiosity o a few, then would satisfie th necessity of a hundred poore wretches almost famished to death? See wee not more drunke in a Taverne at one sit∣ting by a small company, then would serve a troope of sturdy Souldiers in the field? Many goe daily to the Tavern, where they sticke not to spend their twelve pence, who would grudge to give one penny, nay, one farthing to a hungry beg∣ger. Againe, is there not now more spent upon a Ladies fea∣ther, then would pay a meane mans tythes? Is there not more spent upon one paire of sleeves, then would cloath sixe bodies? and more spent at a Whitsun∣ale, then would keepe the poore of the Parish for a yeare? Have wee not amongst our Gentry, some of the female sexe, who will spend more upon a Glasse and a pot of complexion, then they will give a whole yeare at their gate? they must be men∣ders of that which God makes, makers of that which God marres, turning themselves (like the Camelion) into all shapes, though never so grisly and oug∣ly; and being never well till they be most ill, never (as they conceit) in fashion, till indeede they be out of all fashion. If this be not a vanity of vanities, who can tell what is vanity? Every man is an eye-witnesse of this vanity, the more is the pittie that it should bee so common: your Lady, the Merchants wife, the trades mans wife, nay, all of all sorts are a degree above their estate. Your Gallant is no man, unlesse his haire bee of the womans fashion, dangling and waving over his shoulders; your woman no body, except (contrary to the modesty of her sexe) shee be halfe (at least) of the mans fashion: shee jets, she cuts, shee rides, she sweares, she games, she smoakes, shee drinkes, and what not that is e∣vill? Shee is in the universall portraiture of her behaviour, as well as in her accoutrements, more then halfe a man; the man on the other side, no lesse wo∣manish. We may well admire and exclaime with the Poet, O tempora! O mores! O the times! O the manners of these times! O quantum est in rebus mane! O how great a nothing is there in all things! What a vanity of va∣nity hath overspread the age we live in? Were our forefathers now alive to be spectators of this vanity, it would strike them into amazement. In their dayes the Pike, the Speare, the Sword, the Bowe, the Arrow, Musket and Caliever, with the warlike Horse, were the object of exer∣cise and recreation: Now the Pot, the Pipe, Dice and Cards, and such like vanities, indeed worse then the quintessence of the extreamest vanity. We are now all for ease, wee must lye soft, fare deliciously, goe sump∣tuously, drinke Wine in bowles, carowse healths, till health bee quite drunke away; nay, we must kneele to our drinke, when we will not kneele to him that gave us our drinke; we doe ho∣mage to that which takes away the use of our legges, nay, of our braines, our hearts, wits, sence, reason, when we refuse homage to him that gave us all these. O vaine man that dost thus forget thy God, and abuse thy selfe! why dost thou thus suffer thy selfe to be swallowed up in the gulfe of vanity, which hath no bottome but misery? Why sufferest thou the Divell thus to take thee on the hip, that he may cast thee downe into the Abisse of hell? Art thou so bewitched with that which will have an end, a sudden end, a wretched end? Thy honey will prove Gall in the end, and thy Wine, Vinegar. In these faire roses of vanity the Divell hides his pins, that shall pricke thee, when thou lookest to be re∣freshed with their sweet smels. These vanities we purchase at no easie rate; it is with the pro∣curement of punishment, and losse of happinesse: As the bird that accepts of the Fowlers meat, buyes it full dearely, with the losse of her owne life: so when we accept these vanities from the Divell, it is with the losse of better things, in price a∣bove the whole world. In these contracts with Satan, we make Esau's penniworth, sell Heaven for a messe of pottage; Glaucus exchange, Gold for Copper. Now thou art pompering thy corruptible flesh; but let pale death step in, and clap thee on the shoulder, wher's thy mirth, wher's thy felicity? thy volup∣tuous vanity doth presently ex∣pire. There is a banquet set be∣fore thee, in which are all varie∣ties of delicacies, but alas! eve∣ry one poysoned: darest thou touch or taste any one of them? by sin thou poysonest all those outward blessings of God, which in themselves are wholesome and good: and wilt thou ingur∣gitate that which is poyson to thy soule? Tell me, when all is done, two or three hundred yeares hence, what thou wilt be the better for all thy dainties, more then the poore man that never tasted them? Nay, how much better in the day of triall, and at the houre of death? Then all thy pride, pompe, and plea∣sure shall be turned into squa∣led deformity, & irrecoverable calamity; then vanity shewes it selfe in the proper colours, then death, and knell, and hell doe all conspire to aggravate thy sor∣row; yea, then hell begins to come to thee before thou come to it; thy eyes sleepe not, thy senses rest not, thy perplexed heart burnes within thee, thy wounded conscience bleeds within thee; thou seest nothing but terror, thou feelest nothing but horror; thou thinkest thy selfe to be haunted with sprights, ghosts, and hellish furies, sting∣ing thee with Adders, pursuing thee with Torches and fire-brand. That saying of the Hea∣then man is then, if not before, verified: Suae quemque exagitant furiae; every man is tormented with his owne fury, which is his conscience. Besides thy wife, children, or other friends (to the exasperating of thy griefe) doe stand about thee weeping, as loath to part from thee: whereas thy sinnes follow thee, and will follow thee, doe what thou canst; hell gapes before thee with a wide mouth as rea∣dy to devoure thee, destruction on both sides attends thee: backe thou canst not goe, for a dead corps followes thee so neere that thou canst not part from it, it is tied unto thee with an indissolveable knot; besides, conscience followes thee, and cries out against thee, and will not leave thee; continually it presents thee with the dreadfull spectacle of thy dolefull and wo∣full sinnes. If this were now seriously considered, how would it make thy heart to ake with grieving, thy eyes to swell with weeping, thy hands to bee al∣waies lifted up, thy knees ever bended? How wouldest thou strive to subdue thy flesh to the spirit, sensuality to reason, reason to faith, and faith to the service of God? But thou dost not now consider this, that thy sinne is so fast linkt to thy conscience, that at the last (albeit not before) it will pull and hale thee, and rack and prick thy conscience, which wil accuse, convict, & condemne thee: all thy vanities, all thy iniquities, will then pursue thee like so many furious ghosts. Then ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth shalt thou be judged, thou evill servant: thy owne mouth shall confesse that thou hast followed nothing but va∣nity: What a vanity was it for me to make earth my heaven, and so to admire and even adore this earth, that it is a hell to for∣sake it? What a wofull bargaine have I made to sell my soule for vanity? I was borne in vanity, I have lived in vanity, and it is my feare that I shall dye in va∣nity. Oh how griefe followeth griefe? my heart is terrified, my thoughts hurried, my consci∣ence tortured, I fry in anguish, I freeze in paine, I stand agast and know not which way to turne me: my friends must for∣sake me, my foes wil deride me, my earthly joyes and comforts (I should call them vanities) have betraid me. Indeed my friends may goe with me to the grave, but there they must leave me; my riches, pleasures, and such like vanities vanish before; but my sinnes and conscience will never leave me; the divell will still pursue me: hee that tempts me now to sinne, will then torment me for sinning, untill I cry out with Caine, My punishment is greater then I can beare. A horse is but a vaine thing to save a man, said the sweet singer of Israel: so say I, all earthly things are too vaine to save a man, to make him blessed, I appeale to the conscience of every man, if thou hast tried the pleasures of vanity (and who hath not?) whether thou maist not take up the words of Saint Paul, What fruit have I of those Rom. 6. 12. things, whereof I am now asha∣med? Shame, and griefe, and guilt, and punishment are the fruit of vanity: enough I thinke to rend our hearts from affect∣ing of it. Thinke upon this thou that art in the trace of vanity, that thou maist make a retreat; loose no more time herein (for thou hast already lost too much) redeeme the time, because the dayes are evill; and why are they evill, but because they are vaine? Whatsoever is without the circumference of evill, is above the sphere of vanity. Re∣solve therefore with thy selfe that all things earthly, worldly, carnall, sinfull, are vaine: the fashion of this world passeth away, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 3. The fashion, , a word very emphaticall: it signifies first an accidentall and externall figure without substance; se∣condly, the habit, vesture or cloathing of a thing. Saint Paul useth this word to debase the world, by intimating unto us, that the world is cloathed with a vesture, that is, wearing and wasting, the fashion of it lasteth but for a time, it is ready every houre to put on a new fashion: againe, by intimating unto us that the world is without any substantiall forme, like unto shewes and shadowes, that vanish in the representation. Saint Luke cals all Agrippa's pompe but a fancie: David cals the yeares of a man but a tale, Psal. 90. 9. We spend our yeares as a tale that is told. As a tale, nay, as a thought (for so much the originall word doth import) and how many thoughts may a man have in an houre? Nothing is more chang∣able then a vesture, nothing more fugitive then a shadow, nothing more fickle then a fan∣cie, nothing more swift then thought. What a disproportion therefore is it for the immortall soule of a man to bee fastened unto things which are of such a variable nature? What a folly for us to preferre those which are but momentary (for so I may more truely call them then tem∣porall) unto those things which are indeed eternall? Glasses are in great use amongst us, yet be∣cause of their brittlenesse who esteemes them precious? Wee smell to flowers, because they are sweet; but because they are fading, we regard them there∣after. It were well if we would deale thus with all other vani∣ties, viz. regard them as they are: use the creatures we may, but not abuse them; serve our selves of them, but not serve them; injoy them, but not over∣joy in them. Now because examples are very effectuall, whether we use them by way of dehortation, or whether by way of exhorta∣tion, let me propound one or two in this matter whereof I am treating, that by them thou maist be beaten off from the va∣nities and iniquities of this pre∣sent evill world. When Alex∣ander in the height of his glory kept Con∣ventum terrariō orbis. a Parliament of the whole world, himselfe was summoned by death to appeare in another world. It was a wonderfull president of the vanity and va∣riety of humane condition (saith the Historian) to see mighty Justin. l. 2. Zerxes flote and flye away in a small vessel, who before wanted Sea-roome for his Ships. When Belshazzar was laughing and Dan. 5. quaffing with his Princes and Concubines, carowsing healths in the sacred Vessels; deaths se∣cretary, the hand-writing on the wall, told him he was weighed in the ballance, and his King∣dome was finished. And before him his father Nebuchadnezzar (at that time the greatest Mo∣narch in the world) as hee was strouting in his Galleries, and boasting of his owne power and honour, a voyce from Heaven told him that his Kingdome was departed from him, that he Dan. 4. should be driven from amongst men, that hee should have his dwelling with the Beasts of the field, &c. And the sentence was fulfilled on him the same houre. So Zedekiah was a lively specta∣cle 2 King. 25. of this worlds vanity and misery, who of a potent King became a miserable captive, saw his children slaine before his face, after that had his eyes put out, and died miserably in pri∣son. I had almost forgotten Sa∣lomon, the wisest King that ever Eccl. . was, having given himselfe to take pleasure in pleasant things, having made great workes, built goodly Houses, planted Vine∣yards, Gardens, and Orchards, and planted in them trees of all fruit, and having gathered silver and gold, and the chiefe trea∣sures of Kings and Provinces, being now full of wisedome, and schooled with experience, he is licensed to give his sen∣tence of the whole world, and every man knowes what his censure was: Vanity of vani∣ties, Eccl 1. 2. vanity of vanities, all is va∣nity. This wise King travelled all the world over, and the fur∣ther he went the more vanity he did see, and the neerer hee looked, the greater it seemed, till at last he could see nothing but vanity. Wouldst thou know what is to bee seene, or heard, or had in this vast Universe? Vani∣ty saith Salomon, yea vanity of vanities; and what else? Vani∣ty of vanities. And what else? All is vanity. Nothing beneath the Moone that hath not a tin∣cture of vanity. Nay, the Moone it self, the Sunne, all the Planets, all the Starres, the whole body of the Heavens, is become sub∣ject to Vanity. The creature is subject unto Vanity, saith the Apostle, Rom. 8. 20. that is, the whole frame of the world, con∣sisting of the coelestiall and ele∣mentary region, the visible hea∣vens with all their goodly fur∣niture of Starres and of coelesti∣all bodies, and the earth with her ornaments, and the other elements. The Heavens shall pe∣rish, Ps. 102▪ 26. and they shall waxe old as doth a garment, and the Lord shall change them as a vesture, and they shall bee changed. As a garment the older it waxeth, the lesse comely it is, the lesse able to warme him that weares it: so the materiall heavens by conti∣nuance of yeares decrease in beauty and veitue. The neerer the Sunne drawes to the end of his daily course, the lesse is his strength; in the evening wee feele the Sunne to decay in his heat, and he waxeth alway the weaker. Now if those superi∣our bodies, then much more things inferiour and sublunary are included within the com∣passe of vanity. But it was my purpose when I first set upon this sub∣ject, so ample and large, to be so much the more short: even understanding can of it self scourse, where such plenty of atter is offered. I have there∣ re (according to the modell f that gift which God hath en me) contrived a great pi∣cture in a little ring, set forth the eat vanity of this world in a tle Map. Let us now learne the lesson f Saint Iohn, the beloved Dis∣ ple of Christ, who wrote so uch of love, doth yet dehort from loving the world, 1 Iohn 15. Love not the world, neither e things that are in the world. Why not the world? for three asons: 1. If any man love the orld, the love of the Father is not him. 2. All that is in the world, e lust of the flesh, the lust of the s, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world 3. The World passeth away, and the lust thereof: that is, it is vain and vanishing, yea in the ab∣stract Vanity. For these reason we must not suffer our hearts t cleave to the best things in th world, as if happinesse were t be found in them. Follow th counsell of the Holy Ghos 1 Cor. 7. 31. Use this world though thou used it not, for th fashion of this world goeth way. Use the things of th world as helpes to thee in th travell to heaven-ward, but them not steale away thy hea from better things, from Go and Christ, and Heaven, an peace of conscience, and joy the Holy Ghost: these must d ∣light the heart of a Christian, who was redeemed, not with cor∣ruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1 19. but with the precious bloud of Je∣sus Christ, in comparison of whom all the things of the world must seeme losse and drosse, and dung, and whatsoe∣ver is most despicable in the eyes of man. If riches increase, set not thy heart upon them: no reasure, no pleasure, no honour, nor gold, nor plate, nor jewels, Ps. 26. 10. nor house, nor land, nor appa∣rell, nor friends, must steale a∣way thy heart. We must be ffected to these things, as Theo∣doricke the good King of A∣ taine In i ctib tacet, in ma rides, in utrisque Philo∣sophatur was with his play; * In good casts he was silent, in ill mer∣ y, in neither angry, in both a Phylosopher, or a wise man. We must not make these a rivall un∣to God, we must not leaue upon these by our confidence: for they are a reed that shall quick∣ly breake, and the shivers will run into our hand. Death is the most terrible of all things that are terrible, said the Philosopher Aristotle: it is terrible both to man and beast, but most terrible to a wicked man that is worse then a beast, when he remembers his sinfull life past, the complexion of his flesh, the palenesse of his face, the dissolution of his members, the rottennesse of his bones, the obscurenesse of his grave, the solitarinesse of his sepulcher, the gnawing of wormes, and the like. But alas (albeit these are terrible, yet) these are nothing without the consideration of sin, which is the sting of death, the strength and victory of the grave. Thinke upon thy sinnes, whereof thou art guilty, and for which thou must dye, as the condemned malefactor that af∣ter sentence pronounced, is hur∣ried to the fatall place of execu∣tion, to suffer deserved punish∣ment. Remember, yea againe and againe. I say, remember, how miserably, how violently, how suddainely, others have suf∣fered death, that were guilty of those sins which are more pre∣dominant in thee then they were in them. Art thou a thiefe? which thou maist be, though thou wert never attached for theft by the lawes of men; for covetousnesse is a Pick-purse before God: read and remem∣ber how Achan dyed, Iosh. 7. Art thou a whoremaster? which thou maist bee as well in thy minde as in thy body: then read and remember how Hophni 2 Sam. 3. Numb. 25. 8. and Phineas dyed, how Zimri and Cesbi were slaine in the very act of their uncleannesse. And Iezabel an impudent strumpet dyed a sodaine and shamefull death. Art thou a blasphemous swearer that dost rend & grinde the sacred name of God be∣tweene thy teeth? Remember him under the Law that was stoned to death for his blasphe∣my. Art thou an Idolatrous impe of the Popish Church, that dost leave our Lord to worship our Lady, and give that honour to Saints, nay, to stockes and stones, which is proper to God alone? call to minde how Sen∣nacherib was slaine in the midst Isa. 37. ult. of his Idolatry. Art thou an intemperate drunkard, that dost sacrifice thy time and state, nay, soule and body unto Bacchus, rising early to drinke strong drinke, and sitting up late till Wine inflame thee? thinke upon Belshazzar that was slaine in the midst of his cups, whilst Dan. ▪ ult. he was drinking in that Wine, which the swords of his insul∣ting enemies drew out of him together with his latest blood. Art thou a covetous Usurer, that dost let out thy money to men, thy time to Mammon, and thy soule to Satan, that like a common Hackney jade wilt not beare thy debtors one houre past thy day? or art thou a gri∣ping oppressor, that dost racke thy poore tenants, and exact upon thy neighbour, to gaine a little transitory trash? Remem∣ber Nabal, and remember that Miser in the Gospell, who being Lut. 12 asleep in security, and dreaming of enlarged barns and plentifull harvests, was sodainly bereft of all, and being awaked upon the hearing of his Soule-knell perceived himself to be forever wrerched. Consider whether these and the like sinners, that have made their souls the slaves of vanity, have not in the end made themselves the slaves of misery. Have they prospered, or have they perished? if they have prospered, then follow them; if perished (as indeed they have) then in the feare of God retire out of their paths, left thou bee speedily cut off, having no information of the danger, till thine own eyes ama∣zed with the sodainnesse behold it in the shape of inevitable damnation. Be thou warned by their examples; for God hath punished sinne in them, to prevent sinne in thee: Vt ex∣empla Cyprian ser. 5. de Laps. sint omnium, torment a paucorum; that the torments of some few may be terrours unto all: like as thunderbolts fall (Paucorum periculo, sed omnium metu) to the hurt but of few, though not without the horror of all. That ship which sees another ship sinke before her, lookes about her, puls downe her saile, turneth her course, and escapes the sands, which else would swallow her up as they did the other. When the earth swallowed up Corah and his confederates, all Israel that were round about them, fled at the cry of them, for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up also, Num. 16. 34. The Bird will not light on the lime-bush, nor into the net, if shee see ano∣ther insnared before her; the Horse will not follow another, whom he sees to sticke fast in the mire: oh be not lesse wise then bird or beast, nor more brutish then Horse and Mule that hath no understanding. If thou seest another fall into the fire, thou wilt not willingly fol∣low him; then follow not sinners to the fire of hell, lest thou be constrained at last, when it shall bee too late, to bewaile thy fol∣ly: to cry out with those that have mispent their time in va∣nity, Oh that now I might die Thus Franci Spira cried out, af∣ter hee had re∣noun∣ced the profes∣sion of true pietie, for the possessi∣on of earths vanity. the death of the righteous! Oh that I might not die at all! Oh that I might feele in my consci∣ence the least hope of pardon, which is as unpossible as to un∣ ade all the water in the vast Ocean with aspoone! Oh that God would give mee the least dram of grace, which is as im∣possible as for the least graine of Mustardseed to fill the whole earth! prevent this betimes, which thou maist doe, by aban∣doning the vanity of the world; and so live, that wheresoever or howsoever thou dyest, whether abroad or at home, by day or by night, sleeping or waking, whether a sodaine death or a de∣liberate death, thou maist wil∣lingly commend thy spirit unto the hands of God as unto the hands of a faithfull Creator; and maist say with the Bride, Come Lord Iesu, even so, come Lord Iesu, come quickly: my heart is prepa∣red Rev. 2 to enter into thy rest, receive me into the armes of thy mer∣cy, entertaine mee into thy owne kingdome, that leaving the vanity of this world, I may with thy glorified Angels and blessed Saints, enjoy that e∣verlasting felicity of a better world, which never shall have an end. Adew therfore vaine world, with all worldly delights what∣soever: and now solitary soule begin to take thy solace in bet∣ter things. And to prove the world vaine, and consequently thy selfe vaine, behold these shapes, read these Verses, and in order open the leaves that are folded up. Herein, as in a mir∣rour, behold thy owne estate, reade, and consider what thou readest, that thou maist know and see thy owne vanity. Here thou shalt see what thou wert, what thou art, and what thou shalt be. Dust thou wert, dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt returne: dust in thy crea∣tion, dust in thy constitution, dust in thy dissolution. Hels Torments. I. THough long it were since Adam was, Yet seemes he here to be; A blessed creature once he was, Now naked as you see: Whose wife was cause of all my care, To say I may be bold: Turne back the leaves, and then you may My picture there behold. II. To thinke upon the workes of God, All worldly men may wonder: But thinking on thy sinnes O man, Thy heart may burst asunder: The sinner sits and sweetly sings, And so his heart beguiles. Till I come with my bitter stings, And turne to griefe his smiles. III. Muse not to gaze upon my shape, Whose nakednesse you see; By flattering and deceitfull words, The Divell deceived me: Let me example be to all, That once from God doe range: Turne backe the leaves, and then behold Another sight as strange. IV. Had Adam and Eve never beene As there you saw their shape, I never had deceived them, Nor they ere made debate: But turne, behold where both doe stand And lay the fault on me: Turne backe the upper and nether crests, There each of them you see. I. III. Here we doe standin perfect state, All formed as we were; But what the Serpent did by hate, Shall sodainely appeare: Then here behold how both doe stand, And where the fault did lye: Th' almighty power did so command, That once we all must dye. II. IV. See what comes of wicked deed, As all men well doe know; And for the same God hath decreed That we should live in woe: The dust it was my daily food, Vnto it we must turne; And darknesse is my chiefe abode, In sorrow so we mourne. Of the punishments which the Lord threatneth unto such as live a sinfull life. O Ne of the princi∣pall meanes that our Lord hath used oftentimes to bridle the hearts of men, and to draw them unto the obedience of his commandements, hath beene, to set before their eyes the horrible plagues and punishments that are prepared for such persons as bee rebels and transgressours of his Law. For although the hope of the rewards that are promised unto the good in the life to come, may move us very much here∣unto: yet are wee commonly more moved with things that be irkesome unto us, than with such as be pleasant: even as we see by daily experience, that we are vexed more with an injury done unto us, than delighted with any honour; and we are more troubled with sicknesse, than comforted with health: and so by the discommodity of sicknes, we come to understand the commodity of health, as by a thing so much the bet∣ter perceived, by how much more it is sensibly felt. Now for this cause did our Lord in times past use this meane more than any other, as it appeareth most clearely by the writings of the Prophets, which are every where full of dreadfull sayings and threatnings, wherewith our Lord pretendeth to put a terrour into the hearts of men, and so to bridle and subdue them under the obedience of his Law. And for this end he com∣manded the Prophet Ieremie, That hee should take a white booke, and write in the same all the threatnings and calamities which hee had revealed unto him, even from the first day he began to mlke with him, untill that present houre, and that he should read the same in the pre∣sence of all the people, to see if peradventure they would bee moved therewith unto repen∣tance, and to change their for∣mer life, to the end, that hee might also change the determi∣nation of his wrath, which he had purposed to execute upon them. And the holy Scripture saith, That when the Prophet had done according as hee was commanded by almighty God, and had read all those threat∣nings in the presence of the people, and of the Rulers; there arose such a feare and terrour amongst them, that they were all astonished, and as it were bestraughted of their wits, look∣ing one in anothers face, for the exceeding great fear which they had conceived of those words. This was one of the principall means which Almighty God u∣sed with men in the time of the written Law, and so he did also in the time of the Law of graces in vvhich, the holy Apostle saith, That as there is revealed a justice, vvhereby God maketh men just, so is there also revea∣led an indignation and vvrath, vvhereby he punisheth the un∣just: for vvhich cause, S. Iohn Baptist (the glorious forerunner of our Saviour Christ) was sent vvith this commission and em∣bassage, to preach unto the world, That the axe was now put to the rooot of the tree, and that every tree that brought not forth good fruit, should bee cut downe and cast into the fire. Hee said moreover, That there was ano∣ther come into the world, more mighty than hee, that carried in his hand a fanne to winnow and cleanse therewith his floore, and that he would put up the corne into his garner, but the chaffe hee will burne in a fire that should ne∣ver bee quenched. This was the preaching and embassage which he holy fore-runner of our Saviour Jesus Christ brought nto the world. And so great was the thunder of these words, nd the terrour which entered nto mens hearts so dreadfull, that there ran unto him of all sates and conditions of men, ven of the very Pharisees and Publicans, yea, and Souldiers also (which of all others are wont to be most dissolute, and to have the least care of their consciences) and each of them demanded for himselfe particu∣larly of that holy man, what he should doe to attaine unto sal∣vation, and to escape those ter∣rible threatnings which hee had denounced unto them, so great was the feare they had concei∣ved of them. And this is that (deare Chri∣stian brother) which I doe a this present (in the behalfe o Almighty God) deliver unto thee, although not with such fervency of spirit and like holi∣nesse of life, yet that which im∣porteth more in this case, with the same truth and certainty; for so much as the faith and Gospell which Saint Iohn Bap∣tist then preached, is even the same now taught. Now, if thou be desirous to understand in few words, how great the punishment is, that Al∣mighty God hath threatned in his holy Scriptures to the wick∣ed, that which may most briefly and most to the purpose be spo∣ken in this matter, is this: That ke as the reward of the good is universall good thing, even o the punishment of the wick∣ed is an universall evill, which comprehendeth in it al the evils at are. For the better under∣standing whereof it is to be no∣ d, That all the evils of this life are particular evils, and there∣fore doe not torment all our sences generally, but onely one or some of them. As taking an example of the diseases of our body; we see, that one hath a disease in his eyes, another i his eares: one is sicke in th heart, another in the stomacke some other in his head. And so divers men are diseased in diver parts of the body, howbeit, such wise, that none of all the diseases be generally through out all the members of the bo∣dy, but particular to some on of them. And yet for all thi we see what griefe onely one these diseases may put us unt and how painefull a night t sicke man hath in any one these infirmities, yea, although t be nothing else but a little ach n one tooth. Now let us put the case, that there were some one man sicke of such an uni∣versall disease, that he had no part of his body, neither any one joynt or sence free from his proper paine, but that at one ime and instant hee suffered most exceeding sharpe torment n his head, in his eyes, and ares, in his teeth, and stomack, n his liver and heart: and to be hort, in all the rest of his mem∣bers and joynts of his body, and hat he lay after this sort stret∣ hing himselfe in his bed, being ained with these greeses and orments, every member of his ody having his particular tor∣ment and griefe: Hee (I say that should lye thus pained and afflicted, how great torment and griefe of minde and body (thinke ye) should he sustaine: Oh, what thing could any man imagine more miserable, and more worthy of compassion▪ Surely, if thou shouldest see bu a dogge to be so tormented and grieved in the street, his very paines would move thy hear to take pitty upon him. Now this is that (my deare Christian brother, if any comparison may be made betweene them) which is suffered in that most curse and horrible place of hell, and not onely during for the spac of one night, but everlastingly for ever and ever. For like the wicked men have offended Almighty God with all their members and sences, and have made armour of them all to serve sinne, even so will he or∣daine, that they shall bee there tormented every one of them with his propertorment. There shall the wanton un∣chaste eyes be tormented with the terrible sight of Divels: the cares with the confusion of such horrible cries and lamentations which shall there be heard: the nose with the intollerable stinke of that ougly, filthy, and loath∣some place: the taste, with a most ravenous hunger and thirst: the touching, and all the members of the body with ex∣treame burning fire. The ima∣gination shall be tormented by the conceiving of griefes pre∣sent: the memory, by calling to minde the pleasures past: the understanding, by considering what benefits are lost, and what endlesse miseries are to come. This multitude of punish∣ments the holy Scripture signi∣fieth unto us, when it saith, Mat. 15. Psal. 10. That in hell there shall be hunger, thirst, wee∣ping, wailing, gnashing of teeth, swords double edged, spirits crea∣ted for revengement, serpents, wormes, scorpions, hammers, wormewood, water of gall, the spi∣rit of tempest, and other things of like sort. Whereby are sig∣nified unto us (as in a figure) the multitude and dreadfull terrous of the most horrible torments and paines that be in that cursed place. There shall bee likewise darkenesse inward and outward, both of body and soule, farre more obscure than the darke∣nesse of Aegypt, which was to be felt even with hands, Exod. 20. There shall be fire also, not as this fire here, that tormenteth a little, and shortly endeth, but such a fire as that place requi∣reth, which tormenteth excee∣dingly, and shall never make an end of that tormenting. This being true, what greater won∣der can there be, than that they which beleeve and confesse this for truth, should live with such most strange negligence and carelesnesse as they doe? What travell and paines would not a man willingly take to escape even one onely day, yea, one houre, the very least of these torments? and wherefore doe they not then, to escape the everlastingnesse of so great paines and horrible torments, endure so little a travell, as to follow the exercise of vertue. Surely, the consideration of this matter were able to make any sinfull soule to feare and trem∣ble, in case it were deepely re∣garded. And if amongst so great num∣ber of paines, there were any manner hope of end or release, it would be some kinde of com∣fort: but alas it is not so, for there the gates are fast shut up from all expectation of any manner of ease or hope. In all kinde of paines and calamities that be in this world, there is alwaies some gap lying open, whereby the patient may receive some kinde of comfort: sometimes reason, sometimes the weather, sometimes his friends, some∣times the hearing that others are troubled with the very same disease, and sometimes (at the least) the hope of an end may cheare him: onely in these most horrible paines and miseries that be in hell, all the waies are shut up in such sort, and all the havens of comfort so embarred, that the miserable sinner cannot hope for remedy on any side, neither of heaven, nor of earth, neither of the time past, or pre∣sent, or of the time to come, or of any other meanes. The dam∣ned soules thinke, that all men are shooting darts at them, and that all creatures have conspired against them, and that even they themselves are cruell against themselves. This is that distresse whereof the sinners doe lament by the Prophet, saying: The sorrowes of hell have compassed me round about, and the snares of death have besieged me: For on which side soever they looke or turne their eyes, they doe con∣tinually behold occasions of sorrow and griefe, and none at all of any ease or comfort. The wise Virgins (saith the Evange∣list) that stood ready prepared at the gate of the Bridegroome, entred in, and the gate was forthwith locked fast. O locking everla∣sting, O enclosure immortall, O gate of all goodnesse, which shal never any more be opened a∣gaine. As if he had said more plainely, the gate of pardon, of mercy, of comfort, of grace, of intercession, of hope, and of all other goodnesse, is shut up for ever and ever. Six daies and no more was Manna to be ga∣thered, but the seventh day, which was the Sabbath day, was there none to bee found: and therefore shall he fast for ever, that hath not in due time made his provision aforehand. The sluggard (saith the Wise man) will not till his ground for feare of cold, and therefore shall he beg his bread in summer, and no man shall give him to eat. And in another place he saith: He that gathereth in summer, is a wise sonne, but hee that giveth himselfe to sleeping at that season, is the sonne of confusion. For what confusion can be greater then that which that miserable cove∣tous rich man suffereth, who with a few crums of bread that fell from his table, might have purchased to himselfe abun∣dance of everlasting felicity, and glory in the kingdome of Heaven? But because he would not give so small a thing, he came to such an extreame ne∣cessity that he begged (yea, and shall for ever beg in vaine) one∣ly one drop of water, and shall never obtaine it. Who is not moved with that request of that unfortunate damned person, who cried, O father Abraham have compassion on me, and send downe Lazarus unto me, that hee may dip the tip of his finger in wa∣ter, and touch my tongue, for these horrible flames doe torment me exceedingly. What smaller request could there be desired than this? He durst not request so much as one cup of water, neither that Lazarus should put his whole hand into the water, nor yet (which is more to be wondered at) did he request so much as the whole finger, but onely the tip of it, that it might but touch his tongue; and yet even this alone would not be granted unto him. Whereby thou maiest perceive, how fast the gate of all consolation is shut up, and how universall that interdict and excommuni∣cation is that is there laid upon the damned, sith this rich Glut∣ton could not obtaine so much as this small request. So that wheresoever the damned per∣sons doe turne their eyes, and on which side soever they stretch their hands, they shall not finde any manner of com∣fort, be it never so small. And as he that is in the Sea choaked, and almost drowned under the water, not finding any stay whereupon to set his foot, stretcheth forth his hands often∣times on every side in vaine (be∣cause all that he graspeth after, is thin and liquid water, which deceives him) even so shall it fare with the damned persons, when they shall be drowned in that deepe Sea of so many mi∣series, where they shall strive and struggle alwaies with death, without finding any succour or place of stay, whereupon they may rest themselves. Now this is one of the greatest paines wherewith they be tormented in that cursed place: for if these torments should have their con∣tinuance limited but for a cer∣taine time, though it were for a thousand, yea, a hundred thou∣sand millions of yeares, yet even this would be some little com∣fort unto them, for nothing is perfectly great, in case it have an end: But alas, they have not so much as this poore and mise∣rable comfort: but contrariwise, their paines are equall in conti∣nuance with the eternity of Al∣mighty God, and the lasting of their misery with the eternity of Gods glory. As long as Al∣mighty God shall live, so long shall they die: and when Al∣mighty God shall cease to be God, then shall they also cease to be as they are. O deadly life, O immortall death! I know not whether I may truely tearme thee, either life or death: for if thou be life, why dost thou kill? And if thou be death, why doest thou endure? Wherefore I will call thee neither the one, nor the other, for so much as in both of them there is contained something that is good: as in life there is rest, and in death there is an end (which is a great comfort to the afflicted) but thou hast neither rest nor end. What art thou then? Marry, thou art the worst of life, and the worst of death; for of death thou hast the torment, without any end, and of life thou hast the continuance without any rest. O bitter composition, O unsavory purgation of our Lords cup! of the which, all the sin∣ners of the earth shall drinke their part. Now in this continuance in this eternity, I would wish that thou (my deare Christian bro∣ther) wouldst fixe the eyes of thy consideration a little while: and that as the cleane beast cheweth the cud, even so thou wouldest weigh this point within thy selfe with great deli∣beration. And to the intent thou maiest doe it the better, consider a little the paines that a sicke man abideth in one evill night, especially if he be vexed with any vehement griefe, or sharpe disease. Marke how oft he tumbleth and tosseth in his bed, what disquietnesse he hath, how long and tedious one night seemeth unto him, how duely he counteth all the houres of the clocke, and how long hee deemeth each houre of them to be, how he passeth the time in wishing for the dawning of the day, which notwithstanding, is like to helpe him little towards the curing of his disease. If this then be accounted so great a torment, what torment shall that be (thinke you) in that e∣verlasting night in hell, which hath no morning, nor so much as any hope of any dawning of the day: O darknesse most ob∣scure! O night everlasting! O night accursed even by the mouth of Almighty God and all his Saints! That one shall wish for light, and shall never see it, neither shall the bright∣nesse of the morning arise any more. Consider then what a kinde of torment shall that bee, to live everlastingly in such a night as this is, lying not in a soft bed (as the sicke man doth) but in a hot burning furnace, fo∣ming out such terrible raging flames. What shoulders shall be able to abide those horrible heats. If it seeme to us as a thing intollerable to have onely some part of our feet standing upon a pan of burning coales, for the space of repeating the Lords prayer. What shall it be (thinke you) to stand body and soule burning in the midst of those e∣verlasting hot raging fires in hell, in comparison of which, the fires of this world are but painted fires. Is there any wit or judgement in this world? Have men their right sences? doe they understand what these words import? or are they per∣adventure perswaded, that these are onely the fables of Poets? or doe they thinke, that this ap∣pertaineth not to them, or else that it was onely ment for o∣thers? None of all this can they say, for so much as our faith assureth us most certainely herein. And our Saviour Christ himselfe, who is everlasting truth, crieth out in his Gospell, saying, Heaven and earth shall faile, but my word shall not faile. Of this misery there follow∣eth another as great as it, which is, that the paines are alwaies continuing in one like degree, without any manner of inter∣mission, or decreasing. All man∣ner of things that are under the cope of heaven, doe move and turn round about with the same heaven, and doe never stand still at one state or being, but are continually either ascending or descending. The sea and the rivers have their ebbing and flowing, the times, the ages, and the mutable fortune of men, and of kingdomes, are evermore in continuall motion. There is no feaver so fervent, that doth not decline, neither griefe so sharp, but that after it is much aug∣mented, it doth forthwith de∣crease. To be short, all the tri∣bulations and miseries are by little and little worne away with time, and as the common saying is, Nothing is sooner dried up than teares. Onely that paine n hell is alwaies greene, onely that feaver never decreaseth, onely that extremity of heat knoweth not what is either eve∣ning or morning. In the time of Noahs flood, Almighty God ained forty daies and forty ights, continually without easing upon the earth, and this fficed to drowne the whole world. But in that place of torment in hell, there shall raine everlasting vengeance, and darts f furie upon that cursed land, without ever ceasing so much as e onely minute or moment. ow what torment can bee eater and more to be abhor∣ d, than continually to suffer r one like manner, without any kinde of alteration or change? Though a meat bee never so delicate, yet in case we feed continually thereupon, it will in very short time be very loathsome unto us: for no meat can be more precious and deli∣cate than that Manna was, which almighty God sent down unto the children of Israel in the Desart, and yet because they did eat continually thereof, i made them to loath it, yea, and provoked them to vomit it up againe. The way that is all plaine (they say) wearieth more than any other, because alwaies the variety (yea, even in punish∣ment) is a kinde of comfort▪ Tell me then, if things that be pleasant and savoury, when the be alwaies after one manner, are an occasion of loathsome∣nesse and paine: what kinde of loathsomenesse will that bee which shall be caused by those most horrible paines and tor∣ments in hell, which doe con∣tinue everlastingly after one like sort? What will the dam∣ned and cursed creatures think, when they shall there see them∣selves so utterly obhorred and forsaken of Almighty God, that he will not so much as with the remission of any one sinne, mi∣tigate somwhat their torments. And so great shall the fury and rage be which they shall there conceive against him, that they shall never cease continually to curse and blaspheme his holy name. Unto all these paines, there is also added the paine of that everlasting consumer, to wit, the worme of conscience, whereof the holy Scripture maketh so oftentimes mention, saying, Their worme shall never die, and their fire shall never bee quenched. This worme is a fu∣rious raging despight and bitter repentance, without any fruit, which the wicked shall alwaies have in hell, by calling to their remembrance the opportunity and time they had whiles they were in this world, to escape those most grievous and horri∣ble torments, and how they would not use the benefit there∣of. And therefore when the miserable sinner seeth himselfe thus to be tormented and vex∣ed on every side, and doth call to minde how many dayes and yeeres he hath spent idely in va∣nities, pastimes, and pleasures; and how oftentimes he was ad∣vertised of this perill, and how little regard he tooke thereof: What shall he thinke? What anguish and sorrow shall there be in his heart? Hast thou not read in the Gospell, that there shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? The famine of Aegypt endur'd onely seven yeares, but that in hell shall en∣dure everlastingly. In Aegypt they found a remedy, though with great difficulty and charge; out for this, there shall never a∣ y remedy bee found. Theirs was redeemed with money and cattell, but this can never be re∣deemed with any manner of ex∣change. This punishment can∣not bee pardoned, this paine cannot be exchanged, this sen∣tence cannot be revoked. Oh, if thou knewest and wouldest consider, how every one con∣demned to hell, shall there re∣maine tormenting and renting himselfe, weeping and wailing, and saying, O miserable and unfortunate wretch that I am, what times and opportunities have I suffered to passe in vaine? A time there was, when with one cup of cold water I might have purchased to my selfe a crowne of glory, and when also with such necessary workes of mercy in relieving the poore, I might have gained life everla∣sting. Wherefore did I not looke before me? How was I blinded with things present? How did J let passe the fruitfull yeares of abundance, and did not enrich my selfe? If J had beene brought up amongst In∣fidels and Pagans, and had be∣leeved that there had beene no∣thing else but only to be borne, and to die, then might I have had some kinde of excuse, and might have said. I knew not what was commanded or pro∣hibited me: but for so much as I have lived amongst Christians, and was my selfe one of them professed, and held it for an ar∣ticle of my beleefe, that the houre should come when I should give up an account after what order I had spent my life: forsomuch also as it was daily cried out unto me by the conti∣nuall preaching and teaching of Gods Embassadours (whose advertisements many follow∣ing, made preparation in time, and laboured earnestly for the provision of good workes:) forasmuch I say as I made light of all these examples, and per∣swaded my selfe very fondly, that Heaven was prepared for me, though I tooke no paines for it at all: what deserve I that have thus led my life? O ye in∣fernall furies, come and rent me in peeces, and devoure these my bowels, for so have I justly de∣served, I have deserved eternall famishment, seeing I would not provide for my selfe while I had time. I deserve not to reape, because I have not sowne; I am worthy to be destitute, because I have not laid up in store; I deserve that my request should now be denied me, sith when the poore made request unto me, I refused to releeve them: I have deserved to sigh and la∣ment so long as God shall be God; I have deserved, that this worme of conscience shall gnaw ine entrails for ever and ever, by representing unto mee the ittle pleasure that I have en∣ oyed, and the great felicity which I have lost, and how far greater that was which I might have gained, by forgoing that little which J would not forgoe. This is that immortall worme that shall never dye, but shall lye there everlastingly gnawing at the entrailes of the wicked, which is one of the most terri∣ble paines that can possibly be imagined. Peradventure thou art now perswaded (good Reader) that there can be added no more un∣to this, than hath beene said: But surely the mighty arme of God wanteth not force to cha∣stise his enemies more & more: for all these paines that are hi∣therto rehearsed, are such as doe appertaine generally to all the damned: but besides these ge∣nerall paines, there are also other particular paines, which each one of the damned shall there suffer in divers sorts, ac∣cording to the quality of his sinne. And so according to this proportion, the haughty and proud shall there be abased and brought low to their great con∣fusion. The covetous shall bee driven to great necessity. The glutton shall rage with conti∣nuall hunger and thirst. The lecherous shall burne in the ve∣ry same flames which they themselves have enkindled. And those that have al their life time hunted after their pleasures and pastimes, shall live there in continuall lamentation and sor∣row. But because examples are of very great force to move our hearts, I will bring onely one for this purpose, wherby some∣what of this matter may the better be perceived. It is writ∣ten of a certaine holy man, that he saw the paines (in spirit) of a licentious and worldly man in this sort. First, he saw how the divels that were present at the houre of his death, when hee yeelded up his ghost, snatched away his soule with great rejoy∣cing, and made a present there∣of to the Prince of darkenesse, who was then sitting in a chaire of fire, expecting the comming of this present. Immediately af∣ter that it was presented before him, he arose up out of his seat, and said unto the damned soule, that he would give him the pre∣heminence of that honourable seat, because he had been a man of honour, and was alwaies ve∣ry much affected to the same. Incontinently after that he was placed therein, crying and la∣menting in that honourable tor∣ment, there appeared before him two other most ougly di∣vels, and offered him a cup full of most bitter and stinking liquor, and made him to drinke and carouse it up all perforce; saying, It is meet, sithence thou hast beene a lover of precious wines and bankets, that thou shouldest likewise prove of this our wine, whereof all we doe use to drinke in these parts. Immediately after this there came other two, with two fiery trumpets, and setting them at his eares, began to blow into them flames of fire, saying, This melody have we reserved for thee, understanding that in the world thou wast very much delighted with minstrelcie and wanton songs: and sodainly he espied other divels, loaden with vipers and serpents, the which they threw upon the breast and bellies of that miserable sinner, saying unto him, that for somuch as he had beene greatly delight∣ed with the wanton embracings and lecherous lusts of women, he should now solace himselfe with these refreshings, instead of those licentious delights and pleasures, which he had enjoy∣ed in the world. After this sort (as the Prophet Esay saith in the 47. Chapter) when the sinner is punished, there is given measure for measure, to the end, that in such a great variety and propor∣tion of punishments, the order and wisedome of Gods justice, might the more manifestly ap∣peare. This vision hath Almighty God shewed in spirit to this ho∣ly man for advertisement and instruction, not that in hell these things are altogether so mate∣rially done, but that by them we might understand in some man∣ner the variety and multitude of the paines which bee there appointed for the damned. Whereof, I know not how some of the Pagans have had a certaine knowledge: for a Poet speaking of this multitude of paines, affirmed, That although he had a hundred mouthes, and as many tongues, with a voice as strong as Iron, yet were they not able onely to expresse the names of them. A Poet he was that spake this, but truely therin he spake more like a Prophet or an Evangelist than a Poet. Now then, if all this evill shall most assuredly come to passe, what man is he, that seeing all this so certainely with the eyes of his faith, will not turne over the leafe, and begin to provide for himselfe against that time? Where is the judgement of men now become? Where is their wits? yea, where is at least their selfe-love, which seeketh ever∣more for his owne profit, and is much afraid of any losse? May it be thought that men are be∣come beasts, that provide onely for the time present? Or have they peradventure so dimmed their eye-sight, that they cannot looke before them? Hearken (saith Esay) O yee deafe and ye blinde, open your eyes that you may see; Who is blinde but my servant? And who is deafe but wee, unto whom I have sent my messengers? And who is blind, but he that suffereth himselfe to be sold for a slaue? Thou that seest so many things, wilt thou not suffer thy selfe to see this? Thou that hast thine eares open, wilt thou not giue eare hereun∣to? If thou beleeve not this, how art thou then a Christian? If thou beleeve it, and doest not provide for it, how canst thou be thought a reasonable man? Aristotle saith, That this is the difference betweene opinion and imagination, that an imagi∣nation alone is not sufficient to cause a feare, but an opinion is a for if I doe imagine that a house may fall upon mee, it is no enough to make me afraid, un∣lesse J beleeve or have an opi∣nion it will be so indeed: fo then it is sufficient to make mee afraid. And hereof commeth the feare that murderers al∣waies have, by reason of the suspition they conceive, that their enemies doe lye in wai for them. If then the opinion and onely suspition of danger is able to cause the greatest cou∣rage to feare, how is it that the certainty and beleefe of so ma∣ny and so great terrible miseries which are farre more sure than any opinion) doth not make thee to feare? If thou perceivest, that for these many yeares past thou hast led a licentious and sinfull life, and that at the last, according to present justice, thou art condemned to these horrible torments in hell: if al∣so there appeare by probable conjecture, that there is no more likelihood of thy amend∣ment for ensuing years to come, than there was in those already past, how happeneth it, that run∣ning head long into so manifest a danger, thou art not at all a∣fraid? Especially, considering the sinfull state wherein thou livest, and the horrible paines and torments which doe attend for thee, and the time which thou hast lost, and the endlesse repentance which thou shall have therefore in the most hor∣rible torments of hell. Assured∣ly, it goes beyond the compasse of all common sence and con∣ceit of humane reason, to consi∣der, That there should be such negligent, wilfull, grosse, and carelesse blindnesse, able to en∣ter and take such deepe rooting in the soule of man. The Conclusion of all the Premises. I F now all this be so, I beseech thee even for the bitter passi∣on of our sweet viour Jesus Christ, to re∣member thy selfe, and consi∣der that thou art a Christian, d that thou beleevest assu∣ dly for a most undoubted th, whatsoever the true faith sructeth thee. This faith telleth thee, that thou hast a judge above that seeth all the steps and motions of thy life and that certainely there shall a day come, when he will require an account of thee, even for every idle word. This faith teacheth thee, That a man is no altogether at an end when he dieth, but that after this tempo∣rall life, there remaineth ano∣ther everlasting life; and tha the soules die not with th bodies, but that whiles th body remaineth in the grave untill the generall day of judge∣ment, the soule shall enter into another new country, and into a new world, where it shall have such habitation and company as the faith and workes we which it had in this life. This faith telleth thee also, that both the reward of vertue, and the punishment of vice, is athing so wonderfull, that although the whole world were full of bookes, and all creatures were writers, yet should they all be wearied, and the world come to an end, before they should end their description, and make a perfect declaration what is comprehended in each one of these points. This faith infor∣meth thee also, that the debts and duties which we owe to Al∣mighty God, are so great, that albeit a man had so many lives s there be sands in the Sea, yet would they not suffice, if they were al employed in his service. And this faith likewise telleth thee, that vertue is such an ex∣cellent treasure, that all the trea∣sures of the world, and all that mans heart can desire, are in no sort comparable unto it. Wherefore, if there be so many and so great respects that doe invite us unto vertue, how commeth it to passe, that there be so few lovers and followers of the same? If men be moved with gaine & commodity, what greater commodity can there be than to attaine life everlasting? I they be moved with feare of pu¦nishment, what greater punish¦ment can be found, than the mo horrible everlasting dreadful torments in the lake of fire and brimstone, to continue eve world without end? If that bonds of debts and benefits; what debts are greater than hese which we owe unto al∣mighty God, as well for that he s what he is, as also for that which we have received of him? f the feare of perils doe moove s, what greater perill can there be than death, the houre there∣of being so uncertaine, and the ccount so strait? If thou be moved with peace, liberty, qui∣tnesse of minde, and with a leasant life, (which are things hat all the world desires) it is ertaine, that all these are found uch better in the life that is overned by vertue and reason, han in that life which is ruled y the affections and passions of the minde, for so much as ma is a reasonable creature, and n beast. Howbeit, in case tho account all this as not sufficient to move thee thereunto, yet l it suffice thee to consider fur∣ther, that even almighty God abased himselfe for thy sak that he descended from heave unto the earth, and became man, and whereas hee create the whole world in sixe daye hee bestowed three and thi yeares about thy redemption yea, and was also contented the same to loose his life. Al∣mighty God dyed, that sin should dye; and yet for all th doe we endeavour, that sin might live in our hearts, n withstanding that our Lo purposed to take away the life of sinne with his owne death. If this matter were to be discus∣sed with reason, surely this al∣ready spoken might suffice to prevaile with any reasonable creature: for not onely in be∣holding almighty God upon the crosse, but whethersoever wee doe turne our eyes, wee shall finde, that every thing crieth out to us, and calleth upon us to receive this so excellent a bene∣fit: for there is not a thing crea∣ted in the world (if wee duely consider it) but doth invite us to the love and service of our Saviour Jesus Christ, insomuch, that looke how many creatures there be in the world, so many preachers there are, so many bookes, so many voices, and so many reasons, which do all call us unto almighty God. And how is it possible then, that so many callings as these are, so many promises, so many threatnings, and so many pro∣vocations, should not suffice to bring us unto him? What might almighty God have done more than he hath done, or pro∣mised more greater blessings than hee hath promised, or threatned more grievous and horrible torments than he hath threatned, to draw us unto him, and to plucke us away from sinne? And yet all this not∣withstanding, how commeth it to passe, that there is so great (I will not say arrogancy, but) bewitching of men, that doe be∣leeve these things to be certain∣ly true, and yet be not afraid to continue all the daies of their life in the committing of deadly sinnes? Yea, to goe to bed in deadly sinne, and to rise up a∣gaine in deadly sinne, and to embrue themselves in every kinde of loathsome, detestable, and odious sinne, even as though all their whole endeavours in∣tended by the practise of sinne, to resist all grace and favour in the sight of God? And this is done in such sort, so without feare, so without scruple of minde, so without breaking of one houres sleepe, and without the refraining of any one deli∣cate morsell of meate for the same, as if all that they belee∣ved were dreames, and old wives tales, and as if all that the holy Evangelists have written, were meere fiction and fables. But tell me thou that art such a desperate willfull rebell against thy Creator and Redeemer, which by thy detestable life & dissolute conversation, doest evidence thy selfe to bee a fire∣brand, prepared to burne in those everlasting and revenging horrible fires of hell. What wouldest thou have done more than thou hast done, in case thou haddest beene perswaded, that all were meere lyes which thou hast beleeved? For al∣though that for feare of incur∣ring the danger of the princes lawes, and the execution of their force upon thee, thou hast somewhat brideled thine appe∣tites; yet doth it not appeare, that for any feare of Almighty God, thou hast refrained thy will in any one thing, neither from carnall pleasures, not from backebiting and slandering thy neighbours, nor yet from ful∣filling thine inordinate lusts and desires, in case thine ability served thee thereunto. Oh, what doth the worme of thy consci∣ence say unto thee, whiles thou art in such a fond securitie and confidence, continuing in such a dissolute and wicked life as thou doest? Where is now be∣come the understanding, judge∣ment and reason, which thou hast of a man? Why art thou not affraid of so horrible, so cer∣taine, and so assured perils and dangers? if there were a dish o meate set before thee, and some man (albeit hee were a lyer) should say unto thee, refraine to touch and eate therof for it is poysoned; durst thou once ad∣venture to stretch out thy hand, to take a taste thereof, though the meate were never so savoury and delicate, and hee never so great a lyer that should beare thee thus in hand? If then the Prophets, if the Apostles, if the Evangelists, yea, if Almighty God himselfe doe cry out unto thee, and say, Take heede thou miserable man, for death is in that kinde of meate, and death doth lye lurking in that glutto∣ ous morsell, which the divell hath set before thee? How da∣ est thou reach for everlasting death with thine owne hands, nd drinke thine owne damna∣ ion? Where is the applying of hy wits, thy judgement, and the discourse and reason which hou hast of a spirituall man? Where is their light, where is heir force? Sith that none of hem doe bridle thee any whit from thy common usuall vices? Oh thou wretched and care∣lesse creature, be witched by the ommon enemy Satan, adjudg∣ d to everlasting darknesse, both inward and outward, and so oest goe from one darkenesse o the other. Thou art blinde to see thine owne misery, in sensible to understand thine owne perdition, and harde than any Adamant, to feele the hammer of Gods word. Oh, a thousand times most miserable thou art, worthy to be lamented with none other teares, than with those wherewith thy dam∣nation was lamented, when i was said, Luke 19. Oh that thou knewest this day the peace, quiet∣nesse, and treasures, which Al∣mighty God hath offered unto thee, that doe now lye hidden from thine eyes. Oh miserable is the day of thy nativity, and much more miserable the day of thy death: forsomuch, as that shall be the beginning of thine ever∣lasting damnation. Oh, how much better had it beene for thee, never to have been borne, if thou shalt be damned in the horrible pit of hell for ever, where the torments are perpe∣tually durable. How much better had it beene for thee ne∣ver to have beene baptised, not yet to have received the Chri∣stian Faith, if through the abu∣sing thereof by thy wicked life, thy damnation shallt hereby be the greater? For if the light of reason onely sufficeth to make the Heathen Philosophers in∣excusable, because they know∣ing God in some degree, did not glorifie him nor serve him (as the Apostle saith in the first to the Romans) how much lesse shall hee be excused, that hath received the light of faith, and the water of Baptisme, yea, and the holy Sacrament of the body and bloud of our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, hearing dai∣ly the doctrine of the Gospell, if hee doe nothing more than those Pagan Philosophers have done. Now, what other thing may we inferre of the premises, but briefly to conclude, That there is none other understanding, none other wisedome, none o∣ther counsell in the world, but that setting aside all the impedi∣ments and combersome dan∣gerous wayes of this life, wee follow that onely true and cer∣taine way, whereby true peace and everlasting life is obtained. Hereunto are we called by rea∣son, by wisedome, by law, by heaven, by earth, by hell, and by the life, death, justice, and mercy of Almighty God. Hereunto are we also very notably invi∣ted by the Holy Word, spoken by the mouth of Ecclesiasticus in the sixt Chapter, in this wise: My sonne hearken to instruction even from the first yeares of thy youth, and in thy latter daies thou shalt enjoy the sweet fruit of wisedome: Approach unto it, as one that ploweth and soweth, and with patience ex∣pect the fruitfull increase which it shall yeeld unto thee. The paines that thou shalt take, shall bee but little, and the benefits that thou shalt speedily enjoy, shall be great. My son hearken to my words, and neglect not this my counsell which I shall give thee, put thy feet willingly into her fetters, and thy necke into her chaines: bow downe thy shoulders, and carry her upon thee, and be not displea∣sed with her bonds: approach neere unto her with all thy heart, and follow her wayes with all thy strength, seeke for her with all thy diligence, and she will make her selfe knowne unto thee, and after that thou hast found her, never forsake her: for by her shalt thou finde rest in thy latter daies, and that which before did seeme so pain∣full unto thee, will afterwards become very pleasant. Her fet∣ters shall be a defence of thy strength, and a foundation of vertue, and her chaine shall be a obe of glory: for in her is the beauty of life, and her bonds re the bonds of health. Hether∣to Ecclesiasticus. Whereby thou maiest understand in some de∣gree, how great the beauty, the delights, the liberty, and riches of true wisedome are, which is vertue it selfe, and the know∣ledge of Almighty God, wher∣of wee doe intreate. But if all this be insufficient to mollifie our stony hearts, lift up thine eyes, and fix thy thoughts con∣stantly to behold our omnipo∣tent God in his mercy and love towards sinners upon his dying crosse, where he made full sa∣tisfaction for thy sinnes. There shalt thou behold him in this forme: his feet nailed fast, look∣ing for thee; his armes spread abroad to receive thee, and his head bowing downe, to give thee, as to another prodigall sonne, new kisses of peace and attonement. From thence hee calleth thee (if thou wouldest heare) with so many callings and cries as there be wounds in his whole body. Hearken thou therefore unto these voyces, and consider well with thy selfe, that if his prayer be not heard that hearkeneth not unto the cries of the poore, how much lesse shall he be heard, that ma∣keth himselfe deafe to such cries as these, being the most merci∣full cryings of our loving Savi∣our, and intended for our soules salvation. Who is he that hath not cause to resolve himselfe wholly into teares to weepe and bewaile his manifold offences? Who is he that can lament, and will not lament at this? unlesse he be such a one as seeth not, nor careth what great ship∣wracke, waste, and havocke he maketh of al the riches and trea∣sures of his soule. FINIS. Godly CHRISTIAN Prayers. A houshold Prayer for private Families in the Mor∣ning. M Ost mighty and glo∣rious God, the onely Creator and Gover∣nour of Heaven and arth; and all things therein ontained, we miserable sinners here met together by thy gra doe in thy feare prostrate selves before thy throne of Ma∣jesty and glory, desiring in so measure to shew our unfain thankfullnesse, for thy innu∣rable mercies multiplied up us from the first houre of birth, yea before our birth, a before time was. Before foundations of the world w laid, thou out of thy free and meere mercy, didst elect to eternall life, when thou di reject others. Thou didst ∣ate us after thine owne ima engraving upon us the cha ∣cters of spirituall wisedom righteousnesse, and true ho ∣nesse; when it was in thy pow to have made us like unto beasts that perish; yea, to have qualled us to the basest of thy eatures. And when through ur owne default wee lost that ignity, thou didst so pittie us as send from thine owne bo∣ ome thine onely begotten Son recover it for us, and to re∣ tore it to us, and that with no esse price then his owne heart∣ loud. Besides, it hath pleased hee continually to spread the wings of thy gracious protecti∣on over us, to ward and guard s by thy providence, to open y hand and to replenish us with good things, to continue our life, health, strength, food, aiment, peace, and liberty, to his very houre. Thou hast e∣ven loaded us with thy benefits, if we had hearts rightly to con∣sider it; thou renewest thy mer∣cy towards us every morning; and the night past hast given us a testimony of thy love: For whereas, for the sinnes com∣mitted the day before, thou mightest even in the dead of sleepe have given us a sodaine call out of this world, and so presently have brought us to that great account which wee must make before thee, thou vouchsafest yet to spare us, yea (which is more) to refresh us with comfortable rest, to pre∣serve us from all dangers that might have befallen our soules or bodies, and to bring us in safety to the beginning of this day. Heavenly Father, grant that we may not be unmindfull of thy manifold mercies, but that wee may often thinke of them, and speake of them to thy glory; and that the considera∣tion thereof may stirre us up to devote all the powers of our soules, and members of our bodies to thy service. Forgive us our former unthankefulnesse for thy mercies, and our severall abuses of them, yea pardon all our sinnes past, we most hum∣bly beseech thee, for thy owne mercies sake, and for thy Sonnes merits. Our sinnes are great and grievous, for in sinne we were borne, and ever since have we gone on in a course of sinne and rebellion against thee, we doe daily breake thy holy pre∣cepts, and that against the light of our owne knowledge, albeit we know that thou art our Cre∣atour, who hast made us; ou Redeemer, who hast bought us with the precious blood of thy onely begotten sonne; and ou Comforter, who bestowes upon us all things needfull fo our being and well-being, fo this life and for a better life Yea even thee, thee (O Lord have we presumed to offend that hast beene thus abundantly mercifull unto us. For this ou unthankefulnesse and wicked nesse, enter not into judgement with us, wee most humbly be∣seech thee from the bottom of our hearts; but have merc upon us, have mercy upon u most mercifull Father, and in mercy wash away all our sinnes with the bloud of Jesus Christ, hat so they may never bee laid o our charge, nor have power rise up in judgement against s. Pierce our hearts with a eeling of our sinnes, that wee ay mourne for them, as wee ught to doe; make us to loath nd abhorre them, that we may ave and avoid them, that wee may be watchfull against all occasions of sinne, and circum∣ ect over our owne wayes. owre thy Spirit and put thy ace into our hearts, that there∣by we may be inabled for thy vice, and both in body and ule may glorifie thee heere, at wee may be glorified of thee and with thee hereafter. And as a speciall meanes to keepe us in subjection before thee, work in us, holy Father, a continuall and effectuall re∣membrance of this earths vani∣ty, of our owne mortality, o that great and terrible judge∣ment to come; of the paines o hell, and joyes of heaven which follow after; O let the remem∣brance of these things be a spu to provoke us unto vertue, and a bridle to hold us in from gal∣loping after vice and wicked∣nesse. We know not how soon thou wilt set a period to ou lives, and call for our soules to appeare before thee, whether this day or not before the eve∣ning; O prepare us therefore for the houre of death, that we may then neither feare nor faint, but may with joy yeeld up our soules into thy mercifull hands, and doe thou, O Father of mercy, receive them. Let thy mercifull eye look upon us this day, shield us from the tempta∣tions of the divell, and grant us he custody of thy holy Angels, to defend us in all our wayes: nable us with diligence and onscience to discharge the du∣ es of our callings, and crowne all our endeavours with thy blessing: without thy blessing all mans labour is but vaine, oe thou therefore blesse us in ur severall places; O prosper hou our handy-work. Provide or us all things which thou knowest to bee needfull for e∣very one of us this day. Give us a sanctified use of thy creatures agodly jealousie over ourselves a continual remembrance of thy omniscience, & omnipresence that we may labour to approve our very thoughts unto thee weane us from the love of thi world, and ravish our soule with the love of our home and thine everlasting Kingdome Defend the universall Church the Churches of this Land es∣pecially, our gracious King Charles, our illustrious Queen Mary, together with the Prin∣cesse Elizabeth, and her Prince∣ly issue; crowne them with thy graces heere, and with thy glory hereafter. Bee with th Magistracie and Ministerie of the Realme, make thy Gos∣pell to flourish amongst us by the labours of those whom thou hast appointed to this great ser∣vice. Comfort thine afflicted servants, in what place or case soever they be; give us a fel∣low feeling of their miseries, and wisedome to prepare our selves against the evill day. Heare us in these things, and grant what else thou knowest needfull for us, not for our wor∣thinesse, but for thy Sonnes sake, our alone Saviour, in whose name and words, we conclude our imperfect prayers, saying: Our Father, &c. A houshold Prayer for pri∣vate Families in the Evening. O Glorious God, in Jesus Christ our gracious Father, we wretch∣ed creatures by na∣ture, but by thy grace thy ser∣vants and children doe heere make bold to appeare before thee in the humility of our soules, to performe some part of that duty which we owe unto thee. And first we offer unto thy divine Majestie the calves of our lips, the sacrifice f praise and thanksgiving for ine infinite mercies which hou hast beene pleased to con∣ erre upon us out of thy bound∣nesse and endlesse goodnesse. What thou hast done for us this hy, is beyond all that we are ble to expresse or conceive: hou hast preserved us from all erils and dangers, so that none f those judgements (which our nes have deserved) have bin flicted upon us; thou hast nlarged our time and opportu∣ ity to repent; thou hast pro∣ ded for our soules and bodies; ou hast bin no way wanting nto us if we had hearts to ac∣knowledge it. Forgive us that e cannot acknowledge thy goodnesse as we ought to doe and more and more quicken u in this dutie, that we may with heart and voyce acknowledg thee to be that Father of lights from whom we doe receiv every good and perfect gift ascribing unto thee the whole glory of all that we enjoy, both now and evermore. And gran we pray thee, that our thanke∣fulnesse may not be onely ver ball, but reall, we labouring i deede and in truth to be dutiful unto thee that hast bin so boun∣tifull unto us. Pardon us for th sinnes of this day, wherein we have offended thee, whether open or secret, of ignorance o of knowledge, of infirmity o presumption, of omission o commission, in thought, word or deed. The sinnes of this day are enough to plunge us, soule and body, into the bottomlesse gulfe of perdition. If thou shouldest straightly mark them, what answer shall we be able to make thee, how shall wee dare to appeare in thy presence, be∣fore whom all thy creatures feare and tremble? But thy mercy is above all thy workes; much more above all our works of sinne. In the confidence of thy mercy we come unto thee, beseeching thee in thy sonne Christ to be reconciled with us, and to assure us hereof by the certificate of thine owne blessed spirit. Breake the strength of sin that would subdue us more and more; and reare in us cleane hearts, and renew a right spirit within us, Increase our faith in the sweet promises of the Gos∣pell, and our repentance from dead workes, our hope of eter∣nall life, our feare of thy name, our zeale for thy glory, our ha∣tred of sinne, our love of righ∣teousnesse, our contentment in all estates, our patience in ad∣versity, our prudence in prospe∣rity: that so being furnished with the endowments of grace here, we may be fitted for the enjoyment of glory hereafter. And because the night is now upon us, and our bodies desirous of quiet rest, wee pray thee to take us into thy blessed tuition, and to refresh our wearied bo∣dies with comfortable sleepe. Protect us and all that doe be∣long unto us under the shadow of thy vings, defend us from all evill, both of sinne and punish∣ment: keepe us from security and carelesnesse, from dulnesse and drowsinesse of spirit, from fire and robbery, from the ma∣lice of Satan and all his adhe∣rents, from all perils into which for our sinnes wee might justly fall. Let the sight of the bed minde us of that last bed, the grave, wherein wee are shortly to take up our lodging, we know not how soone. None of us here present can certainely tell, whether these eyes of ours once closed up, shall ever any more open againe in this world: therfore receive us, good Lord, receive us into the armes of thy mercy, unto thine Almighty protection wee bequeath our selves, soules and bodies, and all that we have: upon thy mercy alone wee cast our selves both this present night and for ever∣more. Bee mercifull to thy whole Church, continue the flourishing state of the King∣domes wherin we live. Decrease in it the number of superstitious Papists and prophane Atheists, and increase in it the number of such as unfainedly feare thee. Preserve from all dangers and conspiracies our religious King Charles, our gracious Queene Mary, the Lady Elizabeth, and her children. Give them all such a measure of thy Spirit & grace, that they may seeke to advance thy kingdome on earth, and at last be advanced to thine ever∣lasting Kingdome in Heaven. Endow the right Honourable of our Privie Counsell with all such graces as may make them fit for so high a place. Stirre up Magistrates and men in autho∣rity, to endeavour after the fur∣thering of thine honour, and the benefiting of thy people. Make the Ministers able and willing to discharge the duties of their weighty calling with diligence and conscience; water their in∣deavours with the dew of hea∣ven, that daily such as belong unto life eternall may be added unto the Church. Comfort, O comfort thine afflicted ser∣vants, wheresoever or howsoe∣ver troubled: sweeten their af∣flictions and season their sor∣rowes with the comforts of thy Spirit. Give them all needfull assistance, and in thy owne time a joyfull deliverance. And make us ready for afflictions, that they may not come upon us as a snare, but that we may in good measure, like wise Virgins bee prepared for the comming of Christ Jesus, the sweet Bride∣groome of our soules. Finally, wee pray thee beare with the weakenesse, and coldnesse, and imperfection of our prayers, and to grant our requests, not for our merits, but for thine owne mercies, and for the sake of thy dearely beloved Sonne Jesus Christ, who died to make satis∣faction for us, and liveth to make intercession for us, in whose words we shut up our im∣perfect prayers, saying, as him∣selfe hath taught us, Our Father, &c. O Lord blesse and save us, make thy face to shine upon us, thy Word to instruct us, thy grace to direct us, thy Angels to protect us, thy Spirit to comfort and support us, unto the end, and in the end, Amen. Amen. A Prayer in time of VVarre. O LORD GOD of Hoasts, in power invincible, in wis∣dome unsearcha∣ble, in mercy in∣comprehensible; that givest deli∣verance in the time of trouble, & assistance in the day of battel; we most humbly and heartily be∣seech thee to save us from all those extremities, and in speciall from our enemies, which our sins do threaten to bring upon us. Hitherto thou hast pleased to make our Nation a spectacle of thy ineffable goodnesse, but we deserve to be made a spectacle of thy unsupportable wrath. Our contempt of thy threat∣nings, our abuse of thy mercies, our neglect of thy judgements, with infinite other innormities, doe menace the taking away of thy old mercies, and the brin∣ging in of some judgement. We have just cause to feare, O Lord, that our loud and crying sinnes doe call in our enemies upon us, and arme them against us; yea, that they are already prest and prepared to execute thy vengeance. Then open our eyes, we pray thee, that we may see thy Ensigne set up, thy Ban∣ner displayed, and the evidence of thy approaching sword: open our eares that wee may heare thee blowing of thy trumpet, and giving the alarum to warre: open our hearts that we may not be secure in so great danger, but may quake and tremble to see thy hand of vengeance be∣fore us. And howsoever by our sinnes we are set in the middest of this danger, yet let the hand of thy mercy (which is as om∣nipotent as that of thy justice) rescue us; let thy out stretched arme deliver us. Put up thy sword into the scabbard; O bid it rest and be still. Be favou∣rable and gracious unto this thy Syon, crowne her with plenty, prosperity, and victory. Let not her enemies rejoyce in her sub∣version, nor triumph in her destruction. Hide not thy face from her in the day of trouble; stoppe not thine eares at our prayers. Be unto us all a horne of salvation, a rocke of safety, a wall of brasse, a strong tower and fortresse against the face and force of our enemies: divert their designes, frustrate their envie, abate their fury, asswage their pride, restraine their power, and in thy name let us tread them under, that maliciously and mischievously rise up against us. Suffer not the light of thy Gospel to be ec lip∣sed, nor the splendor of thy glory to be obscured; let not thy name be dishonoured, nor thy Sanctuary defiled, nor thy truth slandered: but now and ever defend and deliver (as thou hast formerly done) this Church and State, from Plague, Pesti∣lence, and above all, that most terrible vengeance, the devou∣ring sword: and that for his sake who hath led captivity captive and like a victorious Conque∣ror hath triumphed over all his enemies, even Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all ho∣nour and glory, Amen. A Prayer for them that are about the Sicke. H Eare us, Almighty and most merci∣full God and Sa∣viour, extend thine accustomed good∣ esse to this thy servant, which s grieved with sicknes; visit him (O Lord) as thou didst Peters wives mother, and the Captains ervant, restore unto this sicke ody his former health (if it be hy will) or else give him grace o take this thy visitation pati∣ently, that after this painfull life ended he may dwell with thee in everlasting life: O Lord, be∣hold we bend our knees, yea the knees of our hearts with unfained prayers, and lift up our eyes to the throne of thy mer∣cie seat, to hearken to these our petitions, according to thy promises, therefore, O Lord, grant our requests, we are ga∣thered here together in thy name, in the behalfe of this thy servant; deliver him we hum∣bly beseech thee, from these his languishing paines and miseries of sicknesse, and as it hath plea∣sed thee to lay thine hand upon him; so, O Lord, restore him to his former health; keepe him O Lord, from fearefull and terrible assaults, and despightfull mptations of the Divell, sinne d hell: deliver him, O Lord, thou deliveredst Noah from e raging waves of the floods; from the destruction of So∣ me; Abraham from the feare the Caldeans; the children of rael from the tyranny of Pha∣ oh; David from the hands of liah; the three men from the lence of the fiery furnace in bylon; Daniell from the mouth the Lyons; Ionas from the lly of the Whale, and Peter m the prison of Herod: Even O gratious Lord, deliver the le of this person, both now, whensoever he shall depart ce from all perill and dan∣ r, open unto him at the houre of death the doore of Paradice, the gates of heaven, and the en∣try of everlasting life, O Lord Jesus Christ forgive him all his sinnes, and lead him with joy into the kingdome of thy hea∣venly Father, even unto the bo∣some of Abraham, and appoint him his everlasting rest that hee may rejoyce with thee, and all the elect children of God, to whom be all honour, glory, power, and domi∣nion, Amen. The sicke persons Prayer. L Ord hearken to my prayer, and give eare to my humble re∣quest, Lord be mer∣cifull unto mee, and give mee grace patiently to beare the crosse, and in the midst of this my sicknesse al∣waies to say; thy will O hea∣venly Father be done, and not mine; forgive and forget, most gracious Father all qui∣ties, blo them out of thy re∣membrance and cast them from thy sight, O Lord, as farre as the East is from the West, the North from the South: they are many and innumerable, let them not rise up in judgement against me: neither enter thou into thy narrow judgement with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh is righteous before thee, handle me not according to my deserts, deale not with me after my wickednesse, neither reward me after mine iniquities; O Lord my God looke not into my en∣ormious nor incestious life: I am ashamed of my sinnes, and aske pardon for my faults, even with a repenting heart and sorrow∣full mind, a bleeding soule, with hidden teares of a true and unfained repentance for my misdeeds; yea, my wounded breast surcharged with oppres∣sing griefes, doth sigh, groane, and lament under the burthen of my hainous crimes: where∣fore, O Lord, wash them away with thy bloud which thou hast shed for my sinnes, and I shall be clean and pure without spot, purge me, O Lord, with those precious drops that distilled from thy tormented heart, and I shall be whiter then the snow, burie mine offences in the se∣pulcher of thy death, and cloath me with the garment of righte∣ousnesse, O Lord, for thine in∣finite goodnesse and mercy sake receive me into thy tuition and favour; pardon, O Lord, and remit my sins, as thou forgavest David his murther and adultery with Barsheba; Saul his persecu∣tions of thy people; Peter his deniall; Mary Magdalen her las∣civious life, and the Publican in the Temple with striking his breast craved thy gracious par∣don: saying, Lord have mercy upon me a sinner, and although my sinnes and offences are farre greater, and more grievous then these, yet, O Lord, thy mercies exceede and are far more com∣passionate then our sinnes ma∣nifold; I justifie not my selfe, O my God, by the offences of these, but declare thy righteous∣nesse and mercifull clemencies in forgetting and forgiving our abhominable trespasses and transgressions of thy will, which though we are froward, yet thou art gentle, though we are stubborne, yet thou art meeke, and though we run headlong to the pits brinke, and to the gates of hell; yet thou of thy good∣nesse callest us backe, and re∣mittest all that wee have done amisse, O Lord, I have acknow∣ledged my faults that they are best knowne unto thee: where∣fore, O Lord, I aske forgivenes for the same, send me the com∣fort of thy holy Spirit, that if thou give me my former health and strength of body, I may amend my life according to thy sacred will, and walke worthi∣ly in thy Lawes and Comman∣dements: if it be thy pleasure to take mee hence out of this transitory life, O Lord, grant that I may rest and live with thee forever, world without end. O Lord, hearken unto these my petitions for Jesus Christ his sake, I aske them and all other things which thou shalt think meet both for my soule and bodie in the same forme of prayer as he himself hath taught me, saying: Our Father, &c. A Prayer at the houre of death. O Lord Jesus Christ, which art the on∣ly health of all men living, & the everlasting life of them which dye in thy faith; I wretched sinner give and sub∣mit my selfe wholly to thy most blessed will, being sure that the thing cannot perish which is committed unto thy mercy, I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, to give me grace that I may now willingly leave this fraile and wicked flesh in hope of the resurrection, which in better manner shall restore it to me againe, grant me, O Lord God, that thou wilt by thy grace make strong my soule against all temptations, and that thou wilt cover and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against the assaults of Satan; I acknow∣ledge, that there is in my selfe no hope of salvation; but all my hope and trust is in thy most mercifull goodnesse, I have no merits nor good workes, which I may alleadge before thee; of sinnes and evill works, alas! I see a great heape, but through thy mercy I trust to be of the number of them to whom thou wilt not impute their sins, but take and impute mee for righteous and just, and to be the inheritor of everlasting glory. Thou, O most mercifull Lord, wert borne for my sake, thou didst suffer both hunger and thirst, thou didst preach, teach, pray, and fast for my sake, thou didst all good works, and suffe∣redst most grievous pangs and torments for my sake: and fi∣nally, thou gavest thy most pre∣cious body to dye, and thy bles∣sed bloud to bee shed on the Crosse for my sake: wherefore most mercifull Saviour, let all these things profit me, which thou hast freely given mee, which hast given thy selfe for me, let thy bloud cleanse and wash away the spots and foule∣nesse of my sinnes, let thy righ∣teousnesse hide and cover my unrighteousnesse, let the merits of thy bitter sufferings be a suf∣ficient and propitiatory sacri∣fice, and satisfaction for my sinnes: give me, O Lord, thy grace, that my faith and beleefe of thy true and grievous death waver not in me, but ever be firme and constant, that the hope of thy mercy & life ever∣lasting never decay in me, that charity waxe not cold in me: and finally, that the weaknesse of my flesh be not overcome with the feare of death; grant me also, O most mercifull Savi∣our that when death hath shut up the eyes of my body, yet the eyes of my soule may still be∣hold and look upon thee, and that when death hath taken a∣way the use of my tongue and speech; yet my heart may cry, and say unto thee, O Lord, into thy hands I give and com∣mit my soule, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and take me to thy mercies, A∣men. A Prayer for a Woman in time of her travaile. R Ighteous and holy Lord God, I doe now finde by expe∣rience the fruit of my sinne, that I must travaile in sorrow, and bring forth in paine: and I unfainedly adore the truth of thy sacred Word, as certifying unto me, that sor∣row must be in the Evening: so comforting me also against the Morning, that a Childe shall be borne. Willingly I doe desire to submit my selfe in hope unto this thy chastisement; and to learne the desert of my sinnes, horrible in themselves, that these temporall paines are fore∣runners of eternall: and yet by thy mercy may be so sanctified unto me, as not onely to pre∣vent eternall vengeance, but also prepare for eternall comforts, even to be saved by bearing of Children. Grant me therefore (gracious Father) true repentance and pardon for my sinnes past, that they may not stand at this time in this my need betweene mee and thy mercy. Give mee a comfortable feeling of thy love in Christ, which may sweeten all other pangs, though never so violent or extreame: make me still to lift up my soule unto thee, in my greatest agonies, knowing that thou alone must give a blessing to the ordinary meanes for my safe deliverance. Lay no more upon me then I am able to endure; & strengthen my weake body to the bearing of what sorrowsoever, by which it shall seeme good unto thee to make triall of me. Grant mee to consider that howsoever it be with me, yet I am alwaies at thine hand, whose mercies faile not, who wilt bee found in the Mount and greatest extremitie, and to whom be∣long the issues of death: so pre∣pare me therefore to death, that I may be fit for life, even to yeeld fruit alive unto the world, and to be renewed and enabled to nourish the same. And when thou hast safely given mee the expected fruit of my wombe, make me with a thankfull heart to consecrate both it and my selfe wholly to thy service all the daies of my life, through Jesus Christ mine onely Sa∣viour and Redee∣mer, Amen. A Thankesgiving after safe deliverance. O Blessed for ever bee thy great and glori∣ous Name (most deere and loving Father) for thy great mercy to me most weake and sinfull wo∣man. Wonderfull art thou in all thy workes (O Lord) the riches of thy mercies are past finding out: thou hast plunged me with great afflictions, and yet thou hast returned and refreshed me againe: thou hast brought mee to the feare of the grave, and yet thou hast raised me up again to life. O how hast thou shew∣ed thy power in my weaknesse? How hath thy loving kindnesse prevailed against my unworthi∣nesse? Thou mightest for my sinnes have left me to perish in mine extremities, but thou hast compassed me about with joy∣full deliverance: thou mightest have made my wombe a grave to bury the dead: or in affoor∣ding life to another, thou migh∣test have procured my death, but yet thou hast not onely made my wombe a well-spring of life, but restored life unto me also, for the cherishing thereof. Marveilous (O Lord) are thy workes, infinite are thy mercies, my soule by present experience knoweth it well. O my soule praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name. My soule praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits. Thou hast heard my prayers, and looked upon my sorrow, thou hast redeemed my life from death, and healed mine infirmities, and crowned me with thine everlasting com∣passions. O give me, I humbly pray thee, a thankfull heart, not onely now while the memory and sense of thy favour is fresh be∣fore me, but continually even so long as I have any being. Grant that I may learne by his lively evidence of thy pow∣er and mercy, for ever hereafter o depend only on thee. Quic∣ en me also to all holy duties, hat my thankfullnesse may ap∣peare in my pure and Christian arriage. Make me a kind and carefull nother, willing to undergoe the aine and trouble of education. et no nicenesse or curiositie inder me from those services, o whom both nature and reli∣ ion hath appointed me: let me so be carefull when time re∣ uireth, to season the fruit thou ast given me, with the saving nowledge of thee, & thy deere on, that my desire may mani∣festly appeare to be set for the ncrease of thy Kingdome. Vouchsafe so to order my affe∣ctions and to bring them in obe∣dience unto thee, that if it should bee thy pleasure either now o hereafter to take this infant from me, I may as willingly part with it, as thou freely gave it me. And now (O God) perfect in mee that strength which thou hast begun, make me to grow in care to serve thee faithfully both in the duties of piety, and in other businesse of my place and calling, that I may be a comfort to my husband, a example to my neighbours, grace to my profession, and meanes of glory to thy Name through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour, Amen. FINIS. THE BEL-MANS SOVNDS. For Christmas day REmember all that on this Morne, Our blesseds aviour Christ was borne; Who issued from a Virgin pure, Our soules from Satan to secure; And patronise our feeble spirit, That we through him may heaven inherit. For Saint Stephens day. THis blessed time beare in your mind, How that blest Martyr Stephen died; In whom was all that good confinde, That might with flesh and blood abide; In Doctrine and example he Taught what to doe and what to flee; Full of the Spirit he would preach, Against opinions false and naught, Confute them to, and bouldly teach; What Christ himselfe to him had taught; For which at last he lost his breath, Ston'd by the stonie hearts to death; Let us then learne by this blest Martyrs end To see our follies and our lives amend. For Saint Iohns day. THis man the Word did bouldly teach Saw Christ transform'd, and did preach The glory in that Mount he saw, And by that glory strove to draw; The soule of man from sinfull thrall To heaven, to which God send us all. For Innocents day. THe swords of Herods servants tooke Such sweet yong things, as with a look Might make a heart of Marble melt. But they no grace, nor pittie felt; Some from the cradle, some awake, Some sweetly sleeping, some they take Dandled upon their mothers lap, Some from their armes, some from the pap. For New-yeares day. ALL you that doe the Bell-man heere, The first day of this hopefull yeare; oe in love admonish you, So bid your old sins all adue, And walk as Gods just Law requires, In holy deeds and good desires, Which if to doe youle doe your best, God will in Christ forgive the rest. For Saint Davids day. I Am no Welchman, but yet to show The love I to the Countrey owe, I call this morning and be seeke Each man prepare him for his Leeke; For as I heare some men say, The first of March is Saint Davids day That worthy Britaine, valiant, wise, Withstood his countries enemies, And caused his Souldiers there to choose Leekes for to know them from his foes; Who bravely fought, and conquest wone, And so the custome first begun. Then weare your Lecks and doe not shame To memorize your worthies name: So noble Britaines all adew, Love stil King Charles, for he loves you. For the 5. of Novemb. AWake Britaines subjects with one accord, Extoll and praise, and magnifie the Lord, Humble your hearts, and with devotion sing Praises of thanks to God for our most gratious King; This was the night when in a darkesome Cell, Treason was found in earth it hatcht in hell; And had it tooke effect, what would avail'd our sorrow, The traine being laid to have blowne us up o'th' morrow? Yet God our guide reveal'd the damned plot, And they themselves destroy'd, and we were not. Then let us not forget him thanks to render, That hath preserv'd and kept our faiths Defender. For Good Friday. ALL you that now in bed do lie, Know Iesus Christ this night did die. r soules most sinfull for to save, That we eternall life might have; His whips, his grones, his crown of thorns, Would make us weep, lament, and mourn. For Sunday. LEt labour passe, let prayer be This day the chiefest worke for thee, Thy selfe and servants more and lesse, This day must let all labour passe. ALL hale to you that sleepe and rest; Repent, awake, your sins detest, Call to your mind the day of doome, For then our Saviour Christ will come. Accompt to have he hath decreed, Of every thought, word, worke, and deed And as we have our times here past, So shall our judgements be at last. AS darke some night unto thy thoughts present, What 'tis to want the daies bright Element, So let thy soule descend through contemplation, Where utter darknesse keepes her habitation, Where endlesse, easelesse paines remedilesse Attend to torture sins curst wilfulnesse: O then remember whilst thou yet hast time To call for mercy for each forepast crime; And with good David wash thy bed with teares, That so repentance may subdue hels feares: Then shall thy sovle more purer then the Sunne, Ioy as a Gyant her best race to run, And in unspotted robes her selfe addresse To meet her Lord that Sonne of righteousnesse, To whom with God the Father and the Spirit Be all due praise, where all true joyes inherit. THe Belman like tho wakefull morning Cocke, Doth warne you to be vigilant and wise: Looke to your fire, your candle and your locke, Prevent what may through negligence arise; So may you sleepe with peace and wake with joy, And no mischances shall your state annoy. YOur beds compare unto the grave, Then think what sepulcher you have. For though you lay you downe to sleepe, The Bell-man wakes your peace to keepe, Andnightly walks the round about, To see if fire and light be out; But when the morne (daies light) appeares Be you as ready for your prayers: So shall your labours thrive each day, That you the Bel-man well may pay. LIke to the Seaman is our life, Tost by the waves of sinfull strife, Finding no ground whereon to stand, Vncertaine death is still at hand: If that our lives so vainelesse be, Then all the world is vanitie. THose that live in wrathfull ire, And goe to rest in any sinne, They are worse unto their house then fire Or violent theeves that would breake in Then seek to shun with all your might, That Hidras head, that monstrous sin; That God may blesse your goods abroad, And eke also your selves within. SLeepe on in peace, yet waking be, And dread his powerfull Majestie, Who can translate the irkesome night, rom darknesse to that glorious light, Whose radient beames when once they rise, With winged speed the darkenesse flies. THou God that art our helpe at hand, Preserve and keep our King and land rom forraigne and domesticke foes, uch as the word and truth depose; And ever prosper those of pittie, That love the peace of this our Citie. AWake from sleepe, awake from sin, With voice and heart to call on him, VVho from above pleas'd to descend, From Sathans malice to defend Our forfeit soules, to that rich grace Where we may still behold his face. LEt us repare and God implore, That henceforth we transgres no more And that our joy be at this tide, That we in him be satisfide; Then shall we all for his deare sake, Be blest a sleepe, be blest awake. SIth neither men nor Angels know, When as the dreadful trump shal blow, Nor when our Saviour Christ shall come To give the world a wofull doome; Thinke then but what a case you're in, That sleepe in unrepented sinne: O wake, O wake, O watch and pray, And think upon this dreadfull day. SLeepe not so sound, rest not secure, Marke well my words of this be sure The waking Virgins past the gate, When those that slept came al too late: Wherefore be watchfull in your center. That you may with the bridegroome enter. IF wicked impes wake day and night, And keep their candle alwayes light, And all their skill and practise bend, To bring their damned plots to end; Let us not sleepe, but laud his skill, That frustrates all their projects still. THe night well spent, the day drawes night, Awake from sleep and sin defie, All sluggish sloath expell away, Have still in mind the judgement day, When dead shall rise at trumpets call, The graves shall open wide with all. ARise from sin, awake from sleepe, The earth doth mourne The Heavens weepe; The winds and Seas distempered bin, And all by reason of mans sin: Wherefore arise, lay sleepe aside, And call on God to be your guide, From raging sword and arrowes flight, And from the terrours of the night; From fires flame, from sin and sorrow, God blesse you all, and so good morrow. ALL you which in your beds doe lie, Vnto the Lord ye ought to cry, hat he would pardon all your sins; And thus the Bel mans prayer begins; Lord give us grace our sinful life to mend, And at the last to send a joyfull end: aving put out your fire and your light, or to conclude, I bid you all good night. MAns life is like a warfare on the earth, Whose time is spent with troubles, toyles and cares, Subject to all temptations from his birth: In woe he lives and dies at unnawares. The surest signe true fortitude to show, Is in his life all vice to overthrow. O Harke, O harke my Masters all, To your poore servants cry and call: And know all you that lie at ease, That our great God may if he please, Deprive you of your vitall breath: Then sleeping, thinke your sleepe is death. LEt true repentance cleanse your sin, And then your soules cōmend to him, That by his death hath rais'd and cur'd The dead, the blind, and them assured To give to them eternall rest, To live in Heaven among the blest. Confesse thy sins to God on hie, Who pardons sinners when they cry; Bewray thy faults to him in time, Who will in Christ forgive thy crime. HE that on the Crosse hath died And for our sins was crucified, Be you ever blest in him. And cleane remitted from your sin: Be it granted as I have praid, And so the Bel-man resteth paid. ALL you that in bed doe lye, Harken well to what I cry, Leave off your sins, repentance crave, It is the onely way your soules to save. REpent in time while ye have breath, Repentāce commeth not after death: He therefore that will live for aye, Must leave his sins, and to God pray. O Gratious God and blessed, Preserve all ye that be in bed, So that your quiet rest may take, Vntill the morning that ye wake: Then may ye all with praises sing, To thee O God our heavenly King. REmember man thou art but dust, There is none alive but dye he must, To day a man, to morrow none, So soone our life is past and gone. Mans life is like a withered flower, Alive and dead all in an houre, Leave of thy sins therefore in time, And Christ will rid thee from thy crime. O Mortall man that is made of dust, In worldly riches put not thy trust, Remember how thy time doth passe, Even like the sand that from the Glasse, ath spent the time and there remaines, ever canst thou call that time againe. SIcke men complaine they cannot sleepe, The Bel-man such a noise doth keepe; Others that doe win at play, Sayes he too soone proclaimes the day: Yet to the sicke that drawes short breath, It puts them in the mind of death; And saies the gamster makes good stake, If he for Heaven so long would wake; And all this while like silly worme, He doth his office but performe: Then if his duty breed disease, Heele goe to bed and none displease. FINIS.