


Fin d'Adam, and commencement de Noe. The end of Adam, and beginning of Noe.



PVis il commence ainsi.  La branlante cite
Des peuples escaillez:  tout ce lambris voute.
Ou du grand Foudroyeur  la puissance eternelle
Mit Phebus and Phebe  par tour en sentinelle:
Adam declaire ason fils en co^bien de iours le monde a este cree.
L'air, des nues la lice:  and le camp assine,
Oule coler^ Autan,  le Nort mutine
Se donnent le battaille,  and siers iettent par terre
Maint bois, qui moytoien  veut esteindre leur guerre
Des fragiles humains  le diapre sciour
Fut fait en six Solcils,  and le septiesme iour
Fut le sacre Sabat.  Ainsi la terre, l'onde,
L'air, and l'azur dore  des pauillons du Monde
Subsisteront six iours,  mais longs, and touts diuers
Des iours bornez du cours  de l'oeil de l'Vniuers.
Combien d'aages il dureia.


L'vn co^mence par moy.  L'autre a pour son Aurore
Le pere inuente-nef.  qui les coutaux decore
D'vn pampre cultiue.  L'autre ce grand Berger,
Qui suit le Tout-puissant  en pays estranger:
Et dounant plus de foy  a la saincte parole
De Dieu,
Le premier aage du monde sous Ad^. Le second sous Noe. Le troifiesme sous Abraham. Le quatriesme, sous Dauid and ses success^s.
qu' a la raison,  son fils vnique immole.
L'autre vn autra Pasteur  dextrement courageux,
A qui la fonde-sert  d'vn canon orageux,
Et qui change, veinceur,  en septre sa houlette:
Grand Prophete, grand Roy,  grand Chantre, grand Poets.
Celui la qui le suit,  prend-son commencement
Par lannict de ce Roy, qui void cruellement
Massacrer ses enfans: and sur la riue grasse
D' Euphrase transporter la Iudaique race.

Le cinquiesme sous la capti^i^e d^ Zedechias. Le ^^xiesme sous Iesus Christ. Le de^nier qui sera le repos du monde.
Et lautre a pour Soleil le Messie attendis.
Qui batu, qui chasse, qui moque, qui pendu,
Qui mis dans le cercueil, a de nostre iniustice,
Blen que iuste, souffert l'execrable supplice.
Mais le dernier sera le vray iour da Repos.
L'air deuiendra muet: de Neptune les flots
Chommeront paresseux: le ciel perdra sadance,
Le Soliel saclar^e, la terre sa chena^u^e:
Et nous, estans plongez, en eternels esbats,
Celebrerons au ciel le Sabat des Sabats.


Las! que doy-te esperer de larace voisine,
Du seu qui doit, vengeur, cendroyer la machine:
Considerations d'Adam sur ce qui doit auenir a ses descendans iusques a la sin du premier mo^de extermine par le deluge: comme le rout est expose par Moses.
Des hommes qui n' auront que leur dosir pour loy,
Et qui n' orront parler nide Dieu, nide moy?
Puis que, pleins de sureur, ceux qui prindrent naissance
Dessus le sacre sueil Enos ^establi^ le (...)
Qui sentent bruire e^cor le diuin iudgement,
Et sont comme tesmoins de mon bannissement,
Semblent despiter Dieu. Ame traistre and mutine,
He (...) est ce ass^z d'auoir fuit triple l'Androgyne,
N' est c^ assez, O Lamech, d'auoir ton lict souille,
Si tis n'auois encor ten coutclas mouille
Dans le sang hisayeul? sans que ni la defence
De cil sou qui sleschit l'internale puissance,
Ni la marque qu' au front l'Assassin inhumain
Port^il p^ur saufconduit, ait retenu tamain.


(...) O saint Enos, sus, courage: redresse
L' est (...) la soy,
Enos ^establi^ le (...)
que l'humaine sagesse
Foulois la sous les pieds: inuoque l'Immortol:
Pourpre d'v^l^e le sang les coins de son autel:
D' vn enceas vaporeux son nez sacre parfume,
Et l'amor^i slambcau de Verite r' allume.


V^^^ (...) ^^sciple Henoe, du monde l'ornement,
(...) ^ou^ a sey, vit a Dieu seulement.

Voy,
Par soy Henoca este emporte, a fin qu' il ne vist point la moir: and ne fut point tronue, pource que Dieu l'auoit emporte. Car deou^t qu'il fust emporte, il a cu tesmoignage d'auoit pleu a Dieu Hebr. 11.5.
voy comme its s' ^werce a seussrir la lumiere,
Qui foud^^^-^^^e luit eu l'essence premiere:
Comme libre duioug des corporelies loix,
Et sequestre des sons, il vole quelque foi^
Dans le sain^ cabinet des Idees plus be^ies,
Ayant la Foy, le Ieusne, and l'Oraison pour ailes:
Comme a certains momonts, bien qu' hoste de celieu,
Sainct il posse de tout, sent tout, void tout en Dieu:
Comme pour quelque temps montant de forme en forme
(...) la forme de Dieu, heureux, il se transforme*
Voy comme le Tout-beau, qui brulant d'amitie
Pour ses rares beantez, le vent non par meitie,
Ains tout and pour tousiours, dresse a son Tout ^eschelle
Qui conduit d'icy bas a la gloire eternelle.


C'est donq fait, tu t' en vas? tu t' en vas donq a Dieu?
Adieu mon fils H^^^c, adieu, mon sils adieu.
V^ia haut bien heureux. Ia ton corps que so change
(...) nature d'Esprit, ou bien en forme d'Ange,
Vest l'immortalite. Iaces youx, non plus yeux,
Heno^ chemin^ selo^ Dicu. and na'p^^^^^ (...): ^ar Di^^ le t^ansporta. Gen. 5.^4.
Deco^ent slamboyans d'astres nonueaux les cieux.
^u hum^^ a longs traicts la hoisson Nectaree:
Ton ^abat est sans fin. La courtaine tiree,
T^ ^^is Dieu front a front: and sainctement vni
An bi^n trinement-vn, tu vis en l'infini.


Ce pendant icy has, nouuel Ange, tu laisses
Vn peuple desbord^ i^ses mains sont pilleresses:
Sa langue (...) s^ pla^s^ qu' a semer des discors:
Les (...) Pa^^i^^ (...) ^^^ampe^t and ^^ioigne^^a^ fill^^ (...) ^ac^^^ Ca^^.
Son ventr^ est vn abisme inceste tont son corps.


Qui l'oust iamais pense? La bien heureuserace,
Le p^uple facresainct, ceux que Dieu par sa grace
Adopte, sont, helas, ceux qui plus impudents
Pour courre apres le vice ont pris lemors aux dents,
Embrassant, eschaufez, les impudiques silles
Des pr^pha^es humains: confendant les familles
De Seth and de Cain: and prisant, effron^^^,
Moius les honnestes moeurs, que les fresles beautez.


Deces sal^s ba^sers a prins son origine
Vne ^ngeance qui vit de sang and de rapine:

Iene sc^y quels Geants, cruels, hauts a la main,
Pestes de l'Vniuers,
Genne engendtez de ce meslinge. Coutroux de Dieu contre le premier monde. Gen. 6.3.
fleaux du genre humain.


Adonques Dieu, qui voit que sa lente iustice
Par ses trop longs delais confirme leur malice,
Ne voulant plus plaider, colere, se resout
D' abolir soudain l'homme, and pour l'homme ce Tout.
Au moins tout ce qui fend les airs a tire d'aile,
Ou qui hance, mortel, la terre riche-belle.


Houure d'vne main les fenestres des cieux,
Deluge vniuersel sur le premice monde do^t nul n' eschappe fors Noe, and ce qui estoit enclos auce lui dans l'Arche. Gen. 6.7. and 8.
D'ou tombent mille mers sur les chefs vicieux
Des rebelles humains. De l'autre poing il serre
L' espongeuse rondeur de l'execrable terre:
La met dans le pressoir, and lui fait peu a peu
Regorger tous les flots qui iadis elle a beu.
Dans chaque creux rocher vngrand torrent s' avine:
La neige a son secours des niontaigues arriue:
Les Cedres and Sapins ne monstrent que les bras:
Les fleuues se font hauts, and leurs bors se font bas.


Las! qui d'arriere-fils perds-ie dans les abimes
Pour ne scauoir nager? and sans les aspres cimes
Des monts plus eleuez, sur qui les plus gaillars
Pour se sanuer du flot, grimpent de toutes pars,
Le scrois sans neneux. Mais quoy? las! mais quoy l'onde
Fait ia moindre ces monts: la surface du monde
Deuient vn grand estang. Enfans, ou suyez-vous?
Las! vos pieds sont par tout talonn^z du courrous
Du Dieu croule Vniuers. Le flot in tout ranage:
Les fl^^ues and la mer n'ont desia qu' vn riuage:
Scanoir vn etelaoirei, vn ciel qui charge d'eaux
V^nt produire, irrite, des Oceans nouueaux.


Exclamation pleine de passions and affections bien accommodees a ce discours.
O pere sans enfans! O pere miserable!
O riens par trop seconds! O race dommageable!
O goussres inconus; ou pour moy descouuerts!
O na^^rage du monde! O sin de l'Vniuers!
O ciel! O vaste mer! O terre non plus terre!
O chair! sang! A ces mots la tristesse lui serre
Les conduits de la voix. Il meurt presque d'ennui,
Et l'esprit prediseur se retire de lui.





Adam shews his sonne in how many daies the world was created.
THen thus he gan foretel.  The wauy territorie
Of people skalie-backt,  all this high vaulted story,
Wherein the thundring God  by his e'rlasting might
Hath placed sentinel  Sunne for day, Moone for night.
The highest Aire, the Mean  wherin the clouds do play,
And this below, the field  appointed for the fray
Of sturdie counterwinds  that with a roaring sound
Throw many a wood that stands  betwixt them, to the ground:
The flower-decked Inne  that lodgeth crazie Man,
Were all by th'awfull word  in six daies made,
How many ages it should continue.
and than
Was hallowed the seuenth.  In like sort Earth, Sea, Aire,
And th' Azure-guilt that foldes  the world in curtaine faire,
Shall last six other daies,  but long and farre vnlike
The daies that Heauens bright eye  meates-out with golden-strike.
That first begins at me,
The first age vnder Ada^. The second vnder Noe. The third vnder Abraham.
 the next at him that first
Inuented Ship, and taught  dry hills to slake his thirst
With cheerefull iuice of grapes:  the morning of the third,
Is he the mightie Groome  that led his flocke and heard
From home to follow God,  and sacrifizd his Sonne
By faith in heau'nly word  more than by reason woonne.
The fourth vnder Dauid. The fift vnder Zac^^^^hias.
And he begins the fourth  that had the cannon-sling,
And changed hooke to mace,  great Prophet, Poet, King.
The fift a dismall day  beginneth at the night.
Of that disastrous King  whose last most-rufull fight
Was, of his children slaine,  and Iewes all droue in rankes,
To lead a slauish life  by fat Euphrates bankes.

The sixt daies Sunne is Christ, the Sauiour lookt-for long,
Who sinnelesse, yet for sinne of man is mockt, beat,
The sixt vnder Iesus Christ.
hong,


And laid in graue. The last is th'euerlasting rest.
Then shall th'embillowed Sea be downe a leuell prest:
The Sunne shall lose his light,
The last shalbe the worlds rest.
Heau'n stay his whirling round,
All fruit shall cease to grow vpon th'all-bearing ground.
And we that haue on earth beiecued Heauenly troaths,
Shall keepe in Heau'nly ioy the Saboth of Sabothes.


What shall I hope (alas) of all the latter age,
Adam considers what shall betide his posteritie till the first world is ended by the Flood.
Or fierie vengeance sent to burne this worldly stage,
Or men who law'd by lust, nere heard of God, nor me?
What shall I hope of them, when these whose pedegree,
So late from Eden draw'n, continues liuely sense


Of Heau'nly doome on me, when these with mad offence,
Gods anger still prouoke? Ha traitor, and rebell soule,
Ha Lamech, was't a fault so light thy bed to soule:
To third the paire-of-man: that yet more hellish wood,
Needs must thou dip thy blade in double-gransiers blood?
Nor could the Rogues pasport embrant betwixt his browes,
Nor his charge stay thine hand who power infernall bowes?


But Enos, O thou Saint, be bold,
Enos restablisheth Gods seruice.
and plant againe
The standard of beleefe, which mans vnsteddie braine
Hath laied along the ground: Call-on the Sou'raine Good:
Besprinkle his altars hornes with sacrificed blood:
Send vnto his sacred smell the sweet perfumie clouds,
And Truths bright lampe retinde in Errors ashie shroudes.


See Enoch thy disciple, he with a godly strife,
Still dying to himselfe, liues in the Lord of life.

Grace of the world,
Faithfull Enoch taken away to the Lord for pleasing him Heb. 11.5. Gen. 5.24.
and sets t'abide th'ey daunting shine
That blazeth lightning-like i'th'essence first diuine:
Lo how deliuered from yoake of bodies weight,
And sequestred from sense, he meats the toplesse height
Of Heau'n, and borne on wing of Fasting, Faith, and Prayer,
Styes vp the tent of Saints embroyd'red all so faire,
He, though a guest on earth, in heau'nly trance doth fall;
Know'th all, seeth all, hath all, in God that's all in all.
He passing each degree, from forme to forme ascends,
And (O most happie man) in Gods owne likenesse ends:
For lo, th' All-goodly-faire him for his vertue loues,
And, not in part, but all, from earth to heau'n remoues.


Gone art thou? art thou gone vnto the starrie blew?
Adieu my sonne Enoch, adieu my sonne, adieu.
Liue happie there on high, thy body now a sprite,
Or changed wondrously to shape of Angell bright,
Puts-on eternitie; thine eyes now no more eyes,
But newly-flaming starres, do beautifie the skies.
Thou drinkest now thy fill of Nectar wine, thy day
Of Saboth neuer ends; the vaile now draw'n away,
Thou seest God face to face, and holily vnite
Vnto the Good Three-one thou liu'st i'th infinite
An Angell new: but lo thou leauest here behind
The Patriarchs children corrupt themselues by marrying with the prosanerace of Cain.
Men of vnbounded lust, their hands-rake all they find,
Their bellie like a gulfe is euer gluttonous,
Yea (would a man beleeu't?) the very chosen race,
And holy peopl' of God, th'adopted sonnes of grace,
They are (alas) the men most impudent of all;
They gallop after sinne with bit in teeth, and fall
T'embrace in lustfull heat mans daughters lewd and vaine,
Profanely tempering the blood of Seth and Cain:
So with a shamelesse eye they choose the gawdy face
Before the godly mind: From these foule beds a race
Of Gyants (God knowes what) spring vp with bloodie minde,

Strong, fierce, plagues of the world, and whips of humane kind.
Then God who sees that sinne more by the long delay
Of his reuenging hand encreaseth day by day,
Is angrie and now no more will plead the reason why;
But man an all for man will sodainly destroy:
At least what ere with wing doth clip the yeelding aire,
Or haunt in mortall state the land so richly-faire.
With one hand sets he ope the windowes of the skie,
Whence on mens rebell heads there falleth from on hie
A thousand showrie seas; he gripes i'th'other hand
The soaken spongie globe of th'all defiled land,
And sets it hard in presse, and makes it cast anon
What flouds it euer dronke sen first the world began.
From euery vaulted rocke great riuers gin to flow,
And downe-hill so encrease with flouds of moulten snow,
That Firre and Cedar trees scarce any bow do show,
The wat'r swol'n so hie, and bankes are sunke so low.
O what posteritie for want of skill to swimme,
Loose I within these gulfes, yet some full brauely climme
The craggie peakes of hills, t'escape the raging deepes,
And grapple about the rockes, but (ah) the wat'r vp creeps,
And lesning all these hills makes all the world a meere.
My children whither now? O whither can you steere
From God, but vnto God? whose anger hath shooke the world
Quite cut-off all your legs, in flood your bodies horld.
Now grows ye flood so high that th'erth is more then drownd
The riuers and the sea haue all one onely bound,
To wit, a clowdy skie, a heau'n still full of raine,
As trauelling with child of many another maine,
To make me childerlesse. O father miserable!
O too-to fruitfull reines! O children dammageable!
O gulphes reuealed for me that were before vnknown!
O end of all! O world en wrackt and ouerflow'n!
O Heau'n! O mightie sea! O land now no more land!
O flesh and blood! but here his voice began to stand;
For sorrow stopt the pipe, and ny of life berest him:
So fall'n a swoond with griefe the Prophet Spirit left him.




Annotations vpon the end of Adam and beginning of Noe.
1THe wining Territorie. The verses are graue, and full of maiestie, and agreeable to the person that speakes, Adam sheweth vnto his sonne in how many daies the world was created; and how many ages it shall endure. To giue more weight to this declaration, he brings in the first of Mankind, to speake thereof as it were by the rauishing power of the holy Ghost; for that his purpose was to ioine to the former discourse of Creation, the sequele of diuers ages of the world, which Adam could not speake of, but by Spirit of prophecie.
2That first. As God created Heauen and Earth in sixe daies, and rested the seuenth; so Adam shewes that the world shall continue sixe ages, and in the seuenth shall be the eternall rest of the Church triumphant in Heauen. Some there are, both old and new writers, who discoursing on this number of six, and constring to their purpose the saying, That a thousand yeares are as one day before the Lord, haue imagined that the world from beginning to the end shall fulfill the number of six thousand yeares; to wit, two thousand before the law, two thousand vnder the law, and two thousand vnder Grace. But this opinion hath so little foundation in holy Scripture, that contrariwise it is refuted rather by expresse testimonie of Christ, who saith, the latter day is vnknowne both to men and Angels. Now that which the Poet propoundeth here concerning the worlds six ages, not defining the number of yeres, it is founded in the word of God. The first age then begins from Adam and continues till Noe, 1656 yeares. The second from Noe who built the Arke, and planted the Vine, till Abraham, 292 yeares. The third lasteth from Abraham, the great sheepheard drawne out of Chalden, who obaying the voice of God was readie to sacrifice his onely sonne Isaac, from Abraham (I say) vnto Da^id 942 yeares. The fourth, from Dauid the valiant and nimble sheepheard, who with one cast of his sling ouerthrew the Gyant Goliah; and of sheepheard was made King, renowned aboue others; who was also a great Prophet, and excellent in Poetrie and Musicke; vnto the taking of Ierusalem vnder Zedechias; who after hee had seene his children slaine, and the people of ludea led capture into Babilon, had his eyes put out; containes 475 yeares. Now, from the destruction of the first Temple built by Solomon, vnto the destruction of the second Temple destroyed by the Romans, about fortie yeares after the death of Christ, some reckon 656 yeares; and that's the fift age. The si^t holds on from Christ to the worlds end. If this latter age last yet but 51 yeares longer, the Lord
shall haue attended it with as long patience as he did the former world destroyed by the blood; but the destruction of this world shall be by fire, Hereof see what Saint Peter saith in the third Chapter of his second Epistle.
3What shall I hope (alas.) In all the rest of this discourse vpon the first day of the second weeke, the Poet makes a ^^iefe of the Historie in holy Scripture contained from about the end of the fourth Chapter of Genesis, to the end of the seuenth. Adams first consideration here is of his descendants by Cain: who giuen wholly to the world, forgot to exercise themselues in godlinesse and true justice: Whereupon there ensued such vngedlinesse, vnrighteousnesse, and debauched life, as brought the del^ge and vniuersall flood vpon them. Adam foreseeth that such as shall be liuing in the latter age (wherinto we are fallen) are like to be wondrous peruerse, sithence his so neere successors, euen in his life time, durst prouoke the iust Iudge of All.
The Poets haue fained foure ages of the world, the first of Gold, the second of Siluer, the third of Brasse, the fourth of Iron: And we may put thereto a fift, mingled with Iron and Clay. They said the first was of Gold, for the abundance of all good things: for then was there more knowledge and wisedome in the soule of man; Iustice and all other vertues were more honored, mens bodies were much more big, strong, and vigorous: and so much the longer liuing, by how much the lesse they need care to maintaine health. After this life so commodious and ensie, there followed another more troublesome; and, after that, a third and a fourth, declining still by little and little, from worse to worse. Compare ye the peaceable time of Adam with the broyles and m^ssakers of these our dayes, and you shall see plainely in the one Gold, and in the other Iron. Nay euen in the daies of Hesiod and Ouid, many hundred yeares agoe, the Iron age is discouered by their complaints. But in that Golden age, before the flood, when Adam, Seth, Enos, Henech, and other excellent Patriarches liued in the schoole of God, raigned euer good order: or, if there were any disorder, as in Cain and his line, which corrupted the posteritie of Seth; that same Enos and other good men found remedie for it. Whereas now a daies vice it selfe is held a vertue, and right is tried onely by the swords point: so are both the bodies and soules of men decayed and abased. But, least these my notes turne to a Satire, let vs stay them here with the 12 verse of the 12 chapter of the Apocalips, well agreeing with this latter age. Wo to you inhabitants of the Earth and Sea, for the Diuell is come downe vnto you, which hath great wroth, knowing his time is short.
4Ha traitor and rebell Soule. For example of vice and wickednesse, he noteth Lamech, mentioned in the fourth and fift Chapters of Gen. accusing him to haue tripled the Paire-of-man: that is, to haue brought in Poligamie, by marrying and hauing two wiues at once; so as contrarie to the Lords appointment (who of one body made two, and of two but one) he went about to ioyne three bodies in one: and whereas hee ought to haue but one wife, tooke two, viz. Ada and Tsilla. Beside this desiling the marriage
bed (which the Apostle saith, Hebr. 13. is honourable among all men, and calles it the bed vndesiled) Lamech is here also accused, to haue embrued his sword with the bloud of his Grand-fathers Grand-father, that is, to haue killed Cain, of this descent see Gen. 4. where you shall sinde Lamech in the seuenth degree; counting Adam the first, and Cain the second, etc. Philo Judaus (Lib. de Praem^js and Poe^^s) holds that Cain was not killed; but, as his offence was a thing neuer knowne before; so was it punished after a new fashion: and bearing a certain mark of Gods anger, languished in coutinuall misery, without hope of grace, or comfort. Certaine ancient Doctors giue Lamech the title of a Murderer and bloudy minded Man; and his menaces in the Text shew no lesse: hence it is that the Poet, after diuers others, hath gathered that Cain was killed by Lamech; some say purposely, some vnawares. But these Traditions hauing no ground in holy Scripture, and little concerning the stay of our faith; let the Poet say, and the Reader thinke what they will; Howbeit Muses sheweth plainly that this Lamech of Cains Posteritie was a cruell man, and giuen to his pleasure.
5But Enos, O thou Saint. It is recorded by Moses, Genes. 4. Ch. the last verse, that vnto Seth the third sonne of Adam, was borne a sonne called Enos: and it followeth that then men began to call on the name of the Lord, as much to say, as then began a distinction apparent betweene the Church of God and the Race of Cain. For as much as Adam, Seth, Enos, and their Families only of all the World, called themselues the children of God, and reioyced in that name. The Poet so followes this exposition, that he ioynes in opinion with such as say, when Enos came into the world, Adam was 239. yeares old; and that then the Race of Cain was so multiplied, as the seruice of God began to be of small account, the due calling vpon his name neglected, and the doctrine of Sacrifices mis-vnderstood. Whereupon these good Patriarkes, perceiuing the disorder, opposed themselues against it, by all the best meanes they could. Some learned men there are, who consider the words of Moses otherwise, and as though in the time of Enos, some others, euen the descendents of Seth also, with whom the truth of God remained, began to be debauched in following the course of Cainites. Howsoeuer, most likely it is, that Enos and other good seruants of God by all meanes endeauoured to maintaine true righteousnesse and holinesse, and so much the rather, because they saw that issue of Cain giuen ouer wholly to the world. And hence it is that we reade in the sixt Chapter of Genesis, that the posteritie of Seth were called the Children of God; and there also, by the Daughters of Men are meant women descended of Cain.
6See Euoch. Moses is briefe, but as graue and pithie as may be, speaking of the holy Patriarke Enoch, Gen. 5.22. Enoch after he begat Methusala, walked with God three hundred yeares; and begat sonnes and daughters. So Enoch walked with God and appeared no more; for God tooke him. To walke with God, is to please God, as the Apostle expounds it, Hebr. 11. Hereto the Poet affords his learned Paraphrase. As that Enoch dying to himselfe, and liuing vnto the Lord, was exercised daily in meditation of the ioyes of heauen, and raised himself, as it were, aboue the world with the wings of faith, fasting and prayer.
As also the Apostle saith, By saith Enoch was taken away, that he might not see death; neither was he found; for God had taken him away. Saint Iu^e, in his generall Epistle, saith that Enoch the seuenth from Adam, prophecied against the wicked, saying: Behold the Lord commeth with thousands of his Saints, to giue Iudgement against all men, and to rebuke all the vngodly among them, of all the wicked deeds, which they haue vngodly committed; and of all their cruell speeches, which wicked sinners haue spoken against him. The Poet holds (according to the opinion of many Diuines, both old and new) that Enoch was taken both soule and body vp into heauen, for a manifest witnesse, to the former world, of euerlasting life. For this was no such inuisible departure or disappearance as is of the soule from the body. And whereas the Apostle saith, hee was not found; it shewes, that such, as then liued in the world, laid to heart this miracle, and after diligent search made, the godly were much comforted thereby, as the wicked could not but be much dismayed. Moreouer, the Chronicles doe reckon but fiftie six yeares betwixt the death of Adam, and the taking vp of Enoch: and as the death of the one taught all After-commers to thinke on their weaknesse; so the life of the other made the godly more assured of life euerlasting, and glory of body and soule for euer. I desire each Christian Reader to consider well the fift Chapter of Genesis; that he may well compare the times of these Patriarkes, and marke how long some of them liued with their fore and after-beers, whereby they might the better learne of the one, and teach the other, what was the true seruice of God.
7Men of vnbounded lust. Although the first world endured 669. yeares after the Assumption of Enoch; yet true is the Poets saying, that after this Patriarke was gone, all godlinesse, holinesse and righteousnesse began to decay; howsoeuer Noe, and his Father Lamech, and his Grand-father Methusala (who deceased not many moneths before the Floud, but in the same yeare) did set themselues mainly against those disorders; and shewed themselues, euen by way of preaching, to be as it were the Heraulds of Iustice. Moses shewes plainly the particulars throughout the whole fift Chapter, and, in the beginning of the sixt, what horrible sinnes the descendants of Seth committed by ioyning themselues to those of Cain: as first the neglect of Gods word; then, Tyranny, violence, oppression, iniustice, wantonnesse, polygamie, or hauing more wiues at once than one, and all wickednesse growne to a height altogether vncorrigible: so as the estate both of Church, Kingdome, and Family, were all turned vpside downe; and, to be short, a deluge of impiety and filth had couered the face of the whole earth.
8Of Gyants (God knowes what.) Moses saith (Gen. 6.4.) that in those daies were Giants vpon the earth, and chiefly after that the sons of God (which were the posterity of Seth) grew familiar with the young women descended of the line of Cain; and had issue by them. He saith also that these Giants were mightie men, which in old time were of great renowne. Some apply the word Giant to the exceeding stature of those men, whereby they made all afraid that beheld them; Others, whom the Poet followes, to the Tyranny and violence of such as Irued immediatly before the Deluge: among whom some there were, who bore all afore them, and became a terrour to
all others. Goropius in his Antiquities, handleth at large this point concerning Gyants; especially in his second booke entituled Gygantomachia. 1. Chassagnon hath answered him in a Latine Treatise, where he disputeth of the exceeding height these Gyants etc.
9Then God who saw. The causes of the Deluge, the fore-tellin^, and execution thereof, are set downe by Moses briefly, but sufficiently, and hereto may be applied that which our Lord and Sa^iour saith, as touching these latter times, which he compareth to the time of Noe, Matth. 24. As also that of St. Peter in his first generall Epistle, 3.20. and in his second, 2.5. Lay also to this prediction of Adam, the description of the generall Floud, set downe by the Poet at the end of the second Day of his first Weeke. All this requires a full Commentary; but this may suffice in briefe.

The end of the second Week^s first Day, called Adam.



The second day is called Noe; because the most remarkeable things, in all the time of that holy Father and his successors vntill Abraham, is there represented in foure Bookes following, and thus entitled: Th'Arche, Babylon, Colonies, and Columnes or Pillars: whereof the first is as it were a briefe Commentary vpon diuers passages of the six, seuen, eight, and ninth Chapters of Genesis. But heare the Poet.

L'ARCHE. The first Booke of Noe, called the Arke.



Auant propos, auquel par vne modeste plainte le poete rend les lecteurs attentifs, and se fait voye a linuocacion du nom de Dieu.
SI vous ne, coulez plus ainsi que de coustume
Et sans peine, and sans art, o saincts vers, de maplume:
Si le Laurier sacre, qui m'ombrageoit le front,
Esueille se sletrit: and si du double Mont,
Ou loin de cest Enfer vostre Vranie habite,
Ma muse a corps perdu si bas se prceipite:
Accusez de ce temps l'ingrate cruaute,
Le soin de mes enfans, and masoible sante.
Accusez la douleur de mes pertes nouuelles:
Accusez mes preces, accusez mes tuteles.


Voila le contrepois qui tire, violant,
En bas les plus beaux soins de mon esprit volant:
La gresle de mon champ: les poignantes espines,
Qui estoufent en sleur les semences diuines
Qui germoient en mon ame. O Dieu, despestre moy.
De tant d'empeschemens: r'allume de ma foy
Les charbons presque estemts: attiede vn peu ton ire,
Et de moy ton esprit, o Seigneur, ne retire.
Comparaison propre, enrichistant le sainct desir du Poete.
Peigne, dore, poli mes vers mieux que deuant:
Et permets que ie soy, non point tel que le vent
Qui desploye, mutin, sa bruyante puissance
Contre l'orgueil des monts voisins de sa naissance:
Desplante les forests, and fait parson courroux

Dans les plaines bondir les scintillans cailloux:
Mais courant il se lasse, and sa carriere isnelle
De lieue en lieue perd vne plume de l'aile.
Que plustost ie soy tel qu'vn fleuue qui naissant
D'vn sterile rocher, goutte a goutte descend:
Mais tant plus vers Thetis il fuit loin de sa source,
Il augmente ses flots, prend force de sa course:
Fait rage de choquer, de bruire, d'escumer,
Et desdaigne, orgueilleux, la grandeur de la mer.
Le prophete discours de nostre premier pere
Ne fut point sans effect. Car le ciel, qui colere
Scait punir les humains obstinement peruers.
En fin enseuelit sons les eaux l'vniuers.
Iamais plus des oiseaux les bandes peinturees
N'eussent d'un vol hardi dessie les Borees.
C'eust este fait de nous; and la terre eust en vain
Pousse hors tant de fruicts, tant d'herbe, tant de grain:
Si le sils de Lamce; d'un nouuel artifice
N'eust charpente, penible, vn si vaste edifice,
Que dans ses cabinets, sainct asile, il receut
Les parens accouples de tout ce qui se meut.


Au fin du seconde Iour de la premir Semain.
Ils n'y furent entrez, que dans l'obscure grotte
Du mutin roy des vents le Tout-puissant garotte
L' Aquilon chasse-nue, and met pour quelque temps
La bride sur le col aux forcenez Autans.
D'vne aile toute moyte ils commencent leur cours.
Chasque poil de leur barbe est vne humide sours:
De nues vne nuict envelope leur front:
Leur crin des bagoule tout en pluyes se fond:
Et leur dextres pressants l'espaisseur des nuages,
Les rompent en esclairs, en pluyes, en orages.
Les torrens escumeux, les fleuues, les ruisseaux
S'enslent en vn moment: ia leur confuses eaux
Perdent leur preniers bords, and dans la mer salee
Rauageant les moissons, courent bride auallce.
La terre tremble tout, and tressuant de peur
Daus ses veines ne laisse vne goutte d'humeur.

Et toy, toy-mesme, O Ciel, les escluses desbondes
De tes larges marests, pour desgorger tes ondes
Sur ta soeur, qui vinant and sans honte and sans loy,
Se plaisoit seulement a desplaire a ton Roy.
Ia la terre se perd, ia Neree est sans marge,
Les flounes ne vont plus se perdre en la mer large;
Euz mesmes sont la mer, tant d'Oceans diuers
Ne font qu'vn Ocean, mesme cest vniuers
Nest rien qu'un grand estang, qui vient ioindre son onde
Au demeurant des eaux qui sont dessus le monde.
L'estourgeon costoiant les cimes des Chast eaux
S'esmerueille de voir tant de toits sous les eaux.
Le Manat, le Mular, s'allongent sur les croupes
Ou n'aguere broutoyent les sautelantes troupes
Des cheures porte-barbe: and les Dauphins camus
Des arbres moutaignars razent les chefs ramus.
Rien ne sert au leurier, au cerfe, a la tigresse,
Au lieure, au caualot', sa plus viste vitesse:
Plus il cerche la terre, and plus and plus (helas)
Il la sent, effraye, se perdre sous ses pas.
Ia Bieure, la Tortue, and le fier Crocodyle,
Qui iadis iouissoient d'un double domicile,
N'ont que l'eau pour maison: les loups and les aigneaux,
Les lions and les dains voguent dessus les eaux
Flanc a flane, sans soupcon; le vantour, l'arondelle,
Apres auoir long temps combatude leur ailo
Contre vn certain trespas, en fin tombent lasses,
(N'aians ou se percher) dans les flots courrouces.
Quant aux poures humains, pense que cestui gaigne
La pointe d'une tour, l'autre d'une montaigne:
L'autre, pressant vncedre or'des pies, or'des mains
A bouttees, grauit an plus haut de ses rains.
Mais las, les flots montans a mesure qu'ils montent,
Soudain qu'ils font arrest soudain leur chef surmontent.
L'un sur vn aiz flotant hazardeux se commet,
L'autre vogue en vn cofre, and l'autre en vne met:
L'autre encor mi-dormant sent que l'eau debordec

Savie and son chalit'rauit tout d'une ondce.
L'autre de pies and ^^ra^par mesure ramant
Resiste a la seer ^ur du slot, qui fresch^ment
A son slanc abisma so^ germaines, sa more,
Le plus cher de ses fils, sa compaigne and son pere:
M^is en fin il se rend, ia las de trop ramer,
A la discretion de l'indiscrette mor.
Tout tout mourt ace coup: mais les parques cruelles,
Qui iadis, pour racler les choses les plus belles,
S'armoyent de cent harnois, u'ont ore pour bourreaux
Que les efforts baueux des bouillonantes eaux.
Tandis le patriarch qui doit peupler le monde
Seillonne sur les monts la surface del' onde,
Et-ja la saincte nef sur l'eschine azuree
Du superbe Ocean nauigeoit assuree,
Bien que sans mast, sans rame, and loin loin de tout port:
Car l'Eteruel estoit son pilote and son Nord.
Trois fois cinquante iours le general naufrage
Degasta l'vniuers: durant vn tel rauage
Noe n'abrege point par ieux and vains discours
L'ennuieuse longueur and des nuicts and des iours.
Ains, comme aux mois plus chauds la doux-tombante orce,
Que la champaigne attend d'une bouche alteree,
Fait reuerdir les prez and resleurir les fleurs,
Que le ciel and l'Auton fanent de leur chaleurs;
Le miel charme-souci, qui doucement distille
De son gosier disert, r'anime sa famille,
Flate son desespoir, tarit ses teides pleurs,
Et releue son ceur abatu de doleurs.
Il console and encouragesa famille par la consideration des grandes miscricordes du Seigneur, qui n'oublic peint a tousiours sis enfans.
Courage, mes enfans, bon caeur, ia dieu retire
Les meurtriers Oceans que le vent de sonire
A soussle sur le mond: ire qui semble armer
Con tre nous pour vn temps le ciel, l'air, and la mer,
Tout ainsi que bien tost sa pitoyable grace
Rendrale ciel serain, l'air doux, la mer bonace.


Son ire and sa pitie se suyuent tour a tour
L'ire est comme vinesclair, quine fait point seiour

Long temps en mesme part: and l'autre sous ses ailes
Couure de pere en fils les familles fideles:
Dieu, le bon Dieu depart l'ire auec chiche pois.
Et sans pois la pitie. Il nous bat quelque fois
Sur nos biens, sur nos fils, sur nos corps, sur nos ames:
Mais il iette soudain ses verges dans les flames.
Il nous frappe du doigt, mais non de tout le bras.
Il tonne plus souuent, qu'il ne soudroye pas.
Et prudent Oeconome, Il fait boire aux fideles
Le vin de sacholere, and la lie aux rebelles.


Ainsi le Pere sainct du second Vniuers
Celebroit du Seigneur les traitemens diuers.


Cham plein d'impiete, est introduit repliquant a son pere, and combatant en diuerses sortes la sage and irreprehensible prouidence de Dieu tout puissant and tout bon l'humble deuotion de Noe.
Mais Cham, qui nourrissoit dans sa lasche poitrine
Du profane Atheisme vne aueugle racine:
Ou qui ia desiroit degrader le grand Dieu
De ses ordres sacrez, pour occuper son lieu:
Et, Daemon, posseder vn temple magnifique
Sous le nom de Iupin dans les sablons d'Afrique:
En rechignant la face, and froncant le sourci,
D'vn accent desdaigneux parle ason pere ainsi.


Las! que ie suis marri que ces craintes seruiles,
Geines des bas esprits, and des ames debiles,
Prenent en vous tel pied! Mon pere, he, voulez-vous
Tousiours d'vn Iuge feint redouter le courroux?
Vous voulez vous forger vn Censeur, qui balance
D'vn iuste pois vos mots, iuge vostre silence,
Et conte vos cheueux? vn sin Contrerolleur,
Qui tient tousiours en main la clef de vostre coeur:
Vos souspirs enregistre, espie vos pensees,
Et les pechez presens ioint aux fautes passees?
Vn barbare Bourreau, quid'vn glaiue saigneux
Menace nuict and iour vostre col crimineux?


He! ne voyez-vous pas que cest aueugle zele,
Ceste bigote ardeur, forge en vostre ceruelle
Mille impies erreurs? que la credislite
D'vne extreme vous pousse en l'autre extremite,
Faisant vn Dieu qui sent mille orages dans l'awe,

Les Atheistes consurent a^dacieusement la miscricord^ and la iustice de l'Etern^l.
Plus furieux qu'vn Ours plus lasche qu'vne femme?


Celui qui, mol de coour, pleure en voyant ple^rer,
S'esmeut du mal d'autrui, and ne void point tirer
Vne goutte de sang, que foible, il ne se pame,
Sous vn masle estomac cache v^ vray coeur de femme:
Comme celui, qui sier laisse en toute saison
Aux roides flots de l'ire emporter sa raison,
Et sorcene, gromele vn horrible mena^^,
Cache le coeur d'vn Ours sous vne humaine face.
Ce pendant vous voulez que tantost vostre Roy
Se fonde tout en pleurs, ausi tost que le d^^
Nous fait vn peu de mal: and tantost il foudroye,
Il rauage, il assomme, il tue, il brusle, il noye?


Larage d'vn Sanglier ne brigande qu'vn bois:
Vn Tyran, qu'vn pays. Et ce Dieu toutefois
Tempeste d'vn despit, and tout transporte d'ire,
Extermine, cruel, le Monde son Empire.


O la belle iustice! Vn ou deux d'entre nous
Out (peut-estre) pecheurs, irrite son courroux;
Tous en portent la peine: and ses mains punissantes
Frapent mesme, o pitie! les bestes innocentes.


Mon pere,
Au lic^i de s'csleuer iusques a la main de Dieu qui punit iustewent les hemmes a cause de leurs iniquitez, les Atheistes (contrefais aucc les Philosophes) s'arrestent a Nature, and pensent pounoir rendre raison des iugemens de Dieu.
Dieu n'est point vn esprit inconstant,
Picque de tans diuers, passionne, slotant,
Ireux, vindicatif: and qui pour vne iniure
Renuerse l'Vniuers, and sa propre nature.


Tant d'humides vapeurs, tant ne nuaux slotans,
Tant de mers, dont le ciel auoit fais des long temps
Vn riche magazin, du pois entrepressces
Se sont or tout a'vn coup sur la terre versees.
Et puis l'air insini, qui par secrets tuyaux,
Rare, s'estoit perdu dans les sombres caueaux
Des monts, butes des vents, and change sous la terre
En vn crystal ondeux, par le froid qui le serre:
N'aguere vers le ciel iallissant a bouillons
Seulement n'a noye les moissonneux scillons,
Ains d'vn flot coutrouce dans peu de iours counertes
De Sapins montagnars les cheucleures vertes.

Lors le Pere, dague d'vne iuste douleur,
Response de Noe a tousles blasphemes de Cham.
Arrache vn long souspir du centre de son coeur,
Et prononce ces mots. O Cham race traistresse,
Honte de ma maison, chagrin de ma vicillesse,
Croire trop a toy mesme au sainct Esprit trop peu,
Source de l'Atheisme.
A de ton iugement le plus sain corrompu,
Et ie crain (o bon Dieu, fay menteur mon augure)
Quelle est la sin des Atheistes.
Que du Pere tonnant lamain pesamment dure,
Foudroira sur ton chef. Ie crain que tu seras
L'obiect de sa fureur: and que tu publiras
Par l'estat mal-heureux de ton infame vie,
Ce qu'auiour dhuy ta bouche impudentement nie.


Iescay bien, Dieu merci, que ce Cercle parfait,
Dont le centre est par tont,
1. Response. Dieu est immuable.
est sur tout son rond trait
Que celuy qui seul est, ne sent dans son courage
De mille passions vntempesteux orage:
Qu'immuable il meut tout: and que d'vn seul penser
Il peut bastir le ciel, and le ciel renuerser.
Iescay qu'il a son throsne au milieu d'vne slamme
Inaccessible a nous:
2. Il est incomprehensible.
que nostre ame est sans ame,
Nostre esprit sans esprit, lors qu'il vent conceuoir
Dans son cercle sini son infini pouuoir.
Iescay certes, iescay que saface estoillee
Est du flambant cerceau des Cherubins voilee:
Qu'on ne voit point le sainct, le Grand, le tout-puissaut,
Si ce n'est par le dos, and c'est mesme en passant.
La trace de ses pas nous est plus qu'admirable
Son estre est incompris, son nom est ineffable:
Par ainsi les ho^mes ne peuuent parler de luy qu'improprement.
Si bien que les bourgeois de ce bas clement
Ne peuuent point parler de Dieu qu'improprement.
Si nous l'appellons fort, ce sont basses louanges,
Si bieu-heureux Esprit, nous l'egalons aux Anges;
Si grand sur tout les grands, il est sans quantite;
Si bon, si beau, sisainct, il est sans qualite:
Veu que dans le parfait de sa diuine essance
L'accident n'a point lieu; tout est pure substance:
C'est pourquoy nostre langue en vnsi haut subiect

Ne pouuant suyure l'ame,
Pourquoy nous ne pouuons parler de Dieusinon humainement.
and l'ame son obiect,
Begaye chaque coup: and voulant, peu faconde,
Rendre le nom de Dieu plus redoutable au monde,
Par Anthropopathie elle le dit ialoux,
Repentant, Pitoyable, and Bruslant de courroux.


La repentance and le changement que l'rescriture attribue a Dieu est loin de tout erreur and defaut.
Bien est vray qu'il n'est point par ceste repentance
Accuse, comme nous, d'erreur and d'ignorance.
Le ialoux souuenir ne le rend enuieux:
La pitie, miserable, and l'ire, furieux:
L'Immortel a l'esprit serainement tranquile:
Et ce que l'homme fait, comme instrument fragile,
Et pousse par l'ardeur d'vn esprit vehement,
Le Tout-puissant le fait auec meur iugement.


Premiere comparaison a ce propos.
Et quoy? le Medecin, sans perdre le courage,
Sans s^escouler enpleurs, sans changer de visage,
Verra bien son ami de cent maux tourmente,
Lui tastera le pouls, lui rendra la sante:
Et Dieu, qui tousiours est a soy-mesme semblable,
Ne pourra voir du ciel vn homme miserable,
Sans fremir de douleur, sans se fondre d'ennui:
Ni guerir sa langueur sans languir auec lui?
Le Iuge punira,
Deuxiesme Comparaison.
sans se mettre en cholere,
D'vn supplice honteux l'estranger adultere,
Comme ayant sixement son regard attache
Non point sur le pecheur, ains sur le seul peche:
Et l'Eternel aura ses volontez bouclees,
Ses bras emmanotez, ses volontez reglees
La Iustice, vertu en l'homme, ne peut estre vice en Dieu. Dieu ne chastie pas pour se garantir and maintenir: mais pour garantir la vertu and confondre le vice.
A l'appetit humain? Donc il ne poura pas,
Sans estre forcene, condamner au trespas
L' Athee and le Brigand? Sera donc la iustice
En l'homme vne vertue, en l'Immortel vn vice?
Dieu donques n'aura point en horreur le peche,
Que de cruelle rage il ne soit entache?


Le Pere tousiours-vn ne s'arme a la vengeance,
Pour craintif garcutir d'outrage son essance,
Qu' vn mur de Diamans defend de toutes parts,
Et qui se campe au ciel hors du port de nos darts:

Ainspour regler nos moeurs, remparer l'innocence,
Estanconner les loix, and brider la liceuce.


Dieu n'a passe mesure,
Les iniquitez du monde meritent vn chastiment extreme.
alors qu'il a noye
Presque tout l'Vniuers du sainct trac desuoye,
Car le tige d'Adam (souche de nos deux mondes)
Forcheu, se diuisant es deux branches fecondes
De Cain and de Seth; la premiere a produit
Vn amere, vn sauuage, vn detestable fruict.
L'autre fertile enbiens, s'est a la fin entee
De ces greffes bastards: and fait vne portee
Digne d'vn tel inceste.
Quand tous sont corro^pus entierement, tous meritent d'estre exterminez.
Et qu'est-ce qu'on pouuoit
Sur la terre trouuer ac bon, de pur, de droit?
La race de Cain comme par heritage
Possedoit le peche; L'autre par mariage
L'acqueroit comme en dot: si qu'entre les humains
Ces bigarrez baisers subornoyent les plus saints.
Et nous,
Les moins imparfaits passe^t condemnation lors mesmes qu'il sont plus viuement chastiez.
nous di-ie encor, qu'vn si cruel naufrage
Espargne pour ce coup portons dans le courage
Mille and mille tesmoins, qui d'vne mesme voix
Deposent contre nous denant le Roy des Roys:
Sans que contre pas-vn, comme nos parens proches,
Nous puissions alleguer plaintes, obiets, reproches.


Dieu n'a faict du Tyran, couurant de tant de mers
Les bestes de la terre,
Dieu exterminant l'ouurier ne fait tort aux instrumens s'il les brise and ruine auce leur maistre.
and les hostes des airs.
Car puis qu'il ne viuoyent que pour faire seruice
A l'homme; l'homme estant efface par son vice
Du liure des viuans, ces excellents outils
Priue de leur ouurier, demeuroit inutils.


L'homme est l'unique chef de tout ce qui respire.
Celuy qui perte vn membre, encor se peut-il dire
Plein de l'esprit vital. Mais les pieds and les bras
Separez de leur chef, sentent le froid trepas.


Dieu n'a fait du cruel en submergeant la terre.
Le criminel de lese maieste me rite qu'on rase sa maison.
Car puis que l'homme auoit si l'ong temps fait la guerre
A Dieu son souuerain, nestoit-il pas raison
Que pour sa felonnie on rasast sa maison?
Qu'on (...) semast dusel? and que dans sesruines

On leust pour quelque temps les vengeances diuines,
Qui causent ce desbord, non vn slottant amas
Des eaux qui sont en l'air and des eaux de la bas?


Le deluge n'a point este vn accident naturel, mais vn tres-iuste iugement de Dieu. Les eaux du deluge n'ont este esmeues d'vn mouuement naturel seulement and sont procedees d'ailleurs que des causes naturelles qui ne peuuent produire tels effects.
Si touts les bleus nuaux, qui, meslez d'air and d'onde,
Parles deux Orizons encourtinent le Monde,
En quelque angle du ciel, fuitifs, s' alloient loger,
Sans doute ils pourroient bien vn pais deluger.
Mais nostre Gallion en sa flottante course
Ayant ore la Croix pour son Pole, ore l'Ourse,
Et voguant tant de mois en climats si diuers,
Monstre que ce Deluge a noye l'Vniuers.


Que si, vaincu, tu fuis es cauernes profondes
Pour renforcer ton camp par le secours des ondes
Que tu formes de vent; monstre nous en quels monts
Peut-on imaginer d'antres ass^z profonds
Poury loger tant d'air, que sourdant en foutaines
Il flotte sur l'orgueil des croupes plus hautaines:
Veu que tout l'air qu'il faut pour emplir vn grandseau,
A peine suffiroit pour faire vn verre d'eau.
Et puis que deuiendroient tous ces espaces vuides?
Quels corps succederoient aux parties liquides
De cest air, qui, fait moindre, en fontenilles bout,
Puis qu'on ne peut trouuer rien de vuide en ce Tout?


La consideration de la puissance de Dieu, assuiettissant les animaux a Noe, lez soustena^t and nourrissant tant de te^ps en l'arche (qui estoit comme vn sepulchre) refute toutes les obiections des Atheistes.
D'ou vient donc (diras-tu) ceste mer, dont larage
Les venteuses forests des Riphees saccage:
Met le Liban en friche: and tasche de ses eaux,
Enuieuse, amortir les celestes flambeaux?


D'ou vient (diray-ie o Cham) que les Loups and Pantheres
Bridant pour quelque temps leurs fumantes choleres,
Et des bois ombrageux quittant le triste effroy,
Ont, adiournez du Ciel, comparu deuant moy,
Qui tenant sous mon ioug tant de feres captiues.
Suis remis es honneurs, estats, prerogatiues,
Dont Adam est decheu? Qu'ici de toutes pars
Me sont venus au poing les oiseaux plus hagars,
Sans estre reclamez? Que si peu de fourrage,
Si peu de grain froisse, si peu de doux bruuage

Suffit pour sustenter tant danimaux gloutons,
Qui viuent, confinez, dans ces obscurs grotons?
Qu'ici du sier Autour la Pordris na point crainte,
Ni le Leuraut aile de la Tigresse peinte?
Que le flot contre nous tant de fois mutiue
Nait brise nostre nef? que lair emprisonne,
Les sales excremens, and la punaise haleine
Des corps, dont la Carraque est confusement pleine,
Ne nous ait estousfez? and que bourgeois de l'eau
Nous ne trouuons ailleurs la vie qu'au tombeau?


Ceste nefn'a tant d'ais, tant de cloux, tant de tables,
Que de miracles saincts and prodiges notables.
Icy l'entendement de merueille englouti,
Sans pointe, and sans discours, reste comme abruty:
Et Dieu n'a moins monstre quelle estoit sa puissance
En restaurant ce Tout, qu'en luy donnant essence.


Appaise, o sainct Patron, appaise ton courrous:
Guide au port ce vaiseau: seche l'onde, and fay nous
Cognoistre, soit auant, soit apres la mort blesme,
Ta sureur sur autruy, ta bonte sur nous-mesme.





DIuine Verse, if with ease thou flow not as to fore
The Poets modest complaint to breed attention, and make way for his Innocation.
Fro^ out my weary quil, but make me toyle the more:
The sacred crown of Bay, that wont my fore-head shade,
If now decheueled, it wither, dwindle, fade:
So that my Muse be falne into these earthly hels
From that twypointed Mount where thine Vranie dwels,
Accuse the deadly fewds of this vnthankfull Age,
My many suits in Law, mine often gardianage,
My houshold care, my griefe at late and sundry losses,
And bodies crasie state: these and such other crosses,
They downward force my thoughts aspiring heretofore,
And damp my Muses wings that erst so high did soare.
This haile beats downe my corne, these bushes and these weeds
Before my haruest comes choak-vp those heau'nly seeds
That in my soule shot-out. 2. O rid me of all these lets,
My God and Father deerel kindle in me th' emberets
Of Faith so nie put out: and, least mans wit deceiue me,
Be pleas'd, o Lord, and o let not thy spirit leaue me!
Paint, varnish, guild my Verse, now better then before,
And grant I be not like the winde that in a rore
Sends all his hurring force vpon the first he meets
And proudest hils of all, rooting trees, scouring streets;
That driuing o're the plaine, makes with his angry blast

The stones to bound-againe and firie sparkles cast;
But fainteth more and more, as though his winged sway
Did scatter here and there her feathers by the way.
O rather make me like the streame that drop by drop
At first beginning fals from some rocks barren top;
But farther from the Spring and nar to Thetis flowing,
Encreaseth in his waues and gets more strength by going;
And then enbyllowed-high doth in his pride disdaine
With fome and roaring din all hugenesse of the Maine.
It came to passe at length, as our fore-sire foretold
And hausned long before, that angry heau'n enrould
And toomb'd the world in flood, t'auenge (as well it can)
The many plighted sinne of stubborne harted man.
Ne'r had the birds againe in coueys checky-pide
The windy-whirled ayre with hardy flight defide;
Nor beast nor man had beene: but on the land in vaine
Had sprung all kinde of ftuit, of tree, of hearbe, of graine:
Had not the godly sonne of Lamech learn'd the skill,
And tooke the paine to build, that Arche huge as an hill,
Which of all breathing kinds safe from so great deluge
A paire of breeders held in sakersaint refuge.
When all were once i'th'Arche,
At the end of the second day of the first weeke.
Th'almighty bindeth fast
In Eols closest caue the cleering Northen blast,
And lets the South goe loose; he flyes with myslie wing:
From each bristle of his berd there trickleth downe a spring:
A cloggy night of myst embowdleth round his braine,
His haire all bushy-shagd is turned into raine.


He squeaseth in his hand the sponge of cloudy soods;
And makes it thund'r and flash, and powre down showry floods.
Forthwith the foamie drains, the riuers and the brooks,
Are puft vp all at once: their mingled water lookes,
And cannot finde, her bound; but hauing got the raine,
Bears haruest as it runs into the brackie Maine.
All Earth begins to quake, to sweat, to weepe for feare,
That nor in veine nor eye she leaueth drop or teare.

And thou, O heau'n, thy selfe draw'st all the secret sluses
Of thy so mighty Pooles to wash away th'abuses
That had thy sister soyld, who void of law and shame
Pleas'd onely to displease thy King and scorne his name.
Now lost is all the land. 5. Now Nereus hath no shore;
Into the watry waste the riuers run no more;
Themselues are all a Meere, and all the sundry Meeres
That were before, are one: This All naught else appeares
But as a mighty Poole, and as it would conuent
And ioyne flood with the floods aboue the firmament.
The Sturgeon mounting ore high Castles is abasht
To see so many townes all vnder water dasht.


6. The Secalues and the Seales now wand'r about the rocks,
Where late of bearded goats, were fed the iumping flocks.
Camoysed Dolphins haunt the place of birds, and browse
Vpon the hugest hils, the tallest Cedar browes.
A Greyhound or a Tygre, a Horse, a Haire, a Hinde,
It little auailes them now to run as wight as winde.
They swin and try to stand, and all but little auailes them;
The more they footing seeke (alas) the more it failes them.
The cruell Crocodile, the Tortesse and the Beuer
Haue now but wet aboad that wet and dry had euer.
The Wolfe swims with the Lambe, the Lyon with the Deere,
And neither other frayes; the Hawke and Swallow steere
About with weary wings against a certaine death,
At length for want of perch in fierce waue loose their breath.


But miserable men, how fare they? thinke one treads
On point of highest hill, anoth'r on turret-leads;
Another in Cedars top bestirs him hand and foot
To gaine of all the boughes the farthest from the root.
But (o alas) the Flood, ascending as doe they,
Surmounteth euery head, whereas it makes a stay.
Behold then some their liues to floting plankes commit,
And some in troughes, and some in coffers tottring sit:
One halfe asleepe perceiues the wat'r away to iogge

His bed and life at once, another (like a frog)
Casts out his hands and feet in equall bredth and time,
And striuing still with head aboue the slood to clime,
Sees nere him how before it newly drownd his brother,
His only child, his wife, his father, and his mother:
At length his weary limbes, no longer fit to scull,
Vnto the mercy yeeld of wat'r vnmercifull.
All, all now goes to wracke; yet Fates and deadly seare,
That earst with hundred kindes of weapons armed were
To spoile the fairest things, now only by the force
And foamy sway of Sea make all the world a corse;
Meane while the Patriarch, who should the world refill,
Plowes vp the fallow-waue aboue the proudest hill;
And th'Arche on dapled backe of th'ocean swoln with pride,
Without or mast or oare doth all in safety ride,
Or ankers ankerlesse, although from hav'n so farre:
For God her pylot was, her compasse and her starre.
A hundred fiftie daies in generall profound
Thus is the world ywrackt; and during all the flound


7Good Noe abridgeth not the space of night or day,
Nor puts-off irksomnesse with vaine discourse or play;
But as in dog-day seas'n a raine shed west-by-south,
When Earth desires to drink and thirst hath parcht her mouth,
Reflowreth euery stalke, regreeneth all the field,
That sunne and southerne wind with drought before had peild:
So from his pleafull tongue falls cheering dew and aire,
R'alliuing all his house and beating downe despaire.
And thus he washt their face and wyp'd away their teares,
And raised vp their heart opprest with vgly feares.
He incourageth his familie with consideration of Gods great mercies who neuer forgets his children.
Good ^heere (my lads) quoth he, the Lord will soone rebinde
And stop the murdring Seas, which his fierce angers winde
Hath whirled ore the world; and as his ang'r (I finde)
Hath armed Sea and Aire and Heau'n against our kinde;
So shall sure, er't be long, his mercy more renownd
Cleare heau'n, vnghust this ayre, and bring the Seas to bound.
Still follow one anoth'r his Anger and his Grace.
His anger lightning-like it stay's not long in place:

But th'other vnder wing it broodeth as an Hen,
The manifold descents of faithfull-hearted men.
The Lord, the gracious Lord, bestowes his wroth by waight,
And neuer waighes his grace; he whips vs and throwes straight
His rod into the fire; wer't on our body laid,
Or soule, or childe, or goods; he makes vs only afraid
With fingers tyck, and strikes not with his mightfull arme.
More often thunders he, then shoots a blasting harme.
And, wise-housholder-like, giues them that bend him knees
His angers wholsome wine, and enemies the lees.


This wise, that holy man, sire of the second age,
Discourseth on the praise of Gods both loue and rage.


Wicked Cham replies vpon his father, and diuers waies opposes the wise and blamelesse prouidence of God, and the good and humble deuotion of Noe.8But Cham in whose foule heart blind roots were lately sone
Of godlesse vnbeleefe; that thought ere this t'vnthrone
The mighty God of heau'n, and beare the scept'r himselfe:
To hold in Africke sands, with helpe of hellish Elfe,
By name of Hammon Ioue, some temple stately built,
Where, as a God, he might haue Altars bloudy-guilt:
With anger-bended brow, and count'nance ill apaid
Thus in disdainfull tone his father checkd; and said,


9Fie fath'r, I am asham'd to see on you lay hold
These slauish thoughts, that seize base minds and flie the bold.
This fained angry Iudge thus alway will you feare?
As peyzing words and thoughts, and counting euery heare?
A Censour faine you still that beares in hand the keyes
Of yours and euery heart; to search out when he please
Yours, and all hidden thoughts; yea all your sighs t'enroule,
And present faults and past together to controule?
That ayming at your necke with bloud-embrued knife
Is hangman-like at hand to cut the strings of life?


Alas perceiue you not how this hood-winked zeale
And superstitious heat (to reason I appeale)
Makes errours many and foule your wits bright lampe to smother?
How light beleefe you driues from one extreame t'another?
You make a thousand qualmes your great Gods heart to strike:

You make him fell as Beare,
Thus Atheists presumptuously censure the mercie and Iustice of God.
and queasie woman-like.
Let any sinner weepe, his tender heart will melt;
As if a wretches harme the great Commander felt:
He sees no drop of bloud, but (ere we know what ailes him)
Swoons, and in manly brest his female courage failes him:
And yet you make him fierce, and suffring oft the sway
And foamy streame of wroth to beare his reason away:
With heart of sauage Beare in manly shape he freats;
He rages then, he roares, he thunders out his threats.
Thus if your naile but ake, your God puts fing'r ith'eye;
Againe he kills, burnes, drownes, all for as light a why.


A wilde Boares tusked rage but only one forrest harries,
A Tyrant but a Realme; when angers tempest carries
Your God against the world with such a spightfull ghust,
As if his Realme of All should out of All be thrust.
Here's Iustice! here's good Right! (what other can ensue it?)
Some one or two perhaps haue sinn'd, and all doe rue it.
Nay, nay, his venging hand (alacke) for our offence
The Atheists co^spiring with the Philosophers, ascribe vnto naturall reason all that is done by the iust reuenging hand of God.
Destroys the very beasts for all their innocence.
O fath'r it cannot be that God's so passionate;
So soone in diuers fits, peace and warre, loue and hate:
Or so giu'n to reuenge, that he for one default
Should hurt his owne estate, and bring the world to naught.
The many watrie mists, the many floating clowds,
That heau'n hath stored vp and long kept vnder shrowds,
By selfe-waight enterprest and loosned of their bands,
Now gush out allatonce, and ouer-flow the lands.
Then Aire amightie deale that vnder looser ground
(As thinne it is) a way by secret leaking found,
And lay in wind-shot hilles, by cold turn'd crystall waue,
At first well'd vp the skie, then downward gau to rane,


And drownd the corny rankes; at length so sweld and wox,
It pass'd the green-lock heads of tallest vpland okes.



Nots answer vnto all the blasphemies of Cham and his like.10 By this the father gauld with griefe and godly smart,
A long sigh yexed-out from deepe cent'r of his heart.
And, ha vile Cam, quoth he, head of disloyall race,
Discomfort of myne age, my houses soule disgrace,
Vndon th'art, and deceiu'd, thy sence is growne vnsownd
By trusting to thy selfe without the Spirits ground.
And sure I feare (but o! God let me proue a lyar)
I feare with heauie hand the lofty-thundring Syre
Will blast thy godlesse head, and at thee shall be floong
His angers fierie darts: that, as thy shamelesse toong
With bould and brasen face presumes now to deny him,
Thy miserable estate in time to come may trie him.


First that God is infind^, vnchage able, Alinightie, and incomprehensible.
I know (and God be thankt) this Circle all whole and sound,
Whose cent'r hath place in all, as ou'r all go'th his round,
This onely being power, feeles not within his mind
A thousand diuers fits driu'n with a counter-wind;
He mooues All yet vnmooud, yea onely with a thought
Works-vp the frame of Heau'n, and pulls downe what he wrought.
I know his throne is built amids a flaming fire,
To which none other can (but only of grace) aspire.
For breathlesse is our breath, and ghostlesse is our ghost,
When his vnbounded might in circl 'he list to coast.
I know, I know, his face how bright it thorow shines
The double winged maske of glorious Cherubines.
That Holy, Almightie, Great, but on his backe behinde,
None euer saw, and then he passed like a winde.
The step-tracke of his feet is more then meruellable,
His Being vncomprisd, his name vnutterable:
That we who dwell on earth, so low thrust from the skie,
Do neuer speake of God but all vnproperly.
For, call him happie Ghost, ye grant him not an ase,
Aboue an Angells right: say Strong, and that's more base:
Say Greatest of all Great, he's void of quantitie:
Say Good* Faire, Holy one; he's void of qualitie.
Of his diuine estate the full accomplishment
Is meere substantiall, and takes not accident.
And that's the cause our tongue in such a loftie subiect

Attaining not the minde,
Why wee cannot speake of God, but in termes of manhood.
more then the minde her obiect,
Doth lispe at euery word, and wanting eloquence
When talke it would of God with greatest reuerence,
By Manly-sufferance it hath him Jealous nam'd,
Repenting, pitifull, and with iust ang'r enflam'd.


Repentance yet in God emplies not,
Repentance and change ascribed vnto God in Scripture, is farre from errour and fault.
as in vs,
Misdome or ignorance; nor is he enuious
For all his Iealosie; his pitie cannot set him
In miserable estate; his anger cannot fret him.
Calme and in quiet is the Spirit of the Lord:
And looke what goodly worke fraile man could ere afford,
Thrust headlong on with heat of any raging passion,
The Lord it workes, and all with ripe consideration.


What?
1. Comparison for that purpose.
shall the Leach behold without a weeping eye,
Without a change of looke, without a swoone or cry,
The struggling of his friend with many sorts of paine;
And feele his fainting pulse, and make him whole againe:
And shall not God that was, and is, and shall be th'same,
On miserable man looke downe from heau'nly frame,
Without a fit of griefe, without a wofull crie;
2. Comparison.
Nor heale infirmities without infirmitie?
Or shall a Iudge condemne, without all angers sting,
The strange adulterer to shamefull suffering;
As aiming sharpe reuenge and setting his entence
Not on the sinn'r at all, but on the sole offence;
And shall the fancie of man so binde the will of God,
That which is Iustice in man, cannot be vice in God.
He may not lift his arme and iust reuenging rod


Without some fury against a theefe or Athean?


Or is't a vice in God,
God punisheth not to defend his owne estate: but to maintaine vertue and confoun vice.
that's held a vertue in man?
And cannot God abhorre a sinne abominable,
But of some sinne himselfe he must be censurable?
He alwaies one-the same ne're takes vp armes to guard him
Or his estate from hurt, as if some treason skard him;
Whose campe is pight in heau'n beyond reach of our shot,
And fens'd with Diman wals, this, that-way; which way not?

But eu'n to guid our liues, to maintaine righteousnesse,
T'establish wholesome lawes, and bridle vnrulinesse.


The worlds iniquities deserued extreme punishment.
Nor yet by drowning thus ny-all the world in flood,
Go'th he beyond the bounds of reason in his mood.
For Adam, who the root was of this world and th'other,
Shot-forth a forked stocke, of Cain, and Seth, his brother,
Two ranke and plentious armes; the first a wylding bore,
Disrelisht, verdourlesse, but in aboundant store.
Good fruit on th'other grew; yet graff'd it was ere long
With thossame bastard ympes, and thereof quickly sprong
What lawlesse match begot. Then where, on all this round,
Could any right, or good,
Sith all were corrupted, all deserued exile.
or innocence be found?
For Sinne, that was the right inheritance for Cain,
To Seths posteritie was giuen in dow'r againe
With daughter-heires of Cain: so were defiled then
The dearest groomes of God by marrying brides of men.
Yea we, we, that escape this cruell influence,
The best without excuse.
A million witnesses beare in our conscience,
Which all, and each alike vpon our guilt accords;
Nor haue we any excuse before the Lord of Lords.


Who deales not tyrant-like to whelme in wauy brees
The beast that goes on foot, and all on wing that flees:
Because for mans behoofe they were created all;
And he that should them vse is blotted by his fall
From out the Booke of life:
Th'acecssory sollowes the principall.
and why then should they stay
When he, for whom they were, is iustly tak'n away?


Man is the head of all that drawes the breath of life.
Let one a member loose, he liueth yet; but if
A deadly sword the head from bodies troonke diuide,
How can there any life in leg or arme abide?


But haply God's to feirce that hath the land orewheld.
Yea?
A traitour deserues to haue his house raised.
had so many yeares disloiall man rebeld
Against the Lord his King, and had the Lord no reason
To rase the traitours house for such high points of treason?
To sow salt on the same, and mak't a monument

The flood was no naturall accident but a iust iudgement of God.
That his diuine reuenge, not Sea or Aire hath sent
This rauing water-Masse?
Let all the clowdie weather


That round-encourtaines Earth be gathered thicke together
From either cope of Heau'n, and bee'tall powred downe
In place what e're, it would but some one countrie drowne:


But this our sauing ship, by floating euery where,
Now vnd'r a Southern Crosse, now vnd'r a Northen Beare,
And thwarting all this while so many a diuers Clime,
Shewes all the world is wrapt in generall abysme.


But if thou, vanquisht here, to caues in earth do flie,
With floods there made of Aire thy forces to supplie:
What are those hills, and where, with caues so deep and wide,
To hold-in so much ayre, as into water tri'de,
Might heal the proudest heights; when hardly a violl's fil'd
With water drop by drop of ten-fould aire dystil'd?


Besides, when th'aire to drops of water melts apace,
And lesned fals to spring, what bodie filles the place?
For no where in this all is found roome bodilesse:
Sad waue will sooner mount, and light aire downward presse.


Then how (thou'lt aske me) come these huge and raging floods,
That spoile on Riphean hils the Boree-shake^ woods,
Drowne Libanus, and shew their enuious desires
To quench with tost-vp waue the highest heau'nly fires?
He aske thee (Cham;) how Wolues and Panthers from ye Wild
This refutes all the obiections of Atheists.
At time by Heau'n design'd before me came so mild.


How I keepe vnder yoke so many a fierce captiue,
Restored as I were to th'high prerogatiue
From whence fath'r Adam fell! how wild foule neuer mand
From euery coast of Heau'n came flying to my hand!

How in these cabins darke so many a gluttonous head
Is with so little meat, or drinke, or stouer fed!


Nor feares the Partridge here the Falcons beake and pounces;
Nor shuns the light-foot Hare a Tygers looke or Ounces!
How th'Arch holds-out so long against the wauy shot!
How th'aire so close, the breath and dong it choaks vs not
Confused as it is! and that we find no roome


For life in all the world, but as it were in toombe!
Ther's not so many planks, or boords, or nailes i'th'arch
As holy myracles, and wonders; which to marke,
Astonnes the wit of man. God shew'th as well his might
By thus preseruing all, as bringing all to light.


O holy Syre, appease, appease thy wroth and land
In hau'n our Sea-beat ship; o knit the waters band;
That we may sing-of now, and ours in after age,
Thy mercie shew'd on vs, as on the rest thy rage.



Annotations vpon the first Booke of Noe, called the Arke.
1DIvine verse. He complaines of the miseries of our time, of his bodies crasinesse, and care of houshold affaires, which hinder his bold designes, and make his Muse fall (as it were) from heauen to earth. He calls the verse diuine because of the subiect matter which he handleth; acknowledging withall, that, as Ouid saith, Carmina proueniunt anime deducta sereno: and this serenitie or quietnesse of spirit, which is all in all for a Christian Poem, is a gift from Heauen. And therefore this our Poet, In stead of calling vpon his Muse (which is but himselfe, or helpe of profane inuentions) looketh vp rather vnto that power, from whence commeth euery good and perfect gift, that is the father of light.
2Oh rid me. This is a zealous inuocation, and well beseeming the Authors intent: which also is enriched with a daintie comparison. For verily the chiefe grace of a Poem is, that the Poet begin not in a straine ouer high to continue, and so grow worse and worse to the end: but rather that he increase and aduance himselfe by little and little, as Virgil among the Latin Poets most happily hath done. Horace also willeth a good writer, in a long-winded worke, ex sumo dare lucem, that is, to goe-on and finish more happily then he began. Who so doth otherwise, like is to the blustring wind, which the longer it continues, growes lesse and lesse by degrees: but the wise Poet will follow rather the example of Riuers, which from a small spring, the farther they run grow on still to more and more streame and greatnesse.
3As our foresire foretold. Saint Peter in his 2. chapt. of his 2. Ep. calls Noe the Herault or Preacher of righteousnesse; and in the eleauenth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrewes, it is said that Noe, being aduertised from God of things not yet seene, conceined a reuerent seare; and built the Arch for safegard of his familie: through the which Arch he condemned the world, and was made heire of the righteousnesse, which is by sa^th. By these places may be gathered, that Noe laying hold on the truth of Gods threats and promises (as Moses also sheweth in the sixt of Gen.) prepared materials for the Arch; and in building the same, did, as well by worke, as word of a Preacher, condemne the impiety and wickednesse of men; warning them of
the iudgement which hung ouer their heads; which also was put in execution at the very time appointed by the Almighty.
4When all were once i'th' Arke. This historie of the Deluge our Poet had before touched in the end of the second day of his first weeke; which passage I the Translator thought good here to insert, that the description might be the fuller. These verses, and the rest to the end of this booke, shew vs the fearefull iudgement of God vpon the sinnes of that former world; set downe first by Moses in the 6.7. and 8. chapters of Genesis. Were I to write a full commentary thereof, I should discourse of Noes Arke, and diuers questions which present themselues concerning that rare subiect, with the precedents, consequents and coincidents: but I touch lightly these things, to draw the Readers care, and make still more and more knowne vnto him, the great learning and Art shewed in this diuine Poem. To see how our Author is his crafts-master, let a man conferre this decription with that of Ouid in the first booke of his Metam: concerning the Deluge of Deucalion. Some of his verses I thought good here to set downe, for encouragement of such as haue leysure, more neerely to consider, and compare the French with the Latine.
Protinus Aeolijs Aquilonem claudit in antris,Et quaecunque fugant inductas flamina nubes;Ennttitque Notum; madidis Notus euolat alis,Terribilem picea tectus caligine vultum;Barba grauts nimbis; canis fluit vnda capillis;Fronte sedent nobulae, rorant pennaeque sinusque;Vtque manu late pendentia nubila pressit,Fit fragor, and densi sunduntur ab aethere nimbi.
Then speaking of the land and out-let of Riuers, thus:
Intremuit motuque vias patesecit aquarum,Eupatiata ruunt per apertos slumina campos,Cwnque satis arbusla trabunt, pecudesque, virosque,Tectaque; cumque sais rapiunt penetralia sacris.
See the rest of Ouid; who hath not so exactly described these things, as our Poet.
5Nereus. By this word he means the Sea, which at the Deluge ouerflowed the whole Earth; because it was not then held within the proper bounds thereof by the powerfull goodnesse and prouidence of the Creator. Ouid expresseth it thus; Omnia pontus erant; deerant quoquelittora ponto. Virgil, thus; Spumeus atque imo Nereus ciet aequora sundo. Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, lib. 8. cap. 6. hath much of Nereus and the Nereides: where also he giues a reason why the Poets so call the Sea.
6The Sea-Calues. So I translate [le Manat] for the Veal-like flesh thereof; though this be indeed a great Sea-fish described by Rondeletius in the 18. chapter of his sixt booke. He is also like a young Bull with a broad backe, and a very thicke skin: they say he weigheth more then two oxen are well able to draw. His flesh (as I said before) commeth neere the taste of Yeale, but it is fatter, and not so well relished: he will be made as tame
as a dog; but hath a shrewd remembrance of such as hurt him. P. Marlyr of Millaine, in the 8. booke of his 3. Decade, tels great wonders of one that was tamed and made so familiar with a certaine Cassike or Lord of India: that he would play and make sport like an Ape; and sometimo would carry ten Indians at once on his backe, and passe or ferry them in that wise from one side of a great Lake there to the other. And for as much as hauing foure feet like a Sea-dog, he liued on the land as well as in the water: he would now and then wrestle with Indians, and take meat at their hand; but would in no wise be reconciled vnto the Christians there, because one of them (whom he knew, it seems, very strangely, by his face and clothes) had once strooke him with a lance, though hurt him not, by reason of his hard and thicke hyde. Ouiede, in the 13. booke and 10. chap. f his History, describes one, but not as a creature liuing both at Sea and Land; nor yet foure-footed. Howbeit he saith the name of Manat is giuen to this fish by the Spaniards, because he hath (as t'were) manus duas, two hands neere his head, which doe serue him for fynnes to swim withall: he tels further many things of singular note, and that this Manat or Seabullocke is found about the Isle of Hispaniola. As for other fishes here mentioned, they shall be handled in another place hereafter; but who so desires to know more of the history and nature of them, let him reade Gesner, Rondeletius, and Bellon. So much out of the second day of the first weeke: Now let vs goe on with this booke of the Arke.
7Good Noe. In the history of Moses, Gen. 7. there are certaine points worthy noting, to proue that the faithfull and holy Patriarck Noes heart failed him not, though he saw then the Arke tossed vp and downe the boundlesse waters of this generall Flood; though all the fountaines of the great deepe broke forth, and the flood-gates of Heauen were opened, so as the raine fell amaine and without ceasing vpon the face of the earth forty daies and forty nights together; and the water swelled fiftie cubits aboue the highest of all hills. The first is, that he entred the Arke himselfe with his wife and children, and their wiues also, at the commandement of God. The second is, that, after all the beasts, paire by paire, were also come in, God himselfe shut the doore vpon them. For this shewes that the holy Patriarke with a liuely faith obeyed the voice of God, and vpon his only wise prouidence wholly rested. And therefore good reason had the Poet to set downe such holy exercises, as were likely to be vsed by Noe, being now close prisoner (as it were) for the space of a whole yeare and ten daies: as may be gathered by the 11. and 13. verses of the seauenth chapter of Genesis; and by the 13. and 14. verses of the chapter following. The summe of his discourse is grounded vpon consideration of the great mercy of God, who neuer forgetteth his children and such as feare him and rest vpon his goodnesse. This goodnesse and mercy well shewed it selfe vnto Noe and his, among so many fearefull shapes of death; while in the Arke they were so preserued aliue from the Deluge, together with the whole seminarie of the world next to ensue. The Almighty now held all creatures obedient vnto the Patriarke, as he had before disposed them to come
and range themselues by couples into the Arke, where they were, during this imprisonment, to be fed and kept cleane. Let the Reader duely consider how many wayes the faith, patience, and constancie of Noe was exercised in so waighty a charge; and how needfull it was, that God, who had shut vp his seruant in this prison of wood, should be there also with him from time to time, to strengthen and make him rich in faith, as hee was; whereby he onercame all these dangers. God therefore doubtlesse was the Patron of his ship; the sterne, Load starre, Ancor and Hauen of this Arke, sloating amid the waters now hurried after a strange manner. To this purpose saith a learned Father: Noah iactatur procellis, nec meigitur; serpentibus and beslijs sociatur, nec terretur; ei serae colla submittunt, and alites famulantur. It was the great mercy of God toward Noe, that hee gaue him the skill and knowledge how to fit the seuerall places in the Arke for the creatures and their food: as also, that vnder one man, and so few more as were saued with him, he held in obedience so many beasts, and (for the most part) one contrary to another; that the men were not cho^ked vp with this close ayre, and ill sauour of excrements: that amid so many fearefull apprehensions they were able to keepe life and soule together. But the blessing of God is the stay and sure hold of all his children.
8But Cham. I will not speake here now of the questions arising about the time when began, or how long continued the Flood; nor curiously examine the Hebrew words; lest these Annotations grow too long. And the Poet hath chosen matter of more importance to be considered. I haue said else-where, that it graceth much a Poem, where the certame truth appeares not, there to stand vpon likelyhoods. Cham shewed himselfe a profane wretch and a scosser straight after the Flood; whereupon both he and his posteritie were accursed. The Poet therefore with great probabilitie supposeth he could not long conceale and hold-in the poyson whereof his heart was full: but began to vent and vomit it euen in the Arke: Noe then, a man endued with the feare of God, was (surely) not silent the space of a whole yeare and ten dayes; and his care was not employed altogether vpon the beast: it must needs be therefore that he spent some time in teaching and comforting his familie. Cham was certainly gracelesse, and had no feeling of the Spirit; and fitly then doth the Poet personate in him all that are profane striuers against the iudgements of God. For whatsoeuer is here imputed vnto Cham, may be gathered for likely, by that which he and his posteritie did after the Deluge. Noe who liued yet three hund^ed and fiftie yeares longer, returned (it seemes) from the Armenian hills, where the Arke staid, into his own former habitation, about Damascus, where his fore-fathers were buried. It is held for certaine that Sem also came againe thither; and that his issue peopled the lands thence reaching toward the East and the South; Cham drew to the South and West; Iaphet to the North and West; whereof reade yee the 10. chap. of Genesis. Cham had one sonne called Cus, whose posteritie inhabited a part of Arabia, and that of Ethiopia which is vnder Egypt: another called Mitsraim, of whom came the Egyptians; and another called Canaan, father of the Cananites.
He had also Put, a fourth sonne; but of his posteritie Moses hath not a word. Iosephus, in the sixt chapter of his first booke of Antiquities, saith he peopled Lybia. And it was indeed in the sandie deserts thereof that the children of Cham held the Temple and Oracle of Iupiter Hammon, or Chammon. For the doctrine of truth by little and little being corrupted, and at last quite abolished amongst them (as among the Cananites the Scripture shewes Idolaters, Magitians, and persons euery way debauched and profane) these now blind and ignorant of the true God, make to themselues a God; and giue him a double name: one drawne from the name of the true God Ichoua, turned into Jupiter; and the other from their great Auncestor Cham. After this, the Deuill plaid terrible pranks in this Temple; and it became the most renowmed among the Gentiles; as you may reade in the second booke of Herodotus. And it is not vnlikely that Cham, euen at the time of the Floud, was plotting in his heart for such honours, to be done him by his posteritie, preiudiciall to the glory of Almighty God. As for his obiections here, they tend all (as all Chamites or Atheists reasons doe) first to controll the wise and vnblameable prouidence of the All good and Almighty God. Secondly, to shake the foundation of deuout humilitie in his Church. Thirdly, to censure both the mercy and iustice of the Lord. Fourthly, to make the order of Nature his buckler, to keepe off all apprehension of the vengeance of God; whose wayes, though the wicked thinke to follow them with naturall reason, are all past finding out, as witnesseth the Prophet Isay and S. Paul.
9.Fie Father. I come now to set downe in briefe the reproches, and foule speeches vttered here by Cham, whereof I need say but little, because the Reader may very easily distinguish them; sithence there is nothing in the Poets words, but easie to be vnderstood. The chiefe point is to consider well of Noes answers; which I haue one by one obserued as they stand in the Text.
10.By this the father gauld. After he hath witnessed his griefe in preface, hee bestowes vpon this scoffer such titles as he deserued; and then layes open the well-head of Atheisme; which is, for man to trust ouermuch in himselfe, and little regard what is taught by the Spirit of God: then foretelling the miserable end of all Atheists, he answers the obiections of Cham very punctually; enriching and beautifying his discourse with descriptions, comparisons, inductions and proofes necessarie; which well considered, afford much instruction, and comfort vnto men of an vpright heart. The two last answers are very remarkable; whereunto the Patriarke most fitly adioynes the calling on the name of God; of purpose to shew, vnto whom the faithfull ought to flie in all their troubles and tentations. I will not adde hereunto what Iosephus hath in the first of his Antiquities, because there are many things little to the purpose, and such as sort not with the state and maiestie of that sacred historie set downe by Moses. Something it is that Philo Iudaeus hath written of Moses and the Deluge in his second booke of the life of Moses toward the end. Vpon this historie of the Flood haue the Heathen people forged that fable of Deucalion, described by Ouid in the first of his Metamorphosis. But in these answers, by our Author put vpon Noc, the Reader may finde wherewithall to stop the mouth of all Atheists and Epicures, which are so bold to censure all that the holy Scripture saith, as well of the Essence and Nature of God, as of his workes; whether they concerne the creation and preseruation of the world, with the redemption of Mankinde; or his iust iudgements vpon the profane and reprobate vnbeleeuers.






C'est ainsi que Noe sa prison adoucit,
Enchante sa tristesse,
Dieu fait cesser le deluge.
and le temps acourcit,
Nayant espoir qu'en Dieu, quiresserrant les veines
D'ou surgeonnoyent sans fin tant de viues fontaines:
Arrestant l'eau du ciel, and faisant que les airs
Raffermissent tancez, les digues de leurs mers,
Met les vents en besongne.
Pour cest effect il co^mande auxvents de faire retirer les caux and dessecher la terre.
O balais de la terre,
Frais esuentaus du ciel, o des forests la guerre,
O mes herauts, dit-il, postes and messagers:
O mes nerfs, o mesbras: vous oiscaux, qui legers
Parl'air traine mon char, quand ma bouche allumee
Ne souffle que brassiers, que souffre, que sumce:
Que le foudre est monsceptre: and que l'effroy, le bruit,
L'horreur roule atrauers l'espesseur d'vne nuict:
Esueillez-vous, courez, humez de vos haleines
L'eau qui desrobe au ciel and les monts and les plaines.


Labrigade des vents asa voix obeit:
Fin du deluge, and arrest de l'arche sur les montagnes d'Ararat.
L'orgueil plus escumeux de l'eau s'esuanouit:
La mer fait saretraite: and la Carraque saincte
Prend terre sur vn mont, dont les astres ont crainte,
Qui se perd dans le ciel, and qui void, sourcilleux,
Presque dessous ses pieds mille monts orgueilleux.


Noe,
Le corbeau mis hors l'arche pour descouurir la terre La colombe a la seconde fois apporte au bec vn rameau d'oliuier signe de paix.
qui ce-pendant a'vn doux espoir s'allete,
Donne la clef des champs au Corbeau, qui volete
Antour des monts voisins: and voyant tout noye
Varetrouuer celuy qui l'auoit enuoye.


La Colombe sortant par la fenestre ouuerte
Fait quelques iours apres vne autre descouuerte:
Et coguoissant qu'encore la marine est sans bort,
Lasse de tant ramer, se sauue dans le Fort.


Mais sept-fois par le ciel Phebus n'a fait la ronde,
Qu'elle reprend le vol pour espier le Monde:
Et rapporte a la fin en son bec vnrameau

D'Oliuier palle-gris encore mi-couuert d'eau.


O bien-heureux presage! O plaisante nouuelle!
O mystere agreable! Io, la Colombelle
Paisible port au bec le paisible rainseau
Dieu fait paix auec nous: and d'au si sacre seau
Authorize, benin, son auguste promesse,
Qu'au combat on verrasans rage la Tigresse,
Le Lyon sans audace, and le Lieure sans peur,
Plus-tost qu'anos despens il se monstre trompeur.
O primice des fruicts, osacre-saincte Oliue,
Branche annonce-salut, soit que turestes viue
Apre's le long degast d'vn Deluge enrage,
Ie m'esgaye que l'eau n'apoint tout rauage:
Soit que, baise le slot, ta verdeur rebourgeonne,
I'admire la bonte du grand Dieu, qui redonne,
L'ame a tant darbres morts, and dans moins d'vn moment
Decore l'Vniuers d'vn nouueau parement.


Noe parle en la sorte.
Noe ne vent sortir sans conmandeme^t expres de Dieu qui l'auoit enclos en l'arche.
Or combien que le Monde
Monstrast ja la plus part de ses Iles sur l'onde,
Luy presentant logis: qu'enuieilli dans sa nuict
Il descouure vn Soleil qui sauorable luit:
Qu'vn air infect l'estouffe en si puante estable:
Il ne veut desloger, que Dieu n'ait agreable
Son desembar quement, and que deuotieux,
Il soit auec tout ce qui estoit enserre de viuans auec luy.
Iln'entende tonner quelque oracle des cieux.


Mais si tost que Dieu parle il sorte de sa cauerne,
Ou plustost des cachots d'vn pestilent Auerne
Auec Sem, Cham, Iaphet, sa femme, ses trois Brus,
Et cent and cent facons, soit d'animaux pollus,
Soit de purs animaux: Car le sainct Patriarche
En auoit de tout genre enclos dedans son Arche.





God makes the flood to cease.11 Thus Noah past the time and lesned all their harme
Of irkesome prisonment with such like gentle charme,
His hope was onely in God, who stopping now the vaines,
Whence issued-out before so many wells and raines,
Chidde th'aire,
To that end commands the winds to driue backe the water, and drie the earth.
and bid her shut the flood-gate of her seas;
And sent North-windes abroad; go ye (quoth he) and case
The Land of all this ill, ye cooling fannes of Heau'n,
Earths broomes and warre of woods, my herauts, posts, and cau'n
My sinnows and mine armes; ye birds that hale so lightly
My charriot ore the world, when as in cloud so nightly
With blasting scept'r in hand I, thundring rage and ire,
From smoaky flamed mouth breathe sulph'r and coles of fire.


Awake (I say) make hast, and soop the wat'r away,
That hides the Land from Heau'n, and robs the world of day.


The winds obey his voice, the flood beginnes t'abate,
The Sea retireth backe, 12
The Arklanded.
And th' Arch in Ararate
Lands on a mountains head, that seem'd to threat the skie,
And troad downe vnd'r his feet a thousand hills full high.


13Now Noes heart reioic'd with sweet conceit of hope,
The Rauen sent out to discouer.
And for the Rau'n to flie he sets a casement ope.
To find some resting place the bird soares round-about;
And finding none, returnes to him that sent her out:
Who few daies after sends the Doue, another spie,
That also came againe, because she found no drie.


But after senights rest,
The Doue sent out the second time brings an Oliue branch in signe of peace.
he sends her out againe,
To search if any Land yet peer'd aboue the maine;
Behold an Oliue branch she brings at length in beake:



Then thus the Patriarch with ioy began to speake.
O happie signe! o newes, the best that could be thought!
O mysterie most-desir'd! Io, the Doue hath brought,
The gentle Doue hath brought a peacefull Oliue-bough:
God makes a truce with vs, and so sure sealeth now
The patent of his Loue and heau'nly promises,
That sooner shall we see the Tyger furylesse,
The Lyon fight in seare, the Leuret waxen bold,
Then him against our hope his woonted grace with-hold.
O first fruit of the world! O holy Oliue-tree!
O saufty-boading branch for wheth'r aliue thou be
And wert all while the flood destroyd all else, I ioy
That all is not destroyd: or if, since all th'anoy,
That waters brought on all, so soone thou did'st rebudde,
I wonder at the Lord that is so mightie and good:
To ralliue euery plant, and in so short a space
Cloath all the world anew in liueries of his grace.


14
So said he:
Noe comes not out of the Arke but by the commandement of God who sent him thereinto.
yet (although the flood had so reflowd,
That all about appeerd some Islets thinly strew'd,
Him offring where to rest: although he spied a bright,
And cheerefull day amid his age-encreasing night:
Although th'infected ayre of such a nastie stall
Ny choakt him) would he not come forth before the call
Of God that sent him in: before some thunder-steauen
For warran^ of his act gaue Oracle from Heauen.


No sooner spake the Lord,
He comes forth and all other liuing creatures that were with him.
but he comes out of Cell,
Or rath'r out of dennes, of some infectious Hell,
With Sem, Cham, and laphet, his wise and daughters three,
And all the kinds of Bruits that pure or impure be,
Of hundred hundred shapes: for th'holy Patriarch
Had some of euery sort enclosd with him i'th'Arch.



11.Thus Noah. In the beginning of the 8. Chap. of Gen. Moses reports that God remembred Noe and euery beast, and all the cattell that were with him in the Arke; and made a wind passe vpon the earth; and the waters ceased. This the Poet expoundeth, giuing by the way very proper Epithites vnto the winds: and such also as are mentioned in the Psalmes 18. and 104. This wind dried the earth by degrees, and caused the waters to retire into

their proper place of deepe Sea and Chanels; for the waters enterlaced with the earth make but one globe: And though at the Deluge, by Gods appointment, they went out far beyond their bounds to drowne the wicked; yet when the same God would deliuer his seruant Noe out of danger, at his command they remasse themselues into their wonted heap, furthered thereunto by the winds; and there continue so setled, that they passe

not the bounds of an ordinarie ebbe and flow. This is done by the power of God, and for the promise he made to Noe, that there should be no more generall Flood, to destroy the earth.
12.And th'Arke. The Poet here calls it the Holy Carraque, as built by the commandement of God, and containing his Church. On the seuenth day of the seuenth moneth (saith Moses, Gen. 8.4.) rested the Arke vpon the Mountaines of Ararat. Some by this name vnderstand the great Armenia; others, the top of Caucasus. So Goropius, who thereupon discourseth at large in the 5. booke of his Antiquities, entitled Indo-Scythica. Iosephus, in his first, sheweth what thought Berosus, Nicolaus Damascenus, and others very auncient concerning the Arke; but followeth the first opinion. The Poet contents himselfe here to signifie, and expresse only in generall, some very high hill.
13.Now Noahs heart reioyc'd. From the end of the seuenth moneth to the end of the ninth (saith Moses) the waters began to abate daily more and more; and on the first day of the tenth moneth (that is, eight moneths and thirteene dayes after the Flood began) the tops of the hills appeared: so then already were the waters soonke aboue fifteene cubits. This fust made the Patriarke be of good hope. For after forty dayes, he opened the window of the Arke, and let goe the Rauen; which went and came, till the waters were dried from the surface of the earth. He sent out also a Doue to try if they were yet further abated; but the Doue not finding where to rest the sole of her foot, return^d vnto him againe into the Arke: for the waters were yet ouer the whole earth, and he reached out his band, and tooke her to him into the Arke. And when he had waited yet seauen dayes longer, he sent out the Doue againe, and in the euening shee returned vnto him, hauing in her mouth an Oliue-leafe, which shee bad plucked, etc. I haue recited the Text of Moses, whereupon the Expositors discoursing are wont to shew, wherefore Noah sent-out the Rauen and the Doue rather then any other birds: and why the Doue after the Rauen, and thrice. He knew full well the nature of these two was fit for the discouery; and went on with a discreet feare, attending, in all that he did, the manifest declaration of Gods will, touching his comming forth of the Arke. He had also a strong

hope and confidence in the goodnesse of God, now prouing the patience and constancie of his seruant; and strengthning him still more and more by those meanes of discouery. And although the Doue at last staid and returned not vnto him; the waters being dayed from the earth; yet would he not come forth of the Arke, but contented himselfe to remoue the couering thereof, and behold the dry land round about him; and staid so 27. dayes longer, expecting the will and pleasure of the same God, to call him out of the Arke, which commanded him to enter into it. A singular example of obedience and reuerence due vnto the Almighty. As for the rest, the ancient Diuines haue at large allegorized vpon this Doue and the Oliue leafe, for a token of peace betwixt God and his Church: as also vpon the resemblance, that this deliuerie hath, with our redemption by Iesus Christ. These are contemplations of good vse, whereof the Poet maketh a briefe in speaking of the Oliue. Here it may suffice to haue touched them in a word, and leaue the Reader to meditate thereupon. Whom I wish also to peruse the third chapter of the 1. Epist. of S. Peter, and see what the Apostle there saith concerning the correspondence of Baptisme and the Deluge.
14.Although the Flood. When Noe had patiently attended many dayes after the surface of the Earth began to waxe drie; God spoke vnto him (Gen. 8.15. etc.) saying, Come out of the Arke, thou and thy wife, and thy sonnes and their wiues with thee. Bring forth with thee euery beast that is with thee, of all flesh, both foule and cattell; and euery thing that creepeth and moueth vpon the earth. Then Noe came forth, and his sonnes, and his wife, and his sonnes wiues with him. Euery beast, euery creeping thing, and euery fowle; all that moueth vpon the earth, after their kinds, went out of the Arke; as it were out of a prison most noysome and deadly, but for the presence and singular fauour of the Lord, who preserueth both man and beast, as the Psalmist saith. Here are many things to be admired: Noe and all his come forth safe and sound; the beasts also come forth without preying one vpon another; and they retire themselues to their seuerall haunts; their dens, nests, and places sit for them: and he retaineth what was requisite for sacrifice.






Mais i'enten les meschant qui n'agueres souloyent
Manger leur mots rompus: and ^raintifs, ne parloyent.
Que a vn murmure sourd a l'oreille entre eux-mesmes,
Ores a cor and cri publier leur blasphemes.


Qui croira (disent-ils) sice n'est vn lour daut,
Qu'vn vaisseau quin'a point trent brasses de haut,
Cent cinquante de long, and dix fois cinq de large,
Pout porter tant de mois vne si grande charge:
Ven que le fier Cheual; l'Elephant ride-peau,

Le Chameau souffre-soif, le courageux Taureau,
Et le Rhinocerot auecques leurs fourrages
D'vn plus grand Gallion combleroit les estages?


O profanes moqueurs!
Response que les animaux bastards n'estoye^t en l'Arche, la capacite de laquelle est prouuee en vn mot.
Si ie n'heberge pas
Dans ce parc vagabond ie nescay quel amas
D'animaux nez apres, and de qui l'origine
Ne pend de la faueur d'vne douce Cyprine:
Les fantasque Mulets, and Leopars madrez,
Qu'vne inceste chaleur a depuis engendrez:
Tant de sortes de Chiens, de Coqs, de Colombelles,
Qui croissent chasque iour en especes nouuelles
Par vn baiser meste: sujet, ou de tous temps
La Daedale Nature a prins son passe-temps.
Si ie vous prouue encore mesure par mesure,
Et comme pied par pied, que ceste ample closture
Faite par symmetrie, and subtiliugement,
Pouuoit tant d'animaux loger commodement,
Veu que chaque coudee estoit Geometrique,
Sans doute vous serez, o Momes, sans replique:
Siceux qui contre Dieu s'arment obstinement,
Peuuent prendre, enragez, raison en payement.


Seure replique a toutes obiectio^s profanes.
Mais ioy i'ayme mieux admirer la puissance
Du trois-fois Tout-puissant, and commander silence
Au discours de la chair: S'il l'a dit, il l'a fait:
Car en luy vont ensemble and le dire and l'effect.
Aussi par son bras seul les hostes de la Barque
Noe and ses enfans sacrifient a Dieu.
Se sentent recourus du gossier de la Parque:
Et font, deuotieux, monter iusqu' a son nez
La pacifique odeur des animaux plus nets,
Les bruslant sur l'autel: puis sur l'estoille Pole
Poussent d'vn zele ardant ceste ailee parole.





15 Here yet the damned Crew, I lowdly bawling heare,
That durst ere now no more the^ whisper each oth'r itth eare.


Who but a foole (say they) will thinke a ship so small,
A hundred fiftie long, and thirtie cubits tall,
And fiftie broad, can hold so many months a charge
So combersome and huge? when as the Snout-horne large,

The rinde-hide Elephant, the Camell, Horse, and Bull,
They and their fodder stuffe the greatest Carack full.


O hellish-blasphemie! if of vnlawfull matches
Sproong since a world of beasts,
The answer, that many sorts of beasts are bred since, which were not in the Arke.
that were not vnder hatches
In that same floating parke, a many diuers kinds
Of Cockes, of Doues, of Haukes, of Dogs, of Cats, of Hinds,
Pyde Leopards, giddie Mules, and such as daily increase
By linsiewoolsie loue t' a sundrie-seeming spece:
A thing wherein we find dame Nature hath delight,
And euer had to shew her cunning and her might:
Nay if I plainely proue,
The capacitie of the Arke proued in a word.
with measure foot by foot,
That in so large an hulke they might all well be shut,
So cunningly deuisd and so proportionall,
(Sith euery cubits length was Geometricall)
What Momus can replie? if reason go for pay
Among the mad, who stand against the Lord in ray.


But let me rath'r admire,
A sure answer to all profane obiections.
then bring into dispute
The thrice-Almighties might; and here let flesh be mute.
What he hath said is doon, I build thereon my creede;
For all is one with him, the saying and the deede.
Noe and his, offer sacrifice vnto God.
So brought his arme alone from-out the iawes of Hell,
The skarr'd inhabitants of that same floating Cell:
Who now a peace-offering deuoutly sacrifise,
And from his Alter make perfumes to Heau'n arise
Of purer kinded beasts, and therewithall let flie
Zele-winged, heartie prayers; and thus aloud they crie.



15.Here yet the damned Crew. Before he goe-on, he shewes what certaine profane wretches doe obiect, who make doubt of this history, concerning the Deluge; because they cannot conceiue how it is possible that the Arke, being but 300. cubits long and 50. broad, and 30. high, should liue (it is the Sea-mans phrase) so many moneths, in so great a storme of wind, raine and violence of waters, with so heauy a charge; and containe so many creatures together with their competent food and fodder; sithence the greatest Gallion vpon the Sea, hath hardly stoage for the nourishment of a Horse, an Elephant, a Cammell, a Bull, and a Rhinoceros, the space of ten moneths. The Poet hath diuers answers to this obiection. First, that the mungrell beasts, of what sort soeuer since engendred (as Mules, Leopards, and other like, that Nature daily brings forth) were not in the Arke. And this may be gathered out of the very text of Moses; who speaks of the simple and true kindes, not the mingled or mungrell sort; as all Expositors agree. The second is, that the Arke (because it contained so many cubits geometricall) was able to receiue of all the true and simple kinds, wylde, tame, creeping, flying, both male and female. This is briefly said; but we will speake thereof a word more. Moses hath recorded (in the 6. chap. of Gen. ver. 14. etc.) that God, hauing a purpose to destroy the world, said vnto Noe, Make thee an Arke of Gopher-wood (which is thought to be a sort of Pine or Cedar) Thou shalt make cabins in the Arke, and shalt pitch it inside and out with pitch. And thus thou shalt make it: The length thereof shall be 300 cubits, and the breadth 50 cubits, and the height 30 cubits: a window shalt thou make in the Arke, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it abone; and thou shalt set a doore in the side thereof: And thou shalt make it with a low, second, and third roome, or storie. The timber then of the Arke being of such a fast and sad wood, not easily rotting, was like to hold out: and I imagine it was a kinde of Cedar, such as Plinie nameth in the 15. chap. of his 13. booke, saying, Hanc quoque materiam, siccatam mari, duritie incorrupta spissari, nec vllo modo vehementius. 1. That this kinde of timber, dryed with the Sea, more then any wayes else, growes so sad and hard, that it cannot rot. But sithence the Commentors vpon this place differ much in the interpretation of this word Gopher; which in all the Old Testament is not found but here; I leaue the Reader, that will be exact and curious, to search it out himselfe. As for the rest, it is not to be doubted, but that Noe endowed with a great measure of the holy Spirit, and with exquisite wisdome, did herein euen to the full conceiue and execute the commandement of God: So as the Arke (that is, the close or couered ship) was surely made and finished according to the proportion set downe by Moses: and that, of choice, well seasoned, and most durable materials, 100 yeare a preparing, as may be gathered by comparing the 7. chap. and 6. verse, with the 6.10. and the 5.32. of Genesis. And for as much as the whole businesse was managed by the expresse ordinance of God, who gaue a secret instinct to the beasts, both cleane and vncleane, to enter after Noe by payres into the Arke, I conclude there was roome distinct and sufficient both for them and their prouisions. Apelles an auncient Heretike, and the disciple of a most vngodly Master called Marcion, hauing presumptuously controuled the bookes of Moses, gaue occasion to some of the Fathers, and chiefly Origen, among other points, to treat of the capacitie and largenesse of Noes Arke: wherein he accounts each cubit Geometricall; the Quadrate whereof is as much as six other cubits. And this, I. Buteo, a learned Mathematician of Daulphine, very cunningly declares, in a treatise purposely written of the Arke of Noe: where he proues to the full whatsoeuer may be questioned concerning that admirable peece of Architecture, and all the cabins that it had for the creatures, and their seuerall prouisions. Io. Goropius discourseth likewise hereof, and at large, in the second booke of his Antiquities, entitled Gigantomachia; inserting also some part of Buteo. But, to speake plainly, if we take the cubit in common signification, for a foot and a halfe, and confider the different syze of men of that age from ours, together with the length, bredth and height of the Arke, and three stages (whereof the lowest was for the prouision, the next for the foure-footed and creeping creatures, and the vppermost for the birds, with Noe and his familie) and ouer all these a couering; wee shall finde roome enough to lodge and place all, according to the number in generall set downe by Moses, to wit, male and female of euery sort vncleane; and seauen of the cleane, male and female. The Poet here speaking of the Geometricall cubit, means a cubit solid, that is, in length, bredth and height taken together. There are that make the cubit two foot long; and make difference betwixt the cubit legale (as they call it) and the cubit of a man: glancing at that which is said (Deut. 3.) of the bed of Og king of Basan. Looke what Arias Montanus saith in his Tubal Cain and Noah; where he discourses of the measures and Architectures mentioned in holy Scripture, and of the Arke. These bookes are in the Volume which he calleth Apparatus, ioyned to the great Bibles in Hebrue, Greeke and Latine, and printed at Antwerpe. That which hath led these Atheists and profane wretches into errour, is, that they consider not that Noe, and the men of that Age, by reason of their higher stature, had longer cubits; and hard it is to giue a iust proportion of theirs vnto ours. When Moses wrote, certaine it is, that mens bodies were abated of their bignesse; yet that which he wrote was easily vnderstood of the Israelites, who receiued these things by tradition, and knew them as perfectly, as if they saw them with their eyes. The last argument here vsed by the Poet, adoring the wisdome of Almighty God, who made all things in number, weight and measure, is a reason of all reasons; and altogether vnreasonable are they that reason to the contrary: then beside reason were it, to propound reason to them that haue lost the true vse of reason, and will conceiue nothing, but that which their owne mad and extrauagant reason soundeth in their eares. But againe to the Text.






Pere port-trident,
Pricre de Noe a Dieu.
Roy des vents, dompte-mer,
Voy nous d'vn oeil benin. O Dieu, vueille calmer
Les bouillons de tonire, and conduire au riuage
Les tableaux eschapez d'vn si piteux naufrage,

Et ranger pour iamais les enragez efforts
De l'orgeuse mer dans ses antiques bords.
L'immortel les oyant n'eut pas sonne si tost
La retraite des caux,
2. Iour de la 1. Sepmaine.
que soudain flot sur flot
Elles gaignent au pie: tous les sleuues s'abaissent:
Lamer rentre en prison: les montagnes renaissent:
Les bois monstrent desia leurs limoneux rameaux:
Ia la campagne croist par le discroit des caux:
Et bref la seule main du Dieu dar-detonnerre
Monstre la terre au ciel, and le ciel a la terre.





16Noes prayer to God.


O Father, King of winds, world-shaking, taming-seas,
O God, with gratious eye behold vs, and appease
The billowes of thy wroth: these planchers hardly sau'n,
Of such a piteous wracke, O bring at length to hau'n:

And once for eu'r againe pen-vp i'th'ancient bounds
The breezy Seas mad sway, that yet the land surrounds.


These verses are taken out of the second day of his first weeke.
Th'Eternall heard their voice, and bid his Triton sound
Retreate vnto the flood; then waue by waue to bound
The waters hast away; all nuers know their bankes,
And Seas their wonted shore; hils grow with swelling flanks;
Vpon the tufted woods appeare the slimie webbes;
And earth it seemes to flow as fast as water ebbes.
So did the Lord againe with mercy-might-full hand
Shew vnto Land the Heau'n, and vnto Heau'n the Land.




16.O father, o king of winds. Moses saith (Gen. 8.15.) that God spake vnto Noe, after that he had beene shut vp in the A^ke a yeere and some daies, and bade him come forth with his familie and the beasts; and gaue them all a blessing, which continues vnto this day. The Patriarke obeying the commandement, built an Altar vnto the Lord, and tooke of all the cleane foure-footed, and of all the cleane birds (hauing learned this difference in the holy schoole of his forefathers, who were taught it from God) and offred thereon whole burnt Sacrifices, in repentance and faith apprehending the

Messias and Redeemer to come. For Sacrifices were vnto the faithfull as visible witnesses of their miserable estate in Adam, and Grace offred them in their Sauiour, applied with the eyes and hands of a liuely faith. Out of doubt these holy ceremonies were accompanied with most carnest prayers also: because true faith in a heart enflamed with the loue of God, could not be idle; He beleeued, and beleeuing spake, as did the Psalmist, Psal. 116. This prayer of Noe, supposed by the Poet, is fitted vnto the consideration of time past and to come, and founded vpon the text of Moses.






Puis croissez vous (dit-il) faites par tout le monde
Commandemens and promesses de Dieu a Noe and a sa prosperite: selon que Moyse le declare au 9. chap. de Genese. Defense de manger le sang des bestes. Le meurtre desendu.
Formiller dans peu d'ans vostre engeance feconde.
Reprenez vostresceptre: imposez nouueau frein
Aux animaux qui siers, se sont de vostre main
Iadiscomme sauuez, r'entrez en l'exercice
De vostre estat premier. Chers enfant, vostre office
Est de leur commander. Vsez doncques de tous:
Prenez, tuez, mangez, Mais las! abstenez vous
De leur rougeastre esprit, laissez, race diuine,
Laviande estouffee aux oiseaux de rapine.


Ie hay l'homme de sang. Ie suis sainct, soyez saincts,
Done ne vous souillez point aux sang de vos germains:
Fuyez lacruaute, detestez le carnage:
Et ne romp. z, brutaux, en l'homme mon image.
L'homme cruel mourra d'vne cruelle mort*
Le meurtrier sentira, quoy qu'^l tarde, l'effort
D'vn paricide bras; and tousiours mest empestes,
Grondant, poursuiueront les homicides testes.

Au reste,
Promesse qu'il n'y aura plus de deluge vniuersel.
ne craignez qu'vn Deluge second
Couure de toutes pars de la terre le front.
Non, ie le vous promets. Non, non ticle vous iure.
(Et qui me vit iamais containcu de pariure?)
Ie le reiure encor par mon Nom trois-fois-sainct:
Et pour seau de ma soy,
L'are au. Ciel donne pour gage de ceste promesse.
dans les nues s'ay peint
Ce bel Arc piole. Quand done vnlong orage
Menacera ce Tout d'vn ondoyant rauage:
Que le ciel charge d'caux a vos monts touchera:
Que lair en plain midi la terre anuitera:
Haussez deuers cest Arc vostre alaigre visage;
Car bien qu'il soit empreint dans vn moite nuage.
Qu'il soit tout borde d'eaux, and qu'il semble humer,
Pour noyer l'Vniuers, tous les flots de la mer:
Il fera qu'au plus fort de vos viues destresses
Vous penser^z en moy, and moy en mes promesses.


Noe regard en haut,
Description de l'arc au ciel.
and void, esmerucille,
Vn demi-cercle en l'air de cent teints esmaille,
Et qui, clair, se poussant vers la voute atheree,
A pour son diametrevne ligne tiree
Entre deux Orizon: vn arc de toutes parts
Egalement plie: vn arc fait de trois ares,
Dont l'vn est tout au long peint de couleur doree,
De verte le second, and le tiers d'azuree
Mais de telle facon, qu'en cest or, vert, and bleu,
Ony voit le plus pur riole quelque peu:
Arc qui lunt en la main de l'Archer du tonnerre,
Dont la corde subtil est comme a steur de terre,
Et qui mi-part le ciel: and se courbant sur nous,
Mouille dedans deux mers de ses cornes les bouts:
Temporel ornement des flambantes voutures,
Ou Nature a broye ses plus viues teintures,


Que si tu ne comprens que le rouge,
Quelles choses sont representees par cest arc.
and le bleu^
Pren les pour sacrement de la mer and du feu:
Du rauage ondoyant, and rauage contraire:
Du iugement ia fait, and iugement a faire.




17
Then blest he man, and all, and said againe,
Gods commands and promises to Noe and his posteritie. Gen. 6.
Go breede,
And ouerswarme the world with fast-encreasing seede:
R'enhand your Princely Mace, rule, and hold hard againe
The wildest of the beasts, that erst had got the raine.
Commaund all as before, take, vse, and kill for food:
But this,
Blood-eating forbidden.
beware (my sonnes) you eat no flesh in blood,
The life thereof, beware; vnto the rau'ning foule
The strangled carcasse leaue, you of so heau'nly soule.


I hate the man of blood, be holy, as am I.
Shun all blood thirstinesse,
Murder forbidden.
but more especially
Regard a brothers life, and do not rase in man
The likenesse of your God: my soule doth curse and ban,
And euer shall pursue with stormie ghust of hate,
And strike with murdering hand the murdrer soone or late.

Moreouer,
God promiseth there shall bee n^ more generall stoods.
of a flood stand you no more in feare,
The world shall ne'r againe be ouerflow'n, I sweare,
I sweare eu'n by my selfe (and when broake I myne oath?)
Yet for a seale and more assurance of the troath,


Behold I set my bow vpon the cloud of raine:
That,
The Rainbow a signe thereof.
when long season wet the world shall threat'n againe;
When th'aire all cloudie-thick at noone shal bring you night;
And heau'n orelaid with raine shall on your hills alight;
Ye may reioice to see my seale so eue'nly bow'd:
For, though't imprinted be vpon a misly clowd,
Though albeset with raine, and though it seeme to call
The waues of all the sea to drowne the world withall;
Yet at the sight thereof, in all your sore distresse,
Ye shall remember me, and I my promises.


Then Noe cast-vp eye,
A description of the Rainebow.
and wondred to behold
A demy-circl' i th'aire of colours manifold,
That brightly shining-out, and heauing-vp to heau'n
Hath for Dyameter a line estrained eau'n
Betwixt both Horizons; a goodly bow to see
And comming all alike; nay one bow made of three,
A yellow, a greene, a blew; and yet blew, yellow, greene,
But dapled each with oth'r in neith'r is to be seene.


A bow that shines aloft in Thunder-shooters hand,
That halfe-diuides the heau'n, and laies on face of land
(As twere) her fine spunne string; and bending ore the rocks
Against a misly Sun i'th'Ocean dips her nockes:
The short enduring grace of Heau'ns enflamed blewes,
Whereon dame Nature layes her most-quicke-lustred hewes.
What things are signified by this Bow.
But if thou doe perceiue no more then blew and red,
Take them for Sacraments, as if they figured
The Water and the Fire; whereof th'one hath of yore,
And th'other at latter day shall all the world deuore.




17.Goe breed. The rest of this booke containes a short exposition of the chiefe points handled in the ninth chap. of Gen. Whereof the first shewes the blessing of God, that would haue Noe and his children with the rest, increase and multiply, and replenish the earth. For the world, now as it were created anew, had need be sanctified and quickned from God with a new blessing. The second point is, that all creatures should be subiect vnto man: which we finde true at this day; as well by the inuentions we haue to master them all; and skill to draw food, seruice, profit and pleasure many wayes from them; as also by this, that the fiercest of them doe vs but seldome hurt, though easily they might destroy vs, if that word of God (The feare of you be vpon all the beasts of the earth) were not verified, and cast, as it were, a bridle into the iawes, and shackle to the pawes of enemies armed with so much aduantage against our kinde. The third, that Noe and his haue leaue giuen them, as freely to make vse of the beasts, as of any fruit growing vpon the Earth; so that they eat not the flesh with the blood for God would by this restraint shew how abominable murder is in his sight: whereof, as the fourth point, there is mention made expresly in the text.

And lastly, to comfort Noe and his, the Lord tells them, and sweares thereto, that the world should neuer more be destroyed by a generall Flood; and further to assure them hereof, saith; This is the token of the couenant, which I make betweene me and you, and betweene euery liuing thing that is with you for euer: I will set my Bow in the cloud, etc. Gen 9.12. etc.
18.Then Noe cast-vp eye. To this elegant description of the Rainebow, nothing can be added It appeared certainly before the Flood; but then was it not a token of Gods couenant with mankind (as now it began to be) that the world should be no more destroyed by waters. That our Poet so playes the Philosopher vpon the colours of blew and red; hee takes it of some ancient Fathers of the Church; and it is no wayes impertinent or absurd. But the Reader is at liberty, to settle his iudgument on that hee shall thinke more conuenient. Such Allegories and Poeticall licence, haue their grace and good vse, when a man propounds them with modestie (as doth our Poet) not importuning any to receiue them; but leauing all men their iudgement free.






Ayant inuoque Dieu,
Noe cultiue. la terre, comme il faisoit auant le deluge. Les enfans de Cain s'estomt adonnez aux arts and hauts estats, tandis que ceux de Seth s'occupe^t a l'agriculture.
nostre Ayeul ne veut pas
Qu'vn paresseux repos engourdisse ses bras:
Ilse met en besongae, and sage recommence
Exercer le mestier appris des son enfance.


Car les fils du Tyran, qui dans le sang germain,
Premiere of a tremper sa detestable main,
Ayant comme en horreur l'innocent Labourage
Et preferant, mignards, le delicat ombrage,
Les oisiues citez aux champs, rocher, and bois,
Embrasserent les arts, les sceptres, and les loix.
Mais les enfans de Seth, scachant que la Nature
Se contente de peu prindrent l'Agriculture
Pour leur sainct exercice, ou guiderent, soigneux,
Et les velus troupeaux, and les troupeaux laineux,
Comme vsure louable, and prosit sans enuie,
Art nourrice des arts, and vie de la vie.


Noe est labouteur and plante la vigne.
Aussi le cher honneur des celestes flambeaux
N^a si tost ventouse la terre si gros d'eaux,
Que celuy qui sauua dans vne Nef le Monde,
Suant, raye le dos de sa mere feconde:
Et quelque temps apres plante soigneusement
Du sep porte-Nectar le fragile sarment.



Lieu commode pour la vigne, and les facons d'icelle.
Car parmi les caillous d'vne coline aisee,
Aux yeux du clair Soleil tiedement exposee,
La crossette il ^^^^erre, ou le tendrescion
Maintenant en godean, and tantost en rayon.
Houe la vigne en Mars: la bisne, tierce, emonde,
Taille, amende, eschalasse: and la rende si feconde,
Que dans le tiers Septembre il treuue en cent facons
Son riche espoir vaicu de vineuses moissons.


Noe est surprins de vin.
Or Noe desireux de tromper la tristesse
Qui cruelle, assligeoit sa tremblante vieillesse
Pour voir tant de Palais de mol limon couuerts,
Et rester presque seul bourgeois de l'Vniuers:
Vniour relache vn peu de sa facon de viure
La seuere roideur: s'esgaye, boit, s'enyure:
Et, forcene, pensant dans si douce poison
Noyer son vifennuy, il noye sa raison.


Ia la teste luy pese,
Description de l'homme yure.
and le pied luy chancelle.
Vne forte vapeur luy blesse la ceruelle.
Ses propos hors propos de sa bouche eschapez
Sont consus, sont mal-sains, be gayans and coupez
Il sent geiner de vents sa poitrine trop soule,
Et tout son pauillou branslant se tourneboule.
En sin ne pouuant plus sur ses pieds se tenir,
Accable de sommeil, commence deuenir
D'homme en sal pourceau, and veautrer sans vergongue
Au milieu du logis sa ronflante charongue,
Oublieux de soy-mesme: and noye, ne couurant
Les membres que Cezar couurit mesme en mourant.


Comparaisons propre and qui representent le naturel des calumniateurs, imitateurs de Cham.
Ainsi que le corbeaux d'vne penne* venteuse
Passent les bois pleurans de l'Arabie heureuse:
Mesprise les iardins, and pares delicieux,
Qui de sleurs esmaillez vont parfumant les cieux,
Et s'arreste gloutons sous la sale carcasse
D'vn criminel rompu n'aguerre a coups de masse:
Ou comme vn Peintre sot d'vn apprentis pinceau
Tire negligemment ce qui luit deplus beau
Au poursil d'vne face: and cependant remarque

Les imperfections, and soigneusement marque
L'enfonceure du nez, des leures la grandeur,
La profondeur des yeux, ou quelque autre laideur:
Ainsi les sils malius du Pere de m'ensonge
Hument ingratement d'vne oublieuse esponge
Les traicts de la vertu: and iettent, enuieux,
Sur les moindres pechez le venin de leurs yeux:
Rient du mal d'autruy: trompettent en tous ages
Les legeres erreurs des plus grands personnages:
Tels que Cham,
Impudence de Cham.
qui repaist son regard impudent
Du parent deshonneur, and qui, se desbordant
En vn rire profane, annonce sans vergongne
Le miserable estat de ce vieillard yurongne:


Ce qu'il dit a ses freres voyant la honte de son Pere.
Venez, venez, dit-il: venez, freres: courez
Voir ce Contrerolleur quinous a censurez
A tort and si souuent: comme il sallit sa couche,
Vomissant par le nez, par les youx, par la bouche,
Le vin son gouuerneur: and descouurant, brutal,
Aux yeux de tous venans son membre genital.


Ha, mastin effronte (dit l'vn and l'autre frere,
Sem and Iaphet reprime l'outrageuse moquerie de leurs frere, and font leur deuoir.
Qui porte escrite au front vne iuste cholere)
Vilain, desnature, monstre pernitieux,
Monstre indigne de voir les beaux slambeaux descieux:
Au lieu que tu deuois cacher en nostre absence
De ton propre manteau, mais plus par ton silence,
Ton pere, que lennuy, le vin troop vehement,
Et l'age out fait gliser vne fois seulement.
Tu iappes le premier: and traines, pour tesbatre,
Sa honte au plus haut lieu d'vne infame Theatre.
Et prononcant ces mots, de leur pere chenu
(Tournant ailleurs les yeux) ils voilent le corps nu.


Noe esucille de son yuresse maudit Cham and sa race.
Le vin estant cuue, ce bon homme s'esueille:
Reconnoit son erreur: vergongneux s'esmerueille
De la force du vin: and poingt d'vn vif soucy,
D'vn gosier Profetique ases fils parle ainsi.


Que mandit sois tu Cham, and que maudit encore
Soit Canan ton inignon: que la perleuse Aurore,

Le vespre catharreux, and le midi luisant
Voye tousiours chargeton corps d'vnioug pesant.
Dieu se tienne auec Sem:
Il benit Sem and Iaphet. Detectatio^ de l'yurognerie, descrite en ses effects honteux, dangereux and excecrable.
and que bien tost sa grace
Estende de Iaphet la formillante race.
Salle desuoyement terreur, mais on erreur,
Ains rage volontaire! o transport! o fureur
Courte, mais dangereuse, and qui tues, cholere,
Clyte par son ami, Penthee par sa mere!
Phrenesie qui fais le vanteur insolent,
Bauard le grand parleur, cruel le violent,
Le paillard adultere, and l'adultere inceste,
Enflant tous nos deffauts du leuain de ta peste:
Qui vis sans front, sans yeux: qui l'ame en l'ame esteins^
Qui d'horrible forfaits diffames les plus saincts:
Et qui comme le moust,
Comparaison.
qui bou-bouillant sautelle,
Fait craquer les liens de sa neuue vaisselle,
Tourne-vire la lie, and regorge, fumeux,
Du fond de son vaisseau l'excrement escumeux,
Vas ruinant ton hoste: and pousses, indiscrete,
Du profond de son coeur toute chose secrete:
Quandtu n'aurois iamais, o vilaine poison,
Fait ca bas autre mal, que priuer de raison
L'exemple de vertu, voire la vertu mesme,
On te deurois fuyr plus que la Parque blesme.





19
All holy rites performd, our gransire Noe ne will
That idlenesse and ease benome his armes,
Noe tills the earth as he did before the stood:
and kill
His muskles vnexersd; but hies-him to the field,
And wisely takes in hand the worke he learnd a child.


Whereas the sons of Cain gaue themselues to policie.
For all the tyran-stocke of brother-killing Cain,
More liking sinne with ease, then innocence with paine,


Preferd a citie-life, to rule the peoples wills
With Scepters, arts, and lawes, before fields, woods, or hills.
Whereas the race of Seth, well knowing nature will
With little be suffic'd, began the ground to till
For holy exercise, and kept on dales and rockes
The lowing hairie heards, and bleating woolly flockes.
A praise-worth vsurie, gaine void of enuie and strife,
Art nourishing all Arts, and life maintaining life.


No sooner had the Sunne, grace of coel estiall brands,
Dry'd with rebounding beame the water-soaken lands,
But he that kept in ship the worlds seed from a wracke,
Plowes vp with sweating brow his mothers fruitfull backe.


Noe plants a vine.
Then carefull is to plant a Nectar-bearing vine

Fit place for a Vine, and the manner of dressing it.
Vpon a grittie banke where Sunne doth all day shine:


There either sets he pots, or else a trench he diggs
To sow-in steed of grape, or quick set yonger twiggs.
The next ensuing March he hoes the vine and lops it,
He rubbes, he trims, he spreads, he prunes, and vnderprops it.
So fruitfull then it was, that far beyond his thought,
A haruest rich-of-wine the third Septemb'r it brought.


20Now Noe waxing old,Noe is ouertaken with wine.
and daily sad to see
So many towrs in mud, while none but his and he
Enhabited the world, to driue-of melancholie,
He tooke vpon a day more libertie then holy;
He quaffd and tripsie grew; he thought but for a season
To drowne his griefe in wine, and madly drownd his reason.


A drunkard described.
His tongue-strings ouerwet doe cause him lisp and stut;
No word flies through his teeth, but witlesse, broke and cut:
His stomack ouer-laid with hot fume hurts his braine,
And rawly belcheth wind; his feet stumble on the plaine,
So heauy was his head; the place is turned round;
No longer can he stand, but sleepe him layes aground
Amid his open tent; there he now like a swine
His snoaring carren rowles embrewd with cast-vp-wine:
And albeside himselfe, not knowing what he did,
He naked layes the parts, that dying Caesar hid.


Fit comparisons for all such slanderers as Cham.
Behold as carren crowes with fanny wings oreflie
The Manna-dropping woods of happy Arabie:
And reckning light the lawns and gardens of delight,
Whose ammell beds perfume the skie both day and night,
Seiz-on with glouton beaks, or rath'r anatomize
Some executed corse all-rotting as it lies:
Or as young Painters wont with bungling penecyll
Good features of a face to misse, and hit what's ill;
To draw with little heed what ere is faire to see,

And more then duly marke the least deformitie,
A mole, a wart, a wen, a brow or lip too-fat,
Or else an eye too deep, or else a nose too flat:
So doe the spightfull sonnes of Satan prince of Hell
Spoonge with forgetfulnesse the shew of all that's well,
And biting lip thereat, cast venom of their eyes
Vpon the lightest faults of mens infirmities:
They laugh at others hurt, and sound through-out all ages
The very least escapes of greatest personages.
The impudence of Cham.
So shamelesse Cham beheld his drunken fathers shame,
It shew'd, and laught thereat, and made thereof a game.


21
Come (brothers) come, quoth he; loe he that oft controules
Each little fault in vs, how vp and downe he roules,
And spewing wine, his mast'r, at mouth, at eyes, at nose,
To all doth like a beast his priuitie disclose.


Sem and Iaphet reproue him: and doe their dutie.
Ha dog, ha brazen face (good Sem and Iaphet said,
And with a clowdie brow iust discontent bewraid)
Ha monster vile, vnkinde, vnworthy of this light;
Thou shouldst thy selfe alone, though we were out of sight
Cast on thy mantle, or hide with silence at the least
Thy fathers fault, that, once in all his life, opprest
With griefe, wine, age, hath fal'n; and dost thou make a game
To bring his hoary head first on the stage of shame?


Noe waking curseth Cham and his posteritie.
Thus rate they Cham, and then with fromward looke reti^e
To h^ale the nakednesse of their enyeared Sire.


22
Slept-out the surfet was, and he awoke at length,
And blushing knew his fault, and wondred at the strength
He found in blood of grape: then prickt with inward tine
He propheside, and said, Gods heauy curse and mine
Befall the race of Cham, let South, let East and West

For euer see them serue:
He blesseth Sem and Iaphet.
but euermore be blest
Sems holy-chosen seed; be Canan slaue to them;
A detestation of drunkennesse.
And Iaphet God perswade to dwell ith'tents of Sem:
So ended. O foule vice, errour, enormitie,
Nay voluntarie rage, distract, and phrenesie,
Not long, but dangerous! by thee, mad as a fiend,
Agave slew her sonne, and Alexand'r his friend.
Doth any burne in sinne? thou dost increase the fuell;
Thou mak'st the prater vaine, the hastie cutter cruell,
The vaunting insolent, th'angry tempestuous,
The wanton minde vnchast, th'vnchast incestuous:
Thou canst nor blush nor see, thou life in life destroy'st,
And holiest men of all with many faults accloy'st:
Yea, as the strong new-wine with boyling inshut heat
Cracks eu'n the newest hoopes, and makes the vessell sweat;
Turnes vpsedowne the lees, and froths out at the vent
From bottom of the caske the setled excrement;
So thou vndo'st thine host, and rashly mak'st to flie
From bottom of his heart all matt'r of secresie.
Though no more to thy charge be laid, o poyson vile,
And this were all thy fault, to bruten for a while
A vertue-teaching life, nay vertue-selfe; I sweare
Man ought thee more then face of ghastly death to feare.




19.All holy Rites performed. The Scripture saith (Gen. 9.20.) that Noe was an Husbandman, and planted a vineyard. Hereby appeares that he, before the Flood, had betooke himselfe to the vocation of planting and tilling, with all that belonged thereto. A trade worthy such holy Fathers, and well beseeming their long liues. For then, and a long time after, was this exercise (by good right) held a lawfull vsurie, a gaine void of Enuie, an Art maintaining all Arts, and the true meanes of long liuing. In the meane time, while the posteritie of Seth followed husbandry and tillage, they of Cain gaue themselues wholly to high matters of State and gouernment in the world; whereby they came short of health, and true wisdome. Furthermore it is said, that Noe planted a vine, which was it may be a thing knowne of him before, but neuer dressed to the full proofe, till then; as may be gathered by that which the historie shewes fell out thereupon; to wit, that Noe drunke of the wine, and was drunken, and was vncoured in the mids of his tabernacle. For likely it is that if wine had beene vsed before the Deluge,

drunkennesse in those dayes would haue shewed it selfe among other vices, and increased them: so as Noe might thereby haue taken occasion, after the Deluge, to beware thereof and stand the more vpon his guard But these words (he dranke of the wine) seeme to import that before then he neuer had tasted the sweetnesse of this fruit, and was taken therewith at vnawares. Some are of opinion, that it pleased the diuine goodnesse, because the strength of mans nature was impaired by the Flood, to helpe and recompence him with eating of flesh and drinking of wine; as meat and drinke more strong, and remedies auaileable, against the assaults of diuers diseases and infirmities, then like to ensue. For well may it be thought, by the curse of God, now redoubled vpon mankind, that the earth lost a good part of the force and vigour it had before; and that the Deluge was (as it were) a strong buck-water, to fret and diminish the force of all creatures, especially the body of man, which after the Flood waxed more feeble, and of lesse continuance then before: and for this cause it pleased God to comfort

our poore and weake Nature, with drinke more vigorous and meat more solide. And for the places and countries destitute of wine, he hath furnished them with corne and fruit fit to make (for their comfort, strength and batling) drinke of such force and strength, as will make them drunke, if they take too much of it. The Poet hath hereto fitly adioyned the description of a place fit for a Vineyard; and the manner of dressing it. Whereof looke what Plinie saith in his 17. booke, chap. 21. and 22. and Ch. Stephen at the chapter of the Vine in his Country Farme.
20.Now Noah waxing old. Some thinke that Ianus, whom the writers of old time haue made so famous, was the Patriarke Noe, and that they gaue him that name of Ianus, for the inuention of wine, called by the Hebrewes Iasin: but others hold that Ianus came of Iauan (the sonne of Iaphet, Gen. 10.) of whom descended the Greeks and Latines. Moreouer, they paint this Ianus with two faces, one before and another behind; to shew his wisdome; or rather to signifie, that he saw both the world that was before the Flood, and that which came after. All this, in processe of time hath beene dawbed vp with strange fables; as appeares by the writings of the Gentiles. That which the Poet here saith this one fit of Noes drunkennesse, is touched and couched in a word by Moses, Gen. 9.21. but our Author hath amplified it very artificially; describing in right kind a man, no man, when he is ouercharged with wine: of purpose to make vs abhorre and detest that vice, which ouerthrew the ancient Greeks and Romans; though since their time it is growne a custome, and (as may seeme by the strange debauchment and outrage of our dayes) now taken for a vertue. Among the works of S. Basil, that ancient Greeke Bishop, there is an Homilie against drunkennesse, and the strange behauiour of a drunkard; right so set downe in all points, as liere by the Poet. That which is reported of Caesar, that dying he couered himselfe with his garment, when Brutus, with the rest of that conspiracie, killed him in open Senate; is written by Plutarch in his liues. The drunken man neuer thinks of his shame, as Caesar did; for, during the fit, his reason is gone; which proues that a fit of drunkennesse is much more dangerous then death it selfe: what's then the habit, and continuall custome thereof; besides the daily and great offence giuen by these men, no men, to God and his Church? The comparisons here vsed, to shew the nature of a slanderer (taken from Plutarchs flatterer, etc.) are so fitly applied by the Poet to his purpose, that they need no further exposition.
21.Come (brothers) come. Moses saith (Gen. 9.22.) that Cham the father of Chanaan saw the nakednesse of his father, lying drunke in the tent (as ver. 21.) and told his two brethren without, and Sem and Iaphet tooke a garment, and laid it vpon their shoulders, and went backward and couered the nakednesse of their father; and their faces were fromward, and they saw not their fathers nakednesse. And this is the point which the Poet handles in this section.
22.Slept out the surfet was. It is recorded in the foresaid chapter also, that Noe awoke from his wine, end knew what his younger sonne had done vnto

him; he knew it either by some part of his memory confusedly retained in drunkennesse, or by renelation from God; except we should thinke rather that Sem and Iaphet told him; that he might reproue the foule impietie of their brother: and he is noted the younger, for aggrauation of the crime. Whereupon the Father said: Cursed be Canaan, a seruant of seruants shall he be to his brethren: and againe, Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and Canaan shall be his seruant: God shall enlarge Iaphet, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, and Canaan shall be his seruant. The Diuines propound here many questions to be considered; whereof these two are the chiefe.
1. Why Noe went here so far as to denounce that curse against his grandchild Canaan and that race.2. What is the meaning of these blessings vpon Sem and Iaphet. The Poet answers in a word, that Noe pronounced these curses and blessings by spirit of prophecie.
Forasmuch as God, in his infinite wisdome, when he had before humbled his poore seruant Noe, was pleased now to arme him againe with fatherly authoritie; wherewith hee might pronounce the iust and alway venerable sentences of his eternall decree. For in few words here haue we the state of the world and Gods Church, set downe by this great Patriarke; who could not haue spoken those things (so after verified in destruction of the Canaanites, and Gods extraordinarie fauour to the Israelites, and faithfull Gentiles) but by the Holy Ghost, to whom is alway present, euen that which is to come. For the rest, Moses compriseth all (after his manner) briefely; but with words so liuely and significant, as are easie to be vnderstood of all that weigh and reade them with reuerence and humilitie, and take helpe of the good Commentaries of Fathers both old and new.
23.O soule vice. He detesteth in most proper termes, and grauely inueigheth against drunkennesse, saying, that though it did no more hurt in the world, then impeach the reputation of this Patriarke, otherwise an example of vertue; it were to be hated aboue death. And further, in very few lines he presseth together what the ancient Authors, both holy and profane, haue said against drunkennesse. There are certaine eminent places of holy Scripture, which I need but quote vnto the Reader. See Prou. 20.1. and 21.17. and 23.20.29.30. etc. and 31.4. Esay 5.11. and 22. and 28.1. Hosea 4.11. Luk. 21.34. Rom. 13.13. and 1 Cor. 6.10. Gal. 5.21. Ephes. 5.18. Among the ancient Fathers, S. Chrysostome and S. Basil haue in diuers their Homilies very graue and expresly condemned this vice. And there is a whole Homilie against it in the first Tome of S. Basil, and the 80. of the fourth Tome of S. Chrysostome, vpon those words of S. Paul to Timothie, Modico vino vtere. See also what S. Austen writeth hereof to the holy Virgins, and in his fift booke vpon Gen. where he speaks of Lot. And what S. Ierome hath to Oceanus and Eustochium, vpon the first to Tim. the third chap. and to Titus. Among the works of the Heathen, the 84. Epistle of Seneca is worthy to be read. The Greeke and Latine Poets haue also infinite inuectiues against this vice, so beastly, nay condemned euen by nature it selfe in beasts. As for the examples here alledged by the Poet, of Clytus and

Pentheus, see Plutarch in the life of Alexander the Great, and Ouid in his third booke of Metamorphosis, toward the end: and apparent examples hath the holy Scripture of mischiefe ensuing vpon this wine-bibbing;

Not, Lot, Nabal, Ammon, Ela, Balthasar, and others. But the Histories of our time haue a thousand times worse, and more tragicall; which our after-beers will detest and wonder at.





BABILONE. The second Booke of Noe, called BABILON.



Preface representant la felicite des estats puplics gouuernez par bo^s and sages Princes, and le malheur des peuples assuicttis a vn tyran. Ce que le Poete propose proprement, afin de ce donner entree en lavie and esfaitz de Nembrot.
O QVE c'est vn grand heur de viure sous vn Prince,
Qui prefere a son bien le bien de sa pronince!
Qui fleau des vicieux, and des bons protectuer,
Ounre l'aureil au sage, and la ferme au flateur:
Qui de soy-mesme Roy chasse plustost le vices
Par ses honnestes moeurs, que par loix and supplices:
Qui est humble en son ame and graue par dehors:
Qui a l'amour de siens pour garde de son corps:
Qui le lustre emperle d'vn Scepre n'idolatre:
Et qui se cognoissant monte sur vn Theatre,
Ou pour Contrerolleur tout vn Monde le voit,
Ne fait ce qu'il luy plait, ains plustost ce qu'il doit.


Mais c'est bien vn Enfer de passer en seruage
Sous vn cruel Tyran tout le cours de son age:
D'vn Denis, qui se fait tondre auec vn tison,
D'vn Neron, qui remplit dinceste sa maison:
D'vn Chathuant, qui fuit le soleil des Dietes,
Estats, and parlemens; qui tient mesme suspectes
Les langues des priuez: qui pour ses doux esbats
Fait iouster ses vassaux, and nourrit leurs debats:
Qui n'a deuant ses yeux Honneur, Foy, ni Iustice:
Qui chaque iour erige office sur office:
Qui ne veut des sujets sages, doctes, puissans,
Ains couppe chaque iour les espics paroissans
Sur toute la maison: and pire qu'vne fere
Ne pardonne a son sang, non pas mesme a son frere.
Qui bien qu' enuironne d'espieux and coutelas,
Craint beaucoup plus de gens qu'il n' en effraye pas:
Fait gloire d'inuenter quelque subside estrange,

Et les siens insqu'aux os, Anthropophage, mange.


Imprime,
Priere a Dieu, bien accommo dee au propos precedent, and donnant entree au suyua^t.
o Roy duciel, dans le coeur de nos Roys
L'amour de leurs vassaux, and l'honneur de tes loyx.
Que si des courtizans l'enuenimee langage,
Ou les desbordemens familiers en nostre age
Y laise quelque traict qui sente son Nembrot,
Passe dessus ta plume, and l'efface bien tot:
Asin que pour Babel Solime se bastise,
Et que sous eux ma Muse en tous lieux retentise.





A preface representing the felicitie of common-wealths gouerned by good and wise Princes, and the distresse of people subiect to a Tyrant. Fitly fore placed of the Poet to lead him to the life and deeds of Nimred.
O What a blessed life doe men lead vnd'r a
Prince,
That seeks, before his own, the weal of his Prouince!
That punisheth the bad, and rids the good of wrong,
That entertaines the graue, and shuns the pleasing tongue,
That sou'raine of himselfe doth all vice ouer-awe
More by his honest life then punishment or law:
That being inward meeke, outward maiesticall,
Hath for his guard the loue of all his comminall.
That maketh not his God the bright-emperled Mace;
And knowing that he stands on stages highest place,
Where, to controule his workes, a world hath him in sight,
Commands not what him list; but rather what is right.
But sue a hell it is to suffer seruitude,
And daily beare the yoke of
Tyrant blood-embrude:
A Denis that for feare with brand himselfe yshau'd,
A Nero that his house with incest all deprau'd:
An Owle that e're auoids the light of gouernment,
Of Parlament and Peeres, that feares the prattlement
Of eu'ry priuate toong; that for his only game
His people sets at odds, and feeds their angers-flame.
That honour, faith and right, hath ne'r before his eyes:
That powling Offices doth euery day deuise;
That likes-not of the men best learned, wisest, strongest;
But, as in field of corne, doth euer crop the longest
And best-y flowred eares: That, worse then Tygre wood,
Without respect of kin sheds eu'n his brothers blood:
That, though he sensed be with sword and halberds aid,
Yet feareth many more, then he doth make afraid.
That boasteth to deuise a taxe before vnknone,

And Canibally gnaw'th his peopl' all to the bone.


A prayer to God, fitly arising of the words and matter aferegoing, and making way to the sequele.
Imprint (o king of Heau'n) within our Princes brests
Loue to their-people-ward, and reuerence of thine hests:
And where a courtly toong with venomous language,
Or oth'r enormities too-well knowne in this Age,
Shall taint a princely minde with Nimrods propertie,
Draw there thine iron pen, and rase it speedily.
That for proud Babels towre they may thy Sion reare,
And my Muse vnder them may chaunt it euery where.




1.Prince. Here is the liuely image of a good Prince set downe vnto vs in a few lines, borrowed of many good Authors both diuine and humane, that teach in their writings rules and examples notable for this purpose. Moses in the Law, Dauid in the 101. Psalme, doe declare vnto vs, the rules of dutie belonging vnto Gouernours: and they themselues, with all those the good Iudges and Kings that were among the people of God, serue for sure patterns and examples to all such as meane faithfully to discharge the like duties. Also Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, and Plutarch, with diuers others, for the instruction of those that came after them, haue set forth many godly precepts and examples. The commodities that arise out of euery one of these vertues here described (each one whereof requireth a large Commentarie) are infinite: and where there are now adaies such Princes in the world, their subiects may thinke themselues exceeding happy. For next after the sincere knowledge and worship of the true God, there is no greater happinesse in the world for vs to enioy, than to be gouerned by such vertuous personages as are here described: marke then the perfect image of the good Prince.
2.Tyrant. To giue the better glosse to the former picture, another cleane contrary, and maruellous fearefull to behold, he setteth here before our eyes; the picture of a Tyrant that liueth in mistrust of the whole world, as did Dionysius the elder tyrant of Sicilie, of whom we reade among the liues of Platarch. He was so mistrustfull, that for feare of his Barbers, he made his daughters bring him a burning cole to sindge his haire withall. More than this, a Tyrant defileth himselfe with incests, whoredomes, adulteries, and the sinne of Sodom, and therewith infecteth his whole Court and Country: as that filthy Nero did, whose life is written by Suetonius, Tacitus, and others, reciting therein many horrible and shamefull cases. Againe, the Tyrant will be subiect vnto no law, nor order whatsoeuer; he ouerthroweth the ground lawes and pillars of the state: or if he seeme willing to submit himselfe thereunto, it is to further himselfe so much the more in the vndermining, by diuers hid practises, and destroying all such as might any way resist, or make head against him. Hence commeth it to passe, that he may in no wise abide any inquisition or examination to be

made of his vnworthy and vile outrages, but vaunteth of the iniurie that priuate men suffer, and discredit they are driuen vnto by meanes of his oppression. To maintaine his state the better, he entertaineth and vpholdeth all manner of hurlyburlies, factions, quariels, and ciuill wars: he fauoureth ruffians, bawds, slatterers, lyers, light and loose persons, murderers, impoysoners, Epicures, Atheists, and such as are defiled with all manner of vice and wickednesse. He promiseth mountaines, performeth nothing: glorieth to breake oath and promise, and to deceiue and surprise both small and great by faire words, sweet speech, humble and courteous countenance, when his heart imagineth villanie and treason to his country. He neuer forbeareth any thing, he neuer pardoneth any man, nourisheth and fatteth himselfe with blood and fire: all peaceable and vertuous persons he disgraceth and ouerthroweth, supporting and aduancing all peace-breakers, robbers, and wicked liuers: he taketh bribes for all offices, and oppresseth the people with the vnbrideled number of catchpole-officers, that maintaine themselues only by grating vpon others: his subiects he would haue liue all dayes of their life in ignorance: painfull, wise and learned men, and those that haue well to take vnto, because they need the lesse to depend on him, or else sell themselues for his fauour, he chaseth far from him, and maketh beholding vnto him, none but fooles, idiots, iesters, anticks, wranglers, and such copes-mates as of naught worth are suddenly start vp, that wholly depend vpon him, and reuell in his cofers, not giuing him (as they cannot) any good counsell for the commonwealth; they care not which end thereof goe forward: but all their care and counsell is for their priuate gaine, which serues to no better vse, than to intice and draw them on daily to carelesse and wicked liuing. Further yet, so far is he from regarding or placing neere about him men of worth and good qualities, that on the contrary, to the imitation of Tarquinius surnamed the proud (whose storie Liuie writeth in the first booke of his second Decade, concerning the Poppie heads he broke downe with his staffe, to teach his sonne by a dumbe shew, that he should rid out of the way all the Peeres of the Citie, and forsake (as another saith) fifty frogs to catch one Sammon) he breaketh downe the highest cares of corne:

that is, he causeth all those to be put to death, that might any wayes hinder his wicked intents. What should I say more? Such a cursed creature, without God, without conscience, worse than any wilde beast, spareth neither kith nor kin, but either by sword or poyson maketh away the very neerest of all his blood, that he may raigne alone, if it were possible. But notwithstanding the many bands of his guard, he standeth in feare of euery man, and is despised, mocked, and detested of all. For why? Besides

that is aforesaid, he glorieth and taketh delight to deuise new subsidies, imposts, and tributes, whereby the comminaltie may be impouerished, and held in bondage, and so in steed of Homers people-feeder, he becommeth a people-eater. Of this image of a tyrant, there are examples aboue number found, both in ancient and late writers of Church histories, and others: So I returne to the Poet.






Nen brot petit sils de Cham, des son enfance veut dominer, and est l'image des ambitieux tyrans. Ses exercices, asin de se rendre maistre redoutable par succession de temps.
Nembrot n'a point encor atteiut le douziesme an
Qeentre ceux de son age il tranche du Tyran:
Paroit sur ses esgaux, and sous si bon augure
Iette les fondemens de sa grandeur future:
Et portant dans sa main pour Sceptres des Roseaux:
Fait son aprentissage entre les pastoreanx.
Puis sachant que celuy qui genereux aspire
A l'heur imagine d'vn redoutable empire,
Doit passer enbeaux faicts le vulgaire testu,
Ou porter pour le moins le masque de vertu:
Il ne passe la nuict sous vne molle plume,
Le iour dedans vn poisle: ains, ieune, s'accoustume
Au bon and mauuais temps: ayant, ambitieux,
Pour cheuet vn rocher, and pour rideau les Cieux.
Les ares sons sesiouets, la sucur ses delices,
Les Moineaux ses Autours: ses cher Turquets, let lices:
Et ses mets plus friands, d'vn bean Cheureul la chair,
Que tremblant il n'a point acheue d'escorcher.


Continuation des labcurieux exercices de Nembrot.
Quelque-sois il s'esbat a vaincre d'vne haleine
L'asprete d'vn rother qui domine vne plaine:
A fendre coutremont vn torrent enrage,
Qui d'Hyades repeucent ponts a rauage,
Et d'vn flot bondissant court a bride auall^e
Atran^rs les rochers a'vne estroite vallee:
A r'atraper le traict eschappe de sa main:
Aprendre a belle course ou la Biche ou le Dain.


Il chasse aux bestes pour chasser puis ap^es aux hommes.
Mais ayant ia passe cinq lustres de son age,
Et sentaint, orgueilleux, ses norss and son courage
Digne d'vn Mars plus fier: s'il scait enquelque part
Vu grand Tigre, vn Lyon, vn Ours, vn Leopart,

Ill' attaque sans peur, le veine, l'assomme, and plante
Es lieux plus esleuez sa de spouille sanglante.


Lors le peuple, qui void par ses guerrieres mains
Les chemins affranchis d'assassins inhumains,
D'horrible hurlemens les forests solitaires,
Et les troupeaux de crainte: ayme ce domte-feres,
Cest Hercul chasse-mal: luy monstre safaueur,
Et l'appelle par tout son Pere, and son Sauueur.


Nembrot par les cheueux empoignant la fortune,
Et battant le fer chaut, flatte, presse, importune
Ore l'vn, ore l'autre: and hastant son bon heur,
De veneur d'animaux se sait d'homme veneur.
Car comme il employoit enses premier chasses
Les glus, les trebuchets, les pipeaux, les tirasses:
Et sur la fin encor, contre les plus hagards,
Les masses, les espieux, les fleches and les dards,
Il gaigne quelques-vns par des belles promesses
Les autres par presens les autres par rudesses:
Et rompant, furieux, les liens d'equite,
Au lieu qu'auparauant le chef de chaque race
La commandoit apart, sans que la ieune audace
D'vn esprit fretillant, brouillon, ambitieux,
Mist, comme ore, sa faux en la moissons des vieux.





3.Nimrods first studie and exercise, to get the soueraigntie of the people, surthered by nature.

Scarse is the sonne of Chus now waxen twelue yeere old,
But straight ou'r all his Peeres he playes the Tyrant bold.
He ouer-growes them all, and of his power to come
Vpon a trim foreshow he layes the ground with some:
And in his childish hand for scepter bearing reeds
Among the shephard-swaines beginn'th his prentise-deeds.
Then knowing that the man, whose courage doth aspire
Vnto the deemed blisse of an awfull Empire,
Must passe in braue exploits the doltish vulgar sort,
Or else by seeming good obtaine a good report;
He wasteth not the night in downie leather-bed,
Nor yet the day in shade; but, young, accustomed
Himselfe to good and ill, and made ambitiouslie
His pillowes of a rocke, his curtaines of the skie.
To toyle is his delight, to shoot, his chiefest game,
His baby-play the lysts, his hawk some Sparrow tame:
His most delicious meat the flesh of tender Kid
Which trembleth yet, and scarse is out of skin yslid.


The continuance of his labours to obtaine the peoples sauour.
Sometime he sports himselfe to conquer with a breath
Some craggy rocks ascent that ouerpeers the heath;
Or else some raging flood against the streame diuide,
That, swolne with raine, hath drou'n a hundred brigs aside,
And with a bounding course vnbridled gallops fast
All ouerthwart the stones in narrow valley cast:
Or else straight aft'r his throw to catch againe his dart,
Or else by footmanship to take the Hinde or Hart.


He chaseth beasts first and afterward men.
Thus till his twentith yeare his exercise continues,
Then vnderstanding well his manly minde and sinewes
May fit some great'r attempt, if he know'th any where
A Leopard, a Tyg'r, a Lion, or a Beare,

He stoutly goes t'encount'r, and knocks him downe with mace,
And plants the goary spoiles in most apparant place.


The people then that see by his all-conquering hands
The wayes enfranchised, and all the waster lands
Rid of such roaring theeues, and feeding now at ease
Their fearfull flocks and heards; they loue this Hercules,
This rid-ill monster-mast'r, and shew him speciall fauour,
And call him euermore their fath'r and eu'n their sauiour.


He leaueth his former chase for a better prey.
Here Nimrod by the locks hand-fasting his good fortune,
And striking th'iron hot, doth flatter, presse, importune
Now one and then anoth'r, and hasting to his blisse,
Before that hunted beasts, now of men hunter is.
For as he did imploy about his prey before
The grins, hare-pipes, and traps, and all the lymiestore;
Yea furthermore, at need for stoutest had his art,
The heauy club, the shaft, the sharpe sword and the dart:
So some he wins by gift, and others by hard dealing:
And breaking all in rage the bonds of equitie,
Of that renforcing world vsurps the royaltie.
Whereas in time before the chiefe of each houshold
The same did rule apart; nor did the young man bold,
Aspiring, gyddie-braind, vpon a wanton braue
His sickle thrust, as now, int'haruest of the graue.




3.Scarce is. The posteritie of Noe being much increased, as Moses reckoneth in the 10. chapter of Genesis, they began to spread abroad and take seuerall habitations, but not far one from another so soone after the Flood. Among other the sonnes of Cham, is numbred Cus the father of Nimrod, of whom the historie maketh mention, that he began to be great on the earth, and was a mighty hunter before the Almighty, and that the beginning of his raigne was Babel, Erech, Archad, and Calnch, in the land of Sennaar. Vpon this place are giuen two diuers expositions: The first is, of some that hold that Nimred was the first after the Flood that gaue any meet forme of publike gouernment, and by the consent of many families, considering his wisdome and valour, was accepted for master and gouernour, to rule and order many housholds together: by reason whereof (say they) he is called a strong hunter before the Lord: and namely, for that he repressed, by maine force, the wicked and vnruly, who, like sauage beasts, preied vpon the life of man. But the greater part

of Expositors take this otherwise, and hold, that Nimrod by force and diuers subtleties (here finely set downe by the Poet) got the supremacie; and that this power ascribed vnto him, was not truly Roy all lawfull, but a power vsurped by force, a hunters power, where with he surprised men, and raigning ouer them cruelly, handled them as if they were beasts, and that before the Lord, which is as much to say, as in despite of God, who had established a gentle rule and gouernment among the families. This second exposition is the more certaine; whether we consider the race of Nimrod, or the proper meaning and sequele of the words of the text, or the buildings of Nimrod, or what successe his proud attempt had. The Poet relying on this opinion, hath further followed in the description of the youth, and exercises of this first Tyrant that was in the second world, such things as were likely to be, and that with such a grace, as in a discourse is requisite, that out of the holy Scripture hath so narrow foundation, and in other bookes is, with many fables and names vncertaine, darkned.






Dessus le throne assis,
Domination tyrannique de Nembrot.
violent, il exerce
Cent mille cruautez: pesle-mesle renuerse
Droit humain, and diuin: braue le tout-puissant,
Luy porte iusqu'au nez son Scepre fleurissant.
Ses artifices pour se maintenir.
Et de peur qu'a la sin le peuple aise ne pense
Asecouer sou ioug, il le met en despense:
Espuise sa richesse, and occupe ces bras
A bastir vne Tour, ou plustost vn Atlas.
C'est trop,
Sous couleur d'esleuer vn bastiment contre le deluge, il veut affermir sa tyrannie.
dit-il, vescu en bestes passageres:
Quittons ces toicts roulans, ces tentes voyageres:
Massonnons vn Palais, quifrappe, ambitieux,
Les abismes du pied, de la teste les cieux:
Asyle inuiolable, and sacre-sainct refuge
Contre l'ire desbord a'vn rauageur Deluge.
Sus fondons vne ville, and passons la dedans
Encorps and sous vn Roy le reste de nos ans:
De peur que diuisez en pauillons and Princes,
Nous ne soyons espars par toutes les prouinces,
Que la lampe du iour visite de son cours,
Sans nous pouuoir donner ni conseil, ni secours.
Que si l'ardent tison d'vn intestine guerre,
Ou quelque autre mal-heur nous espand sur la terre,
Au moins frere laissons pour jamais engrauez
Nos beaux noms dans ces murs iusqu'au Pole esleuez.


Comme vn foible Vulcan,
Comparaison propre, monstrant combien grande efficace ont les desseins des tyrans, fleaux de la vengeans de Dieu sur les peuples.
que la troupe frilleuse
Des pasteurs laisse choir dans loree fueilleuse
D'vne vaste forest, se tient quoy quelque temps,
Esleuant les nuaux fumeusement flottant
Sur vn humble buisson, puis ayde par Zephyre
Fait voye rougissant aux efforts de son ire,
Monte du bas hallier au slairant Aubespin
De l'Aubespiu au Chesne and du Chesne au Sapin,
Gaigne tousiours pays, en courant serenforce,
Et ne laisse Dryade en sa natale escorce:
Ainsi ce doux propos premierement issu
De deux ou trois mignons, fauorable, est receu
Des esprits remuants: puis de main en main passe

Iusqu'au plus malotru du confus populace,
Qui desireux de voir parfaite ceste Tour,
En mestier diuise, trauaille nuict and iour.


Le peuple execute le desir de Nembrot, and s'employ a bastir sa prison and le nid de la tyrannie.
Les vns d'vn fer trenchant font trebucher les Presnes
Les Aunes bazardeux, and les durables Chesnes:
Degradent les forests, and monstrent au Soleil
Des Champs, qu'onque il n'auoit esclaire de son oeil.


As-tu veu quelque-fois vne ville exposee
Au sac a'vn cam vaineucur? Le pleur and la risee
Bruyent pesle-meslez. Qui charrie, qui prent,
Qui traine, qui conduit. Le Soldat insolent
Ne treune lieu prou seur, ni serreur assez forte,
Et la ville en vn iour fuit toute par sa porte.
Ainsi ces charpentiers pillent en vn moment
Des collines d'Assur le fucilleux ornement:
D'vne ombrageuse horreure despouillent les montaignes,
Et moissonnent, bouillants, les rameuses campagnes,
Les chars and les mulets s'entre-choquent, espais:
Et l'essieu sl^chisant gemit dessous le fais.


Viue description d'vn peuple embeso^gne a quelque gia^d besongne.
Ici pour dur ciment nuict and iour on amasse
Des estangs bitumeux l'eau gluantement grasse.
Le Tuillier cuit ici dans ses fourneaux fumants
Enbrique les poussiere. Iciles fondemens
Insqu'aux enfers on creuse: and les impures ames
Reuoyent contre espoir du beau soleilles flammes.
Tout le ciel retentit au dur son des marteaux,
Et les poissons du Tygre en tremblent sous les coux.
De tonr and de longuer les murs rougeastres croissent,
Leur ombre s'est end loin, Ia de loin ils paroissent.
Tout bouillonne d'ouuriers: and les foibles humains
Pensent au premier iour toucher le ciel des mains.


Quoy voyant l'Eternel,
Dieu courrouce de l'audacieuse entreprise de Nembrot and des sie^s, conclut de ro^pre les desseins, en confondant leur langage.
renfrongne son visage,
Et d'vn son qui grondant roule comme vn orage
Par les champs nuageux, desracine les monts,
Et fait crouler du ciel les immobiles gonds.
Voyez, dit-il, ces Nains, voyez ceste racaille,
Ces fils de la poussiere. O la belle muraille!

O l'imprenable Tour! O que cefort est seur
Contre tant de canons braquez par ma fureur!
Ie leur auois iure que la terre feconde
Ne craindroit desor mais la cholere de l'onde:
Ils se font vn rempart. Ie voulois qu'espandus
Ils peuplassent le Monde, and les voicy rendus
Prisonniers en vn parc. Ie desirois seul estre
Leur loy, leur protecteur, leur pasteur, and leur maistre:
Ils choisissent pour Prince vn voleur inhumain,
Vn Tyran, qui veut faire a leur despen sa main:
Qui despite mon bras: and qui, plein de branade,
A ma saincte maison presente l'escalade.
Sus, rompons leur dessein: and puis qu'vnis de voix
Aussi bien que de sang, de vouloir, and de loix,
Ils s'obstinent au mal: and d'vn hardi langage
S'animent, sorcenez, nuict and iour a louurage:
Mettons vn enrayoir aleur courant effort:
Frappons les vistement d'vnesprit de discord:
Confondons leurs parole: and faisons que le pere
Soit barbare a son fils, and sourd le frere au frere.


Execution de la sentence de Dieu, qui conf^nd le langage des bastisseurs de la tour and de la cite, qui a cause de ce sut appellee Babel. Comparaison representant le son consus de ceux qui en diuers langages parlent les vos aux autres. Representatio^ de la confusion de ces bastisseurs.
Cela dit, tout soudain s'espand confusement
Vnie nescay quel bruit par tout le bastiment:
Vn tintemarre tel, qu' on oit parmi la bande
Des paisans, que Denys de son Thyrse commande.
L'vn parle entre les deats, l'autre parle du nez,
L'autre forme au gosier ses mots mal-ordonnez:
L'vn hurle, l'autre sisle, and lautre encore begaye.
Chacun a son iargon: chac un en vain essaye
A trouner les accents, and termes bien-aymez,
Dans le berceau tremblant auec le laict humez.


Leue toy du matin and tandis que l'Aurore
D'vn clair griuolement l'huis d'vn beau iour decore,
Escoute patient les discordantes voix
De tant de chantres peints, qui donnent dans vn bois
L'aubade aleurs amours, and chacun ensa langue
Perche sur vn rameau, prononce sa harangue:
Et lors tu conprendras quel meslange de sons

^esle-mesle couroit par-my tant de macons.


Porte-moy crie l'v^^ porte-moy la truelle:
On luy porte vn marteau. Venez-ca, qu'on ciselle,
Dit l'autre, c'este tuille: adonc vn Chesne on fend.
Sus, qu'on tende ce cable: alors on le destend.
Planchez cost eschasaut: on le iette parterre.
Baillez-moy le vniueau on luy baille l'esquierre.
On crie, on se tourmente, on fait signes en vain.
Ce que l'vn a ia fait, lautre desfait soudain.
Les confus hurlemens les mettent hors d'haleine.
Tant plus chacun trauaille, and moins paroist sapeine.


Autre elegante comparaison monstra^t qu'il n'y a conseil, industrie force, diligence, ni multitude, qui puisse resister a Dieu.
Bref, comme les macons, qui bastissent soigneux
Dedans le bas courant d'vn fleuue rauineux
Les haut spiliers d'vn pont: voyant des monts descendre
Cent torrents tous nouueaux, and ia loin loin s'espandre
Le flot qui hait ce ioug, quittent soudainement,
Fuyans deca dela, ce beau commencement:
Tout ainsi ces ouuriers, voyans venir l'orage
De la fur^ur de Dieu, perdent force and courage:
Laissent laleur besongne: and d'vn courrouce bras
Iettent regles, marteaux, plombs, and niueaux en bas.





4.
Now he enthroned is,
The tyrannous gouernment of Nimrod, and his froud attempt.
he bendeth all his thought
To blood and crueltie, profanely sets at naught
The lawes of God and man, out-braues th'Almighty king,
And beardeth him (as 'twere) with scepter flourishing.
And lest the peopl' at length, when ease had bred their pride,
Should aime to cast his yoke he keeps them occupyde:
He lauisheth his wealth, to make them labour still
In building of a towne; nay rath'r an Atlas hill.


We liue too long (quoth he) in brutish wandering;
Now leaue we roaguing tents, our houses wayfaring;
And let's a palace build that stately may be ioynt
In Base vnto the deepe, and vnto heau'n in poynt.


A priuiledged fort against another flood:
And there incorporate liue vnd'r a royall blood.


Lest, if we part in tents with many guides, we run
Asunder, void of help, as far as roules the Sun.


And in case burning coles of at-home-bred sedition,
Or what mishap so-er'e shall driue vs to diuision:
Yet (brothers) let vs leaue, as high as heau'nly flames,
Vpon this Towre engrau'n our euerlasting names.


5.
As fire by shepherds left amidst the dry-leafe woods,
At first is hid, or makes but only smoakie floods


Among the lower shrubs, and then with help of winds
A way by flaming force to further mischiefe finds;
Vnto the bloomy thorne from th'humble shrub it stirres,
From Thorne to Oke, from Oke vnto the tallest Firres;
And, euer gaining ground, runs faster narre the marke,
And leaueth not a nymph within her natiue barke:
Right so this pleasing speech when first it had been grac'd.
By fawning Fauourites, of others 'twas embrac'd;
Among the gyddie-braines then goes from hand to hand

Vnto the baser sort of people through the land;
Who greatly bent to see the famous tower made,
Doe labour day and night in all and euery trade.


Some trip the speare-wood Ash, with sharp-edg'd axes stroke,
And some the sailing Elme, and some th'enduring Oke;
So they degrade the woods and shew vnto the Sunne
The ground where his bright eye before had neuer shone.


Who euer did behold some forraine armie sacke
A citie vanquished? ther's griefe and ioy, no lacke,
Together hurly-burld; he carts, and he lays-hold,
He drags by force, he leads; and there the souldier bold,
Can finde no place too sure, nor yet no locke too strong,
The whole towne in a day forth at the gates doth throng.
So quickly do these men pull-off with one assent
From those Assyrian hills the shaking ornament:
The wildernesse of shade they take from off the rocks,
And sheare off albeswat the leuell countries locks:
The waynes and yoked Mules scarse one by the other wend;
A liuely description of a people, busied about a great worke.
The groaning axeltrees with load surcharged bend.
Behold here one for mort'r is day and night abruing
Of some thicke-slimic poole the water fatly gluing.
And here the Tyler bakes within his smoakie kell
His clay to stone; and here one hollows downe to hell
So deep foundations, that many a damned Spright
Aggazeth once againe the Sunnes vnhoped light.
Hea^'n ecchoes out the sound of their mauls clitter-clatters,
And Tigris feeles his fish all trembling vnd'r his waters.
The ruddy-colourd walls in height and compasse grow,
They far-off cast a shade, they far-off make a show.
The world's all on toile, and men borne all to die
God being angry with the bold enterprise of Nimrod and his folowers, determineth to breake of their enterprise, by confounding their language.
Thinke at the first daies worke their hand shall reach the skie.


6.
Hereat began th'Lord to sowre his countenance,
And with dread thu^ders sound that storm-wise wont to glance
Athwart the clowdie racks, that hills wont ouerthrow
And make heau'ns steddy gates flash often too and fro,
See see (quoth he) these dwarfes, see this same rascall people,
These children of the dust. O what a goodly steeple,

What mighty walls they build! Is this the Cittadell,
So recklesse of my shot that shakes the gates of Hell?
I sware an oath to them henceforth the fruitfull ground
Should neuer stand in feare of waters breaking bound:
They doubting fence themselues; I would by their extent
Haue peopled all the world, they by themselues are pent
In prison-walls of brick: I would haue beene for euer
Their master, their defence, their shepherd, their law-giuer;
And they haue chose for King a sauage Liue-by-spoile,
A Tyrant seeking gaine by their great losse and toile;
Who doth my force despise and with vaine-glory swone
Attempts to scale the walls of my most holy throne.
Come let's defeat their drift, and sith the bond of tong,
Of blood, of will, of law, doth egge on all day long,
And hearten them in sin; to stop their hastie intent,


Among them let vs send the Spirit of dissent;
Their language to confound, to make, both one and other,
The father strange to sonne, the brother deafe to brother.


7.The execution of Gods sentence.

Thus had he said, and straight confusedly there went
I know not what a brute throughout the buyldiment,
None other like (I guesse) then drunken peasants make
Where Bacchus doth his launce with Ivy garland shake.
One doth his language too the, another nose his note,
Another frames his words vnseemly through the throte;
One howleth, one doth hisse, another stuttereth;
Each hath his babbl', and each in vaine endeuoureth
To finde those loued termes, and tunes before exprest,
That in their cradle-bands they drew from mothers brest.
Goe get thee vp betimes; and, while the morning gay
A sit comparison.
With rainbow-glosse bedecks the portaile of the day,
Giue eare a while and marke the disagreeing moods
Of winged quiristers that sing amid the woods
Good-morrow to their loues; where each one in his fashion
Is pearched on a bough and chaunteth his Oration:
Then shalt thou vnderstand what mingle-mangle of sounds

Confusedly was heard among the Mason-lounds.


A Trowell ho, saith one; his mate a beetl'him heaues:
Cut me, saith he, this stone; and he some timber cleaues.
Come ho, corne ho, saith one, and winde me vp this rope;
Then one vnwinding striues to giue it all the scope.
This scaffold bourd, saith one; one makes it downe to fare:
Giue me the line, saith one; and one giues him the square.
He shouts, he signes in vaine, and he with anger boyles;
And looke what one hath made forth with another spoiles,
VVith such confused cries in vaine they spend their winde;
And all the more they chafe, the lesse is knowne their minde.


At length as men that stand an arched bridge to build,
In riuers channell deepe that wont surround the field,
Another excellent comparison declaring how neither counsell, art, force, diligence, nor multitude, is able to resist God.
And sodainly behold how vnexpected raine
Hath sent a hundred floods, that downhill stretch amaine
Their yoake-refusing waues; they leaue with one aduise
(Some hasting here, some there) their carnest enterprise:
So when these Architects perceiu'd the stormy smart
Of Gods displeasure come, they straight were out of heart.
And there they ceas'd their work and with hands malecontent,
Rules, mallets, plomets, lines, all downe the towre they sent.




4.Now he enthroned is. This is the exposition of the words, mightie hunter before the Lord: to wit, that Nimred, Chams nephew, did proudly lift himselfe vp against God and man. His buildings, and the beginning of his raigne could not haue beene such, without offering violence to the peace and libertie of diuers families ouer whom hee bare rule: and there is no shew to the contrary, but that by diuers practises from time to time he got the Soueraigntie. The holy Scripture oftentimes by the names of hunters and chasers, meaneth God, enemies, and the persecutours of his Church, Psa' 91. and 124. Ezech. 32. Lament. 3. The seuentie Interpreters translate the Hebrue text after this manner: This Nimrod began to be a Giant on the earth, and a huntesman, or leader of hounds before the Lord God. By the hounds of Nimrod may be vnderstood his guards, and the fauourers of his tyrannie. Moses called him (...) Gi^or isaid, that is, Iustie, strong, or great and mightie chaser. Which noteth not only the stature and height of bodie, but also might and authoritie ioyned with violence, in all those that want the feare of God. Now although Moses in the cleuenth Chapter of Genesis, where he speaketh of the Citie and Tower of Babel, make no mention of Nimrod, yet hath the Poet aptly gathered out of the Chapter aforegoing, that Nimrod was the author and promoter of

those buildings; in as much as Babel is called the beginning of his raigne, who could not any waies raigne without some habitations for himselfe and his subiects, and considering that Moses in the selfe-same place affirm^th, that the Cities founded by Nimrod, were in the countrey of Sennaar, and that in the 12. verse of the 11. Chapter he saith, that these builders of Babel dwelt on a plaine in the countrey of Sennaar: by good reason the inuention and beginning thereof is here ascribed to Nimrod, who by this meanes sought to set his state on foot. Also this Monarchie of Babylon, was one of the first, and with it that of Niniuie, as may be gathered out of the words of Moses. But the more particular discourse of these matters, and diuers other questions concerning Nimrod and his outrages, require a larger commentatie.
5.Like as the Vulcan weake. The Poet saith, that as a small deale of fire let fall by some Shepherds among the drie leaues of a great Forrest, setting it selfe, and hatching (as it were) the heat a while, at length with helpe of the wind, groweth to so great a flame, that it taketh the whole Forrest, and leaueth not a Driad, that is, not a tree in his proper or naturall barke: So the words first vttered by Nimrod, then blowne with the bellowes of his Minions and fauourites set the hearts of the people on fire, that he soone

obtained his purpose. This is it that Moses noteth in the eleuenth Chapter of Genesis, the third and fourth verses, They said one to another (the chiefe men hauing put it in their heads) Come, let vs make bricke, and burne in well in the fire: so had they bricke in stead of stone, and s^^me had they in stead of morter. Then said they, Goe, let vs build vs a Citie, and a Tower, whose top may reach vnto the heauens, that we may get vs a name, lest we be scattered vpon the whole earth. The Poet in his verse discourseth vpon this deuise. It is thought that this proud building was begun about an hundred and fiftie yeares after the Floud. The good Patriarch Noe, that liued yet long time after, saw his posteritie confounded and scattered: for so it was the Lords will to exercise the patient faith of his seruant, to whom in recompence he shewed the effect of his blessings in the family of Sem, where still remained the Hebrew tongue, together with the doctrine and discipline of the true Church. Now out of this history of Moses touching the building of the Towne, and the confusion of the builders, is sprong (as it seemeth) the fabulous discourse of the Poets, set downe by Ouid in his first booke of Metamorphosis, touching the Giants that heaped hilles one vpon another to scale heauen, and dispossesse Iupiter of his throne. Thus hath Satan endeuoured to falsifie the truth of sacred historie. Well, this arrogant building sheweth vs how vaine are the imaginations of worldly men; namely, to set at naught the true renowne of heauenly life, and seeke after the false of earth. Carnall men haue no care at all to worship and reuerence the name of the true God, they regard only to be accounted-of themselues, and so to write their names in the dust. Against the attempts of the men of Babel, and all their successours, let vs oppose these sentences, the 18. and 21. of Prouerbs. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, thither shall the iust repaire and be exalted. There is no wisdome, nor vnderstanding, nor force, can preuaile against the Lord: and that which is written Psal. the 127. Except the Lord doe build the house, the builders labour but in vaine.
6.God seeing this: Moses in the 5. and 6. verses of the 11. chapter saith: Then the Lord came downe to see the Citie, and Towre, which the sonnes of men had built. And the Lord said, Behold the people is one, and they all haue one language, and this they begin to doe, neither can they now bee stopped from whatsoeuer they haue imagined to doe: come on, let vs goe downe and there confound their language, that they vnderstand not one another. Then he addeth the execution of the sentence, saying; So the Lord scattered them from thence vpon all the earth, and they left off to build the Citie. Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth, and scattered them from thence ouer all the world. God, that is all in all, neuer changeth his place, he goeth neither vpward nor downward, but the Scripture saith, hee goeth downe then when he worketh any thing on earth, which falling out beyond and against the ordinary course of nature, witnesseth his particular presence. Vnder these few words of Moses, a many things are to be considered: chiefly, he noteth the great sinnes of the builders, in that he bringeth in the Lord, iudge of the whole world, vouchsafing to bow downe his eyes particularly vpon

that foolish people. For it is not without cause that the great God of heauen and earth should arise from his throne, and (if I durst so say) leaue the palace of his glory to come and view these durt-dawbers or morter-makers By this manner of speech Moses sheweth, and giueth vs to vnderstand, that, long time before, these Babylonians had built in their hearts most wonderfull high and stately towers, and that long agoe they had bak'd in the sire of their concupiscence some maruellous brickes: to wit, they had much counsailed one with another, and discoursed of meanes to get renowme, and found no better way to attaine their purpose, then to raise a tower vp to the heauens, to rauish with astonishment all those that should behold it. So Moses saith that this pride and froward selfe trust deserued a grieuous punishment: but as God is perfectly iust, so layeth he vpon the builders a chastisement proportionable vnto their offence.
7.Thus had he said and straight. In God it is all one to will and to doe: And further he sendeth not lightning, winde, nor tempest against the tower: but contenteth himselfe to strike the proud and puffed-vp braines of the builders: and so the building founded vpon their folly was ouerthrowne by their foolish iangling that God mingled with their language; and the vainglorious masons insteed of their imagined renowne, haue gotten themselues euerlasting shame. Who would haue thought that God had had so ready such kinde of rods to punish mankinde withall? But let the Reader consider whether the world at this day be not full of Babel-towers. Marke what a number of men doe in euery kinde of vocation. Sith I doe not take vpon mee but to write bare Annotations, I leaue it to the Readers consideration, who may see, now more then euer, that the world continueth the building of Babel: that is, men madly gainset their owne wisedome and power against the wisedome and power of God; who treading as it were with woollen feet, and stealing on softly, is able with an arme of Iron to surprise and seize vpon these builders, and turne by diuers meanes their vaine purposes and weake endeuours to naught. The Poet hath vsed many very sit comparisons to represent the confusion of these workmen. The first is taken from that which wo see fall out in a great rabblement of Pesants, ouerruled by the Launce or Mace of Bacchus: that is, such as haue the wine in their heads, and are drunken: for among such people is commonly heard a strange confused noise and iangling, as the Church-ales and Wakes, and other such passe-times doe now and then declare. The second is taken from the chirping of Birds, in voice and song diuers. The third from Masons, constrained by the sodaine rage of a land-flood, to leaue off the begun worke of a Bridge. And here is a liuely description of Gods iudgements, together with their degrees and consequences: namely, in the confusion of vnderstanding first, then of speech, and lastly of the whole company; which being vnable longer to continue, was quickly so scattered, that (as Moses saith) they ceased to build the Citie.






O superbe reuolte,
Detestation de l'audace de Nembrot and des siens, cause de la desunion and barbarie des peuples.
o traistre felonnie,
Voy de quelle facon l'Eternel t' apuine
Par cebigarrement! Las! se langage doux,
Sainct lien des citez, puissant frein de courroux,
Mastic de l'amitie, iadis vni, s'esgare
Et cent ruisseaux taris. Cest or richement rare,
Dompte-orgueil, charme-soin, traine-peuple, emble-coeur
Mesle change de son, de poids, and de couleur.
Ce don se sophistique, and du Nort insqu'au More
La cheute de Babel confuse bruit encore.


Le Finlandois eust peu visiter l'Africain,
L' Indien l'espagnol,
Incommoditez causees par la confusion des langues aux bastiment de Babel.
l'Anglois l'Amiricain,
Sans aucun interprete. Auiourd'huy le riuage,
Qui borne nostre bourg, borne nostre langage:
Et sortant quatre pas hors de nostre maison:
Muets, las! nous perdons l'outil de la raison:
Commoditez contraires.
Ou bien si nous parlons an peuple moins estranges,
C'est par bouche empruntee, ou par gestes estranges.


Sans maistre and sans trauail, en sucant le laict dout,
Nous apprenions la langue entendue de tous:
Et les sept ans passez, sur la poudre de verre
Nous commencions tirer la rondeur de la terre,
Partir, multiplier: and montant d'art en art,
Nous paruenions bien tost an sommet du rempart,
Ou l'Encyclopedie en signe de victoire
Couronne ses mignons d'vne eternelle gloire.


Misere des ho^mes depuis la confusion des langues apres la cognoissance desquelles ils vieillessent, and le plus fouuent n'out cognoissance que des mots.
Ore tousiours-enfans nous vieillissons apres
La langue des Romains, de Hebrieux, and des Grocs.
Nous n'auons que babil: and pour la cognoissance
Des secrets de Nature, ou de l'Vnique essence,
Qui donne essence a tout, nous vacquons sans repos
Aplier bien vn Verbe, a trouuer de beaux mots:
A mettre au trebuchet les syllabes and lettres:
Et pendons, ia cheuus, de la bouche des maistres
Qui nous monstrent a lire: and nous mettent en main
Vn petit Alphabet, au lieu du droict Romain,
Des oeuures d'Hipocrate, and du volume encore,
Ou Dieu se communique an lecteur qui l'adore.



Et que diray-ie plus?
La langue Hebraique en la bouche de tous anant la confusion des langues.
On disoit en tout lieu
L'idiome sacre, le langage de Dieu:
Langage qui parfait, n'a point de caractere,
Qui ne soit enrichi de quelque grand mystere.
M^is depuis cest orgueil chasque peuple vse a part
D'vn iargon corrompu, effemine, bastard,
Qui chaque iour ce change: and, perdant salumiere,
Ne retient presque rien de la langue premire.


Iadis les Phrygiens,
Les Phrygiens and Egyptiens de batent de l'anciennete de leurs langages and ^'en ^apportent (...) deux enfans, qui ^uge^t a lauantage des Phrygiens.
and ceux-la que le Nil
Paist, alme, d'vn desbord heureusement fertil,
Desireux de scuoir quel de leur deux langages
Estoit plustost en estre: ils commirent, mal-sages,
Le droit de l'eloquence au mol begayement,
Et firent iuge ceux qui n'ont point iugement:
Scauoir deux enfancons, que leurs muettes meres
Nourrirent dans l'effroy des lieux plus solitaires,
Sans que d'aucun humain la charmeresse voix





8
O proud rebellion I o traiterous impietie!
In what a fearefull sort,
The harmes that men suffer by the confusion of speech.
by this thy tongues varietie,
Hath God thee punished? alas that pleasant tongue,
That holy bond of townes, of anger bridle strong,
Strong glue of amitie, once one, now doth waifare
A hundred narrow wayes: this gold so richly rare,
Wrath-taming, charming-care, men-tysing, hart-entangling,
Both color, weight, and sound hath lost by mingle-mangling.
This gift corrupted is, and from the North to South
Confused Babels fall sounds yet in euery mouth.
The cold Finlanders once might visit Affricans,
The Spanish Indians, th'English Americans,
Without Interpreter; but now the compasse small
That doth our Cities bound, our language bounds withall:
And if we from our home but ne're so little went,
Dumbe should we seeme, and reft of reasons instrument.
Or if we speake to some that are but neighbour Nations,
'Tis by a borrow'd tongue, or by strange animations:
Without or Schoole, or paine, and sucking mothers brest,
We might haue learn'd the tongue that euery thought exprest,
And after seuen yeeres old vpon the glistring sand
Begun to draw with skill the shape of Sea and Land;
To part and multiply; and so from skill to skill
We might haue climbed soone the double pointed hill,
Where Arts-perfection, in signe of their victorie,
Her fauourites doth crowne with euerlasting glory.


Now, euer baby-like, we, ere we learne to sound
The Latine, Hebrew, Greeke, are going to the ground.
We learne but eu'n to prate, and for the deepe inseying
Of Natures secresies, and of that onely Being
Which makes all things to be, we labour, as in maze,
To coniugate a verbe, and register a phrase.
In age we learne to spell, like young Grammaticasters,
And nought we know without authoritie of Masters;
Who teach vs still to read, and put into our hands
An A. B. C. for what the Ciuill Law commands:
Instead of Physicke skill, and of that holy Writ,
Where God's to them reueal'd, which godly readen it.



9
Nay, shall I tell you more? they spake in eu'ry place
That holy tongue of God;
The Hebrew tongue generally spoken before the confusion of tongues.
so full of sence and grace,
As not a letter it hath, no not a point so small,
Without some ornament exceeding mysticall.
But since the proud reuolt, in sundry sort they prate
A bastard bibble-babble, impure, effeminate,
And change it eu'ry day; so loosing all their light
They vtter not a word of that first language right.


10
Once when th'Inhabitants of plenty-flowing Nile,
The Phrygians and Egyptians contend for antiquitie of tongue.
With men of Ida stroue for eldership of stile,


The right of Eloquence they tri'd by stammering,
And such as iudgement lackt they set to iudge the thing;
To wit, two sucking babes, whom their two Mothers dumbe
In hermitages kept, where no man else did come.
No charmy voyce of man was heard sound neere the place,




8.O proud rebellion. A fine description of euils ensuing this confusion of speech. First, the acquaintance of all mankinde together, the knot and loue-bond of Nations, is so loosened and broke, that scarse is there found any remedy for it, some of them not thinking on, or not at all ca^^ng for others. Secondly, that onely one language which decked and imbellished the acquaintance and fellowship of men, that kept them in peace and temper, such as it was, that made them all well appaid, that moued each one to his dutie, and was much regarded of all, hath lost all this by this change; and in a word, hath neither shew, nor grace of a language: insomuch, as euen at this day the fall of the Tower of Babel is heard from North to South, from East to West. That is to say, in the diuerse languages of so many Nations, we may obserue almost nothing else but a kinde of chattering and confused sound, neither fit, nor comely, nor expressing at all the nature of things: At least one people so iudgeth of anothers tongue. For I pray you what pleasure taketh a Frenchman to heare a Moscouite or a Mexican speake? And euen the tongues that we vnderstand, and speake (as we thinke) reasonable well, what are they vnto vs in respect of our mother tongue, or the principall tongues? Thirdly, whereas the Nations dwelling farthest asunder, might easily haue come together, beene acquainted, and trafficked one with another: Now a man is no sooner gone out of his owne doores, but hee hath much ^dooe to vnderstand those that he meeteth withall; and if he set foot in any farre countrey, hee needeth interpretouts, or must haue spent a long time before to learne the tongue, or else must speake by signes, or alwayes

hold his peace, and liue like a dumbe creature. Fourthly, to amplifie further this miserie, the Poet sheweth that if this disorder had not happened, a man might haue learned in short time all the Liberall sciences, and gained the top of that hill where Encyclopaedia, (that is, the full compasse of all Arts) crowneth all such lawfull aspiring mindes: and in a word, obtained the perfect knowledge of all things; whereas now we spend our whole life in the learning words of the Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine tongues, and that is nothing else but babling: and in stead of being well seene in the heauenly Philosophie, and that of this lower world, wee must take paines in syllables and words, circuits of speech, and other like exercises, vntill we be gray-headed and white-bearded, and so end our liues scarse hauing yet attained any sufficient knowledge of Law, Physicke or Diuinitie, that are the chiefe professions. The learned know how hard a matter it is to haue a good stile, which is called (...), the measure of learning; and that Aristotle, who hath so excellently well set it downe, in that wonderfull worke of his, commonly called the Organ, is vnderstood but of a few. What may a man say then of the most part of the discourses and speech of men now adayes liuing? It is nothing but babble, it is Babel it selfe. I speake not here of the substance of things, but of the fashion, order, and manner that is vsed to make them bee conceiued of those to whom wee speake, be they neuer so cunning in the tongue themselues. Then of Barbarisme and ignorance, what shall a man thinke?

9.What shall I tell you more? Moses saith, in the beginning of the eleuenth Chapter, that then (that is, many yeares after the Floud, and about the same time when Chams posteritie left the East parts to come and dwell in the plaine of Sennaar) the whole earth was one language and one speech, to wit, Noe and his children: and all the families from them issued, though they dwelt not together, yet spake they all the same language. All of them parted not from the East to the foresaid plaine of Sennaar: but likely enough is their opinion, that hold that Noe and Sem parted not so soone so farre a sunder, and especially that they accompanied not these builders of Babel, who sought renowne, and set vp their rest in this world. A man

may aske now what was that only language they spoke in the world before the Floud, and after, vntill the building of Babel. The Poet answereth, it was the language of God himselfe. Hereupon ariseth two opinions: The first is, of those that to honour their countrey, after the example of some ancient Heathens, would make vs beleeue they are sprung of the earth, or fallen from the Moone, and thinke their speech the most excellent of all other. The Aegyptians and Phrygians haue long sithence debated this matter, as shall be said more at large in the next Section. A few yeares agoe a Physitian of Brabant named I. Goropius, set forth a great booke entituled Origines Antuerpiana, wherein he aimeth especially at this marke, to proue

the Cymbrike tongue (which in his opinion is the base Almaine) to be the first speech of the world. Since his death a certain writer of Liege, hath set forth many other books of his about the same matter: and in one of them, that is called Hermathena, this Cymbrike tongue or low Dutch, is preferred far aboue the Roman, Greek and Hebrue. It asketh a long discourse to answer his Reasons: for this time I will answer but in a word: Namely, that all that which he alledgeth for the preheminence of his owne tongue, is a meere cauill, that is called in the Schooles, Petitio principij: when a Sophister taketh for granted that which is expresly denied him, and hee knowes not how to proue. Goropius groundeth all his discourse on this: that the Cymbrike tongue hath borrowed nothing of any other, and that the Hebrue is comen of it, and euen borroweth of the Cymbricke. This a man will denie Goropius and his disciples: and whereas they shew some Hebrue words or Phrases that resemble the words and termes of the base Almaine, and so conclude that Adam spake low Dutch, and that the language of Moses and the Prophets is hard, ambiguous, poore, and borrowed of the Cymbricke, which they were not well able to follow: I answer, that they are deceiued, and that on the contrary they ought to say, the Hebrue was before all other tongues; who were begun in Babel, and haue sithence brought forth infinite others, as the high and low Dutch, and other like, now vsed in the world. I would the learned professors of principall tongues would find some time to refute the allegations of Goropius: Especially those that make against the Hebrue, which he hath too saucil^e disgraced in the second booke of his Hermath, Pag. 25.26. etc. The second opinion, which I hold with the Poet, is, that the Hebrue tongue, inclosed chiefly in the Canonicall bookes of the old Testament (which haue beene wonderfully preserued vntill our time) is the first speech of the world, and the same that Moses meant, when he said, The whole earth had one mouth or language, before the building of Babel. The reasons therof are touched in a word by the Poet, who doth hereafter treat of them more at large, as wee haue also noted in the margent, and meane to speake somewhat thereof in the 12. Annotation. Now whereas this first language hath at this day no letter nor word, but is full of maimes and miseries, it may be said of euery tongue since the confusion: that it is nothing but corrupt ^angling, weake, vncertaine, and changing euer from time to time, as many haue already shewed heretofore. The Greeke and Latine tongues haue changed fiue or sixe times: and the learned know what wrangling there hath beene about the writing, pronouncing, and disposing of their termes and phrases. Then what is to be said of the Greekish and Latinish tongues, those that are but apes of the other? What of the barbarous, strange, and new tongues? Or of those whose foolish pronunciation only no man can abide, or of others that by vse, time, and force of people, are waxen current? But this I leaue to such as list to Comment hereupon at large.
10.Long since the Phrygians. The Egyptians, being euer great braggers, vaunted long agoe that they were the most ancient people of the world: a certaine King of theirs named Psammetichus, attempted to search out the

truth; and for that end thought meet by some meanes to discouer what was the first language of the world: Thus, he tooke two new-borne babes, and deliuered them vnto shepheards to be nourished, commanding they should be brought vp in a secret staule, there to sucke the milke of Goats, and straitly forbidding, that none should come there to pronounce any word before them: then after a certaine time when they were of age, they should be left alone, and made to fast a while. Now so soone as they were past three years old, their gouernour hauing in all points accomplished the Kings commandement, came to open the staule, and then the two children began to crie Bec, bec: the shepheard said not a word: they repeat still the words: and he let his Master vnderstand thereof, who caused the children to be brought secretly vnto him, and heard them speake. So when the meaning of the word was asked, and the Egyptians vnderstood it signified bread in the Phrygian tongue, they granted the preheminence of antiquitie vnto the Phrygians. Herodotus writeth that the Priests of Vulcan, in the Citie of Memphis, told him the same tale. There are some others that thinke these Babes were brought vp of dumbe nurses: howsoeuer it be, sure it is that the pride of the Egyptians was by some such deuise daunted. Suidas, touching the very point, saith that babes nourished of a Goat, must needs crie somewhat like a Goat, and such was the sound of the word Bec; a meet reward for his wisdome that made such a triall. The Grecians in old time were wont to call an old dotard (...), a word composed of Bec and (...), the Moone: the same is turned into a prouerbe which Erasinus expoundeth. But Goropius in the fifth and ninth booke of his Origines playeth the subtill Sophister, as his manner is, and vseth his beake vpon the word Bec: concluding, since Bec in low Dutch signifies bread, and Psammetichus his babes called for Bec, that so long agoe they spoke low Dutch; whereupon it followeth, that his tongue was the most ancient of the world. He calleth also his discourses vpon the same Bocceselanea, offering the subiect of a Comedie to some new Aristophanes. But let vs consider the answers of the Poet to the Phrygians, and to Goropius.






Resonnast a l'entour de trois-fois douze mois.
Eux conduits au milieu and des peuples de Xante,
Et des Egyptiens, d'vne halaine impuissante
Crient Bec plusieurs-fois, Bec, bec, est le seul mot
Et que leur langue forme, and que leur bouche esclot.


Refutation du iugement de ces enfans.
Adone les Phrygiens sachans qu'en leur langage.
Bec veut dire dupain, peignent de leur courage
Laioye sur le front, pour auoir eutant d'heur
D'obtenir de Nature arrest en leur faueur.


Sots! qui ne pensoient pas que les belantes troupes,
Qui retondoyent les fleurs des plus voisines croupes,
Leur enseignoit ce terme: and que les mots Gaulois,
Memphiens, Grecs, Hebrieux, Troyens, Latins, Anglois,
Ne naissent auec nous: ains que chasque langage
S'aprend and par hantise, and par vn long vsage:
L'aptitude a parler demeurant seulement
Naturelle aux humains, comme l'autre ornement,
Qui richement diuers, les rend plus dissemblables
Aux stupides troupeaux des bestes miserables.


Respo^se a l'obiection prinse de la voix confuse des animaux.
Que si tu mets en ien que le Taureau misgit,
Le tardif Asne brait, and le Lyon rugit
Ore haut, ore bas: and que partels langages
Ils nous semblent, diserts, descouurir leur courages:
Ce ne sont point des mots, ains des expressions
Dubrouille mouuement de peu de passions:
Des indices confus de douleur, de tristesse,
Dire, de soif, de faim, d'amour, on de liesse.


Response a la seconde obiection prinse du gazouillis des oiseaux.
On en peut dire autant de ces chantres ailez,
Qui sur les verds rameaux des bussons reculez
Gringotent le matin. Car bien que, comme il semble,
Deux a deux, trois a trois, ils deuisent ensemble:
Que leur voix se flechisse en cent mille facons:
Qu'ils decoupent hardis, cent mignardes chansons:
Qu' Apollo ait este disciple en leur eschole:
Cest vn son sans sujet, des notes sansparole:
Vne chanson redite en vniour mille fois:
Vn discours qui, muet, se perd dedans les bois.



Auantage de l'homme, doue de rayson, pardessus tous autres animaux.
Mais le seul homme peut discourir d'attrempance,
De force d'equite, d'honneur, and de prudence,
De Dieu, du ciel, de l'eau, de la terre, and des airs,
Au^c termes choisis, signisians, diuers:
Desuelopant son coeur, non par vn seul langage,
Ains comme Scaliger merucille de nostre age,
Louange de Ioseph Scaliger, tres-docte entre les doctes de ce temps.
Le Soleil des scauant qui parle cloquemment
L'Hebrieu, Gregois, Romain, Hespagnol, Alemant,
Francois, Italien, Nubien, Arabique,
Syriaque, Persan, Anglois, and Chaldaique,
Et qui, Chameleon, transfigurer se peut.
O riche, o souple esprit! en tel autheur qu'il v^ut:
Digne fils du grand Iule: and digne srere encor^
De Sylue son aisne, que la Gascongne honore.


Mais quant aux Perroquets, qui faisant leur se jour
Responce a la troisiesme obiection toucha^t les Perroquets semblables a l'Echo, and parlans sans parler.
Dans vn logis perce de toutes parts a-iour,
Plaident auecque nous lapalme deloquence:
Prononcent tout au long des Crestiens la Croyance:
Redisent du Seigneur la deu^te oraison:
Appellent nom par nom tous ceux de la maison:
Ils sont tels que la Voix, qui de nostre voix fille,
Par les creusez vallons, importune, babille,
Sans scauoir qu'elle dit. En vain ils battent l'air,
Et parlant sans s'entendre, ils parlent sans parler,
Sourds a leur propre voix: d'autant que le langage
N'est rien que de l'esprit vn resonnant image:
Mesme qu' and it est court, qu'il est peint, qu'il est doux,
Et tel quauant Nembrot il estoit seen de tous.



La langue Hebraique est la premiere de toutes les autres, pource qu'elle exprime toutes choses en peu de mots.
Or quand i' entre en discours, que la langue Hebraique
Auec bien peu de mots heureusement explique
Les pensers plus brouillez: and guide l'auditeur
Par tous les plis secrets des Dedales du coeur,
Beaucoup mieux que la Grecque auec ses Synonymes,
Epithotes hardis, metaphores sublimes,
Ses couplements de mots, ses diuers temps, ses cas,
Et mille autres beautez dont on fait tant de cas:


Elle comprend vne infinite de secrets en ses ettres, selon l'oppinion des maistres and docteurs d'icelle.
Quand ie pense a par-moy que l'Escole Rabbine
Treuue dans l'Alphabet de la langue diuine
Tout ce qu'on voit de l'oeil, tout ce qu'on croit par foy,

Et que tous ars encor sont comprins dans la loy:
Soit qu'auec grand trauail en cent facons diuerses,
Les lettres de ses mots, curieux in renuerses:
Car ainsi qu'en contant, des chissres le transport
Augmente fort le nombre, ou le decroist bien fort:
L'anagramme roidit, ou relache la force
Du nom, a qui, subtile, elle donne vn entorce:
Ou soit que iustement tu mettes comme en blot
Les nombres, qui naissans des elements d'vn mot
Expriment vn mystere: and que sous ce vocable
On en comprenne vn autre en nombre tout semblable:
Soit qu'vn nom soit marque par vn seul element,
Ou toute l'oraison par vn mot seulement:
Comme sous vn portrait d'Egypte le silence
Seelloit, mysterieux, vne longue sentence:


Il n'y a nation sous le ciel qui ne retienne quelques mots d'hebrieu.
Quand ie pense a par-moy, que du riuage Indois
Iusqu'au mont iette-feu du riuage Irlandois:
Et que du chaut Tambut insqu' a la mer Tartare
Tu n'oeillades, o ciel, nation si barbare,
Peuples tant ignorant es sainctes loix de Dieu,
Qui ne retienne encor quelque mot de l'Hebrieu:
Et dont les elements, pour bien qu'on les desguise,
N' approchent des saincts noms des lettres de Moyse.


Le vieil Testament and la doctrine du plus ancien peuple ne se trouue qu'en langage hebraique.
Quant ie pense a par-moy, que le volume sainct
Du premier testament n' est d'autre lettre peint:
Qu'Vrim, la Vision, le Songe ne prononce
Qu'en la langue d'Isac sa Prophete response:
Que mesme l'Eternel a voulu de son doy
Grauer en mots Hebrieux sur deux marbres sa loy:
Et que long temps depuis ler clairs courriers du Pole
En termes Palestins nous portent sa parole.


Les mots, specialement les noms propre hebraiques, so^t de gra^ds poids and signification.
Et quand ie pense encor qu'aux premiers des humaius
On n'imposoit des noms hazardeusement vains:
Ains qui, riches, marquoyent aues grande energie
Quelque insigne accident du discours de leur vie:
Et toutefois void-on qu'encor tout ces mot vieux
Sont de son and de sens auiourdhuy mesme Hebrieux:

Qu' Eue veut dire vie: Adam, forme d'argile:
Campremier acquis: Abel, comme inutile:
Seth, remis en saplace: and cil, sous qui les flots
Laissent en pais laterre, est nomme le Repos:
I'accorde volontiers, quoy gue gronde la Grece,
A l'idiome Hebrieule sacre droit d'ainesse.


Louange de la langue hebraique, mere and Reyne de toutes les autres.
Ie te salue donc, o surgeon perennel
Des pourtraicts de l'esprit parler de l'Eternel,
Claire perle, o matrice, and Reine des langages,
Qui, pure, as ia franchi l'abysme de tant d'ages:
Qui n'as mot qui ne pese: and dont les Elemens
Sont pleins de sens cachez, les poincts de Sacremens.
Sainct dialecte, en toy les propres noms des hommes*
Des pays, and citez, sont autant d'epitomes
De leurs gestes fameux: Et ceux lades oyseaux,
Des hostes de la terre, and des bourgeois des eaux,
Sont des liures ouuerts, ou chacun eust peu lire
Leur naturelle histoire, auant que par son ire
Le Pere roule-ciel d'vn flambant coutelas
Eust coupe le chemin de l'Eden de ca bas.


Adam impose les noms hebrieux a tous les animaux.
Car Adam imposant en sigue de maistrise
Noms a tous animaux dans les vrais champs d'elise,
Lors que deuant ses yeux deux a deux, flanc a flanc,
En monstre generale ils marcherent de rang,
Il les choisit si beaux que les doctes oreilles
Portant leson a l'ame, y portoyent les merueilles,
Dont la Voix forme-tout embellit richement
Les peuples and du sec and du moite element.


Il entichit ce langage, par composition de verbes and de clauses.
Et dautant que tout Corps souffre, ou fait quelque chose,
Ayant f^rge les Noms, les Verbes il compose.
Et puis pour enrichir d'autant plus l'oraison,
Y ioint quelques membrets seruans de liaison,
Pour coudre proprement ses membres plus notables,
Ainsi qu'vn peu de colle vnit deux grandes tables:
Comparaisons.
Comme seruent encor les pennaches ondants
Sur le sommet creste des morions ardents,
Les franges aux manteaux, les piedestals and bases

Aux statues de marbre, and les anses aux vases.


La Langue hebraique paruient d'Adam iusques au teps de Nemb. ot, depuis lequel elle demeute en la maison d'Heber, de qui elle a este surnomee hebraique.
Ce langage d'Adam de pere en fils coulant
Paruient incorrompu iusque aux temps violant
Du prince eschelle-ciel: and seul sit par le monde
Retentir les accents de sa riche faconde.
Mais comme partial, il se retire alors
En la maison d'Heber, soit qu'il ne fust du corps
De la troupe rebelle: ains, sage, fit a l'heure
Loin des champ de Sennar sa paisible demeure.
Ou soit qu'estant conduit par contraint en ce lieu,
Gemissant, il priast en cachettes son Dieu,
Et d'vn esclaue bras maconnast les murailles,
Qu'il vouoit, despite aux profondes entrailles
De l'Enfer tenebreux: ainsi que le Forcat,
Qui combattant la mer, miserable, combat
Contre sa liberte, and maudit en son ame
Ceux pour qui unict and iour il occupe sa rame.
Soit que de l'Eternel les liberales mains
Allant comme au deuant des oeuures les plus saincts
Pour l'amour de soy-mesme, eust laisse de sa grace
En despost ce thresor a Hebraique race:
Lors que le demeurant des superbes macons,
Brouillon le desguisa en cent mille facons:
Et que chacun, courant ou le destin l'appelle,
Porta des nouueaux mots en sa terre nouuelle.





Till three times had the Sunne runne out his yeerely race.
When brought they were abroad, and set betwixt the people
Of Pantus and of Nile,, they cry with voices feeble,
And often cry they Bec: bec, bec is all the ground
That either tongue can frame, or else their mouth will sound;
Whereat the men of Xanth, who knew the word implide
In Phrygian language Bread, in face they signifide
The ioy they felt in heart, and thought them highly blest
T'obtaine on their behalfe dame Natures owne arrest.


11 O fooles! who neuer cast how that the bleating flocks
That shore the tender flowres vpon the neighbour rocks
Had taught them such a tongue, and that the Dardanish,
French, Latine, Hebrew, Greeke, Egyptian, or English,
They are not borne with vs; but well may be discerned,
That euery tongue by haunt and by long vse is learned.
Disposednesse to speech indeede is Natures gift;
As is the grace of tongues diuersitie and shift,
So variably rich, and richly variable,
As makes a man to beast the more vncomparable.
And if you list oppose,
Men onely speak. An answere to the obiection taken from the vndistinct voyce of beasts. An answer to a second obiection taken from the chirping of biras.
how that the Bull he bellowes,
The slothfull Asse doth bray, the Lyon and his fellowes
Now treble roare, now base, and by those tunes ye finde
They seemen eloquent to make vs know their minde:
I say these are no words but onely declarations
Of their disquiet sturres, prouokt by sundry passions;
Confused signes of griefe, or tokens of their sadnesse.
Of ioyfulnesse, of loue, of hunger, thirst, or madnesse,


The like may well be said of that light-winged quier
That on the greene-locke heads of Oake, Elme,
An answer to the third obiection touching Parrets.
Ash and Brier
Record the morning lay: for though (as is the weather)
By two, by three, by more, they seeme to talke together,
And though their voice it bends a hundred thousand wayes,
And descant though they can a hundred wanton layes;
Though great Apolles selfe within their Schoole was taught;
A groundlesse tune it is of notes entending naught:
A thousand times a day the selfe-same song repeated,
A dumbe discourse, amid the wilde of woods defeated.

But onely man hath powre to preach of modestie,
Of honour, of wisedome, of force, of equitie,
Of God, of heau'n, of earth, of water, and of ayre,
With words of good import, yee cull'd and sundry-faire.
Vnfoulding all his thoughts not onely in one language,
But like to Scaliger, the wonder of our age,
The Lampe of learned men, can wisely speake and much,
In Latine, Hebrew, Greeke, English, Italian, Dutch,
In Spanish, Arabicke, French, and Slauonian,
Caldean, Syrian, and Ethyopian.
This man Camelion-like will make his transformation,
(O rich, o pliant wit!) to any authors fashion.
Great Iulies worthy sonne, great Syluies yonger brother,
In Gascany renoun'd more then was euer other.
But as for Popiniayes, that passing all their ages
Within the pearced grates of thorow-ayred cages,
In eloquence are bould to plead with vs for chiefe,
Pronounce all thorow-out the Christian beliefe;
Repeate the forme of Prayer that from our Sauiour came;
And all the houshold call together name by name;
They like dame Eccho be, our sounding voices daughter,
That through the vaulted hils so rudely bableth-after,
Not weening what she saith: In vaine this ayre they breake,
And speaking without sense, they speake, but nothing speake:
As deafe vnto themselues: for language is definde.
A voyce articulate that represents the minde:
And short it was, and sweet, and deckt with many a flowre,
And vnderstood of all, before the Babell towre.



12.The Hebrew tongue most ancient. Now when I duly wey how th'Ebrew doth report,
And readily expresse in words both few and short,
Most cumbersome conceits, and through each secret plight
Of reasons Labyrinth affords the reader light;
The first reason.
Yea farre aboue the Greeke with her Synonyma,
Her lofty Metaphors, her bould Epitheta,
Her compounding of words, her tenses, and her cases,
And of so great request a thousand other graces:
The second reason.
When I consider well how in the Letter-row
Of that same tongue diuine the Rabby-schoole doth show,
All we beleoue with heart, all that with eye we see,

And that within the Law all arts implyed be:


By turning too and fro, and changing letters roome;
(As in Aritchmeticke it mends or bates the summe)


By gathring of some word the numbers mysticall,
And drawing them throughout a word proportionall.


Or that some word is know'n by some one Element,
Or by some onely word a perfect speech is ment;
As in a short deuise of mysticall embleme
The silent Egypt wont imploy alonger theme.


The third reason.
When I consider well that from th'East-Indie sand
Vnto the flaming Mount that borders Iserland,
And from the frozen Sea to scorched Tombuts shore,
Thou Sunne no people seest so voide of wit and lore,
No men so ignorant of Gods most holy Law,
But they retaine as yet, some words of Ebrew saw;
And but their letters doe (though out of order set)
Come neere the sacred names of Moses Alphabet.


The fourth reason
When with my selfe I wey that th'holy counterpawne
Of Gods old Testament was in those letters drawne:
That Vrim, that the Dreame, and that the Vision wise,
But in this Hebrew tongue spake not their prophesies;
And that th'Eternal selfe did with his finger daigne
To graue in Hebrew stile his Law on tables twaine;
And, many winters since, the Messengers diuine
Did preach the ioyfull word in tongue of Palestine.


And when I further way, that th'ancient Patriarches
The fift reason.
Had all their names impos'd as reasonable markes,
And such as fully shew'd with mightie consequent
What was of all their time the rarest accident;
And thereto that we finde how eu'ry ancient name,
By writ, by sound, by sense, from Hebrew language came

(As Eue is consterd Life, Cain, first of all begot;
(...)
And Adam made of Clay, and Abel, profit not)
Seth, set in others place, and he surnamed Rest,
Who saw th'all-hurting flood below the ground supprest)
I cannot choose but grant, though Greece with furie some,
Preeminence of age to th'Ebrewes I diome.


Great commendation of the Hebrew tongue.
Then thus I thee salute, o ouer-running spring
Of vtterance of minde, leide of th'eternall King,
Thou brightly-shining Pearle, queene-mother of languages,
That spotlesse hast escap'd the dongeon of all ages:
Thou hast no word but wai'th; thy simplest elements
Are full of hidden sense; thy points haue Sacraments.
O holy dialect, in thee the proper names
Of men, townes, countries, are th'abridgements of their fames
And memorable deeds: the names of winged bands,
Of water-habitants, and armies of the Lands,
Are open treatises whereout a man might gather
Their natures historie, before th'heau'n-rowling father,
By mans offence prouokt with flaming Symiteer,
The way of Eden caru'd from these base countries here.


Adam gaue Hebrew names to all creatures according to their nature.
For Adam when in tok'n of his prerogatiue
He did in true Elise each creature title giue
When as before his eyes in muster generall
Two by two, side by side, in ranke they marched all;
He chose the names so fit, that eu'ry learned eare
Which vnderstood the sound, might als the wonders heare
Whereby th'alforming word did richly beautifie,
Or those that liue in wet, or those that liue in dry.


He enriched the tongue with verbs and clauses
And for each body must or suffer thing, or doe,
When he the nownes had fram'd, the verbs he ioyn'd thereto;
And more to beautifie this goodly ground of pleading,
He many tittles made, that serue for knots in reading,
The parts of most account to ioyne, as best it sits,
Right as a little glew two plankes of timber knits;
As eke for ornament like wauing plume of Feathers,
Which on the chamfred top of shining helmet weathers:
Or as Marbl' Images their foot-stals haue and bases,

And siluer cups their cares, and veluet robes their laces.


The Hebrew tougue continued generally spoken, from Adam to Nimrod, then it remained onely in the familie of Heber: whence it was called Hebrew.
This tongue that Adam spake, till in bad time arriu'd
That heau'n assaulting Prince, sincerely was deriu'd
From Father vnto Sonne, the worlds circumference
Did throughly sound the tunes of her rich eloquence:
But after partiall woxe and quickly she retir'd
To Hebers Family; for either he was not hir'd
Among the rebell crew, or wisely did abide
Farre from the Sennar plaine in so disaster tyde.
Or, if he thither were with other moe constrained,
In corners worship'd God and secretly complained,
And so with slauish hand them holpe to build the wall
Against his will, and wisht it sodainly might fall
Into the darkest hell; as gally-slaue in guyues
That combating the Sea most miserable striues
Against his libertie, and curseth in his heart
The head for whom he toyles in such a painefull art.
Or beit th'eternall God, with his hand euer-giuing,
Preuenting as it were the workes of men well liuing,
For his owne honours sake, and of his onely grace,
This treasure least in trust with Hebers holy race:
While all th' vngodly rest of Masons ill-bested
A hundred thousand wayes the same disfigured,
And eu'rychone dispers'd where destinie them taried,
Into their new-found land a new-made language caried.



11.O fooles, that little thought. The first answer is, that this word, Bec, that the children spoke, was a confused found comming neare the crie of Goats: And how could they aske bread, seeing that they vnderstood it not, neuer heard it spoken by any body, neuer heard the meaning of it? The second is, that words are not borne with vs, but that we learne them by haunt and long vsage. If they were borne with vs, doubtlesse these infants would haue spoken as well other words: for the vnderstanding being moued, the belly pinched with hunger, would not content it selfe to expresse his passion in one syllable. The third is, that men are onely the right and proper speakers, yet if they be not taught it, and thereto fashioned, but are brought vp among beasts, in stead of a right and framed speech, they shall make but a sound and crie confused like vnto beasts. In a word, (...) take this discourse of Herodotus, touching the two infants and their Bec, to be but a tale made vpon pleasure, and a very heard-say; and there-against I oppose the antiquitie of the Hebrue tongue. Yet if I were bound to beleeue Herodotus, I would say the Phrygians Bec was drawne from the Hebrues (...) Lechem. The disciples of Goropius will confesse that the Phrygians are come from the successours of Noe: so can it not seeme strange vnto them, that I say the Phrygians retaining some tokens of their grandfathers language, haue (like infinite others) lengthned and shortned the most part of the words: some whereof yet remaine whole, to witnesse the antiquity and principalitie of the Hebrue tongue. After this the Poet answereth those that build vpon the vnframed noise of beasts, the chirping and chattering of birds, and the babling of Parrets, to proue the birth of speech with vs, and cast a cloud ouer that perfection he granted only to the first language; and so he saith that man only endued with reason, is the only creature on earth capable of distinct, ordered, important, and proper speech, and further speaketh many seuerall tongues: whereof he bringeth in for example the learned Scaliger. Hence it ensueth that a man cannot learne to speake, if he be brought vp among beasts that haue no reason whereby to deserue the name of a speech, or to vse the same aright: or if he be brought vp with such as are dombe, of whom he can learne nothing but signes and confused sounds, he will neuer speake treatably, nor vnderstand any thing, except another doe speake first vnto him, and make him vnderstand the speech with often repeating: As appeareth not onely in young children, but in the oldest men also, who learne as long as they liue the words and names of those very things which they haue oftentimes scene before. It followeth then, that all the discourse of the Phrygians Bec is a deuised tale, and therefore vnworthy for them to build vpon, that goe about to proue the Phrygian tongue, or theirs that would draw their pedegree from the Phrygians, to be the first language of the world. Another man may finde in his owne tongue a many like words, and draw thence as good conclusions as Goropius doth. But a strange thing it is, that the Heathen Authors haue faid nothing, nor made any mention in their bookes of the beginnings and occasions of diuersitie of tongues: especially that the Grecians, and other such learned people that haue professed the knowledge of all things, knew not the beginning of their owne language. Moses only hath set vs downe this notable history, and opened to the Heathen the spring of their tongues. And this further is to be wondered at in the Historie of Babel, that the Hebrue tongue alone, as being the first of the world, hath remained among that people that were the Church of God, where the Messias was borne, and from whence arose the preaching of the Gospell, touching the appearance of the promised Sauiour: which Gospell hath sithence by the gift of tongues, and ministerie of the Apostles, ouerspread all the parts of the world. Thus Moses handling the beginning of tongues, proueth his historie to haue long fore-gone all others, and therewithall engraueth vpon the gates and walls of the Citie and Tower of Babel, a goodly warning to all men, to flie and auoid Atheisme, and all vaine-glorious folly, which buildeth Towers against Heauen, and rebelleth against God: who suffereth the wicked to aduance and hoyse vp themselues the space of some few moneths or yeeres, to the end he may giue them a fearefull ouerthrow at length. What would the presumption of a man haue done (saith Saint Augustine) when algate the top of this Tower had raught vnto the clouds? It is humilitie that lifteth vp the heart on high, to the Lord, not against the Lord: she it is that leadeth vs the true, right, and sure way to heauen. These few words I thought good to adde vnto the rest, because the proud aspiring minde of man cannot be sufficiently discouered, nor too much cried out on. Whereas these builders busily forecast in their minde, and laboured to make themselues renowned among their posteritie, and thought men of some worth; let vs remember that the true praise consisteth not in workes of goodly outward shew, but in such as are good indeed, and approued of God. So let vs returne to the text of the Poet, who hauing touched in a word the beginning of tongues, and refuted some contrary objections, sheweth now which of all the tongues that haue beene, are, or shall be in the world; ought to be accounted the chiefe and most ancient, and whereof a man may truely say, it is the most excellent of all other.
12.The Hebrew tongue. He propoundeth fiue reasons, whereby he is induced to beleeue that the Hebrew is the first tongue of all, whatsoeuer the. Greeke and others doc alledge for themselues.
The first is, that this tongue compriseth much matter in few words, is very significant, briefly and plainly expresseth whatsoeuer a man can thinke, and when it is requisite to discouer the most secret and hidden plights of the heart, she slippeth none, but for all things hath words liuely, pleasant, waightie and of great import: and for her circuits of speech and long discourses, they are more wonderfull then the best and sweetest the Greeke hath: which notwithstanding her store of selfe-meaning words, her bould and far-fetcht Epithites, her cunning Metaphores, her words compounded, her tenses and other fine deuises, is no more comparable to the other, then the chirping of a Goldsinch is to the song of the Nightingall. Proofe hereof may bee made by the earnest and diligent consideration, and waying the words, sentences, and discourses of the Hebrew with those of the Greeke, and all others: not onely in Grammers and Dictionaries, but euen in whole bookes and volumes. It shall suffice me to wage and lay the booke of Psalmes onely, or the workes of Salomon, or Iob, or of Esay, against all other Authours: and I dare bouldly auouch, that in one of these a man shall finde almost in euery chapter, more elegance, state and maiestie, more figures, and more of all kinde of ornaments for a discourse, than in all the tedious workes of those that mans wisedome setteth-by so much. I speake not now of the matter and substance of things, which neuerthelesse is in this tongue as happily expressed as in any other; let them straine themselues neuer so much, they are not able but very grosly and a-farre-off to make a shew of that which this other painteth out in orient colours, what matter soeuer it hath occasion to vtter.
The second reason is, that the Rabbines or Hebrew Doctors (men wondrous carefull to preseiue the whole body of the old Testament, so as the least letter, point, and accent, they haue counted ouer and againe often times) haue noted in the 22. letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, either apart or together considered, all the secrets of diuinitie and of Philosophie, both naturall and morall. This is a notable thing in the Hebrew tongue, that all the letters haue their proper signification: and that the letters of most of the principall tongues in the world haue taken their beginning from them: as also that the primitiue words, and those of whom infinite others are deriued in diuers principall tongues, are drawne from the letters, syllables, and words of the Hebrew. To say nothing of the excellency of her accents, and the propertie of her vowels: the Rabbines haue further found out many secrets by diuers-way-turning and alter-placing the letters of Hebrew words: and that which the Greekes and others haue after their example inuented, is nothing in comparison. For there is scarce any word in the Hebrew, but being inuerted (as may easily be done, and sometimes two, three, or foure wayes, as the number of the letters are) offereth to our consideration another word, either of like sense, or contrary: or making relation to the first, giueth thereto such light, beautie and liuelihood, that it is wonderfull to behold. Againe, oftentimes a Nowne or other word, yea a letter, importeth a whole sentence, like vnto the Egyptians Hieroglyphikes, inuented of them to the imitation of the Hebrew letters and words, yet nothing in comparison of them. This matter would require a whole volumne, to be writting according to Art, by the hand of some one that were well seene in the tongues: and I could name three paire yet liuing that are well able to doe it. In the meane season, whosoeuer is desirous to search further herein, let him read the Harmonie of the World, written by Franciscus Georgius, and Guido Faber: the Heptap. of Ioannes Picus, Earle of Mirandola, the Hieroglyphickes of I. Goropius, from the beginning of the seuenth booke, to the end of the sixteenth: three bookes of I. Reuclinus De arte Cabalistica, and other three bookes of his De Verbo mirabil^, the Cabala of Picus, with the interpretations of Angelus Burgoneuensis thereupon Further, much good matter to this purpose a man may finde in Thesauro linguae sanctae, set out by S. Pagninus, and after augmented by many other learned professours of this tongue. See further the Syriac Institut, etc. of Camnius: the Mithridates of C. G^snerus: the Alphabet in 12. tongues of Postella, and his booke. De ant quitate linguae Hebraicae, there are many such Treatises set forth by diuers learned men: whereout, and of the bookes aforenamed, may be gathered infinite proofes of that which the Poet hath touched in this second reason.
The third is, that there liues no Nation vnder the cope of heauen, but keepeth still some words of Hebrew in their speech; First, the Caldean, Syrian, Arabian, Egyptian, Persian, Ethiopian, and many other, as the Gotthicke, Troglodyticke, Punicke, are so deriued thence, that they come as neere it as Italian to Latine, some more, some lesse. Secondly, the Greeke, Latine, and those others, that are farthest off, haue yet here and there some words that we must needes grant are sprong from the same fountaine: a man may set downe a many of them, but it were too long here to coate the examples. Thirdly, the roots of many words that are taken to be Greeke or some other tongue, are found to be Hebrew, as Franciscus Iunius hath plainly shewed in his learned oration Deliuguae Hebraea antiquitate and praeslantia.
The fourth reason is, that the doctrine of the old Testament, which is the doctrine of the first and most ancient people of the world, was not written but in Hebrew. No man denieth that the people that came of Sem the sonne of Noe, is the most ancient: among these remained the Church of God and the Hebrew tongue. God spake not but in the Hebrew tongue by the high Priest that wore the sacred Ephod, and the breast-plate of iudgement, whereon was set (...) Vrim and Thummim (words signifying lights and perfections) which some thinke was the (...) or foure-letered name Iehoua, contained within the brest-plate: others say it was the rankes of those twelue precious stones there enchased, that on them had ingrauen the names of the twelue tribes of Israel: as if it were a repetition of that which Moses saith in the 17, 18, 19, and 20. verses of the 28. chapter of Exodus, where he speaketh of (...), Vrim and Thummim in the 30. verse: others hold they were certaine names: others are of diuers other opinions. Some late writers thinke those words were ingrauen in the breast-plate: This is a secret, the search whereof (whether one dispute of the words, or what they meant, or whats become of them, etc.) is very painfull and needlesse; for that now sithence the comming of Christ we ought to follow the truth it selfe, and not stay vpon shadowes. These words doubtlesse gaue to vnderstand, that all light and perfection commeth of our Sauiour, in whom all the fulnesse of the Godhead bodily dwelleth, in whom are hid all the treasures of vnderstanding and knowledge, who is the light of his Church, that is made vnto vs of God his father wisedome, iustice, redemption, and holinesse. In all iudgements, demands, oracles, and reuelations that were made by Vrim and Thummim (as may be gathered out of the 27. chapter of Numbers, the first booke of Samuel the 13. and 30. chapters, and other places where aduise and counsell was asked of God, and answere was made by the mouth of the high Priest, there appeared a cleere light, a sure truth and perfection: all which in Christ is accomplished. Now these demands and answers were propounded and rendred in the Hebrew tongue, long time before any other language was vsed in the world. For so soone after their scattering at Babel they could not well be incorporated into a common wealth: and as for religion, that was not kept but in the race of Sem, as Moses plainly declareth all through the historie of Abraham. Concerning the Prophets, their dreames and visions, God spake not, they vnderstood not, neither answered or taught they the Church but in the Hebrew; that significant, vnmingled, holy, chaste and heauenly tongue; whereas others lispe and stammer-out vncertaine sounds, and are infinite wayes defiled through the dishonest, foolish, erronious, and vngodly discourses of their inuentours: I except the bookes of the new Testament, and all writings drawne from the cleere fountaines of holy Scripture, besides the which there is nothing but vanitie, filth, wickednesse, and vngodlinesse in the world. Moreouer, the Lord himselfe setteth downe his law to his people, and writing it twise with his owne finger, and speaking with his owne mouth to Moses and his other seruants in the Mount, vsed the Hebrew tongue. So did the Angels and Prophets, and Iesus Christ spake the Syriacke, a tongue so deriued of the Hebrew, that they are very like; as their Grammars declare. The Apostles spake diuers tongues, and wrote also according to the people and persons with whom they had to doe: yet for all that in their bookes may be noted an infinite many of phrases borrowed of the Hebrew: as the learned interpreters of the new Testament haue exactly shewed.
The fift and last reason set downe by the Poet is, that the Hebrew words, especially the proper names (some are alledged for example, and many other may be added) are of great waight and importance: for sometimes they lay open vnto vs the chiefe things that doe befall the person so named. Nay further, if a man would take the paines to change the order of letters, hee may sinde in them many goodly mysteries. The Greekes haue found the way, and followed it in the interpretation of their proper names: but they come farre short of the liuelihood and maiestie of the Hebrewes, who begun the thing before them many hundred yeeres. As for other tongues the most part of their proper names haue no meaning; they are deuised at-all-auentures; so are they right tokens of barbarisme. Some tongues there are more happy and plentious than others in this behalfe: but their interpretations are for the most part vncertaine, especially if the Root thereof come not from or neere the Hebrew. Herehence againe the curious reader may take occasion of a large commentarie: I leaue it vnto him.
13.Then doe I theesalute. It is not without cause, that the Poet straight vpon the former discourse, vseth these words: considering the excellency of the Hebrew tongue, and that he setteth out in so few verses her wonderfull perfections, each one of them requiring a large treatise, and himselfe being vnable to shut vp so great matters in so few words. For example sake let vs consider but very briefly those three points that the Poet here toucheth: to wit, that the two and twenty Hebrew letters are full of hidden sense; that the proper names of persons, Countries, and Cities in this tongue are as much as abridgements of their life and deedes; that the names of birds, beasts and fishes, containe the history of their natures: howbeit since the fall of Adam the knowledge thereof is greatly darkened. To make the Reader somewhat more desirous to enter mediation hereon, I will set him downe some examples. Concerning the mysteries of the Hebrew Letter-row Eusebius and S. Ierom in his Epistle ad Paul. vrbic. which is the 155. expoundeth them, as I shall shew you in our tongue. The first letter (...) Aleph signifieth doctrine, (...) Beth a house, (...) Ghimel, Fulnesse, (...) Daleth Tables, (...) He This, (...) Vau and (...) Zain That or she there, (...) Cheth Life, (...) Teth Good, (...) Iod Beginning, (...) Chaph a Hand, (...) Lamed Discipline, or the Heart, (...) Mem Theirs, or of these, (...) Nun Continuall, (...) Samech Aide or succour, (...) Ain a Spring, or an Eye, (...) Phe a Mouth, (...) Sade Iustice, (...) Coph Calling, (...) Resch a Head, (...) Schin Teeth, (...) Tau Signes. All which may be thus put together and expounded. The Doctrine of the Church, which is the house of God, is found in the fulnesse of the Tables: that is, the holy Scriptures. This doctrine and that fulnesse of the tables is the life; for what life can we haue without the knowledge of holy Scripture? Out of these we learne Iesus Christ, who is the life of them that beleeue. And although this knowledge be excellent and perfect in God, yet as for vs, we know not but in part, we see as it were by a glasse in darknesse: But when we shall ascend vp into heauen, and become like vnto the Angels, then the doctrine of the house, and the fulnesse of the tables of Gods truth, shall be accomplished: then shall we see face to face the Good prince (to wit, God himselfe the Soueraigne Good, who is the Beginning of all things) euen as he is in his owne nature. In the mean-time we must lay Hand to the worke of our Calling, by the meanes of a right Discipline or a true Hart, assuring our selues that we shall finde Continuall Succour in this heauenly truth, which is the Spring or Eye of the Mouth of Iustice, namely Christ our Head, whose Calling is in Signes, or markes of Teeth or framed voyce of the Scripture. I desire the Reader to take in good part this short Allegorie that I am bold to make vpon the Hebrew Letters; and if he desire more in this kinde; let him repaire to the Roots of the essentiall words of these letters, there may he view the matter more at large. For this time it shall suffice to haue shot this arrow toward the marke our Poet aymed at.
Now for the second point touching the names of seuerall men, of Nations and Cities, I will note you a couple of examples of each: (...) Abraham signifieth a Father of many, so was his houshold much increased temporally and spiritually, hee is the Father of all the Beleeuers, whose number is vncountable. (...) Moses signifieth taken out of the waters, so was he by Pharaos daughter, when his mother, loth to haue him slaine according to the Kings cruell commandement, had laid him forth in a pitched flasket by the Riuers brinke, Exod. 2. By him also God guided his people through the waters of the red sea, and wrought many miracles. The Arabians are a people who euen at this day haue no certain place of abode, they wander still vp and downe the champion countries and wildernesse, they are famous theeues, and lurking in secret places, make often sallies out vpon their neighbours, and set vpon all passengers vnawares. Their name commeth of the Verbe (...) Arab, by Ain in the first Coniugation. (...) Hearib, which signifieth to mingle day and night together: and because that in a desert and waste place all things are confused, as if day and night were mingled together, therefore the countrie for the situation is called Arabia. This agreeth right with another (...) Arab, written by Aleph, which signifieth to he in ambush, or to lurke in dennes, as theeues and rauening beasts doe. The Aegyptians in the Scripture are called (...) Mitsraim, because of their strong holds and places of defence, that haue beene long amonst them: the primitiue word is (...) Tsor, that signifieth to trusse close together: In some places of Scripture Aegypt is called (...) Rahab, that signifieth Proud: so indeed they haue alwaies beene high-minded, and greater braggers than any other people. Now for Cities (...) Ierusalem signifieth The vision of peace, and iust according to the truth: for the peace and grace of God hath beene seene and continued vpon that place many hundred yeares, and chiefly because it hath beene a sigure of the Church militant and triumphant; as often mention is made of the new and heauenly Ierusalem. Babylon commeth of the word (...) Babel, which is deriued of the Verbe (...) Balal, to confound mingle, or trouble, as water when it is mudded. For so indeed the earthy Babel, that was in Chadaea, hath made a hotchpotch of the world: and that Babel, the spirituall, that is spoken of in the Reuelation, hath made so many confusions, that it is vnpossible to name them all.
There remaineth the third point, touching Birds, foure-footed Beasts, and Fishes, whereof and euery of them I will name two onely, for a patterne, lest I seeme too long in the Annotations. The Storke, so commended for her loue toward those by whom she receiued life, is called (...) Chasida, that is to say, dutifull, louing, and religious. The Eagle is called Nescher, that commeth neare to Shor and (...) Iashar, the one signifieth to looke the other to be rightfull: and this bird of all other hath the sharpest sight and looketh against the Sunne. There is further a liuely description of this bird in the 39. Chapter of Iob, as also of the Ostrich, and many other in diuers places of Scripture. The horse, called (...) Sus, is thought to come of the Verbe (...) Nasas, if rather this verbe be not thence deriued, which signifieth to aduance himselfe: for it is the brauest and siercest of all other foure-footed beasts: as Iob finely describeth him in his 39. Chapter. The Hebrues haue three names for a Lion; (...) Arieh, (...) Labi and La^jsch: the first commeth of a Verbe that signifieth to snatch, and teare in sunder: the second of the word (...) Leb, that signifieth the Hart, and (...) Laab, to be in solitary and desert places: the third is commonly interpreted a great and roaring Lion, not vnlike the Verbe (...) Losh, that signifieth to surprise or deuoure, for that this beast rampeth vpon and swalloweth vp his pray. The Whales and great fishes are called (...) Thannim, Snakes, Serpents, or Dragons, because they are of a great length, and turne and fold themselues euery way, and are no lesse dangerous in the Sea, than Serpents and Dragons on the land. In the 40. Chapter of Iob, that great Fish is called (...) Leuiathan, which some deriue of the Verbe (...) Lauah, which signifieth to borrow, or take a thing for his recreation: because the Whole seemeth to play vp and downe the sea, as in a place borrowed for recreation. The Crocodile, that liueth both on land and water, is called (...) Hatsab, and seemeth to come of the word (...) Tsab, which signifieth the couering of a Chariot, because this mightie creature hath so long and so thicke a skinne. More ouer, the Hebrues of the whole kinde of fishes speake commonly as if they were of another world, because they are so farre parted and seuered from the sight and conuersation of men: they make three sorts of them, which they expresse by the words (...) Dagh, (...) Thannim, and (...) Leuiathan. This haue I added the more to shew the liuelihood and naturall importance of this tongue, and herewith I will content my selfe at this time, desiring that some other, stirred vp by my example, would take this matter in hand, and discourse of it better and more at large.
15.For when Adam. Moses saith plainly, in the 19. and 20. verses of the second Chapter of Genesis: That God made all the beasts of the field, and fowles of the heauen come before Adam, to see how he would name them, and that howsouer he named euery thing liuing, so was the name thereof. The Man therefore gaue names vnto all Cattell, and to the Fowles of heauen, and to euery beast of the field. The wisdome, wherewith our first Father was endued before his fall, importeth thus much, that he should giue meet and couenable names vnto all creatures vnder his dominion: and although the knowledge and search of birds and beasts names be hard, because of the weaknesse of mans iudgement now since his fall, yet is it not vnpossible, as men well seene in the Hebrue tongue haue alreadie shewed.
16.And for each Bodie. Adam, a man perfectly wise before he sinned, gaue not only meet names to all creatures, that were (in a manner) the moueables and instruments of his house, and of this great shop of the world, whereof the Lord had made him master; but further enriched his language with all manner of ornaments that might be required to make it perfect: So that before his fall he spake more eloquently than any mortall man since. After he had sinned, entred ignorance into his vnderstanding, and frowardnesse into his affections: which haue made the speech of him and his posteritie vnfitting, vnparfit, deceiuable, and often false, euen in humane and indifferent things, yea such sometime as we most curiously study vpon: But the grace of God, the long life of this Patriarch, and his fresh remembrance of the wondrous things that he had seene in the Garden of Eden, haue brought to passe doubtlesse, that the conuersation, instruction, reports and authority of so great a personage, had a maruellous force to perswade and teach all those that were in his schoole. For from him had we ^irst our Arts and Sciences deriued, and especially the knowledge of the true God. And although since his time things haue beene more and more illightened and p^rfited, yet must we needes confesse that Adam was the first teacher of them. Who so desireth to know the depth of his wisedome, let him at his leisure meditate vpon the foure first Chapters of Genesis, and he will confesse there is contained the summe of all that all men haue knowne, or shall vnto the worlds end. Now out of all doubt it is, that Adam taught his children and their posterity all these things exactly. But Moses, by the direction of the spirit of God, thought it sufficient to tepresent onely the ground of things: otherwise the world neither had not would euer be able to containe the bookus that might be made vpon these foure first Chapters.
17.This tongue that Adam spoke. The first world continued 1656 yeeres. Adam liued 930. yeeres, his posterity kept his language, and although they possessed with their tents and dwellings a large peece of ground, yet is there no place of Scripture to be found, whereout may be gathered any proofe of the diuersity of tongues before the flood. There being then but one, it must needes be the same that Adam taught his children: as may also appeare by this, that all proper names vntill the flood are Hebrew. Noe the true sonne of Adam retained and spoke this tongue, and taught it his children. And although three or foure score yeeres before the Floud they began to spread abroad themselues, and corruption grew more and more among them (as by that may be gathered, that is written of Nimrod and Asshur, and the children of Cham, Genesis the 10.) yet in the beginning of the eleuenth Chapter Moses witnesseth that at what time they, that came to dwell in the plaine of Sennaar, spake of building the Citie and Tower afterward called Babel, all the earth was one language and one speech: which I vnderstand not only of those that dwell in the plaine of Sennaar, but of all people then liuing in the world. It is likely that they that came out of the East Countries, and setled themselues in Sennaar were a great number. They spake Hebrue, but when consusion befell their tongue, some drew one way, others another way, and in continuance of time their Hebrue varying by meanes of their separation was embased, and euery seuerall people had their language apart. As for such as were not mingled in this disorder, namely the families of Sem, or the most part of them, they kept the originall and primitiue tongue, whereof Heber was the chiefe professour at the confusion of Babel; and thence it commeth (as it is thought) that the tongue was called Hebrue, and the people Hebrues; as Abraham, in whose family that speech remained, is surnamed an Hebrue. The Poet, with some interpretors, leaues it in doubt whether Heber was among the builders of Babel, or dwelt apart. I thinke with some others, that he was not of the number, but hearing how the Tower-builders were scattered, hee gaue the name of Peleg (that is, Diuision) to his sonne that then was borne: because (saith Mases, Genes. 10.25.) that in his time the earth was diuided. Thus much of the Hebrue tongue, which was after preserued by Moses and the high Priests, the Iudges, Kings and Prophets. Now let vs consider what the Poet saith further as touching those other tongues, that first arising of the Hebrue, were after the confusion a hundred thousand waies altered and disguised by the nations liuing asunder, who themselues inuented, and carried new words and language, each to the place of their abode.






Mais l'age doux-glissant,
Les premiers la^gages diuisez en plusieurs parcelles.
gaste-tout, enuicux
Desfigura bien tost tous ces langages vieux,
Qui nez dessus les tigre au milieu du tonnerre
Des ouuriers martelans, parcoururent la terre:
Et pour rendre aiamais plus confus l'Vniuers,
Fendit le moindre d'eux en langages diuers.


Toutelangue se change,
D'ou procede^t les diuers chan gemens en vn mesme la^gage.
ou soit que le commerce
En nous communiquant de l'Amphitrite Perse
Les thresors precieux, and ceux de terre au flots,
Heureusement hardi, troque mots contro mots:
Soit que l'homme disert d'vne facon gentile
Frisant sos mots dorez and mignardant son stile,
De gloire desireux, marque de nouueaux coins
Les choses and les faicts: on donne pour le moins
Cours aux noms descriez, and remet en nature
Les sur-annez, moisis, gastez de vermoulure.


Comparaison.
Ilen est tout ainsi que des fueilles d'vn bois:
L'vne chaet, l'autre naist. Les mots qui d'autre fois
Le temps cha^ge le langage comme les autres choses.
Brilloient par-cy par-la dans l'oraison diserte,
Comme des fleurs de Lys dans le campaigne verte,
Ne sont plus ore en vogue: ains bannis de la Cour,
Honteux font sous les toicts d'vn bas hameau sejour:

Et ceux qui du vieux temps la chagrine censure
Auoit mis au billon, sont de mise a ceste heure.


Vn bel esprit conduit d'heur,
L'Esprit humain peut enrichir vn langage.
and de iugement,
Peut donner passe-port aux mots, qui freschement
Sortent de sa boutique: adopter ler estranges,
Entre les sauuageons: rendant par ces me slanges
Son oraison plus riche: and d'vn esmail diuers
Riolant sa parole, ou sa prose, ou ses vers.


L'vsage est la Loy des langages du monde: and quelle est la diuersite diceux.
Vn langage n'a point autre Loy que l'vsage
Courant sans frein, sans yeux, oule peuple volage
Le va precipitant: l'autre courant, enclos
Dans les lices de l'art, agence bien ces mots.
L'vn desia vieillissant sur l'huis de son enfance,
A le bers pour tombeau: l'autre fait resistance
Aux filiers des ans. L'vn afaute de coeur
Vit comme confine dans vn valon obscur:
Lautre entre les scauans hardi se fait entendre
Duriuage de Feza l'autel d'Alexandre.


Tels sont pour le iourd'huy l'Hebrieu,
Excellence de l'Hebrieu, Grec, and Romain par dessus tous autres la^gages.
Grec and Romain^
L'Hebrieu, d'autant qu'encore nous tenons de sa main
Du trois-fois eternel la sacree parole,
Et que du droict diuinil est le protecole:
Le Gregeois, comme ayant dans ses doctes escris
Tout genre de scauoir disertement compris:
Et le masle Romain d'autant que sa faconde
Fut par le for plantee en tous les coins du monde.





But softly sliding Age,
The first languages deriued from the Hebrew are each of them agai^e diu ded into diuers others.
whose enuie all doth waste,
Those ancient languages soone eu'ry' chone defac'd,
Which in the thunder-sound of Masons clattring hands
On Tygris banke deuis'd had ouerspread the lands:
And that the world may be more out of order left,
Into a many tongues the least of them hath cleft.


Whence commeth the alteration of a tongue.
And language altereth by reason of Merchandise,
Which bringing vs to land the diuers treasuries
Of azure Amphatrite, and sending ours aboord,
With good successe assaies to change vs word for word:
Or when the learned man delightfully endighting,
With guilt and curled words attires his wanton writing,
And hunting after praise some stampe ne'r seene before
Sets both on deedes and things; or doth at least restore
Disclaimed words to vse, and makes anew be borne
The same that ouer-age with rot and mould had worne.
For herein fals it out as with leaues in a wood,
One sheds, another growes; the words that once were good
And like faire Lyllie-flowers in greenest Medow strew'd,
All ou'r a learned stile their glittring beauty shew'd,
Now are not in request; but, sith Court them exiles,
They blush and hide themselues eu'n vnder cottage tiles:

And such as long agoe were censur'd curiously,
For base and counterfeit, now passe-on currently,


A well-esteemed wit, discreet and fortunate,
May warrant words to passe, albe they but of late
His owne efforged ware; he on the naturall
May graffe some forraine impe, his language therewithall
Enriching more and more, and with a diuers glosse
Enameling his talke, his Poetry or Prose.


Some language hath no Law, but vse vntame and blinde
That runneth wheresoe're the peopl' as light as winde
Goes headlong driuing it: another closely running
Within the bounds of Art, her phrases fits with cunning:
Some one straight waxing old as soone as it is borne
Is buried in the cradl'; anoth'r it is not worne
With file of many yeeres; some one faint-couraged
Within a straight precinct liues euer prisoned;
Another boldly doth from Alexanders altar
Among the learned reach vnto the Mount Gibraltar:
And such now th'Ebrew tongue,
Hebrew, Greeke, and Latine the best of al tongues.
the Greeke and Latine be:
For Hebrew still doth hold, as by her hand doe we,
The sacred word of God, eternall mak'r of all,
And was of Lawes diuine the true Originall:
The Greeke, as one that hath within her learned writ
Comprized all the skill of mans refined wit:
And Latine, for the sword, wherewith her eloquence
Was planted through the worlds so wide circumference.




17.But softly-sliding Age. The Poet here entreth into consideration of other tongues beside the Hebrew: and saith these first tongues that begun in Babel, being all (as it were) Meslins of Hebrew, by tract of time are so worne out, that each one of them hath engendred a many others, as a man may quickly vnde^stand, if he consider the great varietie of ancient people that were before the Greekes and Latines. It shall suffise at this present thus to haue pointed hereat in a word. Who so is desirous of more, let him cast his eye vpon the three first and principall Monarchies, and all the diuers Nations subiect vnto them, and mentioned in the Chronicles of the world: the Abridgement of all is to be found in the first Volumne of the Historicall librarie of N. Vignier.
18.And language altereth. He sheweth by diuers reasons whence commeth

the change of tongues. First, the trafficke that one countrey people hath with another, as well by sea (which he calleth, Th'azur'd Amp^^^^^e) as also by land, is cause why we learne some new words, as if we made no lesse exchange of words than of wares. Secondly, a writer that dares venter, and is desirous to enrich his mother-tongue, decketh it bol^ly w^th that which he borroweth of others, setteth forgotten words on foot againe, inuenteth new words, colouring and fashioning them according. Thirdly, time altereth a speech; as we see it doth all things else; that we might be forced thereby daily more and more to see and confesse, that nothing is sure and stedfast vnder heauen; and to beat downe also the vanitie of ^ans conceit, who commonly vaunteth himselfe and taketh pride in such things as haue nothing constant in them but their owne vnconstancy.

19.A courage bold. This commeth too neere the second reason to be counted a fourth. The French Commentar must pardon me; I thinke rather the Poet hauing spoken of Writers, Merchandise and Time, the right and onely meanes whereby new words and phrases are first brought into a language: here he sheweth vs how they are accepted, for as before he touched in a word that the Courts dislike of old words bred their disuse; so here he telleth vs plainly that the authoritie of him, that deuiseth or vseth new words, is cause of their acceptance: which is afterward confirmed by vse, Q^empenes arbitrium est, and vis and norma loquendi: as Horace writeth. But forasmuch as vse without Art draweth a language head-long into Barbarisme, and so out of request, and Art without authoritie of Empire, shutteth it vp in a narrow compasse, he saith, that the Hebrew, Latine, and Greeke, had all these maintaining meanes, whereby they haue continued ^o long, and spred so farre abroad. So beginneth he cunningly to make his passage from words and phrases vnto entire languages, the better to come at length to that excellent discourse, that followeth in the next Section, vpon all the principall tongues now spoken or knowne in the world. As for the Hebrew, besides the perfections aboue mentioned, he saith, in it God hath reuealed his will, and that it is the originall of the diuine Law: both of great force to make the tongue far^e knowne, and continue long: it had further the Art and knowledge of high Priests and Prophets, the wisedome and state of Salomon, and was a long time vsed and accustomed to be spoke in the famous

commonwealth of the Iewes. But these because they belong not vnto that tongue onely, but as well to the other two, the Poet here le^ueth our. The Greeke he saith, in her bookes containeth at large all the liberall Sciences: a great cause and most proper to the Greeke: the rest as common to the others are let passe. The Latine more graue and forcible then the Greeke (that was a more neat and wanton tongue) was aduanced and continued in request by the Romans force of armes: whose Empire was the greatest and most warlike of all the rest; and therefore is this cause here onely mentioned, as most proper to the Latine tongue, and the rest omitted. These three tongues doe at this day farre surpasse all others; but vngodlinesse and contempt of the true Diuinitie, is cause why the Hebrew is not esteemed as it deserueth: the more is it regarded of them that know it. As for the Greeke, that which is now commonly spoken is very grosse. The pure and good Greeke is contained within the bookes of Plato, Aristotle, Zenophon, Demosthenes, Iscerates, Homer, Euripides, Sophocles, Plutarch, Basil, Nastanzen, Chrysostome, and many others. The Latine, after some ignorant and vnlearned men had gready embased it, was refined and set on foot againe within these fourescore yeeres, at what time there flourished many great and learned personages in Europe, as Melancthon, Erasmus, Picus Myrand. and others: but they come short of that grace and liuelihood that the ancient Latine writers haue: Cicero, Caesar, Liuie, Virgill, Horace, and a number of others well enough knowne: of whom (as also of the most excellent authors in other tongues) the Poet here goes about to entreat.






Tracant les derniers vers,
Le Poete s'excuse, and reprend halaine pour entrer plus alaigrement au suiuant discours, ou il descrit poctiquement and represente les langues principales, and ceux qui ont este plus excellens en icelles. Songe du Poete.
and comme a demi-las
Du labour attrayant de la saincte Pallas,
Ie frappe bien souuent du menton ma paictrine.
Mes deux yeux arrousez d'vne humeur Ambrosine,
Se ferment peu a peu. Ie pers le mouuement,
La plume de ma main coule tout bellement.
Dessus le lict cheri de rechefie m'allonge,
En dans le flot Lethal tous mes enuuis i^ plonge.
I'y noye tous mes soins si ce n'est le desir
De donner a la France vn vaile plaisir.
Car le tan sacre-sainct de l'amour qui m'emflamme,
Ne peut mesme en dormant laisser dormir mon ame.


Le Songe aux-aisles-d'or sortivers le Leuant
Par son huis de cristal, qui s'ouure vn peu deuant
Que la porte duiour, fantastique me guide
En vn valou le ioux, and la nuict fresche-humide,
Le Ciel calme and les Nords, les chauds and les frimas,
La pluye and l'air serain ne sentresuyuent pas:
Le May tousioursy regne and nuict and iour Zephyre



De Roses courronne mignardement souspire
Par les bruyans rameaux d'vn bois qui doux-flairant
Va ce champ porte-fleurs en ouale murant.


Instement au milieu de la plaine esmaillee
Description du logis and de l'Image d'Eloquence.
Se sleue vne grand' Roche en piedestal taillee,
Et dessus sacorniche vn Collosse a' airain,
Qui tient vn clair brandon en sa senestre main,
En l'autre vn vase d'eau. De sa langue dore
Naissent mille chenons qui par toute la pree,
Subtils, semblent trainer vn monde d'auditeurs
Parl'or cille attachez, plus encor parles coeurs.


Ases pieds le Sanglier gist sans baue, and sansrage:
Le Tygrey dort charme, and l'Ours s'y desauuage.
Le proche mont sautelle: and lenceinte du bois
Danse, comme on diroit, an doux air de savoix.


Piliers autour de l'image d'eloquence, f^r lesquels sont les principales langues du mo. de, auec ceux qui les ont enrichies. L'hebraique a pour principaux apuis. Moyse.
De piliers faconnez par vne main subtile
A la cariatique vn double peristile
De l'Eloquence ceint l'Image rauisseur:
Hauts piliers, qui fond^z sur vn plinthe bien seur,
Portent de quatre en quatre vne langue de celles
Quece siecle scauant couche au rang des plus belles.


Or entre les esprit, qui fauoris des cieux
Estanconnent icy la langue des Hebreux,
Celuy de quile front flambe comme vn Comete
Orne-ciel, donne-peur: qui porte vne baguete
Seche and fleurie ensemble: and tient entre ses doigts
Leregistre sacre des dixplus sainctes Loix:
Est la guide d'Isac: l'autheur, qui premiere ose
Vouer ases neueux and ses vers and sa prose;
Escrits qui seulement ne dauancent, sacrez,
De long temps les escrits, ains tout les faits des Grecs.


Le second est Dauid,
Dauid.
de qui l'agile pouce
Attire auce sa voix l'harmonie plus douce
Des cieux organis^z sur son luth qui bruira
Tant que l'astre du iour sur nos testes luira.
Mesme, peut estre apres que lescelestes flammes
Donront fin a leur bal, les bien heureuses ames

Des champions de Christ, au son de ces accors
Danseront a l'honneur du Royle fort des forts:
Et des Anges encor les bandes emplumces
Chanteront, Sainct, o Sainct, o Sainct Dieu des armees.


Salomon.
Le tiers est Salomon, qui^es beanx monumens
A, sage, marquete de plus d'enseignemens,
De plus de mots dorez, que sariche couronne
Derubis de grenats, de perles ne rayonne.


L'autre est le fils d'Amos,
Isaie.
vehement en menaces,
Figure, graue, sainct, accompagne des graces.


La Grecque a pour apuis. Homere.
La Grecque a pour apuy vn Homere aux doux vers,
Dont l'eschole a produit les regimens diuers
Des philosophes vieux, and fait par tout le Monde
Comme vn grand Ocean ruisseler su faconde.
Platon.
Platon le tout diuin qui semblable a l'viseau,
Qu'on dit de Paradis, ne se souille onc en l'eau,
Iamais ne touche a terre, ains sur les astres vole
Plus haut que sur l'Enfer ne s'cleue le' Pole.
Herodote. Demosthene.
Herodote au clair stile: and Demostene encor,
Loy des hommes diserts, Roy des coeurs, bouche d'or.


La Romaine a pourapuis. Ciceron.
L'enuemi capital d'Antoine and Catiline,
Qui foudroye, qui tonne, and de qui la poictrine
Source mille torrens, ou de merueille espris
S'enyurent chasque iour l^s plus rares esprits:
Cesar, qui ne scait moins bien faire que bien dire:
Saluste plein de nerfs:
Cesar. Salaste. Vngile.
Et celuy qui retire
Ilisn sur le Tybre: escriuatin chen des cieux,
Quine serma iamais, pour s'endormir les youx:
Qui iamis ne broncha: tousiours clair, tousionrs graue,
Hont eusement hardi, and modestement braue,
Tousiours semblable a soy, and dissemblable a tous,
Soustiennent des Romains le parler graue-dous.


La Tosca^e, auce ses apuis. Bocace, Petrarque. A^^^^^. T^^^.
Le toscan est sondesur le gentil Bocace:
Le Petrarque aux beaux mots, esmaille, pl^in d'audace:
L'Arioste conlant, pathetique, and diuers:
Le Tasse, digne ouurier d'va Heroiquevers,
Figure, court, aign, lime, riche^^ a l^^gage,

Et premier enhonneur, bien que derniore en age.


Le langage Arabesque a pour f^rmes apuis
Le subtil,
L'Arabesque. Auenrois Auicenne. Eldebag. Ibnu-farid. L'alemande, Beuther. Luther. Peucer Butric. La Castilane. Gueuare. Le Boscan, Grenade. Garcilace.
le profond, le grand fils de Rois:
L' Auicenne facond, l'Eldebag Satyrique,
L'Ibun-farid conlant, gentil, alegorique.


Le Tudesque a celuy, qui refait Alemand
Le gentil Sleidan: l'eternelornement
D'Islebe and Vvitemberg: and Peucer qui redore
Ses attrayans discours: and mon Butric encore.


Gueuare, le Boscan, Grenade, and Garcilace.
Abreuuez du Nectar, qui rit dedans la tasse
De Pitho verse-miel, portent le Castillan.
Et si l'antique honneur du parler Catalan
N'eust Osias raui, docte, il cust pen debatre
Le laurier Hespagnol auec l'vn de ces quatre.


L'Angloise. Morus. Baccon. Cydne.
Le parler des Anglois a pour fermes piliers
Thomas More, and Baccon, tous deux grands Chancelliers,
Qui seurant leur langage, and le tirant d'enfance,
Auscauoir politique ont conioint Peloquence.
Et le Milor Cydne qui Cygue donx-chantant.
Va les flots orgueilleux de Tamise flatant.
Ce fleuue gros d'honneur emporte sa faconde
Dans le sein de Thetis, and Thetis par le Monde.


Mais quel nouueau Soleil me donne sur les yeux?
Sui-ie fait tout d'vn coup heureux bourgeois des cicux?
A l'occasion de l'Angleterre il fait vne digression and entre es louanges de la Reyne Elisabet Princesse sage, paisible, docte, and eloquente.
O quel auguste port! quelle royale grac!
Quels yeux doux-foudroyans! quelle Angelique face!


Filles du souuerain, doctes soeurs, n'est-ce pas
La grand' Elisabeth, la prudente Pallas,
Qui fait que le Breton, desdaigneux, ne desire
Changer au male long d'vne femme l'Empire?
Qui tandis qu'Erynnis lasse d'estre en Enfer,
Rauage ses voisins and par flamme, and par fer,
Et que le noir effroy d'vn murmurant orage
Menace horriblement l'Vniners de naufrage:
Tient en heureuse paix sa prouinse, ou la Loy
Venerable, fleurit auec la blanche Foy.

Quin'a pas soulement l'opislence feconde
Du maternel langage: ains d'vne bouche ronde
Peut si bien sur les champ haranguer en Latin,
Grec, Francois, Hespagnol, Tudesque, and Florentin,
Que Rome l'Emperiere, and la Grece, and la France,
Le Rhin, and l'Arne encor plaident pour sa naissance.


Clair perle du Nort, guerriere, domte-Mars,
Continue a cherir les Muses and les Arts.
Et si iamais ces vers peuuent d'vne aile agile,
Franchissant l'Ocoan, voler iusqu' a ton Isle,
Et tomber, fortunez, entre ces blanches mains,
Qui sous vn iuste frein regissent tant d'humains,
Voy les d'vn ocil benin, and fanorable pense;
Qu'il faut pour to louer auoir ton eloquence.


Mais qui sont les Francois?
Lalangue fiancoise a pour ornemens and apuis. Marot.
Ce terme sans facon.
D'ou la grossiere main du paresseux macon
Aleue s^nlement les plus dures escailles,
C'est toy Clement Marot, qui furieux tranailles
Artistement sans art: and poingt d'vn beau souci,
Transportes Helicond' Italie en Querci.
Marot, que ie reuere ainsi qv'n Colisec
Noircy, brije, moussu: vne medaille vsee:
Vn escorne tombeau non tant pour leur beaute,
Que pour le sainct respect de leup antiquite.


Vigenere. Amyot.
Ie ne puis bonnement cest autre recognoistre
Il abien, quel qu'il soit, la facond'vn bon maistre,
Ie demeur en suspens: carie le pren tantot
Pour Blaisse Vigenere, ore pour Amyot.


Ronsard.
L'autre, ce grand Ronsard, qui pour orner sa France,
Le Grec and le Latin despouille d'eloquence:
Et d'vn Esprit hardi manie heureusement
Toute sorte de vers, de style, and dargument.


De Mornay, en ion docte ocuure de la verite de la Religion Chrestienne.
Cest autre est De-Mornay, qui combat l'Atheisme,
Le Paganisme vain, l'obstine Iudaisme,
Auec leur propre glaiue: and presse, graue, saint,
Roidit si bien son style ensemble simple and peint,
Que ses vines raisons de beaux mots empennees

S'eufonsent comme traicts dans les anses bien-nees.


Et puis ie parle ainsin. O beaux, o clairs esprits,
Qui bien-heureux,
Southait du Poete considerant les hommes doctes; des escrits desquels la France iouit.
auez consacre vos escrits
A l'immortalite: puis que sur mes espaules
Ie ne puis auec vous porter l'honneur des Gaules:
Que, las! ie ne vous puis mesme suyure desyeux
Sur le Mont, qui besson s'auoisine des cieux:
Au moins permettez moy que, prosterne ^embrasse
Vos genous honorez: permettez que i'entasse
Sur voschefs rayonneux d'vn Auril les moissons.
De grace permettez, que mes soibles chausons
Vne gloire cternelle en vostre gloire puisent,
Et que tousiours vos noms dans mes carmes se lisent.


Fin de la vision.
Accordant ma demande, ils abaissent le front:
Le vallon disparoit, les Colomnes s'en vont:
Et le songe suyeit de-mesme auecques elles,
Si ic ncusse englue de mon ancre ses ailes,





When this I wrote, behold,
The Poet takes breath to enter afresh into the next discourse, whereby way of a Vision, he cunningly describeth the principall tongues, with their best authors
with tysing labour led
Of Pallas heau'nly skill, full heauy grew mine head:
And now and then I strike my chin vpon my brest,
That softly both mine eyes are closed vp to rest
With sweet Ambrosian dew; knit is my senses band,
And fairely slides my pen forth of my fainting hand.
Vpon my flattring couch I spread my selfe againe,
And plonge in Lethe-streame all troubles of my braine:
So drowne I all my care, saue one, that with no trance
Is discontinued, to please and profit France;
Whose sacred forge of loue, that me enflamed keepes,
Will not let sleepe my soule although my body sleepes.
Then golden-winged dreame from of th'East-Indy shore
Came forth at Christall gate, and little while before
The day-gate was vnlockt to valley of pleasant ayre
By fancie led my soule, where day, night, foule and faire,
The North winds and the South, the Summer and Winters hew,
The spring and fall of leafe did neu'r each other ensue:
Where alway raigned May and Zepherus bedight

VVith rosie coronets did breath-on day and night,
A young woods whizzing boughes, that blossomes sweet did yeeld,
And ouall-wise bewald the flowre-embossed field
In middle point of all this ammell-blooming glade
Arose a mighty rocke in footstall-manner made;
Vpon the top thereof a brasse-colosse did stand,
That in the left hand held a flaming fierbrand,
And in the right a spout; she shew'd a golden tongue,
And thence a many chaines all o're the medow sprong,
That worlds of hearers drew, with fine deuise of art;
For some were held by th'eares, and some were held by th'hart.
Before her feet the Boare, that forrest wilde had haunted,
The Tiger slept, and Beare, all aft'r a sort enchaunted.
The neighbour hillocks leapt, and woods reioyced round,
Carranting (as it were) at her sweet voices sound.


A double circled row of pillers high and dight
By cunning workmans hand all aft'r a Carian right
With bases vnder-pinn'd, to fasten their foundation,
Beset this goodly shrine of eloquent Oration;
And foure by foure bore-vp amid-them one language
Of those that flourish most in this our learned age.


Among the blessed wits, to whom was giu'n the grace
1. The Hebrue.
To beare-vp th'Ebrew tongue in such a sacred place;
The man whose fore-head shines, as doth a blazing starre,
Skie-gracing, frighting-men; who for his scepter barre
A seare, yet budding, rod, and hath in fingers hent
The ten-fould register of Gods Commandement;
Is he that Isac led: and first authoritie,
Both of free stile and verse, left to posteritie:
Such holy works as doe not onely long fore-run
The writings of the Greekes, but all that Greece hath done.
The second Dauid is, whose touch right cunningly
Combined with his voyce drawes downe sweet harmony
From th'Organized heau'ns, on harpe that aye shall sound
As long as dayes great starre shall o're our heads goe round:
Nay long'r, as who can tell, when all these heau'nly lights
Are at their measures end, but that the blessed sprights,

And Champions of Christ, at sound of his accords
Shall honour with a dance th'Almighty Lord of Lords:
When all the Quire of heau'n, and bands of winged ghosts,
Shall Holy, holy sing, O holy Lord of hosts.
The third is Salomon, whose worke more bringtly beames


With golden sentences, then doth his crowne with gems.


The last is Amos sonne, beset with graces all,
Graue, holy, full of threats, deuout, rhetoricall.


2. The Greeke.
The Greeke on Homer leanes; who sweetly versifies,
Whose learned schoole hath taught a many Companies
Of old Philosophers, and from whose cunning plea
Run riuers through the world, as from an Ocean Sea,


On Plato th'all-diuine, who like the bird we call
The bird of paradise, ne soyles himselfe at all
VVith earth or waters touch; but, more then hels descent
Surmounted is by heau'n, surmounts the firmament.


On Herodote the plaine; and him, of pleaders arts
The Law Demosthenes, the guilt-tongue Prince of harts.
Then he that thunder-speaks, with lightning blast and shine
3. The Latine.
The Foe of Anthonie, the scourge of Catiline,
The spring of thousand floods wherein the rarest wits
Doe daily toyle themselues agast with wonder-fits;
And Coesar, that can doe as well as he can plead:
And sinowie Salust next; then he that Troy doth lead
Againe to Tyber-shore, a writer sent from heauen,
That neuer shuts his eyes to slumber, morne or cu'n;
That euer treadeth sure, is euer plaine and graue;
Demurely venterous, and temperately braue;
That still is like himselfe, and vnlike others all;
These hold the sweet-graue tongue was last imperiall.
Th'Italian founded is on Boccace pleasurous;
4. The ^^al^^^.
With Petrarch finely dight, bould and sententious;
On slowing Ariost, selfe-vnlike, passionate;
With Tasso, worthy wight to frame a verse of State,
Sharpe, short, fil'd, figured, with language rowling fast,

The first to be esteem'd albeet he wrote the last.


Th' Arabian tongue is here most worthily sustained
By great Auerroes deep-reaching,
5. The Arabian.
suttle-brained;
Ibunfarid the smooth allegorizing wag;
And faire-spoake Auicen, and Satyr Eldebag.


The glory of Wittenberg and Isleb, Martin Luther
Is one that beares the Dutch;
6. The Dutch.
another is Michael Buther,
Who Sleydan Almaned; my Butrick is the next;
With Peucer, who reguilds his all-entising text.


Then Boscan, then Gueuare,
7. The Spanish.
Grenade and Graoilas,
With Nectar all distain'd, that mantleth in the glasse
Of hony-powring Peith, vpheld the Castillane.
And had not th'ancient grace of speaking Catallane
Osias ouer-pleas'd, his learning might haue bore
The Spanish Crowne of Bay from one of th'other foure.


8. The English.
The burd'n of th'English tongue I finde here vndertaken
By quicke Sir Thomas More, and graue Sir Nicolas Bacon;
They knit and rais'd the stile, and were both eloquent,
And Keepers of the Scale, and skill'd in gouernment.
Sir Philip Sydn'y is next, who sung as sweet as Swan
That slaps the swelling waues of Tems with siluer fan:
This Riu'r his honour beares, and eloquence together,
To snow-foot Thetis lap, and Thetis eu'ry whither.
But what new sunne is this that beames vpon mine eyes?
Or,
For the fourth piller of the English tongue hee nameth our gratious Queene Elizabeth, duly and truly praising her for wisdome, maintenance of peace, learning, and cloquence.
am I rapt amongst the heau'nly companies?
O what a princely grace! what State Emperiall!
What pleasant-lightning eyes! what face Angelicall!
Say, O yee learned guirles begot of heau'nly breath,
Is't not the wise Minerue, the great Elizabeth?
Who rules the Briton stout with such a tendering,
That neuer did he wish to change her for a King.
She whiles her neighbour Lands are spoil'd with sword and fire,
By Furies weary of hell, with head of snakie tire,
And, whiles the darke affright of tempest roring-great
Doth to the worlds Carack a fearefull ship wrack threat,
Retaines in happie peace her Isle, where true beliefe
And honorable Lawes are reckned of in chiefe.

She hath not only gift of plentie delectable
To speake her Mother-tongue; but readily is able
In Latine, Spanish, French (without premeditation)
In Greeke, Italian, Dutch, to make as good Oration,
As Greece can, as can France, as Rome Imperiall,
As Rhine, as Arne can, plead in their naturall.


O bright Pearle of the North, martiall Mars-conquering,
Loue still and cherish th'Arts, and heare the Muses sing:
And, in case any time my verses winged-light
Shall ouer th'Ocean Sea to thine Isle take their flight,
And by some happie chance into that fairt hand slide,
Which doth so many men with lawfull Scepter guide;
O reade with gracious eye and fauourable thought:
I want thine eloquence to praise thee as I ought.


But what are those of France? this Image was vnshap'd,
9. The French.
Whence hath the bunglar hand of Idle mason skrap'd,
No more then th'harder skales of en'ry rugged knor;
Thee (Marot) sure it meanes, that labourest so hot
Without Arc Artist-like, and prickt with Phoebus Lance
Remouest He'icon from Italy to France.
Thee (Clement) I regard eu'n as an old Colosse,
All soiled, all to broke, and ouergrow'n with mosse;
Astabl' or tombe defac'd, more for th'antiquitie,
Then any bewty in them, or cunning that I see.


What one this other is, I searce remember me;
A Cunning one he seemes, what one soere he be.
I rest yet in suspense, sometime he doth appeare
To be Iames Amiot, sometime Blase Vigineere.


Great Ronsard is the next, who doth of Graces wrong
The Grecke and Latine both to grace his Mother-tongue;
And with a bould attempt do^h mannage happily
All kinde of Argument, of stile of Poetry.


De Mornay this man is, encountring Atheisme,
Iewes stubborne vnbeleefe, and foolish Paganisme,
With weapons of their owne; he godly, graue, and prest,
So solideth his stile both simpl' and courtly-drest,
That feather'd with faire words his reasons sharpe as darts

Instrike themselues adeepe into the brauest hearts.


The Poets desire considering the learned Writers of France.
Then thus I spake to them, o bright, o goodly wits
Who in most happie case haue consecrate your writs
To Immortalitie! fith that my feeble shoulders
May not among you be the French renownes vpholders,
Alas! sith I vneth you follow can with eye
Vpon the twy-top hill so neare acoast the skie:
Yet suffer me at least here prostrate to embrace
Your honourable knees! o giue me leaue to place
Vpon your shining heads a garland of the Spring,
And of your goodnesse grant that these meane tunes I sing
May in your glory draw an euerlasting glory,
And alway this my verse may register your story.


The end of the Vision.
They yeelding to my suit, made semblance with their head;
So vanished the vale, and all the pillars fled:
In like sort had the dreame with them together hasted,
But that I with mine Inke his nimble feathers pasted.




20Tracing these latter lines. Before he endeth this Booke or discourse, hauing begun to speake of tongues, and their comparison one with another, he taketh thence occasion to set before our eyes the three principall tongues, Hebrue, Greeke, and Latine, accompanied with six other greatly now-a-daies esteemed throughout all Europe. For this purpose, and to enrich his Poem with some new ornament, worthy the things he treateth of; he declareth, how being weary with ouer-watching himselfe in these his former studies, he cast him on his bed and slept; yet so as the earnest desire he had to delight and profit his country-men, kept still his soule awake; which caused him to see in his Dreame the Vision here following. A fine inuention, and framed to the imitation of the best ancient Poets both Greeke and Latine, who, being to handle matters of great importance, are wont by such deuices cunningly to prouoke the Readers to marke and giue care vnto them.
21.And golden-winged Dreame. Of Dreames and their causes hath beene spoken sufficiently in the first day of this second Weeke, intituled Eden, page the 46, 47, 48, etc. hauing here to speake of a Dreame cleere and easie to be conceiued, he distinguisheth it from such as are darksome and deceiueable, saying it was about the dawning of the day, when the golden-winged (that is, the sweet, pleasant, and vntroubled) Dreame came forth at the Christall gate in the East: as much to say, as when the day-starre ariseth, or the morning draweth on, we feele (if we were awake before) sleepe gently seazing on vs, and our spirits comming and going, as it were, thorow Christall gates: for then be Dreames and Visions cleerest and best distinguished;

whereas before our meat be fully digested, our braine ouer-loden with vapours, receiueth but troublesome impressions, waued so to and fro, and so enterlaced one with another, that in the twinkling of an eye, it frameth a thousand shapes, that presently vanish away, and are no more remembred. Now the Poet saith, he was guided (as he thought) into a place mo^^ delightfull, which he describeth in few verses, and it is very fit for the matter following.
22Iust in the middle point. First he describeth the dwelling of Eloquence: to wit, on a great Rocke, wrought and fashioned in manner of a foor-stall, or base for an image to stand on: to shew how stedfast and certaine a thing this excellent gift of God is. Secondly, the resemblance or Image of Eloquence, he calleth a Colosse, that is, of stature surpassing all others: which betoketh thus much, that eloquent and faire spoken men goe many degrees beyond others, whom they vse at their pleasure, and draw whither they list, as the example of Pericles and Cicero declare, and many proofes thereof are found in the holy Scripture. He maketh this Image of Brasse, which implieth the faire glosse, the sweet sound and strong force of Eloquence; he placeth in the left hand a fire-brand, to signifie that learned, true, and faire vtterance maketh men see and touch (as it were) the right nature of things: in the right hand an Ewer, because the speech of the wise dampeth and putteth out the flame of passions. I might note hereof many examples, but I leaue them for the diligent Reader to search: meaning here to offer him but Annotations, which I feare alreadie are growen too long. The little chaines that come forth from the Images golden tongue, and draw such a

number of hearers by the eares and heart, signifie the great power of a well framed speech: the truth whereof appeareth chiefely in preaching the word, in counsels of graue common-wealths-men, and orations of good Magistrates and valiant Captaines. In this manner did the ancient Frenchmen paint and set out their Hercules, surnamed Ognius: whereupon Alciat hath made a pretie Embleme: it is the 180. expounded at large by Cl. Minos. The summe of all is, that Eloquence is to be preferred before force. Our Poet aimeth at that description. Further concerning the Bore, the Tygre, and the Beare, lying tame at the feet of this Image, it signifieth that a pleasant and learned speech appeaseth all angrie, cruell, and sauage men; and cuen the maddest and most brutish people in the world: it maketh the woods and hills to daunce and leape: that is to say, it moueth, bendeth and instructeth very block-heads, and such as are most hard of vnderstanding; and this may be the meaning of those fained tales of Amphion, Orpheus, Arion, and other like. Lastly, this Image is inuironed with a double ranke of pillers, well and strongly grounded and vnder-pinned, that beare vp in due proportion the nino languages following, each by her owne chiefe authors and maintainers. For euery pillar was wrought in fashion of a man, and framed to the countenance of one of their best writers in a long gowne, or stole. And that is the meaning of the French a la Cariatide: After the Carian right: as Vitruuius writeth at large in the first Chapter of his first booke of Architecture. This I note because the French Commenter lets it passe, and it troubled my selfe to vnderstand it at the first.
23.Among the blessed wits. For chiefe props of the Hebrue tongue (which he placeth in the fore-front of Eloquence, as in euery regard it was meet, whether we cofider the sweet grauitie, the natural impliance, the shortnes, hautines, liuelines of it: or the sincerity, holines, light, and heauenly Maiestic) he nameth first Moses, because he is the most ancie^t of those whose writings in this tongue are extant. As for the book of the Prophesie of Henoch, it was lost a long time agoe. He describeth this holy Law-writer after an excellent manner, as was requisite in a discourse of eloquence. His face shineth like a blasing Star: alluding to that in the Scripture, that Moses comming downe fro^ the Mount where he had talked with God, his face so shined, that none was able to behold his countenance; in so much as he was faine to weare a vaile ouer it: the rest is very easie to be vnderstood, especially of such as haue neuer so lightly turned ouer the history. Now for the bookes of Moses, they were written many hundred yeares before the Greekes were knowne: who were not heard of in the world, but a little before the reigne of Saul, and had but few workes in writing, or none at all, till after the time of Salomon, as their owne Histories witnesse, whosoeuer will take paines to turne them ouer. Nay further, all their knowledge came from the Aegyptians, Phenicians and others, who had leaned somewhat by conuersing with the Hebiues. And to come againe to Moses, he hath beene in maruellous account with insinite Heathen Writers. If any haue lightly regarded, or found fault with him, it was either because they vnderstood him not at all, or maliced him exceedingly, which a man may easily finde in their writings. The second

Author of the Hebrue he counteth Dauid, whose Psalmes he speaketh of much in few lines; but little it is in comparison of their excellencie, whereof many ancient and late Writers haue spoken notable things: I will not heape them vp here, assuring my selfe that all true Christians will grant me that the Book of Dauids Psalmes is (as Saint Basil saith) the Storehouse and treasurie of all good learning, for all men to come at; and will confesse with Saint Ierome, and Saint Chrysostome, that nothing better becommeth a man, be he Peasant or Crafts-man, great or small, than to sing vnto the Lord the praises and thankesgiuing in these excellent songs contained: the very liuely and true Anatomies of a beleeuing soule. O how cursed and abominable before God and his Church are those wicked ones, that haue forbidden Christians the vnderstanding and vse of them, and banished them out of Christendome: that haue suffered, allowed, maintained, commanded, and commended vnto the people these shamefull and wanton Poesies, these books of vanitie, error, and leasings, which with their Authors deserue the fire: not the quiet and peaceable persons, that call vpon Iesus Christ, and belecue stedfastly the life euerlasting. The soule that feareth God will not take this my digression ill, nor thinke it needlesse: As for the vngodly, let them spit at it, if they will, I regard them not. The third Author and ornament of the Hebrue, is reckoned Salomon in his Prouerbs, the Booke of the Preacher, and the Song of Songs, bookes more besprinckled with golden words and notable sentences, than his Crowne was with pretious stones and pearles embossed. Happie is the man that taketh delight to marke and daily thinke vpon so profitable and necessary instructions. The fourth is the Prophet Esay, the sonne of Amos, right such a one as the Poet hath described. These foure hee thought sufficient to name, because they haue most Writings extant, and are withall exceeding cloquent, as might easily be proued by particulars, if I were to write a Commentary, or a whole discourse thereof.
24.The Greeke. Homer, his Illias and Odyssea containing 48. bookes, is the most ancient Greeke Author we haue: his inuentions are wonderfull, his vaine naturall, his verses smooth, and full of Art, and the more they are considered, the greater grace they haue. There is also in them a hidden sense, and the very well-spring of all humane knowledge; as may appeare by that infinite peeces of his poesies are cited in the bookes of ancient and late Phylosophers, Geographers, Historiographers and Orators, as Plutarch and others witnesse. The next to Homer is Plato, not in time but in worthinesse: he is called the diuine Phylosopher, because he is so maruellous pure, so high and lofty in all his disconrses; the true scholler of him that professing himselfe to know but one thing, namely that he knew nothing, declared that he knew all things that might be learned in the world, as touching the world. For concerning the knowledge of saluation, Plato and his maister both were ignorant: and sith all other knowledge is nothing in comparison of that (the more are we bound to God that haue it) he said most truely, that he knew nothing. The third is Herodotus, who writeth in the Ionick Dialect, that is a kinde of Greeke differing a little in phrases and pronuntiation from the common-spoken,

as some farre scituate shires doe from the Court or mother-Citie of their Countrie: in diuers points it agreeth with the French. Plutarch dealeth somewhat too roughly with this worthy Historiographer, in whose defence I will oppose the authoritie of a learned man of our time; who in a certaine Preface of his, saith of Herodotus: Narrationes eius sunt disertae, iudicationes expressae, speciosae, explicationes accuratae and euidentes, collectiones certae atqueplenae, in his rerum gestarum, hominum, temporum fides, accurata compertorum relatio, dubiorum coniccturasag^x, sabulosorum verecunda commemoratio, miravbique simplicitas, and eximius quidam candor. See the great praises, and perfections of a graue Historiographer. The fourth is Demosthenes, the prince of Greeke Orators, the very rule and square of all that endeuour to speake eloquently, a man that leadeth other mens mindes as he list, excellent in all his discourses: which are extant, the most of them, and read to the great vse and prosit of those that know how to apply them.
25.Then he of Anthonie and Catiline great foe. That is Cicero, surnamed the father of Eloquence: he is the first and chiefe of those that grace and maintaine the Latine tongue. He was extreamely hated of Marke Anthonie and Catiline, both whom he hath also bitterly pursued and touched to the quicke, as his Catilinarie and Philippicke Orations declare: the often printing of his workes, and learned mens continuall reading of them, and borrowing thence the best graces of their writings, doe proue his learning, eloquence and plentie of speech to be such as the Poet here describeth. The second is Caesar, the most valiant of eloquent men, and most eloquent of valiant men, as may well appeare by his life in Plutarch, and his Commontaries de bello Gallico: by which worke he hath wrung the pen out of learned mens hands, and in a manner discouraged them all from writing Histories, because they see such perfection therein, as they are not able to come neere. The third is the Historiographer Salust: we haue of his workes, besides diuers Orations, two Histories remaining, Coniuratio Catilinae: and bellum Iugurthinum, short they are, but full of sentence and sinewes, witnessing the ancient force and vigor of the Roman tongue. The Reader may hereto adde the commendations of these three Authors, as they are in many learned bookes of late writers here and there scattered. As for those that thinke Cicero bableth without learning, and that Caesar the Dictatour and first Emperour wrote not these Commentaries that beare his name, and that Salust writeth a hard and forced stile: because their accusations are false, and they so farre out of the way, I thinke them worthy none other answer, than our Poets few verses here. Of the fourth, which is the Poet Virgil, too much cannot be spoken: his bookes of Georgickes and Aeneidos, being such maruellous workes, and so farre exceeding all other bookes of humanitic: I speake not onely for the excellence of his verse; but sure in the depth of his inuentions, his iudgement, his decence, his modestie, his grauitie, and his state, how much he doth outstrip and goe beyond all others, may be seene not onely in euery booke of his, but euen in euery verse; wherein is contained a thousand thousand secrets, and as it were the abridgement of all kinde of Arts and knowledge; besides his proper tearmes, his Epythites alway fit, his metaphors

and figures sow'n and sprinkled in their right places, and his speech quite throughout eloquent and pure, without any bodging or dawberie whatsoeuer. The learned Caesar Scaliger, among many others, hath plainly and at large declared in his Art of Poetrie, the excellency of this Author.
26.Th'Italian. For ornament of the Italian, a language risen of the Roman or Latine, he nameth three Poets and one Orator, slipping diuers writers of historie and Secretaries, that haue left diuers excellent workes, Orations, and Epistles among vs. The reason is (I thinke) because these foure containe in them all the graces of the others. He nameth also the Tuscan tongue, because of all the diuers Dialects of Italie the Luquish, Milanish, Geneuish, and Venetian, none are so pure and fine as the Florentine or Tuscan. Iohn Boccace hath written long time agoe, but a very fine and pure stile; as his Decameron, his Fiametta, the Philocope, The Laberinth, and his other bookes witnesse, that with the world are in so great request. Francis Petrach hath written since, and inuented goodly words, and partly by his owne pregnant wit, partly by imitation of the best Authors, hath enriched the tongue with many graces: he hath ventured also farre and made Sonets, Chapters, and Cantoes wonderfull curious. Then Ludouico Ariosto of Ferara hath set forth a legend of Loue, entituled Orlando furioso, in verses sweet and meet, famous throughout all Italie; he is full of affections in his discourse, and as delightfull as is possible, by reason of the varietie of that fabulous matter he writeth of, which he shadoweth so cunningly, that the Reader is therewith often affected and mou^d, as if it were a true storie, or at least not altogether false. Torquato Tasso is last of the foure in time of writing, but in account (as the Poet saith) the first and chiefe: he was the sonne of Bernardo Tasso that eloquent man, whose excellent Epistles are in print. This his sonne hath written in twenty bookes or Cantoes, of stately verse, a poeme the best of all Italians, entituled Gierusalemme liberata, all the graces and riches of the Greekes and Latines are there gathered together, all wrought into it after the best manner, so graue, so short, so learned, so comely, so liuely, so stately, as if it were the worke of another Virgil. There are also printed at Ferrara three volumnes of his workes, containing other kindes of verse, and all sorts of fine inuentions, a Comedie, a Tragedie, diuers Dialogues and discourses in prose, all are worth reading, and all make good the iudgement that our Poet hath giuen of the Authour.
27.The language Arabicke. This language is comen of the Hebrew: among other learned mens bookes that haue made this tongue of account, we haue the workes of Aben Rois, that is, the sonne of Kings: for Ben signifieth a sonne in Hebrew: and the Arabians adde to the beginning this preposition A, and sometime Al. This Aben Rois is the same that we commonly call Auerroes, the Commentar, a very excellent Philosopher. He hath commented vpon most of Aristotle, and is translated into Latine, printed at Venice; the worke doth shew the deepe reach and subtill braine of the man. Auicen was a great Rhilosopher and Physitian, as his writings also declare. Gesner saith Auerroes was of Cordway, and Auicen of Seuill, and so I thinke: but it appeareth by their workes that they were both Arabians, and professed

the superstition of Mahomet. As for Eldebag, Iohannes Leo writeth of him in the fift booke of his description of Asticke. This poet borne at Malaga in Grenade, of great name thorough all the parts of Buggie and Thunes, was very eloquent in the Arabian tongue, and wonderfull sharpe in railing on those that did him hurt: he made the men of Tebesse feele it in a Satyre he wrote against them, the effect whereof is this: that Nature knowing the Tebessians should be men of little worth and very swine, would make no good thing grow about their Citie but Nuts. The last, to wit, Ibnu-farid, the French Commentar knoweth not what he was, and I cannot learne.
28.The Dutch, For the Dutch or Almaine tongue hee setteth vs downe Michaell Beuther, who very well hath translated the Latine Commentaries of Sleidan: the next is Luther borne at Islebe, as learned and eloquent a man as any was among the Diuines and Preachers of Germanie, as all will confesse, that haue read his workes in Dutch: he Preached and read Diuinitie the space of many yeeres at Wytteberg in Saxony. Then Gasper Peucer son in law to Phillip Melancibon, an excellent Philosopher, Mathematician, and Phisitian, as his workes declare. And lastly Peter Beutricke, Counceller to Duke Iohn Cosimer, and chiefe dealer for him with diuers Princes; lately deceased. I could name you many more, but I content my selfe, as the poet hath done, with these foure.
29.Then Gueuare. The Bookes of Anthony de Gueuare, du Bosean, de Grenade, de Gracylace, haue beene for the most part, translated into Latine, Italian and French: but they are farre better in their Castilian: which is the most pure Dialect of the Spanish tongue, and wherein the men of learning and good nourtriture are wont ordinarily to write and speake. And these foure the poet hath chosen for the most eloquent writers in this tongue: yet nothing foredeeming diuers others that haue written well both in verse and prose; as namely Osias, whom but for his old Dialect, he iudgeth as good an author as the other.
30.The speech of English. For ornament of the English tongue he nameth Sir Thomas Moore and Sir Nicholas Bacon both Lord Chauncellours: the first of them was very learned in the Arts and tongues: the second exceeding well seene in the common lawes of England: and both very eloquent in their mother language. As for Sir Philip Sidney he deserueth no lesse commendation then the poet hath giuen him. Chaucer deserueth the like commendation here that Osias did among the Spanish Authors.
31.But what new Sunne is this. He maketh a digression in praise of the Queene of England, who the space of seuen and thirty yeeres hath gouerned her Realme in great prosperitie; so as, during the troubles and ouerthrowes of other kingdomes about her, herselfe and her people haue beene preserued from infinite dangers. This famous Queene hath also the tougues, here mentioned by the poet, very par fit, and at this day by the singular grace of God she is accounted the precious pearle of the North, and very fortunate in all the warres she taketh in hand: her happy successe and victories are euery way so memorable, that they deserue to be written in a large historie, and reuerenced of all posteritic.

32.But what are these of France? Clement Marot worthy to be admired for his time, in regard of the ignorance and barbarisme that raigned in Europe many yeeres before him, hath led the Muses ouer the Alpes, and arrayed them after the French fashion: as witnesseth, among other his workes, the translation of nine and fortie Psalmes of Dauid, a worke that will continue in account as long as Yea and Nay are spoken, euen to the worlds end. Indeed he wanteth that Art, and those fine deuices that some later Writers haue; but euen in this want, and these imperfections he hath done wonderous well; and sheweth in his naturall vaine, that if he had list he could haue beene excellent: yea in some points and places he hath so done alreadie, as the best of them all could haue done no better. For translations wee haue Iacques Amiot, who hath turned into French the Aethiopian Historie of Heliodorus, seuen bookes of Diodorus Siculus, and all Plutarch, wherein he hath laboured to very good purpose, and with happie successe: I would to God he had set his hand also to Thucidides, Xenophon, and Seneca: his stile is pure and naturall, not affected, not forced; right good and true French. Blase Viginere hath also translated many bookes, as the Polonian History, a part of Liuie, Caesar, Chalcondylas, Philostratus, three Dialogues of Friendship, and the Psalmes in free verse, all which I haue read ouer and againe, yet doe I preferre Amiot before him. Indeed I finde in Viginere a very ready stile and matter well chosen, but the other (I know not how) me thinkes hath a better cariage of himselfe. The S^iour de Vauprinas in his French Librarie saith, of all the foster-children of the Muses, that were bred in France, Viginere hath so written, that, as well for learning, as for eloquence of speech, he hath preuented all that shall come after him, and as it were shut the gate against them. See what a commendation here is: I leaue the Reader to iudge of our opinions. Our Poet stayeth in doubt, but I haue beene bold to goe further; I trust without any great offence: in this consisteth not the good or bad state of France. Concerning Poets, he nameth Peter Ronsard, who hath made himselfe rich with Greeke and Latine spoiles, as his Treatises of Loue, his Odes, Elegies, and Hymnes doe witnesse: wherein a man may reade all sorts of verses, and all kinde of matter, sometimes in a low stile, sometimes in a meane, sometimes in a loftie stile: For which the Poet calleth him Great Ronsard. I will note here a notable speech of his: After our Poets first Weeke was come forth in Print, being asked his opinion of the worke, he answered, alluding to the title, Mounsieur du Bartas hath done more in one weeke, than I haue done in all my life time. As for Philip de Mornay, Lord of Plessie Marly, his learned worke of the truth of Christian Religion, honoured thus by the true title, and written in good French, with liuely reasons there gathered together, moueth and draweth to his purpose, that is, to acknowledge the truth, all that reade it with a heart desirous of peace and good. The like may be said of his Discourse of Life and Death, of his Treatise of the Church, his Meditations, and some Epistles and Demonstrations of his. For all his Writings are strengthened with Arguments, Inductions, and proofes inuincible, and all in a stile with grauitie and sweetnesse mixed, well knit, and

well sounding, and easie enough to those that are neuer so little acquainted with it. The Poet hauing so liuely represented his Vision, endeth his discoarse

of Elequence, and her most renowned sauourer in euery Language, and so shut vp his sixt Booke: Which is the second of the second day of his second Weeke.





LES COLONIES. The third Booke of Noe, or the Colonies.



Ayant a parler des migrations de tant de diuets peuples issus de Noe, il desire y estre adresse par quelque faueur speciale.
TANDIS que ie conduy par les deserts du Monde
Du Pilote premier la famille seconde:
Que ie vay descouurant and par terre and par eau,
Adelantade heureux, maint Royaume nounean:
Et que du grand Noe la plautureuse vigne
De l'vne and l'autre mer, penible, ie prouigne:
Quel nuage clair-brun me conduira de iour?
Quel feu me guidera la nuict dans le sejour
Promis a chaque peuple, auant que l'Androgyne
Eust receu dans Eden sa double-vne origine?


O sacre-sainct flambeau, qui, clair, marchois deuant
Pour cest effect, sous la sigure de l'estoile des Sages d'Orient il implore la grace and lumiere du S. Esprit.
Les trois Magitiens de l'Odoreux Leuant,
Pour monstrer le maillot de cil, dont la ieunesse
Vit tousiours en sa fleur; chasse la nuict espesse
Qui me bande les yeux: a fin que par mes vers
Ie suiue tous les coins de ce grand Vniuers.
Car bien quemon esprit durant si long voyage
Voltige ca and la si n'ay-ie en mon courage
Autre plus grand desir qu'a mener par la main
Mes lecteurs a l'enfant diuinement-humain.





Being to speake of so many peoples remoues as came from Noe, a hard matter, he desires the furtherance of Gods speciall fauour.
WHile ore th'vnpeopled world, I lead the fruitfull stocke
Of him that first aslaid the waters wrackfull shocke;
While I by sea and land all in their places range
Discou'ries fortunate of many a kingdome strange;
And while of mightie Noe I toile to spread and twine
Fro th'one to th'other Sea the many-branched Vine;
O what twilighty cloud by day shall guide my sight,
What fiery pillar shall my course direct by night
To seats each peopl' ordaind before the Pair-of-Man
Their twy-fold-one estate in Paradise began!


Thou Holy-holy Flame, that led'st the Persian Wyses,
From th'all-perfumy coast where-out faire Titan rises,
To shew the cradle of Christ, whose youth in liuing light
For euer flourisheth; driue hence the gloomie night
That seeleth-vp mine eyes: and so my Muse it shall
Search all the darker nookes of this great earthy Ball.
For though my wandring thought al-throw this iorney long
Turne here and there, yet I no way more bend my song,
Nor ought doe more desire, than to direct and waine
My Readers to the Childe that was Diuine-humaine.




1.What twilightie cloud. The Poet being to make in and out so many wayes, and crosse so many seas and countries, huge and vnknowne, good cause he had to demand (as he doth) a greater helpe than mans wit can afford, such as the children of Israel had, a cloud by day, and a piller of fire by night, to guide them thorow the wildernesse; and surely God gaue him a a very extraordinary gift, otherwise he had neuer beene able so well and briefely to haue comprised so many, hard, and worthy matters, as he hath done, in lesse than six hundred verses. He saith here further, that each peoples place of abode was ordained of God before the paire of man (that is, Adam and Eue) had receiued in Paradise their twifold-one beginning; that is, before Adam was created of earth, and Eue of one of his ribs: noting thereby, how of one they were made two in creation, and after of two one by mariage. And so before the world was made, the Lord had in his eternall deeree marked and skored out the dwelling places of all people: it remained therefore that the same deeree should be accomplished, as appeared afterward.

2.Thou Holy-holy Flame. The Pole-starre is the Marriners guide: but here the Poet asketh another manner helpe to shew him the right way in his trauell: and glancing at the maruellous new Starre that appeared to the Wise-men that came out of the East to see and worship our Sauiour Iesus Christ, then borne in Bethlem, he calleth on the Holy Ghost the true light of our vnderstanding, auerring that although the matter which he hath taken in hand, constraines him to discourse sometime of one thing, and sometime of another, yet is Iesus Christ the chiefe ma^ke he almeth it, vnto whom the desire is to lead his Reader, as also whatsoeuer is set vs downe in the doctrine of Moses, the Prophets and Apostles, tendeth to the selfe-same end. This the Poets holy desire makes much to the shame of those, that hauing themselues an vncleane heart, by setting their filthy workes in print, desile also the eyes and eares of many, whom (as much as in them lies) they lead vnto the Deuill.






Comparaison monstrant l'effect de l'estonnement suruenu entre les bastisseur de Babel, apres que leur la^gage fut confondu.
TOVT ainsi que le choc de l'esclatant tonnere
Que dans le coeur d'vn bois le ciel triste desserre,
Fait quitter tout d'vn coup aux oiseaux tremblottans
Leurs perches and leurs nids dans l'air obscur slottans;
L'vn fuit ca l'autre la: le sisslement des ailes
Bruit tout aux enuirons: les grises Tourterelles
Ne vont plus deux a deux: and ceux qui sont conuerts
Encor d'vn poil folet osent tenter les airs:
De mesme les macons de la grand Tour d'Euphrate,
Oyant la voix de Dieu, qui bruit, tonne, and s'esclate
En la diuersite de leur barbare voix,
Prennent, esponuantex, leur vol tous a la fois,
A main dextre, a main gauche: and par la terre vuide
Chacun voyage a part ou l'Eternel le guide.


Pourquoy Dieu n'a voulu que les descendans de Noe demeurassent en la plaine de Sennaar.
Car le grand Roy du ciel ayant de longue main
Enson Conseil priue fait don au genre humain
De ce bas Vniuers, ne voulut que la Terre
Fust vn nid de brigands: qu'a coup de cimeterre
On en sit le partage: and que brutalement
Pesle mesle on peuplast ce bourbeux element:
Aincois coupant chemin au feu de conuoitise,
La grandeur de la Terre en trois lots il diuise
Entre Sem, Cham, Iaphet. Sem s'acase vers l'Est,
A Cham eschet le Su, Iaphet gaigne l'Ouest.





A comparison silly shewing the effect of that astonishment befallen the builders of Babel.
As, when the skie o're-cast with darksome cloudy rack
A woods hart thorow-strikes with some great thunder-crack,
The Birds eu'n all at once their nest and pearch forsake,
And throw the troubled aire they flit for feare and quake,
One heare, another there; their pinions whizzing sound
Is nois'd all round-about; no greisell Turtle is found
Together with her mate; with downy-callow feather
Some young ones dare assay to wrastl' against the weather:
Right so the men who built the great Assyrian Tower,
Perceiuing Gods great voice in thunder-clashing stower
Of their confounded speech, each barbarous vnt' ether
Betake them to their heeles all fearefull altogether.
Some runne the left-hand way, and some acoste the right;
Why God would not haue the posteritie of Noe stay in the plaine of Sennaar.
All tread th'vnhaunted earth as God ordain'd their flight.
For that great King of heau'n, who long ere creature breath'd
In priuie counsaile had this vnder-world bequeath'd
Vnto the race of Man, ne would at all abide it
To be a den of theeues, as if men should diuide it
By dreadfull dint of sword, and eu'ry people border
This thickned Element beast-like and out of order:
But, fire of warre to quench, he did all try-diuide,
The earth dinided betweene the sonnes of Noe.
Among the sonnes of Noe allotting each his side.
So Sem enhabited the day-beginning East,
To Cham befell the South,
and Iaphet gain'd the West.




3.The men who built. That which the Poet saith concerning the affright of these builders, is implied by the words of Moses, Gen. 11.8. they ceased to build: by the one is the other vnderstood: for vpon the sudden chance of so strange a confusion, they were scarred, as with a thunder-clap, and after by necessitie constrained to sunder themselues. Yet I am of their opinion, who thinke the diuersitie of tongues is to bee considered, not in euery particular builder, but only in families. As that the goodnesse of God was such in his iudgement, that the builders departing thence, each led his wife and children with him, who vnderstood and spake as he did, otherwise mans life could hardly haue beene sustained. They also that parted furthest at the first from those of Noes successors that were not leagued in this presumptuous enterprise, soonest forgat all their former language. And true it is, that at the first they sundered not all very farre one from another: but, as it pleased God more and more to encrease them, they sought further and further for new countries to dwell in, and all by the secret direction of the wonderfull prouidence of God.

4That great King of heau'n. Hee reacheth euen to the first cause of the Colonies, and diuers-way-partings of Noes posteritie. Staight after the Floud God blessed Noe and his children and said, Encrease and multiply, and fill the earth: and the feare of you, and the dread of you shall be vpon euery beast of the earth, and vpon euery fowle of the heauen, vpon all that moueth vpon the earth, and vpon all the fishes of the sea, into your hands are they deliuered, Gen. 9.1, 2. Therefore if the builders had continued and fast setled themselues in the Plaine of Sennaar, they had (as much as was in them) made void the Lords blessing, and berest themselues and their posteritie of those great priuiledges which he had granted them. But the deree of God must needs be fulfilled, and therefore according to his ordinance he chaseth farre away these donataries, to the end that yeare by yeare, some in one place, and some in another, they may take possession of that which was giuen them, the whole compasse of the world. Whereas the Poet saith further, that the Lord diuided the whole earth into three Lots, that may be gathered out of

the tenth Chapter of Genesis, and 32. Chap. of Deuteronom. vers. 8. Noe a wise and learned man, and one of groat experience, was the instrument of Gods blessing in this behalfe: and though the bounds of these habitations be not all and throughly specisied, as were the diuisions of the Land of Canaan among the Tribes of Israel, yet out of the tenth Chapter of Genesis a man may gather, that in those daies Noe and his sonnes, and their posteritie, knew more a great deale hereof, than men can now perceiue: as may appeare by so many diuers Colonies, so many strange languages, so many names changed and rechanged. A good Commentary vpon this Chapter would assoile many questions hereabouts arising.
5To Sem was giuen. Because the sonnes of Noe were but three, therefore here are named but three quarters of the world, the East, West, and South: Some of the successors of Iaphet peopled the North also, as shall be shewed hereafter. Concerning the names of these foure cardinall points, somewhat hath beene said vpon discourse of the winds, in the second day of the first weeke, verse 571. The order of the sonnes of Noe is this, Iaphet is the elder, Sem the second, Cham the last, Gen. 9.24. and 10.21. But Sem is named first, because of the fauour of God shewed to his posteritie, by thence raising the Messias, and there maintaining his Church. Iaphet the second, for that in the vocation of the Gentiles he is receiued into the reuts of Sem, that is, vnited to the family of the faithfull Abraham, according to the Prophecie and blessing of Noe, Gen. 9.27. Now in the tenth of Gen. vers. 25. Moses further affirmeth, that Heber, Sems vnder nephew had two sonnes, the one named Peleg, which signifieth Diuision, or parting asunder (for in his time the Earth was diuided) and the other Ioktan. Whereout some gather, that in the time of Peleg, that is (as I take it) before the cofusion of tongues, Noe and his sonnes remembred the grant that God had made them of all

the Earth: and that Noe then made a kinde of partition thereof among his sonnes. If we recken the confusion of the builders, together with the partition of the world, though about the fiftieth yeare of Peleg, who was borne but an hundred yeares after the Floud, and liued 239. this confusion must happen within 150. yeares after the Floud: which were very soone: yet some take it sooner, as from the time that Peleg receiued his name, for remembrance (as they say) of both things so note-worthy to all posteritie, and especially to the Church of God: which well might be aduertised therof; for Peleg liued 46. yeares after the birth of Abraham, as appeareth by the eleuenth Chapter of Genesis. Two things then are here to be considered: the one, that the partition of the Earth, which Noe made, was to his posteritie a token of Gods great blessing, which neuerthelesse the Babel-builders for their part haue turned into a curse: the other, that this partition (as many Diuines and Chroniclers thinke) was made before Nimrod and his traine came out of the East, and sate downe in the plaine of Sennaar, what time they were scattered thence again by the confusion. Whereunto this I will adioyne, that as then the builders language was confounded: so by continuance of time, the speech of others also was corrupted, especially when they began to forget the true Religion, which euen in Sems family was decayed, as appeareth plainely out of the 24. Chapter of Iosua, where it is said that Terah, father to Abraham and Nachor, had serued strange gods. It was no reason that the Holy tongue should remaine entire and vncorrupt with such as had corrupted the seruice of God. But the Lord being mercifull vnto Abraham, restored to him againe, and kept for his faithfull children the first Language, which had not beene so much corrupted in the family of Sem, who parted not so farre from his father.






La terre partagee entre les enfans de Noe. Sem tire vers l'Orient.
Ce pays qui s'estend, non moins riche que large,
Iusqu'au bord Perosite, ou reide se descharge
L'Ob Roy des douces caux, l'Ob au superbe cours,
Fleuue qu'a peine on peut trauerser en six iours,
Iusques a Malaca: les Isles, ou s'amasse
La Canelle, and le Clou: Sumatre, sur qui passe
Le Cercle egale-nuicts: and iusqu'au slot encor
De Zeilan porte-perle, and Binasgar porte-or.
Depuis la mer Euxine, and l'onde fraternelle
Des fleuues Chaldeans, iusqu' a l'onde cruelle
Du destroit Anien: les paresseuses eaux
Habitation des successeurs de Cham.
Ou Quinzit est hasty: Chiorze, ou les Taureaux
Aussi grands qu'Elephans son habillez de soye,
Est la part du grand Sem. Car le destin enuoye



Assur en l'Assyrie, a sin qu'en peu de iours
Chale, Resen, Niniue, au ciel haussent leurs tours,
Le porte-scepre Elam saisit les monts de Perse,
Et les fertils guerets que l'Araxe trauerse:
Lut, le champ Lydien: Aram, l'Aramean:
Et le docte Arphaxat, le terroir Chaldean.





This countrry reaching forth as rich as it is large,
From Peake of Perosites,
Sem went toward the West.
where doth himselfe discharge
The stately running Ob, great Ob, fresh waters King,
A riuer hardly crost in six daies trauelling,
To Malaca, to th'Isles from whence are brought huge masses
Of Calamus and Cloues: Samotra whereon passes
Heau'ns Equinoctiall line; and to the waters far
Of Pearly Zeilan Isle, and goldie Bisnagar:
And from the Pont-Eusine, and from the brother waues
Of those two Chaldee streames, vnto the Sea that raues
With hideous noise about the Straight of Aniens,
To Quinsies moorie poole, and to Chiorza, whence
Come Elephantick buls with silken-haired hides;
This hight the share of Sem: for Gods decree it guides

Ashur t'Assyriland, that after some few daies
How and what Nations came of Sem.
Chal, Rezen, Niniue, their tow'rs to heau'n may raise.
The Persian hilles possest great Elams kingly race,
And those fat lands where-through Araxes bont his pace.
Lud held the Lydian fields, Aram th'Armenia,
And learned Arphaxad the quarter Chaldean.




6.This Countrey. He setteth downe the lots of Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, first in generall: after meaning to shew the particular Colonies of each. So then to Sem he allotteth Asia. The proofe of these seuerall shares may be gathered out of the tenth Chapter of Genesis. It is not meant that Sem in his owne life-time tooke possession of this huge plot of grou^d, although he liued 600 yeers: but the posteritie of his fiue sonnes ouer-spred it by succession of time, as the Poet declares at large hereafter; and a man may perceiue some token hereof, in that Moses reckoneth in the foresaid Chapter the sonnes of Joktan the sonne of Heber peti-sonne of Arphaxad, sonne of Sem. Now before I shew the bounds here noted by the Poet in this lot of Sem, I will set downe the description and deuision of Asia, as now it is. The map-drawers of our time differ in their order: some consider it by the whole masse; others by the seaborders and parts best knowne, which they reckon to be nine, and those particularly deciphered in the first chapter of the twentieth booke of the Portugall historie. But this kinde of deuision, because it is more obscure and farther from my purpose, I leaue, and rest on the other, which deuides the masse of Asia into siue principall parts: the first, which is ouer-against Europe, and vnder the Emperour of Moscouie, is bounded with the frozen sea, the riuer Ob, or Oby, the lake of Kittay, and the land-straight that is betwixt the Caspian and Euxine sea. The second is Tartary subiect to the great Cham, which abutteth Southward on the Caspian sea, the hill Imaus and the riuer Juxartes; Northward and Eastward on the Ocean, and Westward vpon Moscouie. The third part is possessed by the Turke, and containeth all that lyes betweene the Euxine, Aegean and Midland seas, and so further betwixt Egypt, the Arabian and Persian Gulfes, the riuer Tygris, the Caspian sea, and the land-straight there. The fourth is the Kingdome of Persia, abutting Westward on the Turke, Northward on the great Cham, Eastward on the riuer Indus, and Southward on the Indian sea. As for the fist part, it is the same which we call the East-Indies, so named of the riuer Indus, and distinguished the higher from the lower by the famous riuer Ganges. These Indies are very large Countries, as the Maps declare, and front out Southward as farre as Malaca, hauing besides, an infinite sort of Ilands great and small, which the Card-men haue well set downe, both in Maps and writing. Now see we the manner how the Poet considereth Asia. He takes it first by right line from North to South, to wit, from the Peake, foreland or cape of Perosites as farre as Malaca, where he taketh in the Moluckes and Taprobana, and from thence riseth againe to Zeilan and Bisnagar. Then draweth another line from the

Maior or Euxine sea on the West, to the straights of Anien Northeast, and toucheth by the way some few Countries most note-worthy, reseruing the rest vntill his particular description of the Colonies: which followeth from the 297. verse vnto the 319.
To make plaine some words in the text, the Peake of Perosites is a promontory about the farthest part of Moscouy, neare the Scythian sea, where liueth (as Cellarius reports of Asia in his great booke entituled Speculum orbis terrarum, and Mercator in his world-map) a certaine people which haue so small a vent for their mouth, that they are nourished onely by the sauour and steeme of sodden flesh. And about this promontory the Riuer Ob, rising from the lake of Kythay, groweth to an huge breadth, and so emptieth into the Scythian or frozen sea. The Baron of Herbestoin noteth it in his map of Moscouie, and in his Historie saith as much as here followeth touching this riuer, fol 82. They that haue beene thereon say they haue laboured a whole day without ceasse, their vessell going very fast, to passe the Riuer, and that it is fourescore Italian miles broad Which ageeth well with that the Poet here saith, and with report of Merator and Cellarius: so that by good right it may be called, rather then any other streame, the king of all fiesh waters, because in all the world besides there is none so large, and this also is of a wonderfull great length: for as the foresaid Baron affirmeth, from the one end to the other, to wit, from the lake of Kythay to the frozen-sea, it asketh more then three moneths sayling.
The realme and citie of Malaca are described in the sixth booke of the Portugall historie, chap. 18. It is neare the Equinoctiall aboue Taprobana: so therefore Asia reacheth from the North-pole beyond the Equator.
The Isles from whence are brought buge masses of Cloues and Cassia, are the Moluckes, siue in number, Tidor, Terenat, Motir, Machian, and Bachian, beset with diuers other Isles and Islets vn ler and neere the Equator in the East, which with their properties and manners of their inhabitants are well set downe in the 13. booke of the history of Portugall, Chap. 8.
Samotra, whereon passes the night-equalling line, or the Equator, is the Isle Taprobana Southward ouer against Malaca: it is aboue 450. leagues long, and 120. broad, I haue described it in the fist day of the first weeke: see further the history of Portugall in the sixt booke, the 18. chap.
Zeilan is an Isle right against the Cape of Calecut, aboue Taprebana toward the East, it lies North and South, in length about 125. leagues, and in the broadest place is 75. ouer. There are taken out of the sea great store of

pearles very faire and brighte for the further description thereof, see the 4. booke and 20, chapter of the history of Portugall.
Bisnagar is a kingdome lying betweene Decan and Narsingua, the mountaines of Calecut, and the sea called the great gulfe of Bengala. It is rich in gold which is there found in riuers. Looke the situation thereof in the Map of the East Indies, and in the Asia of Ortelius and Cellarius.
The Pont-Eusine, is now called the Maior or the Hacke Sea: at the one end thereof toward the Midland-sea is Constantinople, the Card-men call it by diuers names, which Orteliu: hath set downe in his Synonym.
By the Brother waues of those Chaldean streames, is meant (as. I suppose) the Persian sea, whereinto Euphrates and Tygris both together empty, being before ioined about Babylon, now called Bagadet, and so the Poet takes as much of the breadth of Asia at the West end as he doth at the East: the one from Quinsay to Chiorze, the other from the sea of Constantinople to the Persian Gulse.
Concerning the straight of Anion, the Cardmen are not all of one opinion: Mercator, Ortelius, Cellarius, Theuet, and others, set downe plainly a good broad arme of Sea betwixt the North-east point of Asia and America. But Vopelius ioynes Asia and this fourth part of the world together, greatly enlarging Asia and cut tolling the other, contrary to the opinion of the Authors aforesaid, and many Spaniards that haue written of the new-found world: the reasons that may be alledged in fauour of either side, require a large Commentary. Vopelius his opinion indeede cutteth off many doubts that arise about the enpeopling of America: but Mercator and the others, who are most commonly followed, seeme to ground more vpon Geography and better to agree with the seas naturall sway and easie compassing the earth. Arias Montanus in his booke intituled Phaleg, where he treateth of the habitations of Noes posteritie, setteth downe a Map according to Vopelius, this booke of his bound in the volume called Apparatus, is ioyned with the great Bibles of Antwerp. But the Poet followeth Mercator, Ortelius, and the common opinion of the Cardmen of our time: for Ptolome, Strabo and Mela in their daies had not discouered so much.
Quinsay, which the Poet cals Quinzit, is a famous citie in the Northeast point of Asia about ten leagues from the sea, built vpon peeres and arches in a marrish ground; it is twenty leagues or one hundred miles about, and by reason as well of the great Lake-waters there, as also of the ebbe and slow of the sea, it bath (as M. P. Venet, reports in the 64. chapter of his second booke) 12000. bridges of stone: the most renoumed bound-marke of all Asia, and the greatest citie in the world, if that be true. But Theuet gainsaith it in the 27. chapter of the 12. booke of his Cosmography, where he describes the Citie and Lake with the Riuer that causes the Lake to swell; he saith it is not aboue foure leagues in compasse: yet M. Paule affirmes he hath beene there.
Chiorze is another worthy part of Asia set downe here for a bound-marke, because of the strange Buls there, as great as Elephants, with haire as smooth and soft as silke. Howsoeuer now adaies that country is nothing so ciuill as

others inhabited by the posterity of Cham and Iaphet, yet the fruitfulnesse of the ground, and great commodities there growing, for maintainance of mans life, declare it hath beene in times past one of the best portions of the children of Noe.
7.Ashur t' Assyriland. Moses saith the sonnes of Sem were Elam, Ashur, Arphaxad, Lud and Aram: The Poet here in six verses hath noted out the first habitations of these fiue: reseruing afterward, about the 300. verse and so forth, to shew their first, second, third, and fourth out-going ouer the rest of Asia. Concerning Ashur it may be gathered out of the 10. of Genesis, verse the 11. that hauing sorted himselfe with the people that now began to feare Nimred, and liking not to liue vnder that yoke, went on further, and in the Countrey after his name called Assyria built Niniuy (which a long time remained one of the greatest Cities in the world, as appeares by the prophesie of Ionas and other places of Scripture) and Caleh and Resen not farre asunder, which haue beene long agoe destroyed, Elam, that was the eldest, seated himselfe by the riuer Euphrates neere the Persian Gulfe, which now is called the Sea of Mesendin. The Poet giues him a Princely title, because the Monarchie began betime and long continued thereabouts, where also reigneth still the Sophi, a great Emperour and deadly enemy of the Turkes. The Riuer Araxes is described by Ptolome in his third Map of Asia, where he makes it spring from the soot of Pariard which some men take for the hill Taurus, and so passing Scapene, Soducene, and Colthene to emptie into the Caspian sea. These Countries are very rich, and therefore the Poet cals them sat lands. Lud hauing passed the Riuer composed of Tygris and Euphrates, which straight after voids into the Golfe, had Elam on the North, the two Riuers ioyned and the Gulfe on the East, and on the West the Marches of Seba, which is the vpper part of Arabia. The poet here allotteth him the Lydian fields, if by Lydia be vnderstood that part of the lesser Asia called Meonia by Ptolome, Herodote and Plinie, Lud should haue wandered further then the other foure brothers. Moses reports not any thing of his Colonies, and his farre going may be the cause, for according to the Poet he should haue coasted vp as farre as Aeolia and the Midland sea. The seat of Aram is Mesopotamia, to wit, the Countries about Babylon, and the mountaines of Armenia, which were after called by the name of Taurus. This also containeth Syria and the great Armenia, betwixt the which runneth Euphrates. Arphaxad passing Euphrates staied in Chaldea: and for that Astronomy and other excellent arts there chiefly flourished, the Poet surnameth him the Learned, which appertaineth also vnto him in regard of the true doctrine maintained by his posteritie, and after some corruption reformed in the house of Abraham, whom the Lord remoued from Vr of the Chaldeans into Syria.






Cham tire vers le Midi.
Cham fut fait le Seigneur de la terre bornee
Vers l'Autan, par les flots de la noire Guinee,
De Sephal, Botongas, Gaguametre, Benin,
Et du chaut Concritan trop fertil en venin.
Vers le Nort, de la mer qui naissant pres d'Abile,
Depart lariche Europe and l'Afrique sterile.
Vers la part ou Tytanle soir noye ses rez,
De l'onde de Cap-verd, de Cap-blanc, and de Fez.
Et vers celle ou Phebus le matin se resueille,
De l'Ocean d'Aden, and de la mer Vermeille.
Et qui plus est, encore tout ce qui gist enclos
Entre le mont Liban, and les Arabes slots,
Habitation des successcuts de Cham.
Entre l'onde Erytree and le Goulfe Persique,
Il l'adiouste, grand Prince, a son sceptre d'Afrique,
Canan l'vn de ces fils s'amaisonne a l'entour
Du Iourdain doux-glissant, ou se doit quel que iour
Heberger Israel: Pheud pouple la Lybie:
Mizraim, fon Egypte: and Chus, l'Ethiopie.





Cham Lord was of the Land that Southward is beset
With blacke Guineas waues, and those of Guagamet;
Of Benin, Cefala; Botongas, Concritan,
That fruitfull is of drugs to poison beast or man.
It Northward fronts the sea from Abil, pent betweene
The barren Affrick shore, and Europs fertil greene:
And on the Westerne coast, where Phoebus drownes his light,
Thrusts-out the Cape of Fesse, the green Cape and the white:
And hath on th'other side, whence comes the Sun from sleepe
Th'Arabick seas, and all the ruddy-sanded deepe.
Nay all the land betwixt the Liban mountaine spred,
And Aden waues, betwixt the Persick and the Red,
This mightie Southerne Prince, commanding far and wide,
Vnto the Regiment and scept'r of Affrick tide.


For Canan one his sonne began to build and dwell
By Iordan, gentle streame, whereas great Israel
Was after to be lodg'd: Phut peopled Lybia.
Misraijm Egypt had, Chus Ethiopia.




8.Cham. The share of Cham was Africke, which the Poet boundeth out as followeth. It hath on the Southside the Ae^hiopicke Ocean, or the sea of Guinea, the land of Negros, the realmes of Caefala (which commeth neere the South Tropicke, and is right-ouer against Madagascar, or as the Spanish call it, the Isle of S Laurence) Bolongas (lower and hard by the Cape of good hope) Guagamet, about the lake of Zembre, from whence the riuer Nile springeth, as Daniell Cellarius noteth in his Map of Africke; and Benin, that Ises aboue th'Equator neere the great bay betwixt Meleget and Mauicongo. As for Concritan, it is a great wildernesse betweene Cefala and Bolongas, which by reason of extreame heare brings forth great store of poisonous things. Now the Northbound of Affricke is the Midland-sea, and on the West it shooteth out three capes or promontories named in the text, all toward the Atlanticke Ocean, but the greene cape; which is more southward and pointeth more toward the Sea, called (in respect of the Antatticke pole) the North Sea, though it lye very neere the Equator: on the East of Affricke plaies the Arabian Gulfe, and the great red Sea now called the Indicke Ocean: and beyond these bounds the Poet saith Cham also possest Arabia, which is distinguished into three parts, the Happy, the Desert, and the Stony, all enclosed by the Mount Libanus, and the Red and Persian Gulfes.
9.Canan. He setteth downe briefly and in foure verses the seuerall abodes of Chams foure sonnes, according as they are named in the tenth chapter of Genesis. Chus the eldest brother had Aethiopia, which some take for that vnder Aegypt, others for the land of Chus which is a part of Arabia the

Happy, as may be gathered by many places of the old Testament, well noted of M. Beroals in the sixt chapter of his fourth booke of Chronicles. Mizraim peopled Aegypt, that of the Hebrewes was commonly called Mitzraijm, and long after Aegypt of the name of King Aegyptus, who succeeded Belus in that kingdome, and was brother to Danaus, who came into Greece and was Author of that name generall to the Grecians, which, as Saint Augustine thinkes De Ciu. Dei, the eighteenth booke and tenth chapter, happened about the time of Iosua. Phut the third sonne of Cham, gaue name (saith Iosephus) to the Phutaeans, after called Lybians, of one of the sonnes of Mesren or Mizrain named Lybis. He addeth also that in Mauritania there is (...) certaine riuer and countrey called Phute. Ezechiel 30.5. numbreth Phut among those that were in league with Chus and Lud, which the Latine interpreter translateth Ethiopia, Lydia, and the Lydians: so also did the 70. Interpreters. This I say to mou^ the Reader, that is so delighted, vnto a further and more diligent search. I thinke Phut was seated neere Arabia and Aegypt; although Arias Montanus and others place him in the coast of Affricke now called Barbary, about Tunis, Bugie, Algeri and the Mountaines of Maroco. Now of Canan or Chanaan, the fourth sonne of Cham, was called that Land of Promise, which the twelue Tribes of Israel vnder the conduct of Iosua in due time entered and possessed. The bounds thereof are plainly set downe in the booke of Exodus, chap 23. verse 31. and elsewhere: I neede not here discourse of them, except I were to write a long Commentarie.






Iaphet tirevers le Septentrion and l'Occident.
Iaphet s'estend depuis les eaux de l'Hellespont,
La Tane and flot Euxin, iusques au double mont
Du fameux Gibaltar, and l'Ocean qui baigne
De son flus and reflus le ruiage d'Hespaigne:
Et depuis ceste mer, ou les chars attelez
Se promenent au lieu des Gallions ailez,
Iusqu'au flot Prouencal, Tyrrhene, Ligustique,
L'onde de la Morce, and de la docte Attique,
Contre le beau terroir de l'Asie mineur,
Second iardin d'Eden, and du monde l'honneur,
Et ce large pays, qui gist depuis Amane
Iusqu'au source du Rha, and du bord de la Tanes


Habitation des enfans de laphet, and leurs descendans.
Des reins de so Gomer se disent descendus
Tant de peuple guerriers par la Gaule espandus,
Et les Germains encor, iadis dits Gomerites:
De tubal, ceux d'Hespaigne, and de Magog, les Scythes:
Mazaca, de Mosoch: de Madai, les Medois:
Les Thraces, de Thyras: de Iauan, les Gregeois.





Iaphet to the North and West.
Now Iaphet spred along from th'Ellesponticke waters,
Th'Euxine, and Tanaies, vnto the mount Gibraltars
Renowned doubl' ascent, and that sun-setting Maine,
Which with his ebbe and flow playes on the shore of Spaine:
And from that higher sea, vpon whose frozen alleyes
Glide swiftly-teemed carres insted of winged gallies,
Vnto the Genoan Tyrrhene and prouence Seas,
With those of learned Greece, and of Peoloponese.
Accoast the goodly shore of Asia the lesse,
(The second paradise, th'worlds chiefe happinesse)
And Tartarie, the ground that reacheth from Amane
Vnto the springs of Rha, and pleasant bankes of Tane.


All those braue men at armes, that France haue ouer-spred,
Of Gomers fruitfull seed, themselues professe, are bred;
And so the Germans are, sometime hight Gomerites:
Of Tubal Spaniards came, of Mosoch Moscouites,
Of Madai sprong the Medes, of Magog Scythians,
Of Iauan rose the Greekes: of Thyras Thracians.




10.Now Japhet. Moses reciting Genesis 9.27. how Noe blessed his two children, sets downe two notable points; the one concerning the great and many Countries which Iaphet and his posteritie should possesse, the other of the fauour that God should shew them, by lodging them in the tents of Sem, that is, by receiuing them at length into his Church; which hath beene fulfilled in the calling of the Gentiles. For the first point, whereas he saith, God enlarge Iaphet (For so the Hebrew word signifieth, although some translate it Persuade) it is as much as if he had said, Let Iaphet and his race possesse the Countries round about him farre and neere. And this hath also beene accomplished in that so infinite a multitude of people hath issued out of the stocke of Iaphet, and peopled Europe; which, though it appeare lesser then the other parts, hath alwayes had more inhabitants, and fewer void Countries: The Poet hath set downe so perfect a description thereof, as it needes no further to be opened, if the Reader haue neuer so little beheld the Maps. On the East it is parted from the greater Asia by the Maior Sea, the Meotis Lake called by Ortelius the Zabach sea, the Riuer Tane or Deu, which voids into the Lake, and the Spring-herds of Rha, Edel, or Volga, running by Tartarie into the Caspian Sea: and from Asia the lesse, sometime the honour of the world and exceeding rich, as still it hath sufficient, it is deuided by the Straight of Gallipoli, sometime called Hellespont. On the West it hath the Straight of Gibraltar, the Spanish and Brittish Oceans: on the North the Frozen Sea, and on the South the Midland Sea, which is diuersly called, to wit, the Sea of Marseil by the coast of Genes, the Adriaticke about Athens and Morea, and

otherwise according to the places adioyning. This goodly part of the world, beside the Romaine Empire, hath many great kingdomes full of people, well set forth by the Card-men. Daniell Cellarius accounts it in length, from Lisbon to Constantinople, about six hundred leagues Almaine, and very neere as much in breadth from Scrifinie to Sicily.
11Gomer. Moses reckeneth seuen sonnes of Iaphet, Gen. 10.2. So doth here the Poet, not standing much vpon the order of them, to follow the verse; of Gomer are come the Gomerites, whom the Greekes called Galates and Gaules: of them came the people that spoiled Delphos, and then sate downe about Troas in Asia, and were called Gaule-Greekes, or Asian Galates, who afterward seized a good part of Phrygia. The Lord threatning by Ezechiel, 38. Chapter; Gog, chiefe of the Princes of Mesech and Tubal, saith he, will destroy him with this Gomer and all his bands, and the house of Togarmah, of the North-quarters. They that expound the Prophesie, gather out of this place that the Gomerites were people bordering on the North of Asia, and brought by the Kings of Syria and Asia to destroy the Iewes after their returne from Babylon. They preased forth of Asia and enlarged their dominions greatly (as hath beene said) for they were a very warlike Nation. Of them, the Poet saith, are come the Germanes, so Melancthon affirmeth vpon Carion, so doe others also, and chiefly Goropius in his fift booke. But there is great diuersitie in these outworne matters, betweene the late and ancient Writers. A diligent conference of places in the old Testament, and the ancient Latine, Greeke, and Chaldean translations serue best for

the purpose: next, a carefull examining of the best Greeke and Latine Histories: but this requires a whole volume, whereunto the searches of Goropius, being so well handled, might afford a man great helpe. Concerning Tubal, the Poet followes the opinion of Iosephus, that he was Author of the Spanish: which must be rightly vnderstood, that is, after a long tract of time. For by the 38. and 39. of Ezechiel, it seemes that the people issued from Tubal and Mosoch, which were neighbours, dwelt neare Arabia, and were gouerned or led to war by the Kings of Asia and Syria. And in the 32. chap. where is mention made of the mourning that should be among the Nations for the King of Aegypt, there are named among others, Ashur, Elam, Mosoch and Tubal: whereby it may be gathered they were of Asia. As for their Colonies and outcreases into Spaine, they are very darke and hardly proued. Vasaeus indeed in his Chronicle of Spaine, and Taraphe in his Historie, and others that haue written of Spaine in diuers languages, following Ioseph and Berose, make Tubal first King of Spaine: but sithence they declare not what time he came thither, I leaue the Reader to consider of, and search further into the matter. Looke the historicall Library of N. Vignier, the first part, page 15. where he treateth of the people of Europe.
Magog, as the Poet saith, is father of the Scythians: his first habitation and Colonie was in Coelesyria, as may be gathered out of the fift booke and 23. chapter of Plinie, and the 37, 38, and 39. chapters of Ezechiel. At this time the right Scythians are the Selauonians, Moscouites and Tartarians, who vaunt of their descent from Iaphet. This might haue beene by tract of time, but not so soone, as the Poet in the sequele. Melancthon in his first vpon Carion takes the prophecies against Gog and Magog to be meant especially of the Turkes, whom he calleth by the name of Scythians, and applieth also vnto them that which is written in the Reuelation. And in the end of his second Booke he giues the name to all people that professe Mahomet. I thinke my selfe, that, some while after Noes partition of the lands, Magog and his people dwelt in Coelesyria, or there abouts, and thence by succession of time thrust vp into the higher Countries. Now as the ancient people of God were much vexed and outraged by the Kings of Syria and Asia, successours of Seleucus Nicanor, and signified by the name of Gog, who aiding the people of Magog, Mosoch and Tubal, their subiects, greatly annoyed the Iewes then returned from Babylon: so hath Satan in these later daies against the

holy Citie, the Church of God, stirred vp againe Gog and Magog, many Kings and Princes enemies to the Faith, who haue conspired together, and made a League to ouerthrow it vtterly: but the Almightie in due time and season shall confound them. Reade the 20. Chapter of the Reuelation, and the 89. Sermon of Bullinger thereupon.
As for Mosoch, Ioseph saith, of him are come the Cappadocians, and for proofe thereof, alledgeth a certaine Towne of their Country called Mazaca. It may be gathered out of the 120. Psalme, that Mesech, or Mosoch, was a neighbour people to Syria and Arabia, which place the Chalde Paraphrast expounding, vseth words of this import: O wretch that I am! for I haue beene a stranger among the Asians, and dwelt in the Arabian tents. The Poet considereth what might haue beene in continuance of time, and how farre the mans posterity might haue stretched.
Madai sure was Author of the name of Medes, whose Empire was very great in the higher Asia; they destroyed the Chaldean Monarchie, as may be noted out of Ierem. 51.11. and Dan. 5.18.
The Thracians (Ioseph saith, and the Poet) are descended of Thyras. Melancthou thinkes that of him are come the Russians, but the Scripture speaketh not of his posteritie. Plinie makes mention of a Riuer Tyra in the Russian or European Sarmatia: Melancthon, Goropius and others call it Nester. Goropius in his seuenth Booke puts the Getes, Daces and Bastarnes among the Thracians, as all of one stocke, and speaking almost the selfe-same tongue, which also (as he saith) comes very neare the Cimbricke and Brabantish.
Iauan, the fourth sonne of Iaphet, gaue names to the Ionians, who after with their neighbours were called Greekes: and therefore the Latine Interpreter, translating the place of Ezech. 27.19. for the Hebrue Iauan hath put Graecia: so haue the seuenty put (...), which is the name of Greece, for the same word. As also in the 13. verse of the same Chapter, and in the 19. of the 66. of Esay, they both haue translated the Hebrue Jeuanim (...) and Graeci. The Country of Athens hath in old time beene called Ionie, as Plutarch saith in the life of Theseus, and Strabo in his ninth Booke recites out of Hecataeus, that the Ionians came out of Asia into Greece. Now the Greekes as they were great discoursers, they haue deuised a thousand tales of their first beginning: but I let them passe, because my notes are already waxen ouer long.






Ioy si-ie voulois, ie ferois vne liste
Discrete modestie du Poete, qui ayme mieux se taire que traiter de choses obscures and cachees sous le voile de l'Antiquite.
De tous nos deuanciers: and marchannt sur la piste
D'vn suppose Berose, and d'antres qui menteurs
Abusent du loisir and bonte des lecteurs,
Hardi i'entreprendrois de toutes les prouinces
Nommer de pere en sils les plus antiques Princes:
Chanter de l'Vniuers les diuers peuplemens,
Et des moindres citez fouiller les fondemens.



Mais quoy? ie ne veux pas abandonner ma voile
Au premier vent qui souffle: and sans la clair estoile
Qui luit sur tou^ les cieux, temeraire, ramer,
Sur les flos inconus de si lontaine mer,
Toute pleine d'escueils, and de Scilles profondes,
Ou ne roulle pas moins de naufrages que d'ondes:
N'ayant autres Patrons que certains escriuains
Forgeurs denoms de Roys, autheurs decontes vains,
Qui sont tout a leur poste: and conuoiteux de gloire,
Sur vn pied de Ciron bastissent vne histoire.





He will not enter into matter farre out of knowledge.
Here if I were dispos'd vpon the ground to treade
Of that suppos'd Berose, abusing all that reade
As he and others doe; well might I let you see
Of all our Ancestors a fained pedegree:
I boldly might assay of all the worlds Prouinces,
From father vnto sonne, to name the former Princes:
To sing, of all the world, each peoples diuers lot,
And of the meanest to w^^es to lay the grunsill-plot.



But what? I meane not, I, as eu'ry wind shall blow,
To leaue the former course, and rashly assay to row,
(The bright Load-starre vnseene) vpon the waues vnknow'n
Of such an Ocean sea, so full of rockes bestrow'n
And Scyllaes glutton gulfes; where tumbleth equall store
Of shipwracks on the sands, and billowes to the shore:
Not hauing other guide then writers such as faine
The names of ancient Kings, and romants tell vs vaine;
Who make all for themselues, and gaping after glory,
On footing of a flie can frame a perfect story.




12Now. The like is seene in many bookes of late times and ancient, that treat of the Kingdomes, Countries, and people of the world: for many labour more to come neare Noes Arke, and to finde there the foundation of their Townes, and names of their first Princes, then about other more certaine and sure grounds. And they had rather forge names, and deuise matter of their owne head, than leaue to packe huge volumes full of tales, witnessing the strange vanity of mans braine. The Poet condemnes this foolish ambition, and by good ^^ght: all the matter, when it is at the best, being very doubtfull and vnprofit^ble: for man was placed on the earth to thinke rather on the seruice of God, than so to trouble his head with curious out-search of his ancestors names.
13Of that suppos'ed Berose. Who so desires to know that the Berose late printed is false, supposed, and cleane contrary to the right Chaldean, cited

often by Ioseph in his Antiquities against Apion, let him reade the fourth booke of Goropius his Origines Antuerpianae. And so let him thinke also of Manetho, Metasthenes, Fabius Pictor, Sempronius, Myrsilus Lesbius and others packt, as they are, into one volume, by some one that thought to doe great matters by abusing so the Readers, and holding them in amuse by false deuises from further search of the truth. I will not here set downe the words of Goropius, who at large discouers the forgednesse of this new Berose and his followers: let it suffice to haue pointed at the place. The true Berose was one of the Priests of Bel, and at the commandement of Antiochus the third, who succeeded Seleucus, wrote three bookes of the Chaldean Historie: so saith Tatianus, Ioseph, and Clemens Alexandrinus. Some fragments of his we reade in Ioseph against Apion, and they make flat against that other Berose published in our time.





Pourquoy la recerche de l'Antiquite est obscure: and co^bien sont mal apuyez ceux qui sondent sur les etymologies and allusions des mots.
L'allusion des mots n'est vn seur fondement
Poury sur-maconner vn ferme bastiment:
Veu que les monts plus hauts, les riuieres plus belles,
Et les plus grandes mers changent, bien qu'eternelles,
De nom a chaque coup: que la posterite
De celuy quibastit les murs d'vne cite
N'en est point heritiere: and qu'ici nullerace
En fief perpetuel ne possede vne place:
Ains qu'a ferme, a louage, ou par forme de prest,
Elle possede vn champ, vn mont vne forest.
Et comme quand l'orage esmeut la mer profonde,
Migrations and diuerses habitations des peuples.
Le flot chasse le flot, and l'onde choque l'onde,
Toutes les nations s'entre-poussent des bras:
L'vn peuple chasse l'autre, and le second n'est pas

Sur l'huis de la maison dont il pense estre maistre,
Qu'vn troisiesme le fait sauter par la fenestre.


Ainsi le vieil Breton,
Exemples a ce propos. les Bretons.
exile par l'Anglois
De sa grande Albion, de sloge le Gaulois
Du terroir Armorique: and donne a la campaigne,
Ou le Loire se perd, le surnom de Bretaigne.


Les Lombards.
De mesme le Lombard ayant abandonne
De l'Istre audouble-nom le marge seillonue
Aux Hongre balafrez, chasse, plein de furie,
Le reste des Gaulois de la riche Insubrie;
Qui tombe derechef sous la main des Franco is
Domptee par le fer du plus grand de nos Roys.


Non autrement l'Alain,
Les Alains and Vandales.
and l'Arctique Vandale,
Desplace par le Goth de Cordube and d'Hispale,
Se saisit du Carthage: and puis sent du Romain
Sous l'autheur de nos loix la vainqueresse main:
Et le Romain enoor, ioint au camp Barbaresque
Du More au poil-frize, fait ioug a l'Arabesque.


Cause de ces migrations and deslogeme^s de peuples
La sacrilege faim des Sceptres and de l'Or:
La soif d'vne vengeance and le desir encor
D'vnfantastique honneur fonde sur des rauages,
Ruines, cruautez, embrassements, carnages,
Desbornent le pays; and font en mille parts
Et vaguer and voguer les peuples fils de Mars.


Laissant a part les courses incertaines des Arabes, Mores and Tartares, il vient a parler des voyages and changemens faits par diuers peuples belliqueux.
Ie ne discour icy des rauisseurs Scaenites,
Des Nomades pasteurs, ou des Hordes vrais Scyches,
Qui suyuant les pasquis, errent par bataillons,
Et sichent ca and la leurs velus pauillons:
Comme les noirs essaims des vistes Arondelles,
Qui deux fois tous les ans franchissent de leurs ailes
La mer porte-nauire, and vont chasque saison
Amies d'vn doux air changer de garnison:
Ains d'autre peuple fier qui par toute la terre
Aux despens de leur sang on recerche la guerre:
Qui scachant beaucoup mieux vaincre que commander,
Demolir que bastir, conquester que garder,
Et preferant Bellone au sainct repos d'Astree,

Braues, ont inonde contree apres contree.


Tout tel fut le Lombard,
Origine, migrations voyages and conquestes des Lombards.
qui nay dedans Schonland*
Saisit la Liuonie, and de la Rugiland.
Puis ayant reuenge sus le peuple Bulgare
Le trespas d'Agilmont, audacieux s'empare
Du terroir de Polongne: and de Polongue anant
Va dans les eaux du Rhin ses blonds cheuenx lauant:
D'ou rebroussant chemin, se parque en Morauie;
A Bude tost apres; de la vole a Pauie:
O u deux cens ans il regne: and fait quele Tesin,
Royal, ose egaler son flot au Pau voisin.


Tel le Goth,
Des Gotht.
qui sortit de la froide Finlande,
Scanzie, Scrifinie, Noruege and Gothlande,
Se campe sur Vistule: and voyant que son air
Aprochoit de celuy de la Baltique mer,
D'vn ost victorieux sait sit la Sclauonie.
Le terroir Valachide, and la Transsiluanie.
De la se parque en Thrace: and quittant les Gregeois,
Desireux du butin entreprend quatre fois
D'arracher aux Romains, fils aisnez de la guerre,
Les lauriers conquestez dessus toute la terre;
Tantost sous Rhadaguise, ores sous Alaric,
Tantost sous Vidimare, ore sous Dietric.
S'acase apres en Gaule: and chasse de Gascongne,
S'arreste en Portugal, Castille, and Catalogne.


Tel l'antique Gaulois,
Des anciens Gaulois.
qui, vagabond, rodant
Par tout ou le Soleil ses rayons va dardant,
Occupe l'Italie and furieux saccage
De Romule, ou plustost de Mars mesme l'ouurage.
De la passe eu Hongrie: and puis du froid Strymon
D'vn soc victorieux renuerse le limon:
Degaste l'Aemathie: and sa main pilleresse
Ne veut mesme Espargner les plus grands Dieux de Grece.
Ia soule de l'Europe, il passe l'Hellespont:
Du Dindyme chastre saccamento le Mont:
Ruine la Piside, occupe la Mysie,
Et plante vne autre Gaule au milieu de l'Asie.



L'histoire des peuples est ob scure aux plus cler voyant
Des peuples plus fameux l'obscure antiquite
Estcomme vne forest, ou la Temerite
Bronche de pas en pas: la docte Diligence
S'entortille elle-mesme: and Paucugle ignorance
Brossant tout a trauers ses eternelles nuicts,
S'enfonce en des marests, baricaues, and puits.





Why it is a hard matter to search Antiquities.
Th' Allusion of words is not a suer ground
For any man thereon a steddy worke to found;
Sith greatest hilles and seas, and most renowmed riuers
(Though they continue still) among long-after liuers
Are often diuers-nam'd; as eke the generation
Of him that built a wall, or laid a townes foundation,
Enhabits not the same; nor any mortall race
Hath an eternall state in any one earthly place:
But holds for terme of life, in fee-farme, or at will,
Possession of a field, a forrest, or an hill.
And like as when the wind amid the main-sea rustles,
One waue another driues, and billow billow iustles;
So are the peopl' at oddes each one for others roome,
One thrusts anoth'r away, and scarce the seconds, come

To threshold of that house whereas he meanes to keepe,
But comes a third and makes ^un forth at window creepe.


A fit Exampe*
So from grea Albion th'old Brit^on being chas'd
By Saxon-English force, the Gaules forthwith displac'd
That wond in Armoricke, and call'd the Land Brittaine,
Where Loyre his gliding charge vnloadeth on the maine.


So when the Lombard left (with minde to rome at large)
Vnto the Skotched Hunnes the diuers furrow'd marge
Of Ister double-nam'd, he made the French to flie
By force of warlike rage from out rich Insubrie;
But vnder-fell againe the French reuenging heat,
And was to bondage brought by sword of Charles the Great.


And so th'Alaine, and so the Northen-borne Vandall.
Dislodged by the Goth from Cordube and Hispall,
In Carthage harboured, then by the conquering stroke
Of him that fram'd our Lawes, sustain'd the Roman yoke.
The Roman eke, and all the soyle Barbarian
Of frizell-headed Moores, obay'd th'Arabian.


What causeth people often to remoue and change their dwelling.
This hunger ne'r-suffiz'd of gold and great Empire,
This thirst of sharpe reuenge, and further this desire
Of honour in conceit (all builded on rapines,
On slaughters, cruelties, towne-burnings and ruines)
Dishabiteth a Land, and diuers waies and farre
To waue and wander makes the people sonnes of Warre.


Diuers examples of wandering people.
I doe not speake-of here the spoiling Arabes,
The Hordies ancient Scythes or shepheards Nomades,
Who gazing on in troopes disdained eu'ry fence,
And pitched where they list their bristle-hairy ten's;
Like as with wing are wont black swarmes of swallowes swift
Crosse o're th'embillowed sea their airy bodies lift,
And changing their abode, as 'twere on progresse goe
For milder season'd aire, twice yearely to and fro;
But other Nations fierce, who for a war-renowne,
With often losse of Bloud haue roamed vp and downe:
Who better skill'd the way how t'ouercome then weild;
To conquer, then to keepe; to pull downe, then to build;
And chosing rather warre, than holy and lawfull rest,

Haue boldly diuers lands, and one aft'r other, prest.


Right such that Lombard was,
The naturall Countrey of the Lombardes, their diuers remoues and conquests.
who, borne in Schonerland,
Seiz'd on Liuonia, thence went to Rugiland;
And hauing wrought reuenge vpon the Bulgar-men
Of Agilmond his death, he boldly ventur'd then
Vpon Polonia; so march'd on braue and fine
To bathe his golden haire in siluer streame of Rhine:
Thence turning him about he setled in Morauie,
And so to Buda went, and after flew to Pauie:
There raign'd two hundred yeares, and honour'd Tesin so,
He princely dares compare streames with his neighbour Po.


Such was the Goth,
Of the Goths.
who left the freezing-cold Finland,
Scanzie, and Scrifinie, Norway and Gottherland,
To sit on Wixel-bankes; and, for that aire did please,
As most in temper neare his owne of Baltick seas,
With his victorious hoste entring Sclauonia
Supprised Zipserland and all Valachia:
Then fortifi'd in Thrace; but scorning long to toile
Among the beggar Greekes, for hope of greater spoile
Foure times the Roman tride, God Mars his elder sonne,
To rob him of the crowne that he from all had wonne,
Led once by Radaguise, led once by Alarick,
Then vnder Vidimare, then vnder Dietrick:
And after dwelt in France; then (chased from Gascoine)
Aboade in Portugal, Castile and Cataloine.


Such whilome was the French,
Of the ancient Gaules.
who, roaming out as farre
As darted are the beames of Titans firie carre,
Inuaded Italy, and would in rage haue spilt
The Tow'rs that Romulus, or Mars himselfe, had built:
Went thence int' Hungary, then with his conquering plough
He fallow'd-vp the soile cold Strimon runneth through:
The faire Emathick fields he then doth all-to-fleece,
And spareth not at all the greatest gods of Greece:
At last with Europe cloy'd he passeth Helespont,
Of th'Eunuck Dindym hill he wasteth all the Front,
Pisidia ruineth, surpriseth Mysia,
And plants another Gaule in mid'st of Asia.



Of people most renown'd the darke antiquitie
Is like a Forrest wide, where hardy-foolery
Shall stumbl' at eu'ry step, the learned Souuenance
It selfe entangled is; but blind-fold ignorance
By blundring through the darke of her eternall Fogges,
Falls headlong downe in pits, in dungeons and bogges:




14Th'Allusion. They that in our time haue entreated of the Nations pedegrees, haue much stood vpon the resemblance that one word or proper name hath to another, and haue aptly framed coniectures of good import and likely-hood, as man may note in Carion, Melanc^hon, Peuter, Althamer, Lazius, Goropius, and others. But the Poet holds that a simple resemblance of words is no good ground for a story. His reasons are, first, that hilles, riuers and seas change their names, as by Ortelius his treasure of Geographie doth appeare, comparing the bookes and tables of Ptolomie, Strabe, Mela, and other ancients, with the maps of Gemma Frisius, Vopelius, Mercator, Postel, Theuet, Cellarius, and other late Writers. Secondly, that Cities and Countries are not alwaies called by the names of their founders and first inhabitants. Thirdly, that no stocke or Nation hath sure hold of any place in the world, because of the many changes that befall this life. Fourthly, that as in the sea one waue thrusteth on another, so the people, and chiefly those of old time, haue driuen each other out of place, and in a manner played In docke, out nettle. All stories prooue these reasons to bee true, and for the last, the Author shewes three notable examples to confirme it.
15Th'old Britton. It is aboue 1200. yeares agoe since Vortiger King of England, then called Great Brittaine, or Albion, (that is, a white-sand Isle) hauing warre with his neighbours the Scots, sent for aid to the Saxon-English a people of Germany, who, after they had done him good seruice, played as the Turkes did in Greece: for they seated themselues in a part of the Island, on the East, where few yeares after they kept such a coile, that the old Britton, the natura^l Inbred of the Countrey, was constrained to forsake it. So with a great multitude passed the sea, and landed in Armoricke, now called little Brittaine: where they gathered more and more together, and increased much by succession of time. See more hereof in the Chronicles of England and Brittaine. The riuer Leyre falls into the trench of Nantes, and so voids into the Ocean.
16The Lombard. About the yeare of Christ 568. Alboin King of Lombardes hauing heard of the fruitfulnesse of Italy, left Pannonia, or Hungary (where he dwelt) in gard of certaine Hunnes, vpon, conditions, and in few weekes after made a rode into Italy with a mightie armie, and got many Townes chiefly in Insubria, now called Lombardy, of those Lombards, who raigned there about two hundred yeares, till they were ouercome and brought to thrall by the Emperour charlemaine, about the yeare 774. Looke the Histories of France, and the second part of the Librarie of

N. Vignier, Ishall speake anon of their beginning more particularly.
17.Th' Aline. About they yeere 412. when Ataulphe King of Gothes had driuen away the Alaines and Vandals from Cordway and Seuill, which they possessed, as also most of the prouinces of Spaine, the Vandals sate downe in Betica, which after was of thir name called first Vandalosie, and then shorter Andalosie: The Alaines in Lusitania and the prouince of Carthage, or (as some say) betwixt the riuers Iberus and Kubricatus, whereabouts in time past dwelt a people called Iacetani, not vnlikely to be the men of Arragon; afterward they ioyned and went both together into Affricke, where they raigned a long time. But in the yeere 534. the Emperour Justinian, who caused the Roman lawes to be gathered together into one body, sent an armie against them vnder the command of Belissarius: he regained Affricke, tooke Carthage, and led Gllimer command of Belissarius: he regained Affricke, tooke Carthage, and led Gllimer king of Goths prisoner vnto Rome. After all this the Romans and the Moores also were constrained to giue place in Affricke to the Arabians, who pressed in there, and encamped themselues in sundry places.
18. This hunger ne're sussiz'd. The Poet saith, that desire of rule, reuenge, and vainglory, ambition and couetousnesse, haue chiefly caused so many people to remoue and change their dwellings. As also many stories of Scripture and others plainly shew. Seneca reckoned diuerse other causes in his booke de Consolatione ad Elbiam, where he saith, The Carthaginians made a road into Spaine, the Greekes into France, and the Frenchmen into Greece. neither could the Pyrene mountaines hinder the Germans passage; ouer wayes vnknowne and vntroad the light-headed people haue caried their wiues and children and ouer-aged parents: some after long wandering vp and downe seated themselnes not according to their free choice, but where they first might, when they waxed weary of trauell: some on other mens possessions s^ized by force of armes: some as they sought vnknown places were drowned in the sea: some there sat downe, where they first began to want pro^ision. And all for sooke not their countries or sought other for the same causes. Many, after their cities were destroyed by warre, sled from their enemies, and so berest of their owne possessions, were faine to presse vpon other mens: many left their dwellings to auoide the disquiet of ciuill warres: and many to emptie Cities of their ouerceasing multitude: some by pestilence, or the earths often gulsing, or like vnsufferable faults of a bad soyle, were cast forth; and some were ent^sed from home by report of a larger and more fruitfull ground: some for one cause, some for another, etc.
19.I doe not speake-of here. The Poet hath Scoenites, which I translate Arabes, because they were a people of Arabia, great robbers and har^^ers of Aegypt and the coast of Affricke (...) the shopheards Nomades are (as I take them)

the Numidians and Moores: or (as some thinke) a kinde of Scythiant. The Hordies are the Tartarians, who liue in the field in chariots and tents. Now the Poet leauing the vncertaine course of these roguing Nations, who haue had no more stay in them then swallowes and other wandring, birds, intendeth to speake of a more warlike people: whereof he alledgeth some notable examples.
20.Right such that Lombard was. He setteth downe much matter in few ords, concerning the Lombards. There are diuerse opinions of their pedegree: Melancthon and Peucer in the third and fourth booke of Carious Chron, hold they dwelt in a Saxonie by the riuer Albis, about where now are the Bishopricks of Meidburg and Halberstad, and a part of the Marquesse of Brandburg; and from thence vnder the conduct of Alboin entred Jtalie, and in the time of the Emperour Iustin the second, seated themselues betweene the Appenine hils and the Alpes, where they began a kingdome. They were called Lombards, either because of their long Ianelines (for thence it seeme are come the names of Halbards and Iauclines de barde) or because they dwelt in a countrey flat and fruitfull, as the Dutch word Bard may signifie. Some otherutho rs count them farre-northerne people, yet shew not their ancient aboad. Ptolomee in the fourth table of Europe deriues them from the countrey of Swaube; as also he noteth in the second booke and 11. chapter of his Geogr. with whom agreeth C. Tacitus in his Histories. But Lazius in the 12. booke of his Migrations of the Northerne people, Vignier in the first part of his Library page 905. and out Poet, here followes the opinion of Paulus Diaconus: they differ not much but onely about the time of their stay, and place of their first aboad. Melancthon and Peucer set them first in Saxonic, Paulus Diaconus, the Poet and others, in Scandinauie, or Schonland, a great nearelsle of the Sound or Baltike Sea, from whence they might come in by the bankes of Albis, all or some of them, and some by the coast of Mekelborg, etc. For Paulus Diaconus, in his first booke second chapter, saith of this people, They encreased so fast in their fore-said Country, that they were faine to part themselues in to three companies, and cast lots, which of them should goe seeke another seat. This I say, to shew the Poets cunning drift, that in so few lines hath set downe matter enough, for any man to write-on whole volumes of bookes. Thus then to follow the Poet, the first notable and fast aboad of the Lombards, who came from the Goths and Vandals, was Schonland, whence a part of them, dislodging vnder the conduct of Ibor and Agio setled in Scoring, which is about the marches of Liuonia and Prussia: and after they had there dwelt certaine yeeres, were constrained by a dearth to seeke further, so as they came to Mauringia, and at length to Rugiland, and the countries neere adioyning, which Paulus Diaconus setteth downe by name. There after the death of their leaders, they chose Agilmond for their king. He had reigned 33. yeeres, when the Bulgares, a neighbour people, assailing them vnawares, slue King Agilmond. After him was chosen Lamisson for King, who to reuenge the death of his predecessour, made warre with the Bulgares, got and held a dart of Pologne: then waxing wearie of that countrey, he led his people toward the Rhine, to the coast of the Countrie Palatine, as Tacitus notes in his

second booke of Histories, and Velleius Patere. in the life of Tiberius. About Heidelberg there is a towne called Lamberten, which seemes to make somewhat for the Lombards aboad there: so saith Lazius. But many yeeres after, they coasted backe againe, and dwelt in Moranie, where they warred against the Heru^es, Sucues and Gepides. Then went they vp into Hungarie vnder the safe-conduit of the Emperour Iustinian, to whom they paid tribute (as Procopius and Diaconus declare at large.) There had they cruell warre with the Gepides, but at length agreed and ioyned with them; and vnderstanding by the practise of Narses, that Italie was a Countrey much sitting their nature, their King Alboin made a road thereinto, and got Lombardie before called Insubria; there they rested and raigned two hundred yeers, vntill Charles the groat vanquisht them, as is before laid.
21.Such was the Goth. Lazius in the tenth booke of his Migrations, hath handled well and largely the Historie of Gothes, gathered out of Procopius, Iornandes, Tacitus, Claudianus, Olaus Magnus, Eutropius, and many others. I will shut vp all in short, and by way of Paraphrase vpon the Poets verse. The Goths, and Almaine people, had for their first assured seat the Isles of the Sound, or Baltike Sea, and Gothland yet retaines the name of them. In Syllaes time they left these Isles, and came to dwell in Almaine beside the riuer Vistula, now called Wixel. After they had warred there against the Frenchmen, they bent toward Transsiluania, Hangaria and Valachia, where they remained vntill the time of Valentinian, maintaining themselues by force of armes against the Greekes and Romans. Then, for many causes alledged by Lazius, they went forward into Thrace, and there dwelt and became tributaries vnto Valentinian and Valens. Eutropius saith, all went not thither, but a good part of them kept their former place, and the cause of their sundring was a civill disagreement about religion: the one side retaining Heathenisme vnder Athalaricke their King: the other vnder Fridigerne mingling with Christenisme the abhominable heresie of Arrius, which taketh quite away the true religion of Christ: The Arrians drew toward the West, and wore after called Visigothes or Westgothes, the other to the contrary, and were called Ostrogothes or Eastgothes, who out of Thrace moued into Hungarie and the countries adioyning, where they had much adoe with the Romaine Emperours, as Lazius well recordeth: at last they got Sclauonia, and all fort ward vnto the Adriaticke Sea: there growing to a mighty number, they determined to set on Italie vnder the command of Radaguise their King in the time of Theodosius the first, sonne of Arcadius. Their Armie was in number aboue two hundred thousand strong, but by the speciall grace of God they were ouerthrowne, captiued and sold most for ducats a peece, their king slaine, and all scattered into diuers countries; but, in the time of Honorius, Alaricke the king of Westgothes made another voyage, and entting into Italie, asked the Emperour a place to dwell on: hauing obtained the coast that marcheth vpon France, as he was going thitherward with his company vpon Easter day, one of the captaines of Sulico set vpon him, and taking him so at disaduantage, by treason slew a great number of the Goths. They, stirred vp with anger and disdaine of such vnf. ithfull dealing of the Romans, make backe to Rome, waste Italie, and in the moneth of

September 1164 beleaguer and take the Citie, and three dayes after depart thence loaden with the spoile. As Alaricke was marching toward Rome, there appeared a reuerend personage vnto him, and aduised him, since he would be counted a Christian, that he should not make such hauocke as he did: whereunto the king answered; it is not my desire to goe to Rome, but euery day ^^m I forced by some one (I know not who) that still cryeth vnto me, Goe on, goe on, and destroy Rome. As the Gothes retired Alaricke dyed, and Athaulph succecded him, who led them backe to Rome againe. So they went through with their saccage, and led away captiue ^alla Placidia the sister of Honorius, whom Athaulph married. Hee was after slaine of his owne people at Barcelona in Spaine, for seeking peace for his wiues sake with Honorius. The third road they made into Italie was vnder the command o^ Vidimer: but they were encountred and beaten backe by Glycerius, as Jornandes writeth: and so they pressed againe vpon the French, and Spanish Nations. Afterward the Goths of Sclauonia, weary of easie liuing, got leaue of the Emperour Zeno and entred Italie, and ouercame Odocacer the Exarch of Rauenna, and there held estate for many yeeres. At length about the yeere of Christ 411. in the time of Honorius, they seated themselues in Spaine vnder Alaricke and his successours. Now during the time of their aboad neere the M^oticke marshes they had nine kings: while they remained in Gothland (which is now deuided into the East and West Goth^e, betwixt Swethland and Norway) they had 8. kings; and 10: about the bankes of Wixel, and in Transsiluania and Sclauonia 26. After that being sundred into Eastgothes and Westgothes, the Eastgothes had in Italy 11. kings from Alarick: to Teias, who with the greater part of his people was ouerthrowne by Narses. The Westgothes in Lion-Gaule, in Languedoc and Guien, had six kings; and the kings of Westgothes in Spaine, from Alaricke in the yeere 411. to Philip that now reigneth, are eight and twenty in number, according to the account to Lazius; who reckoneth also two and thirty kings of Arragon, and two and twenty of Nauarre, vnto the kings father that now is. Of these matters it may suffice to haue touched thus much in a word.
22Such was the French. To enter into the whole history of the French-men, it was not the Poets meaning, but onely to note briefly the chiefe O^troads of this braue Nation, and that within the compasse of two thousand yeares. I will goe no further, but follow the text. The first beginning of the French is diuersly recorded, and all the opinions thereof are well gathered and examined by the Author of the French Antiquities: who in the end sheweth his owne iudgement, and auoucheth it to be very likely, that the land of Gaule (which in old time, besides the Realme of France, did containe also the Low-countries, Germany within Rhine, and Lorraine) was first inhabited by the line of Gomer, hither comming vpon diuers occasions, and increasing more and more with the time: as also by the Germanes a neighbour people: for little could the Rhine hinder the Gaules and Germanes from comming together, but that either, as they preuailed in-strength, might come into others countrey for their better liking. And as the men of Marseil are counted an outcrease of Asia, it is like the rest of the Townes and quarters of France were peopled after the same sort. Amianus

Marcellinus liuely painteth out the Gaules in his fifteenth booke. So doth Polybius, Caesar, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, and others. All agree they were a very warlike people; and their multitude gaue them to thinke vpon such remedie as others had vsed before. Their first outroad, that was of any account, was in the raigne of Tarquinius Priscus, and about the time of the Iewes thraldome in Babylon, some six hundred yeares before the birth of Christ. The Celiae (which were the ancient Gaules) possessed the Countries now called Suisse, Sauoy, Daulphine, Languedoc, Vellay, Viuaretz, Lionnois, Forest, Auuergne, Berri, Limosin, Quercy, Perigort, Xanctoigne, Angulmois, Po^ctou, Brettaigne, Anjou, Tourraine, Maine, Perche, Normandie within Seine, the Chartrain, Hurepois, Beaulse, Gastinois, Brie, Champagne, the Duchie and Counte of Bourgongne: their King Ambigat sent forth Sidoveze and Belloveze to seeke other dwelling. Sidoveze taking towards Germanie, left people in Bauaria, Bohemia and Carinthia, and seated himselfe in the point of Europe, toward and beyond the Riphean mountaines. Belloveze a while staying at the foot of the Alpes, was after by the perswasions of a certaine Tuscane, called Arron drawne into Italy, and possessed Insubria. Some of his company seating first among the Pyrene hils, at length entred a part of Arragon, and gaue the name to Portugal. But these were nothing so renowned as the other: who preasing further into Italy, marched vnder Brennus as farre as Clusium, and so to Rome. Of his exploits there Liuie writeth, and Plutarch in the life of Camillus, which was 386. yeares before the comming of Christ. A third company that followed Belleveze, because they would haue roome enough, ouer-ran Slauonia, and maugre all stay entred Hungary, and after many skirmishes departed thence in two bands: the one coasting into Macedonie, the other into Greece, where they made the whole world afraid of them: after they had slaine Plol^meus Keraunus, brother to Philadelphus King of Aegypt. Pranses was their King, whom others call Brennus; but was not he that sackt Rome. This man not content to haue obtained a great victory of the Macedonians, and harried their country, presumed so farre as to spoile the Temple at Delphos, whereby himselfe and all his were brought to a miserable end. Neuerthelesse the French that stayed behinde, to guard the Frontiers of the Country, fainted not at the report of these newes, but went to field with 1500. foot, and 3000. horse, ouerc^me the G^tes and Triballes, and wasted all Macedonie: only through negligence, as they retired loaden with spoile, they were brought to their end. Yet they that remained in Gaule sent forth other companies into Asia: who passed on as far as Bossen and Dardanie, where, by reason of a quarrell that fell betweene them, they sundred themselues. One part of them cast into Thrace, and raigned there a long time: the other setled about where Sauus and Danubius meet, not far from Belgrade. These that remained in Dardanie, when they heard tell of the fruitfull soile of the lesser Asia, went on so far as Hellespont, and there because they were three Companies, they parted Natolia betweene them into three parts. The Trocynes had the coast of Hellespont; the Tolystoboges, Eolide and Jonie (which the Turkes call Quision.) The Tectosages, the country further into the maine land. All that part of Asia which

lyeth on this side Taurus, they made their tributary, planting themselues all along the riuer H^lys, that parteth Paphlagonia from Syria. That Prouince where the Gaules dwelt in Asia, from their first arriuall to the height of the Romane Empire, retained the name of Gaul-Gre^ce, together with that same language which Saint Ierome (six or seuen hundred yeares after) saith was like that he heard spoken in Gaule about the quarter of Treues. Thus concerning the ancient Gaules: no to cleare some few darke words of the Text. The worke of Romulus, etc. He meaneth Rome, builded by Romulus, the most warlike Citie of all the world; and therefore Mars, whom the Painims counted the God of Warre, may be thought the founder of it. Cold Strymon, a riuer parting Macedonie from Thrace, as Plinie saith: and because Thrace is no very warme country, he giueth Strymon the adioint of Cold. The Emathicke fields, to wit, Macedonie, so called of King Emathion, Plinie speakes thereof in his fourth booke and tenth chapter thus, Macedonie, a Comtrie containing an hundred and fiftie Nations, sometime renowned for two Kings (he meaneth Philip and Alexander) and for the Empire of the whole world: it was afore-time called Emathia: which word the Poets, as Virgil and Lucan, doe sometime vse for Thessaly, a Countrie neare Macedonie. Lucan in his very first verse, Bella per Emathios plusquam ciuilia Campos. And Virgil in the end of his second Georgie.

Nee fuit indiguum superis his sanguine nostroEmath^am and latos Aemi pinguescere campos.
The Pharsalian fields are in Thessaly, as Fliny recordeth in his fourth booke and eight Chapter.
Dindyma. A hill in Phrygia. The Poet calleth it Dindyme chastre, guelt Dindym: because the Priests of Cybele, called Curetes, kept and sacrificed there, and were Eunuches atrired like women. The Poets meaning is, that these Gaules harried also Phrygia, and called the country where they dwelt in Asia, Gaul-Greece, after the name of that from whence they first came, and so planted, as it were, another Gaule in the middest of Asia. What became of their successours in the Romanes time, because the Poet makes no mention thereof, I passe it also.
23Of people most renowad. He sheweth in few words wherefore he thrusteth no further into discourse of the out-roads the people made in old time. For though Carion, Melancthon, P^ucer, Lazius, Rhenanus, Goropius, and others of our time, haue that way farre ventured, and some-while with very good successe; yet it cannot be denied, but that they leaue many doubts, and doe not all-where cleare the matter. See then how fitly the Poet addes that followeth.






Il dit en somme queles trois fils de Noe peuplerent le monde.
Il me suffira donc de suiure son oree:
Et pendant attentif de la bourche dorce
Du sage fils d'Amram, rechanter dans ces vers,
Que Sem, laphet, and Cham, peuplerent l'Vniuers:
Et que du grand Noe la Fuste vagabonde
Pour la seconde fois flott a par tout le Monde.


Cela ne se fit point tout a coup mais par trait de temps.
Non que i'enuoye Sem de Babylone auant
Tout d'vn vol es terroirs du plus lontain Leuant,
Du Tartare Chorat boire l'onde argentine,
Et peupler le Catay, le Cambalu, la Chine:
En Espaigne Iapheth: and le profane Cham
Es pays alterez de Medre and de Bigam:
Es champs de Cephala, dessus le mont Zambrique:
Et le Cup d'Esperance, angle dernier d'Afrique.


Car ainsi que l'Hymete,
Comparaisons bien propres pour monstrer comment les parties du mo^de furent peuplees par les
ou le mont Hiblean
Ne furent tous couuert a^ Auetes en vn an:
Ains la moindre ruchee enuoyant chaque prime
A leurs slancs, a leurs pieds, a leur flairant cime,
Deux ou trois peuplemens, cher nourissons du ciel,
En sin tous leurs rochers se fondirent en miel.

descendans de Noe, asauoir peu a peu, and comme d'an en an, par multiplication de peuple.
Ou plustost tout ainsi que deux Ormes fecondes,
Qui croissent au milieu d'vn champ emmure d'ondes,
An tour de leur estocs produisent des Ormeaux:
Ceux-cy d'autres encor: and tousiours les nouueaux
Gaignent pied a pied l'Isle, and font mesme en ieunesse
D'vn grand pre tondu-ras vne forest espesse.
Tout ainsi les macons de la superbe Tour
S'en vont, esparpillez, acaser a l'entour
De Mesopotamie: and peu a peu leur race
Frayant heureusement sleuue apres sleuue passe:
Saisit terre apres terre: and si le Tout-puissant
Ne va de l'Vniuers les iours accourcissant,
Il ne se trouuera contree si sauuage,
Pourquoy la premiere monarchie se dresse en Assirie.
Que le tige d'Adam de ses branches wombrage.


C'est pourquoy les pays au Tygre aboutissans
Pendant l'age premier sont les plus fleurissans:
Qu'il se parle d'eux seuls: qu'ils commencent la guerre,
Et qu'ils sont la Lecon aureste de la terre.


Babylone viuant sous la grandeur des Roys,
Tenoit l'empire en main auant que le Gregeois
Logeast en ville close, and que des murs Dircees
Vn luth doux eust, mecon, les pierres agences:
Le Latin eust des bourgs, des maison les Gaulois,
Des hutes l'Alemant, and des tentes l'Anglois.


Les Hebrieux, Chaldeans and Egyptiens auoyent la Philosophie super naturelle, auant que les Grees s^euss^t quelque chose.
Les fils d'Heber auoient commerce auce les Anges:
Detestoient les autels dressez aux Dieux estranges:
Conotssoient l'Inconu and des yeux de la foy
Comtemploient bien heureux leur inuisible Roy.
Le Chaldee scauoit des estoilles le nombre:
Auoit aulne le ciel: comprenoit comme l'ombre
De la terre eclipsoit l'Astre au front argente,
Et la sienne esteignoit du Soleil la clarte:
Le Prestre Memphien philosophoit des ames:
Obseruoit, curieux, le sacrebal des slammes:
Qui pour rendre leurs fronts slamboy antement beaux,
Les lauent chaque iour dans les marrines eaux:
Discouroit de nature: estoit bon Geometre,

Auant qu'aucun des Grecs sceust cognoistre vne lettre.


L'Egypte treluisoit en vtensiles d'or,
Les Egyptiens and Tiriens iouissoyent de richesses and delices a coeur saoul, auant que les Greos and Gaulois sceussent que c'est du monde.
Que lefeuure boiteux n'auoit sous Aethne encor
Martele sus le fer: and que par promethee
La flamme entre les Grecs n'estoit point inuentee.


Nous n'estions point encor: ou bien si nous estions,
Nous sentions le sauuage, and barbare, portions
Des plumes pour habits, banquetions sous les Fresnes,
Et beans attendions que le Gland cheust des Chesnes,
Que les bourgeois de Tyrosoyent desia ramer
Contre l'azur salle de l'Afriquaine mer:
Hazardeux trasiquoyent, s'habilloient d'escarlate,
Et que les voluptez regnoyent ia sur l'Euphrate.


Car comme le caillou,
Belle comparaison a ce pro pos, monstrant que tous les Arts sont sortis de la plaine de Sennaar pour s'espandre peu a peu par tout le monde.
quilisse, tombe en l'eau
D'vn viuier sommeilleux, forme vn petit aneau
A l'entour de sacheut. and qu'encor il compasse
Par le doux mouuement qui glise en la sur-face
De cest ondele marbre, and crystal tremoussant,
Vne suitte de ronds qui vont tousious croissart,
Iusqu'a tant qu'a la fin des cercles les plus large
Frappe du sleuue mort and l'vn and l'autre marge:
Ducentre de ce Tout qu'icy ie siche au bord
Des ondes, ou uasquit des langue le discord.
L'homme de iour en iour cultiuant sa prudence,
Fait couler tous les Arts par la circunference,
A mesure qui croist, and qu'en troupeaux diuers
Il esseme fecond par ce grand Vniucrs.


Premieres colonies ou peu plades de Sem en Orient.
De l'Assirie auant du coste de l'Aurore
On se retire au bord que l'Hytane redore
De son grauois brillant: on se met apeupler
L'Oroate Persan: le Coaspe, qui clair
Leche les murs de Suse: and les valees grasses
Des croupes du Caucase, ou regnoyent les Arsaces.
On s'heberge en Medie: on commence a semer
Les champs Hircaniens confrontans a la mer.


Secondes Colonies.
Les eufans de ceux-cy ainsi que d'vne ondee
S'espandent largement sur la terre bordee

Du fleuue Chiesel, dessus Thachalistan,
Charas, Gabel, Chabul, Bedan, and Balestan.


Troisiesmes.
Leur race puis apres bouillonnante desfriche
Besinagar, Nayarde, and la campaigne riche
Que le Gange entre-fend: peuple Aue, Toloman,
Le Royaume de Mein, le musque Charazan:
Et cernele desert de l'Op, ou les phantomes
Masquezen cent facons espouuantent les hommes.


Quatriesines.
Quelques ciecles apres marchans en diuers osts
Elle saisit Tipur riche en Rhinocerots,
Caichin en Aloes, Mangit, and le riuage
De Chinsit and d'Anie arreste leur voyage.


Premieres Colonies ou peuplades-de laphet en Occident.
De ce centre premier tirant vers le Couchant,
Les Nepueux de Noe se vont loin espanchant
Vers la moindre Armenie, and puis dans la Cilice:
Occupent peu a peu les ports de Tarse, and d'Isse,
L'antre Corycien, antre delici^ux,
Colonies ou peuplades du Septentrion.
Qui des cymbales rend le son harmonieux:
Les croupes du Taureau, Cappadoce, Ionie,
Du Meandre les bords, Troade, and Bithynie.


Passant le Phar de Seste, ils s'abreuuent des eaux
De Nest,
Secondes Colonies.
Hebre, and Strimon: pasturent leurs troupeaux
Es vallons de Rhodope: and sement les campaignes
Que pres de ton cercueil, o Danube, tu baignes.


La Thrace d'vn coste peuple les champs Gregeois:
La Grece l'Italie ayme-Mars,
Troisiesmes, diuisees en plusieurs branches.
donne-laix:
L'Italie, la Gaule: and la Gaule, l'Hespaigne,
Le riuage du Rhin, and la grande Bretaigne.
Et de l'autre coste se decharge a lentour
Or' de la Moldauie, or' de la mer Maiour:
S'estend vers Podalie, occupe la Seruie,
Le pays Transsyluain, Hongrie, Morauie,
Le Prussien terroir, de Vistule le bord,
Premieres Colonies on peupla des de Cham vers le M^di.
Et de la l'Aleman qui tire vers le Nord.


Ca, tourne vers le Su. Voy comme la Chaldee
Desgorge en Arabie, en Phenice, en Iudee
La lignee de Cham, qui, fertile, croissant

Entre deux Oceans, en Egypte descent:
En semence Cyrene, and la coste fameuse
Ou la Punique mer se debat escumeuse:
Dara, Gusole, Fez, Argin, Galate, Aden,
Tombut, Melli, Gago, Terminan, and Gogden;
Les deserts bluettans de la triste Lybie,
Cano, Zeczec, Benin, Guber, Borno, Nubie,
Et sablons mouuants du terroir altere,
Ou le Nom de Iesus est encor reuere:
Ou le Prest-ian commande, and bien qu'il Iudaise,
Retient, deuotieux, quelque forme d'Eglise.


Que si tu veux scauoir comment tout ce long traict,
Qui couuert de glacons gist sous l'ardent pourtraict
D'vn beau char glise-doux: and qui d'vn tour oblique
Est clos des flots mutins de l'Ocean Cronique,
Fut assorti d'humains: pense qu'ayans quitte
La campaigne, ou le Tigre entre ensociete
Deux fois auec les eaux du loin courant Euphrate,
Ils se logent au pied du blanchissant Niphate.


De l'Armenic auant le champ Iberien,
L'Albanois, le Colchide, and le Bosphorien,
Sont fournis de bourgeois, and de la vers l'Aurore
Ceste vaste estendue, ou vagabondent ore
Les Tartares cruels, and deuers l'autre part,
Que la Volgue au long-cours pres sa source mi-part,
Les plaine de Moskou, Permie, Liuonie,
Biarme, le lac blanc, Russie, and Scrifinie.





It shall suffice me then to follow the ancient bounds,
He groundeth all his discourse vpon holy writ; and sheweth more particularly how the sons of Noe peopled all the world.
And from the golden mouth of Moses taking grounds,
With all religious heed in verses to record
How Sem, Iaphet and Cham, the world with people stor'd;
And how of mighty Noe the far-out-roaming boat
Did thus the second time all countries ouer-float.


Yet not as if Sems house from Babilon did run
Together all at once vnto the rising sun;
To drinke of Zaiton the water siluer-fine,
To peopl' all rich Catay with Cambalu and Chine:
Nor Iaphet vnto Spaine; nor that vngodly Cham
Vnto the droughty soile of Meder and of Bigam,
The fields of Cephala, the Mount of Zanzibar,
The promontory of Hope, which Africk thrusts-out far.


Very meet comparisons.
For as th'l blean hills, or those Hymettick trees,
Not all in one yeeres space were couered with Bees;
But first some little rock, that swarmed eu'ry prime
Two surcreases or three, made on their tops to clime,
Aside and all about those nurslings of the Sun,
At length all o're the cliffes their hony-combs to run:

Or as two springing Elmes, that grow amids a field
With water compassed, about their stocks doe yeeld
A many younger trees; and they againe shoot-out
As many like themselues encroaching all about;
And gaining foot by foot, so thriue: that aft'r a while
They for a shared mead a forrest make that Isle:
Accordinly the men who built th'Assyrian tower,
Were scattred all abroad; though not all in an hower;
But first enhous'd themselues in Mesopotamie;
By processe then of time increasing happily,
They pass'd streame after streame, and seizd land after land;
And were not th'age of all cut short by Gods command,
No country might be found so sauage or vnknow'n
But by the stock of man had bin ere this o'regrown.
And this the cause is why the Tigre-abutting coast,
In all the former time of all did flourish most.
That first began to warre, that only got a name,
And little knew the rest but learned of the same,
The cause, why the first monarchic was in Assiria.
For Babylon betimes drawne vnd'r a kingly throne
Th'emperiall scepter swaid before the Greeks were knowne
To frame a politie, before by charming tones
Amphion walled Thebes of self-empyling stones;
Yer Latins had their townes, yer Frenchmen houshold rents,
Or Dutchmen cottages, or Englishmen their tents:
The Hebrues and their neighbors were learned and religious before the Greeks knew any thing.
So Hebers sonnes had long abhorred Altars made
For any heathen gods; with Angels had their trade;
And knew the great Vnknowue, yea (o most happy thing!)
With eyes of faith beheld their vnbeholden king.
The learned Chaldee knew of stars the numb'r and lawes,
Had measured the skie, and vnderstood the cause
That muffleth vp the light of Cinthia's siluer lips,
And how her thwarting doth her brothers light eclips.
The Priest of Memphis knew the nature of the soule,
And straitly marked how the hean'nly flames doe roule;
Who, that their faces might more flaming seeme and gay,
In Amphitrites poole once wash them euery day:
He physick also wrote and taught Geometree,

Before thar any Greeke had learn'd his A Be Cee.
The Egyptians and Tyrians had all riches and delights, before the Greeks and Ganles knew the world.
All Egypt ouershone with golden vtensils,
Before the limping smith by Aetnaes burning kills
Had hammerd iron barrs: before Prometheus found
The fire and vse thereof vpon th'Argolian ground.


Alas, we were not then, or, if we were, at least
We led an vnkouth life, and like the sauage beast,
Our garments feathers were, that birds in moulting cast;
We feasted vnder trees and gaped after mast.
VVhen as the men of Tyre already durst assay
To raze the saltie Blew twixt them and Africa,
Aduentur'd merchandise, with purpl'enguirt their flanks,
And pleasure kept her court about Euphrates banks.
For as a peble stone if thou on water fling
Of any sleepie poole, it frames a little ring
First whereabout it fell; then furth'r about doth rase
The wauing marbl', or eu'n the trembling Chrystall face
VVith mouing paralels of many circles moe,
That reaching furth'r abroad together-waxing flow
Vntill the round at length most outward and most large
Strikes of the standing lake both one and other marge:
So from the Cent'r of All (which here I meane to pitch
Vpon the waters brinke where discord sproong of speech)
Man dressing day by day his knowledge more and more
Makes arts and wisdome flow vnto the circle-shore;
As doth himselfe increase, and as in diuers bands
His fruitfull seed in time hath ouergrowne the lands.


The first Colonie^ of Sem in the East.
From faire Assyriland the Semites gan to trauell
Vnto the soile beguilt with glystring Hytan-grauell,
And peopling Persiland dronke Oroates iuyce,
And wat'r of cleare Coaspe that licks the walls of Suse:
So tooke the fruitfull dale and flow'r-embellyd plaines
Betwixt high Caucase tops, where shortly Arsace raignes:
And some in Medye dwelt, and some began to make
The fields abutting on the great Hircanian Lake.


The second.
These mens posteritie did like a flood surround
And ouerflow in time the Cheisel-fronting ground:

They came in diuers troopes vpon Tachalistan,
Caras, Gadel, Chabul, Bedane and Balistan.


^he ^hi^d.
Their Of-spring afterward broke-vp with toyling hands
Narzinga, Bisnagar, and all the plenteous lands
That Ganges thorow flowes, and peopled Toloman,
The realme of Mein, and Aue, and muskie Carazan:
They saw the fearefull sprights in wildernesse of Lop,
That maske in hundred shapes way fairing men to stop,


The fourth.
Long aft'r at sundry times this Race still coasting east
Tipura seizd that breeds the horny-snowted beast,
Mangit and Gaucinchine that Aloes hath store;
And stopt at Anie straights and Cassagalie shore.


The first Celonies of Iaphet in the West.
Now from the Center-point in clining to the Set
Far spred abroad themselues the children of Iaphet,
To Armenie the lesse, and after to Cilice,
So got the hau'ns at length of Tarsis and of Ise,
The sweet Corician caue, that neere to Parnas hill
Delights the commers* in with Cymball-sounding skill:
Huge Taure his loftie downes, Ionie, Cappadoce,
Meanders winding banks, Bythin^ and Illios.


The second.
Then boldly passing-o're the narrow cut of Sest,
They dronke the water chill of Strimon, Heber and Nest:
The Rhodopean dales they graz'd, and laid in swathes
The leas that (running-by) Danubies water bathes.


The third parted into many c^anches.Thrace did a thonside fill the Grecian territorie;
Greece peopled Italie, law-giuing, louing-glory;
By Italie was France, by France was filled Spaine,
The borderings of Rhine and all the Great Britaine:
Ath'otherside againe it sent a Colonie
Both to the Pont-Eusine, and toward Moldauie;
So raught Transyluanie, Morauie, Hungarie,
And Seruie farther-west, and eastward Podolie.
Thence men to Prussie came and Wyxell borders ear'd,
Then that of Almanie that narre the Pole is r^ar'd.


Now turning to the South,
The firs^^ of (...) Sou^
consider how Chaldea
Spewes-out in Arabie, Phenice and Chananea,
The cursed line of Cham; yet ne'rthelesse it growes,

The second.
And twixt Myd-sea and Red along int'Egypt goes:
So stores the towne Corene, and that renowmed coast
Whereon the Punick Seas are all to-froth betost;

Fesse, Gogden, Terminan, Argin, Gusola,
The third.
Dara,


Tombuto, Gualata, Melli, Gago, Mansara,

The sparkling wildernesse of Lybie breeding-venim,

Caun, Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubye,
The fourth.
Benim;

And of the droughtie soile those euer-moouing sands,
Where Iesus yet is known and Prestre Ian commands;
Who, though in many points he commeth neere the Iew,
Yet hath a kind of Church not all vnlike the true.


How the North was peopled.
Here if thou meane to know whence all the land so large,
Which vnder-lies the draught of many a sliding barge,
All-ouer pau'd with Ise, and of the sea of Russe
Enuironed about with surges mutinous,
Was come-vnto by men; thinke after they forsooke
The plaine where Tegil flood swift-running ouertooke
Once and againe the streame of running-far Euphrates
They lodged at the foot of hoary hill Nyphates.


So forth of Armenie the field Hiberian,
The Colchish, th'Albanick, and high Bospherian
Might well be furnished, and thence vnto th'Vprist
Might come the Tartar fell, who roameth where he list
All on that circuit huge; and thence accoast the Set
Was stoard the land that Rha doth neere his rising fret,
The shore of Lyuonie, the plaine, of Moscouie,
Byarmie, Permie, Russe, White-lake and Scrifinie.




24It shall suffice. The Poet hath heretofore compared Antiquity (chiefly concerning the Nations Out-roads) vnto a great forrest, wherein the cunningest guides haue often lost themselues. Now therefore he saith it is the safer way to follow and keepe neare the verge of the forrest, rather than venter too farre into it. He shewes thereby, that his meaning is to giue vs a generall view of these matters, not curiously to minse the particulars, as they haue done, who vndertake to gather out of Authors, and teach others the course of Noes posteritie euery mile, as they haue runne vntill this present; and pore still into the Arke, to finde there the names of their Country-men and ancestors. Therefore he voweth to rely wholly vpon the golden mouth of Moses, which was the sonne of Amram, as the Scripture witnesseth, 
Numb. 26.59. Now Moses saith, Gen. 10. in the end of the Chapter, That of the children of Noe were the Nations diuided on the earth after the Floud. And before in 5.20. and 30. verses, he sheweth plainly from whence they began to people the world, and (as it were) to lead againe the Arke ouer the face of the earth: in filling most countries of the world with their great posteritie, encreased, as it was, by vertue of Gods wonderfull blessing, Gen. 9.1. Encrease and multiply, and fill the earth.
25.Yet not as if Sems house. He saith Sem peopled not the East all at once, but by succession of time; that Iaphet when he came out of the Arke, did not forthwith runne to Spaine, nor Cham to hide himselfe in the furthest part of Affrick: but that by little and little, and in processe of time their issues

ranged so farre forth either way. He speaketh of diuers Countries far vp in the East, and farre downe Southward, the site whereof appeareth plaine in the Mappes: and to emich this true story, he vseth two prettie comparisons, of the rockes of Bees in Hybla, and Elmes in an Island: and as by their surci ease both places are by peecemeale at length quite ouergrowne, so (he saith) the world by yearely encrease of Noes posteritie was part after part ouer-peopled as it is. First after the confusion of tongues they lodged one behinde another, about the coast of Mesopotamia: afterward as they encreased in stocke, their new families passed the riuers hilles and straights, looking-out other dwelling places to their liking: the prouidence of God directing all (as appeares) for the better grace and trimming of the earth, and the commoditie of all manking.
26.And hence it comes to passe. This ensueth necessarily of that goes before. Where the posteritie of Noe were most together in the beginning, there we must confesse was the chiefe sway and greatnesse of mankind, and that was in Assyria and Chaldea, as Moses witnesseth, Gen. 11. whereout the Poet concludeth as afore: see further, Gen. 14. Concerning the Kings wars that are there named, with their countries marching vpon Tigris or there abouts; and of Nymrod it is namely said that the beginning of his raigne was Babel, etc. in the Countrey of Sennaar, marching vpon the riuer Tygris.
27.For Babylon betimes. Hauing spoken in generall of the first peoples greatnesse, hee specifieth now the first Monarchie; whereof it seemes Meses hath enough written in the tenth chapter aforesaid. Now the best Authors many, of these and the former times, declare and proue by the account of yeares that the first Monarchie as in Babylon, and Babylon was in Chald^a: whereupon some dispute for Nimnie and Assyrians, and some because these two great Cities began about one time, had seuerall Princes, and raigned both many hundred yeares, they make a double Monarchie of the first, vntill such time as the Chaldean had swallowed the Assyrian. I take not the word Monarchie too precisely, as if in the time of the Babylonian there were none other in the world. Aegypt began in good time to be of power, and great Kings there were in the Land of Canaan, and the countries adioyning. But I vnderstand with our Poet that the first rule plainly appeared at Babylon, euen in the time of Noe. Hee that would vpon this point compare prophane Histories with the Scripture, might sinde matter for a long discourse, the summe whereof may be seene in Funccius, Carion, Vignier and other Chroniclers. To be short, I say the raigne of Nymrod mentioned, Gen. 10.10. many yeares fore-went all other wee reade of, and especially those of the Greekes, Romanes, Gaules, etc. as is proued plainly by the account of time. Thebes, a Towne of Boeotia in Greece: it hath a spring by it called Dirce, whereof the Towne-selfe among the Poets is often surnamed. Amphion, a wise Polititian, who by his eloquence and sleight perswaded the people of those times, rude as they were and vnciuill, to ioyne together in building the walles of Thebes; whereupon the Poets, to shew the force of eloquence, faine that Amphion by the cunning stroakes of his Lute

made the stones to come downe from the rockes and lay themselues together in order of a wall. And thus saith Horace in his Epistle of Poetrie ad Pisones: Dictus and Ampbion Thebanae conditor vrbis Saxa mouere sono testudinis, and piece blanda Read more of him in Appollonius his Argonauticks.
28.The sonnes H^ber. This proues againe that the neere successours of Noe silled not the world all at once, but by succession of time. So the true religion remained in the family of Sem: The Chaldeans were excellent Astronomers and Philosophers; the Egyptian Priests knew the secrets of Nature, before there was any knowledge of letters in Greece: which was not peopled so soone as the other by many yeeres, as the histories euen of the Greekes themselues declare. See the latter Chronicles.
29.All Egypt ouershone. Another proofe. If the world had beene peopled all straight after the flood, riches and dainties would haue beene found vsed in all countries at the same time. But they were in Egypt and Tyre long before the Greekes and Gaules knew the world. So it followes that Greece and Gaule were not so soone peopled as Egypt and Phaenicia. By the limping Smith, he meanes Vul an, that first found out the vse and forging of Iron in Sicilie. Prometheus was the first that found the vse of fire among the Argol ans or Greekes. Of him saith Hor. 1. booke 2. Ode. Audax Iapeti genus ignem sraude mala gentibus intulit. That is, the bold sonne of Japhet brought fire by craft among the Nations. Of this matter the Poets haue set forth many fables, the true drift whereof our Author sheweth in a word. Looke what I haue noted vpon the 707. verse of the sixt day of the first weeke. The rest of this place is easie to be vnderstood.
30.As is a pebble stone. A fine similitude concerning the aforesaid matter: to shew how all the Arts began from the plaine of Sennaar to spread by little and little ouer all the world.
31.For from Assyria. He beginneth here to treat of the more particular peoplings. And first he sheweth how the posteritie of Sem began to fill Asla. Their first oute-ease, leauing the coast of Assyria, bent toward the East. Of this riuer Hytan, Plinie saith 6.23. Carmaniae slumen Hytanis portuosum and auro fertile. Looke Solinus cha 67. They hauing peopled this quarter, thrust on further toward Oroatis a riuer of Persia: whereof Plinie faith in his 6. booke the 23. Flumen Oroatis oslio dissicili nisi peritis; Insulae 2. paruae: inde vadosa nauigatio palustri similis, per curipos tamen quosdam peragitur, and in the 25 chap. Persidis initium ad Flumen ^roatin, quo diuiditur ab Elimaide. Read also the 24. chapter of the said booke of Plinie, for the better vnderstanding of their dwelling here. Then they drew further forth into Persia towards the Citie of Susa, close by the which Coaspis runneth: such is the sweetnesse of that water, that (as Plinie, Soline, Plutarch, and others record) the Kings of Persia drinke of none other. So they came into the valleys of the famous hill Caucasus, where dwelt the Parthians, whose Kings were commonly called Arsaces. From hence into Medie, and lastly vp higher toward the Hyrcanian, or Caspian lake. Looke Ptolomie in his first, second and third table of Msia, Mercater, Ortelius, Cellarius and Theuet. All these remoues are contained within the compasse of fiue or six hundred leagues.

32.These mens posteritie. He setteth downe in foure verses the chiefe countries peopled by the second ouercrease of Sems Issue. The land fronting Cheisel is a part of Tartarie, not farre from the Caspian sea, whereinto that riuer falleth, and riseth neere the wildernesse of Lop, aboue Tachaliston; which is a great Countrey neighbour to the mountaine Imaus. Charasse, Charassan, or Chorasan, it is a Countrey that lies betweene Isligias, Bedane and Tacalistan, which I note more particularly then I finde in the French Commentary, because there is so little difference of letters betweene that and the name of Carazan, whereof the Poet speaketh in the fourth verse following. This Charasse, Gadel, Cabul, Bedane and Balistan, are prouinces enclosed by the riuer Indus, the mountaine Imaus, the Caspian Sea, and realme of Persia, a circuit of land somewhat more then 600. leagues.
33Their of-spring afterward. He commeth to the third ouercrease of the Semites, who went forth Southward as well as North and Eastward. The inhabitants of Cabul thrust forward their Issue toward Bisnagar, a rich countrey of South Asia, lying betweene the Persian sea and the Gulfe of Bengala. Narfinga (for so I haue translated the French Nayarde) is a kingdome lying yet lower, and very rich. That plenteous land that Ganges thorow-flowes, it containes the higher India, where are many wealthy kingdomes set forth well at large in the Maps, as Cambaie, Decan, Bengala, Pedir, etc. Toloman, is further vp toward the North. Aua, is beyond the Gulfe of Bengala, toward the East, about Pegu and Siam, countries of infinite wealth, Mein, on the West hath Ganges, on the East Macin, on the South Bengala, and on the North Carazan, which the Poet surnameth Muskey, because there is great store of the best Muske, Lop, a Desert thirty dayes iourney ouer, lying yet higher Northward. It seemes the Roet followes the opinion of M. P. Venet, who in the first booke of his Tartarian Historie, chap. 35. makes very strange report of the fearefull sights that the poore passengers there meete with, often to the losse of their liues. Not vnlike it is that certaine legions of cuill Spirits there abiding, haue had some speciall power giuen them so to punish the Idolatrous Mahometists, who still inhabit those quarters. The Poet saith all che countries marching this Wildernesse were peopled by this third outerease of the Semits. It is an opinion somewhat likely, and thereon I rest, vntill I heare some other (if it be possible) giue more certaine intelligence of the matter.
34.Long after sundry times. He speaketh of the fourth and last ouercrease of Sem. Tipura, a Countrey breeding many Rhrinocerots, which, according as the Greeke name signifieth, I haue translated horny-snouted beasts: read the description of them in the exposition of the fortieth verse of the sixt day of the first weeke: this Tipura lieth Eastward aboue Toloman betwixt Carazan an Caichin, or Gaucinchine, for so I haue translated: it hath on the West Tipura and Toloman, on the South Campaa, on the North China and Mein, and on the East the East-Ocean: a land very large and bearing great store of Aloes Mangit is farre vp in the North: so is also Quinsai, Ania, and Tabin, one aboue another euen vnto the Anien Straight and Seythicke Ocean. By this description, plaine to be seene in the Maps of Asia, the Poet meant to shew vs

all the seuerall remoues of Sems posteritie; who not passing beyond the Anian Straight, might long content themselues with ^o large a portion as Asia containing aboue foure thousand leagues of ground. As for the particular description of these Countries, their length, breadth and commodities, I neither dare, nor will euer charge therewith my notes enten^ed for short. Besides, it was not the Poets minde to hold the Reader long with view and study of such matter and questions, as may be had and plainly resoiled of the Card-men.
35.Now from the center-point. Out of Affyria and Mesopotamia, Iaphet, or the next race from him, drew toward the West, into those places that the Poet names, set downe (as they are) in the ancient and later Maps of Asia and Europe. I neede not mine (...) euery word of the text. Armenis is distinguished into the Great and Lesse, it lieth neere the Caspian sea, and coasteth toward Europe. The sweete Corician caue, it is in Cilicia, and is described of Plinie in the 27. chapter of his 5. booke, and Strabo in his 4. booke, and Solinus in his 51. chapter. Concerning the strange matters which the Poet reports of it, read Pomponius Mela his description of Cilicia, the first booke. Besides many notable properties of the place, he saith moreouer that when a man hath gone there a troublesome narrow way a mile and more, he shall come through pleasant shades into certaine thicke woods, which make a sound (no man can tell how) of certaine country-songs: and after he is passed thorow to the end thereof, he shall enter another deeper shadow, which amazeth much all that come there, by reason of a noise is heard, loud and passing mans power to make, as it were the sound of many Cimbals. These are his words: Terret ingredientes sonitu Cimbalorum diuinitus and magno fragore crepitantium. He sets downe also at large all other the pleasant delights of the place. Concerning this musicke, some thinke it a fable: others ascribe it to a naturall cause; as that the ayre entting by a natrow mouth into a vault of stone, wide and very deepe, soone growes thereby exceeding raw, and so turnes into water, then dropping still downe in many places and quantities somewhat proportionable vpon the sounding stone, makes in those hollow rockie places a noyse, as it were, musicall. Taure his lostie downes, this great mountaine reacheth hence well toward Pisidia Westward, and on the other side a great way into Asia, as Ptolomee sheweth in his first table. Meander a riuer arising out of the mountaines of Pelta and Totradium in Asia the lesse, runneth thorow Hierapolis, P^sidia, Licaonia, Caria, and other countries thereabouts, into the Midland sea. Illios or Troas, Bithynia and the rest, are higher toward Hellespont and the Maior sea.
36.Then boldly passing ore. He spake before of Illios, which lies in low Phrigia vpon the shore of the Midland sea, about the Sigean Peake and the riuer Sin Sis, hard by the Straight of Gallipolie, where Abydos on Asia-side standeth, and Sestos on the side of Europe: now he saith the second ouercrease of Semites past the Straight, it being in breadth but the fourth part of a league, as Bellon nuoucheth in the second booke and third chapter of his Singularities. In times past there stood two towers, one in Sest, the other in Abyde, in the tops whereof wont to be set great lights to waine the marrinets by night. Looke what

we haue noted vpon the word Phare in the first day of the first weeke, verse 448. and what vpon the word Leander, first weeke, fift day, 912. verse. At this time Sest and Abyde are two Castles, where the Turke hath Garrisons, and are the very keyes of Turkie in that quarter: so neare is Constantinople vnto them. Strimon, Hebre and Nest, are three great riuers passing thorow Thrace (which is now called Romania) and ^alling into the Aegean sea, called now by some Archipelago, and by the Turkes the white sea. Looke the ninth table of Europe in Ptolomee. The Rhodopean dales. Rhodope is a mountaine bounding Thrace: in the dales thereof, beside other Townes, are Philippoli and Hadrianopoli. Danubie or Donaw is the greatest riuer of all Europe, springing out of Arnobe hill, which Ptolomee and Mercator puts for a bound betweene the Sweues and Grisons: this Riuer running thorow Almaine, Austria, Hungaria, Slauonia, and other countries with them interlaced, receiueth into it aboue fifty great Riuers, and little ones an infinite sort, so emptieth by six great mouthes into the Maior sea. Moldauia, Valachia, and Bulgaria, are the countries neare about the fall of Danubie.
37Thrace. These countries neare the Maior and Aegean Seas, and the Thracian Bosphore, thrust on the third ouercrease of people further West and Northward, as the Poet very likely saith: the Maps of Europe shew plainly the coasts he nameth for their chiefe seats. But to shew how and when they changed and rechanged places and names of places, driuing out one the other, and remouing by diuers enterspaces, it were the matter of a large booke.
38Now turning to the South. He commeth now to handle the Colonies, or ouercreases of Chams posteritie: first in Arabia, Phaenicia, and Chananaea, which was after called Iudea: the site of these countries wee know well: they are easie to be found in the generall Maps, and those of Europe, beside the particulars in Ptolomce and other late Writers, as namely in the Theater of Ortelius. When the Chamites had ouerbred Arabia, and the countries South from Chaldaea, which lies betwixt the Arabian and Persian Gulfes, they went at the second remoue downe into Aegypt betwixt the red and Midland seas: thirdly, they entred Affrick, and by little and little filled it. The Poet points out many countries, for better vnderstanding whereof, wee must consider that Affrick (the fourth part of the world knowne) is diuided into foure parts, Barbaria, Numidia, Lybia, and the Land of Negroes. Barbaria containeth all the North coast, from Alexandria in Aegypt to the Straight of Gibraltar along by the Midland sea, and is diuided into foure Kingdomes, Ma^oco, Fessa, Tremisen, and Tunis, containing vnder them 21. Prouinces. Vnder the same Southward lieth Numidia, called of the Arabians Biledulgerid, and hauing but few places habitable. Next below that is Lybia, called Sarra, as much to say as Desert, a countrie exceeding hot, marching athonside vpon the Land of Negroes: that, the last and greatest part of Affricke reacheth South and Eastward very farre. In the further coast thereof is the countrie of Za^zibar, certaine kingdomes and deserts neare the Cape of good hope, which is the vtmost and Southerest peake of all Affrick. Cor^ne is neare Aegypt. The Punick Sea, the Sea of Carthage, put for the Midland that

parteth Europe and Affrick asunder. Fesse, is the name of the chiefe Citie of that Realme in Barbarie. Gogden, a Prouince of the Negroes, as are also Terminan, Gago and Melli, neare the same. Argin, lieth neare the White Cape. Gusola is one of the seuen Prouinces of Maroco in Barbarie. Dara, a country in the North-west of Numidia, not farre from Gusola. Tembuto, agreat countrie in the West part of the Negroes, neare about the Riuer Niger. So is Gualata, but somewhat higher and right against the Greene Cape. Mansara (which I haue put in for the verse sake, as I left out Aden) it lies neare Melli vpon the lowest mouth of Niger. By Aden, that the French hath, I take to be meant Hoden, which is betwixt Argin and Gualata, or somewhat lower. The Wilde^nesse of Lybie is surnamed Sparkling, because the sands there ouerchafed with a burning heat of the Sunne, flye vp and dazle mens eyes. Cane, Guber, Amasen, Born, Zegzeg, Nubie, Benim: all are easie to be found in the Mappe neare about the Riuer Niger, sauing Benim which is lower by the Gulfe Royall, and Nubie higher toward Nilus. Amas^n (which I haue added) is a great countrie, neare the place where Niger diueth vnder the Earth. From these quarters South and Eastward lies the great Ethiopia, a countrie exceeding hot, sandie, and in many places vnhabitable, because of the sands, which by the wind are so moued and remoued oftentimes, that they ouer-heate and choke-vp diuers great countries, that might otherwise be dwelt in. There the great Negus, called Prester-Ian, raigneth farre and neare. His Realmes, Prouinces, Customes, Lawes, Religion, and the manner of his peoples liuing, are set forth at large by Franciscus Aluares, is his Historie of Ethiopia, that is ioyned with Iohannes Leo his description of Affrick.
39If thou desire to know. Hitherto the Poet hath told vs how Asia, Europe, and Affricke, were peopled by the successours of Noe. But he hath not shewed how the Iaphethites from Chaldaea got vp to the furthest Northerne parts: and that he now goeth about, and doth in sixteene verses: supposing them from Euphrates to coast vp to the mountaines of Armenia, and so to enter Albania and the neighbour places, from thence to people Tartaria, Moscouia, and all the North Countries, they are plainly set downe by Mercator, Ortelius, Theuet and others in their Maps of Europe: and I thought good, for causes often afore-told, not here to entreat of them particularly. There is left vs yet to consider two notable questions concerning these outroades and Colonies of Noes posteritie. The one, how they came vnto the West Jndia, which hath so lately, within these hundred yeares, beene discouered. The other, how it came to passe that so few of them, in the short space of some hundreds of yeares, were able to encrease to such a number, as might empeople and fill so many huge and diuers countries of the world. The Poet straight makes answer hereunto. Let vs marke his discourse vpon either the demands.






Mais par ou,
Comment le monde nouue au descou^it de nostre temps a este peuple.
diras-tu, tout ce Monde nouueau
Que l'Hespagne, en flottant comme Dele sur l'eau,
N'a guere a del erre du tombeau d'oubliance,
Et qui par sa ruine est mis comme en essence,
Reoeut ses habitans? Si c'est de longue main,
He, d'ou vient que le Grec, le Perse, le Romain,
Qui siers ont estendu si loin leur dextre armee,
Ne le conurent onque mesme par ronommee?
Et si c'est depuis hier, d'ou vient que ses citez
Four millent en bourgeois? que ses antiquitez
Font honte au Mausolee, aux vieilles pyramides,
Aux murs de Semirame, aux Palais Romulides?


He,
Response, les habitans du nouueau monde ne so^t point tombez des nues, ni nez de la terre.
quoy? tu penses done que ces hommes icy
Cheurent, ia tous formez, des nues tout ainsi
Que ces petits Crapaux, que quelque tiede oree
Dans les fentes des prez verse sur la seree
Apres vn iour ardent, and qui s'entre-touchans
Bou-bouillonne parmi la poussiere des champs:
Ou bieu, que deschirant certaines secondines,
Qui douillettes sichoient en terre leurs racines,
Ils virent la clarte du Solcil alme-beau,
Ayant l'humeur pour laict, and l'herbe pour berceau:
Qu'ils sortirent parmi les grasses motelettes
Comme des Potirons, des Naueaux, and des Bletes:
Ou qu'ainsi que les os par le Thebain semez,
Ils nasquirent, gaillards, de pied en cap armez.


Tout ce large pays,
Le monde nouueau n'a pas este peuple si tost pource qu'il est plus eslongne de la plaine de Sen naar que l'Afrique, l'Europe and l'Asie.
qu'on appelle Amerique,
Ne fut si tost peuple que la coste d'Afrique,
La terre ingenieuse, ayme-loix, porte-tours,
A qui Iupin donna le nom de ses amours:
Et celle qui s'estend depuis le froid Bosphore
Iusqu'au lict saffrane de la perleuse Aurore:
D'autant que celles-ci voisinent de plus pres
Du Tygre brise-ponts les marges diaprez,
D'ou nos premiers ayeuls, estonnez, descamperent,
Et comme Perdriaux par tout s'esparpillerent
Que le Monde, ou Coulom sous vn belliqueux Roy

De Castille porta les armes and la Foy.


Les edifices, thresors and gouuernement du nouueau monde monstrenl qu'il est habite des long temrs, encor quele moyen (comme cela s'est fait) soit inconu. Coniectures touchant les peuplades du nouueau monde, en Septentrion Occide^t, O^ient and Midi.
Mais la riche grandeur de ses berux edifices,
Ses thresors infinis, ses contraires polices,
Monstrent que de long temps (bien qu'en diuerses fois,
Et par diuers chemins) il receust ses bourgeois:
Soit que lacruaute des nuageux orages
Ait leurs bateaux brisez iette sur ces riuages:
Soit que le desespoir d'vn penple tourmente
De peste, guerre, and faim: soit que l'authorite
D'vn homme d'entreprise ait es Indes nouuelles
Auec trauail conduit ses lasses carauelles.


Qui doute que iadis de Quinsay les vaisseaux
Nayent, auentureux, peu trauerser les eaux
Du destroit d'Anien, and trouuer vn passage
Des Indes d'Orieut au pays de Tolguage,
Par vn chemin si court, que les flottes s'en vont
D' Asie au port Gregois a trauers l'Hellespont:
Singlent d'Hespaigne ex Fez par le destroit d'Abile,
Et par le Phar Messin d'Italie en Sicile?


Des grans landes de Tolme, and Quiuir, ou les Veaux
Ont toison de Belier, eschine de Chameaux,
Et crin de Courserots,
Diuerses contrees du nouueau monde.
ils peuplent l'Azasie,
Toua, Topir, Mechi, Calicuza, Cossie,
La Floride, Auacal, Canada, Bacalos,
Et les champs de Labour ou se gelent les flos.


Merueilles du nouueau Moude.
Ils sement d'autre part la terre Xaliscaine,
Mechuacan, Cusule: and dans l'eau Mexicaine
Fondent vne Venise. Ils voyent, estonnez,
Que les arbres plus verds sont aussi tost fanez
Que touchez de leurs doigts: and que mesme il se tr^uue
Dedans Nicaragua vn enflamme Vesuue.
Et de la saisissant l'Isthme de Panama,
A main droicte il s'en vont bastir Oucanama,
Cassamalca, Quito, Cusque: and dans la contree
Du renomme Peru, terre vrayment doree,
Admirent ce beau lac, dont Colle est abreuue,
Qui dous par le dessus, est de sel tout paue:

Auec l'eau de Cinsa, qui, forte, transfigure
La Croy en vn saillon, la fange en pierre dure.
Ils occupent Chili, ou l'onde auec grand bruit
Court a val tout le iour, and sommeille la nuict:
Chinca, les Patagons, and toute ceste coste
Ou du grand Magellan le bleu Neree flote.
S'eslargissent a gauche au long du Darien,
Ou l'Huo les de slasse: au champ Vrabien:
A l'entour de Zenu, qui vers Neptune roulle
Des grains d'or aussi gros que les oeufs d'vne poulle:
A Grenade, ou le mont des Esmeraudes luit:
Au bord Cumanean, qui d'vn espesse nuict
Leur aueugle les yeux: and du bord de Cumane,
Se logent en Parie, Omagu, Caripane:
Aupres de Maragnon, dans le cruel Brasil,
Et les champs plats de Plate, on coule vn autre Nil.


On pourroit dire encor,
Autre coniecture.
que Picne par Grotlande,
Et les champs de Labour par la Bretonne Irlande
Ont este rafreschis: comme par Terminan,
Par Tombut, and Melli, les bords de Corican.





How America was peopled.
But all this other world that Spaine hath new found-out
By floting Delos-like the Westerne Seas about,
And raised now of late from out the tombe of Leath,
And giu'n it (as it were) a liuing by a death;
How was't inhabited? if long agone:
The first obiection.
how is't
Nor Persians, nor Greeks, nor Romans euer wist,
Or inkling heard thereof, whose euer conquering hosts
Haue spred abroad so farre, and troad so many coasts?
Or if it were of late,
The second obiection.
how could it swarme so thicke
In euery towne, and haue such workes of stone and bricke,
As passe the tow'rs of Rome, th'antike Egyptian Pyramis,
The King Mausolus tombe, the wals of Queene Semiramis?


How thinke you then?
Answer negatiue by an Ironie.
belike these men fell from the skie
All ready-shap'd, as doe the srogges rebounding frie,
That ast'r a sulty day, about the sun-set houre
Are powred on the meads by some warme Aprill-showre,
And entertouch themselues and swarme amid the dust,
All or'e the gaping clists that former drought had brust:
Or grew of tender slips and were in earthly lap
(Instead of cradle) nurst, and had for milke the sap:


Or, as the Musherome, the Sowbread and the Blite,
Among the fatter clods, they start vp in a night:
Or as the Dragons teeth sow'n by the Duke of Thebes,
They brauely sprong all-arm'd from-out the fertill glebes.
Indeede this mighty ground,
The first earnest answer.
ycleaped Americke,
Was not enhabited so soone as Affericke;
Nor as that learned soyle, tow'r-bearing, louing-right,
Which after Iupiter his deare-beloued hight;
Nor as that other part, which from cold Bosphers head
Doth reach the pearly morne at Titons saffran bed:
For they much more approach the diaprized ridges;
And faire-endented bankes of Tegil bursting-bridges;
From whence our ancestors discamp'd astonished,
And like to Partridges were all-to-scattered;
Then doth that newfound world whereto Columbus bore

First vnder Ferdinand the Castill armes and lore.
Generall.
But there the baildings are so huge and brauely dight,
So differing the states, the wealth so infinite;
That long agone it seemes some people thither came,
Although not all atonce, nor all by way the same.
For some by cloudy drift of tempest raging-sore,
Percase with broken barks were cast vpon the shore:
Some others much auoid with famine, plague and warre,
Particular.
Their ancient seats forsooke and sought them new so farre:
Some by some Captaine led, who bare a searching minde,
With weary ships arriu'd vpon the Westerne Inde.


Or could not long ere this,
The second.
the Quinsay vessels finde
A way by th'Anien straight from th'one to th'other Inde?


As short a cut it is,
Colonies according to the cond Answer: noting by the way certaine meruailes of the countrie.
as that of Hellespont
From Asia to Greece; or that, where-ore they wont
Saile from the Spanish hill vnto the Realme of Fesse;
Or into Sicilie from out the hau'n of Resse.


So from the Wastes of Tolme and Quiuer (where the kine
Bring calues with weathers fleece, with Camels bunchie chine
And haire, as Genets, slicke) they peopled Azasie;
Cosse, Toua, Caliquas, Topira, Terlichie,
And Florida the faire, Auacal, Hochilega,
The frosen Labour-lands, Canada, Norumbega.


They sow'd ath'other side the land of Xalisco,
Mechuacan, Cusule; and founded Mexico
Like Venice, o're a Lake; and saw, astonished
The greenest budding trees become all withered,
As soone as euer touch'd; and eke a mountaine found
Vesevus-like enflam'd about Nicargua ground.
So passing forth along the straight of Panama,
Vpon the better hand they first Oucanama,
Then Quito, then Cusco, then Caxamalca built;
And in Peruuiland, a country thorow-guilt,
They wondred at the Lake that waters Colochim,
All vnder-paued salt, and fresh about the brim:

And at the springs of Chinke, whose water strongly-good
Makes pebble-stones of chalke, and sandy stones of mood.


Then Chili they possest, whose riuers cold and bright
Run all the day apace, and rest them all the night:
Quinteat, Patagonie, and all those lower seats,
Whereon the foamy bracke of Magellanus beats,
Vpon the left they spread along by Darien side,
Where Huo them refresh'd, then in Vraba spide
How Zenu's wealthie waves adowne to Neptune rould
As bid as pullets egges the massie graines of gould;
A mount of Emeralds in Grenad saw they shine;
But on Cumana banks hoodwinked weare their eyne
With shady night of mist: so quickly from Cumane
They on to Pary went, Omagu and Caribane:
Then by Maragnon dwelt, then entred fierce Bresile
Then Plata's leauell fields, where flowes another Nile.


Moreouer,
The third answer.
one may say that Picne by Grotland,
The land of Labour was by Brittish Iserland
Replenished with men: as eke, by Terminan,
By Tombut and Melli the shore of Corican.




40But all this other world. This is the first of the foresaid questions: how it came to passe that the new world, discouered in these latter times, could be so replenished with people, as the Spaniards (who haue thereof written very much) did finde it. He speaketh of the West India, which is called another world, or the new world, for the hugenesse thereof; being more then 9300. leagues about, as Gomara saith in his Indian Historie 1. book. 12. chap. it is longer then all the other three parts of the world: and two or three waies as broad as Asia and Europe laid together. This quarter, so great and full of kingdomes and people, if it haue been long agone inhabited, how hap (saith our Poet) the Perstans, Greeks, and Remans, who vndertooke so many far voyages came neuer there, nor once heard thereof? For Ptolomee, Strabo, Mela, and other ancient writers make no mention of it: and if it were peopled but of late yeares, he asketh, how came so many people there, so many great Cities and stately monuments, as Gomara, Benzo, Cieque, Ouiede, Cortes, and others write of. Benzo and Barthelemi de las Casas doe report, that, in that little the Spaniards haue there gotten within these thirtie or fortie yeares, they haue slaine aboue twentie millions of people, vndone and brought to great distresse as many or more, and wasted and vnpeopled twice as much ground as is contained in Europe, and a part of Asia to that. Neuerthelesse in many places, and euen in Mexico, New Spaine and Peru, where they haue vsed all

the crueltie, wickednesse and villanie that mans heart or the deuils rage could imagine, there are yet liuing many thousand Indians. Concerning the ancient Monuments of this new world, I will reckon at this time but one of them, taken out of the fourth booke and 194. chapter of Gomara: There are (saith he) in Peru two great high-wayes, ^eaching the one thorow the hilles, the other ouer the plaines, from Quito to Cusco, which is aboue fiue hundred leagues out-right, a worke so great and chargeable, that it is well worthy noting: that ouer the plaines, is 25. foot broad, and walled on either side, and hath little brookes running along in it, with store of the trees called Molli planted on the bankes. The other is of like breadth, cutting thorow the rockes, and filling vp the lower grounds with stone worke: for they are both of them leuell without mounting or descending any hill, and straight without stopping at any lake or poole. In a word, whosoeuer hath seene either of them, will say it is a worke farre surpassing all the great buildings and paued causies of the Romanes, or the walles of Babylon built by Queene Semyramis, or those most wonderfull Pyramides of Aegypt. Guaynacapa, a certaine King of the Indians (who liued about an hundred yeares agoe) caused these waies to be repaired and enlarged; but he was not the first beginner of them, as some would make vs beleeue: for he could not haue finished them in all his life-time, and the stone-worke

semes to be much more ancient. There are built vpon them a daies iourney asunder, many goodly Pallaces, called Tambos, wherein the Court and armies of the Princes wont to lodge. But, Gomara saith, our Spanyards haue by their ciuill warres vtterly destroyed these causies, and cut them asunder in many places, that they might not come one to another: yea the Indians themselues haue broke off and seuered their parts in time of warre. Now let vs heare the Poets answer.
41What then alas? belike. His first answer is, that the people of the West-Indies fell not out of the ayre, as many little frogs doe in a warme shower, framed, by the vertue of the Sunne, of the dust or vapours arising out of the earth: nor that they grew not out of the ground, like roots or plants: nor by any strange or vaine inchantment, as of the Serpents teeth sowne by Cadmus, the Poets faine, grew souldiers in compleat harnesse. But these they are men well-featured, stout, and long-liuing, chiefly in the North and South-parts of the Country, where both men and women in stature, strength, and continuance, farre excell the people of Europe, Asia, and Affricke. The commodities they haue for health, their meat, drinke and dwelling, their ceremonies, ciuill gouernment and other properties, duly noted by the Historians, make very good proofe of the Poets saying.
42Indeed this mightie ground. This new-found world is called America, of the name of Americus Vespusius, a certaine famous Pilot of Florence, one of the first discouerers of the Countrey, not much more than an hundred yeares agoe. His second answer is, that this part of the world could not be so soone inhabited as the other three: because it is discoasted further from the plaine of Sennaar, for in Asia the plaine it selfe was. And Arabia being peopled, Affrick was very neare at hand, and Europe from the lesser Asia is parted but with a narrow Phare: whereas America is farre beyong all these, which way soeuer we coast. He calleth Europe a learned Soyle, tower-bearing, louing-right, for the number of learned men and cunning Artisans, of Kingdomes and States well gouerned, and Fortresses that are there, That after Iupiter his deare-beloued hight, lo wit, Europa, that was the daughter of Agenor, King of Phaenicia. For the prophane Poets faine their great god, being in loue with her, to haue taken the shape of a Bull, and on his backe to haue carried her ouer Hellespont, and therefore the place, where he first landed her, was called by her name. From this fable seemes to be drawne the name of Besphore: which is as much to say as Bull-ferry. Perhaps this Iupiter was some notable Pirate or Tyrant there-about raigning, who in a Ship called the Bull, stole away some young Lady, and fled for safetie into Europe. These words (which from cold Bosphors head Doth reach the pearly dow of Tithons saffron bed) set downe the length of Asia, that is, from the Bosphere of Thrace vnto the East-Ocean. The Castile armes and lore: that is, the Spanish Religion and forces, which Christopher Columbus brought first into America, and there planted in the name of the Spanish King.
43But there the buildings. The third answer is, that the stately buildings, infinite treasures, and diuers gouernments that are there, will witnesse that the country hath beene long inhabited, although hard it is to learne how.

I haue already spoke of the great Causeyes of Peru. Now the sumptuousnesse of Themixtetan, the great Citie of the Kingdome of Mexico, and the Kings Pallaces of Peru (such they are described by the Spaniards) make further proofe of the Poets saying. As for the vncountable wealth of the Indies it plainly appeares, that aboue ten thousand millions of gold haue beene brought thence into Europe, beside heapes of Rubies, Emerauds and Pearle, much wracked in the sea, and much brought for a yearely tribute into Spaine. Whereunto I will adde what Franciscus Lopes de Gomara saith concerning the vnualuable riches of Guainacapa, (the name signifieth young and rich) the father of Antibalippa, last King of Peru, whom the Spaniards put to death. All the furniture of his house, table and kitchin (saith he in the 120. chapter of his fourth booke) were of gold and siluer, and the meanest of siluer somewhat embased with copper for the more strength. He had in his Wardrop Giantlike Images of gold liuely featured; as also all kinde of beasts, fowles, trees, herbes, and flowers that the Land there beareth; and all kinde of fishes, that either the Sea there, or any fresh water of his Kingdome breedeth, in the said mettals well and proportianably resembled, not so much as cords, paniers, troughes, billets, and other such implements, but were so; to conclude, there was nothing in his Kingdome, whereof he had not the counfeit in gold or siluer. It is also said that the Kings of Peru, called Ingaes, haue a garden in a certaine Isle neare Puna, where they delight themselues when they list take the Sea, that hath in gold and siluer all herbes, slowers and trees, and other things whatsoeuer meet for a pleasant garden: such a sumptuous deuice, as neuer was heard-of, or seene elsewhere. Besides all this, that King, last but one, had gathered into Cusco huge masses of gold and siluer vnfined: which the Indians hid so secretly, as the Spaniards could neuer come by it, there was also in and about Cusco great store of picture-tables and tombes all of sine siluer, worth some thirtie, some fiftie, some threescore thousand Ducats a peece: also dining-tables, vessels, and Images a great number, all of fine gold. The Spaniards at the taking of Antibalippa, found as good as 252000. pounds of siluer, and of gold 1300265. pezoes, euery pezo valued at a Ducat and a halse. Besides the great golden table of Antibalippa, worth nigh 40000. Crownes. Now for all this great spoile that the Spaniards got, and hauock that they made, as well in Peru, as other the Prouinces there-about, yet the Indians (as Benzo reports, who stayed there with the Spaniards fourteene yeares, and wrote in three bookes, worthy reading, that whole story) they sticke not to say, they haue yet more remaining than all that the Spaniards euer had. And to make their meaning plainer, they will take out of a great vessel ful of wheat one grain betwixt their singers, and say: See you this? the Viracochie (so they call the Spaniards) haue taken, as it were, this one graine away: but thus much (say they, pointing to the rest in the vessell) thus much and more haue they left behinde them. Now the word Viracochie, because it comes thus in my way, Benzo himselfe in his third booke saith, it signifies the froth or scumme of the Sea: and that the Peruvians so call the Spaniards for deepe hatred and abomination of them; saying also sometimes one to another in their language: The wind beares downe houses and trees, and the fire burnes them, but these Viracochie they doe worse than wind and fire. They waste all, they eat all, they turne the earth and all vpside downe: they

turne the course of Riuers: they are neuer at quiet: they neuer cease ranging vp and downe to seeke gold and siluer: and all they finde is too little for them. When they haue it, what doe they? They take their pleasure, they warre one with another, rob one another, kill one another: they are euer giuen to lying, blaspheming, and denying the same God whom they professe: and these men haue cruelly slame without cause our fathers, our children and kinsfolkes, taken from vs, contrary to all right, our goods, our libertie and countrie. Hauing thus commended the Spaniards, they cause the Sea for vomiting on the Earth so cruell and wicked a people, and often haue vpbraided the Spaniards themselues with this notorious reproach: that Gold was the Christians God. O how shall this people in the latter day condemne that euer greedy couetousnesse, for which Europe now adaies heareth so ill, and is by the selfe-people thereof so wasted and vnpeopled! But concerning the diuers gouernments of the West-Indies, seeing they are set downe so well at large by Lopes, Ou^ede, Benzo and others, it is too great a matter for me to handle in this discourse, which is (I feare me) growne too long already: therefore will I draw to an end. The Poet at the 413. verse begins to shew some likely opinions how this newfound world was pleopled: and first in generall, that the people of countries inhabited, exercising their ordinary traffick one with another, might sometimes be cast by force of tempest vpon the West-Indian shore, and so be constrained (their ships being broken) to remaine still there. Others by plague, war, or famine were driuen to leaue their countries, and seeke some quietter dwelling farre off, and so haue lighted on these new Countries. Or perhaps some great man of authority, or cunning Pilot, by ventring made a discouery thereof, and led the ouer-creases of some people thither. As the Poet sheweth more particularly in the verses following.
44Nay could not long agoe. He guesseth in speciall (and most likely) that the inhabitants of the furthest Northeast shore of Asia, to wit, the men of Quinsay, and other places there, might haue emptied their ouer-peopled Cities, by passing the Anien Straight (a part of Sea no broader (as he saith) then the Phare of Gallipoli, Gibraltare, or Messine) and so from the East Indies might they haue stored first the land of Tolguage (which Theues, in his map of the new world, placeth betwixt the Realmes of Anian, Tolm, and Quiuir, within 15 degrees of the North-pole:) then the rest as followeth.
45So from the Wastes of Tolm and Quiuir. In all this huge Northren part of America, few people there are, especially toward the coast ouer against Quinsay and the other East countries. There are therefore great Waste-lands (as the later Card-men haue noted) about the kingdomes or countries of Anian, Tolguage, Quiuir and Tolm, about 12000 leagues compasse.
So then the Poet holds opinion that some of Sems posteritie, hauing once passed from the farthest East-point of Asia ouer to the West-Indian Coast, thrust their of-spring farther into the land. The Countries here named by the Poet, are to be found in the Sea-cards and Land-maps betwixt Now-Spaine and Estotilant: as if he meant that the North-part of America was first inhabited: concerning the properties and particular descriptions of

these places, reade the third volume of the Spanish Nauigations, the second Booke of the generall historie of Lopez de Gomara, chap. 37. etc. the Historie of Florida, Benzo, the Reports of Johannes Verazzanus, laques Cartier, and other French Captaines, concerning their discouering of the Land of Labour (where the Sea is frozen) Baccalos, New France, Canada, Hochilega, and other lands thereabouts. Reade Thenet also, and the later Card men. For the French Calienza I haue translated Caliquas, according as I finde it writted both in others and in Ortellus; who also hath for Mechi Terlichi-mechi; and therefore I translate it Terlichi.
46They sow'd at'nother side. Xalisco, now called Noua Gallicia, is described by Gomara in the 21. chapter of his fift booke. It is a land very fruitfull, and rich in honey, waxe and siluer: and the people there are Idolaters and Men-eaters. Nunnius Gusmannus, who seized the country for the King of Spaine in the yeare 1530. hath written a discourse thereof, and it is to be read in the third volume of the Spanish Nauigations The Prouince of Mechuacan (from whence not far lyeth Cusule) is about 40 leagues lower southward then Xalisco: that also the said Gusmannus conquered, after he had most cruelly and traiterously put to death the Prince and Peeres of the country, as Gomara sheweth in his booke and chapter aboue quoted. Mexico (which some account all one with Themixtetan) is the mother-Citie of that kingdome, now called Hispania Nona: wonderfull rich it is and strong, and of high renoume: built, farre more curiously then Venice, vpon a lake salt on the north-side, because it is there of a Sea-like breadth, and on the southside fresh, because of a Riuer that empties there into it. Greater is the Citie thought to be, then Seuille in Spaine, the streets are passing well set, and their channels in such manner cast, as cannot be mended. Diuers places there are to buy and sell-in the needfull and ordinarie wares, but one there is greater then the rest, with many walkes and galleries round about it, where euery day may be seene aboue threescore thousand Chapmen. There is the Iudgement Hall for common Pleas: and were also many temples and shrines of Idols before the comming of Ferdinando Cortez, who made thereof the first conquest for the king of Spaine, exercising most horrible cruelties vpon all both young and old in the Citie, as Barthelemi delas Casas, a Monke and Bishop of Spaine, reports in his historie of the Indies, where he stayed a long time. Looke the description of Mexico in the third volume of the Spanish Nauigations, fol. 300. See also Benzo of Millaine his historie of the new world, the second booke and 13. Chapter. Now from these parts abouenamed, (after report of some wonders of many there seene, and worthy a larger discourse by themselues) the Poet drawes his Colonies downe further towards Peru, by the Land-straight of Panama, which parts the South-sea from the Ocean, and thereabout is hardly 20. leagues in breadth. The fiery mountaine of Nicaragua is by Gomara described in his fist booke, chap. 203. so are the other wonders, which the Poet here notes, in his fourth booke, chap. 194.
47Then Chili they possest. Gomara, in his fourth booke, chap. 131. holds opinion that the men of Chili are the right Antipodes or Counter-walkers vnto Spaine,

and that the country there is of the same temper with Andaluzie. This Chili lyeth on the shore of el Mar Pacisico, so also doth Quintete (which I haue put for Chinca) both neere the Panagones or Giants, whose country is full of people, and hath certaine riuers that runne by day and stand by night, some thinke because of the snowes which in the day time are melted by the Sunne, and frozen by the Moone in the night: but I take it rather to be some great secret and miracle of nature. The cause, why here I made exchange of Chinca, was first for that the Poet had spoke before of the springs of Chink, which I take for the same; then because it is so diuerfly placed of the Card-men: for Ortelius, in his Map of the New World, sets it aboue, and Theuet beside Chili, in either place it stands well to be taken for the Chink aforenamed: but Mercator placeth it a great deale lower, and on the contarry coast, neere the riuer of Plata, where indeed is a country called Chica, that perhaps hath bred this error. Lastly, Quintete stands so right in way, which the Poet followes, from Chili to the Patagones, that I thought it not amisse to take the same rather then the doubtfull Chinca. By the somie Brack of Magellanus, he meanes the Sea and Straight of Magellan close by terra Australis. Gomara describeth it well in the beginning of the third booke of his Portugall Historie. The Poet hath already shewed how people came first on the North-America from the kingdome of Anian ouer the maine land to the Atlantick sea shore, then on all the further coasts from Quiuir to the Magellan Straight, along the Archipelago de San Lazaro, Mar del Zur, and Pacifico: and now hee takes the higher side on the left hand from the Land-Straight of Panama to the riuer of Plata, which is not farre from the Magellan: noting by the way the most note-worthy places of all this huge reach of ground, represented, as it is, by our late writers in their generall and particular Maps of the Newfound world. Huo is a great sweat-water streame arising at Quillacingas, (that lieth vnder the Equator) and running athwart the country called Caribage into the Sea at Garra. Vraba is the country that lieth betwixt that riuer and Carthagene. Concerning Zenu, marke what Gomara saith thereof in his second booke and 69. chapter. It is the name of a Riuer and Citie both, and of a Hauen very large and sure. The Citie is some 8. leagues from the Sea. There is a great Mart for Salt and Fish. Gold the inhabitants gather all about; and when they set themselues to get much, they lay sine-wrought nets in the riuer of Zenu and others, and oftentimes they draw-vp graines of pure gold as big as eggs. This country is not farre from the Straight of Darien. In the said second booke, chap. 72. He describes also Noua Grenada, and the Mount of Emeraudes: which is very high, bare, and peeld, without any herbe or tree thereon growing, and lyeth some fiue degrees on this side the Equator. The Indians, when they goe-about to get the stones, first vse many enchauntments to know where the best veine is. The first time the Spaniards came there, they drew thence great and little 1800. very faire and of great price: but for this commoditie, the country is so barren that the people were faine to feed on Pismers: till of late the Spanish couetousnesse hath made them know the value of their Mountaine. Cumana is described in the foresaid booke, chap. 79. in the end whereof Gomara saith, the vapours

of the riuer Cumana engender a certaine little mist or slime vpon mens eyes, so as the people there are very pore-blind. Parie is described in the 84, chapter of the said second booke. Maragnon, a Riuer, which (as Gomara saith, 2 booke, 87 chapter) is threescore miles ouer. It emprieth at the Cape of Alinde, three degrees beyond the Aequator: but springeth a great way further South, by Tarama in Peru; thence running Eastward, it casteth only an Arme into the Amazon about Picora. Which hath caused many the first writers of America to count from that place both but one riuer. So also doth our Poet here: otherwise he would haue msntioned first how the people passed the Amezon, that other great streame now knowne by the name of Orenoque; which riseth about Carangui, and emptieth (as Theuet saith) 104. leagues aboue the mouth of Maragnon. Bresile, which the Spaniard discouered in the yeare 1504. is surnamed fierce, because of the Canibales, Caribes, and other man-eating people there. I. de Leri hath written very fully all the historie of his aduenture in part of the country, where dwell the people called Toupinamboes. The riuer of Plata the Indians call Paranagacuc, which word importeth as much as a great water. Gomara speaking thereof in the 89. chapter of his second booke, saith, In this riuer is found siluer, pearles, and other things of great price. It containes in breadth 25. leagues, making many Islands and swels like Nilus, and about the selfe-same time. It springeth first out of the mountaines of Peru, and is after increased by the infall of many riuers: for the country thereabout is leuell, or slat, whereof it seemes to haue receiued the name of Plate.
Thus the Poet guesseth at the manner of this new-found worlds empeopling by the coast of Asia. Whereunto I will adde what Arias Mont that learned Spaniard hath written thereof in his booke entituled Phaleg. He saith Ioktan the double pety-sonne of Sem, (that is, whose double grandfather Sem was) had thirteene sonnes, which are named by Moses in the 10. of Genesis, and some of them peopled the West Indies from the East. That which Moses saith, Genesis 10. chap. 30. vers. concerning Sephar a mountaine of the East, Arias applies to the great hills of Peru, which the Spaniards call Andes: they reach out further in length then any other in the world, and neere them stands an ancient towne called Iuktan. Moreouer, there lies higher a neere-Isle, betwixt Cuba and Mexico, called Iukatas: which may bee thought to resemble still the name of him that first brought people into the country. To Ophir, one of the sonnes of Ioktan, Arias allots the land of Peru: for as much as in the third chapter, and six verse of the second booke of Chron. there is mention made of the gold of Paruaim. To Iobab the country of Paria, which is neere the Straight of Panama, very ^i^h also in gold and pearle. I haue said else-where that Arias Montanus tooke Asia to be all one main-land with America, and knew no Anian Straight. If that be true, sure the race of Sem peopled those quarters. But others considering the horrible ignorance and brutishnesse of the West-Indians so lately discouered, and the rather to excuse their outragious cruelty exercised vpon the poore people, cannot thinke but that

they are some relikes of the race of Cham. This opinion hath but a weake ground, as he may well perceiue that will duly examine the circumstances. For strange it is not that the race of Sem, after so many generations, and in so farre discoasted Countries, should at length be thus corrupted. Besides, the West-Indies in diuers places liue still after the manner of the East. But for better answering sundry obiections, that make to proue them Chamites, reade the Preface to the New-found world of Benzo, Frenched by M. Vrbain Chauueton.
48Morcouer one may say. This is another guesse of the Poet; as that the West-India was peopled from the North by some Iaphethites, who ventured ouer the Straight of Grotland. Indeed these Northerne countries haue euer swarmed with people: and well it may be, that some thence by others driuen, or by necessity, or of their owne heads, haue sought that way other

places more to their liking. As also that the coasts of Bresile and Plata (which I thinke the Poet meanes by the Shore of Corican) were peopled by some Chamites from Terminan, Tombut, and Melli, Countries lying in the West of Affricke, about the fall of Niger. For vnlikery it were, seeing Almightie God gaue the whole earth to Noe and his three sonnes, (Gen 9.) that the race of any one of them should engrosse all this New-found world, beside his part in the other. Thus rather doubtlesse, as the Poet guesseth, and I am further bold to gather, by little and little, at sundrie times and places, did all the three Families of Noe possesse those quarters as the rest: that the will of God might be fulfilled, and the light of his glory appeare, in so equall parting and ouer-peopling the whole earth: howsoeuer all that huge reach of ground that lieth vnder the South-pole, and is thought the fist and greatest part (if it all be habitable) is as yet vnknowne, or very little discouered.






Rien n'est impossible a l'ambition.
I'accorde volontiers (me diras tu possible)
Que ce bas Vniuers n'a rien d'inaccessible
A nostre ambition: qu'elle breche les monts,
Court a sec sur les slots des abysmes profonds:
Et despitant la soif ses carauanes guide
Par le sable Tolmois, Arabesque, and Numide.
Obiection. Qu'il n'est pas possible que Noe and ses trois fils aycnt ainsi foisonne. 1 Response son dee surla benediction de Dieu. 2 Resp. fondee sur l'exemple des septante persones dont nasquirent tant de gens en Egypte. 3 Le pur traitement, la bon ne sante, la paix, la vigueur de corps corps, le repos, la longue vie, l'vsage de pleusieurs semmes causoyent la^ multiplication duger^re humain on ce premier temps.
Mais ie ne puis peuser qu'vne seule maison
Reduite a quatre licts, ait rompu la cloison
D'Afrique, Europe, Asie: and qu'encor tout le Monde
Semble estre trop estroit pour sa race seconde.


Si tu fais peu d'estat de l'immortelle vois,
Qui puissante benit pour la seconde fois
L'amour que le noeud sainct du mariage serre,
Disant, Croissez humains, and remplissez la terre.


Si, profane, tu tions pour baye, que iadis
Des enfans d'Abraham seulement sept sois dix
Pullulerent gaillards dans l'Egypte fertile
Durant quatre cens ans iusques acinq cens mile:
He considere au moins, que nos premiers ayeuls,
Pour estre alimentez des fruicts delicicux
D'un non-fume terroir, and repeus de viandes,
Que l'art gaste-sante des cuisines friandes
N'alteroit point encor: pour n'estre moissonnez
Par l'homicide for des voisins forcenez:
Et pourn' auoir le corps enerue de paresse,
Ou casse de tranaux; viuoient pleins de ieunesse

Quelques centaines d'ans, and que ia tous chenus
Ils pouuoint exercer le mestier de Venus:
Que la poly gamie en leur temps familiere
Fit que cest Vuiuers fust vne formiliere
D'animaux marche-droict: and que bien tost des reins
D'vn Patriarche seul sortissent tant d'humains.


Comparaisons a ce propos.
Ainsi vn grain de bled si tout ce qu'il rapporte,
Est souuent reseme dans vne terre forte,
Charge en sin les greniers, and iaunit de moissons
Toute vne grand campaigne. Ainsi de deux poissons
Lettez dans vn viuier la semence fertille,
De viuers en peu d'ans pouruoit toute vne ville.


Exemple en nostre temps.
N'a-t'on pas en nos iours conu certain vieillard,
Qui du fruict de son corps auoit peuple gaillard,
Vn village a cent feux: and heureux en famille,
Veu ioints d'vn iuste Hymen sons fils auce sa fille,
L'arbre de parente ne pouuant plus de rang
Fournir assez denoms aux degr^z de leur sang?


Scait-on pas,
Autre exeple.
que bien peu de maisons d'Arabie
En moins de trois cens ans remplirent la Lybie
D'habitans tous nouueaux? and Fez, Tunes, Oran,
Tesse, Bugie, Arger, des loix del' Alcoran?


Siles Africains moins propres a la generation ont peu en peu d'annces em^^lu de grands pays, beaucoup plus les peuples Septentrionaux.
Que si cela se void es bourgeois de l'Afrique,
Qu' vn hum^ur corrosif, picquant, melaneholique,
Chatouille nuict and iour, and rend plus desireux
Du plaisir Cyprien, mais non si vigoureux
A faire des infans: d'autant que la frequence
De l'amoureux deduit rend foible leur semeace,
Et qu'vn frilleux Hyuer au centre de leurs corps
Regne eternellement, comme vn Este dehors:
Songez vnpeu combien ceux, qui prez de leur teste
Voyent tourner du Ciel la slambante charette,
Frayent secondement: d'autant qu'ils n'entrent pas
Qu' a temps and rarement aux amoureux combas:
Et le froid demeurant sous l'Astre de Parrhase
Tousiours victorieux en la campaigne rase,
La chaleur se retranche, and dans le Fort du corps,

Actiue, se serrant les rend beaucoup plus sorts.


Les peuples de Septe^trion tousiours en beaucoup plus grand nombre que ceux du Midi qui sot foibles and ne multiplient pas ainsi.
Aussi de la les Huns, Francs, Herules, Bulgares,
Sueues, Bourguignons, Circassiens, Tartares,
Alains, Cimbres, Teutons, Tigurins, Ostrogots,
Vandales, Tures, Lombards, Normans, and Visigots,
Ont deluge la terre: and comme sauterelles,
Gaste del' Vniuers les prouinces plus belles.
Mais le sterile Su a peine en tout iamais,
Poible, a pen desbander deux osts, qui renommez
Ont fait trembler le Nort: dont l'vn suyuit la rage
Du Borgne, quirendit Reine and serue Cartage:
Et l'autre par Martelpres de Tours martele,
Espuisa de soldats tout le terroir brusle.





How it was possible that Noe and his three sonnes should increase as they did.
Well may I grant you then (saith one perhaps) ther's naught
In all this lower world, but will at length be raught
By mans ambition; it makes a breach in hills;
It runneth dry by Sea among the raging Scylls;
And in despite of thirst it guides the Carauands
Amids the drie Tolmish, Arabick, Numyd sands.
But yet he lewdly thinks it goes against all sense
That one house, beds but foure, should breake so large a sense,
As t'ouerbreed the lands of Affrick, Europe, Ase,
And make the world appeare too narrow for the race.


What ere thou be,
1. Answer.
if light thou reck th'Immortals hest,
That once againe the bond of sacred mariage blest,
And said Encrease and fill:
^. Answer.
if thou profane denie
That Iacobs little traine so thicke did multiplie
On Pharoh's fruitfull ground, that in foure hundred yeere
The seuentie liuing soules fiue hundred thousand were.


Alas, yet thinke at least,
3. Answer.
how (for in elder time
The fruits they are ne grew not on so foggy slime
As ours doe now, nor was their meats with sawces dight,
Nor altered as yet with health-empairing slight
Of gluttonating Cooks; and for with murdring sword
Of neigh bour enemies they seld were swept aboord;
And for their mightie limbes they dulled not by sloth,
Or want of exercise) they wox in liuely groth,

And liu'd some hundred yeeres, and in their latter daies
With siluer-haired heads were able sons to raise.
So that Polygamie, then taken for a right,
This world an ant-hill made of creatures bolt-vpright,
And many peopl' arose in short time (if thou marke)
From out the fruitfull raines of some one Patriarch.


Eu'n as a graine of wheat,
Two sit comparisons.
if all th'increase it yeelds
Be often-times resow'd vpon some harty fields,
Will stuffe the barnes at length and colour mighty launes
With yellow-stalked eares: and as two fishes spaunes
Cast int' a standing poole, so fast breed vp and downe,
That aft'r a while they store the larders of a towne.
An example of late yeares.
And haue we not of late a certaine Elder knowne,
That with his fruitfull seed a village had o're-growne
Of fiuescore houses big; so blessed that he saw
His sonnes and daughters knit by ord'r of mariage law?
The tree of parentage was ouershort and thin
To branch-out proper names for their degrees of kin.
Another example.
Who knowes not that within three hundred yeeres and lesse,
A few Arabians did Lybie fill and presse
With new inhabitants, and taught Mahound in Fesse
In Oran, in Argier, in Tunis, Bugy and Tesse?
Now if they so increas'd that woon'd in Afferick,
That with an humor sharpe, fretting, melancholick,
Prouok'd are day and night, and made more amorous,
Then able to beget, (for deed venerious,


The more enforc'd, the lesse it is of force (no doubt)
And inward doe they freize that most doe boyle without)
Imagine how the men, who neerer to the Poule
Behold the flaming wheeles of heau'nly chariots roule,
Doe wax and multiplie: because they come but seeld
And at well chosen times, to Cithareas field:
And sith cold weather staies about the northen Beare,
O're all that rugged coast triumphing euery where,
The liuely heat reures into the bodies tower,

The North hath swarmed with people, not the South.
And closer-trussed makes their seed of greater power.


And thence the Cimbrians, Gaules, Herules and Bulgares,
The Sweues, Burgundians, Circassians and Tartares,
Huns, Lombards, Tigurines, Alanes, and Estergoths,
Turks, Vandalls, Teutonicks, Normans, and Westergoths,
Haue ouerflow'd the lands, and like to Grashoppers
Destroy'd the fairer parts of all this Vniuerse:
Whereas the barren South in all those former daies
Hath scarce been able enough two martiall bands to raise
That could the North affright; one vnder Haniball;
Who brought the Punick State both vnto rule and thrall;
Anoth'r impression made as far as Towers wall,
And there with Abderame was knockt by Charles the Maule.




49Well may I grant. This is the second obiection against that hath beene said concerning the Colonies drawne from Noes three sonnes: to wit, that it is impossible so few housholds should in so short time fill so many countries as are in the world, so thicke as now they swarme.
50Jf little thou regard. The Poet answers at large, and very exactly to the said obiection. First, out of the words of Moses, Gen. 9. And God blessed Noe and his children, and said vnto them: Encrease and fill the earth. This answer is right to the point, and very sufficient to stop the mouthes of all curious questioners, that at least beleeue the word and power of God. Such is also the answer following.
51If thou profane deny. He that beleeues the holy Scripture knowes well that in the space of foure hundred yeares the family of Iacob, no more than seuentie persons, encreased in Aegypt vnto the number of fiue hundred thousand, besides women and children. This is an argument from the lesse to the greater: if in one little countrie a few so much encreased, and that in the short space of 400. yeares; how much more might all the people else in the world encrease in 4000. yeares? But the prophane man will not beleeue the story, he will say it is vnpossible. I will make no miracle of it, although the Scripture noteth how the people encreased maruellously; and therefore vseth a word which signifieth to multiply, or spawne like fishes. But let him cast account, as neare as he can, not of excesse, but the ordinarie encrease that might arise of seuentie persons in the space they were in Aegypt, and before he come to two hundred and fifty of the foure hundred, he shall haue the number, as Morneus noteth in his book Deveritate, Chap. 26.
52At least consider how. This the third answer is also of great importance, especially for Atheists: because it relieth vpon naturall reason: as namely, that a purer sood, and better health, with peace, strength, rest, long life, and Polygamie (which is the vse of many wiues) made greatly for the encrease of mankinde in those former times. Each point of this answer is

of great waight, and may perswade easily all that is written of the matter.
53Right so a graine of Wheat. For confirmation of the foresaid arguments, he bringeth in two fine comparisons, and sit for the purpose. The one drawne from a corne of Wheat, the other from the spawne of two fishes. Both so much the better in this case, because they are of common things, and such as we daily see before our eyes.
54Haue we not in our daies. He confirmes his reasons further by a notable example of a certain man, who liued to see a whole towne, of no lesse then 100, houses, peopled only with persons issued of himselfe and his: so that there were no names in law for their degrees of blood: Ludouicus Viues affirmeth he saw the man in Spaine. There died also lately an honourable Lady in Germanie, who saw of her selfe and hers borne a hundred and threescore children; notwithstanding many died vnmarried, and those that were married are yet like to haue more.
55Who knowes not that within. Loe another notable example of a few Arabian families, set downe at large by Iohn Lyon in his historie of Affrick, and cited also by Philip Morney in his 26. chapter de Veritate. And wee see (saith he) how the threescore Families, that for the Sect of Califa moued out of Arabia, in lesse then three hundred yeares haue peopled all Affrick: so as at this day the countries there are surnamed after them Beni Megher, Beni Guariten, Beni Fensecar, etc. that is, The sonnes of Megher, the sonnes of Guariten, the sonnes of Fensecar, etc. as each of them grew-vp to a people. In like sort the East-Indies, that were discouered now a hundred yeares agoe, and straight ahnost vnpeopled, within another hundred will be stored againe and repeopled by the Spaniards.
56Now if they so increase. A strong conclusion from the Lesse to the More, gathered out of the example next aforegoing: thus, If the people of Affrick, that are not very fit to engender, were able in few yeares to store so huge countries; how much more might the Northerne and Asiaticke

people increase? and if a small number of weaklings; how much rather an infinite sort of lustie and fruitfull men? This is grounded vpon naturall reason, regarding the climats and site of each countries, together with daily experience of the matter. Hipocrates in his booke de Acre, aquis and locis, and his enterpreters discourse at large thereon. It were long to follow their steps, and I haue been too long in this matter already.
57And thence the Cambrians. For a further proofe of the last conclusion, hee alleadgeth, and no man can denie, that the North hath alway brought forth most and most warlike people: (and diuers he reckons-vp, of whom we haue spoken heretofore) whereas from the South haue hardly euer come aboue two Armies worth naming. The one vnder command of Hanibal, whom the Poet noteth by the name of Borgne, (which is as much to say as Blind, or bad-eyed) because he lost an eye by ouer-watching himselfe in the passage of certaine great marrish grounds into Hetruria, Liuie. 22. He it was

that enlarged the Empire of Carthage, by meanes of the great ouerthrowes he gaue the Romans, but was after driuen out of Italic, and in Affrick quite vanquished at Zama field, where the Carthaginians were forced to yeeld themselues wholly to the Romans mercy, so had their Citie razed and their State viterly destroyed. The other Armie of the South was of Sarasens, no lesse then foure hundred thousand strong, led by their King and Captaine Abderame: they set out of Affrick into Spaine, from thence marched forward into Aquitaine, and came wasting all the way as farre as the Citie of Tours; there three hundred thousand of them, with the King himselfe, were slaine by the French, who had for Generall the Duke or Prince Charles, that for this great and happy victorie was after surnamed Martel the Maul: because he broke and battered the force of that Southerne people, as a great maul or hammer doth Iron. Looke the Histories and Chronicles of France in the life of Charles Martel.






A l'occasion du propos precedent il entre au beau discours des merueilles de Dieu en la diueise temperature and complexion des peuples.
Que tu es, o Nature, en merueilles feconde!
On ne void seulement en chaque part du monde
Les hommes differens en stature, en humeurs,
En force, en poil, en teint, aincois mesmes en moeurs:
Ou soit que la coustume en nature se change:
Qu' a l'exemple des vieux la ieunesse se range:
Que le droict positif change diuersement
En Royaumes diuers: que le temperament
Qu'ici bas nous humons des tousiours-viues flammes,
Semble comme imprimer ses effects en nos ames*


Differences des hommes Septentrionaux and Meridionaux.
L'homme du Nort est beau, celui du Midi laid:
L'vn blanc, l'autre tanne: l'vn fort, l'autre foiblet:
L'vn a le poil menu, l'autre gros, frize, rude:
L'vn aime le labeur, l'autre cherit l'estude.
L'vn est chaut and humide, and l'autre sec and chaut:
L'vn gay, l'autre chagrin. L'vn entonne bien haut,
L'autre a gresle la voix. L'vn est bon and facile,
L'autre double and malin. L'vn lourd, and l'autre habile.
L'vn d'vn esprit leger change souuent d'auis,
Et l'autre ne demord iamais ce qu'il a pris.
L'vn trinque nuict and iour, l'autre aime l'abstinence:
L'vn prodigue le sien, l'autre est chiche en despence.
L'vn se rend sociable, and l'autre chaque fois
Ainsi qu'vn Lougarou se perd dedans les bois:
L'vn s'habille de cuir, l'autre de riche estofe:

L'vn est ne Martial, and l'autre Philosofe.


Naturel des peuples entre le Septentrion and Midi.
Mais celui du milieu a part aux qualitez.
Du peuple qui se tient aux deux extremitez,
Ayant le corps plus fort, mais non l'ame si viue,
Que celui qui du Nil seme la grasse riue:
Moins robuste au contraire, and mille fois plus sin
Que les hommes logez de la l'Istre, and le Rhin.


Le peuple de Midi represente la vie contemplatiue.
Car dans le clos sacre de la cite du Monde
Le peuple de Midi, qui, curieux, se fonde
En ectases profonds, songes, rauissemens:
Qui mesure du ciel les reglez mouuemens,
Et qui contemplatif ne peut son ame paistre
D'vn vulgaire scauoir, tient la place du Prestre.
Celui du Septentrion la vie actiue and manuelle.
Cil du Nort, dont l'esprit s'enfuit au bout des doigts,
Qui fait tout ce qu'il veut du metal and du bois,
Et qui peut, Salmonee, imiter le tonnerre,
Y tient rang d'artisan, and rang d'homme de guerre.
Celui d'entredeuxla vic politique.
Le tiers, comme sachant bien regler vn Estat,
Tient grauement accort le lieu du Magistrat:
Et bref l'vn studieux admire la science,
L'autre a les Arts en main, and l'autre la prudence.
Restriction de la reigle precedente.
Bien est vray que, depuis quelques lustres Pallas,
Phebus, Themis, Mercure, and les Muses n'ont pas
Dresse moins leur eschole en la prouince Arctique,
Que Bellone sa lice, and Vulcan sa boutique.


Diuersitez no tables entre les peoples de l'Europe, specialement le Francois, l'Alemain, l'Italien, and l'Espagnol.
Mesme ne void-on pas entre nous qui viuons
Quasi pesle-meslez, and qui pauures n'auons
Pour partage a peu pres qu'vne motte de terre,
Ceste variete? L'Alemand est in guerre
Courageux, mais venal: l'Hespaignol lent, and fin:
Le nostre impatient, and cruel le Latin.
L' Alemand en conseil est froid, le Romain sage,
L'Hespaignol cauteleux, and le Fancois volage.
L'Hespaignol mange peu, le Romain nottement:
Le Francois vit en Prince, en pour ceau'l Alemant,
Le nostre est doux en mots, l'Hispaignol fier and braue,
L'Alemand rude and simple, and l'Italien graue:

L'Ibare en habio propro, impropre le Germain,
Inconstant le Prancois, superbe le Romain.
Nous brauons l'ennemi, le Romain le caresse:
L'Hespagnol onc ne l'aime, and l'Alemand le blesse.
Nous chantons, le Tuscan semble apeu presbeller,
Pleurer le Castalian, le Tudesque hurler.
Le nostre marche viste, en sier Coq le Tudesque:
L' Ib^re en basteleur, en boeuf le Romanesque.
Nostre ameureux est gay, le Romain enuieux,
Suberbel' Alemand, l'Hespaignol surieux.


P^u^quoy Dieu a voulu que les infans de Noe f^sse^^ ^^pais par ^out le monde.
Toutes sois l'Immortel v^ulut que nostre race
De ce vaste Vniuers cou^rist toute la face:
Asin que retirant ses enfans des pechez,
Dont leurs pays nataux semblent estre entachez,
Il nous monstrast sa grace: and que du ciel les slammes
Peuu^nt bien incliner, mais non forcer nos ames.
Qu'es lieux plus reculez ses seruiteurs deuets
Lui peussent presenter sacrifice de los:
Et que son Nom s'onist de la froide Scythie
Iusqu' aux tristes deserts de l'Asrique rostie:
Que les tresors produits par les champs estrangers
Ne fussent comme vams parsaute d'vsagers:
Ains que les regions de Thetis separees,
En semble trasiquant, troquassent leurs deurees.


Le monde compare a vne grand ville, ou les vns troquent auec les auti^es.
Car comme dans les murs d'vne grande cite
Le Palais est ici, la l'Vniuer site,
Deca sont les Marchans, dela les Mechaniques:
Ce quartier de souliers a plcines ses boutiques,
Cest autre de chalits, cest autre de chapeaux:
Cest autre de pour points, and cest autre de peaux:
Vne rue fournit le drap, l'autre la soye,
L'autre l'orfeurerie, and l'autre la monnoye:
Cen'est qu'vn contr'eschange, and tout ce que chaeun
A de propre, se fait par l'vsage comman.


Ainsi le pays se fournissent les vns les autres de ce qu'ils ont: le tout pour la commodue, and pour l'entretenement de la grande Cite qui est le monde.
Ainsi le Sucre doux nous vient de Canarie,
D'Inde l'yuoire blanc, l'Amome d'Assyrie.
L' Antractique Perunous fait part de son Or,

Damas de son Albastre, and l'Arabie encor
De son Encens fumeux. La trasiqueuse Hespaigne
Nous pauruoit de Sasran, de cheuaux l'Alomagne.
L' ardent Chus nous produit l'Ebore rougissant,
Et le Baltique flot son Ambre pallissant.
Le terroir Russlen ses Martres nous e^uoye^
Albion son Estain, l'Italie sa Soye.
Bref chaque terre apporte vn tribut tout diuers
Es c^ffres du thresor de ce grand Vniuers.


L'homme est Seigneur du monde, qui contribue tous ses biens pour la commodite de la vic.
Et comme encor iadis la compaigne du Prince
Des Persans belliqueux nommoit vne prouince
Sa robbe, ou son mateau, l'autre ses brasselets,
Et l'autre ses patins, and l'autre ses collets:
L'homme le peut de mesme. He, quel mont si sauuage,
Quel si vague desert, quelle si triste plage,
Quel slot si naufrageux, quel si sterile bord
Peut on imaginer du Mady iusqu'au Nord,
Qui ne lui face rente: and, despouille d'enuie,
N'aille emtribuant au bon-heur de sa vie?


Declaration speciale de ce que dessus.
Les vallons esmaillez, que maint ruisseau bruyan^
Fend du cours replie de son verrcondoyant,
Nous seruent de tardins: and leur herbe fanee
Met en oeuure nos faulx deux ou trois fois l'annee.
Ceres regne en la pl^^^c,
Ce que les Atheisies estiment auoir este cree en vain and ne seruir comme de rien, est bien souuent ce qui nous aide le plus: tesmoms les mont^gnes les deserts and la Mer.
and Bacchus es cout auts,
Ces esch^llons du Ciel, ces monts asprement hauts,
Magazins de l'orage, and forges du tonnerrs,
Que tu nommes a tort la honte de la terre,
Et crois que l'Eternel (o profane sureur!)
Les forma par malice, ou le sort par erreur;
De confins eternels limitent les Empires:
Produisent des forests, dont tu fais des nauires:
Bastis, ingenieux, ta superbe maison,
Et te defens du froid de la grise saison:
Vomissent nuict and iour des prosondes riuieres,
Qui les peuples voisins nourrissent voicturieres:
Engraissent les guerets de leurs fertils brouillars:
Font tourner les moulins: sont au lieu de rempars

Pour arrester le cours d'vne bouillante guerre,
Et ioignent a la mer le milieu de la terre.
Ces landes and deserts, qui t' effrayent si fort,
Sont autant de pasquis, dont chaque heure te sort
Le bestail a miliers pour labourer les plaines,
Et te fournir de peaux, and de chair, and de laines.
Et mesme ceste mer, qui ne semble seruir
Qu' a noyer l'Vniuers, and bruyante couurir
Tant de larges pays, ou pour ses perses ondes
Des orget on verroit flotter les moissons blondes,
Est vn grand reseruoir, qui sous ses vagues eaux
Nonrrit, pour te nourrir, innombrables troupeaux:
Viuandiere pouruoit vn million de villes
Qui criroyent a la faim, and languiroyent debiles
Sans elle, tout ainsi qu'vn Dauphin, qui mi-mort
A sec l'ondant reslus a laisse sur le bord:
Augmente le trafiq, acourcit les voyages:
Exhale nuict and iour les flo-flottans ni^^ges
Quira fraichissent l'air, and se fondant en eau
Font croistre aveue d'oeil le fromentier tuyau.


Le Poete se retire de ceste ample description comme d'v ne vaste mer pour se rendre au port de France.
Mais seray-ie tousiours le iouet de Borec?
L'obiet de la fureur du tempesteux Neree?
Verray ie point iamais mon Ithaque fumer?
Maschalupe fait cau: ie ne puis plus ramer.
C'est fait, c'est fait de moy, si quelque humain riuage
Ne recoit promptement les ais de mon naufrage.


Ha, France, ie te voy: tume tends ia le bras:
Tu m'ouures ton giron, and, mere, ne veux pas
Qu'en estrange pays, vagabond, ie vicillisse.
Tu ne veux qu'vn Brasil de mes os s'orgueillisse,
Vn Catay de ma gloire, vn Peru de mes vers:
Tu veux estre ma tombe aussi bien que mon bers.


L'ouanges de la France, pays and royaume exellent par dessus tous au ^es, qui a produit les guerriers, les artisans, les doctes.
O mille and mille fois terre heureuse and feconde!
O perle de l'Europe! o Paradis du Monde!
France, ie te salue, o mere des guerriers,
Qui iadis ont plante leurs triomphans lauriers
Sur les riues d'Euphrate and sanglante leur glaiue

Ou la torche du iour and se couche and se leue:
Mere de tant d'ouuriers, qui d'vn hardi bon-heur
Taschent comme obscurcir de Nature l'honneur:
Mere de tant d'esprits, qui de scauoir espuisent
Egypte, Grece, Rome: and sur les doctes luisent
Comme vn iaune esclattant sur les palles couleurs
Sur les astres Phebus, and sa fieur sur les fleurs.


Tes sleuues sont de mers,
Ses grandes commoditez.
des prouinces tes villes,
Orgueilleuses en murs, non moins qu'en moeurs ciuiles.
Ton terroir est fertil, and temperez tes airs.
Tu as pour bastious and deux monts, and deux mers.
Le Crocodile sier tes riuages n'infeste,
Exemple des dangers qui ruinent plusieurs autres pays.
Des piolez Serpens la race porte-peste
Sur le verd de tes fleurs a rompu-dos-rempant,
N'aune de sa longueur la longueur d'vn arpent.
Le Tigre aux pieds volans ne fait ses brigandages
Dans tes monts cauerneux, le Lyon ses carnages
Dans tes bruslants deserts: and le Cheual de l'eau
Ne traine tes enfans sous vn vagueux tombeau.
Ses rich esses estriuent de la preference contre les thresors and biens des autres pays.
Que si le riche flot de tes fleuues ne roule
L'or auecses caillous: si de tes monts ne coule
Vn Argent espure: si nous n'y trouuons pas
Le Grenat, le Ruby, la Perle a chaque pas:
Tes toiles, tou Pastel, tes Laines tes Salines,
Ton froment, and ton Vin, sont d'assez riches mines
Pour te faire nommer Reine de l'Vniuers.
La seule paix te manque.
Elle a rout, sors la paix, que le Poete demande a celui qui la peut donner.
O Dieu qui tiens ouuers
Tousiours les yeux sur nous, de l'eau de ta Clemenco
Amortile brasier qui consume la France.
Balaye nostre ciel: remets o Pere doux,
Remets dans ton carquois les traicts de ton courroux.





A fine discourse vpon the wonderfull wisdome of God that appeareth in the diners temper and complexion of people.
O world of sundry kinds! O Nature full of wonders!
For euery part thereof, as from the rest it sunders,
It hath not only men of diuers haire and hew,
Of stature, humor, force; but of behauiour new:
Be't that some custome held at length a nature makes,
Or that the younger sort still after th'elder takes,
Or that the proper lawes of diuers-coasted Realmes
Doe greatly disagree, or these enflowing beames
Of h'umour-alering lights, that whirling neuer stint,
Here in our minds below their heau'nly force imprint.


The Northen man is faire, the Southern fauor'd hard;
One strong, another weake; one white, another sward;
This hath haire fine and smooth, that other grosse and twinde;
He loues the bodies paine, and he the toile of minde;
Some men are hot and moist, some other hot and drie;
Some merry, and other sad; one thunders out on hie,
Another speaketh low; one dudgen is and spightfull,
Another gentl' and plaine; one slow, another slightfull.
Some are vnconstant so, they often change their thought;
And others ne'r let goe conceits they once haue caught.
He tipples day and night, and he loues abstinence;
A penyfath'r is one, and one spares no expence.
One is for company, another hath his moods,
And like a Buggle-bo straies eu'r amids the woods:
One goes in leathern pelch, another richly dight;

On's a Philosopher, another borne to fight.


The middle man takes part of all the qualities
Of people dwelling neere the two extremities;
In bodie strong'r is made, but not of minde so franke,
As they who till the gleabes of Nyle his fruitfull banke.
Againe, he's not so strong, but many waies more fine
Then they that dwell betwixt the Donaw and the Rhine.


For in the wide precinct of th'vniuersall Towne
The Southern men that oft with ouer-musing sowne,
That fall int' extasies, that vse to dreame and proue,
That measure how the heau'ns by rules appointed moue,
And are so curious none other knowledge base
May satisfie their minds; they hold the Priest his place.
The Northen whose conceit in hand and finger lurkes,
That all, what ere he list, in wood and mettall workes,
And like Salmoneus with thunder-sound compares,
He's for the man of warre, and makes all cunning wares.
The meane, as knowing well to gouerne an Estate,
Sits with a grauer grace in throne of Magistrate:
And, to be short, the first seeks knowledge wondrously,
The second handie-crafts, the third good policie:
Though fourescore yeeres ago Themis that mends abuses,
Apollo, Mercurie, Minerua with her Muses,
Haue taught their holy schooles as neer the Northen coast,
As Vnlcan euer forg'd, or Mars encamp'd his hoast.
How the French, Dutch, Jtalian, and Spanish nations differ in many points.
Now eu'n among our selues that altogether mell,
And haue of all the world no more whereon to dwell
Then as it were a clot, how diuers are the fashions?
How great varietie? the Dutch of all our Nations
Most stout, is hir'd to warre; the Spaniard soft and neat;
Th'Italian mercilesse; the Frenchman soone on heat.
The Dutch in counsaile cold, th'Italian all things weeting,
The Spaniard full of guile, the Frenchman euer-sleeting.
Th'Italian finely feeds, the Spaniard doth but minse,
The Dutch feeds like a swine, the Frenchman like a Prince.
The Frenchman gently speaks, the Spaniard fierce and braue,
The German plaine and grosse, the Roman fine and graue.

The Duch attire is strange, the Spanish is their owne,
Th'Italian sumptuous, and owers neuer knowne.
We braue an enemie, th'Italian friendly looks him,
The Duchman strikes him straight: the Spaniard neuer brooks him.
We sing a cheerefull note, the Tuscan like a sheep;
The German seems to howle, the Lusitan to weep.
The French march thick and short, the Duch like battel-cocks,
The Spaniards Fencer like, the Romans like an Oxe.
The Duch in loue is proud, th'Italian enuious,
The Frenchman full of mirch, the Spaniard furious.


Why it pleas^d God the world sho^^d be inhabited of so diuers natur'd people.
Yet would th'Immortall pow'r appoint so strange a race
Of this great earthie bowle to couer all the face:
To th' end he clensing all his children from the foile
Of sinne, which had as 'twere bestain'd their natiue foile,
His mercy might vnfold, and shew how heaun'ly signes
A little only moue, but not o'resway our mindes.
That eu'n in further parts his seruants eu'ry chone
A sacrifice of praise might offer to his throne:
And that his holy name from Isye Scythia
Might sound vnto the sands of red-hot Africa:
Nor should his treasures hid in far-asunder lands
Created seeme in vaine, and neuer come to hands.
But that all country-coasts where Thetis enter-lyes
The world compared to a great Citie.
Might trafficke one with oth'r and change commodities.


For as a Citie large containes within her wall
Here th'Vniuersitie and there the Princes Hall;
Here men of handie-crafts, there Merchant-venterers;
This lane all full of ware and shops of shoomakers,
That other changing coyne, that other working gold,
Here silke, there cloth; here hats, there leather to be sold;
Here furniture for beds, there doublets ready made;
And each among themselues haue vse of others trade:


So from the Canar Isles the pleasant sugar comes,
And from Chaldea spice, and from Arabia gums,
That stand vs much in stead both for perfume and plaster,

And Peru sends vs gold and Damaske Alabaster;
Our Saffron comes from Spaine, our Ivory from Inde,
And out of Germanie our horse of largest kinde;
The scorched land of Chus brings Heben for our chamber,
The Northren Baltike Sound imparts her bleakish Amber,
The frostie coasts of Russe her Ermyns white as milke,
And Albion her Tynne, and Italie her silke.
Thus eu'ry country payes her diuers tribute-rate
Vnto the treasurie of th'vniuersall state.


Man Lord of the world.
And as the Persian Queene this prouince call'd her chains,
And that her stomachers; her plate this, that her traines;


So man may say; for loe, what desert so vntrad,
What hill so wilde and wafte? what Region so bad?
Or what so wrackfull sea? or what so barren shore
From North to South appeares, but payes him euermore
Some kind of yearely rent, and grudging not his glory
Vnto his happy life becomes contributory?


A particular declaration of the great vse of some vnl^kely creatures against the A^heist, who saith they are to little vse, or made by chance.
These moores enamelled where many purling brooks
Enchase their winding wayes with glassie-wauing crooks,
They stand for garden plots; their herbage, ere it sades,
Twise yearely sets on worke our swapping two-hand blades.
The plaine field Ceres holds, the stonie Bacchus fills;
These ladders of the skie, the rough-aspiring hills,
The store-houses of stormes, and forging-shops of thunders,
(Which thou vntruly call'st th'erths faults and shamfull wonders,
And thinkst the liuing God (to say't I am aserd)
Created them of spight, or in creating err'd)
They bound the kingdoms out with euer-standing marks,
And for our shipping beare of timber goodly parks:
The same afford thee stuffe to build thy sumptuous Hold;
The same in winter-time defend thee from the cold:
They pow'r-out day and night the deep-enchaneld riuers,
Which breed and beare on them to feed the neighbour-liuers:
They oft manure the lands with fruitfull clouds and showers,
They helpe the mylls to turne, and stand in stead of towers

And bulwarks to keepe-off Bellona's dreely stound,
They morter to the sea the mid-point of the ground.
The wasternesse of land, that men so much amazeth,
Is like a common field where store of cattell grazeth,
And whence by thousand heads they come our tylth t'enrood,
To furnish vs with furre, with leather, wooll and food.
The Sea it selfe, that seemes for nothing else to sarue
But eu'n to drowne the world (although it neuer swarue)
That roaring ouer-heales so many a mightie land,
Where, in the waters stead, much wauing corne might stand;
A mightie Stew it is, or vnd'r a watry plame
Flocks numberlesse it feeds, to feed mankind againe.
For of the Cates thereof are thousand Cities saru'd,
Which could not otherwise but languish hunger-staru'd,
As doth a Dolphin whom vpon the shore halfe-dead
The tide vntrustie left, when backe againe it fled:
It shorter makes the wayes, increases marchandise,
And causes day and night the reaking mysts arise,
That still refresh our ayre, and downe in water flowing,
Set, eu'n before our eyes, the graynie pipe a growing.


The Poet as after a long voyage landeth in France.
But shall I still be tost with Boreas boysterous puffs?
Still subiect to the rage of Nere's counterbuffs?
And shall I neuer see my country-chimnies reake?
Alas, I row no more, my boat begins to leake:
I am vndone, I am, except some gentle banke
Receiue, and that with speed, this wrack-reserued planke.
O France, I ken thy shore; thou reachest me thine arme;
Thou op'nest wide thy lap to shend thy sonne from harme:
Nor wilt I end my dayes from home so many a mile,
Nor o're my bones triumph the Caniball Bresile,
Nor Catay o're my fame, nor Peru o're my verse;
As thou my cradle wert, so wilt thou be mine herse.
The praise of France.
O thousand thousand times most happy land of price,
O Europes only pearle, and earthly paradise!
All-haile renowmed France: from thee sprong many a knight,
Which hath in former time his flag of triumph pight
Vpon Euphrates banks, and blood with Bylbo^ shed

Both at the suns vprist, and where he goes to bed.
Thou breedest many men which happy and boldly dare
In works of handy-trade with Nature selfe compare:
And many wits that seeke out all the skill diuine
From Egypt, Greece and Rome, and o're the learned shine
As o're the paler hewes doe glister golden yellowes,
The Sun aboue the star's, thy flow'r aboue the fellowes.


Thy riuers are like Seas; thy Cities prouinces,
In building full of state, and gentle in vsages;
Thine ayre is temperate, thy soile yeelds good increase,
Thou hast for thy defence two mountaines and two seas:
Th'Egyptian Crocodile disquiets not thy banks,
Th'infectious kind of Snakes with poyson-spotted flanks
Ne crawle not burst-in-plights vpon thy flowrie plaines,
Nor mete an ak'r of ground by length of dragling traines:
No Hircan Tygers flight boot-hailes thy vaulted hills,
Nor on thy scorched wasts th'Arcadian Lion kills
Thy wandring habitants; nor Cayrick water-horses
Drag vnd'r vncertaine toombe thy childers tender corses;
And though like Indie streames, thy fairest riuers driue not
Among their pebbles gold, although thy mountains riue not
With veines of siluer Ore, nor yet among they greet
Carbuncles, Granats, Pearles, lie scattred at our feet;
Thy cloth, thy wooll, thy woad, thy salt, thy corne, thy wines,
(More necessarie fruits) are all sufficient mines,
T'entitle thee the queene of all this earthie scope:
Thy want is only peace.
Peace, the onely want of France, prayed-for in conclusion.
O God that holdest ope
Alwaies thine eyes on vs, we humbly thee desire
Quench with thy mercy-drops the France-deuouring fire:
O calme our stormous ayre; Deere Fath'r vs all deliuer,
And put thine angers shafts againe into thy quiuer.




58O world of sundry kindes! Without this discourse, all that went before concerning the worlds enpeopling, were to lit'le purpose or none at all, saue only to breed many doubts in the Readers vnderstanding. For a man may aske, How falls it out that the Nations of the world, comming all of one father, Noe, doe varie so much one from another, both in body and minde? The Poet therefore making this obiection, most worthy to be considered, giueth also answer thereunto: first, in generall, by way of exclamation and

maruaile, then in particular manner, setting downe some speciall reasons of this wonderfull diuersitie, that appeareth in the stature, complexion, strength, colour, and custome of people wheresoeuer dispersed ouer the face of the earth. The first and principall cause is Nature it selfe, that is, the wise prouidence of God, maruellous in all his workes. If God had made the earth in all places alike, all flowers of one colour and sauour, all beasts, fowles, fishes and creeping things, of one kinde; had he made the heauen without

starres, or the starres all of one bignesse, and men all of the same hew, beauty, feature, strength and disposition, as well of bodie as minde: the diuers colours of his infinite wisdome had not so shined in them. But as he is aboue all (yea onely) wise, good and beautifull, so would he in his workes keepe a certaine resemblance of his owne perfection, prouoking vs thereby daily to aduance and raise our thoughts vnto the high consideration, perfect loue and due reuerence of himselfe. Now if we consider all his workes, the light of his wonderfull glory no where appeareth more, then in the diligent view of Man, who is very fitly called of the Greekes (...), the little world. For in this little table hath he lymbed-out in orient colours, for all that will behold, the wonders of his vnsearchable wisdome: and they are here some of them by the Poet well pointed-out. And a wonderfull thing indeed it is, that among so many men as haue beene since the beginning, are, or shall be to the worlds end, there neuer was, nor is, nor can be any one, but differing much from all the rest, both in bodie and minde, and in many things else that ensue thereon. This I am content to note, but in a word, leauing all the particulars of this miracle for the Reader priuatly to consider; that he may wonder the more thereat, and praise there-according th' almighty Creator, the Soueraigne Good: neither will I now take in hand to dispute against those that in searching the causes of this diuersitie, ascribe all to Fortune or Nature, as they call it (meaning a secret propertie and power of the creatures) or to the starres and other heauenly bodies; to mans lawes, custome or nourishment, in stead of God: who is indeed the first and only working cause of all things; in whom we liue, moue and are. This matter would require a long discourse; and though the Poet here, beside the chiefe and only tine cause, reckoneth certaine vnder-causes; as custome growing to Nature, th'example of Elders, prouinciall Lawes, and the influence of Stars; it is not his meaning to take from the Lord of Nature this honour due vnto him for the diuersitie of his wonderfull works: but only to lay open vnto vs a few such instruments as his incomprehensible wisdome vseth, to make vs the better conceiue the manner of his heauenly working. The Philosophers, Astronomers, Physicians and Politicks, discourse at large vpon these differences: he that would see them well handled, let him reade the fift chapter of Bodines Method, entituled de recto historiarum indicio, and the first chapter of his fift booke de Republica, which is the summe of all that he writes thereof in his Method. Peucer also in the 13. and 14. bookes of his discourse vpon the principall sorts of diuinations: and Hippocrates in his booke de Aere, aquis and locis: but especially Bodin, may ferue to expound our Poet; who in very few lines hath penned matter of so long discourse.
59The Northen man. He entreth consideration of many points, wherein the North and Southerne people differ Bodin in the places afore-quoted shewes the causes thereof, according to Philosophie and Physicke: because his bookes are common, specially his Politicks, I will not here set downe what he saith, nor examine his opinions, but leaue that wholly to the diligent Reader. Concerning that the Poer noteth, the best Histories auerre the same: and namely for the Southerne people, Iohannes Leo, and Franciscus

Aluares; for the Northen, Olaus Magnus, the Baron of Herbestan in his Muscouie, Buchanan in the historie of Scotland, and diuers others.
60The Middle Man. Bodm in the fift booke of his Politickes, the first chapter, diuideth all people dwelling on this side the Aequator into 3. kinds, to wit, the hot and Southerne people from the Aequator 30. degrees vpward; the Meane and temperate in the next 30. and the Extreame cold and Northen people, from the 60. degree to the Pole. And so of the nations and countries beyond the Aequator. The reason hereof he setteth downe in his Method, chap. 5.
61For in the sacred close. The Poet goes on according to the said diuision: and in few words implies all that discourse of Bodin: who saith among other matters there, that the people dwelling in the middle Regions haue more strength and lesse wit then the Southerne; better parts of minde, and lesse bodily force then the Northen: and are moreouer the fittest for gouernment of Common-wealths, and iustest in their actions. And if a man doe marke well the histories of the world, he shall finde that the greatest and most valiant Armies came euer out of the North: the deepest and subtilest knowledge of Philosophie, Mathematickes, and all other contemplatiue Arts, from the South: and the best gouernment, the best lawes, Lawyers and Orators from the Middle countries; and that the greatest Empires were founded and established there, etc. What reason there is for this, he sheweth also in his fift chap. of his Meth. Looke more thereof in L. Regius, de vicissitudine and varietate rerum. For my part, I am of opinion that Almighty God as he hath knit and bound together the Elements, and Creatures made of them, with a maruellous compasse, in number, weight and measure, best for continuance of the whole worke, and mutuall agreement of the parts; so hee hath also placed the chiefe subtiltie and liuely-hood of spirit farthest from the greatest bodily force, either in beast or man; for the better maintenance of humane societie in a iust counterpoys, and gaue the middle kinde of people a nature of either tempered, though if a man enter into particular discourse, he may easily finde the northerne, southerne and middle Nature in euery Nation. What say I, euery Nation? nay I dare say in euery one of vs, so fitly is Man called a little world. But the southerne men, for the most part hauing so quick and liuely parts of minde in a bodie lesse charged with flesh, they represent the contemplatiue and studious kinde of life: the northerne that haue their vvit in their fingers ends, that is, that are so cunning craftesmen, inuenters of warlike engins, artillerie, and all sorts of needfull instruments, they may well be likened vnto the actiue and trading life: and the middle sort vnto the ciuill gouernment and politicke life; which is a meane betwixt the other two. Yet this the Poet well restraineth, saying, that the northerne people also in these latter dayes haue beene renowmed for the Tongues, the Lawes, the Mathematicks, Poesie, Oratorie, and all good learning; as well as in times past, they were, and are still, for warlike valour and cunning handworks. Not without cause; for in England, Scotland, Polonie, Denmarke, and other such countries, are and haue beene diuers very learned men flourishing: and Germanie especially, which is (as it were) Vuleans forge, and the

Campe of Mars, hath brought forth many men excelent well seene in all kinde of learning it were needlesse to name them, they are so well knowne.
62But eu'n among our selues. The more to magnifie the vnsoundable wisdome of God, appearing in the creation of so diuers-disposed people, he noteth out many points of great difference euen among those Nations that liue neare together, and are seuered only by certaine hilles, riuers, and forrests: as the French, Dutch, Jtalian, and Spanish. He paints them out all in their kinde, for such properties as are daily seene in them, and may be easily gathered out of their owne Histories: for there are not the like-differing neighbour-nations in all Europe, no not in the world. Let me consider, and all my Countrey-men with me, what he saith of the French: the other three may doe the like by themselues if they list. The French (he saith) is in Warre impatient, in Counsaile wauering, in Diet sumptuous, gentle in Speech, diuers in Apparell, out-facing his Enemie, a sweet Singer, a swift Paser, a merty Louer. If any man can draw a righter counterfeit of our Nation, let him take the pensill.
63Yet would the immortall God. He shewes for what cause it pleased God the earth should be inhabited by men of so diuers natures: As first, to the end he might shew forth his mercy and louing kindnesse in raising his chosen out of the sincks of sinne, wherewith each of their birth soiles were bestained. Secondly, That it might appeare how neither the soiles, nor yet the heauenly Signes (though they haue great power ouer earthly bodies) can force the minds of men, especially such as God himselfe hath blessed. Thirdly, That there might be some in all places of the world to acknowledge his manifold goodnesse, and glorifie his Name. And fourthly, that whatsoeuer needfull things the earth any where, by his gartious blessing, bringeth forth proper and seuerally, they might be enterchanged and carried from place to place for the vse of man.
64For as a Citie. The last consideration giues the Author occasion to compare the world vnto a great Citie, such as Paris, Roan, Tolouse, Lyons, or any other like, where there are merchants and craftesmen for all kinde of wares, each in their seuerall wards, buying, selling, changing and trading one with another. And euen so one Countrey affordeth Suger, another Spice, another Gummes; and Gold, Alabaster, Iuory, Heben-wood. Horses, Amber, Furres, Tynne and Silke, they are brought from diuers coasts, all the more to furnish with things necessary this great Citie of the world. Whereby we may note that no Countrie (be it neuer so well appointed) can say that it needs not the commodities of another. And againe, that there is no Land so barren, but hath some good thing or other which the rest want. For euen in men we see the like; there is none so poore but hath some speciall gift: none so rich, but hath need of the poorest. Our Poet therefore hauing so fitly resembled the world by a great Citie, he brings-in thereupon a sine example of the Persian Queene, who (as Herodotus, Xenophon and Plutarch report) called one Prouince her lewell-house, another her Wardrope, etc. for euen so may euery man say, that hath the true knowledge and feare of God; such a man may say, Peru brings forth Gold for me: the

Moluckes or Chaldea, Spice: Damaske, Alabaster: and Italy, Silke: Germany sends me great Horses: Moscouie, rich Furres: Arabia, sweet Parfumes: Spaine, Saffron: Prusse, Amber: England, Cloth and Tinne: France, Corne and Wine. Yea more the childe of God may say; the Earth, the Sea, the Aire and all that is therein; the Sunne, the Moone, the Heauens, are mine: for he that needeth nothing, made all things of nothing to serue me, and mee to worship him. But of this let the Diuines discourse more at large. I will goe on with the Poet: who saith further, against the carping Atheist, that nothing was created in vaine, but euen the most vnlikely places bring forth many good fruits, and very necessary for the life of Man. And hee proues it plainly by some notable particulars that follow.
65The Moores enameled. First, The Fenny Valleyes, though too moist they are and ouer-low for men to build and dwell vpon, yet are they so beset with diuers harbes and flowers, so lagged, garded, and enter-trailed with riuers, that they are, as it were, the common gardens of the world: as also the plaine fields are our seed-plots, and the stony grounds our Vineyards. Secondly, The huge Mountaines, about whose tops are engendred thunders, lightnings and tempests: for which cause the Atheists count them hurtfull, or at least superfluous, or made by chance and errour: they are in truth cleane contrary (as Th^odoret hath long agoe shewed in his Sermons of Gods Prouidence) ^uen the sure standing Bounds and Land-markes of euery Kingdome and Countrie: they beare great store of timber-trees for ships and houses, and fuell to burne: from them spring the great riners, that breed much fish, and helpe the conueyance of prouision and other merchandise vnto many people dwelling farre-off: by them are stayed and gathered the clowdes and thicke mists, that manure and fatten the lower grounds: the Wind-milles are much helped by them, as if they were the the store houses of winde: like rampiers and bulwarkes they keepe-of the sudden force of warlike neighbours: and to conclude, they are (as it were) the very morter that ioynes Land and Sea together. Thirdly, The great Deserts and wast-grounds, that are for men (by reason of some wants) searse habitable, yet like huge Commons they feed an infinit sort of beasts great and small, whereof we haue good vse and commoditie. Fourthly, The Sea, it breeds fish, maintaines many Cities, encreases Trafficke, and makes the wayes for trauell easier, and shorter: And lastly, thereout the Sunne draweth vapours, which after, turned into raine, doe refresh the Aire, and make the ground fruitfull. The like good vses may be found in all other the Creatures of God, how vnlikely foeuer they seeme to wicked Atheists. Looke more in S. Basil, Chrysostome, Ambrose and others, who write of the Creation, and at large haue declared what excellent commodities man may reape of euery creature.
66But shall I still be toss'd. Fitly and in very good time the Poet, hauing ouerslipt nothing worthy note in this discourse of Colonies, now strikes saile, and after his long voyage thorow all Climates of the world, ariues happily at the hauen he most desired, to weet, in France: and well he takes occasion to reckon-vp the great commodities of his countrie, as commending

the same aboue all the Kingdomes of the world. After he hath saluted the land with diuers honourable termes and titles, he saith very truly, that it hath brought-forth many worthy warriours, cunning work-men, and learned Schollers: more is the meruaile, because it is but a small kingdome in comparison of Polonia, Persia, Tartaria, China and others. But indeed the commodities thereof are most wonderfull. Besides the seas that bound it, as on the North and West the Ocean, and the Midland on the South, it hath many riuers of great name, and euen little seas: as the Rosne, Saone, Dordogne, Loire, Marne, Seine, Oise: and yet a great number of other lesser streames and brookes. Cities it hath, as Paris, Tolouse, Ro^^m, Lyon, Bourdeaux, and others of more value then diuers whole Dutchies, Earldomes, or Prouinces elsewhere. There are Forts and Castles now stronger and goodlier than euer were. As for the ciuill behauiour of the people, I report me to the iudgement of other nations. The Land for the most part is very fruitfull, and the aire there temperate almost euery where. Against the sudden inuasion of enemies, all is well defended by the two Seas aforesaid, and the Alpes toward Italy, and the Pyrenes toward Spaine. More than all

this, the countrie is no where troubled with Crocodiles as Aegypt is, nor with monstrous long Serpents, or any wilde rauening beasts, as the inner countries of Affricke are. And in stead of Gold and Siluer, Pearles and precious stones, which diuers Lands barren of necessary fruits abound with, it hath of Cloath, Woade, Wood, Salt Corne and Wine, euer-growing Mines, and euen vnwastable: Woade and Salt in Languedoc; and Salt againe in Guyenne; Wine in most places; Wooll and Corne in Prouence and Beausse; and in euery Prouince, but foure or fiue, good store of diuers the said commodities. More there are, but the Poet notes the chiefe only, and such as the neighbour countries and many farre-off doe most of all trade-for. Hereby we are taught, and should be moued with heartie thankes to acknowledge the great benefits that God hath bestowed on vs: for the Poet rightly concludes that we lacke nothing but peace, and peace he craueth of the Lord: with whom, and all my good countrimen, I ioyne humble suit from the bottome of my heart, that once againe this Realme (sometime so flourishing) may enioy a sure, that is, a iust and right Christian peace. Amen.





LES COLOMNES. The Pillars, or fourth Booke of Noe.



ETernel,
Il inuoque Dieu, estant question d'entrer en la deduction d'vne matiere nouuelle, haute, and tresdiffici le a comprendre asauoir des Mathematiques.
si iamais le plus pur de mon ame
Put espris de l'ardeur d'vne celeste flamme,
Et si de ton esprit mon esprit inspire
T'offrit onques vn vers de la France honore,
O Pere de lumiere, o source de doctrine,
Il est temps, ou iamais, que ta fureur diuine
Quint'essance mon ame, and qu'vn sacre souci
Meutrier de tous soucis, m'emporte loin d'ici.
Il est temps qu'espure des passions humaines,
Par les brillans climats du Cieltu me promeines:
Que bien-heureux i'accolle Vranie and ses soeurs:
Que i'enyure mes sens des charmeuses douceurs
Des Syrenes du Pole: and qu'en paix ie contemple
Le lambris estoille d'vn si superbe temple:
A sin que tout ainsi que nos premiers ayeux
Receurent de ta main les loix du cours des cieux,
Tu me dictes vn vers, qui grand and beau responde
Il introduit Phalec, qui ayant trouue.
Aux grandeurs and beautez des plus clairs feux du Monde.


Apres que des humains l'ambitieux discord

Eut ce bas Vniuers part age comme au sort,
Phalec, le fils, d'Heber, passant chemin rencontre
Vn Pilier, qui, brauache, en la plaine se monstre
Tel qu'vn Roc, qui veincueur du flot-flot importun
Semble, assis au milicu, faire peur a Neptun.
Et qui portant vn Phare, empesche qu'Amphitrite
De ses flots ne nous iette es noirs slots de Cocyte.
Puis en void vn second tout semblable en grandeur,
Mais non point en estofe, and moins encor en heur.
Car il gist estendu sur la terre esmaillee,
Basti tant seulement d'vne tuile rouillee,
Au lieu des grands carreaux du I aspe faconne,
Et Porphire eternel, dont l'autre est maconne.


Quels miracles, dit-il? quelles masses enormes!
Quels mons faits a la main! quelles estranges formes
D'antiques bastimens? Toy donq qui tout-sc^nant
Tiens comme sur le doigt les siecles de deuant,
O Pere debonnaire, instrui moy de l'vsage,
Du temps, and de l'aut beur de ce iumeau ouurage.


Seth disciple d'Adam,
Heber respond que les Mathematiques ayans este aprises par Seth a ses enfans, eux preuoyans la ruine du monde dresserent ces deux colomnes pour refister au fcu and a l'eau and grauerent de dans les re^gles and preceptes des Mathematiques.
grand disciple de Dieu
(Commence adonq Heber) ayant appris le lieu,
Aspect, cours, and grandeur de tant e'esparses flammes
Qui dorent le seiour des bien heureuses ames,
L'apprend a ses enfans: ses enfans d'autre part
Escoliers studieux cultiuent ce bel art.
Car paissant leurs troupeaux sur les herbeuses riues
Des ondes du Leuant murmurantement viues,
Tandis que la douceur du somme abrege-nuis
Du reste des humains fait dormur les ennuis,
Et robustes, viuans l'age de trois Corneilles,
Ils obseruent du ciel les brillantes marueilles,
Et sur le pilot is de l'ayeul fondement
Parfont auec le temps vn pompeux bastiment.
Mais sachant bien que Dieu rauagcroit le Monde
Vne fois par la flamme, vne autre fois par l'onde,
(Cabale hereditaire) ils surhaussent, massons,
La superbe grandour de ces Piliers bessons,

Et les font pour long temps loyaux depositaries,
En faueur de leurs sils de cent doctes mysteres.


Il ouure le cabinet ou sont les statues des Mathematiques.
Heber disant ces mots, ouure subtilement
Vu huis ie ne scay quel du pierreux bastiment:
Et suyui de Phalecy treuue vne chandelle;
Qui a'vn suif eternel paist sa slamme immortelle.


Comme vn homme prine,
Comparaison.
qui cent fois esconduit
Par vn seuere Huissier, en sinest introduit
Au cabinet d'vn Prince, admire sacheuance,
Et i^tite haut and bas de ses youx l'inconstance,
Ainsi Phalec s'estonne.
Demande de Phalec.
O mon Pere, dit-il,
De qui sont ces portraicts, qu'vn Imagier subtil,
D'vn art partout egal, a fait tant agreables,
Que quatre gouttes d'eau ne sont point plus semblables?
Quel est leur equipage? and quels diuins secrets
Sont cachez doctement sous ces outils sacrez?


Les Mathematiques ou sciences liberales. Arithmetique. Geometrie. Musique. 1 Arithmetique auec sa contenence.
Mon sils, respond Heber, voici quatre pucelles,
Quatre silles du Ciel, quatre soeurs les plus belles,
Que l'Esprit eternel d'vn double esprit yssu
Ait engendre iamais, and nostre ame conceu.


Celle-la qui tousiours remue, comme il semble,
Et sa langue, and ses doigts: qui leue, couche, assemble,
Ses gets en cent facons, est l'art industrieux
Qui peut, hardi, conter les medailles des cieux,
Les glacons de l'Hyuer, and les fleurs diaprees
Dont l'odoreux Printemps enghirlande les prees,
Il pare sa beaute d'vn magnifique attour:
Son parement.
Ila de grands monceaux d'argent tout a l'entour.
Le ciel, comme on diroit, sur sa teste sacree
Verse les clairs thresors d'vne pluye doree.
Sarobe est a plein fonds; A sa ceinture pend.
Au lieu d'vn clair miroir, vn tableau qui comprend
Ses nombres dont tous les autres sont composez iusques a l'infini. L'vn.
L'honneur de son scauoir: and, maugre tant de siecles,
Garde comme en depost la plus part de ses regles.


Voy de quel charactere on marque l'Vnite,
Racine de tout nombre, and de l'infinite,
Les delices d'Amour, gloire de l'harmonie,

Pepiniere de tout, and but de Polymnie:
Non-nombres ain' plus que nombre, en qui comme parfait
Tout par puissance gist, lui en tout par effait.
Le deux.
Voy quel signe lettre denote le Binaire,
Fils premier nay de l'vn, premier nombre, and le pere
Des pairs effeminez.
Le Trois.
Quel designe le Trois,
Frere aisne des impairs, propre au grand Roy des Rois,
Ou le nombre and non-nombre amourensement entre:
Nombre cheri de Dieu, nombre de qui le centre
Des deux extremitez s'eloigne egalement,
Et qui premier a fin, milieu, commencement.
Le Quart,
Le Quatre.
baze du Cube, and quantite qui pleine
Auec ses propres parts acomplit la Dixaine,
Nombre du Nom de Dieu, nombre des Elements,
Des saisons, des vertus, des humeurs, and des vents.
L'Hermaphrodite Cinq,
Le Cinq.
qui iamis ne s'masse
Auec vn nombre impair, qu'il ne monstre sa face
Tout au premier abordicar cinq double cinq fois
Ne fait que vingt and cinque, and quinze cinq fois trois.
L' Analogique Six,
Le Six.
and qui, par fait assemble,
Pour composer son tout, tous ses membres ensemble.
Car trois est sa moitie, sa sexte vn, son tiers deux,
Et l'vn, le deux, le trois font le six, ioints entre eux.
Que le critique Sept,
Le Sept.
le sept masle and femelle,
Nombre des seux errants de la voute eternelle,
Des clairs brandons du Pole, and du sacre Repos,
Et qui tient, bien-heureux, le trois and quatre enclos.
Le Huit. Le Neuf.
L'Huit doublement quarre La sacree Enncade,
Qui des muses comprend vne triple triade.
Le Dix,
Le Dix.
qui la vertu de tous nombres conioint:
Le Dix, qui fait la ligne, ainsi que l'vn le poinct,
La figure le Cent, le Mile vn corps solide:
Le 'Dix, qui redouble peut du bord Atlantide
Nombrer la molle arene, and les flots agitez
Par le souffle orageux des Austres irritez.


L.'ddition.
Coutemple comme ici plusieurs sommes escrites
L'vne sur l'autre a plomb, sont en vne reduites.

La Soustraction. Lamultiplication. La diuision.
Voy comme d'vn grand nombre vn petit on extrait,
Comme vn nombre petit, multiplie, se fait
A peu pres infini. Et d'autre part aduise
Comme en mainte parcelle vne somme on diuise.


La vierge aufront terni, la Nymphe audos voute,
Qui,
2. Geometrie and sa contenance.
triste, contre terre a tousiours l'oeil plante,
Et qui, comme on diroit, d'vne verge scauante
Imprime quelques traicts dans l'arene mouuante:
Son habillement.
Qui porte vn beau manteau de Torrents chamarre,
Recame de fin Or, de cent fleurs bigarre,
Parseme d'arbrisseaux au verdissant fuellage,
Et frange de l'azur d'une mer soufre-orage;
De qui les bordequins poudreux and deschirez
Monstrent qu'elle a courules climats alterez,





ETernall, o, if e're the purest of my minde
Hath beene possest with heat of any heau'nly winde,
If e're my heart enspir'd with thine high spirits glance,
Hath to thine Altar brought a verse of famous France,
O Father of shining light, o first Fountaine of skill,
Or now, or neu'r is time,
1.
Thine heauenly fury fill
And quintessence my soule, and that some thought diuine,
Base cares abandoning, me lift-vp to the skine.
Time is thou lead me farre fro mens cares and alarmes,
That I endronke my sence with heau'nly Syrens charmes,
Embrace with peace and ioy Vrany and her sisters,
And view th'all-starry roofe, that o're this Temple glisters.


To th'end, as heretofore our Elders haue beene taught
By thine owne hand the rules of this high rowling vaut,
Thou pro^pt my Muse a verse, whose bewty and state may square
With state and bewty of all heau'ns clearest lights that are,
When th'Earth was seuered by mens ambitious I arre.



2.Old Heber on a time with Phaleg walking farre,
A piller found vpright that on the plaine stood-out


As Rock that scornes the Sea assaulting round-about,
And beares a signe in top, to warne least Amphitrite
Cast any there to waues of helly-darke Cocyte:
He saw not far-aside, another like in masse,
But not in stuffe the same, nor that like happie was;
For on the flowry land Cylinder-wise it lay,
All-only built of bricke and short enduring clay:
Whereas the standing pile was hew'n and framed strong
Of I asper quarries huge, and Marbl'enduring-long.


What miracles be these, quoth Phaleg to his father,
What great enormous heaps? hils handy-wroughen rather:
I wonder what so strange a frame of worke entends;
Say thou (I pray) that hast ykon'd at fingers ends
The monuments of old, o say for what entent,
When, and by whom, these twins of ancient worke vp-went.


Then Heber said; my sonne, of Gods eternall breth
First Adam learned all, and he enstructed
3.
Seth
The compasse, course, and site of all those flaming boules
That gild th'abiding-place of th'euer-happy soules:
And Seth his children taught, they also view'd the skies,
And trim'd and perfected this Art in curious wise.
For, on the fourdy bankes of th'easterne hurring streames,
All-out the carelesse night, when other lay in dreames,
They fed their bleating flockes, and liuing many Ages,
Might well the wonders marke of all the shining stages.


And building on the plot of their fore-fathers ground-work,
They raised-vp in time a rich, a faire, a sound worke.
But vnderstanding well that Gods reuenging Ire
Should once the world destroy by wat'r, and then by fire,
(As th'old Tradition was) thus high aboue the land
They rais'd a paire of Pyles with cunning Masons hand.

That there from throat of Time for their posterities,
They might the treasures hoard of Algrim Mysteries.


4.
Thus hauing said, he went vnto the standing Rocke,
And did (I know not how) a secret doore vnlocke:
So went with Phaleg in, and to a candle came,
Which with eternall thirst maintain'd immortall flame.


5.
As, when a priuate man is through a hundred wayes
Brought by some husher sterne vnto the shining rayes
At length of royall seat, he wonders at the sight,
And glaunces vp and downe his eyes vnstayed light;
So Phaleg was amaz'd, and said, o father deere,
What cunning worke is this? whose are these statues heere?
I thinke foure water-drops may scarse be more then they
Th'each vnto th'other like. How strange is their aray?
What secret mystery of heau'nly-learned skilles
Is hidden vnder vaile of these faire vtensilles?


6.
My sonne (quoth Heber) see foure daughter-twins of heau'n,
Foure sister-ladies braue, the fairest doubled eau'n
That ere th'Eternall Spirit proceeding one of twaine
Begotten hath, or e're conceiued manly braine.


7.
She there, which euer shifts or euer seemes to shift
Her fingers and her tongue, to gather, lay, and lift
Her counters many-wise, is th'Art of Odde and eau'n,
Whose industrie can search and count all th'oast of heau'n,
The winter I sickles, and flowers diapreade,
Wherewith sweet sauoury Prime enguyrlands eu'ry meade.
She sets her bewtie forth with rich acoutrements,
And round about her lye great heapes of siluer pence;
Heau'n o're her sacred head a shining treasure powers
(Like Ioue in Danaes lap) of many golden showers.
Her gowne trailes on the ground; instead of glassie plate,
To view her bewties in, hangs at her girdl' a slate,
Which maugr' all force of time for vs here keepeth still
The more part of the rules of her most certaine skill.
See with what manner marke is painted
8.
Vnitie,
The root of eu'ry numb'r, and of Infinitie,
True Friendships deare delight, renowne of Harmony,

Seed-plot of all that is, and ayme of Polymnie;
No numb'r and more then numb'r, on all-sides so exact,
It hath in't all by powre, and is in all by act.


See here the Caracter, that signifieth
9.
Twaine,
The first-borne sonne of One, first numb'r and fath'r againe
Of heau'ns effeminate: See here of numbers Odde
That eldest brother
10.
Three, which proper is vnto God;
Wherein no-numb'r and numb'r is sweetly-kissing met,
Whose two extremities and cent'r are eau'nstly set
Asunder each from oth'r, a numb'r heau'ns fauour winning,
And first of all that hath both end, middle and beginning.
Heer's
11
Foure, base of the Cube, and that with one, two, three,
His own contents, amountsiust to the tenth degree;
The numb'r of th'Elements, and of the name of feare,
Of Vertues, Honours, Winds, and seasons in the yeare.
Heer's
12.
Fiue, th'Ermaphrodite, which ne're is multiplide
With any numb'r vneu'n, but shewes it selfe in pride
Iust at the first Encount'r; as fiue times fiue we see
Full Fiue and twenty makes, and Fifteene, fiue times three.


13
Lo th'Analogicke Six, which, with his owne content,
Nor mounts aboue it selfe, nor needeth complement;
For three is halfe thereof, a third two, one, a sixt,
And all the six is made of one, two, three, commixt.


Behold
14
The criticke seu'n, male, female, eu'n, and odde;
Containing three and foure, and call'd the Rest of God,
The numb'r of clearest brands that fixt are neare the Pole,
And those that guyrding heau'n with course vncertaine roule.
Heer's
15
Eight the double square,
16
And sacred nine lo heere
The sister-Muses holds in triple-triple queere.


17
See Ten, that doth the force of numbers all combine;
As one sets downe pricke, ten drawes in length the line,
An hundred broads the plaine, a thousand thickes the bulke;
So by redoubling ten, the ballast of an hulke
Or all the sand is summ'd vpon th'Atlantike coast,
Or all the swelling waues that angry winds haue tost.


18
See here how diuers summes, each right o're other set,
Are altogeth'r in one by rules of Adding met;

How by abating here the lesser numb'r is tride
From out the more; and here how small ones multiplide
Waxe almost infinite: and then how counter-guided
Into as many small the greater summ's diuided.
This Nymph that sadly frownes, with back and shoulders bent,
And holds her stedfast eye still on the ground intent,
And drawes, or seemes to draw, with point of skilfull wand
So many portratures vpon the mouing sand,
In mantle of golden ground with riuers chamleted,
With many embroydred flow'rs all-ouer diuersed,
Embost with little trees, and greeny-leaued slips,,
And edg'd with azur-frenge of some sea bearing-ships;
It is Geometrie; her buskins dusty and rent
Shew well she trauell'd farre, and o're the Climats went




1.Thine heau'nly furie. That is Inspiration; a word well taken among the Poets, who say, Est deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo. The Prophets also, swayed by the Spirit of God, had their extraordinarie motions, extasies, and rauishments; which were holy possessions and inspirations: yet such suffred not the inspired seruants to wander from the way of truth; howsoeuer they had their spirits then raised farre aboue condition of all worldly things. The Poet then craues that the holy Spirit might be present with him, after a speciall manner, to raise him vnto the heauens, where he may learne to sing worthy so great a subiect, as he now takes in hand. The Muses are all sisters of Vrania, whose proper office is to treat of heauen and heauenly things. By heauenly Syrens charmes, he meanes the Harmonie of the Spheres; whereof hereafter. He saith also that our Elders, that is, Adam and his sonnes, were taught, by the hand of God himselfe, rules of the course of Heauen; that is, the knowledge of Astronomie: which is very likely, because the wit of man was not able to atraine to things of so high a nature, without some extraordinarie helpe and fauour.
2.Old Heber. Iosephus in his first booke of Antiquities, toward the end of the second chapter, speaking of the children of Seth, is of opinion that they first inuented Astrologie; and applied their mindes to know the course and motion of those heauenly bodies: And to the end their inuention should not be forgotten, or perish before it was knowne, (Adam hauing foretold that all things should be destroyed, once by water, and againe by fire) they erected two pillars; one bricke, another stone, the better to withstand the waters; and graued, and set therein the records and rules of their inventions, for posteritie to learne. The pillar of stone some say is yet to be seene in Syria. This doth Iosephus report vpon heare-say: which the Poet termes an old Tradition, or Cabala. Thus Josephus thrusts-in many things among his Antiquities, that haue no good ground, but are taken vpon trust of the Caballists

and Rabbins; who neuer considering the maiestie and sufficiencie of holy Scripture, thought to helpe out and adorne it with fillets and labels of their owne. Many learned men thinke that Noe and his sonnes had the Arts well setled in their mindes: and the Arke is a sufficient proofe of Noes skill in Arithmetike and Geometrie: but the Reader may, if he will, ascribe the inuention to Noes predecessors: so doth the Poet, following the opinion of Iosephus. For the rest, he giues the whole discourse of Mathematikes to Heber and Phaleg; because, the earth being in their time diuided, it was requisite that these Arts were knowne, to be carried euery way for comfort and helpe of Colonies, in peopling the world. Cylinderwise it lay. (So I translate) that is, along the ground like a rouller; supposing the waters had ouerthrowne it.
3.Seth. Polidore Virgil, in his first booke de Inuentoribus rerum, chap. 14.17.18. and 19. speakes of the first finders-out of the liberall Sciences, alledging the testimonie of diuers Authors. But it came neuer into his minde to deriue all from the spring-head, as here the Poet hath done, who shewes, with great probabilitie, that Adam, being endowed with excellent knowledge of hidden things concerning both great and little world, taught it his sonne and schollar Seth, and others that conuersed with him; who also conueyed it ouer to their descendants. And this was not hard to be done, considering the long life of them all. So the true Cabala of inheritance left to posteritie, was the instruction which they receiued one from other by word of mouth; and this might be so continued from father to sonne, as it need not be graued in brick or stone. But sithence the Poet was content to set-out the opinion of Iosephus, rather then his owne; Ile say no more against it. The meanes and order kept by Seths posteritie, to continue the knowledge of the Mathematicks, was not all of one sort; though the Poet propounds but one, which was very likely.

4.Thus hauing said, he went. That is, Heber. Poets, missing sometime the certaine truth, are wont yet to stand-vpon that is likely; wherefore this our Author, hauing before spoke-of the pillar of stone, which stood still vpright, brings-in Heber opening the doore thereof by a sleight, and finding therein a burning lampe or candle. This secret of burning lamps of some vnquenchable stone, or other matter of that nature, hath beene vsed in the world long agoe; and proued true by diuers ancient sepulchers found vnder the ground. Selinus in his 12. chap. saith there is in Arcadia a certaine stone of the colour of Iron, which once set a fire cannot be quenched, and therefore is called Asbeslos, which signifies as much. Plutarch, in the beginning of his booke De cessatione Oraculorum, saith as much of the vnquenchable lampe in the Temple of Jupiter Hammon; which was the most ancient, and of most renowme among the Chamites, who soone fell from the true Religion. Plinie, in the first chapter of his 19. booke, tells also a great maruaile of a kinde of linnen cloth which consumes not in the fire. I thinke the immediate successors of Adam and Noe had knowledge of many secrets in Nature, which we now would thinke incredible, impossible, or altogether miraculous, if we saw the experience thereof.
5.As when a priuate man. By an excellent comparison the Poet here describes the affection that Phaleg had to vnderstand these things; and so makes way to his discourse of the Mathematike Arts; which he faines to be sisters, and one much like another; because they are all composed as it were of numbers, concords and proportions, which by Addition, Multiplication, Substraction, and Diuision, doe bring forth great varietie of rare and dainty secrets.
6.My sonne. He shewes in few words the iust commendation of these Liberall Sciences, called here Virgins, because of their simplicitie and puritie: Daughters of Heauen; because they are placed in the vnderstanding, the principall facultie of our soule, which is from Heauen; though the vnderstanding adorned with Mathematikes, doe many times bring forth effects, which depart farther and farther from their spring-head; and so by little and little fall among the Mechanicks, or Handycrafts. He saith also further, that these foure Sciences are the fairest, which that one Spirit issuing from two, (that is, the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Sonne) did euer beget, or mans soule conceiue: he speaks this only of such gifts as the Holy Ghost hath imparted vnto men, for the maintenance of their societie. For what were the life of man, if it had neither number, waight, nor measure; neither sight, nor hearing well gouerned? as (needs) it must be while it wants the Mathematikes: whose due praise and profit ensuing, with what other Arts depend thereon, you may reade at large in the Prefaces before Euclide^; especially in one of Christopher Clanius, and another of our English Iohn Dee.
7.She there. The learned differ concerning the order and disposition of these foure Arts: some set Geometrie in the first place, Arithmeticke in the second, Musicke in the third, and Astronomie last. Others cleane contrary. Our Author hath followed the most receiued opinion. Reade Scaliger against

Cardan, Exer. 321. The chiefe thing is to consider well the bounds and coherences of these Arts, that we neither confound nor seuer them among themselues, nor mingle them with others: for, this doing sometimes hath brought most dangerous errours both into Church and Common-wealth. To proceed: In this description which the Poet makes of Arithmetikes both habit and gesture, we may see what is required to the right vnderstanding that abstract Arte; now adayes farre out of the way, or soyled with grosse materials.
8.Vnitie. In fortie verses, or thereabouts, the Poet hath set downe the grounds of infinite Arithmeticall secrets. He that will search what the ancient and late Authors haue written, shall finde matter enough for a good thicke booke: I speake here but briefly, so much as may serue for vnderstanding the text, leauing the rest to a larger Commentarie. First, he calls Vnitie, or One, the root of all numbers; because euery number, great and small, ariseth from One. Secondly, he calls it also the root of Infinitie; for the greatest numbers, and such as vnto vs are vncountable or infinite, what are they but multiplied Vnities? Thirdly, he tearmes Vnitie, True friendships deare delight; because the faithfull louer delights in one onely, and seeks no more. Fourthly, The renowme of Harmonie; which tends to one sweet consort of diuers voyces. Fiftly, The seed-plot of all that is; because by one spice or kinde, of man, beast, fish, fowle, etc. was filled the whole world. Sixtly, he calls it the Aime of Polymnie. I thinke by this he meanes the intent that all learned men haue, in their discourses by word or writing, to tend alwayes to some one certaine point or end, as the only marke they aime or leuell-at. Let the Reader finde out some better note hereupon; for mine owne scarse contents me. Seuenthly, this Vnitie is said to be no number; because a number (taken as it is commonly for a name of multitude) is composed of many vnities: and more then number, because it giues a being to all numbers; and thus it hath a power to comprehend all numbers, and is actually in all. Let vs adde a word more to the praise of Vnitie; God is one, and the Church, of many gathered together, is but one; yea there was but one Creator, one world, one man; for of him was the woman framed; one language before the confusion of Babel; one Law, one Gospell, one Baptisme, one Supper of the Lord; one hope, one loue, one Paradise, one life euerlasting. Concerning the diuers significations of one, and other numbers in holy Scripture, I forbeare to speake; because the Poet makes no plaine mention thereof. But this I note further; that out of these verses, so artificially couched together, nothing can be drawne, which may any way seeme to fauour their vaine speculations; who goe about to build vpon numbers the rules of Religion; and such as are of force to establish or ouerthrow Common-wealths: and least of all hath any support or rellyance for Arithmanticall Cheaters, Magicians, and other like mischiefes of the world; who abusing the passages of holy Scripture, where numbers are vsed, thinke they haue found therein the way to foretell what is to come; or power to raise vp Spirits; and in a word, to practise many things vnlawfull; which the curious and profane haue taught by their bookes published in Print:

but let their names bee buried in euerlasting silence.
9.Twaine. The Pythagorians called the number of two or twaine, Isis and Diana; because as Diana was barren (saith Plato in his Th^^te^us) so Two, being the head and beginning of Diuersitie, and vnlikenesse, hath no such power, as other numbers haue. It is the father of numbers huen, which the Poet calles esseminate, because they bring forth nothing; but are cause rather of the ruine of Vnitie. For, to diuide a thing, is to destroy it, as Aristotle argues very punctually in the eight Booke of his Metaphysickes. Plutarch in his Treatise of the Soules creation, saith that Zaratas, the Master of Pythagoras, called Two the mother of Numbers, and One the father; whereof he yeelds a reason, which our Author hath in a word.
10.Three. Some account Three the first of all numbers; for, as for Two, the Pythagorians doe not vouchsafe it the name of a number; but call it a confounding of Vnities, which are (to speake properly) no numbers, but the roots and beginnings of numbers. I will say nothing here of the praise of Three, set downe by Plutarch in his Treatise of Isis and Osiris, and elsewhere: nor yet what say the Poets; whose Chiefe hath this; Numero Deus impare gaudet; meaning not an odde number whatsoeuer, as Fiue or Seuen, but only Three, which is the first of all the odde numbers, and makes in Geometry, of three surfaces only, the first body that hath length, breadth, and thicknesse, called a Triangle. The Pythagoreans call this kinde of Solide Minerua; and in their purifications and washings, doe vse much the number of Three. Virgil also toucheth vpon this secret in the 6. of his Aeneids. Thus, Idem ter socios pura circumtulit vnda and in the first of his Georg. thus, Terque nouas circum saelix cat hoslia fruges. And Ouid. 2. Fast. thus, Et digitis tria thura tribus sublimine ponit. And in the 6. Protinus arbutea postes terin ordine tangit Fronde, ter arbutea lamina fronde notal. Infinite authorities haue we to this purpose: to name one, Plinie saith, (in translating, I searched out the place) Nat. Hist. 28.4. Terna despuere deprecatione in omni medicina mes suit, atque ex hec effectus adiu^are. But for as much as this, and the like fauours of superstition and witchcraft, I leaue it; and for beare also to shew further how curiously some apply this number vnto diuers mysteries of Religion; contenting my selfe onely to expound the Poets words. First, hee saith it is a number proper vnto God, and I thinke he meanes it of the holy Trinitie, Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, which is one true God: for of nothing else can it be said, that Three are One, and One is Three. Againe, he saith it is the eldest brother of all the Odde numbers, but of that wee spoke before. Thirdly, he saith that in this number Three is No number and Number well met. Then he saith further, it is a number well beloued of Almightie God; I translate it Heau'ns fauour winning; and it hath respect either to the sore-alledged place of Virgil; or rather to the effects that God worketh in his creatures, which would make a large Commentary: for the number of three hath beene obserued by some in the Order of Angels sent downe vnto Men; in Men themselues, in Sciences, in Vertues and other things so many, as can hardly be numbred. Moreouer, he saith the number Three hath a Center and two Extremities of equall distance one from another:

which is easie to be vnderstood, for the Center of Three is the second Vnitie, which is equally distant from the first and the third, and by this reason also is it the first of all number, that hath End, Middle, and Beginning, which is also very plaine to conceiue.
11Foure. The Cube, or perfect Square body in Geometrie, hath a piedestall, or base of foure corners, and is the most perfect of Solide bodies, representing stedfastnesse, continuance and vertue; whereof came the prouerbe of Homo quadratus; not square faced like the Chinois (Trigault, in expedit one Iesuitica) but a man disposed and dealing squarely; a man sound, constant, and vertuous. Reade Pierius his Exposition of this number, with the rest, before and after it. I haue said much thereof in my Commentaries vpon the Quartaines of le Sieur de Pybrac. Expos. 39. where he saith, that Truth is framed of a perfect Cube. Now to the rest of our Poets words. Secondly then he ascribes to the number of Foure this property, that with his owne contents, which are one, two, three, he makes vp I en: this is plaine. Thirdly, he saith it is the number of the name most to be feared, that is, the name of God. For the Hebrues write the name of God with foure letters, and say it is vn-vtterable, and pronounce euer Adonai for Ichoua, which name the Diuines call Tetragramaton. Iohn Reuelm hath discoursed largely thereof in his Cabala, and in his bookes de Verbo Mirifico. Other Nations also haue giuen to God a name of foure letters. The Assyrians Adad, the Aegyptians Amun, the Persians Syre, the old Romans Aius, the Greekes THEOS, the Mahumetans Alla, the Goths Thor, the Spaniards Dios, the Italians Idio, the Germans Gott, the French Dieu. I passe by the names Adon, Adni, Iaho, Iesu; as also what some haue inuented vpon the names of Cain, Abel, Seth, Enos; for they haue written herein very much to little purpose. The Spirit of God would haue vs rest vpon the substance of things, not vpon the number of letters vsed in their names. For the fourth commendation of this number, he saith it is the number of the Elements, to wit, the Earth, the Water, the Aire, and the Fire: whereof thus Ouid, Metam. 15. Quatuor ^ternus genitalia corpora Mundus-Continet etc. And in his first booke more distinctly: Ignea conuexi vis and sine pondere coeli Emicuit, summaque ^^cum sibi legit in arce. Proximus est Aer illi leuitate locoque. Densior his Tellus, elementaque grandia traxit, Et pressa est grauitatesui. Circumsluus hu^^^ Vltima possed^t solid^amque coereuit orbem. For the fist, he saith it represents the foure Seasons of the yeare; the Spring, Sommer, Autumne, and Winter. For the sixt, he compares it to the foure Cardinall Vertues, Iustice, Fortitude, Temperance, and Prudence. For these seuenth, to the Huanours of Mans bodie, bloud, Coller, Phlegme, and Melancholy. For the eight, to the principall Winds, East, West, North, and South. Let me say moreouer, that the Pythagoreans (as Ma^rebius reports) had this number in so great esteeme, that they were w^n^ to sweare by it.
12.F^ue, th'Ermaphrodite. So called, because it is composed of the Femall (...), and Masculine Three, which is the first Odde number. That which followeth, how this number multiphed alway shewes it selfe, is easie. Plutarch (de Cessatione Oraculorum) and vpon the Title of Et, in the

Temple at Delphos, telleth great wonders of this number of Fiue.
13Th'Analogicke Six. Saint Augustine in his fourth booke, De Trinitate, and in his fourth booke also, De Genesi ad literam; and Hugode Sto Victore, in his booke, De Sacramentis, both say the number of Six is a perfect number, because it is composed of his owne proper parts. For the Diuisors of Six (besides the Vnitie, which diuides all numbers by themselues) as 1, is in Six six times, and so of the rest) are 6, 3, and 2. Diuide then Six by Six, the Quotus is 1, diuide it by 3, the Quotus is 2, diuide it by 2, the Quotus is 3, that is a Sixt part, a Third, and a Second, which 1, 2, and 3, being put together, make-vp againe the whole Six, which preoues it a perfect number. Other numbers (the most) thus examined, are found more or lesse than their parts. As the Diuisers of 10. are 10.5. and 2. Ten is in ten once, Fiue is in Ten twise; two is in Ten fiue times, so the Quotes of Ten thus diuided, are 1.2. and 5. which added make but eight, two lesse than the number deuided. Wheras the Diuisers of 12. being 6.4.3. and 1. The Quote of 12 diuided by twelue is 1. by six 2. by foure 3. by three 4. by two 6. and these Quotes 1.2.3.4. and 6. make a Totall of 16. which is foure more than the number diuided Some say then that, Six being the first perfect number, and answerable to his owne parts, therefore it pleased God to create the World in six daies, to shew that all was perfect; nothing more than need, nothing lesse. So by good right is this number tearmed Analogicke, that is, proportionate, and answerable in all points to it selfe; as hath beene shewed.
14The Criticke Seu'n. First, the Poet calles Seuen a Criticke number, as much to say as Iudging of a matter. For that on the seuenth day Physitions are wont to iudge of a disease to life or death: though sometimes, where a strange and resisting nature is, they double the number, and awaite the fourteenth day; which is (as saith Hippocrates in his Aphorismes) the tearme of diseases, that are simply acute or sharpe. If the maladie passe this day, it is commonly seene that it continues to the one and twentieth, which is a third Seuenth. Looke what Galen saith in his bookes De diebus Criticis; and what Consorius in his booke De die Natali: as also what the Physitians hold concerning euery Seuenth and Climactericall yeare, as of the nine and fortieth, composed of seuen times seuen, and the sixty three, of nine times seuen. In the second place the Poet calles this number Male and Female, because it is made of an Eauen and an Odde, three and foure: hereof see Scaliger in his 365. Exer. against Cardan. In the third and last place, he commends it for the number of the Planets, and of the holy Rest-day; because the Lord rested the seuenth day, and hallowed it.

15Eight the double Square. The smallest Latus of any Square-number is two, which multiplied by it selfe makes foure, and the same againe multiplied by the Latus two, is eight, which is the first Cube, and double the first Square. Some haue played the subtill Figure-slingers with the Greeke name of our Sauiour (...), and found it to make 888. to wit, eight Vnities, eight Tens, and eight Hundreds; applying also thereto certaine Prophesies of Silylla, but I leaue this subtill deuice, sithence the Poet giues me no occasion to handle it.
16And sacred Nine. So stiled for the number of the Muses; though otherwise in Musike this number makes a discord; and the Astrologers call it a sinister number, and ill-betokening. In the Theogonie of ^^^lodus, and in Virgil, where he speakes of the nine turnings of the infernall Riuer Styx, some are of opinion that it represents the disagreeing Complexions of Mans bodie. See the Hieroglyphikes of Iohn Pierius in his 37. booke.
17Ten. Of this number Ouid in his booke, De Fastis, speakes very properly; Semper adusque decom numero crescente venitur Principium spatijs sumitur inde nonis. But to our Poet, he saith it containe in it selfe the force and vertue of all numbers, either simply, or by multiplication; as it is plaine in the Text. Againe, he saith it is like the Line in Geometrie, because it is the first that makes a length, for all that goe before it are expressed by single Characters, as 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9. and so stand like prickes or points not flowing to a Line: but Ten hauing alwaies one other Figure or Cypher ioyned vnto it, thrusts-out into length, and so makes (as it were) a Line in Arithmeticke: beyond which Line there is no proceeding, but by multiplying this Ten againe, and so forth to the greatest number that can be giuen, which may surmount the waues, or sands of the sea. Forcadel in his Arithmeticke, and others, besides those of old, haue shewed the manner how. But Archimedes wrote thereof long agoe, and entituled his worke De numeo arenae. And surely by the multiplication of Ten it may be done. Let them examine or trie it that haue leisure: or rather let vs all leaue this to him that made all things in number, weight, and measure; who onely knowes the the number of the Starres, with all things past, present, and to come.
18See here. He speakes of the foure fundamentall Rules of Arithmeticke, Addition, Multiplication, Subtraction, and Diuision; where-out doe spring an infinite sort of braue and pleasant secrets, which the Masters of this Art haue plainly set-downe in their bookes. Sithence then the Rules aforesaid are, or may be, well knowne to all men; I say no more of them, but goe-on to consider what our Poet saith of Geometrie.






Et les terroirs du Nord; est la Geometrie,
Guide des artisans, mere de Symmetrie,
Ame des instruments en effect si diuers,
Loy mesme de la Loy qui forma l'Vuiuers.
Ie ne voy rien qui poids,
Ses instrume^s. (...) eftects and ^^^rages. ^^^igne. (...) Triangles. Quadrangles and sigures au tres geometriques.
que compas, que mesures,

Que regles, que niueaux, qu'esquierres, que figures.
Regarde comme ici iadis l'ouurter subtil
A tire dext ement vne ligne a (...) fil:
Les Triangles guerriers, les maisonniers Quadrangles,
El cent autres facons de formes a plus d'Angles,
Droits, mousses, ^u poinctus. Remarque en cest endroit
Celle-la, dont iamais le traict ne glisse droit:
Comme la limac^use auec la serpentec:
Et la sigu^^ en^or des scauans tant vantce,
Le Cercle.
Le Cercle compasse, dont l'arrondissement
Est du centre par tout distant egalement.


Les figures solides. Le Rond, figure parsaite, and excellente entre toutes les autres, par diuerses raisons icy mar quees clairement par le Poete.
Mesure ici de l'oeil les figures Solides,
Cubes, Dodechedrons, Cylindres, Pyramides.
Admire ici le Rond, image de ce Tout,
Qui tout en soy compris, n'a ni milieu ni bout:
Perfection de l'art, and l'honneur de ses freres,
Merueille contenant cent merueilles contreres:
Immobile, and mobile: and conuexe, and creuse:
Oblique en son contour, and du droit compose.
Voy qu'il n'a pas fi tost commencesa quarriere,
Qu'il marche en haut, en bas, en auant, en arriere:
Et que d'autrui pousse ne se meut seulement,
Ams esmeut ses voisins de son esbranlement.
(Le Cicl en est tesmoin.) Qui plus est comme il semble,
Lors qu'il est en repos, de tous costez il tremble,
D'autant qu'il n'a qu'vn poin^l pour baze and fondement,
Et que de toutes parts il panche iustement
D'vne de ses moitiez. Et tout esfois la Boule,
Sur qui nous habitons pendue en l'air, ne croule:
Car elle est le moyen des concentriques corps,
Qu'aucun angle ou forjet ne presse par dehors.


Les autres corps iettez dans le vague, figurent
Autres formes qu'ils n'ont: mais les traicts tousiours durent
Semblables en vn globe, a cause qu'il n'a point
Part qui ne soit pareille aux autres de-tout-poinct.


Puis apres tout ainsi qu'es l^ges Ambligones
Se rangent plus de corps qu'es maisons Oxygones,

Vieu que les angles Droits, and les angles Aigus,
Vont moins eslargissant leurs iambes, que l'Obtus:
Le Rond non autrement en sa mousse closture
Contiendra plus de lieu que tonte autre figure.


Les autres corps choquez se rompent aisement,
D'autant qu'on treuue en eux sin and commencement:
Qu'ils ont des aspretez, des plis, des commissures:
Mais le Rond est sans coins, sans pointes, sans ioinctures.


La quarreure du Cercle and le redoublement du Cube.
Sur tout, mon cher Phalec, bande ici tes esprits,
Etcompren deux secrets de peu de gens compris,
Noeuds cents fois renouez, and cruelles tortures,
Qui sans fin geineront les Escholes futures,
La quarreure du Cercle, and le redoublement
D'vn corps qui soit quarre par tout egalement.


Certitude de la Geometrie, qui a inuente mille vtilitez ala vic humaine.
Plus durque dans l'airain tien pour iamais grauees
En ton sidele esprit cent regles non prouuces
Parfoibles arguments, par syllogismes vains,
Ains dont la verite se touche de nos mains:
Science sans dispute: and qui mere feconde,
De miracles nouueaux remplira tout le Monde.


Les Moulins.
Par elle le flot bas des ruisseaux fontaniers,
Comme les foibles vents, seruiront de Meusniers,
Et le grain ecraze dans la rouante presse
Payerace qu'il doit a sa chiche maistresse.
L'artillerie.
Par elle le boulet fumeusement vomy
Par vn gosier d'air ain contre vn mur ennemy
Broyera, tonnerreux, les rochers mesme enpoudre,
Et rendra parson bruit contemptible le foudre.
Le Gouuernail and equip page des nauires.
Par elle les cerceaux d'vnfauor able vent
Tireront du Bresiliusq' au riche Leuant,
Puis des flots Afriquains iusqu'aux glacons de Thyle
Vn Palais de Sapin, ou plustost vne ville:
Et le Pilote assis remuera promptement
Auec vn court leuier tout ce grand bastiment:
L'Imprimerie.
L'Imprimeur en vn iour f^ra plus de volumes
Que le subtil trauail de mille doctes plumes:
Vne Grue a bastir vaudra cent crocheteurs:

La Grue and autres machines. Le Rayon and autres engins pour mesurer promptement toutes hauteurs, largeurs and profondeurs. Les horloges. Les images de bois parlantes artificiellement and autres inuentions merueilleuses.
Vn Rayon mesureur, mille ailez arpenteurs,
Pour partager la terre enclimats and ceintures,
Et la grandeur du ciel en huict fois six figures:
L'eau, le sablon, la verge and des rouets les tours,
En quatre fois six parts diuiseront les iours:
D'vne image de bois sourdra quelques parole:
Vn globe contiendra les miracles dis Pole:
Les hommes se guidans par le vuide des airs,
D'vn temeraire vol trauerseront les mers.
Et lon ne doute point, que si le Geometre
Treuue vn autre vniuers pour a son aise y mettre
Ses pieds, and ses engins, que comme vn nouueau Dieu
Il ne puisse porter ce Monde en autre lieu.





Of North and Southerne Pole; painfull
19.
Geometrie,
The guide of Artisans, and mother of Symmetrie;
Life of those instruments so diuers-vsuall
And law eu'n of the law that framed all this All.
20.Behold her's nothing else but compasse, measure, weight,

Rules, plommets, squiers, shapes: See vnd'r a line drawne straight


The soldiour Triangles, and th'architect Quadrangles,
With hundred other shapes of more increased Angles,
Sharpe, blont, or falling right; Loe here two crooked lines,
One like a crawling Snake, one like a Dodman twines:
Lo many crooked shapes, and here, of all the rest
The Circle in fauour most with eu'ry learned brest;
Whose roundell doth it selfe right-equally display,
And from the Center stands like distant euery way.
21.Here measure with thine eye all manner Cors-solids,
The Cubes, Dodechedrons, Cylinders, Pyramids;
And wond'r here at the
22.
Globe, which all doth comprehend,
So like the world it selfe, and hath nor mid, nor end:
The highest point of Art, and top of all his kynt
A maruaile that containes much counter-maruaile in't:
Moouabl' and immoouabl', inward-bent and bent-out,
Composed of a straight, yet crooked round about.
Behold, at any time when on a plaine 'tis throne,
It downe and vpward stirs, back, forward, all in one.
Nor stirs it all alone when cunning force it moues,
But neighbour moouables proportionally shoues;
As by the heau'ns appears; nay more, though still it bide,
It seemes to threat'n a fall and shake on eu'ry side:
Because a point is all it hath for standing-place,
And halfe on eu'ry side hangs o're so small a base.
And much more wond'r it is how this great earthie ball
Whereon we dwell, sans-base, hangs fast and cannot fall
Amids the yeelding ayre: it selfe is (out of doubt)
The commyd bodies midst, that are not press'd without.


All bodies other-shap'd, into the water cast,
Make shapes vnlike their owne; but alway round do last
Th'impressions of a Round: because it cannot strike
With any diuers part, all are vnt'all so like:


Beside as moe may stand in houses Amblygons,
Then can in equall-bought of any Oxygons;

Because the sharpe and right take not so large a stride
As corner blunt; so doth the Round in cloyster wide
More hold then all the rest.


And other bodies breake
With eu'ry knock, because they haue both bay and peake,
Beginning, end, and ioynts; whereas the bodie round
Is creastlesse, cornerlesse, and eu'ry-side-way sound.
Son, summon here thy wits, and marke that few haue found,
23.
The doubling of a Cube, and squaring of a Round:
Such hundred-folded knots, such hidden mysteries,
As shall troubl' all the schooles of our posterities.


24.
Keepe faster then in brasse for euer grau'n in minde,
In faithfull minde, these rules, which thou shalt proued finde,
Not by vaine syllogismes or probable arguments;
But whose vndoubted truth appears eu'n vnto sence:
An Art of certainties, whose euer-fruitfull wombe
With wonders new-deuis'd shall fill the world to come.
25.
By her the gentle streame, by her the feeble winde,
Shall driue the whirling presse, and so be taught to grinde
The graine of life to meale; that with increase it may
Vnto the sparing Dames all that is due repay.
By her the brasen throat shall vomit Iron balles,
With smoake and roaring noyse, vpon besieged walles:
The force whereof shall rent the hardestrocks asunder,
And giue more fearefull thumps then any bolt of thunder.
By her the borrowed wings of some assisting winde
Shall beare from out Bresile vnto the rich East-Inde,
And to the frozen Sea from Affricks boyling flood,
A iogging towre, or eu'n a floating towne of wood:
Wherein the Pylot set shall with a leauer light
Most huge waights easily moue, and make all coast aright.
So shall one Printer worke more learned sheets aday,
Then eu'n a thousand hands of ready-writers may:
One Crane shall more auaile then Porters many a score;

And then a thousand men one Staffe shall profit more
To measure-out the fields; to part th'earth into lines,
And all the cope of heau'n int' eight and fortie signes:
So shall the wat'r, and sand, the Style and clock in towers,
Most euenly part the day to foure and twentie howers:
An Image made of wood some voice shall vtter plaine;
An artificiall globe heau'ns wonders shall containe:
Men through th'ayres emptinesse their bodies peysing right
Shall ouer-mount the Seas with bold-aduentring flight.
And doubtlesse if the wise Geometer had place
To plant his engins on, and stand himselfe in case
To stirre them aft'r his Art, so could he thrust and shoue,
That like some pettie-god the world he might remoue.




19.Geometrie. Shee is described as a Nymph that frownes, or hath a wrinkled forehead: because the studie of this Art is very painfull, and makes the student waxe old apace; and crookbackt also, by reason of their much stooping downward, to measure and compasse their plots. Shee is sad and looks stedfastly on the ground: because all hard works make men pensiue and full of care; Geometrie especially, which causeth a man to six his eye wholly vpon that he goes about. Shee hath a wand, or straight rod, also in her hand, wherewith shee drawes certaine figures and shapes in the dust; for that in this Art, aboue others, must be demonstrations vsed, without which the Theoremes and Propositions cannot be vnderstood. And for as much as Shee measures the whole Earth, the breadth and deepnesse of Riuers, high Mountaines, low Valleyes and Mines, with pleasant Medowes, prospects of Seas and Climats from one end of the world to the other; therefore hath the Poet her so apparelled, as we see in his verse. Furthermore She is called the Guide of Artisans; because they without her can doe nothing answerable to the expectation of an vnderstanding eye: and in this respect also is shee called the mother of Symmetrie, or proportion, requisite in all Crafts Mechanicall; yea the soule or life of all those different instruments, which without due measure and proportion would doe more hurt then good, as we finde by experience. Whereas shee is called, The law euen of that law which framed all this All: the Poet herein expounds well that saying of Plato, That God exerciseth Geometric from day to day. This also Moses well signifieth in those words, And God saw all that he had made was perfectly good: and the Wiseman in those; God made all things in number, weight and measure: as indeed a man shall not finde any creature, small or great, in heauen, earth, or Sea, that is not made (as it were) by the rounding-toole, weight-beame, and squire; by the compasse, leuell and perpendicular of an infinite wisdome.
20.Here's nothing else. First he shewes the tooles and instruments necessarie

for the practise of Geometrie: then draughts of one dimension, as of leggth only: to wit, Lines straight, for Opticks and planting of Ordnance; and crooked, for mynes, wayes vnder ground, and Labyrinths; as we are taught by the storie of Theseus and Ariadne. Thirdly, shapes of two dimensions; as of length and breadth also; to wit, Triangles for commanders in warre, to range their battailes thereby; Quadrangles, for building, because they are most sound and fast-standing; and other figures, wreathed, bulked, longer-one-way-then-other; Ovalls, Lozenges, and Rounds; all which are set-downe particularly in the Commentaries of Candales, Pellitier, Clauius, and others vpon Euclide.
21.Here measure. In the third place hee propounds certaine figures, called Bodies solide; because they haue both length, breadth, and thicknesse. As the Cube, fouresquare euery way, like a dye; the Dodecacdron, of twelue corners or angles; the Cylinder, long and round like a rouller; the Pyramis, which hath three or foure corners in base, and but one aboue in point. These foure, together with the Sphere (which is round through all dimensions) are called the fiue Bodies regular; whereof Euclide and his Expositors haue spoken at large in their sixt booke: as they haue also many propositions touching the same before.
22.The Globe. This is a kind of Geometricall Solide most excellent and perfect aboue all others; as all men, that haue written thereof, doe plainly declare: whom the Poet here also followeth. Their chiefe reasons are,
1. That it hath the same fashion and shape, that the world hath.2. That it hath neither beginning, mids, nor end.3. That it is moueable in place, and immoueable out of place. That it is concaue and conuex, which is as much to say, as Inbent and Out-bent, or crusye and bulked; that it is made of straight lines, meaning the diameters, and yet crooked round about, as is the surface thereof; that it mooueth euery way at once, vpward, downward, backward, forward, rightway, leftway; that it swayes and mooues with it, according

to proportion, all round bodies next it: This we may well perceiue by that heauen called Primum mobile, which drawes with it the firmament of fixed starres, together with the seauen spheres of Planets: That, although it stand still, as when the sphere is laid on a plaine; yet seemes it to be in continuall motion, and euery way nods and threatens to fall, because the base or foot it stands-on is but a point, from whence on euery-side halfe hangs-ouer. This may seeme strange then, euen where there is a foundation to rest-on. Much more in the Earth, that hath no foundation to sense, but hangs in the Ayre; whereof the Poet giues a good reason; because it selfe is the resting-place, or middle point, of all the bodies concentrike, and round of it selfe, is not by any promontorie or corner forced from abroad. More ample reasons hereof shall yee finde in the Commentaries of Clauius, Junctinus, Schreckensuschius, and others, vpon the Spheare of Iohn of Hallifax, commonly called Iohannes de sacro Bosco; and in the Commentarie of Millichius vpon the second booke of Plinie.4. The Sphere is alwaies and euery where throughout like it selfe; so are not other bodies Geometricall.5: As houses that are blunt-cornerd, receiue more into them, then do the straight or sharp-cornerd; because these stride not so wide as the other: so the Sphere being (as it were) euery way blunt, containes more then any Geometricall bodie of other shape.6. Other Solides are broken oft-times, by reason of their beginnings, ends, plights, knobs and ioynts: whereas the Sphere is voide of all those; and therefore must needs be more perfect and sound; as all Astronomers and Geometricians doe proue both by their owne experience, and to the view of others.
23.The doubling of a Cube, and squaring of a Round. About these two secrets of Geometrie diuers learned men of our Age haue taken great pains; as well in their Commentaries vpon Euclide, as in Bookes and Treatises printed apart. But because these matters doe require demonstrations with distinct number and figure, it was impossible for me to set them downe here; and my ayme is at things of more vse and profit. He that would be further satisfied herein, let him repaire to the learned Mathematicians, or to their Bookes set forth in Print. Nicolas de Cusa, Orontius, Cardan in his worke de proportionibus, Pelletier, Clauius, and Candales, in diuers demonstrations vpon 
Euclide, haue largely discoursed vpon these Secrets, and others drawing neere vnto them.
24.Keepe faster. The Theoremes, Problemes and Propositions of Geometrie, contained in the books of Euclide are most certaine, and out of all controuersie, among people endued with reason; as the Expositors of this Author doe plainly shew. Howbeit the Sceptikes and Pyrrhonians, both old and new, do oppose them. But the Poet simply considers the truth of things, reiecting all Sophistrie; which deserues not to be disputed withall, especially when it denies principles; and such as these, whereby Geometrie hath filled the whole world, and that but a hundred yeares since, with an infinite sort of rare and admirable inuentions.
25.By her the gentle streame. For proofe of that last point, he brings in
1. The vse of Wind-mills and Water-mills.2. Artillerie.3. The Saile, mast, sterne, and other furniture of a ship.4. Printing.5. The Crane or wheele, deuised to draw or lift-vp great stones to a high building; and other Engines, to command and beat downe pyles, planks and whole trees (if need be) into the earth vnder water.6. The Crosse-staffe, or Iacobs-staffe (as we call it) to measure the Earth, Ayre, Heauen and Sea, and vnder this may be comprised all other instruments, which the Surveyours of Land, Camp-masters, Geometors, Astronomers, and other men vse to that purpose, or the like.7. All kinde of howre-glasses, of sand or water, Dyals of all sorts, and sounding clocks, to marke how the time passes both by day and night.8. Certaine statues and deuises of wood, which by meanes of sundry gynnes of motion within them, haue beene made to pronounce some words of mans voice: whereto may be added the woodden Pigeon of Archytas, the Eagle and Flie of Iohn de Montroyall, the brasen head of Albertus Magnus, and the clock-cock of Strausburg.9. The deuise of Daedalus, to flie in the ayre; which hath beene imitated since by others.
In the tenth and last place he glaunceth at the vaunt which Archimedes made, that he would mooue the Earth out of place, if he had but elsewhere to stand. These all deserue throughly to be considered; but for the present I will content my selfe thus only to haue pointed at them. And so come to the third Image, which is Astronomie.






3. L'Astronomie ne peut estre bien veue que de ceux qui conoissent l'Arithmetique and la Germetrie.
Or d'autant que ces deux nous donnent seure entree
Dans le sainct Cabinet, ou l'Vranie astree
Tient sa ceinture d'or, ses lumineux pendans,
Ses Perles, ses rubis, and ses saphirs ardans:
Qu'homme ne peut monter sur les croupes iumelles
Du Parnasse estoille, que guinde sur leurs ailes:
Que quiconque est priue de l'vn de ces deux yeux,
Contemple vainement l'artifice des cieux:
Le sculpteur a dresse pres de l'Arithmetique,
Et l'Art mesure-champ, l'image Astronomique.



Ornemens de l'Astronomie.
Elle a pour Diademe vn argente Croissant,
Sous qui iusqa'aux talons a iaunes flots descend
Vn Comet allume: pour yeux deux Escarboucles:
Pour robe vn bleu Rideau, que deux luisantes boucles
Attachent sur l'espaule, vn damas azure,
D'estoilles, d'animaux richement figure:
Et pour plumes encor elle porte les ailes
De l'oiseau mouchete de brillantes roueles.




Now these two Arts because they lead vs onward right
Into that sacred tent where Vranie the bright
Sits guirt in golden belt, with spangles albedight
Of carbuncl' and of pearle, of rubye and chrysolite;
And that a man withou the help of eithers quill
May neuer mount the twyns of starrie Pernas hill;
But whosoeuer wants one of these Eagles eies,
In vaine beholds the glore and fabrick of the skies;
Therefore this cunning Wryght hath neer Arithmetrie
And th'Art of measuring set-forth Astronomie.



A siluer-bright new Moone shee weares for dyademe,
Wherevnder to her foot shines downe with golden beame
A firie blazing starre; two pyrops are her eyes,
Or flaming Carbuncles; her gowne is like the skies,
Blew damaske, all with stars and pictures beautiside,
And with two golden claspes on either shoulder ty'de:
And for her plume or fan shee beares the traine and wings
Of bird whom nature deckt with shining studs and rings.




26.Now these two Arts. Without the helpe of Arithmetike and Geometrie (saith our Poet) a man is not able to reach vnto the excellencie of the third: as by the Astronomical Institutions appeareth most plainly.
27.A siluer-bright New-Moone. Here is a fit dresse for Astronomie; The Moone her Coronet, because of all the Globes of Heauen that is neerest vnto vs; and vnder that, her traine is a Blazing starre; because that fierie Meteor, anciently thought to be engendred in the vpper region of the Ayre, and

euer vnder the Moone, till of late it hath beene prooued, by the Parallax, to be sometime aboue. By the two Carbuncles here set for her eyes, are meant two bright starres: the blew damaske gowne embrodered with stars and pictures of liuing creatures, is the skie and Zodiack: the two golden clasps or buckles are the Poles: by the plume, or fan of Peacocks feathers, may be meant the starrie firmament, or eighth heauen A description very proper, and representing the whole subiect of Astronomie.






Mais que sont, dit Phalec,
Les deux Globes, celui de sa main dextre est le Tertestre ou la Sphere du monde ou se voyent La Terre,
dit Phalec, que sont ces globles peints
Qu'elle nous semble offrir en estendant ses mains?
Mon sils, respond Heber, ceste figure ronde
Faite a cercles croisez, est la Sphere du Monde,
Ou la verte rondeur du terrestre element
Retient le plus bas lieu comme vil excrement
Et marc de l'Vniuers, que la sage Nature
Entoure obliquement d'vne perse ceinture:
Ou plut ost que la mer couure des toutes pars,
Sice n'est quelques poincts confusement espars.
Car l'ondeux Ocean se laisse aller,
La Mer,
humide,
Dans les creux plus profonds de l'Element solide:
Et cerche en l'inegal de sa vaste rondeur
Le centre de son poids, and non de sa grandeur.


La seroit l'air,
L'air, le feu. Les cieux des estoilles errantes and fixes ne peuuent estre peints. Ils sont representez par des^ Cercles.
le feu, les cieux des sept Errantes,
Le plancher marquete de platines brillantes,
Les mobiles plus hauts, and le seiour des Saincts,
L'vn sur l'autre estendus, s'ils pouuoient estre peints.


Maiis l'ouurier de ce Rond ayant feint en leur place
Dix circles embrassans la celeste sur-face,
Les a representezen vn globe creuse,

Ily en a six grands: asauoir. L'Acquateur ou Equinoctial.
Pour nous guider la haut par vn trac plus aise.


Entre les six plus grands, and qui d'vn pli contrere
Partent en deux moitiez le contour de la Sphere,
Le Cercle egale-nuicts est iustement distant
De ces deux Gonds, qui vont tout le monde portant,
Aussi chaque flambeau, qui sous lui se tournoye,
Postillonne tousiours par vne longue voye:
Fait vne plus grand traite, and va plus vistement
Que tout autre brandon qui luise au Firmament:
Qui se rend paresseux, tant plus pres d'vn des Poles
Au son du luth de Dieu il poursuit ses caroles:
Et tandis que Phebus sous sa ligne conduit
Le char donne-clarte, la lumiere and la nuict
Marchent d'vn mesme pas, and la docte Nature
Les aune en tous pays d'vne mesme mesure.


Le Zodiaque.
Cest autre, qui sous lui se couche de trauers,
Escartant ses piuots de ceux de l'Vniuers
Vingt and quatre degrez, est dit le Zodiaque,
Lice des vagues feux ou Phebus tousiours vaque
A r'amener les ans, and changeant de maisons,
Cause le changement de deux fois deux saisons.


Le premier Colure.
Cest autre, qui passant and par les Gonds du Monde
Et par les Gonds du cercle ou Phebus fait sa ronde,
Forme des angles droicts: and, courbe, va fendant
Dela le Capricorne, ici le Chancre ardant:
Des arrests du Soleil est nomme le Colure.
Car le Pere du iour rend morne son alleure
Aux poincts du coupement, comme ne dressant pas
Au long, ains sur les flanes de la Sphere ses pas.


Le deu xiesme Colure. Le Meridian.
C'est autre, qui le coupe en egale distance,
Auecques le Belier, les Poles, la Balance,
Est le second Colure. Et cestui le Mi-iour,
Qui ne fait dans le ciel en mesme poinct seiour,
Ains suit nostre Zenit, comme auec nostre veue
L'inconstant Horizon deca de la se mue.


L'Horizon. Les 4. petis cercles sont.
Quant aux quatres petits: voici de ce coste
Le Tropique hyuernal, la celui de l'Este:

Le Tropique du solstice d'hiuer. Le tropique d'Este. Le Cercle meridional. Le Cercle Septenttional. Le globe en la main gauche, est le Celeste, representant les estoilles du pole arctique and anttarctique.
Et plus pres des Piuots de la Sphere doree,
Ici le cercle Austral, la celui de Boree:
Cercles, qui ne passant, comme on void, a trauers
Du poinct qui, ferme, sert de centre a l'Vniuers,
Ains faisant de la Shere inegales parcelles,
Entre eux and l'Equateur demeurent paralleles.


La Balle qu'elle tient en son senestre poing,
Est le portrait du Ciel. Car encor que de loing
L'Artsuyue la Nature, ici les belles ames
Admirent les beautez du lambris porte-flammes.


He Dieu quel plaisir c'est, qu'en tournant lentement
L'abrege rayonneux du dore firmament,
On void comme passer d'vne superbe suite
Les luisans bataillons du Celeste exercite.
Figures attribuces aux estoilles par les Astronomes.
L'vn est arme de traicts and d'arc and de carquois,
L'autre de coutelas, and l'autre de long bois.
L'vn chet and l'autre assis dans vn coche se roule
Sur l'airain azure de la flambante Boule.
L'vn est des gens de pied, l'autre marche a cheual:
L'vn deuant, l'autre a dos: l'vn a mont, l'autre a val.
L'ordre est ence desordre: and leur paisible guerre
Engrosse l'Ocean, and feconde la terre.


Aspects diuers des corps celestes.
Ie ne les voy iamais s'eutr'oeillader a part,
En triangle, en quadrangle, en sextile regard:
Or'doux, ore malins, qu'en vn pre ie ne pense
Comparaison.
Voir des paisans galliards vne lasciue danse,
Ou l'vn and l'antre sexe alegre, s'esiouit,
Ou l'vn file apres l'autre, ou l'vn pied l'autre suit,
Ou l'vn d'vn oeil ami guigne sur son espouse,
L'autre va descohant vne fleche ialouse.


Mais pourquoy,
Obiection de Phalec, pensant que Dieu ait imprime au ciel ces diuerses figures selon qu'elles ont este imagintes par les.
dit Phalec, le Tout-beau, quine fait
Ca bas rien qui ne soit en beaute tout-parfait,
Imprima dans les pers de la voute supreme
(Ou doit auec l'Amour viure la Beaute mesme)
Tant de Monstres hideux, tant de fiers animaux
Dignes concitoyens des esprits inferuaux?


Certes, replique Heber, la Diuine industrie

Astronomes: a quoy Heber respond proprement.
Ne fait rien qu'auec art and iuste symetrie:
Et ce qui mesme rend plus beau cest Vniuers,
C'est qu'il est haut and bas infiniment diuers.


Puis nos doctes parens, qui sur ce rond ouurage
Des clairs Signes du ciel firent le beau partage,
Donnerent a chacun and les noms, and les traits
Qui vont symbolisant a leurs quissans effaits.


Raison des noms donnez aux douze signes du Zodiaque.
Il ont fait vn Mouton de l'Astre a double corne,
Qui vestu a'Or frize, des ans choque la borne,
D'autant que l'Vniuers sous ses tiedes chaleurs
Se pare richement d'vne toison de fleurs.
1. Au Monton.
Du seco^d vn Taureau d'autant qu'on couple a l'heure
Les Taureaux,
2. Au Taureau.
qui fuma^ts vont d'vne morne alleure
Seillonner la nouale: and renuersant les champs
Refourbissent l'acier de leurs coutres tranchans.
Et du tiers,
3. Aux Iumeaux.
des Iume aux, d'autant que la quadrelle
Du doux fier Cupidon fait du masle and femelle
Vn corps vraiment parfait: les fruits croissent bessons:
Et qu'on void tout d'vn coup fleur and grain and moissons.
4. Al'Escreuisse.
Au quart ils ont baille le non d'vne escreuisse,
D'autant qu'alors Phebus deuers l'Autan reglisse,
Va comme elle en arriere: and, n'estant iamais las,
Sur vne mesme orniere il r'imprime ses pas.
A l'autre,
5. Au Lyon.
d'vn Lyon. Car comme son haleine
Brule pesteusement, la moissonneuse plaine
Bluette sous cest astre, and tousiours sur les eaux
Le perruque Soleil sagette ses flambeaux.
Celui qui vient apres,
6. A La Vierge.
est nomme la Pucelle,
A cause que la terre abomine sous elle
Le regard amoureux du Soleil qui la cuit,
Et que ceste saison, vierge, rien ne produit.
L'autre,
7. A la Balance.
le Trebuchet, pour raison qu'il balance
La clarte guide-peine, and l'ombre aime-silence,
Le froid and la chaleur: and qu'au mois donne-vin
Le iour and nuict, pesez, demeurent sur le sin.
L'autre,
8. Au Scorpion
le Scorpion. Car sous lui lon endure
Les premiers aiguillons, d'vne triste froidure.

9. A l'Archer.
L'autre retient la forme and le nom del' Archer,
Qui cruel, nuict and iour ne fait que descocher
Sur les bois, sur les tours, sur les herbes fenees
Ses sleches de glacons and de neige empennees.
De l'autre on fait vn Bouc:
10. Au Boucou Cheurueil.
car tout ainsi que, pront,
De rocher en rocher le Bouc sautelle a mont,
L'estoille au crin dore, l'ornement des Panetes,
Commence en remontant r'approcher de nos testes.
Et pour ce que le ciel sous les signes suyuans
Semble tousiours pleurer, nos bisay eux scauans
11. Au Verscau.
Out peint vn Verseur d'cau dans le lambris du Monde,
12. Aux Poissons.
Et puis deux clairs Poissons, qui slottent dans son onde.


Autre raison, plus subtile.
Que si tu ne te peux contenter de ceci,
On peut, mon cher Phalec, dire que tout ainsi
Que plustost que le Rien par vne voix feconde
Fust fait and la matrice and l'embryon du Monde,
L'exemplaire eternel, l'auant-coucen portrait,
Et l'admirable seau de tout ce qui s'est fait,
Logeoit Diuinement dans l'esprit du grand Maistre,
Et l'Vniuers auoit essence anant son estre:
Ainsi le Trois fois grand tendant, ingenieux,
Du ciel esclaire-tout le rideau precieux,
Le chargea de facon, and des futurs ouurages,
Ainsi qu'en vn tableau y peignit les images.


Au ciel sont. les modelles de ce qui est co terre.
Voici pas le crayon d'vn fleuue iaunissant,
Qui par le bleu plancher, tortueux, va glissant?
Ici le Corbeau vole, ici l'Aigle se ioue:
Le Daufin nage ici, la Baleine ici noue:
Le Cheualy bondit, l'aileureuly fuit:
L'ardent T'aureauy fume, and le Dragony luit:
Et l'air, la terre, and l'eau n'ont en eux chose belle,
Qu'on en treuue la haut quelque insigne modelle.


Mesme nos coutelas, nos couronnes, nos traits,
Nos balances, nos dards, ne sont que le extraits
Des saincts originaux, que Dieu par sa porole
Escriuit pour iamais dans les liures du Pole.





28But what (quoth Phaleg) mean these globes of diuers hew
Shee holds in hand, and seems to reach vnto our view.
My sonne (quoth Heber then) this round shape set-out here
With circles ouerthwart, is of the world the Spheare:
Where th'element of Earth made like a greenie ball,
The setled residence and cent'r of all this All,
Retaines the lowest place; this the wise Naturante
With azure-wauie skarfe hath guirt-about aslante:
Or (plaine to say)
29
The Sea doth cou'r all eu'ry where,
But only certaine parts disparpled here and there.
For th'Ocean Tide he flowes and leaking finds a vent
Into the deepest holes of all th'erth-element;
And where her ouer-face hath any vnequall traite
Seeks-out the midder point not of his masse; but waite.
30Here should th' Aire and the Fire, and all the wandring seau'n,
The starre-empowdred vault, the highest-whirling heau'n,
And th'empyrean-selfe be one ore other set,
But that each vpper seene would sight of th'vnder let.
Therefore in place of them the workman of this Round
Ten circles here hath made one ouer others bound,
And Armyllary-wise hath set-out their aray,

To lead vs vp on-high an easie and gainer way.
Six great Circles.31
Among the greater Six, that with a counterplight
Doe halfe-diuide the globe, the circl' of match-day-night
The Aequater.
Is iustly set betwixt the North and Southern pole,
Which beare-vp, and whereon is turnd-about the Whole:
Now eu'ry lamp of heau'n that vnderglideth it
A longer iourney takes, and doth more wightly flit
Then any of all the rest, who narre the Poles haue leasure
Vnto the Lute of God to dance a slower measure:


And alway when the Sunne his giue day charrot guides
Right vnder line thereof, and rometh not besides,
The day and night goe euen, and cunning Nature than
In eu'ry country metes them out with equall span.
The Zodiacke.32
This other couched here next vnd'r it ouerth warr,
Whose poles doe from the poles of th'All warp-out apart
Some twenty foure degrees, is call'd the Zodiack,
The race of wandring flames: here Phoebus keeps his track
To bring-about the yeares, and monthly changing Innes
Procures the quarter-change of Seasons double twinnes.
The first Colure.33
This other passing-through the poles both of the world
And of the foresaid wheele where Phoebus round is horld,
And framing angles euen on th'Equinoctiall rote
A th'onside thwarts the Crab, ath'otherside the Goat,
The Solsticial Colure is call'd, for Phoebus there
Runs slow, as not along, but ath'onside the Sphere:


The second Colure.34
And this here crossing that in spheryck angles eu'n
And running by the Ram, the Skoles and Axe of heau'n,
The second is, and call'd the nigh-equall Colure.
The Meridian.35
And this the circle of Noone, that neuer standeth sure,
But with our Zenith flits: as also with our sight
The Horizon.
Th'vnstedfast Horizon takes euery way his flight.


Now for the lesser foure, aside th'Equator lie
Foure lesse Circles.36
The winter Tropick low, and summer Tropick high.

The Tropicks.
And higher then the high is
37
th'Artick circle pight;
And lower then the low th'Antartick out of sight.
The North Circle and the South.
These foure misse common Centr' and wry-part heau'ns-high wheele; --
Each to th'Equat'r and each vnt' each is paralleel.


The Globe of heauen.38
The Ball shee beares in left the portrait is of heau'n;
For howbeit Arte we finde to Nature match vneuen,
Good wits yet ner'thelesse thus also take delight
To view and maruaile-at the Vault so flamie-bright.


O what a pleasure 'tis that turning softly about
This starrie briefe of heau'n we see as 'twere come out,
And with a stately traine before our eyes to coast,
The bands and banners bright of that all-conquering hoast!
One hath a quiu'r and bow,
Shapes giuen by diuers aspects.
with arrowes quick-to-strike;
Another swayes a Mace; another shakes a pike.
One lies along, anoth'r enthrond in stately chaire
Rowles-ore the brasen blew of th'euer-shining Sphaire.
Behold, some march afoot, and some on horseback ride;
Some vp, some downe, and some before, behind, beside:
Her's ord'r eu'n in disord'r; and of this iarre doth come
Both vnto Sea and Land a plenty-swelling wombe.
39
I neuer see them looke one aft'r anoth'r askance
In tryangl, in quadrangle, or in sextile agglance,
Sometime with gentle smile, and sometime with a frowne,
But that me thinks I see the braue youth of a towne
All dancing on a greene; where each sex freely playes,
And one another leads to foot the country layes:
Where one darts as he go'th a looke of I elousie,
Another throwes his Lasse a louely glauncing eye.
40
Then Phaleg said,
Phalegs obiection concerning the strange shapet giuen by the
how is't (Sir) that the Souerain-faire
Who naught vnseemly makes in Sea, in earth, in ayre,
Yet on this heau'nly vault, which doth all else containe,
(Where ought delight her selfe and grace and beauty raigne)
Sets many a cruell beast and many a monster fell,
That meeter were t'abide among the fiends in hell?


Sonne (answers Heb'r) indeed the curious hand of God

Makes all by rules of Art,
Astronomers.
and nothing gracelesse-odde;
And this especially the world doth beautifie,
Hebers answer.
That both aloft and here is such varietie.
Yet more, our ancestors that wisely drew the lines,
And skoared first the Globe according to the Signes,
Gaue each a name and shape implying such effects
Reason of the names giuen to the Signes.
As on all vnder-things they worke by their aspects.
For thy a Ram they made the Sunnes twyhorned Inne,
His curly-golden signe whereat the yeares begin.
1. The Ramme.
Wherevnd'r is all the land lukewarmed peece by peece
And puts on rich attire, a flowrie-golden fleece.
The next they made a Bull,
2. The Bull.
for there they wont to yoke
The softly-drawing steers that in a sweaty smoke
Plow-vp the fallow grounds, and turning-ore the mould
Doe skowre the coult'r againe that rust before had fould.
Twinnes of the third they made,
3. The Twinnes.
where Loue that angry-sweet
The male and female makes in one together meet
For eithers perfiture; when fruit in cluster growes,
And all at once are seene both flowr' and graynie rowes.
The fourth a Crab,
4. The Crab.
whereat this prince of wandring fires
A coast the South againe vntireably retires;
And backward (like a Crab) the way before he trode
Reprints with equall steps, and keeps his beaten rode.
The fift a Lyon fierce;
5. The Lion.
for as the Lyons are
Of hot-infecting breath, so vnder this same starre
Our haruest glowes with heat; yea on the Sea and streames
The Lyon-maned Sun shoots-out his burning beames.
The sixt by their deuise the title hath of a maid,
6. The Virgin.
Because th'Earth like a Girle therevnd'r is ill apaid
To beare the loue-hot looks that Phoebus on her flings,
And then, chast as a maid, no fruit at all she brings.
The next hath of the Scoales,
7. The Ballance.
because it seems to way
The silence-louing night and labour-guiding day,
The Summer and the Wint'r, and in the month of Wines
Makes either side so eu'n, as neither more declines.
The next, because we feele then first the Summer gon,
And sting of Winter come,
8. The Scorpion.
they call'd a Scorpion.

The next, in name and shape an Archer, bow in hand,
9. The Archer.
He shooteth day and night vpon the witherd land,
Vpon th'embattled towrs, vpon the tufted woods,
His arrowes fethered with Ise and snowie soods,
The next they made a Goat, where, as in shaggie locks
10. The Goat.
The Goat is wont to clime and countermount the rocks,
Our goldy-locked Sun, the fairest wandring starre,
Remounting vp the Globe begins to come vs narre.
And in the latter signes, because they saw a wet
And euer-weeping heau'n, our fathers wisely set
11. The Water-bearer.
One with a water-spout still running o're the brim,
12 The Fishes.
And fishes there apaire which in the water swim.
But if-so this (my sonne) not satisfie thy minde,
Another more subtile reason.
A man may well thereof some other reason finde;
As, that before the word of God made all of naught,
Before that breeding voice not only th'Infant wrought
But euen the wombe of All; th'eterne exampl' and plot,
The wondrous print of things, (now being, and then not)
On heau'nly manner lodg'd in th'Architects foreseeing;
And thus, before it was, the world it had a being.
So first the great Three-One with drift ingenious
Diplaid of shining heau'n the curtaine precious;
And, as vpon a slate, or on a painters frame,
The shape, of things to-be, portrayed on the same.
Loe, is not there the draught of some gold-sandy brooke
On the beauens are the models of all on earth.
That on this azure ground glydes (as it were) acrooke?
There softly fannes a Rav'n, here swiftly an Eagle driues;
There walloweth a Whale, and here a Dolphin diues:
A Dragon glisters here, a Bull there sweating frets;
Here runs the light-foot Rid, and there the horse curuets;
What thing so goodly abides in ayre, at sea, aground,
But some right shape thereof in heau'n aloft is found?
Our ballances, our crownes, our arrowes, darts and maulles,
What are they but estreats of those originals
Whereof th'Almighty word engroue the portraiture
Vpon the books of heau'n for euermore t'endure?




28But what (quoth Phaleg.) Phaleg asketh Heber concerning the two Globes that Astronomic held in her hands Heber makes answer that in her right hand is the Globe of Sea and Earth: and because there-ouer could not be painted the Elements of Aire and Fire; nor ouer them the heauens of Starres wandring and fixed; the Primum mobile, and Empirean; they are all here together tepresented by ten Circles, whereof I shall speake hereafter: but first concerning the Seas interlacement with the Earth, to make on Globe.
29--The Sea doth cou'r all eu'ry where,But onely in certaine parts d^sparpled here and there. All the points hence arising to be considered, may be drawne to eight Articles.
1 Concerning the diuers names of the Sea.2. Concerning the place or Channell thereof.3. To shew the parts thereof, and whether it composse the Earth, and how.4. Why it is not encreased by the waters continually falling into it.5 Concerning the Ebbe and Flow.6. Why the Sea-water is salt.7. Of the Enterlacement of the Sea with the Land.8. Whether the Earth be round or flat. Of them all in order.
1 For the Names of the Sea, it is called of our Poet, Th'Ocean, Neptune, Neree, and La-Mer. Some thinke this last was drawne from the Latine Amarum, because the Sea-water is salt and bitter. Why not rather of Mare, which commeth of Marath, signifying the same? The word Ocean hath diuers Etymologies. For Suidas holds the Sea so called of a priuatiue turned into (...), and (...) diuido, because the waues thereof so follow one another, as they cannot be seuered. Others deriue it of (...), that signifies Swift; because the Sea hath so quicke a continuall motion. The other two names are meerely poeticall, and vsed by a Metonymie.
2 Now concerning the place or Channell of the Sea: It is said in the 33. Psalme, That God hath gathered the waters together as into a vessell, and heaped them vp as a treasure: Whereto not vnlike is the Philosophers opinion; that the Earth is the Center of the world, girt and compassed (though here and there vncouered) by the Sea; which also falles-into, and filles vp the hollow deepes thereof; and so becomes a huge masse and treasure (as it were) of waters, from whence the Diuine prouidence drawes innumerable Riuers, to runne thorow the vaines and ouer the face of the Earth. And further, that the Sea is not only the receptacle of all riuers thereinto falling; but is also the great store-house of waters, both for the Earth, and Sunne; which haling-vp the steeme of waters from Sea, to mid region of the Aire, makes thereof diuers Meteors, but most store of Raine. Our Terrestriall Globes, and the report of Pilots and Nauigators, that within this hundred yeares haue t^auelled all Seas, make-good that is said of the great bed or channell of the waters. And thereto also accords that which Ouid hath, 1. Metam.
Tum freta dissundit rapidisque tumescere ventis.Iussit, and ambitae circundare littora terrae.
Then spred the Seas, them bad with boistrous windTo swell, and all the Shores of Earth imbind.

3 Whereas it hath beene aforesaid, in ordering the Elements, that the Water is aboue the Earth; this breeds a scarre to the third Article: for if the Sea lye higher then the Land, and doth the same round about enuiron; how comes it to passe that the Land is not ouerflowed thereby? Considering this Element is not easily kept within bounds; but of a moist and flowing nature, still running downward. But this is before answered in the second Article, where it is said, that the Sea is gathered together on a heape to a large compasse; so as the parts thereof next the land, tending toward the proper Center of their whole masse, draw not from, but rather to the Sea; which hath for maine bed or channell that large extent of the East and West O^ean: where, what doe we see (to speake of) but waters? For a few Islands, here and there scattered, are nothing to the huge wasternes of the Sea. And that is moued three kinde of waies: One way, as it is Water; another way, as it is the Sea; the third, as it is accidentally forced by the winds. Of the later I will not here speake, but of the two former together. It is the nature, indeed, of all water to runne downwards; but the Sea, as well in proper channell (where it is hoised farre aboue the land) as also in the parts and armes thereof, hath set-limits and bounds which it cannot passe. For so Almightie God the Creator hath ordained; who shut the Sea with do^res, when it b^ake forth as if it had iss^od out of the wombe, Iob. 38.8. Who bound the Sea with Sand, by a perpetuall decree, which it cannot passe; and though the waues thereof tosse themselues, yet can they not preuaile; though they roare, yet can they not passe ouer it, Ier. 5.22. and diuers like places there are in holy Scripture. Now, whereas the Sea and Land doe make one Globe together, certaine it is that the highest part of the Land is commonly furthest from the sea, as plainly appeares by the current of Riuers; and the highest of Sea furthest from Land. This also is proued by diuers of the learned, and men expert in Nauigation; who say, that comming to land, they perceiue the Sea still to decline, and that vnder the Equator it is higher than in any place else: the reason is (I thinke) because there it hath in furface the largest compasse, and highest Arch of a Circle, or Globe; as appeares by the Card. How then doth the Sea compasse and enuno on the whole Earth? First by the great body thereof, which is the Ocean; then by the Midland-sea, the Sound, and other like Bayes; by the Cimbrian, Arabian, Persian Gulphes; and many other little Seas and great Riuers; which are to that bodie, as armes, legges, vaines and haire, whereby it is ioyned to the Earth. The particulars of both are plainly set forth vnto vs, both in our globy and flat Mappes of the world; that I need say no more of them.
4 For the fourth Article we must consider this; that the Earth so enuironed with Sea is a spongie and poicus body, full of channels and conduit-pipes; both neare her ouer-face, and thorow her inner parts euery way: whereby it comes to passe, that all the great streams arising of little springs and fountaines farre from Sea, and, before they come there, encountring and bearing with them an ininite company of land flouds, brookes, and small tides; yet encrease not the Sea; which affords so much water to the

whole Earth by her secret waies afore-said. As for the Snow and Raine, which falleth sometime in great plentie, to encrease the waters: this is but an exchange that the Aire still makes in paying that againe which it borrowed of the Sea. Yet aboue all is the power and wisdome of God the Creator to be thought-on, who by his onely will and command keepes so the waters heapt-together in his great Magazin of the Sea; which otherwise, both by reason of their nature, and daily encrease, would ouerflow all, as they did before God commanded the dry-land to shew it selfe: then fled they at the voice of their Maker, as it is said in the 104. Psalme, And beholding the shore stopt their course there; yea ran againe backward, as fearing their Master.
5 Hereupon it folleth out fit, that I speake somewhat of the Seas Ebbe and Flow. This is the right and proper motion thereof, considered, not as water, but as the Sea. The Poet in the third day of his first weeke, shewes diuers opinions concerning this Ebbe and Flow. Some thinke that when the waters were first commanded to retire and shew the dry-land, God gaue them this perpetuall motion; which as a ballance, whereof the Equator is beame, doth rise and fall without ceasing; and hath this vertue from the Primouable; and shall continue it to the worlds end. But the learneder sort hold the Moone, by her diuers apparitions of waxing and waining, to cause this motion of the Sea. Whereunto the Poet also, in place aboue-quoted, seemes to encline. Some say also the Sunne helpes it forward, and breeds great alteration in the masse of waters, by his great heat and brightnesse: because it is obserued that alwaies, when the Sunne and Moone are in coniunction, the Seas Ebbe and Flow is greatest: but this also comes specially by the Moone; as by some reasons here following shall further appeare. The holy Scripture indeed here, as all where else mining the wonderous order of Nature, teacheth vs to lift vp our thoughts to God the Creator; who stirres and stayes the Sea, how and when it pleaseth him: yet may we say neuerthelesse, that herein he commonly doth vse the seruice of second causes; though keeping still to himselfe the soueraigne authority ouer them all; so as he can hinder, change, and vtterly destroy them at his pleasure. With this acknowledgement consider we these Inseriour causes. Plutarch in his third booke of the Philosophers Opinions, Chap. 17. showes what they thought of old time concerning the T^des and alterations of the Sea. Some (he saith) ascribe the cause of them to the Sunne and Winds; others to the Moone; a third sort, to the high-rising of waters in generall; a fourth, to the swelling of the Atlanticke Sea. Now he distinguishes the motion into three kinds; to wit, the Streame, and that is naturall; the Floud, and that is violent; the Ebbe, and that is extraordinarie. As for the Floud, it is a motion of the Sea water, rising and falling twice in some and twentie houres; whereby the Sea is purged and cleansed, by certaine periods answerable to the rising and setting of the Moone. It is in the n^ame Ocean, open to the winds, that the sloud is strongest, but appears chiefe^y by the shore-side, and where it is not checkt or staid by some isla^ds. The Midland Sea hath not the Tide: In the Adriatike and other like Bayes there

is searse any. The Baltique hath none at all; because it is so straightned and bound with land euery way, and is so full of Islands. If the Moone be in the waine, or past the first qua^ter, the Tide is euery where weake; but neare the new Moone, or full, it waxeth very strong: and this is held to be the reason, because this Planet being so neere vnto vs, and hauing Domimon ouer all moisture, encreaseth the waters, and drawes them to and fro, as she riseth or setteth: for where she setteth vnto vs, shee riseth vnto the other Hemisphere. The Ebbe and Flow is sometime more slow and gentle, sometime more swift and violent, according as the Moone waineth or waxeth: but herein must we note also the diuers seasons of the yeare; together with the winds, which helpe or hinder much the Tides, and cause them to runne more swift or slow. This power hath the Moone by motion of the Primouable; which maketh her tise and set, as the Sunne and other Starres doe, in the space of a day. When she riseth, the sea begins to swell, till shee come to the Medridian or Moone-line of any place; and from thence abateth all the while she is tending to the set: then the Sea descends with her, till she come toward the Counter-Meridian; where the water is againe at the highest, and falles till she rise againe to this our Hemisphere. So whereas the Tides keepe no certaine hower, but are sometime sooner, sometime later; the cause is, that, though the Moone be whirled about with motion of the Primouable; yet, hauing proper motion in latitude of the Zodiacke, thwarting that other, she riseth not alwaies at the same time, nor in the same Signe, not with the same light and distance from the Sunne; nor with the same coniunction and aspect of other Planets and fixed Stars: all which cause a difference, and are some more, some lesse disposed to the encrease of waters. And these Sea-waters doe also much differ in nature: Some are cleare and purified, and haue roome enough; these flow moderately, but higher; others muddy, thicke, and kept-in with straights; which runne with more violence, though not with so high a Tide. This hath God appointed to cleanse and preserue the waters: for in time of calmes they grow ranke, and the Sea sends-vp ill vapours; being the great sinke (as it were) of corrupt matter, which is to be scummed and cleansed by the Tides and winds. These also doe serue for Nauigation; but chiefly to magnifie the Creators wonderfull power; when wee see thereby, and consider how truly it is said in the Psalme 107.23. and 24. They that goe dawne to the Sea in sh^ps, and occupie their busiaesse in great waters, doe see the workes of the Lord, and his wonders in the deepe, etc. For that huge masse of salt-water yeelds it selfe captiue (as it were) to the Moone-beames, and thereby is easily commanded. I will enter no further into the cause of this Miracle, but, lest I be too long in these notes, leaue those to search it deeper, that are more able.
6 Concerning the bitter and saltnesse of the Sea-water, Plutarch hath spoke thereof, in his booke of the Philosophers Opinions, 3.16. see what he saith there; and in the ninth question of his first booke of Table-talke, and in the first question of his Naturall causes. Aristotle in the 23. Section of his Problemos. Pliny in his second booke, from the 97. chap. to the 101.

where he assoiles the most obiections that are made concerning this point of the Sea: but especially in the 110. he ascribes there to the Sunne the Saltnesse of Sea-water at the top, not at the bottome. With him agrees Mellichius vpon the same Chapter of Plinie: Garcaeus in the 36. Chapter of his Meteorologie: Danaeus in his Christian Physickes, 2.11. And Velcurio in his Comment vpon Aristolles Naturall Philosophie, 3.7.
7 Of the seuenth Article enough hath beene said in the third, and the Terrestriall Globe and Mappes doe make all very plaine.
8 There rests, for the eight Article a word to be said concerning the forme or shape of the Sea; whether it be round or flat. That which hath beene afore-said, shewes plainly it is round; but neither in it whole selfe, nor parts: how then? Only as it is enterlaced with the whole body of the Earth, and hath for bed the great deepe. If any be so curious, as to seeke herein further satisfaction; let him reade Scaliger against Card. Exercit. 37. etc. So much for these eight Articles touching the Sea.
30Here should th'Aire. The Poet goes about here to range in proper place both the Elements and Heauens: to wit, The Earth lowest, the Water next thereupon, then the Aire, then the Fire: next ouer these the seuen Planets, and aboue them the Fix-star-heauen embrased with the primouable; and ouer that the glorious habitation of Saints. This is the common opinion of Christian Astronomie, agreed-on by most Winters both of late and former times. Some few, as Copernicus and his followers, gainsay it: but the Poet takes after that opinion, which is most likely and most receiued.
31Among the greater Six The Terestriall Globe hath Ten Rings or Circles; six great ones; so called, because they diuide the Sphere after the full compasse thereof into equall parts: and foure called leste, because they diuide it into parts vnequall. The first of the great, here mined by the Poet, is the Equator or Equinoctiall, which I tearme The Circl' of Match-day night. This Circle in euery part therof is like distant from the Poles of the world: diuideth the Globe into two equall parts, and is the greatest of all the Circles: by reason whereof it comes to passe that the Sunne and other Planets haue vnder this a swifter course than other of those heauenly bodies: as contrariwise, they runne slower when they come nearer the Poles. And when the Sunne is vnder this Line, day and night is equall throughout the world, and that caused the name. There are two such times in the yeare; the one called of the Spring the Vernall Equinox, about the eleuenth of March; the other the Autumnall of that Season, and falleth commonly neare the thirteenth of September. For when the Sunne first entreth Aries, or Libra; then is he vnder the Equinoctiall, and stayeth as long aboue, as vnder euery Horison: that is, twelue houres a peece, halfe the naturall day. This and the rest would better be vnderstood with an Armillary Sphere in hand.
32This other. The second great Circle is called the Zodiake, which diuides the Equator into two equall parts, at the beginning of Aries and Libra, and the one toward the North, is called the Articke halfe, and the

other, toward the South, the Antarticke halfe of the Equator. The Zodiake hath other Poles or Axelpoints, than those of the world, and from them also distant 24. degrees: which also in the Globes turning draw-out the Tropicke Circles of Cancer and Capricorne; whereof hereafter.
33This other passing-through. The Astronomers imagine also two other great Circles, called the Colures, which a man may thinke doe stead the Globe no more than to hold the parts thereof together. For the office that some giue them to distinguish the Night-qualles and Sunstaies, belongeth more properly to the Equator and Tropickes. The Poet here exactly describes the first Colure, and saith it is drawne from one of the Tropickes to the other, to note the staies of the Sunne, who comming thereto neere, goes not so fast as afore.
34And this here crossing. This is the description of the second Colure, that shewes the equall space betwixt the two Equinoxes, or Eauen-nights of Spring and Autumne, and the two Solstices or Sun-stayes of Summer and Winter. The word Colure comes of the Greeke, (...), which signifies curtolled, or cut off by the taile: because onely one part appeares vnto vs, and the other is hid, and so saith Proclus.
35And this the circl' of Noon. That is, the Meridian, which passing through the Poles, and our Zenith, or Crowne-point, diuides the Globe into halues, the one East, the other West. It is called the Noon-line, or Meridian, because alwaies when the Sunne by sway of the Primovable comes thereto, at what time or place soeuer, then there it is Noone; and Noone is nothing else but the midday Naturall, or Artificiall: Whereupon it followes, that all Cities vnder the same Meridian stand alike distant from East and West: and contrary-wise, if one be neerer East or West then another, they haue not the same Meridian, but diuers. Th'arke then, or round parcell of th'Equator (reckoning from West to East) which is betweene the Meridian of the Fortunate Isles, and the noon-point of any place or Citie, is colled the longitude or length of that Citie or place; and their Latitude or bredth is the Arke of their Noon-circle from th'Equator to the Crowne-point. Hence also arises the distinction of Climats, implied here in the word Horison, which moueth as farre as you will to North or South. The Ancient Astionomers (saith Appian in the 6. Chapter of his Cosmography) diuided the whole Earth into seuen Climats, or degrees of heat and cold: but we now obserue nine, by reason of our late more exact discoueries. A Climate is a space of the Earth betweene two paralels, or lines of Latitude, differing halfe an houre in Sunne-dyall one from other: for the Sunne drawing from the Equator toward the Poles, must needs make the daies vnequall. And so much is one Climat remoued from the Equato, as makes the daies there differ halfe an houre from the Equinox; from Day-and night-cauen. Heere further is to be noted, that euery Climate takes (...) of (...): en^^keble Citie, Riuer, Country, Isle, or Mountaine etc. From the ^^qu^^^ then to reckon Northward, the first Climate is c^lled of M^^^, because it runnes thorow the midst of that Citie in d^^^ke: (...) second of Sie^^, a Citie in Egypt, vnder the Tropick of Ca^^^: the third, of Alexandria; the fourth, of

Rhodes; the fift, of Rome; the sixt, of Pontus; the seuenth, of Boristhenes; the eight, of the Riphean hills; and the ninth, of Denmarke: And Southward, the same with note of opposition, or relation; as the first is Counter-Me^oe, the second Counter-Sie^^, and so the rest.
36The Winter Tropicke. Hauing spoken of the six great Circles in the Sp^ere, he comes now to handle the foure lesse; whereof two are cal^ed Tropicks or Turnes, one of Winter, the other of Summer. The Winter-Tropicke circle is made or drawne by the Sunne first entring into Capricorne; whereof it is called also the Tropicke of Capricorne, and fals out nigh the 12. of September, with the Winter Sunne-stay: for then the Sunne ^ay goe no further from vs, but turnes againe toward vs; and thence hath this Circle the name: as also that other Tropicke of Cancer, which is the Summer Sun-stay or Turnagaine of the Sunne then entring into Cancer, (about the 12. of Iune) and mounting no higher aboue our Horison.
37 The two other small Circles, are the Artick and Antartick, both equally distant from the Equator, and easie to be obserued in the Maps, both flat and round. They are imagined, for Astronomy-sake, to be drawne by the Poles of the Zodiack mouing about the fixed Poles of the world; one at North, the other at South. That of the North is called the Artick or Beare-circle, of that Pole so neere ar markable Starre in taile of the little Beare; I say so neere, because, although it be commonly called the Pole-starre, yet is it some foure degrees from the Pole: that of the South is called Antartick, because it is opposite to the other Circle and Pole, and hath not (no more then the South-pole it selfe) as yet got any other proper name: though some that haue that way sayled, haue obserued, about the South-pole, one great and faire Starre called Can^pus; and others take notice of foure, which ^^ey call the Crosse.
38The Ball she b^ares. After description of the Globe Terrestriall, hee comes to the Celestiall, the Globe of Heauen; wherein are set downe, from either side of the Equator to the Poles, the suadry Constellations, according to the diuers names and figures, which the Astronomers haue giuen them; to shew in what sort they worke vpon the lower bodies on earth, and to make their postures and distances the better obserued.
39I neuer see them looke. By a daintie comparison he toucheth, in few verses, vpon the chiefe point of Astronomie; concerning the Aspects, influences, and wonderfull operations of the Setstars and Planets; according to their sundry coniunctions and distances (beside their proper motions) caused by the heauens admirable whirlung-about. To speake of these, their aspects, and glauncings one at another, in Triangle, Quadrangle and Sextile, whereupon the Astrologers make their discourse and iudgement, would require a long Comment. Reade the third booke of the Diuinations of learned Peucer.
40Then Phaleg said, how is't. Phaleg (as the Poet makes him) imagining all these strange and vgly shapes, which Astronomers haue deuised, were by the Creators selfe so drawne-out and limbed on the ouerface of heauen, asketh Heber the reasons thereof: who nameth diuers, here cunningly set

forth by the Poet. The first is taken from the consideration of Gods infinite wisdome. who in the diuers proportions of so many bodies, hath engrauen most manifest arguments of his owne greatnesse and power. The second is, that the ancient Astronomers, well weighing the powerfull effects of these heauenly Signes, gaue them names most answerable to their properties As in the Zodiack (to omit the rest) there is
1. the Ram,2. the Bull,3. the Twynnes,4. the Crab,5 the Lyon,6. the Virgin,7. the Ballance,8. the Scorpion,9. the Archer,10. the Goat,11. the Water bearer,12. the Fishes. Of those Marsilius Ficinus, in his Comment vpon Ficinus Platonicus (3. lib. Ennead. 2.) hath in few words to this effect. The old Heathen Philosophers did set the Ram first of all the Signes in the Zodiack, in honour of Iupiter Ammon, whom also they were wont to paint with two hornes on his head: The Bull followes next, because when the Sunne comes there, the earth is fit for tillage: In third place, the Twynnes, for increase and multiplication of all things then springing and engendring: After these comes the Crab, because the Sunne in that Signe begins to recoyle and go backward: then the Lyon, because there the Sunne is most hot and fiery coloured: then the Virgin, because the earth at that time scorched with heat of the Sunne, is barren, or like a Maide brings forth no encrease: then the Skoales or Ballance, because the Sunne therein weigheth (as it were) the day and night, and makes them equall: then the Scorpion, so called, because the Sunne is there gone so far of, that the Ayre begins to stnoteng vs with cold: and therefore the rather next followes the Archor: so named for the piercing cold of his arrowes driuen with the wind. The Goat hath the next place, because the Sunne there begins againe to raise vp himselfe, as a Goat doth to brouse: The two last are allotted vnto the Waterman and Fishes, for the much raine and moist season of Ianuarie and February. Some say otherwise; that these Signes, and the rest, had their names from the posture of starres in their sundry constellations. Let me ioyne hereto (as it will be are the translating) that which Macrobius hath in the first booke of his Saturnals, chap. 21. The Aegyptians when they would consecrate an Image for the Sunne, they made it with the head halfe-shauen and hairie on the right side This haire kept-on doth import that the Sunne is neuer quite hidden, or hindred from his working vpon naturall things: but the shauen haire, whose roots yet are left, sheweth that this glorious Planet euen when we see him not, hath power like haire to rise and grow againe vpon vs. Hereby also they signified that time of yeare when the day close-powled (as it were) is at the shortest; which men of old time called the Winter-Sun-stay, in Latine So^stitium brumale, of Bruma, drawne from (...), Short day. Thence the Sunne thrusting vpward againe, out of the secret places where he lay (as it were) hid, enlargeth his course, and preuailes euen to the Sun-stay of Summer; which is counted his kingdome; and therefore the Egyptians haue consecrated the beast that stands in Zodiack, where the Sunne hath yearely greatest heat: and call that Signe of the Lyon, the house of the Sunne, because the substance of that beast seems to be drawne from the nature of that Planet. For first he surpasseth

all other beasts in force and heat, as the Sun doth other Starres: then as the Sun in the forepart of the day and yeare, hath his force still increasing till Noone or Summer, and then growes weaker and weaker till Set, which is the weakest part of the day; and Winter which is the weakest of the yeare; euen so is the Lyon made strong before, small and weake behinde. Moreouer, it is obserued, that the Lyon hath his eyes alwaies open and sparkling; as the Sunne with an open and vnweariable eye, lookes on the round world continually. Thus of that Signe, though all the rest also are held by good reason agreeable to the nature of the Sunne. To begin with the Ram; See the great agreement: For he, during the six moneths of Winter, vseth to lye on his left side; and all the rest, from the Spring to Winter againe, on his right: as the Sunne also, from the Equinox or Euen-night of Spring runs the right side-Hemisphere, and at the other Euen-night changes to the left: and for that cause Iupiter Ammon, the supposed Sunne-setting god of Libya, is fained to haue the hornes of a Ram; wherein lies the force of that beast, as the force of the Sunne is in his beames: The Greekes also call him (...), a Ram, of (...), a horn. Now, that the Bull hath some correspondence with the Sunne, the Egyptian Idolatry shewes it by diuers instances: one, that in Heliopolis (i. the Citie of the Sunne) they chiefely worship a Bull called Netiros, consecrate to the Sunne: Another, because the Citie of Memphis honours the Bullocke Apis for the Sunne: a third is, that in a stately Temple of Apollo at Herminthi they consecrate to the Sunne, and worship a Bull, which they call Bacchis, there famous for diuers miracles agreeable to the nature of the Sunne: for his haire growes backward contrary to the nature of other beasts; and therein they hold him like the Sunne, striuing against the course of Heauen: they say also that he changes his colour euery houre in the day. What to make of this I the Translator know not; except it imply the same that Hermes Trismegistus noted, when he saw in Egypt a beast dedicated to Serapis, make-water twelue times of equall distance in a day; and thereby gathered that the day should be diuided into twelue houres, P. Virg. de Inuent. 2.5. and this may haue relation to the Sunne: but I come againe to Macrebius. The Signe of Twinnes, which are taken for Castor and Pollux, that were thought to liue and dye by turnes, what may it better signifie then one and the same Sunne, sometime rising vpon our Hemisphere, sometime going downe to the other? The side-way crawling of the Crab, what better can it meane, then the Sunnes neuer straight, but side-way passing thorow the Signes; and here especially, where he begins to turne from aloft downeward? Of the Lyon we haue said already. The Signe of the Virgin with an care of corne in her hand, what meanes it else, but the power and vertue of

the Sunne, whereby that eare and all others are loden with Come? therefore also is this Maiden taken for Justice, which onely causeth all fruits growing to serue mans vse. The Scorpion, and the Ballance likewise, doth wholly represent the Sunnes Nature, which is but cold and starke in Winter, and sunke downe as the lower Scoale; but afterward stirs-vp againe the sting of his inward force, nothing diminished by the late could. Th' Archer which is lowest of al the Signes in the Zodiak, hath the fore-part of a man, and hinder-part of a horse: to shew that the Sunne is fallen from his highest place to his lowest; as it is a strange abasing of a man, to become a beast; yet shootes he an arrow, to signifie that all creatures on earth be cheered and quickned by the Sunne, howeuer farre from them. Vnder the Goat the Sunne begins to aduance himselfe againe from below; and this is the right manner of that beast, who commonly stands on his hinder legges to feed vpon the Rocks aboue him. And doth not the Water bearer shew also the right nature of the Sunne? For how should we haue raine vpon the earth, if the Sunnes hear drew not first the vapours vpward; which being turned into water by the cold mid-region of the Aire falls downe againe in plentifull shewers? In the last place of the Zodiack are the Fishes. These also haue beene consecrated vnto the Sunne; not so much for likelihood of nature, as to shew the force and vertue of that Planet, which maintaines life not onely in the Birds of the Aire, and Beasts of the field; but euen among those Creatures also, which liuing in the water seeme to be vnseene of him. So mighty is the Suns operation, that with his piercing beames he quickneth such things as man would thinke farre out of his reach. So ends the Chapter. Now concerning such Countries as are subiect to the sundry Signes, looke what Ptolomey saith, and what the Poet Manilius in the fouth booke of his Astronomicall Poeme; though many toyes he hath, not agreeing with Ptolomey. Reade also Lucas Gauricus, who in his Geometry hath set downe euery particular. I tell them not here, lest I be too long.
41.But if-so this. Of the aforesaid shapes in heauen, this is the third reason, somewhat more curious then the two former; to wit, that God, from all Eternity conceiuing in himselfe the Idea and paterne of the World, which he meant to create, would haue the models of all earthly things be recorded in the heauens: I call this a curious reason; because if it bee narrowly examined, it will be found but a pretie inuention to embellish a Poeme, wherein a man hath leaue to take any matter, sauouring of trueth or likelihood, to refresh and please the most courteous Readers withall.






Passant outre and pour aneantir les fables des Grees Heber dit que les noms donnez aux estoil les des deux poles contienent les mysteres de l'eglise: ce qu'il tasche de prouuer par vne brefue consideration de chascune d'icelles: premierement du pole arctique.
Et vrayement si i'osoy (que n'oseray-ie pas
Pour arracher du ciel les forcenez combats,
Les prophanes larcins, les nopces detestables,
Et bref tout l'attirail de ces monstreuses fables,
Dont ie ne scay quels Grees a l'auenir voudront

Du Ciel glisse-tousiours deshonorer le front?)
Ie te pourroy monstrer, que sous ces characteres
La Tout-puissante main a descrit les mysteres
De sa saincte Cite: que ce n'est qu'vn crystal,
Ou du sicele auenir se lit l'ordre fatal:
Vn publique instrument, vne carte authentique,
Qui sans ordre contient le recit Prephetique
Des gestes de l'Eglise. O bean Char flamboyant,
Qui comme vn tourbillon enleues le Voyant,
Tu roues a l'entour d'vn des Poles du monde
Sans mouiller plus les bords de tes iantes dans l'onde;
Le Chariot.
Et sans plus establer tes courserots sumans,
Sous la ronde espesseur des plus bas Elemens.
Cependant Elisec,
Bootes.
attentif, te regarde:
Brule a'vn feu de zele: and, conuoiteux, lui tarde
Qu'il pique tes cheuaux, and que sur l'astre mont
Il les face tourner dedans vn petit rond.


A son flanc est Dauid,
Hercule.
qui dans sa main guerriere
Por te d'vn fier Lyomla flambante criniere.
Ici luit sa Couronne: ici sa Harpe d'or:
Ici de sept brandons riche,
La Couronne. La Lire. La petite Our se. Le Dard. Andromode.
s'honore encor
Cest Ours, qu'll mit a mort: and la sifflante Lance
Que le Roy d'Israel, maniaque, lui lance.


Patron de Chastete, sainct honneur de l'Honneur,
Susanne, en te voyant ie fremiroy de peur:
Ie pleureroy tes pleurs, and les pesantes chaines
Dont tes bras sont liez, me donroyent mille geines,
Ainsi qu'a tes Parens: and, triste vers les cieux,
Cassiopee. Cephee.
Comme eux ie leuerois and mes mains and mes yeux,
Sans que d'vn Daniell'ayde sainctement pronte
Te sauue bien a temps,
Persee.
and de mort, and de honte:
Et par les rais puissans d'vne horrible clarte,
Qui part non de Meduse,
La Teste de Meduse.
ains de la Verite,
Empierre les tesmoins: and fait qu'vne tempeste
De cailloux foudroyez leur gresle sur la teste*
Aussi tant que le ciel en rond se tournera,
Vn trophee si sainct sur nos chefs brillera.

Auec ce grand Dragon,
Le Dragon.
ceste Idole felonne,
Que ce Prophete Hebrieu dans Babel emprisonne.


Pegase.
A qui pourray-ie mieux vn Pegase egaler
Qu' al' vn de ces Cheuaux qui slamboyent en l'air,
Auant que le Tyran de la petite Asie,
Euflamme de courroux,
Maccab. c. 5.
ait Solime saisie?
A qui l'ardent Chartier,
Le Chartier.
qu' au grand Ezechiel,
Qui attelle si bien la coche d'Israel?
A qui le Cigne blanc,
Le Cigne.
qu' a ce Tesmoin sidelle,
Qui pour son maistre mort souffre vne mort cruelle,
Ace Diacre sainct, des Martyrs l'ornement,
Qui mesme auant mourir chante si doucement?
Le Poisson Borcal. Le Dausin.
A qui ce be au Poisson qu'on voit ici reluire,
Qu'au Poisson qui seruit a Tobit de collire?
A qui le clair Dausin, qu' a ce grand fils d'Amram,
Qui conduit a trauers le flot Erythrean
Les poissons de Iacob, and passe son armee
A pied sec and sans nef sur la riue Idumce?


Et que diray ie plus? Dieu n'a pas seulement
Engraue dans l'airain du viste Firmament
Sa deuise sacree: and dessous la figure
Le Triangle. Ophiucun
D'vn Triangle portrait sa trine-vne Nature:
Ains sons ce Iouuenceau, qui tue le Serpent,
Son fils domte-Satan, son fil! qui va rompant
Par le choc d'vne Croix (sa machine plus forte)
Les verrous eternels de l'infernale porte:
Et sous ce bel Oiseau,
L'Aigle, ou Colombe.
mignon du Dieu des Dieux;
Qui contemple asseure le Soleil de ses yeux,
Et souuent de ses mains arrache le Tonnerre,
Son Esprit, son Amour qui visite la terre,
De plumes reuesru: Ioint que cest Astre aile,
Par le chef par le col, par le dos estoille,
Ne resemble pas moins la simple Colombelle,
Quel' Aigle aubec-crochu, l'Aigle fierement belle.


Et que diray-ie encor du Baudrier,
Puis du Zodiaque. Le Belier.
qui dore
Est de deux fois six Feux richement decore?
Celui qui guide l'an, est l'Agneau du Passage:

Le Taureau.
Le second, ce Taureau, que l'idolatre rage
D' Isaac moule au desert. Et les clairs Ensanconr,
Les Bessons. L'escreuice.
Du sainct fils d'Abraham sont les Enfans bessons.
Le quart est Salomon, qui comme v^e Escreuice,
Chemine en reculant: se touill dans le vice
Tout ainsi qu'^m verrat: and profane Vieillard,
Se rend d'ame and de cor^^galement paillard.
Le Lyon.
Le quint, ce Lionceau, que la robuste adresse
Dufoy droyeur Samson comme vn cheureau despece,
Et le sixiesme encor,
La Vierge.
la Vierge, qui pour nous
Enfante son germain, son pere, and son esponx.
La Balance.
L' antre, ce Trebuchet, ou l'Isacide Prince
Va iuste balancant le droit de saprouince.
Le Scorpion.
L' autre, cest animal qui blesse traistrement
Car il n' importe rien que ce signe on appelle
Ou madre Scorpion, ou Vipere cruelle.
L' Archer est Ismael.
Le Sagitaire, Leuit c. 16. Le Ch^urecorne. Aquarius.
Et celui qui le suit,
Est le Bouc qu'au desert le Prestre husle conduit:
Le Vers' cau est le fils du muet Zacharie,
L'auant-coureur de Dieu, le fourrier du Messie,
Qui dans le clair Iordain noye tous les pechez
Des hommes viuement d'vn repentir touchez.
Les Poissons.
Et ces ceux clairs Poissons, ceux que dessus la riue
De l'Asphaltite mer la Parole alme-viue
Benit diuinement, si bien qu' auec cinq pains
Ils soulent, nourrissiers, plus de cinq mille humains,


Finalement, celles du Pole Antarctique. Orion.
Mais ca tournons vn peu l'estincellante Bale,
Et subtils visitons la demi voute Australe.
He, ne cognois-tu pas ce Guerrier furieux,
Qui pres du clair Taureau slamboye dans les cieux?
L' Eridan. Le Chien. Le Canicule. Le Lieure.
C'est le grand Iosue, le fils de Nun, qui passe
A pied see le Iourdain: and qui passe, terrasse
Les Chiens Cananea^s: and met son pied veinceueur
Sur le Lieure d'Amor ia veincu par la peur.


Voici l'antique Nef, sainct asyle du Monde,
Qui superbe triomphe and du vent, and de l'onde.

L'Hydre.
Voici les launes plis du Couleuure d'airain
Qui luit dans le desert, Medicin souuerain.
Le Corbeau. La Coupe.
Voici l'heureux Corbeau qui nourrit le Thesbyte,
Voici la riche T'asse ou Ioseph premedite
Ses Prophetes discours. Voici sur mesine ranc
Le Centaure.
Le Cheualier du ciel, qui reuestu de blanc
Paroit a Macabee, and dont l'argente lance
Le Loup, ou fere. Ara.
En sin du Loup Payen creue si bien la pance,
Que sur l'Autel de Dieu profane tant de fois
Refume vn sainct encens, que l'accordante voi^
Des Leuites sacrez dans le temple resonne,
La Couronne australe. Le poisson austral. La Balaine.
Et larace Asmonee obtinent ceste Couronne
Pour regner en Isac. Voici l'heureux Poisson
Qui paye le tribut pour Christ, nostre rancon.
Et la Balcine encor, dont la poictrine infete
Tient trois iours en depost la vie a'vn Profete.


Notable correction du Poete, sur les discours precedens en quoy sa piete and son erudition se descouurent.
Or ce pendant qu'Heber, comme mon truchement,
Des figures du Ciel discourt si hardiment,
Qu'il tente les destours d'vne sente nouuelle,
Et bat, audacieux, vne corde pucelle,
Chrestiens, ne ponsez pas que i'aille receuant
Pour Articles de foy ce qu'il met en auant:
Que du Zenonic vneille apuyer le Portique,
Mettre aux sepi l'Eternel, and du destin Stoique,
R'ensiler les chesnons: ou, lisant l'auenir
Dans le liure duciel, Chaldee deuenir.


Rien, rien de teut cela: seulement s'entrelasse,
Vn si nouueau discours, a sin qu'il vous deslasse,
Et qu'ay ant^usqu'^ci passe tant de fossez,
Tant d'horribles deserts, taut de rocs creuassez,
Tant de baueux torrents, dont la bruyante rage
Poussant flot contre flot guorroye son riuage,
Vou^ reucontriez en fin vn lieu delicieux,
Qui tousiours a'vn bon oeil soit regarde des cieux,
Ou coule vn clair ruisseau, ou vente vn doux Zephyre,
Ou pour vous caresser la terre semble rire.


He! quiscait o Lecteur, si ceux-la qui viendront
Apres nous, comme nous, pleins de zele, rendront





Yea,
Further, to blot out of memory the Greeke fables, Heber saith, that the names giuen to the stars containe the mysteries of Holy Church.
were it not (I feare) to bold an enterprise,
(Although why should I feare to cancell all the vice,
Theft, furie, sacrilege, profane incestuous beds,
And all the monster-lyes wherewith Greeks idle heads,
(We know not what they were) to mock all After-age,

giuen to the stars containe the mysteries of Holy Church.
Of th'euermouing heau'n dishonour would the stage?)
Well could I let thee know how these shapes vnder them
Containe the mysteries of new Ierusalem:
That here the fing'r of God as on a crystall drew,
For holy men to reade, what euer should ensue:
A publike register and chartr' authenticall
Containing orderlesse the view propheticall
Of all Church-monuments.
Charles-waine.
O chariot firie-cleer,
That swift and whirlwind-like vp-rauishedst the Seer,
About the Northen Pole thou draw'n art day and night,
And dippest not at all thy wheeles in Amphitrite:
Nor stablest once thy teeme, still-royling, neuer spent,
Below the massie round of baser Element.
Bootes.
Meane while Elisha (loe) full wistly thee beholds,
And with a fiery zeale his master so with-holds,
That vp the starrie mount he makes the steeds to sting
And round and round againe to turne and troe the ring,
See Dauid fast-him-by,
Hereulet. The Crowne.
who beares in warlike hand
Some Lyons tufted mane, that flameth like a brand:
Here shines his royall crowne,
The Harpe.
and here his harpe of gold;
With seu'n stars richly deckt;
The little Bear^.
here th'vgly Beare behold
That for his fathers Lambe he, then a shepherd, slew;
The Launce.
And here the whizzing launce that mad Saul at him threw.


Now thee Susanna faire,
Andromeda.
example of chastitee,
And honors chiefest hou'r, I tremble should to see,
And weep thy trickling teares; and those so weighty chaines
That binde thy lillie wrests would yeeld me a thousand paines
Among thy dearest kin; and cause me to the skies
Cessiopea.
For thy deliuerance ioine with them hands and eyes:
Cepheus.
But that a Daniel I see makes holy speed
From death and shamefull doome to saue a maid at need.
Perseus.
He with some powerfull beames of ouer-awing light,
Which comes not of Meduse,
Medusaes head.
but of the Truth and Right,
Confounds the witnesses, and breaks them head and bones
With thunder-darted haile of ly-reuenging stones.
And sure, as long as heau'n doth whirl-round any Signe,
Shall eu'r aboue our head so holy a Trophey shine

Anuyst this Idol foule, this dragon vgly and fell,
The Dragon. Pegasus.
Which was in Babel pent by that young Daniel.
To whom may Pegasus more sitly be compared
Then t'one of those same horse that in th'aire burning flared,
Macab. c. 5.
Before the Tyrant great of Asia the Lesse
Did in a firie rage Ierusalem oppresse.
This earnest Wagoner,
The Coachman.
who'st but Ez^chiel,
Which manageth so right the Coach of Israel?
And who's the siluer swan that shineth here,
The Swan.
but eu'n
That Deacon clad in white, the faithfull Martyr Steu'n,
Who death endured for his master crucified,
And sung more heau'nly sweet then swan before he died?
The Fish of the South.
The siluer-scaled fish that shines here in the skies
I take to be the same that heald old Tobyts eyes:
The Dolphin.
And whom this Dolphin bright but great Amramides
Which out of Egypt led athwart the ruddie Seas
The frie of Israel, and brought his armed ranks,
A dry foot, wanting ship, to th'ldumean banks?


What shall I further say? God hath not only engrau'n
The Triangle.
His sakersaint Emprese on brasse of whirling heau'n;
And in tryangle shape embleam'd his mysterie
Of nature wonderfull, three in one, one in three:
But by this valiant youth,
Ophiouchu^.
who slew you creeping euill,
Set-forth his only Sonne which ouercame the Deuill,
And with sway of a Crosse (his engine most of might)
Broke-ope the brasen gates of euerlasting night:
Yea by this goodly bird,
The Eagle or Done.
the God-of-Gods delight,
Which with a stedfast eye beholds the Sun so bright,
And takes the thunder-boult oft out of's angry hand,
His Spirit and Loue is ment; who visited the land
Descending feathered. for why? this winged signe
In head, in brest, in back of starred-crmyline,
No lesse resembl' it may the Pigeon simple and meeke,
Then th'eagle goodly-fierce, then th'Eagle crookie-beeke.


Of the Zodiack.
As for the golden belt wherewith all heau'n is cross'd,
Whereon the dosen signes are curiously emboss'd;
Who, but the Paschall Lambe,
The Ram.
is he that leads the ring?

The Bull.
The Bull's that moulten calfe whom peopl' Idolatring
The Twins. The Crab.
Made Aron make for God. The Twins, that shine so bright,
Are Isacks sons who stroue before they saw this light.
The next is Salomon, who like a Crab recoiles,
And in his latter time himselfe with sin besoiles:
And, as a swine in mud doth after washing roule,
Becomes adulterer both in his bodie and soule.
The Lyon. The Virgin.
The Lyon is the same that crusht was like a Kid
By Samsons thundring hand: The Virgin, she that hid
In vndefiled wombe, (for vs made maiden-mother)
And brought-forth at her time, her father, husband, brother.
The Ballance.
The Ballance here is set for Kings of Israel
To iudge the peopl' aright and ponder causes well.
The Scorpion.
The next that serpent is which on the Maltan sand
With traiterous intent hung-on th' Apostles hand:
For whether it be call'd a spotted Scorpion,
Or Viper-poysonous, it matters not, all's one.
The Ancher. Levit. ^6. Capricorne. The Water-bearer
The Bowman may be thought old Abrahams elder childe.
This Goat that scape-lot is whom Aaron lets goe wilde.
This Ewrer is the sonne of dombe Zacharia,
Messia's herbenger, preparer of his way:
Which in the siluer streame of Iordan drown'd the sinne
Of all that doe repent, and will new life beginne:
The Fishes.
And these two Fishes they that with fiue loues of bread,
Blest of th'all-feeding Word aboue fiue thousand fed.


Of the Antartike Pole Orion.
But let the twinkling Ball now vpsidowne be rowl^d,
And with like curious eye the sotherne halfe behold:
O know you not the face of this fierce warlike wight,
That neere the shining Bull enlustres heau'n with light?
The sonne of Nun it is, that worthy Ioshuah,
Eridanus. The Dogs. The Hare. Argo.
Who dry ore Iordan went as on a sandy bay:
And did those Canan dogges from prey vnworthy scare,
And set his conquering foot vpon Loues hartlesse Hare.


Loe here that Argosie which all the world did saue,
And brauely now triumphs both ouer wind and waue.

Lo here the yellow plights of Moses brasen snake,
Hydra.
That shone in wildernesse all others sting to slake.
The Rave^. The Gobles.
Lo here that happy Rav'n which did Elia feed:
Here Iosephs golden cup wherein he wont arreed
His wondrous prophesies: and here that heau'nly knight
Which vnto Machabee appeared all in white;
The Centaure. The wo'fe. The Altar-slone.
His ang'r-enflamed launce so strooke this Pagan Woolfe
With paine and bursten-rot athwart the belly-gulfe,
That on Gods Altar-stone prophaned many a yeere
Now reeks a sweet perfume; and Levies hallowed queere
Sings ioyfull Psalms againe in Gods temple Idol-staind,
And th' Idumean Race this Crowne at length obtainde,
The southerne Crowne. The southerne Fish. The Whale.
To raigne in Israel. Now here the Fish behold
With tribute paid for him that was for sinners sold:
And here the gaping Whale, whose ill-digesting maw
Three daies a Prophets life held as empawn'd by law.
The Poet by this correction shews his pietie and learning.

While Heb'r all sings for me, with Muse so bold, new, odd,
And strikes a string vntouchd, and walks a path vntrod,
Thinke not (o Christen peopl') I take all that he saith
Concerning th'oast of he^u'n for articl' of my faith:
Or that I ment set-vp old Zenoes schoole againe,
T'embound th'eternall God, and so relinke the chaine
Of Stoyck destinie: or would of all to come
(As Caldeman) arreed in books of heau'n the summe.
No, nothing lesse I meane; but only thought by grace
Of such a new deuise, as here I enterlace,
Refresh your weary minds; that hauing past before
So many a foamy flood; such warre against the shore,
And hurly-burling rage of counterbuffed waue;
So many a ghastly Wylde, a dyke, a rock, a caue:
You might set foot at length on some delightfull place,
Whereon the skie may shew for eu'r a louely face:
Where runs a siluer streame, the wind blowes sweetly awhile,
And where to welcome you the ground-selfe seems to smile.


Oh who (good Reader) knowes, but fuller may be done
Hereaft'r, of some so zeal'd, this worke I first begon!




42.Yea, were it not. This is the fourth reason, wherein the Poet, with commendable courage, aduentures to blot out of memory the Greeke, Latine and Arabian fables; which with so many gybrish names had soyled (as it were) the face of heauen; and makes Heber say that the names of Constellations on either side the Equator, doe containe the mysteries of Holy Church. First then hee speakes of the North-Pole-Starres, and saith the Chariot (which is commonly called Charles Waine) is the same that carried vp to heauen the Prophet or Seer Elias, 2. King 2. And Bootes is Elizeus there mentioned to with-hold first, and then behold his Masters going away: As for the other names of that kinde here following, any Reader acquainted with the Bible, may conceiue them at first, and what the Poet meanes by them.
43.While Heber sings. The Poet, now hee hath made Heber so largely discourse vpon the reasons of these shapes and names giuen by the Astronomers to the six Starres of both Poles and of the Zodiack, he ^oynes thereto a notable correction thereof; to auoid two extreames: the one of Zeno, the chiefe Stoicke and his followers; who so tie the first cause (which is God) to the second; that they hold all good or euill successe of our life vnauoydably to

depend vpon the Starres. Their opinion touching the necessity of Fate, hath beene fully refuted by many famous men, both old and new Writers; but especially by Saint Auslen in his Bookes De Ciuitats Dei: The other extremitie is that opinion of Iudiciall Astrologers, who make our whole life, from the beginning to the end, liable to the vertue and influence of the heauens. Those also haue beene refuted by diuers of our time, especially by the learned John Picus Earle of Mirandula; and by his Nephew Francis Picus in his Booke intituled De praenotione rerum. Our Author shewes therefore that he vtterly disauoweth such opinions of the Stoicks and Astrologers; whom he tearmeth Caldemen, or Caldeans, because Iudiciall Astrologic was in great vse among that people; as may be gathered out of History; but most out of the Bookes of the Prophets, and Esay chiefely, Chap. 52. at length he shewes the reason (which I touched before) why he brings in this new discourse: namely, to giue the Reader an acceptable pause of recreation, and shew how much he desires that our posteritie may see Heauen cleansed of these Idolls, which the Heathen, by names giuen to the Starres, pretend to haue place there.






Cest art du tout diuin, donnant a tant d'imagee
Non le nom des Payens, ains des saincts personnages?


Continuation du descouurement des secrets de l'Astronomie, par la declaration des principaux mots vsitez entre les Astronomes. Discours sur les cieux des Planetes destinguez subtillement and doctement par les Astronomes
Mais allons retrouuer Heber, dont le discours
Enseigne a son Phalec des Planetes le cours
Figure dans l'acier: qu'est-ce que Perigee,
C^ncentrique, Eccentrique, Epicycle, Apogee:
Et de quelle facon Mars le seme-debats,
La Torche porte-iour, la Cyprine aime-esbats,
Saturne, and Iupiter, ont trois Spheres en vne,
Cinq le facond Mercure, and deux fois deux la Lune.


Car les diuins esprits, dont nous tenons cest art,
Voyant leurs Feux errer or' d'vne, or' d'autre part,
Tantost loin, tantost pres du centre de Nature,
Pour bannir de la haut le vuide, la rupture,
Et le brouillis des corps, que leur desuoyement
Causeroit dans les cieux couuerts du Firmament,
Ont ose, plus qu'humains, des roues eternelles
Qui portent ces brandons, faire plusieurs rouelles,
Qui tousiours se baisant ne s'entreheurtent point,
Tant bien l'vn rond a l'autre est distinctements ioint.
Le bas est sous le haut qui recourbe l'^^ccolle,
Ainsi que le Marron porte vne taye molle.

Pour emmantellement, la taye vn cuir tane,
Le cuir vn feutre espais, picquant, herisonne.
Puis il prend l'Astrebale, ou la Sphere est reduite
En forme toute plate. Ici ie voy descrite
La Carte des hauteurs,
Lignes verticales. Lignes paralleles du Soleil
les Almucantharats,
Auec les Azimuts, and les Almadarats.
(Muse pardonne moy, si ie pein de grotesques
Vn siriche tableau, side mots Barbaresques
Ie souille mon discours, veu qu'en cest argument
Il faut pour bien parler, parler barbarement.)


Mais dessus l'autrepart se tourne vne visiere,
Et sous elle vne Table, o^ se void la carriere
Des slambeaux vagabons, mais sous certaines loix,
L'Eschelle des hauteurs, les iours, les noms de mois.


Remuant l'Alhidade, vn temps il se trauaille
Amonstrer,
L'Vsage de l'Astrelabe.
comme on doit toiser vne muraille,
La profondeur d'vn puits, la distance des lieux,
La largeur d'vn pays par la largeur des cieux:
Chez quel signe estoille, conime par etiquete,
Le Tout-puissant logea la plus belle Planete:
En quel est son Nadir, comme on peut seurement
Trouuer and son declin, and son eleuement:
Le temps qu'vn Signe entier doit employer a faire
Son chemin pour monter dessus nostre Hemisphere:
Du Pole la hauteur, la ligne du Mi-iour,
Les heures de la nuict, and les heures du iour.


Phalec enseigae l'Astronomie a ses enfans, qui enri chissent ceste science par nou uelles inuentions. Ceste science paruient des Hebre^ux aux Chaldeans.
L'ingeni^ux Phalec a si doctes merucilles
Preste attentinement ses dociles oreilles:
Alchimiste parfait, multiplie cest or:
Fait courre ce talent: presente ce thresor,
Pour vne riche Estreine, a son illustre race,
Qui mesme son Docteur endoctrine surpasse.


Mais tout ainsi qu'vn Mars, vn Herme, vne Venus,
Vont ores visitant les Troglodytes nus,
Or' laue, or' l'Amerique: and torches vagabondes,
Muent de garnison pour hanter les deux Mondes,
Qu'vn Cercle egale-iours egalement mi-part:

Ainsi, ou peu s'en faut, l'honneur d'vn si bel art
Ne cheri, eleue chez larace Hebraique,
Des Chaldeans elle s'en va aux Egyptiens d'eux aux Grees: de rechef aux Egyptiens, puis aux arabes, finalement aux Italiens and Alemans.
Fils adoptif, se donne au peuple Chaldaique.
Puis faisant peu d'estat des sommets sourcilleux
De l'antique Babel, se retire, ^rgueilleux,
Du Tigre au Nil fecond, deuers l'Austre s'en vole,
Et dresse daus l'Egypte vne fameuse eschole:
Et puis s'amourachant des Pelasges subtils,
Commet ^ntre leurs mains and soy, and ses outils:
Et derechef encor sous le grand Ptolomee,
De Peluse reuoid la riue bien-aimee:
Et d'Egypte eschappe, se donne aux Musulmans,
De'ux aux Hesperiens, and d'eux aux Alemans.


Louange des doctes Astronomes.
O vrais Endymions, qui sur l'astre Latmi^
Caress^z, baisotez, embrassez vostre amie,
Qui, grand Reine duciel, a son lict entoure
D'vn miliond' Archers portans l'escu dore:
Atlas non-fabuleux, colomnes eternelles
Du Palais du Seigneur, ames doctement belles:
Las! sans vos monumens la doctrine des cieux
Vtilitez de la doctrine Astronomique.
Ruineuse cherriot dans le flot oublieux.
C'est vous qui ae sbrouillez les mois, and les anne es:
Qui cottez au Nocher les heures fortune es,
Pour couper la commande: and les iours que la mort
Peinte au ciel, le se mond d'aller surgir a bord:
En quel temps le Bouuier doit es mains de la terre
Depositerson grain: quand vn homine de guerre
Doit faire battre aux champs: quand tenir garnison:
Quand forcer vn rempart: quand tonduire a foison
Leu viures en son camp: quelle saison est saine
Ou pour purger le corps, ou pour ouurir la veine:
Et comme vn Medecin doctemert curieux
Pour ses drogues mester doit regarder les cieux.





And, by the name of Saints giu'n t'eu'ry heau'nly Signe
In stead of heathen lyes, this Art made all-diuine?
Now heare we Heb'r againe; to Phaleg whose discourse
The principall words of this Art.
Of euery Planet shewes the downing and resours
Grau'n on the lasting brasse; and what's the Perigee,
The Planets learnedly distinguisht.
Concentrike, Excentrike, Epicycl' Apogee;
And how the bring-day Sun, and Venus fond-of-mate,
Together with the starre of Mars the sow-debate,
Saturne and Iupiter, three circles haue in one;
And Mercurie only fiue, and only foure the Moone:
For those same heau'nly wits who taught vs first this Art,
Perceiuing well these Lights now that, now this-way, start;
That now alow they stoop, and now aloft they reach;
To banish from aboue th'vnlikely voide, the breach
And bodie-piercing broile, the which their course vneau'n
Might cause among the Spheres enclos'd by th'vpper heau'n;
Vnt'each eternall wheele, that round each Planet soops,
Haue, more then manly, durst appoint some lesser hoops;
Who kissing either-oth'r oppose not other-either:
So well is round to round distinctly set together,
A lesse one vnd'r a great with bent so close embras'd;
Euen as the Chesnut is in tender skin encas'd,

The tender skin ypent within a tanned hyde,
The tanned hide in huske thick, sharp; rough, brittle-dry'd.
The lines ver. call. Parallels of the Sunne.

Then takes he th'Astrolabe, and shewes the Sphere in flats:
The Pole-heights, Azimuths, Alcanthars, Almadrats.
(Ye Muses pardon me if I deface with blots
A table of such a price, if I with barbarots
So soile my faire discourse; for why? this matt'r of mine,
In case I speake it right, I may not speake it fine.)


But on that other side a Sight-rule turnes about,
And vnd'r it lyes a tabl', on which they see set-out
The course of wandring starres (who keep yet certaine rites)
The names of eu'ry month, the dayes and scale of heights.
He mouing that same Rule now takes the paine to teach
The toysing of a wall,
Vse of th'Astrolabe.
and now to know the reach
From any place to place; the depth of any Well,
By view of breadth in heau'n a breadth on earth to tell:
As als' at what-signe Inne, by tyquet as it were,
Th'Almight' appoints the Sun to lodge all months i'th'yeere;
And where his Nadir is, and how much he declines,
Or how much he aduanc'd aboue th'Equator shines:
What time a Signe entire allotted hath to runne
Ere on our Hemisphere he mount; and how to konne
Each countries mid-day-line, the Pole-heights euery way,
All howers of the night, all howers of the day.
Phaleg improues and commends this Art to his posterity.

The pregnant Phaleg yeelds vnt'all old Heber taught,
His eu'r attentiue eare and quick-conceiuing thought;
As perfect Alcumist this gold he multiplies,
And vsing well the stock bequeaths rich legacies
Of learning, treasured in his encreasing Casse,
Vnt' all his noble race; and they their teacher passe.
But as of Venus, Mars, and Mercurie the lights
Goe visit otherwhile the naked Troglodytes;
Now Iava, now Peru, and oft remoue, to shine
In either world, a-this, a-that side th'Equall line:

This knowledge came from the Hebrewes to the Chaldeans. From the Caldeans to the Egyptians. Then to the Grecians.
So this renowmed Art was first an Hebrue borne,


And then a Chaldee adopt; soone after gan to scorne
And brauely set-by light old Babels ruyn'd pile,
So south from Tiger flew vnto the fruitfull Nile:
There taught sh'a noble schoole; but thence the Grecian wits
Her tys'd, and shee to them her tooles and selfe commits:


Then to Egypt againe. Then to the Arabians, and so to the Italians and Almans. The praise of Astronomers, with commodities of Astronomie.
Then vnder Ptolomey shee t'Egypt turnes againe,
Delighting to reuise her deere Pelusian plaine:
And ye: vnconstant went from thence int' Arabie,
From thence int' Italie, from thence int' Almanie.
O right Endymions, on Latmos star-set hill
Who coll, embrace, and kisse your welbelou'd at will,
Dame Cynthia queene of heau'n: about whose bed there stand
A thousand thousand guards, with golden shield in hand:
O goodly-learned soules! o Atlasses vnfained!
By whom the throne of God is eu'r (as 'twere) sustained!
Without your helps (alas) into the Sea or Hell
Of all forgetfulnesse this skill of heau'n had fell.
Tis you diuide the months and seasons of the yeere
Confused altofore; you quote the Marinere,
By searching all that Fate doth on the skie descriue,
His time to hoise-vp saile, and when and where t' arriue.
You teach the slow-foot oxe and daily-sweating swaine
What time the faithfull earth may best receiue their graine.


You teach the man of warre to keep his hold, or fight,
And when to scale a wall, and when to vi^tl' aright
His hunger-doubting camp: of you all season good
The good Physician learnes, to purge and let vs blood,




44.Now heare we Heb'r againe. Hee begins to discouer the secrets of Astronomy contained in certaine principall words vsed by the professors thereof; which we are now briefely to interpret. Th' Apogee is the Sunnes greatest distance from the earth; as the Perigee his least: for we haue two

kinde of distances; one Solsticiall, and the other Excentrick: the Solsticiall is, when the Sunne entring into Cancer, (that is the Signe of the Crab) and, comming neere to our Crowne-point in the Noone-line casteth on vs his beames most directly, which by reflection from the earth become more

scorching, sharpe and violent. This distance is not vniuersall, but proper to that Region or Climate whose Crowne-point the Sunne then approacheth neerest. The distance Excentricke (common to the whole world) is, when the Center of the Sunne is come to the highest of his Epicyle, and so put-of farthest from the earth: and thither is he brought by meanes of his particular Orbe, in Center differing from the Center of the earth; and this shewes the meaning of Excentricke and Concentricke. Now, the Sunne is at highest of this kinde a little after the Sunstay of Summer, and at the lowest soone after the Winter Sunstay, whereof before. When he is at the highest, hee seemes very small, and to goe very slowly: at the lowest, a mans eye may discerne him to be much greater, and to passe away swifter. Wherein appeares the wondrous wisdome and prouidence of the Almighty Creator. For so it falling-out, that at the Summer Stay the Sunne is hottest, because of his beames more closely gathered and reflected; and that he tarries there the longer, because of the daies length; therefore God raiseth him vp then into the Apogee, or highest place of his Epicycle, and furthest of-vs; lest running below he should make our heat intollerable. And further, his stay in that place is the longer; darting his beames more perpendicularly, and marching more slowly through the Summer Signes; that he may the better concoct and ripen the Fruits of the Earth. Whereas, in the Winter time, casting his Rayes aslope, and so of lesse force; that the Earth wax not thereby all thorow cold and barren; the Sunne descends into his Perigee, or lowest Chamber, to comfort and maintaine the all-nourishing Element in heat and vigour. And, to the end the cold, which is enemy to fertility and generation, may the better bee driuen away, and the Sunne recouer his higher Signes; from whence he may send downe more comfortable beames; God hath giuen him, about the Winter Stay, great swiftnesse to dispatch his iourney withall. No man will thinke it strange, that considers the huge distance that is betwixt the Apogee and Perigee; that is, betwixt the highest, and lowest station of the Sunne. For the Astronomers cast it vp to the number of 315244. Italian leagues. Besides, that neither the other six Planets, nor the Firmament of six Starres, doe with contrary motion hinder the Sunne in his course, he runnes not directly against the Primouable sway; but byasing a-to-side, and as it were yeelding to that violent motion: that he might the better come to an end of his owne iourney, and draw the other Planets with him. Were it not for this course of the Sunne in Byas, or (as Heraults say) in Bend of the Zodiacke, the sundry Climats and Regions which he comes at by turnes, should not be heatte and cooled in their due seasons; Nay certaine Season should there be none, nor any inequality of night and day; but all in a hoch-poch, all confused: Diuers other benefits of this bendy motion doe the Astronomers declare; who reckon also that the space, from hence to the Sunnes higest point in Apogee, is 4329244. leagues of Italy; and from hence to his lowest, 4014000. Subduct this latter summe from the former, and so for the distance betwixt the Apogee and Perigee, you shall haue, as before, 315244. but enough of this; For one sight of a good Armillarie Sphere will teach more then all these words: yet whoso desires

to know more concerning the number of Spheres and Planets, let him reade 1. Bassantin, who sets downe the figures very exactly.
45Then takes he th' Astrolabe. That is an Instrument flat and round, a foot or lesse in Diameter, of brasse or wood, containing many lines both straight and circular, and inuented long since; though the Author be not certainly knowne (some hold it was the Arabian Messahala, some Ptol^mey, some Abraham) to cast and know the motions of these heauenly bodies and their dependances. Some call it the Planisphere, because it hath the Sphere drawne into a Flat. The word is Greeke of (...), a Signe or Starre, and (...) to take, or (...) (which commeth of the same verbe) a bandle to hold by; for hereby we lay-hold (as it were) on the Starres, or take the position and height of them* For holding this Instrument by the handle, a skilfull man may soone discouer the braue secrets of Astronomie. As for the parts thereof, there is first a large ring that beares-vp the handle, then the Astrolabe it selfe, which hath two sides: the fore-side, otherwise called the Mother, because shee containes in her wombe (as it were) diuers other tables, seruing for diuers eleuations of the Pole, and the back-side, whereon are drawne sundrie lines and circles: the first of them, next the edge, shewes the degrees of Altitude, whereof there is a double vse; for, applying them to the numbers in border that exceed not ninety, they shew how many degrees the Sunne or other Starre is raised aboue our Horizon, with many commodities thereon depending: and applying them to the numbers below, which goe-on from thirtie to thirtie, they shew the degrees of the Zodiake, where the Signes are written with their names and characters, to know the true place of the Sunne euery day. After these you shall finde set downe other circles, wherein be the twelue Moneths of the yeare, answerable to the Signes, with daies vnto each apart, or two by two, numbred by Fiues or Tens, not exceeding 31. which is the quantitie of the greatest Moneth. This serues to know in what degree of the Zodiacke the Sunne is euery day. Moreouer, there are two Diameter-lines crossing each other in Rectangle at the Center of the Astrolabe; one called the Noone-line, drawne from the Ring by the Center downward; and another from East to West, which represents the generall Horizon, at whose either end indifferently begin the degrees of Altitude aforesaid. Six other small lines there are like Arches, together with the Skale of heights, the Winds, and the Rule turning-about on the backside, whereof we shall speake anon. As for parts of the foreside, called the Mother; there is first a circle or border diuided into 360. degrees, these stand for the Equinoxiall or Eauen night, wherein are by iust measure set downe and distributed the 24 houres of the day, containing each fifteene degrees, and euery degree foure minutes, so as euery houre hath threescore minutes. The wombe (as I said) of this Mother is to beare sundry tables according to the Pole height of sundry places: these tables haue each about their Centers drawne three concentrike circles; whereof the least is the Tropike of Cancer, called in the Sphere the Summer Tropike; where the dry is at longest about the twelfth of lune: the Mid-circle is the Equator, passing close by the beginning of Aries and

Libra, in which two places the Sunne makes day and night equall throughout the whole world; to wit, about the eleuenth of March, and the 13. of September. So followes it then, that the greatest circle of these three, which is towards the edge of each table, must be the Tropike of Capricorne, where the day is at shortest, about the twelfth of December. Moreouer, in these Tables there are the Almucantaraths; by that Arabian word is signified the circle of Pole height vpon our Hemisphere, some perfect some imperfect. The first of them stands for the slope Horison, diuiding the world into two parts; whereof the one we see, the other is hid from vs. The Center of the least Almucantarath stands for the Zenith or Crowne point, from whence to the Horison are ninety degrees euery way drawn-out by Twoes, Threes, Fiues, or Tens, according to the capacitie of the Instrument, and distance of the lines; which are so drawne, for the Sunne or other Starre to be thereto applied; as often as a man will take their eleuation aboue the Horizon. Beside these, here are also the Azimuths, or crowne circles; which doe cut euery Almucantarath by Fiues, Tens, or Fifteenes, into 360 degrees, quartered by ninetie, and distinguished one quarter from another by the two principall Azimuths, which are the Meridian, and the Equinoctiall; that passeth from the right East-point by our Zenith to the West. Where we begin commonly to count the degrees of the Quarters Northward and Southward. These are to make knowne in what part of the world the Sun or other Starre riseth and setteth. After these doe follow the vnequall houres, called the houres of the Planets, together with the names and characters of then Planets; the lines of twy light, noone and mid-night; the figures of the twelue houses, the line of the Zodiake, and consequently the directory or Index which turneth about the Instrument at either side, by the brim. Lastly, there is the Hole of the Net or Cob-web, which stands for the Pole of the world; and by the pinne that goes thorow the same Hole are all the tables or plates of the Astrolabe ioyned and held fast together.

Concerning the vse of this Instrument in measuring all heights, bulkes, lengths, breadths, thicknesse and depths, I. Stoster, D. Iaquinot, and I. Bassantin haue largely thereon discoursed in their bookes of the Astrolabe: And what need I take further paines in Englishing more of this Subiect, when the famous Geoffrey Chaucer 233. yeares agoe hath made all so plaine in the best English of his time? Somewhat only must be said of that Alhidode, as the Poet here calles the Rule; it is an Arabian word, in Greeke (...), in Latine Radius: as in Virgil, Descripsit radio totum qui gentibus orbem. It is the turning Rule on the back-side of the Astrolabe, whereon are fastned two square tablets with small sight-holes persed, for the height-taking of Sunne or Starre, and for measuring of quantities aforesaid, or any other vse here specified by the Poet.
46The pregnant Phaleg yeelds. Hauing shewed the excellence of Astronomie, he comes now to declare by what meanes the knowledge thereof was deriued vnto vs; and saith (as it is most likely) that from the Hebrues it came to the Chaldeans, from them to the Aegyptians, from them to the Arabians, and so to the Italians and Germans, whose names haue beene gathered and set downe by H. Ranzouius, in his Treatise of the excellence of Astronomie.
47.O right Endymions. This is in commendation of the learned Astronomers, and their profession. The Poets faine that the Moone was so in loue with Endymion, that as he slept on a high hill-top, shee came thither to kisse and embrace him. It is thought he was some great Astronomer. At least, this fable was ment of Students in Astronomie, whom our Author for that cause here termeth Right Endymions. The great vse and further commendation of this Art you may reade in Virgil. Georg. 1. Aeneid. 1. and 3. and almost euery where in Ptolomey; but especially in Peucer and such as haue lately written, or prefaced vpon Astrologie.






C'est vous qui parcourez les celestes prouinces
En moins d'vn tourne-main: qui plus grans que nos Princes,
Possed. z. tout le monde: and faites, demi dieux,
Tourner entre vos mains les clairs Cercles des cieux.


Pour vous,
Il l^^sse l'Astionomie pour consi^erer la quatriesme Image, qui est la Musique, la quelle il descrit auec ses orneme^^.
Esprits diuins, ma plus diserte-plume.
Feroit son miel plus doux couler dans ce volume:
Vous seriez mon subiet, si la derniere Soeur
Desia ne me trainoit a soy par sa douceur.
Car i'enten mon Phalec, qui d'vne humble langage:
S'informe auec Heber du nom du quart Image.
I'oy qu'il respond ainst. Cher fils, ce teint noignard,
La douceur de ces yeux, ce pied qui fretillard
Semble tousiours danser: les guitterres, les fluttes,

Les cistres, les cornets, les luths, les saquebutes,
Et les lyres encor, qu'autour d'elle tu vois,
Nous monstrent que c'est l'Art qui modere la voix,
Qui mesnage le vent, and qui guide, maistresse,
Dessus les nerfs par leurs de nos nerfs la souplesse:
Le discordant accord, la sacree harmonie,
Et la nombreuse loy, qui te noit compaignie
A Dieu, lors qu'il voulut donner, ingenieux,
A la terre repos,
Discours Platonique de la Musique and harmoni^ des Cieux.
and des ailes aux cieux:
D'autant, comme lon dit, que la Voix souueraine
Logea dans chaque ciel vne douce Syrene,
Comme sur-intendante: a sin que ces bas corps
Emprunt assent des hauts l^urs plus parfaits accords,
Et qu'vn Choeur aime-bal auec le choeur des Anges
Dans sa Chapelle ardente entonnast ses louanges.


Comparaison seruant a representer plus aisement ce qu'il a touche de la musique des Cieux.
Ou comme vn mesme vent artistement vomi
Par le souflet Panthois, se pourmetne parmi
L'ingenieux Secret, entre par les soupapes,
Qu'en battant le clauier, organiste, tu frapes:
Coule dans la graueure, and monte, diuise,
Par les conduits espars du Sommier pertuise:
Anime tout d'vn c^up les aigues Cimbales,
Les flutes au-doux-air, and les aigres Regales:
De la bouche de Dieu l'Esprit tout-auinant
Des cieux organisez va les roues mounant^
Si bien que retracant leur orniere eternelle,
L'vn d'eux fait le bourdon, l'autre la chanterelle.


Musique es humeurs, saiso^s and elemens. Le Bassus.
Or tous ces co^ tr'accerts enchanteusement doux:
Plus clairque dans le ciel s'entendent parmi nous.
La plus pesante humeur, l'Hyuer, la Terre basse,
Vont tenant la partie and plus lente, and plus casse.
Le Phlegme blanchissant, l'humide Automne, and l'Eau,
Le Tenor. L'Altus ou Contratenor.
La Teneur qui tousiours coule comme au nineau.
Le Sang, la Prime, and l'Air transparentement rare,
La Voix qui fleuretant se peint, se tord, s'esgare.
La Cholere, l'Este, l'Element sec and chant,
La corde plus tendue,
Le Superius.
and le son le plus haut,



Efficace de la Musique.
Et c'est pourquoy (mon fils) les plus rebelles choses
Se laissent veincre au chant, comme tenant encloses
Les semences du nombre: and, foibles, ne viuant
Qu'en vertu de l'Esprit qui va les cieux mouuant.


Ample description del efficace and vertu de la Musique. A lendroit des hommes sages and fouls.
Le chant harmonieux fait aux plus fiers gendarmes
Tout ensemble tomber la cholere, and les armes:
Sereine l'ame triste: and charmeusement doux
Acoise peu a peu les bourrasques des fouls:
Donne frein au desir, and fait mourir la flamme
De celui qui, bouillant, idolatre vne femme:
Guerit le patient des Phalanges blesse,
Qui proche du tombeau saute comme insense.
A lendroit des bestes.
Le Cigne en est raui, la Biche en est trompee,
Et des peints oisillons la simplesse pipee.
Le Dausin suit la Lyre, and le bruyant essain
Des Abeilles t'arreste au tin-tin de l'airain.


A lendroit de Dieu mesmes.
He, que ne peut le chant? veu que mesme il commande
A l'Esprit donne-esprit: ven qu'il fait qu'il descende
Dans l'ame d'vn Prophete: and d'vn diuin acceut
Vnit l'esprit raui a l'esprit rauissant?
Veu que quand l'Eternel en sa fureur plus grande
Fume, tonne, treluit: que tous ses nerfs il bande:
Et que courbant le dos, and haussant ses deux bras,
Ses foudres plus aigus il veut lancer en bas:
L'accord melodieux, qu'vn coeur deuot souspire,
Destrempe ses tendons, fait rendormir son ire,
Et Clemence aux-doux-yeux emble d'entre ses mains
Le supplice ensouffre des rebelles humains?


Canan entrerompt le propos d'Heber, dont le Poete lasse pred occasion de mettre conuenable sin aux beaux discours de ceste seconde Semaine.
Mais si tost qu'Heber veut de l'antique Musique
Deschiffrer, eloquent, and l'art, and la pratique,
Canan, qui du Iourdain cerche le fatal cours,
Passant pres la Colomne, interrompt son discours.


Aussi n'en puis-ie plus. La longueur du voyage
Que, foible, i'entrepren, me fait perdre courage.
Il me faut impetrer nouueau secours d'enhaut,
Et reculer vn peu pour faire vn plus grand saut.





And how to mingl' his drugs: you passe all o're the skie
In turning of an hand, or twinckling of an eye.
You, more then princely rule all countries vnder Sun;
You demigodly make heau'n twixt your hands to run.
For you (o heauenly wits) my fairest painting quill
Should on these folded sheets her hony-dew distill,
Still would I write of you: but with her daintie sweets
The last sist'r of the foure me calls and louely greets.
For I this Phaleg heare with sonly-meeke language
His fath'r entreat to tell the name of th'oth'r Image;
And Heb'r him answer thus: Deere sonne, this painted girle
By that her wanton foot seems still to daunce and tirle,
By glauncing of her eye, the Cornets, Guytterns, Flutes,

Shawmes, Sackbuts, Vyols, Harps, Bandoraes, Organs,
Musicke, the fourth Image, described with her Implements.
Lutes,
Which all-about her lye vpon the table and ground,
Appeares to be that Art which rules the voice and sound.
Which guides the gentle breath and mistresse-like appoints
How on the tuned string we trull our nimble ioynts.
The sacred harmonie, the discordant accord,
Law numbred, number law'd, which waited on the Lord,
When his creating Word spring of All-euerie
Made th'earth to stand so fast, and heau'n so fast to flie.
Platoes opinion of Harmonie among the Spheres.

Sith euery Sphere (they say) hath some Intelligent,
Or Angell musicall, for Lady president,
Appointed by the Word: to th'end of those aboue
These lower things may learne the perfect cord of loue;
And that with Angell-queers a dauncing Set be seene
To reuell on his praise in temple fyrie-sheene.
Or as from bellow-loongs a breath one and the same
The Spirit of God compared to the wind of an Organ.
In skilfull wise put-out straies through the secret frame
Of curious handyworke, quits euery stop and list,
That opens when the keyes are tickt by th'Organist;
And mounting here and therefrom out the channell scored*
Into th'esparsed pipes o'th'Sommier thorow-bored,
Alliues, all in a trice, Recorders sweetly-still
And Regals eager-tun'd, and Cymballs sounding shrill:
So of Gods mouth the breath and Spirit all-aliuing
Stirres of the tuned heau'n these wheeles all louely striuing,
And as their wonted way eternally they trace,
Some of them trill the Trebl^, and some bomb-out the Base.
Now all these counter-notes; so charmy-sweet,
Musicke in our Humours, Seasons and Elements. B^ss^.
appeere
Yet not so plainly in heau'n as eu'n among vs heere.
Th'humour Melancholike, the Wint'r, and cold dry ground,
They beare the Bases part, and soft and slowly sound.
The white phleame, th'Autom-time, the water cold and wet,
They all aleauell run,
Tenr.
and are for Tenor set.
The Blood the prime of yere, the moist and luke-warme Aire,
Play Descant florisher, deuider, painter,
Countertenor.
strayer.
The Choller, Summer, Fire, that are so hot and dry,
Treble.
Resembl' a strained chord that soundeth eu'r on high.

The reason and force of Musicke.

See then the cause (my son) why song doth ofte^ win them
That are most fierce by kinde; there are inclos'd within them
The seeds of numb'r and time: nor can their life hold-out
But by the Spirits helpe, that whirleth heau'n about.
With wisemen.

Sweet harmony it makes the fiercest Army stay
Their deadly fewd and force; the griefe it doth allay
Of eu'ry pained soule; and with a gentle charme
And Fooles.
Withdraweth by degrees the Foole from trickes of harme;
It bridleth hot desire, and putteth-out the flame
That makes a louers-heart Idolatrize a dame;
It heales a man that's hurt with fly Phalangy's sting,
That eu'n at point of death will madly daunce and fling:
With Beasts.
The Swan delights therein, deceiu'd thereby we finde
The shye discoullard fowle, and fearefull starting hinde.
The Dolphin loues the Leere, th'vnhiued swarme of Bees
With tinkling sound of brasse, are clustred on the trees.
With God himselfe.

O what's to Musick hard? which wont so much to merit,
Which wont so to preuaile eu'n with th'enspiring Spirit,
As bring him downe on Saul, and in Elisha wed
The Spirit rauisher vnto the rauished?
Yea when th'eternall God, to sharpest anger bent,
Smoakes, thunders, lightens, hailes, with all his pow'rs assent,
And with his heau'd-vp arme, and with his backe enfoul't,
Is ready to discharge his forest blasting-boult;
Th'armonyons accord that hearts deuout shall weepe
His sinnowes albenombes, and brings his ang'r asleepe:
Then sweet-ey'd mercy steales (as well shee wont and can)
From vnd'r his hand the rod deseru'd by rebell man.
But now as Heb'r had thought t'haue further gon and told:
The practise and the skill of all the Musicke old;
See, Canan searching-out his Iordans fatall walke,
Vnto the Pillernies and breakes-off all the talke.


Nor can I further goe; this iourneyes irksome length
In weaknesse vndertooke, hath wasted all my strengthe:
I must anew entreat some helpe of heau'nly grace,
And somewhat need recoile to leape a greater space.




48For you (o heauenly wits.) Shewing that he had a good minde to dilate vpon the praise of this Art, he breaks-off to come to the description of the fourth Image, which is Musick; and her he sets-out with all the most necessarie and gracefull attire, both for voice and instruments of diuers sorts. It requires a long dispute and hard to resolue, what manner of Instruments, and how framed they were, which we reade by translated names to haue beene in vse among the Hebrues, Greeks, and other people of old time. This would take-vp a whole Volume; as also that other question, what was their vocall Musicke; whereof Plutarch and Boetius both haue treated. I perswade my selfe they had in those dayes a kinde of skill in making and managing their musicall Instruments, and ioyning voice thereto; which is hardly well knowne or conceiued now of vs: though some of our Musicians we finde both in voice and vpon instrument so exceeding skilfull, that they are able much to moue our affections; but short of that wonderfull power which hath been ascribed to the ancient Musicke.
49.Sith eu'ry Sphere (they say.) The Poet vpon this occasion of Musicke, raiseth himselfe to consider the accord and harmony of the Heauens; borrowing his discourse from the Philosophie of Plato: whereof I shall endeuour here to set downe the summe He saith then that our Musicke on earth is but a shadow of that superlatiue harmonie which God hath ordained the great Cymbals (as it were) of heauen to make, by their so swift and orderly mouing: sithence vnlikely it is, but that the Primovable and other Spheres, that whirle-about continually and haue done so long, should make some noise answerable to their compasse and cadence so proportionall. And rather may we presume they make a most excellent melody, and far exceeding our earthly Musicke, which from that heauenly borroweth her perfection. For so it being, that God hath made all things in number, weight and measure, very likely it is that he kept a due proportion in the heauens; and that more exactly than on the earth: because this is the lowest part of all, for habitation of the meanest creatures; when they (as their English name signifies) are heauen-vp on high, to make a beautifull and glorious palace for th'All-Creator. To consider the matter yet more particularly; the Platonikes doe say, that God (who is the Voice Soueraigne, and giueth voice, sound, and harmony to all things, high and low) hath in euery Sphere of heauen set an Intelligence (some call it Scule; some, Angell; some, morion quickned by the Primouable) whereby the heauens are moued to their cadence appointed, so exactly as no melody can be more pleasing. As for mine owne opinion hereof, I thinke the Platonicks (who say also that God still exerciseth Geometry) meant hereby to commend the perfection of Mathematicks, and chiefely Astronomy; which is most excellent and certaine of them all. And because the minde is maruellously delighted with Musicall proportions, which no where can be found more perfect then in the heauens; who so hath the gift to vnderstand them, enioyes a contentment surpassing all sweetnesse of earthly and eare-pleasing Musicke. Now, to the end this heauenly Musicke may be the better conceiued; our Poet here vseth a very choice and daintie comparison, and saith the Spirit of God

giues the heauens a Musicall motion, which breeds a sweet harmony among them; euen as an Organist by due fingring the keys of his Instrument stirres vp therein a melodious sound. Thus much by the way; that the Reader may thereby take occasion to stop his eares against the tempestuous broyles and discords of this world, and raise-vp himselfe toward this heauenly concord; or rather to fly-vp thither with the wings of faith, and learne, in the company of Saints and blessed Soules, to vnderstand those excellent Songs, which are partly set-downe for vs in diuers passages of the Apocalyps.
50.Now all these counter-notes. Leauing that heauenly Musicke of the Spheres, he shewes now that we haue a Musicke also contained euen in the humors of our bodies, answerable to the foure Seasons of the yeare and the Elements: Our Melancholy, like the Earth and Winter Season, holds the Basse; our Phleme, like the Autume time, and Element of Water, the Tenor; our Blood, like the Spring and Aire, the Counter-tenor, which runnes through all kinde of Notes; our Choller, as the Summer time, and Fire, the Treble: as for all other parts vsed in Musicke, they are euer correspondent to some one of these foure.
51.See then the cause. He speakes now of the effect and power of Musicke. The Platonicks held the soule of Man to be composed of numbers and proportions, the excellence whereof is chiefely in the heauens: whereupon it ensues that Musicall harmony, somewhat partaking with the nature of ise and soule, diuersly mooues and affects all liuing Creatures capable thereof. The Poet plaies vpon this opinion, but still with a caueat, that the truth and ground of this doctrine be rightly vnderstood: For mans Soule is not made of numbers, as the word is simply taken: but thus much onely meanes the Platonist, that these spirituall substances enclosed in mans body are so exquisite, and (as it were) harmonious, that all harmony concord, and proportion delights them and contrariwise all discord and disproportion, or confused noyse offends them, as we see by daily experience. Furthermore, he that hath created all things in perfect concord and proportion, would euen in such as seeme farthest from well agreeing, haue the force of Musicke shew it selfe, ^y the attention it commandeth of hearers, and by their loue and reuerence thereof. Whereupon I boldly dare auouch that soule not well ordered in it selfe, or not well fitted with a body, which cannot abide sweet harmony
52.Sweet Harmony. In twelue verses here the Poet sets-out the force of Musicke, both in regard of men and beasts: whereof we finde in ancient History very notable examples; as Te^^a^der, Timotheus, Ari^^, and others, wh^^by their Musicke haue done great wonders; made the most offended to be friends one with another; the most melancholy and sad, to bee merry; fooles, to be wise; and sum as were like to runne mad for loue, to be stayed; and what not? It is reported also, that against the Ph^l^^gies poyson, there ^^n helpe to ready and oueraigne as the well ordered sound of Musicall Instruments* See what Ae^^an, P^^^y, and Plutarch ^y thereof.
53.O what's to Musicke hard. He goes on yet further, and shewes how Musicke is able to preua^e euen with God himselfe. And this he proues by

three examples; the first of Soul, (1. Sam. 10.) who meeting a company of Prophets with Instruments of Musicke, began also to prophesie among them; the second, of Elizeus (2. King. 3.) who called for a Minstrell; and when the Minstrell played, the hand of the Lord (that is his Spirit) came vpon the Prophet: the third, of God, anger appeased by deuout singing of Psalmes; and namely those of Dauid, which in the mouth of Gods faithfull seruants are of wonderfull power; as by many particulars of these and former times may well be proued. For God indeed hath promised to be neere vnto all those that call vpon him faithfully, Psal. 145.18. And it becommeth well the righteous to reioyce in the Lord and be thankfull, Psal. 33.1. To conclude, here is the effect of a zealous prayer, wherein heart, voice and accent runne together, most liuely set-out by the Poet, describing with most elegant similitudes the fierce wrath of God against sinne, and the sweetnesse of his mercy, when he is appeased.
54.But now as Heb'r had thought. The Poet intending to make here an end of the second day of his second weeke, brings-in Canan the sonne of Cham, to seeke (as it were by Fate) along the bankes of Iordaine, for the Countrey that was after to be inhabited by his posteritie. So he comming toward the Pillar, breakes-off the learned conference that was betwixt the other two. And here therefore shall end our Commentary-Notes vpon these high conceits of this excellent Poet.



FINIS.

