The third dayes creation. By that most excellent, learned, and diuine poet, VVilliam, Lord Bartas. Done verse for verse out of the originall French by Thomas VVinter, Master of Arts Sepmaine. Day 3. English Du Bartas, Guillaume de Salluste, seigneur, 1544-1590. The third dayes creation. By that most excellent, learned, and diuine poet, VVilliam, Lord Bartas. Done verse for verse out of the originall French by Thomas VVinter, Master of Arts Sepmaine. Day 3. English Du Bartas, Guillaume de Salluste, seigneur, 1544-1590. Winter, Thomas, Master of Arts. Sur le troisiesme jour de la pre∣miere Sepmaine, du Sieur Du Bar∣tas, traduict en Anglois par Tho: Winter. QVittant le pourpris & plancher de l'air, D'où chet la gresle, esclairs, vents, & frimats, Q i descochez nous liurent maints combats; Tu prends ton vol vers la Terre & la Mer. Où pourmenant par les flairants destours, Tu ueilles de leur sein plantes & fleurs, Bassinez du ciel, nourriz par ses pleurs, Alaictez d'eau qui là traine son cours. Puis soubs les monts les riches mineraux, Q i nous font tant de biens, & tant de maux Vas recerchant, Or, Argent, Plomb, & Fer. Lors regaignant des costauts le hault doz, Et couronnant la terre de ton loz, Fais icy le Printemps de ton Hyuer. Iean Sanford. Ad Thomam Winterum Guliel∣mi Salustij Metaphrasten. NOmina qui nobis prima imposuêre, videntur Fatidicis cecinisse modis, quae fata futura, Allusum est ad Ausonij E∣pigram. 19. Quae vitae studia, & quantùm praecordia fumant Ardore A Ethereo: sic dictus virbius olìm Hippolytus, quòd equis sparsim discerptamarinis Membra iacent: Medicus sic Virgilianus Iapis Et magnum augurium Brumali nomine iactas O Wintere nouem soboles charissima Musis! Nam deus aequoreas qui cuspide temperat vndas Te vatem pelago, Phoebo cedente, dicauit. Ergò age sortitus Brumali à frigore nomen Perge tuo augurio Neptunia regna referre Frigidiora noui mundi loca; qualiter olìm Vel dicto tantùm verbo, difflauexat vndas Ille sator mundi{que} opifex à vertice terrae: Qualiter, & tumidas in vertice comprimit vndas, Littoribus{que} datis incingit Nerea ponto; Qualiter Amphitrite impleto ventre tumescit, An compressa deo Neptuno, an Sydere tacta Tethyos vnda vagae Lunaribus aesluet horis, Expedias; mundi sunt haec arcana refusi. Quin age commotum Neptunum hortamine blando Alloquere, vt retrahat truculenti Immanis habenas, Et refugis imo in Barathro se fluctibus abda . Quanquam amnes decet ira, tamen Neptune quiescas; Non timidi fluctus superare repagula possunt. Haec miranda Dei quae primùm idiomate sacro Et numeris, dicente Deo, dictante Prophetâ Sunt signata pijs, quae dudum Gallia nouit Arte tuâ, penso{que} tuo diuine Salusti. Perge tuo ingenio nostrae procudere genti, Et patria cantare sono secreta profundi Wintere; vt vulgus cognoscat in aethere summo Qui sedet Omnipotens, ima quid praestet Abysso, Et laudet, timeat{que} admiretur{que} potentem. Ioannes Dunster. Ad Eundem. QVando alimenta calor coquit, & benè digerit; illud Quod capit haec, fiet pinguius inde magis; Anglia sermones peregrinos concoquit; ergò Facta est pinguescens inde opulenta magis: In{que} Hye me accrescit viuus calor; vnde profectum Totum opus euenta non caruisse potest. Hoc laudi est (Wintere) tibi; benè concoquis artes Linguas, sermones tanquam alimenta tuos. Thomas Masonus. In DIEM tertiam BARTASSII a Tho. VVINTERO Anglicè redditam. BARTASSII secunda, tibi fuit DIES WINTERE prima: primus idcircò liber Rores canebat, fulmina & coeli faces: At nunc secundo (qui tuus labor) libro Flores canuntur, flumina, & facies soli. Haec tibi secunda, tertia est illi DIES. In primâ haberis omnibus vates prior. BARTASSIO excepto vnico vatum patre: Satis est Homeri si istius fueris Maro. Prodis secundus in secund Nemini Dum tersiore tertiam versu canis, Adusque vatis sidus interpres boni. Sic cautus ipse, dum DIES trudit DIEM ( WINTERE Musis VERIS assulgens vice) Prehendis ansam Temporis, captas DIEM, Tam{que} Bona sequitur prima quàm fuit Bona. Nathanael Tomkins. In tertium & quasi Mercurialem Diem primae Hebdomadis Guli∣ lmi Salustij. ECce Deo est sua cuique dies, nec numine ab vno Concipit auspicium Lucifer omnis idem, Altera Sithonio lux est exorta Gradiuo, Tertia Mercurio prodijt ista dies: Credo nec antiquos decepit abula vates, Spirat enim numen Lumen vtrumque suum. Interpres facunde Deum, te namque magistro Interpres lucis prodijt ecce tuae. Si fuit vlla dies solem non passa cadentem, Splendeat haec, nunquam sole cadente, dies. Henricus Ashwood. The Argument. T HE Lord BARTAS hauing deliuered in the former Dayes-worke, an excellent discourse of the foure elements in generall, and therein more particularly comprised both the nature of the fire and the aire: doth in this third booke (which is an explanation of the third dayes creation,) descend from the superior to the two inferior elements; in the description of which, as of the former, being alway like himselfe, that is, most excellent; he doth first in∣uoke the Diuine assistance; then branching his whole dis∣course into two principall parts, he doth in the former des∣cribe the manner, how the waters were assembled together for the discouerie of the drie land; how the sea is situated and restrained within his bounds, which it neither doth, nor can transgresse; and how it imbraceth the earth in his armes, which together with the more famous riuers of the world are repeated. Vnto which discourse he addeth a briefe conside∣ration of fountaines, brookes, land-flouds, and riuers; of their increase and falling into the sea, which being no whit augmented by their continuall accesse, brings much admira∣tion to those, that labour in searching the reasons of the eb∣bing and flowing of the same: which, though it be a question full of difficultie, and either meerely or nearely vnresolua∣ble, yet doth he couch in a very few verses, as much as reason or probability can perswade in so abstruse a speculation. Then intreating of the saltnesse of the sea, and of the admirable ef∣fects of diuers springs and bathes, he concludes the first part of this booke with an enumeration of those singular commo∣dities which all creatures receiue by the conglobation of the earth with the water. In the second part, which is an ample and elegant description of the earth, the stabilitie and vtili∣tie therof is first deciphered; the quaking ouertures and com∣passe of the same are proposed: which together with the sea, being but a point compared to the heauens; doth giue him occasion to deduce therehence a necessarie exhortation, to withdraw the worldly minds of wretched men from the ouer greedie pursuit of these earthly things. Now forasmuch as the earth so separated from the sea, was by the heauenly Pro∣uidence pre-ordained to be the mother, nource, and entertai∣ning hostesse of all mankind, he doth most artificially embla∣son the profitable beauties thereof, as being most variously a∣dorned with trees, plants, hearbes and flowers of such singu∣lar and sundrie vertues for the vse of man, that they seeme to haue engrauen vpon them, and that in Capitall letters, the aboundant wisdome, and super aboundant grace of the puis∣sant Creator. Which is amplified by the admired sympathies of diuerse creatures; by the varietie of graine, of wools, silks, cottons, flaxe, hempe, and such other commodities as the diuersified disposition of sundrie clymates produceth; all which are yearely renewed by that prouident hand, from which they receiued their originall vertues. Among other wonders of nature, he mentioneth the tree called Cocos, whose strange proprieties are almost incredible; and desiring more perfectly to anatomize the whole bodie and bowels of the earth, he rips vp her very entrailes, to find what mettals and minerals are treasured vp in that great store-house of the world. Then teaching the true vse of gold and iron, he speaketh of the admired vertue of the Load-stone, of the ma∣riners compasse-needle, and sundrie sorts of earth which by experience are of themselues medicinable. Which hauing per∣formed, he greets the earth, painting out in fresh and liuely colours her deserued prayses: and by the example both of an∣cient Patriarkes, and men of great esteeme among the Pai∣nims) he blames those that contemne husbandrie, and the profitable knowledge of simples. And so with an excellent amplification of the vnmatchable pleasures and happie secu∣ritie of the countrie life: he conclusiuely prayeth, that he may either end his quiet dayes in the countrie, or spend them in the Court without suspition of flatterie. The third Day of the first Weeke of the most excellent, learned, and diuine Poet, William, Lord Bartas. MY Muse that whilome ouer-topt each spheare, The Poets tian sition from the superior to the inferior Ele∣ments. Whose course life-giuing influence doth beare; That in so braue a stile discours'd of Winds, And ayrie meteors frighting silly minds: And did of sulphur'd-lightning stormes intreate, And made her verse so graue a path to beate: Creeping to day on the base elements, Must cloath her speech with base habiliments: Where if by chaunce she sing a loftie straine, She's lifted higher by the swelling Maine. Great King of earth, and of the liquide plaine, His inuocation Whose very breath doth dreadfully constraine The sturdiest hils to quake, and oft exaults The stormie waues vp to the starrie valuts: Grant that my measuring skill may well suruay, The fleeting and firme element this Day. Grant that my learned verse may well discouer The nature of the sea, and of our Mother: That with a flowring stile I may pourtray The flowers▪ that cloath the earth with rich array. All those high hils, whose forked tops do border Vpon the clouds, that wander in disorder, Did hide their bo sed backes vnder the floud, Which on the earth a pudled ma ish stood; When heau'ns great King, desiring liberally T'en eoffe vs with this low worlds Empirie, Gaue charge, that Neptune should the waters gather, And shew the earth, which but a litle rather They had ore-whelm'd; and be content with pleasure, That one whole day he had this All in seazure. Iust as the heauens showring teares adowne, Si il. And froathie flouds hiding the plainer ground, Do make the fields a sea; then ceassing spoile, Inuisibly forsakes the urrowed soile, Ploude by the painefull oxe; and seemes to drinke It selfe, and to some channell straight to shrinke: So doth the sea this day leaue his possession Of mountaines, knoles, and fields by retrogression. And in the wombe of a lesse continent, Tuns vp with speed that watrie element. Whether at first the light, by God created, Cōiectural rea∣sons how he waters were gathered tog ∣ther for the dis∣co erie of the . Had store of this moyst humor eleuated Vnto such places, as then highest were, Of which he might next day make euery sphaere: Or whether the Almightie had created New roomes, to which these waters were translated: Or opening the poares of hill and plaine, Would hide some arme of that so spacious maine: Or whether thickening their thinner smother, That like a cloake of cloudes this All did couer, He did imprison them within their bankes, Gainst which the Ocean playes his daring prankes, Yet dares not to transgresse: for Gods owne might, The Sea consi∣ned to vnpassa∣ble bounds by▪ the pu ssance of the Almigh∣ . Kenning their nature mutinous and light, Thus bridled them, and gainst their fierce brauadoes, Made of the flower-clad earth his barricadoes: So that sometimes the fleeting hils which roare, And threaten to orewhelme the bordring shoare, Do wast in froath, and breaking neare the brim, Dare not beyond their watrie dwelling swim. And what could herein be impossible To this high Admirall, whose terrible And powerfull voice did riue the depths in twaine, To saue his flocke; and made the ruddie maine Exod. 14. Hang in the ayre? that forced Iordans course Iosuah. 3. 16. Backe to retire toward his double source? That drown'd the world become deuoid of good? Gen. 7. 21. That made the rocke gush foorth a litle floud? Exod. 17. 8. The Earth the great land of the world. Lo then the waters crooked circling path, An Iland of this world yformed hath: As boyling lead pour'd on a place vnplaine, Simil. Doth diuers formes and sundrie fashions gaine, Here runneth straight, there windeth like a snake, Here breaking hands, there hands againe doth take, And in an instant makes his small hote riuers, Within the mould to shew themselues so diuers: So God did spread the waters on the ground, In steeple forme, croysure, and figure round, Crooked and square, that in the water cleare, The earth might faire more rich and faire appeare. Such is the Germaine arme, the bay of Ganges, The Gulfe of Persia, and the sea that ranges By Happie Arabie, such the whole Ocean That parts in three this All by od proportion. And though that euerie arme how long soeuer, Why the mes of the Sea are subdiuided into lesser chanels. Compar'd vnto the whole be but a riuer: Yet makes a hundred seas in course and name, By's nookes and crookes, the water still the same: To slake the thirstie drinesse of the plaines, With welcome moisture of their secret veines: To rampire in the nations, and to daunt The proudest champion Princes when they vaunt: To confine kingdomes with eternall borders, To ease the trauell of the trading orders, Shortning their way, the wind helping to get, With in a month from th'East to the Sun-set. Nor doth the earth giue to the sea alone The most re∣nowned riuers of the world relie used. These bigger armes; she giues the riuer Don, And Nilus, Egypts store house, which doth hide Himselfe so often in the deserts wide. She giues the Rhene, Danubius, and Euphrates, Proud Tigris, issue of the hill Niphates, Broad Ganges riuer of such ample same, That Easterne India takes of it her name: The golden Tagus, Thames, Mariza, Rhone, Tartarian Rha, Po, Seina, and Garone: Garone, whose name shall sound so in my verse, As shall perchance ring through the Vniuerse. She giues R o de la Plata. Parana yeelding siluer matter, Great Darien which doth new Castile water: Maraignon too, flouds of that new-found All, Which men for wealth the Golden land may call. The fruitfull earth from her doth draw her streames, And all the water running in her veines: Which she (not thanklesse) doth in time and place, Repay both wayes, as it receiued was. S ll. For as the Lembicke heated, oft doth hap T'exhale a vapor to his vpmost cap; And wanting meanes to draw that fragrant sweat Higher, doth gently thicken it, and let That cleare as christall humor drop by drop, Replenish the receiuer to the top: So the thin humor of the brinie streames Is drawne into the aire by sunnie beames, Which turn'd to water showres it downe, and maketh That to the sea through th'earth a course it taketh. For the drie earth this falling water straines Howe the springs are engendred: Through the thin boulter of her hollow veines, Then makes it way, and from the rockie mountaines, Makes bubble daily millions of fountaines; Of these the litle gurgling brookes do grow, Which ioyn'd do make the wasting torrents flow, The wasting torrents do proud riuers forme, Of which the sailing floud is eftsoones borne. The snowie hils that border neare the skie, Vnto this grouth contribute willingly: How the tor∣rents or land∣flouds & riuers are engendred. For Titans taske begun anew, at times Which bring the faire spring to the colder climes, He melts vpon their backes the heapes of snow; Their tops turne greene, each where the waters flow Tumbling, and bubling as they froathing runne Along steepe trackes of craggie mountaine stone, They make a hundred torrents, one of which Seeing his brother ouergo him mich, Hastens his course to make with him an vnion, Whiles that a third and fourth help their communion; Running the same carier, and quickly drowne Of their falling into the sea. Their names and selues in streames of more renowne. Those streames of some great riuer are deuoured, Which ouerswaying fields, at length is powred Into that Rendez-vous, where God assigned They should discharge the taxes they were fined. Yet all these riuers running to the sea, Why the a of the fresh water . Do not a whit enlarge that watrie Lea: For besides that these flouds heap't all t'one top, Compar'd to it, are lesse then one poore drop: Yet doth the Sunne and Aeolus his race, Sweeping eftsoones great Neptunes sweating face, Exhale as much from that broad wauing field, As th'aire and earth vnto the same do yeeld. But as the quaking heate, and shiuering cold, Of the of the ea. And gnashing teeth which do the feavrous hold, Come not hap-hazard, but in time and order, Bring the weake trembling members in disorder. So doth the sea by sits approach to lond, And coming to, forsakes againe the strond. Whether the sea moued with Gods right hand, The thre to ∣ching the luxe and of the sea. Simile. Tooke first this motion, and may not stand Idle not any while from's mouing course; Like as a whirlegig once turn'd, doth force It selfe to moue around, and vertue takes From him that formerly the motion makes. Or that the sea which men the Midland call, 2 Be but a parcell of that liquide All, Whose waues falling into some higher ocean, Do dash themselues in their so angrie motion Against the rockie hils, whose solid strength, Quelling their force, makes them recueile at length. Or that the Moone, whose influence aboue 3 Ruling moist bodies, cause it so to moue. And to speake truth, we see the sea to slow, Why this last opinion is most probable. When on our Hemisphaere the Moone doth show: And suddenly to bbe, when toward Spaine The Cressant takes her backward course againe. Againe soone as her face, constant in changing, Encreasing shew's th' Antipodes her ranging, It marches foorth, and when her waning fire Doth passe the other noone, it doth retire. Yea which is more, the Midland sea, we know, Why some armes of the sea haue grea∣ter tides then othersome. Doth farther then the Tuscane ocean flow: Or that hight Bosphorus: and no such motion Doth stirre some duller places of the ocean: Because the Luna. siluer Planet, which will haue Rule of the flowing and the ebbing waue, With lesser force doth shed her influence Vpon a sea, where the circumference Is mountainous, or streightened twixt two stronds, Then where the ocean seemes to want such bonds. As in the Sommer, if the windie traine Simile. Of A Eolus be calme, with lesser paine The Delphian flame the champion fields doth drie, Then dales immur'd with hils and mountaines hie. If so this fluxe do shew it selfe more plaine Why the eb∣ ing is better per∣cei ed neare the sh e then in the maine sea. Hard by the shoare, then in the deeper maine: The pulse (Natures true clocke) it doth resemble, Whose extreame part more then the mid doth tremble; At least it seemes so. Now the starrie king Is equall to the queene, in gouerning The waters. For his hote light-giuing beames, How the salt∣nesse of the sea is caused. Scorching the fishie vessel-bearing streames, And sucking vp in's each dayes iournement, The sweeter iuice of that cold element: Leaues tart and thickened liquor in the Deepe, A transition frō the sea, to the consideration of admi∣rable effects of sund ie springs and riuers. With salt that on the vpmost top doth fleet. But see, how heare the sea doth pull me downe Into deepe seas, where I am like to drowne. See how his fluxe makes my words ouerflow. Well then let's hie to land, that sitting low Beside the brim of riuer, lake and brooke, Our thoughts into their strange effects may looke, Whose maruels nigh exceeding saith and wonder, Astound our wits, our eyes, our eares like thunder. The spring of Med o tu cor∣niger , vn die est, . 15. Meta . Hamon, while the Sun giues light, Is cold as ice; and contrarie, by night Though the cold Cressant make the night lesse hot, Yet boiles and fumes like water in a pot. Some hold for certaine, that the boughs of wood, Which being wind-broke, fall into the floud Of In stumi e Si∣laro vltra , non virgul∣ modo immer∣sa, verum & o l a lapidescunt. Pli▪ lib 2. c. 103. Silaris, or of Eurimedon, Are turn'd both wood, and barke, and leafe to stone. Ah, can my verse omit that streame in Iosephus lib. 7. bell. Iu , cap. 24. Iurie, That euery Sabbath stayes his running furie Religiously? vnwilling to be pained That seuenth day, which God for rest ordained. If so the shepheard chaunt his louely rounds By th' Eleusina brooke, those musickes sounds Do make the water boile, and dance and skip, And point by point the rusticke measures keepe. Plin lib 2. cap. 1 3. Cephis turnes white, Ceron blacke, Xanthus red, The fleecie troupes which there are watered. Like an Solin s cap 40. Arabian spring, that bordring neare To the red sea, turnes red their woolly weare. You Vide Ph . lib. 2 cap 103. vbi de so e loqui∣tur. Solan waters, and In Andro su∣la templo Liaberi pa so tem no∣nu Ianuarijs ∣per vini sap e flu re ter co . credit. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103. Andreian riuer, Whence comes that oyle and wine, which you yeeld euer Once in a yeare? art thou (O earthie Dame) So fruitfull? or beneath this worldly frame Are vines and gardens? and in them do lurke Men, that for Bacchus and Minerua worke? What shall I say of thee Sclauonian spring? Pl id. . . . Or what of thee Dodonian fountaine sing? When one burnes cloth, the other wood doth stench Halfe burnt, and kindles what it earst did quench. Faith, I should place these vertues admirable, In the false Register of euery fable; Wer't not for due respect, which (young) I giue To vnreproued Writers that did liue: And that the greedie Pilots of our daies, Had not found riuers stranger many wayes. In this great number of such differing brookes, A continuation of the f rmer argument, con∣firmed by ocu lar witnesse, of later ages. Of which a scholer might compile great bookes, Ile choose farre hence in places harbourlesse, Some fiue or sixe, as true as held truthlesse. In th'Ile of Fer, (mong other tis an Ile, Which men of old with Insulae forma∣tae. the Canatie Ilands. Happie name did stile) The sauage folke draw not their watrie food, As others do, from spring or running floud: Their drinke is in the aire, their waters source Takes from a weeping tree his dropping course: A weeping tree growing in a drie field, Doth make his sweating leaues sweet liquor yeeld: And (as the vine late cut, more fruite to beare, Distilleth gently many a pearled teare) Ceaslesse it droppeth downe a water cleare, Where round about the people pressen neare, Yet faile with all the vessels that they bring, T'exhaust the streames of this one woodden spring. In Thule. Ice-land men do find two wondrous springs, The one yeelds waxe; the other changeth things Cast in, to stone, although his water hot, Regurgeth bubbles, like a boyling pot. In golden Peru neare Saint Helens mount, Defyling pitch doth issue from a fount. What should I say? this is that new-found All, Whose riuers running to their Westerne fall, Know bet then we what right vse should be made Of working day-time, and the chillie shade Of th'idle night, and therefore runne by day, And spend the night in idle resting play. Great God, I feare I iealous should be counted and me ble for the bodie. Of thy great praise, if there were not recounted In my vnthankfull verse such streames, as runne Through Alume, Lime, Salt-peter and Brimstone▪ Whose vertues perfect medecines are held, For maladies that strike vs into eld In th'Aprill of our age, and with great strife Would antedate the period of our life. Now as my Gascoigne is the happiest field A particular description of the pleasant profitable of Gas∣coine. or corne, and wine, and men, the world doth yeeld; So free-cost baths do there abounden most, There stranger people flocke from euery coast, There the drie wombe, the paralyticall, The gowtie, vlc'rous, deafe, sciaticall, Comming from East and Westerne parts, do gaine The speedie cure of their tormenting paine. Witnesse Barege, Eucausse and the hote vaines Of Aigue-caud, Caudret and Baigner plaines, Baigner the beautie, paradise and praise Of those high hils, on whom in alder dayes The Hercules of France with child did bring Pyrene, daughter to the * sire and King Bebrix. Of Gascoins, whose attempts so generous Shew they deseru'd a sire so valorous. The mountaines whited with eternall snow, Do slanker in a part in stately row. Th'immortall verdure of a smiling plaine Excelling A valley n he of whose ∣tion do c use other pl asant ces to be hyperbolically so called. Tempe, hemmes it in againe On th'other side, the houses new appeare, The verie tiles do shine, a riuer cleare As Chrystall, so transparantly doth glide In each streete, that the pauement may be spide: And though that yeie riuer runne hard by A bath, that cureth euerie maladie, It keepes her nature, scorning all desire Voyez le neuf Mu es y a sune des p 165 To mixe her coolenesse with the others fire. But all these strange effects match not at all, Strauge Lers, that from a rockie stone doth fall. If it be true, that Aristoteles non capit Euripi , Euripu capiet Aristotelem. Lauren. Valle dealog. de Libero a bitrio. one most rarely wise, For want of skill the reason to comprise, How seuen times a day Plin. lib. 2 c 97▪ Pomp. M la li. 2. Euripus floweth, And seuen times t'his ebbing prison goeth; Egd with despaire, and with great shame confounded, Drownd him in flouds more fadomed then sounded: What would he do, if he should beate his braines, About the spring that waters Masere plaines, Rising at Belestat, neare th'hill of Fois, That stores with wood the people of Toloise? As oft as Phoebus ending his carrier, Each horizon with welcome light doth cheare, His burthen-bearing streames months fiue or foure, Doth runne and stay by turne in each halfe houre; For one halfe houre you may passe ouer drie, The other halfe it runnes so stickerly, As none can passe; his waters as they rise, The most renowmed streames would equalize: A learned streame that doth (Nature her guide) Without a clocke count euerie time and tide. Now the great God by his eternall hand, Of the o the earth and the sea. Most wisely plac'd the water and the land: For one requiring many moistning drops, The other chanels, banks and vnderprops, He enterlin'd them: so that the earth widing Her bosome to the sea, and the sea gliding About, throughout, vnder this earthie round, That the earth and the water are the center of the world, and why. Both make the perfect center of the Mound. For if their mingled selues be prou'd to be Beside the mid of the worlds axeltree, 1 All climats should not haue the silent night In equall ballance counterpoise the light. The ill▪deuided horizons decline 2 Would stretch too farre on one side of the line: Th' Antipodes or we should see by night 3 More then sixe signes to shed their glistering light. No certaine time should shew th'eclipsed Moone, 4 The heauens deboshd should seasons alter soone. This doth suffise to shew, that so compound The earth and the water make one round globe. Into one masse, they yet are fully round, Which by a turning art made like a ball, See day and night successiuely to fall. For Americ, Doue, Pole surnamed Marke, The reason. Nor anie cunning pilot of a barke One pole to th'other euer could subdue, Or liuing on the seas find countries new: Nor euer lose the Northerne starre, to view The Southerne pole, if so the ocean blew To fashion with the earth one globie tumor, Did not each where circle his fleeting humor. But (ô thou heauenly workman) whose essayes Why the water is of a spheari∣call figure. Are nere in vaine, what arches, or what stayes Couldst thou inuent the sea to vnderprop, That by a downward line it should not drop? O God, is it, because the watrie masse 1 Would by his nature to the center passe, And striuing so the deepest depth to sound, By falling by a line, remaineth round? Or is't because the shoares and coasting banks 2 Captiue the seas within their prouder flanks? Or is't because the Sea some stay doth winne 3 By millions of rocks scattered therein? Or is't alonely thy all-working grace 4 That makes it thus the tressed earth embrace? It is thy hand, thy hand (O God) alone, A transition frō the water to th'earth, wher∣of the figure, situation and stablenesse is described. That firmes with piles mans habitation: For though it hang in th'aire, or else be found To swim vpon the sea; though it be round, And round about it each thing turne, nay more, Though her foundations haue bene mou'd of yore; Yet it vnmoued is, that Adams race Might here obtaine a peacefull biding place. The earth the dearest mother the tenderest nource and the kindest hostesse that man finds. It is the earth receiues man being borne, Receiued fosters him; become the scorne Of other elements, by Natures enmitie, Her lap yeelds place for his last obsequie. The aire against vs often doth rebell, The whelming waters shew their malice fell Gainst wretched men; gainst men supernall fire As well as this below displayes his ire: But of the foure, onely the humble earth Is mans alone best friend after his birth. Tis she alone, that neuer leaues the place, Which earst was her assigned by thy grace. Yet is it true, that execrable folke , the of the earthquak With their deboshed manners, do prouoke Thy angrie hand (O Lord) some piece to shake, Although the totall frame do neuer quake: Aided with Northerne winds, which being pent Within her bowels, cause mad rumblement. . eare chils our hearts and makes our faces pale, The wind doth stirre the woods without a gale: High turrets tremble, and th'infernall caue, De oures in choler many a citie b aue. Sith then the earthie and the watrie Round The whole earth and the sea, is but point to he uens, whereof the least is eighteen times b gger then the earth. Is center, heart, and nombrill of the mound; And that, by reason, nothing closde about Equals the thing enclosing it without: Who doubts, but that this earthie watrie spheare Doth lesse proportion then the others beare? Iudge who so will; the greatnesse of this round, Which we admiring, doth vs so astound, Seemes but a point to that high . spheare aboue, Which forceth all the rest with him to moue: Sith the least twinkling starre, that with our eye We see to glitter in the vaulted skye, (If so Astronomers count not amisse) Then the whole earth twise nine times greater is▪ And if we count all that the Midland maine, The Indian seas, and all their armes do gaine, Beside what other riuers do possesse, Or desert is by heate or colds excesse, This Little will▪ be nought. Lo here ( men) the earth bears to the heauens, should reach men not to make a heauen of the earth. The place, for which you heauen do contemne. See with what confines your great'st renomie Bounds your best actions proudest memorie. Ye Monarches (thral'd to pride) that for the gaines Of one haires breadth, hide th'earth with slaughtred swains: Corrupted Magistrates, that on your chaires Sell causes as in markets or in faires: Who traffiquing the Law prophane your states, To leaue some trifle to your thanklesse brats: You that do vse vpon vse multiplie, You that do waights and measures falsifie: That so for you, the yoaked Oxe may beare The coulter, that the clodded earth doth teare: You that do sell your wals; you that would faine Some inch of land vpon your neighbour gaine, Mouing by stealth and sacrilegious hands The ma kes, that bounded out your grandsires lands: Alas what get you? When a warlike prince, By force or fraud shall all the world euince: A needles point, a moate, an atomie, Shall be his vertues largest salarie▪ A point his Empire, yea a very nought, Yea lesse then nothing, if that lesse were ought. When God (whose word doth more of nothing make, Then all the paines that proudest kings can take) Had seuerald the louds, equald the fields; Sunke downe the valleys, blowen vp the hils; Change, change (quoth he) o solid element, Thy sadder weed t'a greene habilement: A fragrant flowring girlond be ywreathed About thy forehead, by my fingers weaued. Display thy periwinke; with finest paint Embellish now thy bleake and paler taint. That from henceforth, thy proper guests alone May not be fed with plentie of thy wombe: But that thy stored lap may meate prouide For people of each element beside: So that the water, aire, and Angels dwelling May of thy glorieiealously be telling. He spake, and straight the Firre that pitch doth drop, The gummie Larix, Cedar with high top, And Boxe still greene are plac'd in trouped row, And on the highest tops of hils do grow. The aco ne-bearing Oake, the Carpie white, The barke-exchanging Corke, and Elme vpright, On litle hils and fields do pitch their ranks. The writhing riuers border out their banks With sailing Alder, with greene Osier, With Willow pale, and trembling Popular, And manie other trees for fewell made, For building carpentrie, and beasts to shade. Here hairie Peaches and the Orange golden, Sweete Apricots, the Quince faire to beholden With his white downe, vpon their backs they beare Ywritten faire Gods all-prouiding care. Sweet-smelling Apples, Nuts of either kinde, Idumean Dates, and Peares still apt to binde, The milkie Figge, the double died Cherrie, The sugred plumme, the hungrie Oliue berrie, Present a pleasant spring vnto the eyes, And make each field a verie Paradise. Here Pepper graines like clustered Grapes assemble, There Cynamon doth grow; here Nutmegs tremble With gentle gales, which do each yeare pouruey For Bandan ylanders a publike pray. There the white sweetnesse of moist sugar, breeds Within the bowels of Canarie reeds; There balme in teares doth drop; there the rich Vide Pl . l. 12 cap. 14. wood Of Saba land weepes fuming incense good. The louing Vine with winding armes embraceth The praise of the vine and w e takē with moderation. Her bearing husband, bout whose stocke she traceth. The Vine for fairenesse t'other trees inferior, As she for goodnes is their farre superior: Her liquor sober-taken rarifies The spirits, cheares the heart, and purifies The braines, brings colour, and awaketh The appetite, cleares passages, and maketh Fresh heate, pure bloud it breeds and subtilizeth The grosse, and the duld vnderstanding wiseth, Expels bad excrements, the bladder cleareth, Preserues our bodie that to death anneareth. Though th'earth for sinne, whereby our father old Though the degenerating earth be farre inferior to it selfe, in respect of her primi∣tiue beautie & fertilitie during mans innocen∣cie, yet doth the present cō∣dition thereof minister more then sufficient matter to vn∣deseruing man for the celebra∣tion of the pru∣dence and pro∣uidence of the omnipotent creator. Banisht his seed from heauen, no longer hold Her former glorie, hauing grau'd vpon her▪ Th'eternall makers vndeseru'd dishonor: Though with the world she strike her selfe in yeares, Though her fertilitie much lesse appeares, Like her who bruisd with many a wofull grone Of bearing child, whose oft-conceiuing wombe Peopling almost the circuit of a parish, At length becommeth barren, drie and warish: Yet doth it yeeld an ample argument, To praise the author of her ornament. The pleasing spring doth nere to me propose The blew-flour'd Flaxe, or the carnation Rose, The blushing Gellifloure in's purple fold, The snow-white Lillie, or the Marigold, But I admire the Painter that doth trace In them more colours, then Aurorae's face, Or in that Bow, which on the thirstie plaine Doth promise to shoure downe his fruitfull raine. God not content t'enrich with wholesome fruites, . Perfume with smels, and cloath with flowrie sutes The plants; hath in their rootes laid vp in store A perfect curing salue for euery sore. Sure without them (death fights so many wayes) Man should not liue full twentie yeares of dayes: But (like the flowre of flaxe, that dies in th'wombe In one selfe day) his cradle should be's tombe, His spring his winter, and his birth his death. Good Lord, how many draw their gasping breath By Stigian bankes, and cur'd by hearbes againe, Make greedie Pluto lose his hoped gaine! By them young Phoebus bearded cunning . sonne Restor'd the . young man, that to death was done, That did preferre, in modest chastitie, His death before incestuous venerie. . Medea by their iuice, to please her Iason, Made young againe cold and old▪aged Aeson. You hearbs that do our life in life maintaine, And when tis gone do call it backe againe: Tis not your iuice dispersed in your veines, That cur s alone so many deadly paines: But your meere smell, your onely being by, Gainst many daungers doth vs fortifie, Working such wonders as exceede beliefe, Vnlesse the hand and eyes do know the priefe. The of . V de P n. lib. 20. cap 8. He that about his necke doth suckorie bind, It doth expell the mists that make vs blind; So Cy minus. Tradu t si prag∣ radi em transgrediatur ▪ accelerat, &c. Diosc. lib▪ 2. c. 155 Swines-bread hung, doth not alonely bring Long trauell to a quicke deliuering; But more, if one with child do passe secure Ouer the root, she's forced to endure Abortment there: th'vnwholesome scorching blast, Th'envenimd glasse, nay poison creeping fast, That so dispeoples all Cyrenia land, Hurts not the man hath Artemisia. Pl n. lib. 25. cap. 7. Di sco. li. 3. cap. 108. Mug-wort in his hand. The Pionie tied to an infants necke, It giues vnto that cruell Morb comi∣ . Ill the checke, That tamed Hercules. If in thy braine God Bacchus chance excessiuely to raigne, Cirkle thy front with Qut ex on . . lib. 1. cap 24. Coro ae qu que ex co e∣ . . lib. 21. cap. 20. Saffron gatherd new, And thou shalt sodainely that storme subdew. The Syrens with their subtil-charming times, The dankish noy some gales from Southerne climes, Hurt not at all, those that alonely vse, Betweene their teeth Angelica to bruse: Angelica. A heauenly simple by an Angell brought, As both the name and force thereof haue taught. So Burnet held within the hand, doth stop The fluxe of bloud which from the sicke doth drop. And so his vrine redly shall be varied, That in his fist hath Rul siue . a ud quosdam (inquit ) morbu reg um sanar , eti∣a si ad gatus spectet r tantū. lib. 24. cap 11. An mplificati∣on of this dis∣course by other admirable in∣stances. madder long time caried. The force of Woad is strange, which they that touch, Do make the colour of their humors such. You Plants, your force doth not alone extend To men; but your strange force doth make to bend The fiercest creatures, and the Iron strong, The legions blacke of the infernall throng, The brightest lampes of heauen, if all be right, That of Vide Pl n. lib. 30. cap. 1. Thessalian sorceries men write. The Aconitum. (vt sa∣tua est) es admot qui rur∣s m Hellel ri contactu, ci∣iantur. Diosc. li. 4. cap 66. Plin. l 27. c. 2. Libbards-bane touch'd doth of sense depriue The chequerd Scorpion, that was earst aliue: As Plin. l. 25 c. 10 Lingwort touch'd reuiues the force, Which smotherd was in the dead-seeming corps. Serpents which Betonica vit tan a per betur vt clusae circu∣lo cius serpentes. ipsae sese flagellā lo. Plin lib. 25. c 8 Ma hiolus in 1. cap 4. lib Diosc. a th, that the I aliaus in cō∣mendation of any mans excel ling vertues, do vse this proue ∣biall speech, Tu vntu he no he la Betonica that is, You are more vertuous then Betoni . Betonie compasd around, Aduance their wrathfull heads aboue the ground, They hisse alowd, and from their fire-red eyes The flames of burning candles seeme to rise; They stemme each other, breake their long allyance, And wrathfully do make to each defyance. With furious onset they together bring Poison gainst poison, sting against a sting: Their bloud doth soile the blew-green-yellow groūds, Their bodies couerd are with deadly wounds; Nay but one wound; and onely death so cruell Can from their firie feud withdraw the fewell. As this dissolues the knots of amitie, So Inue it Lysi∣ herbam. Lysinachiā, vis est, vt dis or∣da ibus ugo im∣posit , asp ritatē co beat. Plin. li. 25. cap. . Water-sage doth stint the enmitie Of sighting Genets, if some carefull eye, The same vnto their collars chance to tye. If so a Mat. hiol. vpō Diosc. allegeth as much out of Columella. Hogge out of a trough do seed Made of the Decoctum so∣liorum cum vin potum absunut. . . 1. cap. 99. Tamarix, his milt with speed Doth wast; as if his teeth did lately bruise A plenū vim han , vt per dies 40. pot Lientem absumat. Discor. lib. 3. cap 128. Idem affirmat Plin. lib. 27. cap. 5. Milt-wast, that cunningly doth know to choose By vertue strange among the bowels all The milt, and hungerly thereon doth fall. Shall I stay here? the jades that feeding go Vpon the ground where The Italians (saith Matthiolus) call this he be Sferra-cauallo, that is, Vnshoe horse. lorio seemes to make it all one with the he be AEthiopis mentioned by Plini lib. 26. cap. 4. Lunarie doth grow Their wondring maister then away doth ride Vnshod. Moonwort, where dost that Loadstone hide, That doth the yron keepe in humble awe? Moonwort, where are thy pincers that do draw So cunningly the yron? where dost lay That marshals hand that sweetly puls away Their nailes? What locke can serue t'exclude Your craftie skill, if so a horse well shood, Pacing along where you your growing haue, Cannot be sure his nailes from you to saue? But I do thinke, the world doth not bring forth On hils or dales a plant of rarer worth, Then Produut i C ta capra sa∣gittis per ussas, herbae pa∣stu eas excutere. Diosc. lib. 3. ca. 31. Idem affir∣mat Plin. lib 8. cap. 27 lib. 25. cap 8. Aelian. lib. 1. de varia hist. Sohu cap. 31 Dittanie, which eaten by the Deere, Doth not his wounded side from danger cleare Alone; but backwardly doth daft Vnto the Archer his life-wounding shaft. What should I say? O God, is't not thy worke, That men may see in euery turfe to lurke A thousand other plants, each place t'adorne, Diffring in colour, in effect, in forme? And that each one pul'd timely from the ground, Doth poyson one, and make another sound. Th'hearbe Ferulae asinu gratissimae sunt in pabulo, c teris ve o praesentaneo ve∣ne o: qua de cau sa d. animal Li bero patri assig∣natur, & se∣rula. Plin. lib. 24. cap 1. Ferula brings beeues to deadly passe, And yet is wholesome for the drudging Asse. Galen de t m∣peramentis: d s∣cribitur b c her∣ba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67. lib. 6. c. 11. Et Plin. li. 25 cap. 13. Hemlocke to Stares is right commodious, But vnto man is poison odious. The Galen de t m∣peramentis: d s∣cribitur b c her∣ba a Diosc. lib 4. cap. 67. lib. 6. c. 11. Et Plin. li. 25 cap. 13. Rose of Daphne mules doth euer kill, But vnto man is counter-poison still. What is to man more poysonfull and vile, Then that fell weed which Rhododendri stores & olia muli , cambus, a∣sinu & quad u∣pedum plurimis venena sunt: ho∣minib. verò con∣tra serpentium morsus praesidia, èvi opota, &c. Diosc. lib 4. cap. 70 Plin. 16 lib. 20. cap & lib. 20 cap. 11. a est natura, vt homi∣nem oc dat, nisi quod in homine peri∣mat cum eo solo colluctatur, ve∣lut part in∣uento sola haec pugna est cum venenum in vis∣cerib. reperit, mi∣rum per se a bo cùm fin , du v ena in homine co riuntur, vt homo supersit. Plin. lib. 27. cap. 2. Libbards-bane we stile? And yet his iuice doth cure that burning smart, That from a Serpents taile would thrill our heart. O valiant poyson! ô couragious iuice! Proud liquor! plant full of disdainfull vse! That kils vnhelped, scornes his force to show Gainst vs, if any succour neare he know. A poyson giuing health, if so he spie Some other poison in vs; then he'le trie His force against it, and with secret spite, Euen hand to hand most cruelly they fight, So long they combat, and so strong they striue, That they both die, that man may scape aliue. Briefly, be it in fields abroad I walke, Of grai s, wool, silke, cotton, flaxe hempe, & such other com∣modities as the earth produ∣ceth. Climbe vp the hils, or in the woods do stalke, God is each where, from him comes each things store, He nought but giues, and I take euermore. Here for my food the haruest fields do waue Their tops; and here a thousand flieces braue (Worthie to make the greatest kings array) Shake in the silken forrests of Catay. And here the lower boughs of Malta cottons; Do garments beare within their tuffed buttons: Here linnen fine is made of flaxe ykempt, And sailes and tackling made of hollow hempe: That caried on the sea with wind and weather, I may acquaint the East and West together; And drily passe ouer the watrie lea, And many a towne may walke vpon the sea. As the diuine on ipotence did sh w it selfe mi aculously in the creation of all things of nothing, so doth it shine most gloriously in the yearely re∣no ation of some, and the daily preserua∣tion of all. Here Indian Wheate growes on a loftie reede, And thrice a yeare fiue hundred graines doth breede; Which Indian men do drie and bray, and knead, And bake it into hunger-killing bread. That puissant voice which built this worldly Round Doth euer glad vs with his ioyfull sound: Renewes the world each yeare, and by his strength Each thing is borne, doth liue, and grow to length. It makes the plough-swaine scatter (not in vaine) Vpon the crumbled earth his hopefull graine: Which couerd with the plough and hatch'd with care, Vnder the labour of the renting share, It dies to spring; and moistly hote doth tend Downward his root, vpward his blade to send: Enriching with his verdure all the plaines, And cheares the husbandmen with hope of gaines: The bud growes to an hearbe, th'hearbe to a reede, The reede an eare, the eare produceth seede: The eares to saue them from the sparrowes wast, With bearded eyles is hemd and ramperd fast: The seed hath cods, that it nor fall, nor rot, Nor blast, by wind, water, or weather hote: And the soft stemme to beare more bet the seed, Is vnderpropt as t'were with a new reed. Reader, excuse me, if thy wondring eye, So many trees do in my wood espie, My meadow so beslowr'd, my garden hearbed, My close so fruitfull, and my field so garbed: Sith in the Ile of Zebut there's a tree Surnamed Cocos, which appeares to be The tree called Cocos and his strange propri∣eties described. More rich then ought that woods, or hils, or fields, Or close, or garden, or an orchard yeelds. Art thirstie? in his bruised leaues is wine, Hast need of slaxe to make thee linnen fine? Then take the barke, beate it, and do it twist, To make thee cloth thereof when ere thou list. Wouldst thou so soone haue butter? do but clap Thy greedie teeth into the tender sap. Dost long for oyle? why that it yeelds also, If so his fruite be tossed to and fro. Wantst vineger? why all that's to be done, Is for to lay it in the burning Sunne. Wilt thou haue sugar? take his pompions ripe, And coole them in some fresher water pipe. Tis what thou wilt. I feare when Midas shall But touch it, t'will become a golden ball. I thinke that God, to make our ioyes notorious, The earth so fruitfull, and his name so glorious, Would nothing else haue made, if the whole▪ frame Should not haue had lesse beautie by the same. Now th'earthy surface is not onely drest Of the rich mettals and minerals em∣boweld in the earth. With things of price; for in her fruitfull brest Such treasures heaped are, as by no meane Can lucre-hunting men make riddance cleane: As more then all the starres in heauens vault, Or roaring waues of Amphitrite salt, Then haruest eares, or branches in the wood, Then foure-foot beasts or fishes in the floud. I will conceale the Ieat, Marble and Slat, Sa t Su & mon∣te natius salis, vt in India Oro∣nienus, in quo la∣picidinarum mo∣docae itur renas∣ce . re∣gum vect galex coest quàm ex a ro atque mar∣gari s. Pl . lib. 31. cap. 7. Oromen shall this time be forgat: That mount in . Arragon also, whose shiuers Do season meate for all the mountaine liuers. I am content that now my booke do passe Adorn'd with Mercurie, Vermilion, Brasse, With Orpine, Copper, Siluer, Gold, and Oare, Antimonie, Lead, Tinne, and Iron stoare. It pleaseth me t'enchase my worke of gold With Christall, that each faces life doth hold; The purple Amethist, th'Agate of name So diuers, and the Diamond of rich fame, The Cassidon faire circled to be seene, The Opall, Sardonix and Emraud greene, Hard Topaze, with the Carbuncle that burneth, Although the fire his substance neuer turneth. I know the earth seemes to a wretched wight None of the f med mettals are of themselues hu tfull, al∣though the co pt nature of man do most vngraciously abuse them. No mother, but stepmother full of spite; Because she brings foorth, to our litle good, Care-bringing gold and iron shedding bloud: As if mans malice made not vice abound, But these vnfaultie mettals of the ground. Like as th'alluring treasured gold doth kill Both soule and bodie of the man that's ill, So gold doth vertue guild, and giues vs wings Wherewith t'aspire vnto the Formam qui∣dem ipsam (Mar ce sili) & tanquá faciem honesti vides qu si cu∣lis cerne etur, mirabiles am res (vt a Plato) excitaret sapien∣tiae. Cic. de Ossic. lib. 1. fairest things. Man well aduis'd with iron serues his turne To plow the field, that (thankfull) yeelds him corne: For to defend his countrie and his life, From stranger tyrannie and ciuill knife. But wicked men do neuer iron take, But for hell furies weapons of it make, To spoile the passenger, to kill his brother, To wast his countrie, massacre his mother. Like drunkards that abuse a gift diuine, Other like in∣stances. And drowne their reason in a cup of wine: Simil. Of the secret vertue and ad∣mirable sympa∣thie of the Loadstone. As corrupt Lawyers with their eloquence Do palliate vice, and burden innocence: As Preachers false Gods word do often vse, When they the hearers fouly do abuse: For as the mustie vessell that doth stinke, Depriues of smell God- Bacchus richest drinke: So Gods best gifts are turn'd to vile excesse Of vice, when vicious men do them possesse. Shall I the Magnes appel latus est ab inuē∣tore (vt author est Nicander) in Idareperius in∣uenisse autē r∣tur, cla cre∣pidarum & ba∣culi cuspide ha∣rentibus, m armenta pasce∣ret. Plin. lib. 36. cap. 16. Load-stone passe, that dead-aliue My reason doth of reason selfe depriue? Magnesian praise, vndrawing drawing stone, Whose Lure is secret, and his hooke vnknowne, His baites and grapples are insensible; His lines vnseene, his hands inuisible Draw distant iron; and is nere at rest, Till with a longed kisse his hope be blest, Nay with embracement; and knowes not the force (O loyall mind) of vncoupling diuorce, Vnlesse we them disioyne: such tender loue This stone and iron towards each do proue. And though a put-betweene barre their desire, It puts not out their in-bred louing fire: But towards one another leape they will, At least by signes confirming their good will. Good God, who can conceiue, why that a ring But touch't therewith should straight his fellow bring? That second draw a third, that third another, And that pull after his fifth iron brother? Good Lord, whence comes this vertue, that doth cause That one vntoucht must follow th'others lawes? That knit and bound and glued they should be, Where neither glue, nor knot, nor coard we see? Disprouing reason, holding no compound Can hang in th'aire, not falling to the ground. Now I know well, that Lucretius. he whose cunning wit The cause of this sympathie vndemonstra∣ble. With Latine weeds the Grecians skill did fit, And from his wife receiu'd that deadly drinke, Wherewith t'augment his loue she (foole) did thinke, Doth striue to shew, by many a subtill reason, The reason of this sympathie so geason. But ( Lucrece ) tell whence comes that vertue forth, That turnes the compasse-needle to the North Toucht by this stone? faile not in this essay, And I will crowne thy head with verdant bay, And say in Natures secrets thou speakst truer, Then thy Empedocles, or Epicure. Bacchus for wine, Ceres for corne do bind Of the mari∣ners compasse needle. No faster vnto their deserts mankind, Then Flauus, when he first did bring to light The compasse-needle, for the sailing wight. His braue inuention guides on watrie rudges, The caricke that so slowly onward drudges: Serues for a cresset-light, and for a guide To search all corners of the earth so wide: It makes a ship, enforced by the wind, Almost a new world in one day to find, To marke the clime, and pricke vpon the card, How farre from th'Aequinoctiall they are squard. But th'earth doth not deserue this glorious name, Of diuers for of earth that are medicina∣ble. For things that grow alone vpon the same, Or in her bowels; but her proper merit To sing her praise inuites my thankfull spirit. I call to witnesse such as haue made proofe With profit, for their feebled healths behoofe, Of th'earth of Diosc. lib. 5. ca. 94 Plin. lib. 35. c. 16. Chios, and of Selia, Of that of Erithrie and Melia. Haile mother Earth, that bearest men and corne, Terr Encomion. Gold, houses, health, fruites, garments to be worne: Thou nourcing wombe, faire, patient, vnmoued, Fruitfull and fragrant, various and beloued, Clad with a robe with flowers all bespangled, With riuers lac't, fretted with colours fangled. Haile heart, roote, foot to that great Animal, Which men the World most vulgarly do call; Chast spouse of heauen, and foundation sound For all the buildings of this totall Round. I greete thee mother, sister, nource, and hostesse Of man, the king of creatures; all (great Princesse) Do liue for thee: for euery wheeling spheare T'enlighten thee his slaming torch doth beare; To giue thee heate, the purer fierie slame, To motion orbicular doth frame. The aire for thy refreshing pleasure taketh, When with the North or gentler West it shaketh. To moisten thee, the sea, fountaine and riuer With veines do interlace thy bodie euer. Oh! how it grieues me, that the wittiest men Against the scornfull con tempt of hus∣bandtie, and carelesse re∣gard of sear∣ching the na∣tures of sim∣ples. Do thee (O earth) so commonly contemne: That greatest hearts do husbandrie deride, And care of simples proudly lay aside For simplest men, and men of no demerits, That iron bodies haue and leaden spirits. Such were not once those venerable Sages, Whose praise the Bible tels to coming ages, Noe, Moses, Abram, who did most time spend In tilling, or vpon their flockes did tend. Such were not Cyrus, or king Archelas, Hiero, Philometor, or Attalus, Whose royall hands in steade of conquering blade And scepter, held a bill-hooke or a spade. Such were not Manius, Cincinnat, Fabricius, Vide Pl n. lib. 18 cap. 3. Or Serran that made warre gainst passions vicious, And did with coulter crown'd, with conqu'ring hand, With plough triumphant raze the Romane land. Yea Scipio tir'd with seeming happinesse, With Court-eclipses, tedious The word Au∣bades signifies such squea ing musique, as fid∣ling minstrels plav at mens windowes. sportfulnesse Of following troupes; and that great ( Diocletian ) Emperor, That, mad a king, became a labourer, To pettie hamlets did retire againe, And did in tilling take as mickle paine As earst in warre; setting their trees in rowes, As orderly as squadrons gainst their foes▪ An excellent commendation of the countrie life. O man thrise happie that himselfe sequesters From Citie troubles! and that neuer pesters His thoughts with kings affaires; but doth him arme (By Ceres taught) to plow his fathers farme! Pale Enuies poisond tooth doth not him bite, Nor greedie Care depriue him of delight. His will is bounded iust as is his farme; He neuer drinks such potions as do charme Mens Loue in stead of wine; nor mong his meate Doth euer life-depriuing Arsenicum. Orpine eate. His hand his goblet is, the siluer streame His sweetest Ipocras: his cheese and creame, And apples graffed by his proper hand, In vnprepared readinesse do stand. False pettifoggers (harpies of the barre, And bloud-suckers of men) with pratling warre Triflingly tedious, neuer dull his sence. But birds with their melodious eloquence Deceiue the busie time, on fragrant twigs Chanting sweet couplets to harmonious jigs. His wandring ship vpon the stormie maine Becomes no play-game for the windie traine: Nor doth he roame vpon the Ocean wide, To seeke where death doth dreadfully abide; But quietly his dayes all passing thorough, Doth neuer lose the sight of's natiue borough. Nor sea, nor riuer doth he euer know, Saue such cleare brookes as gurglingly do flow Watring his verdant fields; and that selfe earth Enterres him, that receiu'd him at his birth. To purchase sleepe he drinks no dulling ( . lib. 2 ▪ cap 18. ) poppie, Nor the cold ( ) rush that growes in Aethiopie. He doth not like ( ) Mecaenas musique buy, When his grieu'd soule in bodie pain'd did lye, And had no resting peace, but without stay The iealous paine on's verie bones did play: But on greene carpets of soft mosse that growes Fringing the banks, from out his side he blowes Sweet slumbring naps, enchanted by the sounds Of warbling brookes that runne on stonie grounds. Nor warlike trumpe, nor clarion, drumme or tabour Breaking his sleepe, put him to arming labour; Nor the commaund of anie chieftaine braue Leades him from bed blindfold vnto his graue. The wakefull Cocke makes him the time to know, Limits his sleepe, and with his chearefull crow Cheares him to walke among the floures early, Which with Aurora's teares waxen all pearlie. Close stinking aire in streets and filthie lanes, His bloud with damps infectious nere enflames: But open aire wherein he euer liues, Fresh appetite vnto him alway giues: Maintaines his health, puts verie death in doubt, In manie yeares to find his lodging out. In clymbe-fall court he spends no wretched yeares, His will depends not on the greatest peeres: He changeth not religion with his Lord. His mercenarie stile doth not accord, With lyes to make an Antan Elephant, Or stile a coward hard and valiant; Or make an Adon of some foule Thersite, Or wrong leud Flora with Alcestes right: But liues vnto himselfe, serues God in feare, And sings the verie thought his heart doth beare. Pale feare doth neuer feede vpon his heart; Nor doth he practise conicatching art: If he thinke on deceipt, tis to lay snares For rauenous beasts, or to catch vnawares The birds with twigs, with wieles the sealie frie. Now if his ward-robe be not sumptuouslie With silkes and tissue stuft; if so his chest Be not vnsafe with greedie Lingots prest: Yet are his garments made of purer wooll, And with vnboughten wines his sellar full, His lofts with graine, his wels with water cleare, His grange with hay, his parke is stoar'd with deare. For I speake of that countrie-mans good state, Whose house a pettie common-wealth doth mate: Not of the broken bouth, or hungrie neede Of the poore drudge that begs whereon to feede, Or hungrie fisher-man, whose foure-legd roome Hath but at pushes for to fill his wombe. His conclusiue oraison. Let me (ô God) of greatest Kings vnkend, In solitarie woods my life-time end; My pond my sea, my groue let be Ardena, Gimon my Nilus, Sarrapin my Sena, My Lutes and quiresters the winged sort, Bartas my The Kings house Paris so called. Louver, and my men my Court: Where I vntroubled may thy praise so thunder, As may strike dead succeeding men with wonder. Or if my dutie and my Princes grace Shall call me vnto anie waiting place, Grant, with his fauor I nere drunken be, But subiect to command, may yet liue free. False honour I may shunne, true honour gaine, Lou'd for no slatterie, but for dealing plaine. FINIS. Effugiunt auidos carmina sola rogos. Ouid. Amorum lib. 3. Eleg. 8.