The historie of the Councel of Trent Conteining eight bookes. In which (besides the ordinarie actes of the Councell) are declared many notable occurrences, which happened in Christendome, during the space of fourtie yeeres and more. And, particularly, the practises of the Court of Rome, to hinder the reformation of their errors, and to maintaine their greatnesse. Written in Italian by Pietro Soaue Polano, and faithfully translated into English by Nathanael Brent. Historia del Concilio tridentino. English Sarpi, Paolo, 1552-1623. The historie of the Councel of Trent Conteining eight bookes. In which (besides the ordinarie actes of the Councell) are declared many notable occurrences, which happened in Christendome, during the space of fourtie yeeres and more. And, particularly, the practises of the Court of Rome, to hinder the reformation of their errors, and to maintaine their greatnesse. Written in Italian by Pietro Soaue Polano, and faithfully translated into English by Nathanael Brent. Historia del Concilio tridentino. English Sarpi, Paolo, 1552-1623. Brent, Nathaniel, Sir, 1573?-1652. Vnto this second edition are added diuers obseruable passages, and epistles, concerning the trueth of this historie, specified in the next page. THE APPENDIX OF THIS SE∣COND Edition, conteining; 1 AN Epistle of Gregory the First, Bishop of Rome to Maurice the Emperour. 2 A passage of the History of Fr. Guicciardine Florentine, con∣cerning Pope Alex. 6. left out of his third Booke in the printed Copies. 3 A second passage of the same Author, conteining a large dis∣course of the meanes, whereby the Popes of Rome atteined to their greatnesse, that they now enioy, left out of the fourth Booke. 4 third passage of the same Author, left out of his 10. Booke. 5 Certaine passages out of the Letters of the Lords de Lansac, Pibr c, Ferrier, &c. taken foorth of the Instructions, and Missies of the Kings of France, and their Ambassadours sent to the Councell of Trent, Published in French. An. 1608. 6 Andr. udithius, Bishop of Quinquecclesiae in Hungary, his Testimony of the Councell of Trent, in his Epistle to Maxi∣milian 2. Emperour. 7 An Epistle f Bishop Iewell vnto Seignior Scipio, a Senatour of Venice, touching the causes mouing the Church of England to refuse Communion with the Councell of Trent: now first published according to the Originall annexed. 8 Lastly, the foresaid Epistle of Dudithius, written by himself in Latine. TO THE READER. C Ourteous Reader, thou shalt see in this Booke greater va∣rietie of remarkeable accidents, then, before the reading of it, thou couldest haue possibly imagined. The state of re∣ligion quite altered, in diuers Kingdomes and Countreys of Christendome; the Grandies sometimes diuided and armed one against another, sometimes ioyned in confederations and leagues; the Ecclesiastikes oppressed; the Protestants per∣secuted; the Bishops of Rome, as it were, acting their parts, and most liuely deciphered in their naturall colours. If learning will content thee, marke the disputations of the Theologues, and the deepe discourses of the Author him∣selfe. If policie will please thee, thou shalt finde it in the consultations and treaties of Princes, managed, with admirable dexterity, by their Am∣bassadors and Ministers; and generally no delight will bee wanting to thee, which thy curiositie can desire, or any other Historie affoord. But consider, aboue all, in what a strange manner the Conciliarie Acts of this assembly in Trent were caried. By reading of those few words of thy Countrey-man Edmond Campian, below in this page, thou maist perceiue in what repute the Papalins doe hold it; and after, when thou hast read the Booke, thou wilt know how much it is ouer-valued. Compare thy iudicious censure with his that is partiall, and thou shalt finde them to agree as white with blackenesse, darkenesse with light. Farewell. Verba Edmundi Campiani, ratione quarta, reddita Academicis. T Ridentina Synodus quo magis inueterascet, eò magis indies ebque perennius efflores∣cet. Bone Deus, quae gentium varietas, qui delectus Episcoporum totius orbis, qui regum & rerumpublicarum splendor, quae medulla Theologorum, quae sanctitas, quae lachrymae, quae ieiunia, qui flores Academici, quae linguae, quanta subtilitas, quantus labor, quam infinita lectio, quanta virtutum & studiorum diuitiae augustum illud Sacrarium im∣pleuerunt? The words of Edmond Campian in his fourth reason giuen to the Vniuersities. T He Synod of Trent the older it waxeth, the more it will flourish, Good God, what varietie of Nations, what choice of Bishops of the whole world, what splendor of Kings and Common-wealths, what marrow of Theologues, what sanctitie, what weepings, what fasts, what Academicall flowres, what languages, what subtilties, what labour, what infinite reading, what riches of vertues and studies did fill vp that Maiesticall sacred place? THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. M Y purpose 1500 Pope ALEX∣ANDER 6: Emperour MAXIML∣LIAN. I. HENRY 7. King of England. LEVVIS 12. French king. is to write the History of the Coun∣cell The purpose of the Author of Trent. For though many famous Histo∣rians of our age haue made mention in their writings of some particular accidents that happened therein, and Iohn Sleidam, a most di∣ligent author, hath related, with exquisite in∣dustry, the causes that went before, notwith∣standing all these things put together would not suffice for an entire narration. For my selfe, so soone as I had vnderstan∣ding The meanes he vsed for collection of his matter. of the affaires of the world, I became exceeding curious to know the whole proceedings therof: and after I had diligently read whatsoeuer I found written, and the publique instructions, whether printed or diuulged by pen, I betooke my selfe, without sparing either paines or care, to search in the re∣mainder of the writings of the Prelates, and others who were present in the Councel the Records which they left behinde them, and the Suffrages or o∣pinions deliuered in publique, preserued by the Authors themselues, or by o∣thers, and the letters of aduice written from that Citie; whereby I haue had the fauour to see euen a whole register of Notes and Letters of those persons, who had a great part in those negotiations. Hauing therefore collected so many things as may minister vnto me sufficient matter for a narration of the progresse, I am resolued to set it downe in order. I wil relate the causes and managings of an Ecclesiasticall Conuocation, by some, for diuers ends, and by diuers meanes procured and hastened, by some hindered and deferred for the space of 22. yeeres: and for 18. yeeres more, sometimes assembled, sometimes dissolued, alwayes celebrated with diuers intentions, and which hath gotten a forme and conclusion contrary altoge∣ther to the deseigne of them that procured it, and to the feare of those, that with all diligence disturbed it; a cleere instruction for vs to referre our selues to God, and not to trust in the wisedome of man. For this Councell desired and procured by godly men, to reunite the 1500 ALEXAND. 6. MAXIMILL 1. HENRY 7. LEVVIS 12. The conclu∣sion of this Councell was contrary to the opinion of all men. Church which began to bee diuided, hath so established the Schisme, and made the parties so obstinate, that the discords are become irreconciliable: and being managed by Princes for reformation of Ecclesiasticall discipline, hath caused the greatest deformation that euer was since Christianity did be∣gin: and hoped for by the Bishops to regaine the Episcopall authority, vsur∣ped for the most part by the Pope, hath made them loose it altogether, bring∣ing them into greater seruitude: on the contrary, feared and auoided by the Sea of Rome, as a potent meanes, to moderate the exorbitant power, moun∣ted from small beginnings by diuers degrees vnto an vnlimited excesse, it hath so established and confirmed the same, ouer that part which remaineth subiect vnto it, that it was neuer so great nor so soundly rooted. It will not be inconuenient therefore to call it the Iliade of our age; in the explanation whereof I will exactly follow the truth, not being possessed with any passion that may make me erre. And hee that shall obserue that I speake more copiously of some times, and more sparingly of others, let him remem∣ber that all fields are not equally fruitfull, nor all graines deserue to be kept: and that, of those which the Reaper would preserue, some eare escapeth the hand, or the edge of the sickle; that being the condition of euery haruest, that some part remaineth to be gleaned after. But first I must call to minde, that it hath beene a most ancient custome in the Church of Christ to compose the differences of Religion, and to reforme The originall cause & pro∣gresse of Sy∣nods. the corrupted discipline, by the conuocation of Synods. So, the first which be∣gan in the life time of many of the holy Apostles, whether the conuerted Gentiles were bound to obserue Moses law, was composed by a meeting in Hierusalem of foure Apostles, and of all the faithfull which were in that Ci∣tie: by which example in the occurrences which incidently sprung vp in e∣uery prouince for the space of 200. yeeres and more afterwards, the Bishops and chiefest of the Churches assembled themselues together to qualifie and end them; that being the onely remedy to reunite diuisions, and to accord contrary opinions. But after that it pleased God to giue peace vnto his Church, by exciting Constantine to fauour religion, as it was more easie for many Churches to communicate and treate together, so also the diuisions became more com∣mon. And whereas before, the differences went not out of a city, or, at the most, out of a Prouince, now by reason of the liberty of meeting together, they extended themselues ouer the whole Empire. Wherefore also it was ne∣cessary that the Councels (which were the vsual remedie) should be assembled from places more distant. Whereupon a Councell of the whole Empire, being congregated in those times by that Prince, it had the name of the holy and great Synod; and a litle after was called the general & Oecumenical Councel, though not assembled from all parts of the Church, a great part whereof ex∣tended it selfe beyond the bounds of the Romane Empire; but because the vse of that age was to call the Emperour Lord of the whole habitable earth, howbeit the tenth part thereof was not subiect vnto him. By which exam∣ple the like Councels were called by Constantine his successors in other occur∣ring differences of Religion. And though the Empire was diuided into the Easterne and Westerne, notwithstanding the affaires thereof being mana∣ged A new deri∣uation of the name of gene∣rall Councels. vnder a common name, the Conuocation of Synods throughout the whole continued still. 7 But after that the East was so diuided from the West, that there remai∣ned no more communion in the Soueraignty, and after that the East was for the most part possessed by the Saracens, and the West parted amongst many Princes, the name of an Vniuersall and oecumenicall Councell was no more deriued from the Roman Empire, but amongst the Grecians, from the assem∣bly of the fiue Patriarkes, and in these countreys of ours, from the vnitie and communion of those Kingdomes and States which obeyed the Pope in cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall. And the assembling of these hath beene continued, not to appease the dissentions about Religion principally, as before, but either to make warre in the Holy-land, or to compose Schismes and diuisions of the Church of Rome, or else for controuersies betweene the Bishops and Chri∣stian Princes. 8 In the beginning of the 16. centurie of yeeres after the natiuitie of our 1500 Sauiour Christ, there appeared no vrgent cause to celebrate a Councell, nei∣ther was there any likely to happen for a long space. For the complaints of many Churches against the greatnesse of the Court, seemed absolutely to be appeased, and all the countreys of the Westerne Christians were in the com∣munion and obedience of the Church of Rome. Onely in a small part, that is in that tract where the Alpes are ioyned with the Pyrences, there were some remainders of the olde Waldenses or Albigenses. In whom notwithstanding Waldenses in the Alpes. there was so great simplicitie and ignorance in learning, that they were not fit to communicate their doctrine vnto others; besides their neighbours conceiued so sinister an opinion of their impietie and obscenitie, that there was no danger that the contagion could spread any further. 9 In some Cantons also of Bohemia there were some few who maintai∣ned Picards in Bohemia. the same doctrine, euen remnants of those whom the Bohemians call Picards; whose increase could not be feared for the same reason. 10 In the same Kingdome of Bohemia there were some followers of Iohn Hus, which were called Calistini, or Subutraque, who, except that particular, Calistial in Bohemia. that in the holy Communion they ministred the Cup vnto the people, in o∣ther things differed not much from the doctrine of the Church of Rome. But these also were not esteemed considerable, aswell for their small number, as because they wanted learning; neither did it appeare that they desired to communicate their doctrine, nor that others were curious to vnderstand it. 11 There was yet some danger of Schisme. For Iulius the second, hauing Pope Iulius the second was more a souldier then a Clergie man. addicted himselfe more to the Arts of warre, then to the Priestly ministery, and gouerned the Popedome with excessiue imperiousnes towards the Prin∣ces and Cardinals, had constrained some of them to separate themselues from him, and to call a Councell. And the French King Lewis the twelfth, excom∣municated Levvis the 12. excommuni∣cated. by the same Pope, had withdrawen his obedience from him, and was ioyned with the separated Cardinals; which beginning, did seeme might produce some important cōclusion. But Iulius opportunely dying, and Leo be∣ing created in his stead, with his dexterity he reconciled, in a very short space, the Cardinals and the Kingdome of France both at once: so that a fire was quenched with admirable celerity and ease, which in likelihood might haue burned the Church. LEO 10. MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 7. LEVVIS 12. The descrip∣tion of Pope Leo. 12 Leo the tenth, as one whose birth and education was noble, adorned the Papacie with many good parts which he brought into it; amongst which were his singular learning in humanitie, goodnesse, and a marueilous sweete manner in treating of affayres, together with a pleasing behauiour, more then humane, ioyned with incomparable liberalitie, and a great inclination to fa∣uour those that were learned, and endowed with any extraordinary quality. Which vertues were not found in that Sea of a long time before, neither e∣quall, nor neere vnto his. And he would haue been a Pope absolutely com∣pleate, if with these he had ioyned some knowledge in things that concerne Religion, and some more propension vnto pietie, of both which he seemed carelesse. And as he was most liberall and well seene in the Arte of giuing, so in that other of gaining he was not able enough of himselfe, but vsed the as∣sistance of Lorenzo Pucci, Cardinall of Santi Quatro, a man exceeding sufficient in that behalfe. 13 Leo therefore finding himselfe in this state, quiet, the Schisme extingui∣shed absolutely, without an aduersary, as one may say, (because those few Waldenses and Calistini were not any way considerable) liberall in spending and rewarding aswell his kindred, as Courtiers, and professors of learning, o∣ther fountaines, from whence the Court of Rome was wont to draw riches vnto it selfe out of other nations, being dried vp, he thought fit to serue him∣selfe of that of Indulgences. 14 This manner of gaining money was put in practise after the yeere When the Art of gaining money by In∣dulgences be∣gan. 1100. For Pope Vrbane the second hauing granted a plenary Indulgence and re∣mission of all sins to whosoeuer made warre in the Holy land, to regaine and set at liberty the Sepulchre of Christ, out of the hands of the Mahumetans, was imitated by his Successors for many hundreds of yeeres; some of which (as alwaies new inuentions are enlarged) granted it to those that maintained a souldier, in case they could not, or would not goe to warre themselues in per∣son. And after in progresse of time, the same indulgences and pardons were giuen for the taking of armes against those that obeyed not the Church of Rome, although they were Christians: and for the most part infinite exactions were made vnder those pretences; all which, or the greater part, were applied to other vses. 15 Leo being counselled, by the Cardinall of Santi Quatro, to follow these examples, sent an Indulgence and pardon for sinnes throughout all Christen∣dome, Leo granted a plenary Indul∣gence. granting it to whosoeuer would giue money, and extending of it euen vnto the dead; for whom when the disbursement was made, his will was that they should be freed from the paines of Purgatory; giuing also power to eat egges and whitmeats on fasting daies, to choose themselues a Confessor, and other such like abilities. And although the execution of this enterprise of Leo had some particular in it that was neither pious nor honest, as hereaf∣ter shall appeare (which did giue scandall, and caused innouation) notwith∣standing many of the grants formerly made by the preceding Popes, had cau∣ses more vniust, and were exercised with more auarice and extortion. But oc∣casions arise many times which are able to produce notable effects, and yet come to nothing, for want of those that know how to vse them. And, which 1517 LEO 10. MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. 1517 is more, it is necessary, for the effecting of anything, that the time come in which it may please God to correct the errours of men. All these things met together in the time of Leo, of whom we speake. 16 For hauing published an vniuersall grant of Indulgence, in the yeere 1517. he distributed part of the haruest, before it was reaped or well sowed, gi∣uing vnto diuers persons the reuenues of diuers Prouinces, and reseruing some also for his owne Exchequer. In particular, the Indulgences of Saxonie, and of that arme of Germanie, which reacheth from thence to the sea, hee gaue The Popes sister hath a great part of the benefit of Indulgences. Leo was cre∣ated Cardinal at the age of fourteene. to his sister Magdalene, wife vnto Franceschetto Cibo, bastard sonne of Innocen∣tius the eighth: By reason of which marriage, this Leo was created Cardinall at the age of fourteene yeeres, which was the first beginning of Ecclesiasti∣call greatnesse in the house of the Medici. And Leo vsed this liberality, not so much through brotherly loue, as for recompense of the charges which the fa∣milie of Cibo were at, when he retired himselfe to Genua, not daring to abide in Rome so long as Alexander the 6. had linked himselfe with the Florentines, who being enemies to the house of the Medici, had chased it out of Florence. The sister (that the Pope his gift might be profitable vnto her) committed the care of preaching the Indulgences, & exacting the money vnto Bishop Arem∣boldus, Aremboldus was the agent of the Popes sister. who in the assumption of the Episcopal dignity, deuested not himselfe of any of the qualities of a perfect Genua Merchant. This man gaue power to publish the Indulgences to whosoeuer promised to raise most profit by them, without any regard of the qualitie of the persons, euen so so rididly, that no man of any tolerable condition could contract with him; but he found Mi∣nisters like vnto himselfe, who aimed at nothing but the gaine of money. 17 It was a custome in Saxonie, that whensoeuer Indulgences were sent by The Heremit Friars were publishers of Indulgences in Saxonie by custome. Popes, the Friars of the order of the Heremites were imployed to publish them. The Pardon-mongers, Ministers of Aremboldus would not goe to these, because, being accustomed to manage the like merchandizes, they might vse some deuice to draw some secret profit to themselues, and from whom likewise, as practised in this office, they expected not any extraordina∣ry thing, which might bring them more then vsuall aduantage; but they The Domini∣cans were im∣ployed by the ministers of Aremboldus. went to the Dominican Friars. These men, in publishing the Indulgences, desi∣ring to amplifie the value of them, more then others had done before, spake many strange things, which gaue cause of scandall. Whereunto was added the bad life of the Pardoners, who, in Tauernes, and elsewhere, in games, and other things not fit to bee named, spent that which the people spared from their necessary expences, to purchase the Indulgences. 18 By these meanes Martin Luther, an Heremite Friar, being stirred vp, began Martin Luther speaketh a∣gainst the In∣dulgences. to speake against the Pardoners, first reprehending these new excessiue abuses onely; after being prouoked by them, hee set himselfe to study this matter, being desirous to see the foundations and the rootes of the doctrine of In∣dulgences. Which when he had examined, passing from the new to the old 95. Conclusi∣ons of Luther. abuses, and from the building to the foundations, he published 95. Conclu∣sions in this matter, which were proposed to bee disputed on in Wittenberg, Iohn Thecel a Dominican proposed Cō∣clusions con∣trary to those of Luther. where they being seene and read, they were not opposed in any vocall confe∣rence, because no man appeared against him: but Iohn Thecel, a Dominican Friar, proposed others contrary vnto these, in Frankfort of Brandeburg. 19 These two files of Conclusions were, as one may say, a ioyning of issue. Wherefore Martin Luther went on to write in defence of his, and Iohn Ecchius to oppose them; and these Conclusions, together with other writings, being gone to Rome, Siluester Prierius, a Dominican Friar, wrote against Luther. Which contestation enforced both the one and the other partie to swarue from this Iohn Ecchius opposeth Lu∣thers conclusi∣ons. Siluester Prie∣rius wrot a∣gainst Luther. The doctrine of Indulgen∣ces was neuer well vnder∣stood vntill this time. matter, and passe to other things of greater importance. For the doctrine of Indulgences hauing not beene well examined in former ages, which did neuer consider how they might bee defended and maintained, or how impugned, the essence and causes of them were not well vnderstood. Some thought they were nothing but an absolution or freeing, made by au∣thority of the Prelate, from penance which the Church in the most aun∣cient times imposed, by way of discipline, vpon the penitent, (which im∣position was assumed in succeeding ages by the Bishop onely, after delega∣ted to the penetentiary Priest, and in conclusion left wholly to the will of the Confessor) and that they deliuered vs not from paying the debt due to the Iustice of God. Others thinking that this brought more hurt vnto Christi∣ans then benefit, who being deliuered from Canonicall punishments, be∣came negligent to satisfie the diuine Iustice with voluntary penance, be∣gan to bee of opinion, that they set vs free from both the one and the o∣ther: but these were diuided. Some thought that they set vs free, though nothing were giuen in recompence for them. Others, abhorring that opini∣on, said, that, by reason of the mutuall participation in charitie of the members of holy Church, the penance of one might bee communicated vnto another, and free him by this compensation. But because it seemed that this was more proper to men of an holy and austere life, then to the au∣thority of Prelates, there arose a third opinion, which made them in part an absolution, because authority was necessary for them, and in part a com∣pensation. But in regard the Prelates liued not in such sort, as that they could spare much of their merits for others, there was made a treasury in the Church full of the merits of all those who had more of them then would serue their owne turnes; the dispensation whereof is committed to the Pope, who, when he giueth Indulgences, recompenseth the debt of the sin∣ner, by assigning so much in value out of the treasurie. Neither was there The treasure of the Church an end of the difficulties: for it was opposed that the merits of Saints being finite and limited, this treasure might be diminished. Wherefore desiring to make it indeficient, they added the merits of Christ, which are infinite: Whence arose a doubt what need there might be of the little drops of the me∣rits of others, when there was an infinite Ocean of the merits of Christ: which gaue cause to some to make the treasure to bee onely of the merits of our Sauiour. 20 These things, so vncertaine at that time, and which had no other foun∣dation then the Bull of Clement 6. made for the Iubilie of they yeere 1350, seemed not sufficient to oppugne the doctrine of Martin Luther, to resolue his reasons, and to conuince him. Wherefore Thecel, Ecchius, and Prierius, seeing them∣selues The aduersa∣ries of Luther prooue the doctrine of Indulgences by common reasons only. not strong enough in points proper for this matter, betooke them∣selues to common places, and layd for their ground worke the Popes autho∣ritie, and consent of the Schoolemen; concluding that the Pope, not beeing 1518 LEO 20. MAXIMIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Luther begin∣neth to speake against the Popes autho∣rity, and other doctrines of the Romane Church. able to erre in matters of faith, and hauing approoued the doctrine of the Schoolemen, and himselfe publishing the Indulgences to all the faithfull, it was necessary to beleeue them as an article of faith. This gaue occasion to Martin to passe from Indulgences to the authoritie of the Pope; which being predicated by others to be the highest in the Church, was by him made infe∣riour to a Generall Councell lawfully called, where of he said there was need in that instant and vrgent necessitie: and the heat of disputation continuing, the more the Papall authority was aduanced by others, the more it was by him abased. Notwithstanding, he conteined himselfe within the bounds of speaking modestly of the person of Leo, sometimes referring himselfe to his iudgement. And, for the same reason, the doctrine of remission of sinnes, of Penance, and of Purgatorie was set on foote, the Romanists seruing them∣selues of all these common places for proofe of Indulgence. 21 Friar Iames Hogostrat, a Dominican Inquisitor, wrote against Martin Lu∣ther Iames Hogo∣strat his per∣swasion to the Pope. more to the purpose then them all; who, setting these reasons aside, ex∣horted the Pope to conuince Martin with chaines, fire, and flames. 22 Neuertheles, the controuersie grew still more bitter, and Martin alwaies 1518 went forwards to some new proposition, as occasion was offered. Wherefore Pope Leo caused him to be cited to Rome by Hierom Bishop of Ascoli, Auditor of Meanes vsed by the Pope to bring Lu∣ther to Rome. the Chamber, in August 1518; and wrote a Briefe to Fredericke Duke of Saxo∣nie, exhorting him not to protect him. He wrote also to Thomas de Vio, Car∣dinall Caietan, his Legat in the diet of Ausburg, that he should vse all diligence to commit him to prison, and to send him to Rome. Diuers meanes were v∣sed to the Pope, that he would be contented to order that his cause might be examined in Germany; who yeelded to referre it to his Legat, vnto whom the iudicature thereof was committed, with instruction, that if he could disco∣uer any hope of repentance in Martin, he should receiue him into fauour, pro∣mising Luthers cause referrred to Card. Caietan the Popes Le∣gat. him pardon of all his errours past, together with honours and re∣wards, referring the whole to his wisedome; but in case he found him in∣corrigible, he should desire Maximilian the Emperour, and the other Princes of Germany, that he might be punished. 23 Martin went to the Legat to Ausburg, vnder the safe-conduct of Maximi∣lian; Luther com∣meth to the Legat with the Emperors safe-conduct. where, after a conuenient conference vpon the controuersed doctrine, the Cardinall hauing discouered that by tearmes of Schoole-diuinity in the pro∣fession where of himselfe was most excellent, Martin could not be conuinced, that he alwaies serued himselfe of the holy Scripture, which is vsed but a little by the Schoolemen, he declared that he would dispute no more with him, but exhorted him to a retractation, or, at least, to submit his Bookes and doctrine to the iudgement of the Pope, shewing him the danger he was in, if he persisted, and promising him fauours and benefits from his Holines. Martin not answering to the contrary, he thought it not fit to wring from him a negatiue, by pressing him too much, but rather to giue space, that the threats and promises might make impression, and therefore gaue him leaue Luther had leaue to de∣part. to depart for that time. He caused also Friar Iohn Stopiccius, Vicar generall of the order of the Heremites to treat with him in conformity hereof. 24 Martin beeing returned once more, the Cardinall had much confe∣rence with him concerning the heads of his doctrine, rather hearing what he said, then disputing, to gaine himselfe credit by the proposition of ac∣commodating the busines. Whereunto when he descended, exhorting him not to let slip so secure an occasion, and so profitable, Luther answered him, with his accustomed vehemencie, that no composition could be made to the preiudice of the truth; that he had offended no man, nor had neede of the fa∣uour At his returne he was more vehement then before. of any; that he feared no threats, and that, if any thing were vnduly at∣tempted against him, he would appeale to a Councell. The Cardinall (who had heard that Martin was secured by some Grandies, that they might hold a bridle in the Popes mouth) suspecting that he was perswaded to speake in that sort, disdained at it, and descended to bitter reprehensions, and base tearmes, and concluded that Princes haue long hands, and so bid him bee gone. Martin, beeing parted from the Legats presence, remembring Iohn Hus his case, went from Ausburg without saying any more. From whence when he was a good way distant, thinking better of his owne case, he wrote a letter to the Cardinall, confessing he had been too sharpe, laying the blame Luthers letter. vpon the importunity of the Pardoners and of those that wrote against him, promising more modestie hereafter, to satisfie the Pope, and not to speake any more of Indulgences, with condition that his aduersaries should doe the like. Yet neither they nor he could be kept silent, but one prouoked the other; whereby the controuersie grew more sharpe. 25 Wherefore the Court in Rome spake disgracefully of the Cardinall, at∣tributing The Cardinall is blamed in Rome for vsing Luther with base termes. all the mischeife to the seueritie and base termes vsed against Luther; they blamed him for not hauing promised him great riches, a Bishopricke, and euen the red hat of a Cardinall. And Leo, fearing some great innouation in Germanie, not so much against Indulgences, as against his owne authoritie, made a Bull vnder the date of the 9. of Nouember 1518, wherein he set forth the validitie of Indulgences, and that himselfe as successor of Peter, and Vi∣car The Bull of Leo for the do∣ctrine of In∣dulgences. of CHRIST had power to grant them, both for the liuing & for the dead; and that this was the doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is mother and mistris of all Christians, which ought to be receiued of whosoeuer would be in the communion of the Church. He sent this Bull to Cardinall Caietan, who, being at Lintz in vpper Austria, published it, and caused many authenti∣call copies to be made thereof, sending them to all the Bishops of Germany, with commandement to publish them, and seuerely, and vnder great penal∣ties to enioyne all men not to haue any other faith. 26 By this Bull Martin saw cleerely, that from Rome, and from the Pope, he could looke for nothing but condemnation; and as before he had for the most part spoken reseruedly of the person and iudgement of the Pope, so af∣ter the publication of this Bull he resolued to reiect it. Wherefore he set forth The Popes Bull made Lu∣ther appeale to a Councell. an Appeale; wherein hauing first said, that hee would not oppose himselfe to the authoritie of the Pope when he taught the truth, he added, that he was not exempt from the common conditions of being subiect to erre & to sinne; alleadging the example of S. Peter, sharpely reprehended by S. Paul. But hee said, it was an easie thing for the Pope, hauing so great riches and retinue, to oppresse whosoeuer was not of his opinion, without respect of any; vnto whom none other helpe remained, but to flie vnto a Councell, by the benefit of appeale; because all reason perswadeth, that a Councell ought to be pre∣ferred 1519 LEO 10. MAXINIL. 1. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 7. before him. This Appeale went throughout all Germany, and was read by many, and esteemed reasonable. Wherefore Leo his Bull extingui∣shed not the fire that was kindled in those parts. 27 But it hauing giuen courage to the Court in Rome, as if the flame had been quenched, Friar Samson of Milan, of the order of S. Francis, was sent to preach the same Indulgences amongst the Suisses; who hauing published them in many places, and collected the summe of 120000. crownes, came fi∣nally The occasion why Zuinglius began to op∣pose the Pope. to Zuric, where Vlricus Zuinglius, a Canon in that Church, was professor; who opposing himselfe to the doctrine of this Friar the Pardoner, there grew great disputation between them, passing also from one matter to another, as it happened in Germanie. Whereby it came to passe that Zuinglius was hear∣kened vnto by many, and gained credit, and was imboldned to speake, not onely against the abuse of Indulgences, but against the Indulgences them∣selues, and euen against the authoritie of the Pope, who granted them. 26 Martin Luther perceiuing that his doctrine was esteemed, and that it Luther pas∣seth to other points. passed also into other countreys, became more couragious, and set himselfe to examine other articles, and, in the matter of Confession, and of the Com∣munion, he forsooke the opinion of the Schoolemen, and of the Church of Rome, approouing rather the Communion of the Cup vsed in Bohemia, and setting downe for the principall part of repentance, not the diligent confes∣sion made to the Priest, but rather the purpose of amendment of life for the time to come. He passed also vnto Vowes, and touched the abuses of the Monasticall Order; and these his writings, going on their iourney, arriued in Louaine and Collen; where, being seene and examined by the Diuines of those His Bookes were condem∣ned in Louaine and Collen. Vniuersities, they were condemned by them. Neither did this trouble Martin one iote, but rather caused him to goe on, and to declare and fortifie his do∣ctrine the more it was opposed. 29 With these contentions rather then resolute discussions passed the yeere 1519 1519, when many aduertisements comming to Rome, of the stirres in Germany and Suisserland, augmented with many amplifications and additions, as the manner of fame is, especially when matters are related from places farre di∣stant, Leo was noted for negligence, that in so great dangers had not vsed pow∣erfull The Pope was blamed. remedies. The Friars particularly blamed him; that being addicted to magnificence, to hunting, to deliciousnesse, and to musicke, (with which he was delighted beyond measure) he passed ouer things of the greatest impor∣tance. They said, that in point of Faith the least thing ought not to be neg∣lected, nor the prouision against it one iote to bee deferred, which, as it is most easie before the mischiefe take roote, so it commeth too late when it is waxed old. That Arius was but a small sparke, which might easily haue been put out, and yet it set the whole world on fire. That Iohn Hus and Hie∣rome of Praghe would then haue done as much, if in the beginning they had not been suppressed by the Councell of Constance. On the contrary side, Leo Leo, though reprehended for negligence thought hee had done too much. repented himselfe of whatsoeuer he had done in these occurrences, and most of all of the Briefe of Indulgences sent into Germany, thinking it would haue been better to let the Friars dispute amongst themselues, and to keepe him∣selfe neutrall, and reuerenced by both parties, then by declaring himselfe for one to constraine the other to alienate themselues from him; that this con∣tention 1520 LEo 10. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1 was not so great, as that it was necessarie to hold it in any reputati∣on, and that, so long as it was lightly esteemed of, few would thinke of it, and if the Popes name had not been vsed in it vntill then, would haue ended his course, and so vanished. 30 Notwithstanding for the many instances of the Prelates of Germanie, of the Vniuersities, who, being interessed by the sentence of condemnation, betooke themselues to the Popes authoritie for their protection, and especi∣ally for the continuall importunities of the Friars of Rome, he resolued to yeeld to the common opinion. And he made an assembly of Cardinals, Pre∣lates, Diuines, and Canonists, vnto which he wholly remitted the busines. A dispute be∣tween the Di∣uines and Ca∣nonists. By this it was most easily concluded, that the Pope should denounce fire and sword against so great an impietie. But yet the Canonists differed from the Diuines, these beeing of opinion that he ought presently to descend to this denunciation, and those saying that a citation ought to go before. The Di∣uines alleadged that the doctrine was euidently seen to be impious, that the books were divulged, and the sermons of Luther notorious. The others said, that Notoriousnes did not take away the defence, which is allowed by the law of God and nature, alleadging the vsuall places: Adam where art thou? Where is thy brother Abel? and in the accident of the fiue Cities, I will go down and see. They added that the citation of the Auditor the yeere before, by vertue whereof the iudicature was referred to Caietan in Ausburg, and remained vn∣perfect, if nothing els were, shewed it to be necessary. After many disputes, in which the Diuines attributed the decision vnto themselues alone, because the question was in point of faith, & the Lawyers appropriated vnto themselues as much as concerned the forme of iudgement, a composition betweene them was proposed, distinguishing the businesse into three parts, the do∣ctrine, the bookes, and the person. For the doctrine, the Canonists yeelded that it should be condemned without citation: for the person, they persisted to maintaine that the citation was necessarie. Yet not beeing able to ouer∣come others who insisted vpon their owne opinions with greater acrimony, & couered themselues with the buckler of religion, they found a middle way, that a precept should be sent to Martin with a conuenient terme, that so it should be resolued into a citation. Concerning the bookes there was more to doe. The Diuines did thinke they ought to be condemned absolutely to∣gether with the doctrine, and the Canonists that they should be ioyned with the person, and comprehended vnder the terme. It not being possible to make an accord herein, they did both the one and the other. For first they were condemned for the time present, and afterwards a terme alotted to burne them. And with this resolution a Bul was framed vnder the date of the 15. of Iune 1520; Which being, as it were, a beginning and foundation of the Councell of Trent, whereof wee are to speake, it is necessary to set downe 1520 here a briefe Epitomic thereof. 31 In which the Pope, directing the beginning of his words to Christ, who hath left Peter and his Successours for Vicars of his Church, exciteth him to The Popes Bull. assist it in these necessities. From Christ he turneth to S. Peter, and praieth him, by the charge which he receiued of our Sauiour, to be carefull of the distresses of the Church of Rome, consecrated with his blood. And passing to S. Paul, desireth the like assistance from him; adding, that, although he hath deemed heresies to bee necessarie for triall of the good, yet it is conuenient to extin∣guish them in the beginning. Finally, turning himselfe to all the Saints of heauen, and to the Church vniuersall, hee prayeth them to intercede with God, that the Church may be purged from so great contagion. Then hee proceedeth to shew how it came to his knowledge, and how hee hath seene with his eyes, that many errors were renewed, which were condemned long before, of Grecians, Bohemians, and others, false, scandalous, apt to offend god∣ly eares, and to deceiue simple mindes, sowed in Germanie, alwayes beloued both by him, and by his predecessors, who, after the translation of the Greeke Empire, haue euer taken their protectors from that nation, and that many pious decrees against heretikes haue beene made by those Princes, which the Popes also haue confirmed. Therefore that hee, not willing to tolerate the like errors any longer, but rather to make prouision against them, would re∣cite some of them: and here he repeateth 42. Articles, which are in the points The Pope condemneth 42. articles of Luthers doctrine. of originall sin, Penance and remission of sins, of the communion, of Indul∣gences, of Excommunication, of the power of the Pope, of the authoritie of Councels, of good works, of Free-will, of Purgatory, & of pouerty, all which he saith are respectiuely pestiferous, pernicious, scandalous, offensiue to pious eares, contrary to charity, contrary to the reuerence which is due to the Church of Rome, contrary to obedience, which is the sinew of Ecclesiasti∣call discipline: wherefore being willing to proceede to sentence, he, with the Cardinals, genetals of the regular orders; with other Diuines and Doctours, both of the one and the other law, hath made diligent examination of them. Therefore hee condemneth and reiecteth them, respectiuely, as hereticall, scandalous, false, offensiue to pious eares, deceitfull to godly minds, and con∣trary to the Catholike trueth: Hee prohibiteth vpon paine of excommunica∣tion, and infinite punishments, that no man should dare to keepe them, de∣fend them, preach them, or fauour them. And because the same assertions are found in the bookes of Martin, therefore he condemneth them, comman∣ding Luthers bookes are condemned to the fire. vnder the same paines, that none may reade or keepe them, but that they ought to be burned, as well those which doe containe the foresaid proposi∣tions, as all the rest. Concerning the person of Martin himselfe, he saith, he The Pope gi∣ueth an admo∣nition to Lu∣ther and his followers. hath many times admonished, cited, and called him, with promise of safe con∣duct, and prouision for his iourney; that, if hee had come, hee would not haue found so many errours in the Court as hee saide, and that himselfe the Pope would haue taught him, that the Popes his predecessors haue neuer er∣red in their constitutions. But because he hath endured the censures for the space of a whole yeere, and hath dared to appeale vnto a future Councell, a thing prohibited by Pius, and Iulius the second, vnder the punishments due to heretikes, hee could proceed to condemnation without any more adoe; notwithstanding, forgetting these iniuries, hee admonisheth the said Martin, and his protectors, to change their opinions, cease to preach, and in the terme of 60. dayes, vpon the same paines, to reuoke al the foresaid errors, and burne the bookes; which in case they doe not, hee declareth them notorious and obstinate heretiques. After he commandeth all vnder the same paines, that they keepe not any booke of the same Martin, though it conteine not the like errours. Then ordaineth that all men ought to shunne as well him as his fa∣uourers; yea, commandeth euery one to apprehend them, and bring them personally before him, or at least chase them out of their Lands and Coun∣treys: hee interdicteth all places whither they shall goe: commandeth that they bee euery where made knowen, and that his Bull ought to bee read in euery place, excommunicating whosoeuer shall hinder the publication there∣of: he determineth that the exemplifications ought to be beleeued, and or∣dereth that his Bull be published in Rome, Brandeburg, Misna, and Mansperg. Martin Luther receiuing newes of the condemnation of his doctrine and The Popes admonition cruseth Lu∣ther to make a solemne Appeale. bookes, set foorth a writing, repeating the Appeale made to the Councell, and making replication thereof for the same causes. Furthermore, for that the Pope had proceeded against a man not called, nor conuinced, nor the controuersie of the doctrine heard, preferring his owne opinions to the word of God, and leauing no place for the Councell, he offereth to demonstrate all these things, praying the Emperour and all Magistrates to accept this his Ap∣peale, for defence of the authority of the Councell, thinking that this decree of the Pope bindeth not any, till the cause be lawfully discussed in a Synod. But men of vnderstanding seeing the Bull of Leo, marueiled at it for ma∣ny causes. First, concerning the forme, that the Pope should proceede to a The Bull of Leo censured: declaration with clauses of the palace in a matter which ought to be han∣dled with the words of the holy Scripture; and especially vsing periods so intricate, and so long and prolixe, that it was scarcely possible to draw any sense from them, as if he had been to giue sentence in a feodatary cause. And it was particularly noted that one clause which saith, Inhibentes omnibus ne praefa∣tos errores asserere praesumant, is so drawen out in length, with so many inlarge∣ments and restrictions, that betweene Inhibentes and Praesumant, there are placed more then foure hundred words. Others, passing on a little further, considered that, to haue proposed and condemned as hereticall, scandalous, false, offensiue to pious eares, and deceit∣full to simple minds, 42. propositions, without declaring which of them were hereticall, which scandalous, which false, but onely with a word (res∣pectiuely) attributing to euery one of them an vncertaine qualitie, caused a greater doubt then was before; which was not to define the cause but to make it more controuersed, and to shew more plainely, that another autho∣rity and wisedome was necessary to determine it. Some also were filled with admiration, for that it was said, that amongst the 41. propositions there were errours of the Grecians condemned long a∣goe. Others thought it a strange thing, that so many propositions in diuers points of faith, should be decided in Rome by the aduice of the Courtiers onely without participating them to other Bishops, Academies, and learned persons of Europe. But the Vniuersities of Louain and Collen, being pleased that there was a co∣lour giuen to their sentence by the Popes Edict, publikely burned the bookes of Luther. Which gaue cause that he also in Wittenberg, (all that Schoole be∣ing The Popes Bull and the Decretals burned in Wittenberg. assembled) iudicially and publiquely made to be burned, not onely the Bull of Leo, but together also the Popes Decretals; and after gaue an account to the world of that action in a long manifest, published in writing, noting 521. LEO 10. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. A Councell was thought to be necessa∣rie for two causes. the Papacie in tyrannie of the Church, peruersenesse of Christian doctrine, and vsurpation of the power of lawfull magistrates. But aswell for Luthers appeale, as for these and other considerations, euery one became of opinion, that a lawfull Councell was necessarie, by which, not onely the controuersies might bee decided, but the abuses also, long since brought into the Church, might bee redressed; and alwayes the necessitie hereof appeared the more, by how much the more the contentions increa∣sed, writings being set forth continually, both by the one part, and the other. For Martin failed not to confirme his doctrine by diuers writings, and, accor∣dingly as he studied, hee discouered more light, euer passing some step fur∣ther forward, and finding articles, of which in the beginning hee had not thought: Which hee sayd he did for the zeale of the House of God. But hee was constrained also by necessitie. For the Romanists hauing laboured ef∣fectually in Collen with the Elector of Saxonie, by the mediation of Hierom Aleander, that he would deliuer Martin prisoner to the Pope, or by some other meanes to procure his death, he saw that he was obliged to shew vnto that Prince, and to the people of Saxonie, and euery one else, that he had rea∣son on his side, that neither hee nor any other potentate, might yeelde to the earnest intreaties of the Romanists, made against his life. The yeere 1520, being thus passed, the diet of Wormes, of the yeere 1521. 1521. Luther called to the Diet. was celebrated in Germanie; to which Luther was called to render an account of his doctrine, and had giuen vnto him a safe conduct by the Emperour Charles, elected two yeeres before. He was counselled not to goe thither, seeing that the sentence of his condemnation made by Leo was published before, and hanged vp; whereby he might assure himselfe to bring backe no∣thing but a confirmation of his doome, if peraduenture no worse thing hap∣pened vnto him. Notwithstanding himselfe thought the contrary, against the opinion of al his friends, and said, that though he were sure to haue to doe against as many deuils as there were tiles in the roofes of the houses of that citie, he would goe thither. And in that place, the seuenteenth of Aprill, hee was demaunded by the Luther inter∣rogated in the Diet. Emperour and the whole assembly of the Princes, if hee were Authour of the Bookes which went abroad vnder his name, the Titles whereof were recited, and the copies, placed in the midst of the roome where they sate, were shewed vnto him; and whether he would defend whatsoeuer was contained in them, or retract something. His answer was that, concerning the books, he acknow∣ledged thē to be his; but to resolue whether to maintaine the things cōtained in them, or not, was a matter of great moment, & therfore required some time of deliberation. There was granted him time that day, to giue his answere the next: Which being come, Martin, brought into the assembly, made a long ora∣tion. Answereth. First, he excused his simplicitie, if, bred after a priuate & simple maner, he had not vsed tearmes according to the dignitie of that place, and giuen to eue∣ry one conuenient titles; then he confirmed that he acknowledged the books for his owne. And concerning the defence of them, hee said they were not all of one sort, but some contained doctrine of Faith and Pietie, others reprehen∣ded the Doctrine of the Romanists, and a third kinde was of those which were written contentiously, against the defenders of the contrarie doctrine. For the first, he said he were no Christian or honest man if he should retract them; the rather, because though all were condemned, yet all were not iud∣ged naught by the same Bull of Leo. For the second, that it was too manifest, that all the Countryes of Christendome were oppressed and groaned vnder the bondage. And therefore to retract the things alreadie spoken would bee nothing else but to confirme that tyrannie. In the bookes of the third kinde, he confessed hee was more bitter and vehement then hee ought, excusing himselfe that hee made not profession of Sanctitie, nor would maintaine his owne manners, but his doctrine onely; whereof hee was readie to giue an account to any man whatsoeuer, promising not to be obstinate, but to cast his books into the fire himselfe, in case any errour were shewed him with the Scripture in hand. Hee turned himselfe to the Emperour, and the Princes, saying, it was a blessing of God when the true doctrine came to be made ma∣nifest, as to reiect it, was to draw vpon vs a cause of extreame calamities. His Oration being ended, he was by order required by the Emperour to giue a plaine and simple answere, whether or no he would maintaine his wri∣tings. Luther refuseth to retract any thing. Whereunto he answered that hee could not reuoke any thing that hee had written or taught, if he were not conuinced by the words of the Scrip∣ture, or by euident reasons. The Emperour hearing these things, resolued, following the steps of his predecessours, to maintaine the Church of Rome, and to vse all meanes to quench that fire. Howbeit hee would not violate the faith giuen, but pro∣claime a banishment against Martin after hee was safely returned to his house. Some of the assembly approouing that which was done at Constance, said A noble reso∣lution of the Prince Elector Palatine. that the faith ought not to be kept. But Lewis Count Elector Palatine op∣posed himselfe, as vnto a thing which would brand the German name with a marke of perpetuall ignominie, expressing with disdaine, that it was intole-Rable, that for the seruice of Priests, Germanie should draw vpon it selfe the in∣famie of not keeping the publique faith. Some there were also that said that there was no neede to proceede so fast to condemnation, because it was a matter of great moment, and which might produce great consequences. The dayes following there was a treatie in presence of some of the Prin∣ces, and in particular, of the Archbishop of Triers, and of Ioachimus Elector of Brandenburg, & many things were spokē by Martin in defence of that doctrine and by others against it, being desirous to induce him to referre euery thing to the iudgement of the Emperor, and of the assembly, & of the Diet, without any condition whatsoeuer. But he answering that the Prophet forbade to put our confidence in men, yea euen in Princes, to whose iudgment, nothing ought lesse to bee committed then the word of God, it was at last proposed that hee would submit all to the iudgment of the future Councell, whereunto Luther refer∣reth himselfe to a generall Councell. he agreed, with condition, that first the articles, which he intended to referre, might be drawen out of his bookes: and that sentence might not be giuen of them but according to the Scriptures. Last of all, being demanded what reme∣dies he thought might be vsed in this cause? he answered, those onely which were proposed to the Iewes by Gamaliel; that is, that if the enterprize were of man it would vanish, but if it came frō God, it was impossible to hinder it; and that it might giue satisfaction to the Pope, because all men ought to rest se∣cure (as himselfe did) that if his deseigne came not from God, it would perish in a short time. From which things it being impossible to remoue him, and standing firme in his resolution, not to accept any iudgement but vnder the rule of the scripture, he had leaue giuen him to depart, and a terme of 21 daies assigned him to returne to his home, with condition that hee should neither preach nor write any thing in his iourney. For which, after hee had giuen thankes, he departed the 26. of April. 43 Afterwards Charles the Emperour published an Edict in the same Diet The Empe∣rours Edict against Luther. at Wormes, the 8. of April. In which, hauing first declared, that it belonged to the duty of the Emperour to aduance Religion, and to extinguish heresies, which began to spring vp, he proceeded on to shew that Friar Martine Luther endeauoured to staine Germanie with that contagion, so that, if he were not hindered, all that nation would fall into an horrible ruine; that Pope Leo had fatherly admonished him, and, after that, the assembly of Cardinals, and other excellent men, had condemned his writings, and declared him an Heretique, if within a certaine terme he reuoked not his errours; and had sent by Ierom Aleander, his Nuncio, a copie of that Bull of condemnation to him the Empe∣rour, as protectour of the Church, desiring him it might bee put in execution in the Empire, his Kingdomes, Dominions and Prouinces; that notwithstan∣ding this, Martin amended not himselfe, yea multiplied his Bookes daily, full, not onely of new heresies, but euen of those which haue been long since con∣demned by holy Councels, and not only in the Latine tongue, but in the Ger∣man also, naming in particular many of his errours; he concluded that there was no writing of his where there was not to bee found some contagion or deadly sting, so that it might be said, that euery word was a poyson; that these things being considered by him the Emperour, and his Counsellours of all nations subiect vnto him, treading in the steps of the Romane Emperours his predecessours, hauing conferred, in that Diet of Wormes, with the Electors, and men of other States of the Empire, by their counsell and assent, (though it was not fit to heare a man condemned by the Pope, obstinate in his peruerse∣nes and a notorious Heretique notwithstanding, to take away all occasion of cauill, many saying it was necessary to heare the man before the Popes de∣cree was executed) he resolued to send to fetch him by one of his Heraulds, not to know and iudge the things that concerne faith, which belongeth to the Pope alone, but to bring him to the right way with good perswasions. Then hee shewed how Martin was brought into the publique assembly, and whereof he was interrogated, and what he answered, as it hath beene decla∣red before, and how he had leaue giuen him, and departed. 44 Afterwards he goeth on, concluding that therefore for the honour of God, and reuerence of the Pope, and for the duty of the Imperiall dignity, by the counsell and assent of the Princes, Electors, and States, executing the sentence and condemnation of the Pope, he declared that hee holdeth Mar∣tin Luther for a notorious Heretique, and determineth that hee ought to be so held of men, prohibiting euery one to receiue or defend him in any sort, commanding both Princes and States, vnder all the penalties, to appre∣hend and take him after the terme of twenty dayes, and also to prosecute all his complices, adherents, and fauourers, spoyling them of all their goods mooueable and immooueable. Hee commandeth also that no man should reade or keepe his books, notwithstanding that some thing be good in them, giuing order as well to Princes, as others that administer Iustice, that they, burne and destroy them. And because books extracted out of his workes are composed and printed in some places, and pictures and images spread abroad to the disgrace of many, yea, euen of the Pope himselfe, he commandeth that none should print, paint, or keep any of them, but that they be taken and bur∣ned by the Magistrates, and the Printers, buyers and sellers punished, adding a generall law, that no writing may be printed where any point of faith is handled, though the least of all, without consent of the Ordinary. 45 In this selfe same time also the Vniuersity of Paris, drawing diuers con∣clusions from the bookes of Luther, condemned them, partly as renewed out The Vniuer∣sity of Paris condemned the writings of Luther. of the doctrine of Wigleffe and Husse, and partly as newly deliuered by him a∣gainst the Catholique Doctrine. But all these oppositions effected nothing else, but that Luther answering, bookes were multiplyed both of the one side and the other, and the contentions waxed more sharpe, and the curiosity of many was stirred vp, who, willing to informe themselues of the state of the controuersie, came to note the errours reprehended, and so withdrew their deuotion from the Pope. 46 Amongst the most famous contradictors, which the doctrine of Luther found, was Henry 8. King of England, who not being borne the Kings eldest Henry the 8. King of Eng∣land writeth against Luther sonne, had beene destinated by his father to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and therefore in his youth was made to study; But the eldest being dead, and af∣ter him the father also, hee succeeded in the Kingdome; and esteeming it a great honour to imploy himselfe in so famous a controuersie of learning, he wrot a booke of the seuen Sacraments, defending also the Popedome, and oppugning the Doctrine of Luther; a thing so gratefull to the Pope, that ha∣uing receiued the Kings booke, he honoured him with the vsuall title of Defender of the Faith. But Martin suffered not himselfe to bescared with that Gaineth the Title of Defen∣der of the faith. most illustrious glittering name of a King, but answered his Maiesty with asmuch acrimony, vehemencie, and as small respect, as he had answered the petty Doctors. This Kingly tittle being entred into the controuersies made men more curious, and, as it happeneth in combats, that the lookers on are alwayes ready to fauour the weaker, and to extoll his actions, though they bee but meanes, so so heere it stirred vp a generall inclination towards Luther. 47 So soone as the Emperours decree of banishment was published tho∣roughout, the same month Hugo Bishop of Constance, in whose Diocesse is the The B. of Con∣stance wrot to Zurie against Zuinglius. Citty of Zuric, wrot to the Colledge of the Canons of that place, of which number Zuinglius was one, and another letter to the Senate of the same City. In those letters he put them in mind of the dammage which the Churches, and Common-wealths also endured by innouation of doctrine, with much detriment to spirituall well-fare, and confusion of publique quiet and tran∣quility Hee exhorteth them to beware of new Doctours, shewing that they are mooued onely by their owne ambition, and instigation of the deuil. He sent there withall the Decree of Leo, and the banishment published by the Emperour, exhorting them to receiue and obey both the one and the other, and particularly noted the person and doctrine of Zuinglius and his adherents, which constrained him to giue an account of whatsoeuer he had taught his Collegues, and to satisfie the Senate. Hee wrot also to the Bishop, insisting principally vpon this, that concubinarie Priests were not any more to bee tolerated, from whom sprang infamy to the Clergy, and bad example to the people, and generally corruption of manners in all; a thing which could not be taken away, but by bringing in of marriage, according to the Apostles doctrine. Hee wrot also to all the Cantons of the Suisses in his owne defence, making particular mention of an Edict made by the Magistrates their prede∣cessors, that euery Priest should bee bound to haue his proper concubine, that hee might not ensnare the chastity of honest women; adding that though it seemed a ridiculous decree, yet it was necessarily to be made, nor could bee changed, vnlesse that as much as was constituted in fauour of keeping Concu∣bines, were at that present conuerted vnto lawfull matrimony. 48 The stirring of the Bishop induced the Dominicans to preach against The Domini∣cans preach against Zuin∣glius, whereby he is stirred vp the more. the doctrine of Zuinglius, and him to defend himselfe. Wherefore he wrote and published 67. conclusions, which contained his doctrine, and touched the abu∣ses of the Clergy, and of the Prelats. Whereupon much confusion and dissenti∣on arising, the Senate of Zuric began to consult how to appease the tumults, and called together all the Preachers and Doctors of their iurisdiction. They inuited also the Bishop of Constance to send some man of wisedome and lear∣ning, to assist at that conference, to the end they might pacifie the troubles, and order some thing which might bee for the glory of God. The Bishop sent his Vicar, Iames Faber, who afterward was Bishop of Vienna; and the day Faber sent by the Bishop of Constance to assist in com∣posing the controuersies. appointed for the meeting being come, and a great multitude assembled to∣gether, Zuinglius reproduced his conclusions, offered to defend them; and to answere to whosoeuer would contradict them. After many things were spokē by diuers Dominican Friars, and other Doctors against Zuinglius, and by him answered, Faber said, that that time and place were not fit to treate of such a matter, & that the discussing of such propositions belonged to the Councell, which would be called very soon: for he said, the Pope had so agreed with the Princes, and greater Magistrates, and Prelates of Christendome. Which gaue subiect to Zuinglius to fortifie himselfe, saying, that these promises were made to feede the people with vaine hopes, and in the meane space to lull them asleepe in ignorance; that the things which were certaine and cleere in the holy Scripture, and in the vse of the Primitiue Church, might very well bee handled at that time, though they expected a more exact declaration from the Councell, of the points that were doubtfull; and alwayes vrging him to say what he could, against his conclusions, Faber told him that hee would not Who will not answere in words, but in writing. treat with him in words, but would answere his conclusions in writing. Fi∣nally, the assembly ended with a Decree of the Senate, that the Gospell should bee preached according to the doctrine of the old and new Testament, not The decree of the Senate of Zuric. according to any humane Decree or Constitution. 49 It being therefore perceiued, that the labours of the Doctours and Pre∣lates of the Church of Rome, and the Popes decree, who proceeded to an ab∣solute condemnation, and the Emperours Bando, so seuere, not onely could not extinguish the new doctrine, but that notwithstanding it made euery day a greater progresse, euery one beganne to thinke that these medicines were not proper for such a malady, and that in conclusion it was necessary to come to such a kinde of remedy, which, being vsed in times past in the like occasi∣ons, seemed had appeased all troubles, which was the celebration of a Coun∣cell. Wherefore this was desired by all sorts of men, as a wholesome and the A generall Councell was thought to bee necessary. onely remedy. 50 It came to be considered, that these nouelties had not had any other be∣ginning but from the abuses which time brought in, and from the negli∣gence of the Pastors; and therefore that it was impossible to remedy the con∣fusions sprung vp, but by remedying the abuses which caused them; and that there was no other way to prouide against them, with concord and v∣niformity, but by an vniuersall Congregation. And this was the discourse of godly and well disposed men. Notwithstanding there wanted not diuers sorts of persons, who thought the Councell would be profitable for their ends, and desired it should be regulated with such conditions, that it could Diuers sorts of persons desire the Councell for diuers ends. not be but in their fauour, and not contrary to their interests. First, those that had embraced Luthers opinions desired the Councell, with condition that therein all might be decided and gouerned by the Scripture, all the Pope his constitutions and schoole learning being excluded: For so they assured them∣selues, not onely to defend their owne doctrine, but also that onely theirs should be approoued. But a Councell that should proceed, as the vse was 800. yeeres before, they would not, and would be vnderstood that they referred not themselues to that censure. And Martin was vsed to say, that in Wormes hee was too faint hearted, and that he was so well assured of his doctrine, that it being diuine, he would not submit it so much as to the iudgement of An∣gels; yea, that with it he was to iudge all, both men and Angels. The Princes and other gouernors of the Countreys regarded not much what the Coun∣cell might determine concerning doctriens, but desired it might bee such a one as might reduce the Priests and Friars to their beginning, hoping that, by that meanes the regalities, and temporall iurisdictions would returne vnto them, which, in such abundance and plenty, were passed into the Ecclesiasti∣call order. And therefore they said, that it was in vaine to call a Councell, where the Bishops and other Prelates onely should haue a deliberatiue voyce, because they ought to bee reformed, and it was necessary that others should haue the charge thereof, who could not be deceiued by their proper interests, nor constrained to resolue against the common good of Christendome. The meaner sort, though they had not much knowledge of the affaires of the world, desired that the Ecclesiasticall authority might be moderated, and the poore people not burthened with so many exactions, vnder pretence of Tithes, Almes, and Indulgences, nor oppressed by the Bishops Officials, vnder colour of corrections, and sentences. The Court of Rome, the most principall part, desired the Councell, that it mighe restore obedience to the Pope, which was taken from him, & approued such a one as might be gouerned according to the formes vsed in the last ages. But that it should haue power to reforme the Papacy, and to take away those introductions, from which the Court re∣ceiued so many emoluments, and by which a great part of the gold of Chri∣stendome was glued together in Rome, this pleased them not. Leo the Pope be∣ing, as it were, in a strait betweene both the parties, knew not what to de∣sire. 1522 ADRIAN 6. CHARLLS 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Pope Leo knoweth not what to resolue about the Councell. What benefit the Lateran Councell brought to the Papacy. He saw that euery day his obedience was diminished, and that whole countreys separated themselues from him, and desired a Councell for remedy. But when hee considered that it would bee worse then the malady, carying with it in consequence a reformation, he abhorred it. Hee considered with himselfe how to call a Councell in Rome, or some other place of the Churches dominion; as his Predecessor and himselfe had celebrated with singular fruit, the Councell of Lateran a few yeeres before, hauing by that meanes appeased the schisme, reduced the kingdome of France, which was separa∣ted, and, which was of no lesse importance, abolished the Prgamaticall San∣ction, doubly contrary to the monarchy of Rome; as well in regard it was an example to take from him the collation of benefices, a great foundation of the Pontificall greatnesse, as also because it was a preseruation of the memory of the Councell of Basil, and by consequence of the subiection of the Pope to a generall Synode. But afterwards hee saw not how a Councell of that sort could giue remedy to the disease, which was not in the Princes and great Pre∣lates, with whom familiarity and interest preuailed, but in the people, with whom it was necessary to vse reality, and to make a true mutation. The case The death of Pope Leo. standing thus, in the end of the yeere 1521. Pope Leo departed this life. 51 And in the beginning of the next yeere the ninth of Ianuary Adrian was Adriax is crea∣ted Pope, and much feared. 1522 created. Which assumption to the Popedome being made of a man who was neuer seene in Rome, vnknowne to the Cardinals and the Court, and remai∣ned in Spaine (besides the world holding an opinion that hee would not ap∣proue the manners of the Romans, nor the free life of the Courtiers) all mens thoughts were turned to consider of it; so that Luthers innouations were no more thought of. Some doubted that hee was too much inclined to a refor∣mation, others that hee would call the Cardinals vnto him, and so transport the Papacy out of Italy, as had happened at other times. But they were soone deliuered from this great feare. For the new Pope, the next day after he had receiued aduice of his election (which was the 22. of the same moneth in the city of Victoria in Biscay) not expecting the Legats sent vnto him from the Colledge of Cardinals, to signifie it vnto him, and to haue his consent, as∣sembled those few Prelates which he could get, consented to the Election, and hauing taken the habit and armes, declared himselfe Pope, and went pre∣sently to Barcellona; where he wrote to the Colledge of Cardinals the cause why he had taken vpon him the name and charge of the Pope, without ex∣pecting the Legates, committing also vnto them the publication of it through∣out all Italy. He was inforced to tarry at Barcellona a conuenient time, to passe the gulfe of Lions, which was very dangerous; yet he deferred no lon∣ger then needs must to imbarke for Italy; and arriued there in the end of Au∣gust 1522. 52 Adrian found all Italy in commotion, by reason of the warre betweene the Emperour and the French King, and the Apostolicall Sea ouer head and The troubled state of Italy at the arriuall of Adrian. eares in a particular warre with the Dukes of Ferrara and Vrbin, Arimini, new∣ly taken by the Malatesti, the Cardinals diuided, and not trusting one ano∣ther, the Isle of Rhodes assieged by the Turkes, the lands of the Church exhausted and in extreame confusion, during the anarchy of eight moneths. Notwithstanding hee applied himselfe principally to compose the discords in religion in Germany. And being nourished and brought vp from his child∣hood in the studies of School-Diuinity, he held those opinions to be so cleare and euident, that he was perswaded that no reasonable man could thinke the contrary. Wherefore he gaue no other title to the doctrine of Luther, but vn∣sauoury, Adrian was ve∣ry learned' in Schoole Diui∣nity. The Epithetes he gaue to the doctrine of Luther. foolish, and vnreasonable, and thought that none, but some fewe fooles, could beleeue it, and that those that followed Martin were men, who, in their conscience, vndoubtedly maintained the opinions of the Church of Rome, and fained the contrary, beeing prouoked by the burthens layd vpon them. His opinion therefore was, that it must needes bee an easie thing to extinguish that doctrine, which had none other foundation then matter of profite, and thought that, by giuing some small satisfaction, the body would easily bee healed, which rather made shew to bee sicke, then that it was so in∣deed. Adrian borne in Vtrect. And because he was borne in Vtrect, a city of low Germanie, hee hoped that all that nation would willingly hearken to his proposes, and ingage themselues to maintaine his authority, as being an Alman, and so sincere in all his treaties, that he vsed neither Arts nor secret ends. And being perswa∣ded that it imported much to vse celerity, he resolued to make his first propo∣sition in the Diet, which was prepared at Noremberg: which to the ende it He resolueth to make a refor∣mation before he maketh his first propositi∣on in the Diet of Noremberg. might be gratefully heard, and his promise esteemed reall, he thought it ne∣cessary to giue a taste, by beginning a reformation, before hee treated with them, remoouing the abuses which caused the dissention. To this ende hee called to Rome, Iohn Peter Caraffa, Archbishop of Chieti, and Marcellus Cazele of Gaeta, men esteemed for their honesty and vertues, and very skilfull in whatsoeuer belonged to Ecclesiasticall discipline, that by the counsell of them, and of the Cardinals which he trusted, hee might finde some remedy against the corruptions which were of greatest moment. In this number the prodigality vsed in giuing Indulgences first presented it selfe vnto him, because it gaue way to the reputation which the new Preachers in Germany, had gained. 53 The Pope, being a Diuine who had written in this matter long before Luther thought to handle it, meant to establish by an Apostolicall Decree, and as Pope, that doctrine which, being a priuate man, he had taught and written. That is, that an Indulgence being granted to one that shall doe such a godly worke, the worke may be performed by some in such perfection, that he may obtaine the Indulgence; but if it want something of that exactnesse, the wor∣ker obtaineth not all the Indulgence, but onely so much as answereth in pro∣portion to the imperfect worke. The Pope thought that by this meanes hee should not onely prouide against scandall hereafter, but remedy also those that were past, because it being possible to qualifie with so good circumstan∣ces euery little worke, that it may deserue any great reward, Luthers obiection was answered, how by the offering of a penny so great a treasure could bee gained; and seeing that by the defect of the worke, he that gaineth not all, obtaineth notwithstanding a proportionable part, the faithfull drewe not themselues backe from seeking Indulgences. 54 But Friar Thomas of Gaeta, Cardinall of S. Sistus, a perfect Diuine, dis∣swaded it, telling him, that this was to punish that truth, which, for the safe∣tie of soules, it was better to keepe secret amongst learned men, and that it was rather disputable then decided. Therefore, that himselfe also, who sted∣fastly beleeued it in his conscience, notwithstanding had so carried it in his writings, that none but the most learned men could draw it from his words: which doctrine beeing divulged and authorized, there would be danger, that Card. Caietan disswaded the Pope from ma∣king a decree concerning Indulgences. euen learned men would conclude, that the Popes grant profited nothing, but that all oughtt to be attributed to the quality of the worke, which would absolutely diminish mens hote desires to purchase Indulgences, and the e∣steeme of the Popes authority. The Cardinall added that, after hee had ex∣actly studied this subiect, by the command of Leo, at the time when these contentions began in Germanie, and written a full tract thereof, being Legat in Ausburg, the next yeare he had occasion to examine and treat of it more di∣ligently, speaking with many, and discussing the difficulties and motiues which troubled those Countryes: and in two conferences which hee had with Luther in that City, he disputed that matter at large, which hauing well digested, he doubted not but that he might say with asseueration & without danger of errour, that there was no other way to giue remedy to the scandals past, present, and to come, then by bringing backe those things to their first beginning. That it is a cleare case, that, howsoeuer the Pope may free the faithfull from any punishment, by the meanes of Indulgences, yet to him that readeth the Decretals it plainely appeareth, that an Indulgence is an ab∣solution from penance imposed in confession onely. Wherefore causing the disused penitentiary Canons to be obserued again, and imposing conuenient penance, euery one would euidently see the necessity and vtility of Indul∣gences, and would earnestly seeke them, to free themselues from that great burthen of penance; and the golden age of the Primitiue Church would re∣turne againe, in which the P relates had absolute command ouer the faithful, onely because they were held in continuall exercise with penance; whereas now, being become wanton, they would shake off from them the yoke of obedience. The people of Germanie, who buried in idlenes, giue care to Mar∣tin for preaching Christian liberty, if they were curbed with penances, would thinke no more of this innouation, and the Apostolical Sea might fauour therein whosoeuer would be thankefull to it in that behalfe. 55 This opinion pleased the Pope, as grounded vpon authority, and where∣unto he saw not what opposition could be made. He caused it to be propo∣sed Who was wil∣ling to imbrace his opinion. in the Penitentiarie Court, to finde a meanes and forme how to put it in practise first in Rome, and then in all Christendome. For this cause diuers as∣semblies were made by the deputies for the reformation, together with the Penitentiaries, to treat of the manner how to vse it. But so many difficulties did crosse it, that in conclusion Lorenzo Puccio, a Florentine, Cardinall of Santi Quatro, who was Datarie to Pope Leo, and (as hath been said) a diligent mini∣ster But was disswa∣ded by Lorenzo Puccio. to find out money, and was now chiefe Penitentiary, related to the Pope, with a generall assent, that the proposition was thought impossible, and that, when proofe thereof should be made, in stead of curing the present diseases, farre geater would be stirred vp. That the Canonicall punishments were grown into disuse, because they could no longer be supported for want of the ancient zeale. Wherefore for him that would bring them backe, it was ne∣cessary he should make the same zeale and Charity in the Church to returne againe. That this presentage was not like vnto those that were past, in which all the Constitutions of the Church were receiued, without thinking any more of them, whereas now euery one will be a iudge, and examine the rea∣sons: Which, if it happen in things that bring with them no burden at all, or very little, how much more must it be expected in a thing that would bee most heauy. It was true, that the remedie was fitted for the disease, but that it was too strong for the body that was sicke, and insteed of curing would kill it, and that in place of regaining Germany, Italy would first bee lost, and that estranged much more. The Cardinall added, mee thinkes I heare one say, as S. Peter did, Why do they tempt God laying vpon the Disciples shoul∣ders that, which neither we nor our fathers haue been able to beare. That his Holynes should remember that famous place of the Glosse, alleadged by him in his fourth booke vpon the Sentences, that, concerning the value of ndul∣gences, the complaint is both old and doubtfull; That hee should consider the foure Opinions, all Catholique, and yet so different as that Glosse doth Fowre very different opi∣nions about Indulgences, and all Catho∣lique. recite. Whereby it is manifest, that this matter in these times requireth silence rather then any further discussion. 56 These reasons sanke deepe into Adrians mind, and made him not know what to doe, and hee was perplexed so much the more, because he found no lesse difficulty in other things, which, in his secret purpose, hee meaned to re∣forme. In the matter of dispensations for marriage, the taking away of many prohibitions against contracting matrimony betweene certaine persons, which seemed superfluous, and hard to bee obserued (whereunto hee was much inclined, and it would haue beene a great ease to the people) was bla∣med by many, as a thing that weakened the sinewes of discipline, and the continuing of them made the Lutherans say, that they were onely to get money. To restraine the dispensations to certaine qualities of persons, was to giue new matter to the pretendants to alleadge that in spirituall things, and in whatsoeuer belonged to the ministery of CHRIST, there was no dif∣ference of persons. To take away pecuniary expences for these things, that could not be, but by rebuying the Offices which Leo sold, the buyers where∣of were gainers by this. Which also hindered the abolishing of Regresses, Ac∣cesses, and Coadiutories, and other deuices vsed in the collation of Benefices, which had the appearance (if not rather the essence) of Simony. To rebuy the Offices was impossible, in regard of the great charges which must bee made, and alwayes continued. And that which most troubled his mind was, that when he was resolued to take away any abuse, there wanted not some, who tooke vpon him to maintaine with colourable shew, that the thing was good or necessary. With these doubts the Pope was grieued vntill Nouem∣ber, desirous to make some notable prouision, to giue the world a taste of his minde, who was resolute to remedy all the abuses, before hee began to treat in Germany. 57 At length Franciscus Soderinus Cardinal of Preneste, called Cardinal of Vol∣terra, The counsell of Franciscus Soderinus. in whom he put most confidence (though afterward he was so far in his disfauour that he cast him into prison) made him come to resolution. This Cardinall, most conuersant in managing ciuill affaires, and imployed in the Papacies of Alexander, Iulius, and Leo, which were full of diuers and impor∣tant accidents, in al his discourses with the Pope cast out words which might instruct him. Hee commended his goodnesse, his ingenuity and his minde inclined to the reformation of the Church, and the rooting out of heresies: adding, notwithstanding, that hee could not haue praise by his good intenti∣on onely, not able to doe good by it selfe, vnlesse hee ioyned thereunto an exact choyce of fit meanes, and an execution managed with the greatest cir∣cumspection. But when hee saw him constrained by the straitnesse of time to resolue, hee told him there was no hope to confound and roote out the Lutherans by correcting the manners of the Court, but rather that it would bee a meanes to augment their credit much more. For the people, who al∣wayes iudge by the euents, when they shall bee assured, by the following a∣mendment, that the Popes gouernment was iustly reprehonded, wil perswade themselues likewise, that the other innouations proposed haue good founda∣tion, and the arch-heretiques, seeing they haue ouercome in one part, will not cease to reprehend the rest. That in all humane affaires it falleth out, that to receiue satisfaction in some requests, giueth pretence to prepare more, and to thinke they are due. That reading the stories past of the times, when he∣rosies haue beene raised against the authority of the Church of Rome, it will appeare, that all tooke pretence from the corrupted manners of the Court. Neuerthelesse, neuer any Pope thought fit to reforme them, but after ad∣monitions and instructions vsed, to induce the Princes to protect the Church. That, whatsoeuer hath succeeded well here to fore, ought alwayes to bee obserued and kept. That nothing did more ruine a gouernment, then to change the manner of ruling it. That to open new wayes not vsed was to expose himselfe to great dangers, and that it was most secure to tread in the steps of the holy Popes, who alwayes haue brought their enterprises to a prosperous end. That no man hath euer extinguished heresies by refor∣mations, but by Crusadoes, and by exciting Princes and people to roote them out. That he should remember that Innocentius the third, did by such meanes happily oppresse the Albigenses of Langue doc, and the next Popes extinguished in other places, and by no other means, the Waldenses, Picards, poore people of Lions, Arnaldists, Speronists, and Patauines, so that now there remaineth no more of them but the name onely. That there would not want Princes in Germanie, who, in case the Pope would giue them leaue to seaze themselues of the States of Luthers fauourers, would greedily embrace the condition; and that hee might cause many people to follow them, by granting Indul∣gences and Pardons to whosoeuer would assist them. The Cardinall put him also in minde, that he ought not to thinke of the Germane stirres in Re∣ligion, as if there were no more imminent danger to the Apostolicall Sea; be∣cause the warre of Italy, a thing of greater perill, hanged ouer their heads, whereunto he ought principally to apply his mind: in managing whereof, if he wanted money, which is the sinew of warre, hee might receiue some no∣torious affront; and that no reformation could bee made, that would not notably diminish the rents of the Church; which hauing foure fountaines, the one temporall, the rents of the Ecclesiasticall state, the other three spi∣rituall, Indulgences, dispensations, and collations of Benefices, none of them could be stopped, but that one quarter of the reuenues would be cut off. The Pope relating these discourses to William Encourt, whom afterward he created Cardinall, and Theodorie Hezius, his familiar and trustie friends, sayd the condition of Popes was miserable, seeing it was plaine that they could not doe good, though they desired and indeauoured to doe it, and concluded Adriā be wai∣leth the con∣dition of the Popes. that, before the iourney which hee was to make into Germanie, it was not possible to effect any one point of reformation, and that it was necessarie they should be contented to beleeue his promises, which he was resolued to main∣taine, though it were to deuest himselfe of all temporall dominion, and to be reduced to the life of the Apostles. Neuerthelesse hee gaue strait commis∣sion to both, of which one was Dataric, and the other Secretarie, that they should be sparing to grant Indulgences, dispensations, regresses, and coadiu∣tories, vntill meanes were found to giue a rule for them by a Law and perpe∣tuall Constitution. These things, hauing read them largely related in a Dia∣rie of the Bishop of Fabriano, where he noted all the remarkeable things which hee had seene and heard, I was willing briefely to repeate here, because they may serue much to the vnderstanding of those things which shall be spoken of hereafter. In the first Consistorie of Nouember, by consent of the Cardinalls, hee appointed Francesco Chiericato, whom he knew in Spaine, Bishop of Fabriano (whom I named a little before) for his Nuncio to the Diet of Noremberg, The Bishop of Fabriano is sent Nuncio to the Diet of Noremberg. which was assembled in absence of the Emperour, who, some few moneths before, was inforced to passe into Spaine, to appease the tumults and seditions begunne in those kingdomes. The Nuncio arriued at Noremberg at the end of the yeere, and presented the Popes Letters to the Electors, Princes, and The Popes letter to the Diet against Luther. Orators of Cities, written generally to them all, vnder the date of the fiue and twentieth of Nouember; in which hee first complained that Martin Luther, hauing beene condemned by the sentence of Leo, and the sentence executed in Wormes by the Emperours Decree, published thoughout all Germany, hee perseuered notwithstanding in the same errours, continually publishing bookes full of heresies, and that he was fauoured, not onely by the meaner sort, but euen by the Nobles also. Adding that, though the Apostle foretold that heresies were necessarie for exercise of the godly, yet that necessitie was tolerable in times conuenient, not in those, in which Christianitie being op∣pressed by the Turkish armes, all industrie should be vsed to purge the disease within, that the dammage and danger, which it bringeth by it selfe alone, hindereth his endeauours against so great an enemie. Then hee exhorteth the Princes and people not to make shew of giuing any consent to so great an abomination; by tolerating it any longer. Hee shewed them that it was a most shamefull thing to suffer themselues to be led out of the way of their an∣cestors, by a simple Friar, as if onely Luther were of vnderstanding, and wise. He aduertiseth them that, if Luthers followers haue denied obedience to the Ecclesiasticall Lawes, much more will they esteeme basely of the secu∣lar; and if they haue vsurped the goods of the Church, much lesse will they abstaine from those of the Laitie, and hauing dared to lay their hands vpon the Priests of God, they will not spare the houses, wiues, and children of them▪ He exhorteth them, if they cannot reduce Martin and his followers into 1523 ADRIAN 6. CHARLES HENRY 8. FRANCIS the right way by faire meanes, to proceed to sharpe and ry remedies, to cut the dead members from the body, as anciently was done vnto Dathan▪ and A∣biram, to Anania and Saphira, to Iouinian and Vigilantius; and finally as their predecessors did against John Husse, and Hierome of Praghe, in the Councell of Constance, whose example, in case they cannot otherwise doe, they ought to imitate. In conclusion he referred himselfe as well in this particular, as in other affaires, to the relation of Francesco Chiericato his Nuncio. He wrot letters also almost to all the Princes, with the very same conceits▪ and to the The Popes let∣to the Duke of Saxonie. Elector of Saxony he wrot in particular, that he should consider what ble∣mish it would be to his posterity, to haue fauoured a franticke man, who put confusion into the world with impious and foolish inuentions, turning vp∣side downe the doctrine established by the blood of the Martyrs, labours of the holy Doctors, and armes of the most valiant Princes; that he should walke in the pathes of his ancestours, not suffering his eyes to bee dazled by the fury of a petty companion, to follow errous condemned by so many Councels. 60 The Nuncio presented to the Diet, not onely the Popes Briefe, but his The Nuncio perswadeth the Princes by sea∣uen reasons to oppose Luther, 1523 owne instructions also, by which he was inioyned to exhort the Princes, with seauen reasons, to oppose themselues against that pestilent doctrine of Luther. The first, because the worship of God, and charity towards their neighbour mooued them thereunto. Secondly, the infamy of their nation. Thirdly, their owne honour, shewing themselues not to degenerate from their prede∣cessours, who where present at the condemnation of Iohn Husse in Constance, and of the other heretiques, leading some of them to the fire, euen with their owne hands; and that they would not faile of their owne promise and con∣stancy, the greater part of them hauing approoued the Emperours Edict a∣gainst Luther. Fourthly, that the iniury should mooue them, which Luther hath done to their progenitors, publishing another faith then that which they beleeued, and concluding by consequence that they are all in hell. Fiftly, they ought to be mooued, by the marke which the Lutherans aime at, which is to weaken the secular power, after they haue annihilated the Ecclesiasticall, by a false pretence that it is vsurped against the Gospell, although they crafti∣ly make shew to prcferue the secular, onely to deceiue them? Sixtly, that they should consider the dissentions and confusions raised in Germany by the sect, And finally he desireth them to obserue that Luther treadeth in the same way that Mahomet did long agoe, permitting carnall inclinations to be sa ia ed▪ though he seeme to doe it with more modesty, that he may the more pow∣erfully deceiue them. And if any should say that hee was condemned in ab∣sence and without defence, and therefore that it were fit to heare him, the answere was, that it was a iust thing to heare him in that which concerneth the fact, that is, if hee haue preached, written, or not; but that in matter of faith, and of the Sacraments, it was not conuenient: because that ought not to be questioned, which hath beene once confirmed by generall Councels, The Pope ∣fesseth the abu∣ses of the Cler∣gie, not exemp∣ting the A ∣sto S and by the whole Church. Then the Pope giueth him commission to ac∣knowledge ingenuously, that this confusion was caused by the sinnes of men, especially of the Priests and Prelates; confessing that some yeeres since some abominations haue beene committed euen in that holy Sea, many abu∣ses in spirituall things, many transgressions of the commandements, and lastly, all things turned to the worst, so that it may be said, that the infirmity is passed from the head to the members, from the Popes to the inferiour Pre∣lates, in so much, that there hath beene none that hath done good, no not one▪ For the amendment of which euil, himselfe is resolued to imploy all his wits, and vse all diligence that the Court of Rome, from whence peraduenture all this mischiefe proceeded, should be reformed first of all. Which he will the rather doe, because he seeth that all the world doth earnestly desire it. Not∣withstanding that no man ought to maruaile, if he shall see that all the abu∣ses be not so suddendy amended. For the disease being inueterated and mul∣tiplied, it is necessary to proceed slowly in the cure, and to begin from things of greatest weight, to auoyd the confounding of all, by desiring to doe all to∣gether. He gaue him commission also to promise in his name the obseruation of the Concordates, that he would informe himselfe of the causes called into the Rota, to remaund them to the parties according vnto iustice. And lastly, that he should sollicite the Princes and States in his name, to answere the let∣ters, and to informe him of the meanes, by which he might most commodi∣ously resist the Lutherans. Besides, the presentation of the Popes Briefe, and the information, the Nuncio proposed that it was obserued that almost euery where in Germany, religious men forsooke the Cloisters, and returned to the world, and that the Priests married themselues, to the great contempt and dis∣grace of religion; and the greater part of them committed many excesses and enormities. Wherefore it was necessary that some order were taken that these Sacrilegious marriages might bee dissolued, the Authors seueral∣ly punished, and the Apostates reduced vnder the power of their Superi∣ours. 61 The Diet answered the Nuncio in writing, that with reuerence they had read the Popes Briefe, and the instructions concerning Luthers sect, and that The answere of the Diet. they gaue thankes to God for his Holynesse assumption to the Popedome, wishing him all happynesse from aboue. And (when they had spoken what came into their minds about the concord betweene Christian Princes, and the warre against the Turkes) concerning the demand to execute the Sentence gi∣uen against Luther, and the Edict of Wormes, they answered that they were most ready to imploy all their power to roote out heresies, but that they had omitted to execute the Sentence, and Edict, for most weighty and vr∣gent causes, in regard that the greater part of the people was perswa∣ded by Luthers bookes that the Court of Rome had brought many grieuan∣ces vpon Germany; so that if any thing had beene done for execution of the Sentence, the multitude would haue entered into suspition that it was done to vphold and mainetaine the abuses and impiety, and popular tumults would haue beene raised with danger of ciuill warres. Wherefore they sayd, that in such difficulties, more fitting remedies were necessary; especially himselfe the Nuncio hauing confessed in the Popes name that these euills proceeded from the sinnes of men, and promised a reformation of the Court of Rome▪ the abuses whereof, if they were not amended, and the grieuances remoued, and some Articles reformed, it was impossible to make peace be∣tweene the Ecclesiastiques and Seculars, and to extirpate the present tumults. And because Germany had consented to the paiment of Annates, vpon con∣dition they should be spent in the warre against the Turkes, they being payd so many yeares, and neuer conuerted to that vse, they desired the Pope, that from hencefoorth the Court of Rome might not be troubled to exact them, but that they might be left to the Exchequer of the Empire for the expences of that warre. And whereas his Holinesse demanded counsell of the meanes, by the which he might oppose himselfe to so great inconuenience, they an∣swered, that, if the treaty were not of Luther onely, but of rooting out altoge∣ther many errours, and vices which by long custome, and for diuers respects, The Councel is demanded in the Diet to be held in some place of Germany. haue taken deepe roote, by some ignorantly, by others maliciously defended, they deemed no remedy more commodious, effectuall, and opportune, then if his Holines, by the Emperours consent, would call a godly, free, and Chri∣stian Councell, so soone as it were possible, in some conuenient place in Ger∣manie; that is, in Argentine, in Mentz, Collen, or Metz, not deferring the con∣uocation thereof aboue a yeere; granting power to euery one, as well Eccle∣siastical as Secular, to speake and giue counsell for the glory of God, and sal∣uation of soules, any oath or obligation to the contrary notwithstanding. Which, they thinking that his Holinesse ought speedily to execute, and being desirous to make, for the interim, the best prouision they were able, they were resolued to treat with the Elector of Saxonie, that the Lutherans should neither write not print any more, & that the preachers throughout all Germa∣nie should be silent in those things that might cause popular tumult, & should preach the holy Gospel sincerely and purely, according to the doctrine appro∣ued by the Church, not mouing disputations, but reseruing all controuersies to the determination of the Councell. That the Bishops should depute godly and learned men to be superintendents ouer the preachers, to informe & cor∣rect them; yet so, as that no suspition might be giuen that it was done to hin∣der the truth of the Gospel; that hereafter no new thing should be printed be∣fore it were seen & allowed, by honest & learned men. Hoping by this means to prouide against the tumults, if his Holines will take order against the grie∣uances, and ordaine a free and Christian Councell; not doubting but that the tumults will so be quieted, and the greater part reduced to tranquillity. For vndoubtedly all honest men would expect the determination of the Coun∣cell, when they saw that it was to bee celebrated quickly. Concerning mar∣ried Priests, and religious men, who returned to the world, they thought it sufficient if the Ordinaries did impose vpon them Canonicall punishments, because the Ciuill Lawes had made no prouision against them: But in case they commit any wickednesse, that the Prince, or Magistrate, in whose Ter∣ritory they shall offend, ought to giue them their due chastisement. 62 The Nuncio was not satisfied with this answere, and resolued to reply. The replie of the Nuncio to the answer of the Di And first for the cause why the Popes sentence, and the Emperours Edict a∣gainst Luther were not executed, he sayd, that the reason alleadged did not sa∣tisfie, which was, that they refrained to doe it, to auoyd scandals. For it was not conuenient to tolerate an euill, that good may come thereby, and that they ought to esteeme more the saluation of soules, then worldly tranquilli∣ty. He added that Luthers followers ought not to be excused by the scandals and grieuances of the Court of Rome. For in case they were true, yet ought they not to forsake the Catholique vnitie, but rather support whatsoeuer was amisse with all patience. Whereupon he entreated them to execute the sen∣tence and Edict before the Diet ended. And if Germany were any way bur∣thened by the Court of Rome, the Apostolicall Sea would bee ready to ease it. And if there were any differences betweene the Ecclesiastiques, and secu∣lar Princes, the Pope was willing to compose and extinguish them. Concer∣ning the Annates, then he said nothing, for that his Holinesse would answere them in time conuenient. But to their demand of a Councell, he replied, that his hope was, that it would not displease his Holinesse, if they had demanded it in more fitting termes, and therefore besought them to take away all those words that might giue him any vmbrage. As those, that the Councell might be called by the Emperours consent; and those other, that the Councell might be Celebrated rather in one Citie then another. For if they were not taken a∣way, it seemed they would binde his Holinesse hands, a thing which could not produce any good effect. For the Preachers, he intreated them that the Popes decree might be obserued, that thence forward none might preach be∣fore his doctrine were examined by the Bishop. For the Printers and diuul∣gers of Books, he replied that the answer no way pleased him; that they ought to execute the sentence of the Pope and Emperour, to burne the bookes, and punish the diuulgers, earnestly aduertising them that all consisted in this. And concerning bookes to be printed hereafter, that the late Lateran Councell ought to be obserued. But, for the married Priests, the answere would not haue displeased him, had it not had a sting in the taile, while it was sayd, that if they shall doe any wicked thing, they shall be punished by the Princes or Magistrates. For this would be against the liberty of the Church and the sickle would be put into another mans field, and those men would be censured by the world, who are reserued vnto CHRIST. For Princes should not presume to beleeue that they were deuolued to their iurisdiction by their apostasie, nor that they could be punished by them for their other offences, in regard, the character remaining in them, and the order, they are euer vnder the power of the Church; neither can Princes doe more then delate them to their Bishops and superiours, that may chastize them. In the end he desired them to consider more maturely vpon the foresaid things, and to giue a better answer, more plaine, more sound, and better consulted of. 63 The reply of the Nuncio was not well taken in the Diet, and it was commonly spoken amongst those Princes, that he had a measure of good and Was not well t ken by the Princes. euill, only by relation vnto the profit of the Court, and not to the necessities of Germany; and that the conseruation of the Catholike amity, ought rather to incite to doe the good that is easie to be executed, then to support the e∣uill which is hard to be indured. And yet the Nuncio desired, that Ger∣many would support, with all patience, the oppressions layd vpon it by the Court of Rome, which was not willing to bend it selfe, though neuer so little to doe good, or rather to desist from euill, but with promise onely. They sayd, his Holinesse had too quicke a sence, if he would be offended by so The Dite re∣solueth to giue no other answer. modest and so necessary a demand of a Councell. And after long discussion it was resolued by common consent, not to giue any other answere but to expect what the Pope would resolue vpon that which they had giuen al∣ready. 64 Afterwards the secular Princes made a long complaint apart, of that which they pretended against the Court of Rome, and the whole Ecclesiasti∣call order; reducing it to an hundred heads, which therefore they called Cen∣tum grauamina. These they sent vnto the Pope (because the Nuncio, vnto The huudred grieuances of the Princes of Germanie. whom they were imparted, went away before they were enlarged) with protestation that they neither would nor could endure them any longer, and that they were constrained by necessity, and the iniquity of them, to seeke with all industry to free themselues from them, and by the most commodi∣ous wayes they could. 65 It would be long to expresse the whole contents. But in summe, they complained of the payment for dispensations, and absolutions, of the money which was drawen from them by indulgences; of the suits in Law which were drawne to Rome; of the reseruation of Benefices, and the abuses of Commendaes, and Annates; of the exemption of the Ecclesiastiques in offen∣ces; of Excommunications and vnlawfull interdicts; of Lay causes drawen before the Ecclesiasticall Iudge by diuers pretences, of the great expences in consecrating Churches and Church-yards, of pecuniarie penance; of expen∣ces to haue the Sacraments and the buriall. All which were reduced to three principall heads; to enthrall the people, to rob them of their money, and to appropriate vnto themselues the iurisdiction of the secular Magistrate. 66 The sixt of March the Recesse was made with the precepts contained The Recesse of the in the answer to the Nuncio; and, a little after euery thing was printed, as well the Popes Briefe, as also the instructions of the Nuncio, the answers, and replies, with the hundred greiuances and they were diuulged through Germanie, and passed from thence to other places, and euen vnto Rome also. Where the open confession of the Pope, that all the mischeife proceeded from the Court of Rome, and from the Ecclesiasticall order, did not please; and The Popes confession of the abuses of the Clergy was distastfull in Rome. generally it was not gratefull to the Prelates. For it seemed to be too ignomi∣nious, and might make them more odious to the world, and cause the peo∣ple to despise them; yea, that it would make the Lutherans more bold and saucy: And it grieued them most of all, to see a gate opened, where necessarily the moderation of their profits, which they so much abhorred, would bee brought in, or themselues conuinced of incorrigibility. And those that excu∣sed Reputation is the cheifest ground of the Pontificall greatnesse. the Pope most, did attribute it to his small knowledge of the Arts by which the pontificall greatnesse, and the authority of the Court is maintai∣ned, which are founded vpon reputation. They commended the iudgement and wisedome of Pope Leo, who knew how to attribute the bad opinion which Germany conceiued of the manners of the Court, to the want of know∣ing it. And therefore he said in the Bull against Martin Luther, that if he after he was cited, had come to Rome, hee would not haue found so many abuses in the Court, as was beleeued. The Popes condition was ex∣pounded in German. 67 But in Germany those that were ill affected to the Court of Rome, expoun∣ded that ingenuous confession in the worier sence, saying, it was an vsuall Art to confesse the euill, and to promise the amendment thereof, without any thought to effect any thing, to lull a sleepe those that are not wary, to enioy the benefit of time, and, in the meane space by treating with Princes, to iu∣stifie themselues, in such sort, that they may the better make the people sub∣iect 1524 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. vnto them, and take from them all power to oppose themselues against their wills, and to speake of their defects. And because the Pope sayd, that in giuing the remedy, it was necessary not to striue to prouide against all at once, for feare of causing great mischiefe, but to doe things step by step, they laughed at it; adding that it was well sayd, step by step, but so that there were a whole age betweene one and another. But, in regard of Adrians good life before his assumption to the Papacie, as well after hee was Bishop and Cardi∣nall, as before, and the good intention which was shewed in all his actions, holy men expounded all in good sense, thinking verily that hee confessed the errours with ingenuity, and that he would redresse them sooner then hee promised; neither did the euent make them iudge the contrary. For the Court being not worthy of such a Pope, it pleased God to call him, almost as soone as he had receiued the relation of his Nuncio from Noremberg. For the 13. of September he ended the course of his yeeres. 68 But when the decree of the Recesse of Noremberg was published in Ger∣many, Pope Adrian dieth. The decree of the Recesse of Noremberg was expounded in contrary sences according to mens contrarie interests. with the precepts concerning Sermons and Prints, the greater part e∣steemed not thereof, but those that were interested, aswell followers of the Church of Rome, as Lutherans, expounded all in their owne fauour. For it being sayd that the things which might stirre vp popular tumults, should not be spoken of, the Catholiques vnderstood it, that the things brought in by Luthers doctrine, and the reproofe of the abuses of the Ecclesiasticall or∣der should not be spoken of; and the Lutherans sayd, that the meaning of the Diet was, that the abuses, which stirred vp the people against the Prea∣chers, when they heard as well bad things as good represented vnto them, should not be defended. And that part of the Decree, which commanded to preach the Gospell according to the doctrine of writers approoued by the Church, the Catholiques vnderstood, according to the doctrine of the Schoole-men, and the last postillers of the Scriptures. But the Lu∣therans sayd, it was to be vnderstood of the holy Fathers, Hilary, Ambrose, Au∣stin, Ierom, and the like; expounding also, that by vertue of the Edict of the Re∣cesse, it was lawfull for them to continue in teaching their doctrine vntill the Councell: and the Catholiques vnderstood that the meaning of the Diet was, that they should continue in the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Whereby it appeared that the Edict, in stead of quenching the fire of Controuersies, enfla∣med it the more; and in the mindes of godly men there remained a desire of a free Councell, vnto which it seemed, that both the parties would sub∣mit themselues; hoping that by this they should bee deliuered from so great mischiefe. 69 After the death of Adrian, Iulio de Medicis, cousin to Pope Leo, was crea∣ted successor, and called Clement, the seauenth; who suddenly applied himselfe Iulio de Medici- cousen to Leo the tenth, was created Pope, and called cle∣ment the ∣uenth 1524 to the affaires of Germanie. And, being skilfull in the knowledge of negotia∣tions, he saw clearely that Pope Adrian, contrary to the stile of wise Popes was too facil, as in confessing the defects of the Court, so in promising the reformation; and too abiect in asking counsell of the Germans how proui∣sion might be made against the contentions of that kingdome. For thereby hee drew vpon his backe the demaund of a Councell, which was of great 1524 ADRIAN 6 —CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS importance, especially with condition to celebrate it in Germanie, and had gi∣uen too much courage to tht Princes, that they dared not onely to send, but to print also the hundred grieuances; a writing ignom inious to the Ecclesia∣stiques of Germanie, but more to the Court of Rome. Hauing considered all things well, he resolued that it was necessarie to giue some satisfaction to the Dutch men, yetso, that his authority might not bee indangered, nor the commodities of the Court, taken away. He considered that howsoeuer some of the 100 greiuances concerned the Court, yet the greater part touched the Bishops, Officials, Curates, and other Priests of Germanie. Therefore he hoped if that the foresaid persons were reformed, the Germans would easily be in∣duced to be silent for the present, in that which concerned Rome, and that with that reformation he should haue diuerted the treaty of the Councell. There∣fore hee thought it conuenient suddenly to dispatch a Legate, a man of wisedome and authoritie, tothe Diet, which was to be celebrated theree moneths after in Noremberg, with instruction, to walke in the same way and aboue all, to dissemble the knowledge of Adrians propositions, and of the answers giuen vnto him, that hee might not receiue any preiu∣dice in his Tretaie, and might proceede, as if the matter were to begin. 70 The Legat was Lorenzo Campeggio, Cardinall of S. Anastafia, who being Card. Campeg∣gio is Legat to the Diet of Noremberg. come to the Diet, after he had treated of diuers things, with diuers particu∣lar men, to set his negotiation in order, he spake also in publique, where hee said, that he wondered that so many Princes, and so wise, could endure that religion, rites, and ceremonies, in which, they, their fathers and ancestors de∣ceased, were borne and bred, should be extinguished and abolished, not con∣sidering that such innouation tended to the rebellion of the people against the Magistrates. That the Pope not aiming at any interest of his owne, but ha∣uing a fatherly compassion of Germanie, fallen into spirituall and temporall infirmities, and subiect to very great imminent dangers, had sent him to find a meanes to cure the disease. That it was not the intention of his Holinesse to prescribe any thing vnto them, much lesse that any thing should be prescri∣bed vnto himselfe, but onely to consult of the fit remedies, concluding that if the diligence of his Holinesse were refused, it would not afterwards bee reasonable to lay any fault vpon him. 71 Hee was answered by the Princes (for the Emperour was in Spaine, as The answere of the Diet. was sayd before) after they had thanked the Pope for his good will, that they knew well the danger which hanged ouer their heads, by reason of the change of the doctrine of Religion; that therefore, in the Diet the yeere before, they had shewed vnto the Nuncio of Pope Adrian, a meanes and way to compose the differences, and had giuen him also in writing whatsoeuer they desired or sought from Rome; which writing they belee∣ued that Adrian had receiued, because the Nuncio promised to deliuer it, as also they thought that the grieuances, which Germany receiued from the Clergy, were knowne vnto all, being published in Print, and that they ex∣pected, euen vntill that instant, that their iust desires should be heard, and continued expecting still. Wherefore, if he had any order or instruction from the Pope, they prayed him to declare it, that they might consult of the whole together with him. 72 To this the Legat replyed, according to his commission, that he knew not that any instruction had bin brought to the Pope or Cardinals, concerning the meanes & way of composing the differences in religion. But he well assu∣red them of the Popes very good meaning, from whom he had most abso∣lute power, to doe whatsoeuer might serue for that end but that it concerned The Legeats reply. them to shew the way, who knew the condition of the persons, and the cu∣stomes of the country. That it was very well knowne that Cesar in the Diet of Wormes, had published, by their consent, an Edict against the Lutherans, whereunto some had giuen obedience, and some not; of which diuersity and variety he knew not the reason: but it seemed good vnto him, that first of all they ought to deliberate of the meanes, how to put it in execution. That although he had not as yet vnderstood that the 100. grieuances had beene published to bee presented to the Pope, notwithstanding hee knew that three copies had beene brought to some priuate men in Rome, that himselfe had seene one of them, and that they were seene by the Pope and Cardinals, who could not perswade themselues that they were collected by any of the Princes, but thought they were set out by some malignant person in spite to the Court of Rome; that although hee had neither order nor instruction from the Pope in that matter, yet they ought not to thinke that he had not authority to treat thereof, as occasion serued. Hee sayd, that in those de∣maunds, there were many that derogated from the power of the Pope, and sauoured of heresie, that of those he could not treate, but offered to be infor∣med, and to speake of those which were not against the Pope, and had ground of equity, that if any thing remained, to be treated of with his Holynes, they might propose it, but in more moderate tearmes. That he could not choose but finde fault that they were printed and published, because it seemed too much, yet that he was certaine, that the Pope, being Vniuersall Pastour, would doe any thing for the loue of Germany: but if the voyce of the Pastour were not heard, the Pope and himselfe must take it patiently, and referre euery thing to God. 73 The Diet, though they did not thinke it probable, that the Cardinall and Is suspected by the Diet. Pope knew not the treaties with Adrian, and iudged, that in the Legates an∣sweres there might be cunning, yet desiring that good deliberation might be taken for the quiet of their Country, they deputed some Princes to negotiate with the Cardinall, who could get nothing from him, but that he would haue a good reformation made of the Clergy of Germany; but for the abuse of the Court of Rome, it was not possible to make him yeeld to anything. For when they began to discourse of them, either he sayd that it was heresic to reprehend them, or that hee referred it to the Pope, and that it was necessary to treat with him thereof. 74 The Cardinall made a reformation of Germanie, the which (touching And his refor∣mation was not accepted. only the inferiour Clergie, and being iudged that it would not onely cherish the euill, as light remedies alwaies doe, but that it would serue to inlarge the dominion of the Court, and greater Prelates to the preiudice of temporall authoritie, and would make an entrance to greater extorsions of money) was not receiued, it being esteemed but a maske to delude Germany, and to reduce it vnder greater tyranny, though the Legate vsed all effectuall diligence that it might be accepted. Wherefore he would not consent to any of the propo∣sitions, made by the deputies of the Diet. By this it being plaine, that it was impossible to conclude any thing with him, they published the recesse the eighteenth of Aprill, with a Decree, that by the Pope, with consent of the Emperour, a free Councell, in some conuenient place in Germany, should be The Decree of the Diet. intimated, so soone as was possible; and that the States of the Empire should assemble themselues at Spira the eighteenth of Nouember, to determine what course should be taken vntill the Councell were begun. That euery Prince should call together, in his owne State, men, godly and learned, to collect the things that ought to be disputed on in the Councell. That the Magistrates should haue care that the Gospel should be preached according to the doctrine of the approoued writers of the Church, and all pictures and contumelious bookes against the Court of Rome should be prohibited. 75 The Legat hauing answered to euery point of the Decree, and shewed With which the Legat was not pleasep. that it was not the office of Seculars, to deliberate of any thing concerning faith and doctrine, or preaching thereof, he promised that he would giue the Pope an account concerning the Councell onely. 76 The Princes being gone from the Diet, the Legat endeauoured to bring He laboureth to cause his reformation to be receiued. together those that most fauoured the affaires of Rome, to cause the reforma∣tion (which the Diet would not receiue) to be published; and there did meete him in Ratisbon, Ferdinand the Emperours brother, the Cardinall Archbishop of Salzburg, two Dukes of Bauaria, two Bishops, of Trent and Ratisbon, and the Agents of nine Bishops. Where first they made a Decree vnder the date of the sixt of Iuly; That it hauing beene ordered in the assembly at Noremberg, that the Edict of Wormes against Luther should be put in execution, as farre as was possible, therefore they, at the instance of the Legat, Cardinall Campeggio, did command that it should be obserued in all their Dominions and States. That the innouators should be punished, according to the forme of the E∣dict. That nothing should be changed in the Celebration of the Masse and Sacraments. That the Apostates, Monkes and Nunnes, and married Priests, and those that receiued the Eucharist without confession, or did eate forbid∣den meates, should be punished. And that all their subiects that were in the Vniuersitie of Wittenberg should depart from thence, within three moneths, and returne home, or goe to some other place. The day following, beeing the seauenth, the Cardinall published his Constitutions of the reformation, And effecteth it. which were approoued by all the forenamed Princes, and it was commanded that they should bee published, receiued, and obserued, throughout all their States and Dominions. 77 In the proheme of the Constitutions the Cardinall said, that to reforme the life & manners of the Clergie being a thing of great moment for the roo∣ting out of the Lutheran heresie, he had ordained these decrees by the coun∣sell of the Princes, and Prelats assembled with him, which he commanded to be obserued throughout all Germany, by the Archbishops, Bishops, and other The reforma∣tion contained 37. heads Prelates, Priests, and Regulars, and published in all the Cities and Churches. They contained seauen and thirty heads, concerning the apparell and conuer∣sation of the Cleargie, administring gratis the Sacraments, and other Ecclesia∣sticall functions, Banquets, Fabriques of the Churches; those that were to take orders, celebration of holy-dayes, fastings: against Priests that were mar∣ried, against those that confessed not, nor communicated, against blasphe∣mers, sorcerers, soothsayers, and other things like these. In conclusion, the celebration of Diocesan Councels euery yeare was commanded for the obser∣uation of these Statutes, giuing the Bishops power to inuocate the secular arme against the transgressors. 78 The Edict of the reformation being diuulged, the Princes and Bishops, who in the Diet had not consented to the Cardinals demand, were offended, as well with him, as with all those that assembled in Ratisbon, it seeming vn∣to Diuers Princes and Bishops were offended with the accep∣tance of this reformation. them, that they were wronged by the Legat, for making a generall order for all Germany, in a meeting of some fewe onely; and so much the rather, because it was done after it was demonstrated vnto him, that no good could come thereby. They thought themselues iniured also by those fewe Princes and Bishops, who alone had taken vpon them to oblige all Germany, con∣trary to the opinion of the rest. It was opposed also against that reformati∣on, that, leauing the things of importance, as if there had beene no disorder in them, they made prouision in things of the smallest weight. For Germany suffered but little inconuenience by the abuses of the inferiour Cleargy, but great by the vsurpation of the Bishops and Prelates, and greatest of all by those of the Court of Rome. And yet there was no mention made of them, as if they were now in better order then in the Primitiue Church. Then concerning the inferiour Clergy, the principall abuses were not treated of, but those that were of least consequence, which was, as it were to approoue them; and those also that were reprehended, were left without their true re∣medies, being onely noted without applying the medicine, necessary to cure the malady. 79 But the Legat, and the forenamed Princes that met him, cared but little for what was said in Germany, and lesse for what would follow the publica∣tion of the Edict. For their end was onely to satisfie the Pope, and the Popes end was onely to shew, that he had made prouision that there should be no need of a Councell. For Clement, a man skilfull in State affaires, euen in Adrians time, alwayes maintained that it was pernicious counsell, in the occurrences of those times, to vse the meanes of Councels; and was wont to say, that a Clement did euer thinkes Councell dan∣gerous when the Popes au∣thority was in question. Councell was alwayes good when any thing else was treated of but the Popes authority, but, that being called into question, that nothing was more dangerous. For as in former times, the Popes strength consisted in ha∣uing recourse to Councels, so now the security of the Popedome consisteth in declining and auoyding them, and the rather, because Leo hauing condem∣ned the doctrine of Luther, the same matter could not bee handled or exa∣mined in a Councell, without doubting of the authority of the Apostolicall Sea. 80 The Emperour hauing receiued the Decree of Noremberg, was much mooued at it; thinking that to treat and giue so resolute an answere to a stran∣ger The Emperour was distasted with the decree of Noremberg. Prince, without his knowledge, in so important a matter, was but small reputation to his imperiall Maiesty. Neither did the rigour of the Decree please him, foreseeing the Popes displeasure, whom he desired to keepe louing 1525 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. and well affected towards him, in regard of the warre which his Captaines then made with the French-men. Wherefore he wrote backe to the Princes in Germany complaining that, himselfe hauing condemned all the bookes of Luther, the Diet restrained themselues onely to those that were contumelious. But he reprehended them more seuerely, that they had decreed the celebrati∣on of a Councell in Germany, and desired the Legate to treate thereof with Hee wrtteth to the Princes. the Pope, as if this did not more belong to the Pope and him, then vnto them, who, if they thought that a Councell would be so commodious for Germany, they ought to haue recourse vnto him, to obtaine it of the Pope; howsoeuer, he knowing also that this would be profitable for that Coun∣trey, was resolute it should be celebrated, yet in time and place, when and where himselfe could be personally present. But touching a new assembly at Spira, which they had ordained, to order their matters of Religion vntill the time of the Councell, he said that by no mean; he would yeeld vnto it: yea, he commanded they should be carefull to obey the Edict of Wormes, And comman∣deth the exe∣cution of the Edict of Wormes. and that they handled no point of Religion, vntill a Councell were called by the Popes order and his. The Emperours letters, more Imperious then Ger∣many was vsed to receiue from his predecessours, mooued very dangerous hu∣mors in the minds of many Princes, which floting vp and downe, might ea∣sily haue come to a troublesome conclusion. 81 But the moouing was soone stopped, and the yeare following 1525. had 1525 no negotiation in this matter. For the Bores in Germany rebelled against the Princes, and Magistrates, and euery one was busied with the warre of the Anabaptists, and in Italy in the beginning of the yeere succeeded the battell of Francis the French King is taken priso∣ner in the bat∣tell at Pauia. Pauia and the imprisonment of Francis the French King. Which so li ted vp the Emperours minde, that he thought he had all the world in his power: But afterwards the leagues of many Princes against him, which were trea∣ted of, and the negotiation of the Kings liberty, gaue him businesse enough. The Pope also, because Italy was without defence, in the power of the Em∣perours The Pope su∣specteth the greatnesse of the Emperor. Ministers, thought of his owne case, and how he might be ioyned with others, who were able to defend him against the Emperour, from whom his mind was alienated, seeing he was become so potent, that the Popedome remained at his discretion. 82 In the yeare 1526, they returned to the same treaty in Germany and Italy. In Germany all the States of the Empire being assembled at the Diet in Spira 1526 in the ende of Iune, it was consulted of, by speciall order from the Emperour, how Christian Religion, and the ancient customes of the Church might be The Diet of Spira. preserued, and the transgressors punished. The opinions being so various, that it was impossible to conclud any thing, those that represented the Em∣perours persons caused the Imperiall letters to be read: where Charles said, that hee was resolued to passe into Italy, and to Rome, for the Crowne, and to treat with the Pope for the calling of a Councell. Wherefore he comman∣ded that nothing should be ordained in the Diet contrary to the lawes, Cere∣monies, The Emperor promiseth to Procure a Councell. and auncient customes of the Church; but that the forme of the E∣dict of Wormes should be obserued, and that they should patiently beare that small delay, vntill hee had negotiated with the Pope the celebration of a Councell, which should shortly be. Forby treating of matters of Religion 1526 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Why the Edict of Wormes could not be executed. in a Diet, rather hurt ariseth then good. 83 The Cities, for the most part, answered, that their desire was to gratifie and obey the Emperour, but that they saw not the meanes how to doe that which he commanded in his letters, because the controuersies were increa∣sed, and did increase still, particularly concerning the ceremonies, and rites: and if for the time past the Edict of Wormes could not bee obserued, for feare of Sedition, the difficulty was then greater, as was declared to the Popes Le∣gate. And if the Emperour were present, and informed of the state of the bu∣sinesse, hee would bee of the same opinion. Concerning the promise of his Maiesty, for the celebration of a Councell; euery one said, hee might haue effected it when he wrot the letters, because he was then in amity with the Pope; but afterwards there being distastes betweene them, and the Pope ha∣uing taken armes against him, it appeared not how, things standing thus, a Councell could be called. For these respects some proposed that the Empe∣rour should be intreated to grant a nationall Councell in Germanie, to giuen re∣medie A Nationall Councell in Germany is desired. to the dangers that were imminent. Which if it pleased him not, at least (the better to withstand the most greiuous seditions) that he would be con∣tented to deferre the execution of the Edict of Wormes vntill a generall Coun∣cell. But the Bishops, who had no other ayme but the preseruation of their owne authority, said that no treatie ought to be made in the cause of Religi∣on, during the discords betweene the Emperour and the Pope, but that all should be deferred vntill a better time. 84 The opinions were so diuerse, and such discord, betweene the Ecclesi∣astiques, and those that were inclined to Luther, doctrine, was stirred vp, that The Princes did not agree in the Diet of Spira. there appeared manifest danger of Ciuill warre, and many of the Princes put themselues in order to depart. But Ferdinand and the other ministers of the Emperour, seeing clearely what dang d arise, if the Diet were dissol∣ued with such dissention of mindes, and Princes departed without any Decree (because they would haue proceeded diuersly, with danger to haue diuided Germany, without hope of reconciliation) they endeuoured to pacific the chiefest both of the one, and the other side; and in the end, they came to a resolution, to make a Decree: which though it concluded not in substance according to the Emperours minde, yet it shewed some appearance of agree∣ment betweene the States, and obedience towards his Maiesty. The con∣tents of it was; that it being necessary, for giuing of order and forme to the The decree of the Diet of Spira. affaires of Religion, and for the maintaining of liberty, to celebrate a lawfull Councell in Germany, or an vniuersall of all Christendome, which may begin within the compasse of a yeare, Ambassadours should bee sent to the Empe∣rour, to pray him, that he would cast his eye vpon the miserable and tumul∣tuous state of the Empire, and to returne into Germany so soone as might be, to prouide for it. That in the meane space, while the one or the other Coun∣cell, necessary for the businesse of Religion and of the Edict of Wormes, be ob∣tained, all the Princes and States ought to gouerne themselues in their Pro∣uinces and Iurisdictions, that they may giue a good account of their actions to God and the Emperour. 85 But in Italy, Clement hauing passed the yeere before in griefe of mind and feares, thinking that sometimes hee saw Charles armed in Rome, to possesse himselfe of the Ecclesiasticall state, and to regaine the possession of the Ro∣man Empire, vsurped by the Artes of his predecessours; sometimes set in a Councell to moderate the Popes authority in the Church, without which, hee well saw it was impossible to diminish the Temporal; and, aboue all, ha∣uing conceiued a bad presage, that all the ministers sent into France, to treate with the Queene mother, and the State, were perished in the iourney, at last, The Pope was distracted with feare of the Emperor, and of the Councell. in the end of March this yeere, hee tooke breath a little, vnderstanding that the King was set at liberty, and returned into France. Hee sent presently to congratulate with him, and to make a confederation against the Emperour. The which being ratified in Cugnac the two and twentieth of May between He maketh a confederation with the French King set at libertie. him, that King, and the Princes of Italie, vnder the name of the most holy League, and hauing absolued the King from the Oath taken in Spaine, for the obseruation of the things agreed vpon, now deliuered from feare, a passion which had much power ouer him, thinking he was in libertie, and being much prouoked that, not onely in Rome and Naples, Ordinances were publi∣shed to the preiudice of the Court of Rome, but, which more greiued him, that in those dayes a Spanish Notary dared to appeare publikely in the Rota, and command two Napolitans in Cesars name to desist from litigating in that Court, hee resolued to declare his minde, that hee might incourage the con∣federates; and the three and twentieth of Iune, he wrote vnto Charles a very Writeth a se∣uere Briefe to Charles. long Briefe, in manner of an inuectiue; hauing repeated the benefits which hee had done him, as well being Cardinall, as after his assumption to the Popedome, and the great offers which hee had refused from other Prin∣ces, to stand firme in his freindship, seeing hee was ill requited, and that there was no correspondence, neither in good will, nor obseruation of promises, but on the contary, much matter of suspicion was giuen him, and many of∣fences committed by exciting new warres in Italie, and elsewhere (all which hee repeated in particular) laying the blame of all the mischeifes vpon the Emperour, shewing that the Papall dignity was offended in all; and passing to another kinde of offences done vnto him, by publishing lawes in Spaine, and Pragmatiques in Naples, against the liberty of the Church, and the dig∣nity of the Apostolicall Sea, hee concluded in the end, not according to the vse of the Popes, by denouncing spirituall punishments, but protesting vnto him, that if hee will not leaue to doe wrong, ceasing to possesse Italie, and to trouble other parts of Christendome, hee will not be wanting to the Iustice and liberty of his Countrey, wherein standeth the protection of that holy Sea, but will mooue his iust and holy armes against him, not to offend him, but to defend the publique safety, and his owne proper dignity. 86 This dispatch being sent into Spaine, the next day he wrot and dispatch∣ed another Briefe to the Emperour, without making mention of the first. And after∣wards another more mode∣rate then the former. Where he said in substance, that, for the maintaining of the liberty of Italie, and the prouiding against the dangers of the Sea of Rome, he had beene con∣strained to come to these deliberations, which could not be omitted with out failing to performe the duty of a good Pope, and a iust Prince. Wherein if his Maiesty will afford the remedy, which is easie, profitable, and glorious for him to doe, hee shall thereby deliuer Christendome from a great feare; whereof his Nuncio residing with him, shall giue him an account more at large. He prayed him, for Gods sake, to heare him, and to prouide for the publike wel-fare, and to containe within the termes of iustice, the vnbridled, and iniurious desires of his ministers, that others may rest secure of their goods and liues. Vnder these last words the Pope comprehended principally Pompeius, Cardinall Colonna, Vespasianus, and Ascanius, with others of that family, who followed the Imperiall part, and were assisted by the Vice-roy of Naples: from whom hee daily receiued diuers oppositions to his ende∣uours. And, which made greater impression in his mind, he feared also that they might bring the Papacie into straights. For the forenamed Cardinall, a man bould and proud, contented not himselfe to speake of him publikely, as of one assumed to the Papacie by vnlawfull meanes, magnifying what the house of Colonna had done against other Popes, intruders (as hee named them) and vnlawfully chosen, but he added that it was fatall to that family to hate the tyrannicall Popes, and to them to bee reprehended by the vertue of it: and threatned him with a Councell, and treated with all the Emperors ministers, to perswade the Emperour to call it. Whereby the Pope being prouoked to anger, the better to preuent him, published a seuere Monitory against that Cardinall, citing him to Rome, vnder the greatest penalties and The Popesen∣deth a Moni∣torie against Card. Colonna. censures; in which also hee touched manifestly the Vice-roy of Naples, and obliquely the Emperour. But the warre was not prosperously begunne in Lombardie, the army of the French King, not appearing as yet; and the Chri∣stian army was discomfited at the same time in Hungarie, King Lewis dead, the number of those who followed Luthers doctrine did still increase, and all men required a Councell, which might make an vniuersall peace amongst Chri∣stians, and giue an end to so great disorders. 87 The Pope for these causes, hauing first composed the differences with And hauing changed his mind, maketh a long dis∣course in Consistorie. those of the house of Colonna, and abolished the Monitory sent out against the Cardinall, called a Consistory the thirteenth of September; in which hee comiserated, in a long discourse, the calamities of Christendome, bewayled the death of the King of Hungarie, and attributed all misfortune to the anger of God, stirred vp by sinne, confessing that all began from the deformation of the Clergy. Hee shewed how it was necessary, for the appeasing of it, to begin (for so hee said) from the house of God, wherein hee would giue ex∣ample in his owne person. He excused the raysing of armes, and the Processe against those of the house of Colonna, exhorted the Cardinalls to amend their manners, said hee would goe in person to all the Princes, to negotiate an vni∣uersall Peace, resolute rather to die, then to leaue this enterprise, vntill he had brought it to effect, yet assuredly trusting in God to see the conclusion there∣of. The which being obtained, hee resolued to call a generall Councell, to extinguish the diuision in the Church, and to take away the heresies. Hee exhorted the Cardinalls, euery one to thinke of, and propose vnto him all those meanes, which they thought might serue for these two endes, that is, to plant peace, and roote out heresie. The Popes discourse was published throughout Rome and Italie, and Copies thereof were The Popes discourse was thought not to be sincere. sent abroad by many; and though it was much helped by the com∣mendation of his followers, yet few beleeued it to bee sincere. 88 But in Spaine the two letters being presented by the Popes Nuncio, to the Emperour, the one a day after the other, there was much surmising rai∣sed in the Counsell of that Prince. Some of them beleeued that Clement, re∣penting himselfe of the bitternesse of the first, had wrot the second for a medicine: wherefore they aduised that no notice should bee taken thereof. And this opinion was increased by a report giuen out by the Nuncio, that Surmises in Spaine con∣cerning the two Briefes of the Pope. by the second hee had receiued order, that if the first were not deliuered, it should not bee deliuered at all, but sent backe againe, and the second onely consigned. The wiser sort saw well enough, that if the Pope had repented, hee might haue preuented the first Corrier, by causing the second to make more hast: moreouer, that it was not likely that so wise a Prince as hee, would resolue to write so bitterly without great consultation. Therefore they thought it was a kind of cunning to make a protestation, and not to haue an answer. And it was resolued that the Emperour should imitate him, answe∣ring The Empe∣rour maketh two answeres. to the first with termes fitting seuerity, and a day after to the second, ac∣cording to the forme thereof. 89 And so it was done, and an apologeticall letter was written by the Em∣perour the seuenteenth of September, which in the originall conteined 22. The first con∣teined 22 sheets of all paper. sheetes of royall paper, which Mercurius Gattinara presented open to the Nuncio, and read it to him, and sealed it in his presence, and consigned it, that hee might cause it to be deliuered to the Pope. In the beginning of the letter the Emperour shewed that the forme which the Pope held was disproportionable to the duty of a true Pastor, and not correspondent to the filiall obedience which hee had performed towards the Apostolicall Sea, and his Holinesse, who so praysed his owne actions, and so condemned his, with titles of ambition and auarice, that he was constrained to declare his innocency. And beginning the narration from what happened in the time of Leo, afterwards in the time of Adrian, and finally in his Papacie, he shewed that he had a good intention in all his actions, and was inforced to doe as hee had done, laying the fault vpon the Pope. Hee repeated many benefits which hee had done him, and on the contrary side many treaties which the Pope had made against him in diuers occasions: and in conclu∣sion he said, that he desired nothing more then the publique quiet, an vni∣uersall peace, and the iust liberty of Italie. Which things if they were desi∣red by his Holinesse, hee ought to lay downe his weapons, putting Peters sword into the sheath. For this foundation being laid, it was easie to build peace thereupon, and to apply themselues to correct the errours of the Lu∣therans, and other heretiques; wherein hee should haue found him an obe∣dient sonne. But if his Holinesse did otherwise, hee protested before God and men, that hee could not bee blamed for none of these sinister chances which should happen to Christian Religion; promising that if hee will ad∣mit his iustifications as true and lawfull, hee will not remember any iniuries receiued. But if hee shall continue to beare armes against him, because this will not bee the office of a father, but of a party, nor of a Pastor, but of an as∣sayler, it will not be conuenient that hee bee iudge in those causes, and there being none other vnto whom recourse may he had against him, for his own iustification, hee will referre all to the knowledge and iudgement of a gene∣rall Councell of all Christendome; exhorting his Holinesse in the Lord to in∣timate it in a secure and fit place, limiting vnto it a conuenient terme. For see∣ing the state of the Church and of Religion to be altogether troubled, to pro∣uide for his owne and the Common-wealths safety, hee flieth to that sacred and vniuersall Councell, and appealeth vnto it against all the threats past, and grieuances to come. 90 The answer to the second was made the eighteenth; and in that he said, that hee was glad to see his Holinesse treat more louingly, and to desire peace The Empe∣rours answer to the second Briefe. more earnestly in his second letters; which if it were as much in his power to establish, as it is in the power of others to make warre, he should see what his mind was. Although he thinketh that his Holines speaketh as thrust for∣ward by others, not of his voluntary mind, and hopeth in God that hee will rather procure the publique good, then follow the affections of other men. Wherefore he prayeth him to behold the calamities of Christendome. For he calleth God to witnesse, that he will be alwaies ready to let euery one know, that he hath none other end then the glory of God, and the safety of his peo∣ple; as he hath written more at large in the other letters. 91 The Emperour, the sixt of October, wrot also to the Colledge of Car∣dinalls; that he was exceedingly grieued, that the Pope forgetting the Papall The Empe∣ror writeth to the Col∣ledge of Car∣dinals. dignity, went about to disturbe the publique quiet, and when he thought hee had giuen peace to the whole world, by making the accord with the French King, that letters came to him from his Holinesse, such as hee neuer thought would haue come from a common Father, and Vicar of CHRIST: which he beleeued also were not resolued on without their counsell, because he was perswaded that the Pope treated not of things of so great a moment, without communicating all vnto them. Therefore hee was troubled very much, to see that from a Pope, and so religious fathers, should proceed warres, threats, and pernicious counsells against an Emperour, protectour of the Church, and so well deseruing, that to please them hee stopped his eares in Wormes against the prayers of all Germanie, made vnto him against the op∣pressions and grieuanes, which it receiued from the Court of Rome, ma∣king none account of the honest demands that a Councell might bee called, to withstand the foresaid oppressions, which would be as much as to with∣stand the Lutheran heresie. That to serue the Sea of Rome, hee had prohi∣bited the meeting at Spira, which Germanie had intimated, foreseeing that it would haue bin a beginning to separate it frō the obedience of Rome, & hath diuerted the thoughts of those Princes by promising them a Councel. Where∣of hauing written, and giuen an account to the Pope, his Holinesse thanked him for hauing forbid the assembly of Spira, but prayed him to deferre to speake of a Councell vntill a more conuenient time. And hee, to please, made more account to giue him satisfaction, then of the prayers of Germa∣nie, which were so necessarie. And yet for all this the Pope now wrot letters vnto him, full of complaints and imputations, demanding things of him, which hee could neither iustly, nor securely grant. Of which letters he sen∣deth them a copy, being desirous to signifie the whole vnto them, that they might vphold Christianity, now ready to fall, and imploy themselues to diuert the Pope from so pernicious a deliberation; in which if he shall re∣maine vnmoueable, they may exhort him to call a Councell; whereunto in case he will not condescend according to order of law, hee beseecheth their most reuerend Paternities, and the sacred Colledge, that, the Pope denying or deferring the conuocation, they would call it themselues, obseruing the due order. Wherefore if they shall refuse to grant him this iust demand, or shall deferre longer then is conuenient, he wil make prouision for it himselfe And perswa∣deth them to call a Coun∣cel if the Pope refuse. by the Imperiall authority, vsing the meanes that are iust and fitting. This let∣ter was deliuered in the Consistory the twelfth of December, and together also with it a duplicate of the letter, which was consigned to the Nuncio in Granada, was presented to the Pope. 92 All these letters were instantly printed in diuers places of Germanie, Spaine, and Italie, and many copies went vp and downe from hand to hand. Those persons, who though they obserue the accidents of the world, yet haue not much capacity, and vse to liue and gouerne themselues by the examples of others, and especially of the Grandies, and who by the demonstrations which Charles made against the Lutherans, as well in Wormes, as in other places, in The Empe∣ror is censu∣red in Ger∣many. contemplation of the Papacie, beleeued that he fauoured the Popes side for religion and conscience sake, seeing his change, were much scandalized, espe∣cially for that he said, that he stopped his eares to the honest prayers of Ger∣manie, to doe the Pope a pleasure. And those of the wiser sort were of opi∣nion, that his Maiesty was not well aduised to diuulge so great a secret, and to giue the world occasion to beleeue, that the reuerence shewed towards the Pope, was an Art of gouernement couered with the cloake of religion. And further they expected, that for these letters the Pope would shew some de∣sire of reuenge, the Emperour hauing touched two great secrets of the Pope∣dome: the one in appealing from the Pope to a future Councell, contrary to the Constitutions of Pius and Iulius the seconds, the other, in hauing inuited the Cardinalls to call a Councell, in case of a negatiue giuen, or a dilation in∣terposed by the Pope. And it was necessary that this beginning should draw great consequences with it. 93 But as seedes, though most fertile, cast into the ground out of season, fru∣ctifie not; so these great attempts happening in time not conuenient, became The family of Colonna assault Rome, and take it. vaine. And so much happened in this occasion. For while the Pope sought reuenge with his armes, and with the armes of so many Princes, that hee might vse spirituall remedies, after he had made some temporall foundation, those of the familie of Colonna, either not trusting the Popes promises, or for some other cause, arming their Subiects, and others who followed that faction, approched Rome, vpon the side of the Suburbs, the twentieth of September: which amazed very much the Popes family. And the Pope himselfe, surprized vpon the sudden, and wholly confused, knowing not what resolution to take, called for the solemne Pontificall habits, saying, that so apparelled, to the imitation of Boniface the 8. sitting in the Pontificall chaire, hee would expect to see if they dared adde to the first, a second violation of the Apostolicall dignity, in the person of the Pope himselfe. But hee easily The Pope sa∣ueth himselfe in the Castle. yeelded to the counsel of his friends, to saue himselfe in the Castle by the gal∣lery, and not giue occasion to be noted of folly. 94 The Colonnesi entred Rome, and sacked the Popes palace, and S. Peters Church. They spread themselues also euen vnto the principall houses of the Borough. But the inhabitants making resistance, and the Orsini, a contrary faction, comming in ayde against them, they were constrained to retire themselues into a secure quarter, which they had taken neere hand, yet cary∣ing with them the spoyles of the Vatican, with the infinite displeasure of the Pope; and the army waxing bigger euery day with succours, that arriued The palace and S. Peters Church are sacked. from Naples, the Pope fearing some greater incounter, ouercome by necessi∣ty, called into the Castle Don Hugo de Moncado, one of the Emperours mi∣nisters, concluded a truce with him for foure moneths, with condition that the Colonnesi and Neapolitans should retire themselues from Rome, and the A truce con∣cluded. Pope should call backe his Souldiers from Lombardie: the which both parties performing, Clement caused his men to returne to Rome, vnder pretence to obserue the capitulations of the truce; and being by them secured, hee thun∣dered out excommunications against the Colonnesi, declaring them heretiques, The Popes Bull against the Colonnest. and Schismatiques, and excommunicating whosoeuer afforded them assi∣stance, counsell or fauour, or gaue them entertainment, and depriued also the Cardinall of his red Hatte. This Cardinall being in Naples, not esteeming the Popes censures, published an appeale to the Councell, proposing not only the The Cardinal appealeth to the Councel. iniustice and nullity of the monitories, censures and sentences; but also the ne∣cessities of the Church vniuersall, which being manifestly ruinated, could not be easied any other way, then by calling of a lawfull Councell, which might reforme it in the head and in the members. In conclusion he cited Clement to the Councell, which the Emperour would assemble in Spira. 95 Of this Appeale, or Citation, or Manifest, there were copies hanged by night, by those of the faction of the house of Colonna, vpon the doores of the principall Churches in Rome, and in diuers other places, and spread ouer Italie. This put Clement in a great passion, who mightily abhorred the very name of a Councell; not so much fearing the moderating of the Popes au∣thority, and of the profit of the Court, as for his owne proper respects. For though Leo his kinsman, when he made him Cardinall, caused proofe to The Pope feareth a coū∣cell in regard of his illegiti∣mation, and Semonie. be made, that there was promise of marriage betweene his mother and his father Iulianus, yet the vntruth of the proofes was notorious: and though there bee no law which prohibiteth bastards to ascend to the Papacie, yet the vulgar opinion is, that the Papall dignity is not compatible with such a quality. Hee doubted exceedingly, that vnto such a pretence, though vaine, strength might be giuen by his enemies, being vpheld by the power of the Emperour. But hee was more afrayd, because, being conscious by what artes he mounted to the Popedome, and how Cardinall Colonna had a way to No subse∣quent consent can make good a Simo∣niacall electi∣on of the Pope. proue it, considering the seuere Bull of Iulius the 2. which maketh a nullity in a Simoniacall election, and forbiddeth that it should be made good by any subsequent consent, hee greatly doubted that it would happen vnto him as it did vnto Baltassar Cossa, called Iohn the 23, But I haue not been able to learne what was the negotiation of the Counsell of Spira, hauing not found any mention thereof, but in the foresaid Manifest, and in Paulus Iouius in the life of the forenamed Cardinal. In the height of these tumults the yeere ended, with publique expectation, and feare where the tempest would fall. 96 For the next yeere 1527. the negotiations of a Councell were buried in 1527 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. The Viceroy of Naples mar∣cheth towards Rome, preten∣ding the breach of the truce. Charles of Bor∣bon marcheth towards Rome. George Fran∣speg is Gene∣rall of 13000. Almans. silence; according to the vse of humane affaires, that in the time of warre, prouision for lawes hath no place. Yet there succeeded notable accidents, necessarie to bee related, for the vnderstanding of those things which hapned afterwards, in the matter which we handle. For the Viceroy of Naples, pre∣tending that the Pope, by proceeding against the Colonnesi, had broken the truce, incited by the Cardinall, and others of that family, put his Souldiers into their iourney towards Rome: And on the other side also, Charles of Bor∣bone, generall of the Emperours armie in Lombardie, not hauing wherewith to pay his Souldiers, fearing they would mutin, or at least, runne away, beeing desirous by all meanes to keepe them together, sent them towards the Eccle∣siasticall State; whereunto also he was mightily incited, by George Fransperg, a German captaine; who hauing conducted into Italie betweene thirteene and foureteene thousand Souldiers of Germanie, almost all Lutherans, with no other pay, but of one crowne a peice of his own goods, and promise to lead them to Rome, hee shewed the great opportunitie they had to get spoyles, and to make themselues rich, in a citie where all the gold of Europe may bee found. 97 In the end of Ianuarie, Borbon passed the Po with all his troupes, and directed his iourney towards Romania: which march troubled Clement excee∣dingly, considering the qualitie of the men, and the continuall threats of Fransperg, who caused a halter to be caried neere his Colours, saying, that He calleth with him an halter to hang the Pope. with that he would hang the Pope, the better to encourage his men to stand vnited, and to support the iourney though they were not paid: All which things induced the Pope to giue care to Cesar Fieramosca, a Neapolitan, who came newly from Spaine, and brought a long letter from Cesar, full of offers. And, assuring his Holines, that his Maiesty disliked the inuasion of Rome, made by the Colonnesi, and that he was desirous of peace, he induced him to kearken to the truce, which should be negotiated between him, & the Viceroy of Na∣ples. And although in March, Captaine George Fransperg was taken with a fit of an Apoplexie, which caused his death, yet because the army was entred in∣to Fransperg dieth. the Ecclesiasticall State, and still marched forward, the Pope in the end of the moneth, resolued to come to an accord, though he saw it would bee to his great indignity, and would giue suspition to his confederates, and per∣haps aliene them from defending him. Therefore the suspension of armes for An accord is made. eight moneths was established, the Pope paying 60000. crownes, absoluing those of the house of Colonna from the censures, and restoring to the Cardinal his dignity; whereunto he condescended exceeding hardly. But howsoeuer the truce was concluded with the Viceroy of Naples, the money disbursed, and the Colonnesi restored, yet this was not accepted by the Duke of Borbon; who following on his iourney, the 5. of May lodged neere Rome, and assayled it the next day on the Vatican side. Where, though the Popes Souldiers, and the youth of Rome, especially of the Guelfish faction, opposed themselues valiantly in the beginning, and Bourbon were slaine by a Musket-shot, not∣withstanding the army entred, and those that defended the Towne, fled into Rome taken by the armie of Borbon after his death, and sacked. the Suburbes. The Pope, as in sudden accidents, full of feare, saued himselfe, with some of the Cardinalls, in the Castle: and although hee was counselled not to tary, but to passe immediately into Rome, and from thence, to goe to some secure place, yet, refusing this good counsell, hee resolued to remaine there. The Citie, now without a head, was full of confusion, so that none vsed the remedie which then was fit, that is, to breake downe the Bridges, which goe ouer the riuer Tiber, from the Suburbes to the Citie, and to defend themselues; which if it had been done, the Romans would haue had time, at the least, to retire all men of account, and goods of value, into a secure place. But this not beeing done, the Souldiers passed into the Citie, spoyled not onely the houses, but the Churches also of all their ornaments, casting on the ground; and treading vnder feet the reliques, and other sacred things which were not of value, putting the Cardinals and other Prelates in prison, making a mocke of their persons, by setting them on vilebeasts in the Pon∣tificall The Cardinals imprisoned & mocked, and some of them beaten. habit. It is certaine, that the Cardinals of Siena, Minerua, and Ponceta were well beaten, and carried most basely in procession, and that the Spanish and German Cardinals, though they were confident, because the armie was composed of their nations, were not better vsed then the rest. The Pope, re∣tired into the Castle of Saint Angelo, was besieged, and constrained to make an accord, at the same time yeelding the Castle to the Emperours Captaines, and The Pope yeeldeth the Castle and his person. consigning his person prisoner therein: where hee was kept verie close. And beeing in exceeding great affliction for the things past, there was added one more, in his opinion, much greater, that the Cardinall of Cortona, who go∣uerned Florence in his name, hauing heard the newes, retired himselfe from Florence be∣commeth free againe. the Citie, and left it free. The which hauing suddenly chased out the Medici, and regained their libertie, reformed their gouernement, and the greater part of the Citizens shewed such hatred towards the Pope, and his family, that they defaced their armes, euen in their priuate places, and disgraced, with ma∣ny blowes, the images of Leo and Clement, which were in the Church of the The images of Leo the 10. & of Clement the 7. are defaced. Nunciata. 98 But the Emperour hauing receiued aduice of the sacking of Rome, and of the imprisonment of the Pope, gaue many signes of infinite griefe, and The Emperor maketh a shew of griefe for the Popes ca∣lamitie. made demonstration thereof by causing the solemnefeasts to cease, which were made in Validolid, for the birth of his sonne, the one and twentieth of the same moneth. By which appearances he would haue giuen testimony to the world, of his pietie and religion, if hee had commanded at the same time that the person of the Pope should bee set at libertie. But the world, that saw the Pope was prisoner sixe moneths more, perceiued what difference there was between truth and appearance. 99 They began immediately to treat of the Popes deliuery. The Emperour would haue had him conducted into Spaine, deeming (as was true indeede) And is disswa∣ded from cau∣sing him to be brought into Spaine. that it would haue beene a great reputation to him, if in two yeeres there had beene brought out of Italie into Spaine, two so great prisoners, a French King, and a Pope of Rome. But because all Spaine, and especially the Pre∣lates, detested to behold so great an ignominie of Christianitie, that he should be brought prisoner thither, who represented the person of CHRIST, hee changed that opinion, considering also it was not good to stirre vp too much enuie against himselfe, nor to prouoke the King of England, whom he feared much, in case he should haue ioyned himselfe more neerely with the French King, then he was by the peace published in August; who had alreadie sent a potent army into Italie, and atchieued diuers victories in Lombardie. Where∣fore in the ende of the yeere, the Emperour graunted that the Pope should be set free with this condition, that hee should not be against him in the affaires of Milan and Naples, and, for securitie thereof, should giue into his hands, O∣stia, Ciuita vecchia, Ciuita Castellana, and the Cittadell of Furli, and for hostages, The Pope is set at liberty vpon hard conditions. his two Nephews, Hippolitus and Alexander, that he should grant him a Crusa∣do in Spaine, and a tenth of the Church reuenues in all his kingdomes. The de∣liuerie being concluded, and hauing receiued power to depart out of the Ca∣stle the ninth of December, he durst not expect so long, but went out the night before, with a small conuoy, in the habit of a Merchant, and retired himselfe immediately to Monte Fiascone, and after he had taried there a little, from thence he passed to Oruieto. 100 While the Princes were all busied in war, the affaires of religion alte∣red in diuers places; in some, by publike Decree of the Magistrates; in others, by popular sedition. For Berne, making a solemne assembly, both of their own The state of religion in the Cantons of the Suisses & other places. Doctors, and of Strangers, and hearing a disputation many dayes, receiued the doctrine conformable to Zuric; and in Basil all the images were ruined and burnt, by a popular sedition, and the Magistrate depriued, and others put in his place, and the new religion established. And on the other side, eight Can∣tons assembled themselues together, and ratified within their territories the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and wrote a long exhortation to those of Berne, perswading them not to change their Religion, which belonged not to one people, or one Countrey, but onely to a Councel of the whole world. But for all that, the example of Berne was followed at Geneua, Constance, and other places thereabout; and in Argentina, after a publike disputation, the Masse was prohibited by a publike Decree, vntill the defenders of it could shew that it was a worship acceptable to God, notwithstanding that the Chamber of Spira had made a great and a long remonstrance, that it was not lawfull, not onely for one Citie, but not for all the States of the Empire, to make innouation of rites and doctrine, it belonging onely to a generall or na∣tionall Councell. 101 In Italie, these two yeares there being neither Pope nor Court of Rome, 1528 The reformed religion in∣creaseth in Italie. and it seeming, that these calamities were an execution of Gods iudge∣ment against that gouernement, many men beganne to reforme, and in priuate houses in diuers Cities, especially in Faenza, a Towne belonging to the Pope, there was preaching against the Church of Rome, and the number of those, whom others called Lutherans, and themselues Gospellers, increa∣sed euery day. 102 The yeare following 1528, the French army was farre aduanced with∣in The French-men beeing entred into the kingdome of Naples, cause the Spa∣nish army to forsake Rome, the Kingdome of Naples, and had possessed it almost all; which constrai∣ned the Emperours Captaines to conduct the army out of Rome, much diminished, partly by reason of those, who, laden with spoyles, meant to put them in a secure place; and partly because of the plague, which caused great mortalitie among them. The confederates instantly desired the Pope, that Rome beeing set at liberty by necessity, not by the desire of the Emperour, hauing no more neede to temporize with him, hee would in that occasion declare himselfe to be ioyned with them, and proceede against 1529 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. him with spirituall armes, and depriue him of the Kingdome of Naples, and of the Empire. But the Pope, as well for that hee was wearied with trou∣bles, as also, because in case the confederates had gained the better, they would haue maintained the liberty of Florence, the gouernment whereof he more desired to recouer, then to bee reuenged of the iniuries receiued from Charles, hee made a firme resolution not to bee contrary, yea, to ioyne him∣selfe The Pope re∣fuseth to ioine with the con∣federates, for the more easie recouery of Florence. with him vpon the first occasion, to regaine Florence: the which hee was assured that, if the French King and the Venetians had beene conquerours in Italie, they would haue maintained in libertie. Yet keeping this within his breast for the present, he excused himselfe that, by reason of his pouertie, and want of power, it would rather be a burthen then an ease to the confe∣derats, and that the depriuation of the Emperour would cause Germany to be suspicious, that he would pretend to haue authoritie to create the Emperour. And thinking that his confederates perceiued what he aymed at, as he was ex∣cellent in couering his designes, he made all demonstration that hee had laid The Pope ma∣keth shew to haue laid aside all careof tem∣porall things. aside all thought of Temporall things. He let the Florentines vnderstand ma∣ny moneths together, that he was most vnwilling to meddle in their gouern∣ment, onely desiring that they would acknowledge him as Pope, and not more then other Christian Princes did: that they would not persecute his fa∣mily in their priuate affaires; that they would be contented that their armes should stand within the buildings of his predecessors. Hee spake of nothing but of reforming the Church, and reducing the Lutherans. That he was resol∣ued to passe into Germanie in person, & to giue such an example that all should be conuerted. And these were the speaches he vsed all this yeere: so that ma∣ny beleeued for certaine, that those afflictions which God had laid vpon him for his amendment, had procured their due fruit. But that which followed in the yeeres after, made the godly beleeue, that they were as seed sowen vp∣on a rocke, or by the way side; and the wise, that they were a baite to bring the Florentines asleepe. 103 The next yeare 1529, a peace being negotiated between the Emperour, and the French King, and the heate of warre abated, the treaties of a Coun∣cell 1529 The treaties of the Coun∣cell begin a∣gaine. beganne againe. For Francis Guignones, Cardinall of Santa Croce, hauing brought out of Spaine, from the Emperour to the Pope, the release of Ostia, Ciuitta Vecchia, and other Townes belonging to the Church, consigned to the Emperours ministers for securitie of the Popes promises, together with The cautiona∣ry townes are restored to the Pope. large offers, Clement, considering the treatie of peace, which was negotiated with the French King, and how much his owne interests required, that hee should be firmely ioyned with Charles, hee sent vnto him, vnto Barcellona, Ierolamo Bishop of Vasone, master of his house, to treate the articles of accord betweene them: which were easily concluded, for that the Pope pro∣mised the inuestiture of Naples, for the tribute of a white horse onely, the A peace is cō∣cluded be∣tweene the Pope and the Emperour, with diuerse conditions. patronage of the 24. Churches, passage for his men, and the Imperial Crowne. On the other, the Emperour promised to restore into Florence the Popes Nephew, the sonne of Lorenzo, and to giue him to wife Margarite his bastard daughter, and to assist him in the recouerie of Ceruia, Rauenna, Modena, and Rheggio, taken from him by the Venetians, and the Duke of Ferrara. They agreed also to receiue one another at the Coronation, with the accustomed ceremonies. Onely one point was long disputed: For the Popes Ministers proposed, that Charles and Ferdinand should be bound to constraine the Lu∣therans, by force of armes, to returne to the obedience of the Church of Rome; and those that were for the Emperour required, that to reduce them the better, the Pope should call a generall Councell. After long discussion of this point, not to cut off so many other important designes, on which they A point much dispùted be∣tweene the Pope end the Emperour. were agreed, it was resolued to stand in this article in generall tearmes, and concluded, that, to reduce the Lutherans to the vnion of the Church, the Pope should vse spirituall meanes, and Charles and Ferdinand temporall; who also should make warre against them if they remained obstinate: and in that case the Pope should prouide that the other Christian Princes should assist them. 104 In this sort the confederation was concluded, with much ioy of Cle∣ment, Clement sud∣denly recoue∣reth all his greatnesse. and maruell of the world, how, hauing lost all his state and reputation, he should returne to the same greatnes in so short a time. In Italie, which saw an accident so full of varietie, or rather contrarietie, it was esteemed a diuine miracle, and by those that loued the Court, it was ascribed to a demonstrati∣on of the fauour of God towards the Church. 105 But in Germanie a Diet being intimated in Spira, which began the 15. of He sendeth to the Diet of Spira. March, the Pope sent thither Iohn Thomas of Mirandula, to exhort them to the warre against the Turke, promising to contribute himselfe also as much as his forces, exhausted by the calamities of the yeares past, would allow him to doe, and to giue assurance that he would vse all industrie to accord the diffe∣rences betweene the Emperour and the French King; that all things being pa∣cified, and all impediments taken away, he might apply himselfe, as soone as it was possible, to the calling and celebration of a Councell, to reestablish Religion in Germanie. 106 In the Diet they first treated of Religion: And the Catholiques thought The Land∣graue of Hassia preuenteth the diuision which the Ro∣mane Catho∣liques, would haue made a∣mongst the Reformatists. to put dissention between their aduersaries, diuided into two opinions, some following the doctrine of Luther, and some of Zuinglius, if the Landgraue of Hassia, a man wise and prouident, had not withstood the danger; shew∣ing that the difference was not great, and giuing hope that it might easily be accorded, and declaring the dammage that would arise by the diuision, and the aduantage which their aduersaries would haue gained. After long disputation in the Diet, to finde out a forme of composition, in the ende a Decree was made, that, the Decree of the former Diet of Spira, beeing wrested by the bad interpretations to defend all absurditie of opinions, and The decree of the Diet of Spira. therefore being now constrained to expound it, they ordained, That whoso∣euer had obserued the Emperours Edict of Wormes, should obserue it still, compelling also the people thereunto vntill the time of the Councel, which the Emperour gaue assured hope should be called shortly: and hee that had changed doctrine, and could not bee reduced without danger of sedition, should abide there, and innouate nothing more vntill the Councell began: that the Masse should not bee taken away, nor hindred in any place where the new doctrine was receiued; that Anabaptisme should be punished capi∣tally, according to the Edict published by the Emperour, which they ratified, and that concerning the Sermons and Prints, the Decrees made in the two last Diets of Noremberg should be obserued; that is, that the Preachers bee circum∣spect, take heede of giuing offensiue words, and giue not occasion to the peo∣ple to rise against the Magistrate, that they propose no new opinions which haue no foundation in the holy Scripture, but preach the Gospell according to the interpretation approoued by the Church, without touching other things that be disputable, expecting the determination of the Councel, where all shall be lawfully decided. 107 The Elector of Saxonie, and fiue Princes more, opposed themselues to this Decree, saying, that they ought not to forsake the Decree made in the Is opposed. former Diet, by which euery one might exercise his owne religion vntill the Councell; which Decree being made by the common consent of all, could not without the same consent, bee changed. That the originall cause of the dissentions was very clearely perceiued in the Diet of Noremberg, and the same Pope, vnto whom the demands were sent, and the hundred grieuances ex∣pounded, confessed it; yet for all this, no amendment was seene. That, in all the consultations it was euer concluded, that there was no way more con∣uenient to remooue the controuersies then by a Councell. In the meane space, while this is expected, to receiue their Decree, were to denie the pure and vndefiled word of God; and to allow the Masse, were to renew the dis∣orders. They said they commended that part, that is, to preach the Gospell according to the interpretations approoued by the Church, but that there remained a doubt which was the true Church. That to establish a Decree so obscure, was to lay open a way to many tumults and controuersies, & there∣fore would not by any meanes giue consent vnto it. That they would giue account to all men, and euen vnto Cesar himselfe, of this their opinion. And that vntill the beginning of the Councell, either generall of all Christen∣dome, or nationall of Germanie, they will doe nothing that may iustly be re∣prooued. 108 To this declaration foureteene principall cities of Germanie adhered, How the name of Protestants began. and from hence came the name of Protestants, by which they are called who follow the doctrine renewed by Luther. For these Princes and Cities gaue out their protestation and appeale, from that Decree vnto Cesar, and to a fu∣ture Generall Councell, or Nationall of Germanie, and to all iudges not suspected. 109 And because mention is made of the difference in opinion between Lu∣ther and Zuinglius, in matter of the Sacrament, it is fit to shew heere, how the The difference in opinion be∣tweene Luther and Zuinglius. renouation of doctrine being begun in two places, by two persons indepen∣dent the one of the other, that is, by Luther in Saxonie, and Zuinglius in Zuric, they consented in all the heads of doctrine, vntill the yeere 1525. and then in the explication of the mysterie of the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, though they both agreed, in saying that the bodie and blood of our Lord Iesus Christ are in the Sacrament onely in vse, receiued with the heart and faith, yet Luther taught that the words of our Lord (This is my body) ought to be receiued in a naked and plaine sence; and, on the contrary, Zuinglius taught that the words were figuratiuely, spiritually, and Sacramentally, and not carnally to be vnderstood. And the contention alwayes increased, and be∣came euery day more bitter, especially on Martins side, who treated after a sharpe manner against the aduerse partie. And this gaue matter to the Catho∣likes in this yeeres Diet of Spira, to be able (as hath beene said) to put distrust and distast betweene the parties. But the Landgraue of Hassia, who, hauing discouered the cunning of the aduersaries, kept his side in peace, with hope to reconcile the contrary opinions, as Well to maintaine his promise, as to withstand future dangers, procured a conference, sollicited the Suisses to send The confe∣rence of Marpurg. 1529 their men, and assigned Marpurg for the place of the disputation, and all the moneth of October of the same yeere 1529. There came out of Saxonie, Luther and his two schollers, and out of Suisserland, Zuinglius and Ecolampadius. Only Luther and Zuinglius disputed, and the disputation continued many dayes; yet Luther and Zuinglius could not agree. for all this it was impossible for them to agree; whether it were, because the controuersie being passed on so farre, it seemed that the honour of the Au∣thors was in question, or because, as it happeneth in verball contentions, the smalnesse of the difference, nourisheth the obstinacie of the parties: or be∣cause, as a little after Martin wrote to a friend, seeing much tumult raysed, he would not by Zuinglius his forme of words, which the Romanists so much abhorred, make his Princes more odious, and expose them to greater danger. But bee the cause what it will, one more vniuersall is very true, that it pleased the Maiesty of God to vse this difference of opinions, for diuers effects, which followed after. It was necessarie to end the colloquie without conclusion, but that, by the meanes of the Landgraue they agreed in this, that being of ac∣cord in all other points, they ought heereafter to abstaine from bitternesse in this particular, praying God to shew some light of agreement. Which con∣clusion, though resolued on with wisedome, and, as they said, with charitie, being not followed by their successours, hindered very much the progresse of the reformed Doctrine. For in cause of religion, euery sub-diuision is a strong weapon in the hand of the contrary part. But the league betweene the Pope and Emperour being concluded, as hath beene said, and the order set downe for the Coronation, the Citie of The Pope and Emperour met at Bologna about the co∣ronation, but treated of di∣uers other matters. Bolonia was appointed for the place. For it seemed not conuenient to the Pope that this solemnitie should bee performed in Rome, in the presence of those who had sacked it but two yeeres before. This was acceptable also to Charles, because it made the ceremonies more short: which he desired, that he might passe into Germanie so soone as might bee. Therefore the Pope, as the greater person, arriued first in Bolonia, and afterwards the Emperour the fifth of No∣uember, where hee taried foure moneths, and remained in the same pallace with the Pope. Many things were treated of by these two Princes, partly for the vniuersall quiet of Christendome, and partly for the priuate interest of the one and the other. The principall were, the generall peace of Italie, and the extirpation of the Protestants in Germanie. To speake of the first, be∣longeth not to the subiect that is handled, but concerning the Protestants, it was proposed by one of the Emperours Counsellors, that, considering the nature of Germans, who are tenacious of libertie, it were better by faire meanes and sweet representations, & by dissembling the knowledge of many things, to cause the Princes to returne to the obedience of the Pope. For this protection being taken from the new Doctors, the residue would easily bee remedied. And to doe this, a Councell was the true and proper remedie: as well because it was desired by them, as because euery one would bow at that maiesticall and venerable name. But the Pope, who feared nothing more then a Councell, especially if it were to bee celebrated beyond the mountaines, free, and in the presence of those, who alreadie had openly shaken off the yoke of obedience, saw very well what an easie thing it was for these to perswade the others also. Hee considered further, that although the cause was common to him with all other Bishops, whom the new opinions sought to depriue of the wealth they possessed, yet there remained some matter of distast, betweene them and the Court of Rome. For they pretended that collation of Benefices, with the reseruations and preuentions, was vsurped from them, and a great part of their authoritie taken away, and drawen to Rome, by calling of causes thither, by reseruations of dispensations, & absolutions, and such like faculties, which formerly being common to all Bishops, the Popes of Rome had appro∣priated to themselues. Whereupon it was represented vnto him, that the ce∣lebration of a Councell would be a totall diminution of the Popes authoritie. Therefore he turned all his thoughts to perswade the Emperor, that a Coun∣cell And the Pope did infinitely disswade the Emperour from desiring a Councell. vvas not good, to pacifie the stirres of Germanie, but pernicious for the Imperiall authoritie in those Prouinces. He put him in mind of two sorts of persons, the multitude, and the Princes and Grandies: that it vvas probable that the multitude vvas deceiued, but to giue it satisfaction in the demand of a Councell, vvas not to giue it more light, but to bring in popular licence. If it vvere granted vnto them to make question, or seeke greater perspicuitie in religion, they vvould immediately pretend also to giue lavves for gouerne∣ment, and to restraine the authoritie of Princes by Decrees: and vvhen they haue obtained to examine and discusse the Ecclesiasticall authority, they vvill learne also to trouble the temporall. He shevved him that it vvas more easie to oppose the first demaunds of a multitude, then after they had beene grati∣fied in part, to prescribe them a measure. For the Princes and Grandies, hee might assure himselfe, that their end was not pietie, but the making them∣selues Lords of the Ecclesiasticall goods, and being become absolute, to ac∣knowledge the Emperour nothing at all, or very little; and that many of them kept themselues vnspotted with that contagion, because they haue not, as yet, discouered the secret, which being made manifest, they will all addresse themselues to the same scope. That there was no doubt but that the Papa∣cio would lose much in the losse of Germanie: but the losse of the Emperour, and of the house of Austria would bee farre greater. Against which, if hee would make prouision, he had no other meanes, then seuerely to imploy his authoritie and power, while the greater part obeyed him: wherein expedi∣tion was necessarie, before the number increased, and the profit were disco∣uered by all, which is reaped by following those opinions. That vnto expe∣dition, so necessarie, nothing is more contrarie, then to treate of a Councell. For though euery one incline himselfe to it, and no impediment bee inter∣posed, yet it cannot bee assembled but in length of yeeres, nor the causes han∣dled without prolixitie: which thing onely he would consider. For it were infinite to speake of impediments which would bee raysed for diuers inte∣rests rests of persons, who would oppose themselues with diuers pretences, at the least putting in delayes, that it may come to nothing. That there was a same spread, that the Popes will haue no Councell, for feare their authoritie should be restrained, a reason, which maketh no impression at all in him, hauing his authoritie immediately from Christ, with promise, that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. And the experience of for∣mer times hath shewed; that the Papall authoritie hath neuer beene dimi∣nished in any Councell, but according to the words of our Lord, the Fathers haue euer confessed it to bee absolute and vnlimited, as it is in deede. And when the Popes in humilitie, or for some other respect, haue forborne to vse it intirely, the Fathers haue made him to put it wholly in execution. And this is cleerely to be seene by him that shall reade the things that are past. For the Popes haue alwayes imployed this meanes against the new opini∣ons of heretiques, and in euery other necessitie, with increase of their autho∣ritie. And setting aside the promise of CHRIST, which is the true and one∣ly foundation, and considering the things but temporally the Councel con∣sisteth of Bishops; vnto Bishops the Papall greatnesse is profitable, because they are by that protected against Prince and people. Kings and other So∣uereignes also who haue vnderstood, and will vnderstand well the rules of gouerning, will alwayes fauour the Apostolicall authoritie, hauing no other meanes to represse and keepe in order their Prelates, when they haue the spirit to goe beyond their degree. The Pope concluded, that in his minde hee was so assured of the issue, that hee could speake thereof as a Prophet; and affirme, that, by calling a Councel, greater disorders would ensue in Ger∣many. For those that desire it, pretend to continue vntill then in what they haue begun, when their opinions shall bee condemned, and nothing else can succeede, they will take another cloake to detract from the Councell: and in conclusion the Emperours authoritie in Germany will come to nothing, and in other places will be shaken; the Popes power will bee diminished in that Countrey, and in all the residue of the world, will bee increased the more. And therefore the Emperour should beleeue his opinion, the rather because hee was not mooued by his proper interest, but with a desire to see Germany reunited to the Church, and himselfe obeyed. That nothing The Pope perswadeth the Emperor to execute the sentence of Leo, and the Edict of Wormes. would take good effect, if hee went not presently into Germany, and imme∣diately vsed his authoritie, intimating that the sentence of Leo, and the E∣dict of Wormes should bee executed without any replie, not giuing eare to any thing the Protestants could say, either demanding a Councell, or more instruction, or alleaging their appeale or protestation, or any other excuse, because they are all but pretences of impietie. That hee should vse force a∣gainst the first incounter of disobedience, which would bee easie for him to doe against a few, hauing all the Ecclesiasticall Princes, and the greater part of the Seculars, who, to this end, would take armes with him. That this and no other thing is congruous to the office of the Emperour, Aduo∣cate of the Church of Rome, and to the oath taken in Aquisgran, and which hee ought to take in receiuing the Crowne from his hand. Lastly, that it was a cleere case, that the holding of a Councell, or any other treatie or nego∣tiation in this occasion, would necessarily end with warre. Therefore it was better to make triall of composing these disorders, by the strength of autho∣ritie, 1530 CLEMENT CHARLES—HENRY 8. FRANCIS and with absolute commaund, which would easily take good effect; and in case it should not, rather to proceede to force of armes, then let the raines loose to popular licence, to the ambition of the Grandies, and per∣uersenesse of the arch heretiques. These reasons vnseemely in the mouth of Friar Iulius de Medici, Ganalier Who conde∣scendeth ther∣unto. of Malta, (for so the Pope was called before he was created Cardinall) much more of Pope Clement the 7. did notwithstanding preuaile with Charles, be∣ing seconded by the perswasions of Mercurius de Gattinara, the Emperours Chancellour and Cardinall, (vnto whom the Pope made many promises, and particularly that in the first promotion of Cardinals, which he then prepa∣red to make, he would haue regard to his kinred and dependants) and by the Emperours proper inclination to haue more absolute authoritie in Ger∣manie, then was granted to his grandfather, or his fathers grandfather. In Bolonia all the solemne acts and ceremonies of the coronation were 1530 The Emperor is crowned in Bolonia. performed, which was finished the 14. of February, and Caesar being resolued to goe personally into Germanie, to giue an end to those disorders, be intima∣ted an imperiall Diet for the 8. of April, and in March he began his iourney. The Emperour parted from Bolonia with this firme resolution, to labour And resolueth to employ his authoritie in matter of re∣ligion. in the Diet, with authoritie and command, that the Princes separated one from another, should returne to the obedience of the Church of Rome, and to prohibite Sermons and bookes of the reformed doctrine. And the Pope gaue him for company the Cardinall Campeggio, as Legate, who should Campeggio the Legate goeth with him. And Peter Paul Vergeri∣us to Ferdi∣nand. follow him to the Diet. He sent also Peter Paul Vergerius, Nuncio to King Ferdinand, with instruction to labour with him, that there should bee no dis∣putation in the Diet, nor consultation concerning Religion, nor any re∣solution taken to call a Councell in Germanie to that purpose; and to gaine the fauour of that Prince, (who, being the Emperours brother, and hauing spent many yeeres in Germanie, hee thought was able to doe much) hee should grant him power to take a contribution of the Clergie of Germanie, for the warre against the Turkes, and to make vse of the gold and siluer appoynted for ornament of the Churches. Almost all the Princes arriued at the Diet before Caesar, who came thi∣ther the thirteenth of Iune, the eue of Corpus Christi day, and went in The Diet of Ausburg. The Prote∣stants refuse to goe in pro∣cession. procession the day following; but was not able to obtaine that the Prote∣stants would content themselues to be there. Which the Legate perceiuing, with infinite displeasure, for the preiudice done to the Pope by this contu∣macie, as hee tearmed it, to goe a step further, and to cause the Protestants to assist at the Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, was a meanes that the Emperour eight dayes after, being to begin the assembly, gaue order to the Elector of Saxonie to carrie the sword before him, as he went thither, accor∣ding The Duke of Saxonte cari∣eth the sword.] after a long disputation whether hee might tely assist at the Masse. to his office, and to stand at the Masse. The Elector thought that by yeelding hee should contradict his profession, and by refusing should loose his dignitie, hauing found out, that in case of his deniall, the Emperour would giue the honour to another. But hee was counselled by his Diuines Luthers Schollers, that he might doe it without offence to his conscience, assisting as at a ciuill, not as at a religious Ceremony: by the example of the Prophet E∣lizeus, who thought it not inconuinient that the captaine of the troupes of Syria, conuerted to the true Religion, should bow himselfe in the Temple of the Idole, when the King bowed, who leaned on his arme. This ∣sell was not approoued by others, because by it one might conclude that e∣uery one might lawfully be present at all the Rites of another Religion, as at ciuill Ceremonies, for no man could want a cause of necessitie, or vtilities which might induce thereunto. But others approouing the counsell, and the purpose of the Elector concluded, that if the new doctors had formerly vsed this reason, and would vse it hereafter, a gate had not beene opened in many occasions to diuers inconueniences, because it would be lawfull to e∣uery one by that example, for preseruation of his dignitie, or his territorie, or the fauour of his Lord, or other eminent person, not to refuse to giue assi∣stance to any action whatsoeuer, at which, though others were presentes at a religious acte, he assisted, as at a ciuill thing. In that Masse; Vicenzo Pimpinello Archbishop of Rosano the Popes, Nun∣cio, The Sermon of Vicen Pi the Popes made an Oration in Latine before the Offertorie; in which he spake not a word of any spirituall or religious matter, but vpbraided Germanie for ha∣uing suffered so many wrongs by the Turkes without reuenge and exhor∣ted them by many examples of ancient Captaines of the Romane Com∣mon-wealth, to make warre against them. Hee said, the disaduantage of Germanie was that the Turke obeyed one Prince onely, whereas in Germa∣nie many obeyed not at all: that the Turkes liue in one religion, and the Germans euery day inuent new, and mocke the old, as if it were become mouldie. Hee taxed them, that being desirous to change the faith, they had not found our one more holy at the least, and more wise. Finally hee exhor∣ted them, that imitating Scipio Nasica, Cato, the people of Rome, and their ancestors, they should obserue the Catholique Religion, forsake those noui∣ties, and applie themselues to the warre. In the first Session of the Diet, the Legat, Cardinall Campeggio, presented The Leg presenteth his letters, and maketh an oration. the letters of his Legation, and in the assembly, in the presence of the Em∣perour, made an Oration in Latine, the substance whereof was, that the cause of so many Sects, which then reigned, was want of charitie and loue, that the change of doctrine and rites, had not onely rent the Church in pieces, but brought all policie to a miserable desolation. For remedying of which mischiefe, the former Popes hauing sent Legats to the Diets, and no fruit comming thereby, Clement had sent him to exhort, to counsel, and to imploy all his indeuours to restore the true doctrine. And hauing commended the Emperour, hee exhorted all to obey whatsoeuer hee shall ordaine and re∣solue vpon concerning Religion, and Articles of beliefe. Hee perswaded them to make warre against the Turkes, promising that the Pope would spare no cost to assist them. Hee prayed them for the loue of CHRIST, for their Countreys, and their owne safetie, that, laying aside all errors, they would applie themselues to set Germanie, and all Christendome at libertie. That in so doing, the Pope, successor of S. Peter, gaue them his benediction. The Arch-bishop of Mentz answered the Legats oration, by order of the And is answer¦red by the Arch-bishop of Emperour and the Diet, that Caesar, as supreme Aduocate of the Church, will vse all meanes to compose the disorders, will imploy all his forces in the against the Turkes, and that all the Princes will joyne themselues that their action shall bee approoued by God and the Pope After this, many being heard, the Elector of Sacco∣ and protestant Cities oyned with him, presented to the Emperour she confession of their faith, written Latine and Dutch, it might be read. But the Emperour refusing to haue it The Luthe∣rans doe pre∣sent a confes∣sion of their faith. And so do the Zuinglians. in publique it was put off vntill the next day, when the Legate would not be present for feare of receiuing some prejudice. But the Princes being assembled before the Emperor in an Hall, capable to receiue about persons, it was read with aloud voyce. And the Cities, which followed the doctrine of Zuinglius, presented apart the confession of their faith, not diffe∣ring from the former, but onely in the point of the Eucharist! The confession of the Princes, which afterwards from this place, where it was read, was called Augustana, cont ined two parts: in the first were The name of the Augustan confession be∣ga expounded de of the vnitie of the God-head, of origi∣nall sinne, of the incarnation, of iustification, of the ministery of the Gospel, of the Church, of administring the Sacraments, of Baptisme, of the Eucharist, of Confession, of Penance, of the vse of the Sacraments, and the Ecclesiasticall order, of the rites of the Church, of the ciuill Common-wealth, of the last udgement, of free will, of the cause of sinne, of faith, of good workes, and worshipping of Saints. In the second were expounded the doctrines which were different from the Church of Rome, & the abuses which the Confessio∣nists reprooued. And these were declared at large in seuen articles; of the holy Communion, mariage of Priests, of the Masse, of Confession, of the distin∣ction of meates, of Monasticall vowes, and Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction. In conclusion they offered, in case it were needfull, a more full information. But in the proheme thereof they deliuered, that they had put their confes∣sion in writing to obey the Propose of his Maiestie, that all men ought to present their opinions and therefore if the other Princes will giue vp theirs in writing, they are readie to conferre peaceably with them, that they may come to an agreement; whereunto in case they could not come, his Maie∣stie, hauing giuen them to vnderstand in all the former Diets, that he could not determine or conclude any matter of Religion for diuers respects then alleaged, but that he would perswade the Pope to call a generall Councell, and finally hauing caused it to bee said in the Diet of Spira, that the differences betweene his Maiestie and the Pope being readie to bee composed, there could bee no doubt but that hee would giue consent vnto it, they offered to app , and to giue a reason, and make a defence of their cause in such a ge∣nerall, free, and Christian assembly, of which it hath alwayes bin treated, in all the Diets celebrated during the time of his Empire. Vnto which Councell, and to his Maiestie, they haue formerly in due forme, and vpon good cause appealed, vnto which appeale they doe yet adhere, not intending to aban∣don it, neither by this treatie, nor by any other, if the difference bee not charitably reduced first to a Christian concord. This was the onely Act of the first day. But the Emperour, before he made any resolution, would haue the Legates aduice. Who, hauing read The Legate would not censure the Confession. and considered the confession, together with the Diuines which he brought out of Italie, though hee was of opinion that it ought to bee opposed, and a censure published vnder his name; yet, foreseeing that it would giue occa∣sion of greater tumults, and saying plainely that the difference for the most part seemed verball, and that it imported not much whether one spake after one manner or after another, and that it was not reasonable that the Aposto∣licall Sea should take part in the disputations of the Schooles, hee con ented not to haue his name vsed in the contentions. And hee answered the Empe∣rour, that for the present, there was no cause to make any examinati∣on of the doctrine, but to consider the example which would bee giuen to all vnquiet and subtile wits, who would not haue wanted infinite other nouities to propose, with no lesse probabilitie, which would haue beene heard with greedines, because of the itching of cares which they stirre vp in the world, and that by correcting the abuses that were noted, greater incon∣ueniencies would be raised then those which one sought to remedie. That his opinion was that the doctrine of the Lutherans being read, to remoue all preiudice, a confutation thereof should be read likewise, which should not be But gaue or∣der that a con∣futation ther∣of should be read, and no copie giuen. published in copies, for feare of opening a way to disputations, but meanes should be vsed, that the Protestants should from going further on, by proposing fauours and threats. But the Confession being it wrought diuers effects in the mindes of the Catholiques who heard it. Some thought the Protestants more wicked, then they were perswaded, before they were informed of their particular opinions others on the contrary, remitted much of the bad conceit they had against them, esteeming their opinions not to ab∣surd as before they did, yea, for a great part of the abuses, they confessed they were iustly reprehended. It is not to be omitted that Cardinal Mattheo Langi, Archbishop of Salzburg, told euery one, that the reformation of the Masse The Archbi∣shop of Salz∣burg would not haue the world refor∣med by a Monke. was honest, the libertie of meates conuenient, and the demand iust, to be dis∣burthened of so many commandements of men, but that a poore Monke should reforme all, was not to bee endured. And Cornelius Scoperus, the Em∣perours Secretarie, saide, that if the Protestant Preachers had money, they would easily buy of the Italians what Religion pleased them best, but without golde, it was impossible to make theirs shine in the world. The Emperour, according to the Legates aduice, approued also by his owne Counsellers, desirous to compose all by a negatiue, went first about to separate the Ambassadors of the cities from ioyning with the Princes: which proiect not succeeding, he caused a confutation to be made of what the Pro∣testants put vp in writing, and another of that which was produced by the Cities. And hauing called the whole Diet together, hee told the Protestants that he had considered of the confession presented vnto him, and giuen or∣der to some pious and learned men, to deliuer their opinion thereof. And heere he made the confutation of it to be read, in which, many of their opi∣nions being taxed, it was confessed in the end, that in the Church of Rome, there were some things fit to bee amended, against which hee promised that prouision should be made, therefore that the Protestants ought to referre themselues vnto him, and returne to the Church, assuring them to obtaine all their iust demands, but in case they did otherwise, he would not faile to shew himselfe protector and defender of it. The Protestant Princes offered to performe whatsoeuer could bee done with a safe conscience, and if out of the holy Scripture, any errour in their doctrine were shewed to correct it, or to make a further declaration, in case it were necessarie. And because some of the points proposed by them, were granted in the confutation, and some reiected, if a copie of the confutations were giuen them, they should be expounded more cleerely. After many treaties, seuen Catholikes, and seuen Protestants were chosen, A Colloquie between the Protestants & Catholikes. to conferre together, to find out a meanes of composition: who, not being able to agree the number was restrained to three a piece. And though some few small points of doctrine, and other petty things; belonging to some rites, were agreed on, yet in conclusion, it was perceiued, that the conference could produce no concord at all, because neither partie was willing to grant to the other any thing of importance. Many dayes being spent in this treatie, the refutation of the Cities confession was read: whereunto their Ambassadors answered, that many Articles of their writing were repeated otherwise then The answer of the Protestant Ambassadors to the confu∣tation. they were written by them, & many other things proposed by them, drawne to a bad sence, to make them odious: vnto all which obiections they would haue answered, if a copie of the confutation had beene giuen them: in the meane time, they prayed them nor to beleeue any calumnie, but to ex∣pect their defence. They denyed to giue them a copie, and sayde that the Emperour would not suffer, that the points of Religion should bee put in∣to disputation. The Emperour assayed by way of canuase to perswade the Princes, tel∣ling them, that they were but few, their doctrine new, that it had been suffi∣ciently confuted in this Diet, that their boldnesse was great to condemne of errour, heresie, and false religion, the Imperiall Maiestie, and so many Prin∣ces and States of Germany, with whom, themselues beeing compared, made not a number; and which is worse, to esteeme also for heretikes, their owne fathers and ancestours, and to demand a Councell, and yet to goe on still in the errours. These perswasions auayling nothing, because they denied theirs to be new, and the rites of the Romane Church olde, the Emperour im∣ploying other remedies, vnto which he was aduised by the Legat Campeggio, caused euery one to be treated with apart, proposing vnto them some satis∣faction in their proper interests, and laying before them diuers oppositions and crosses, which he would haue raised against their proceedings, in case they persisted in their resolution, not to reunite themselues to the Church. But whither those thought to bring about their owne designes by perse∣uering, or preferred the preseruation of their Religion, before all o∣ther interest, the perswasions, though very potent, produced none effect. Neither could the Emperour obtaine of them, to grant the exercise of the Romane religion within their territories, vntill the time of the Councell, which he promised should bee intimated within sixe moneths, because the Protestants had discouered that this was the inuention of the Popes Legate, who not being able to obtaine his purpose for the present, thought it suffi∣cient, if by the establishing the Romane doctrin in euery place, he put confu∣sion among the people who were alienated already, whereby away might be opened to those accidents which might giue occasion to roote out the new. For concerning the promise, to intimate a Councell within sixe moneths, he well knew that many impediments might bee pretended in the very nicke and finally all expectation deluded. It being impossible to conclude any thing, the Protestants departed in the end of October, and the Emperour made an Edict, to establish the an∣cient rites of the Roman Catholike religion; which contained in summe, The Edict of A . that nothing should be changed in the Masse, in the Sacrament of Confir∣mation, and extreame vnction, that the Images should not bee taken out of any place, and those restored that were taken away already, that it should not be lawfull to denie free-will, nor to hold opinion, that onely faith doeth iustifie, that the Sacraments, Ceremonies, Rites, Obsequies of the dead, should be obserued in the same manner they were before, that Benefices should bee giuen to fit persons, and that the marryed Priests should forsake their wiues, or be banished, all sales of Church goods, and other vsurpa∣tions made voyd, that in preaching and teaching, no man should passe these tearmes, but the people should be exhorted to heare Masse, to inuocate the Virgin Mary, and the other Saints, to obserue the feasts and fastings, that the Monasteries, and other sacred Edifices, which haue beene destroyed, should be rebuilt, and the Pope should be requested to intimate a Councell within sixe moneths, in a conuenient place, and after to beginne it within a yeere at the most, that all things remaine firme and constant, and no appeale or exception to the contrary take place, and that euery one ought to imploy all his forces, possessions, life, and blood, to preserue this Decree, and that the Imperiall Chamber proceed against whosoeuer shall oppose it. The Pope hauing receiued aduice from his Legat, of what was done in the Diet, was touched with an inward griefe of minde, discouering that, The Pope was displeased with the Emperour for me ling in religion, but especially for promising a Councell. though Charles had receiued his counsell, by vsing his authority, and threat∣ning violence, yet he had not proceeded as aduocate of the Church of Rome, vnto whom it belongeth not to take knowledge of the cause, but to bee a meere executor of the Popes Decrees: whereunto was quite contrary to haue receiued the confessions, and caused them to bee read, and to haue in∣stituted a conference to accord the differences. Hee complayned beyond measure, that some points were agreed vnto, and especially that he had con∣sented to the abolition of some rites; thinking that the Popes authoritie was violated, when things of so great moment were treated of, without his pri∣uity: at the least if his Legates authoritie had beene interposed, it had beene tollerable. After he considered that it was a great preiudice to him, that the Prelates had consented to it. But the promising of a Councell, which hee so much abhorred, pressed him aboue all: in which, though honourable mention were made of his authoritie, yet to subscribe sixe moneths, to call it, and a yeere to beginne it, was to meddle with that which was proper to the Pope, and to make the Emperor the principall, and the Pope his mini∣ster. By the obseruation of these beginnings, he concluded that there was little hope in the affayres of Germany, and that hee was to thinke of a defen∣siue, that the disease might not passe to other parts of the body of the Church. And because that which was past, could not be yndone, hee thought it not wisedome to shew it was done against his will, but to make himselfe the au∣thor 1531 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. He writeth to al Princes that he would call a Councell, though he ne∣uer meant it. of it, that he might receiue a lesse blow in his reputation. Therefore he gaue an account of the things past to all Kings and Prin∣ces dispatching his letters the first of December, all of the same tenour, that he hoped the Lutheran heresie might be extinguished by the presence of the Emperour, and that principally for that cause hee went to Bolonia to intreat him for, it, though he knew that of himself he was very wel affected that way. But hauing receiued aduice from the Emperour, and from his Legat Campeg∣gio, that the Protestants are become more obstinate, hee hath communica∣ted the whole to the Cardinals, and together with them, seeth cleerely, that there remaineth no other remedie, but that which hath beene vsed by his Predecessors, that is a generall Councell. Therefore hee exhorteth them to assist in the Councell that shall be called, either in person, or by their Am∣bassadours; a thing so holy, that hee is resolued to put it in execution; so soone as it is possible, intimating a generall and free Councell, in some fitte place in Italie. The Popes letters were knowen to the whole world, because his ministers endeuoured in euery place to giue notice of them vnto all: not because the Pope or the Court desired to apply their minds to a Councell, from which they were most auerse, but to entertaine the world; that by ex∣pectation of the remedie of the abuses and inconueniences, they might re∣maine constant in obedience. Yet few were deceiued; for it was not hard to discouer, that to desire Princes to send Ambassadours to a Councell, whereof And his col∣lusion is dis∣couered by many. neither time, nor place, nor manner was resolued on, was too much affected preuention. But the Protestants also tooke occasion by these letters to write like∣wise to the Kings and Princes: and the next yeere in February they fra∣med 1531 The Prote∣stants doe write likewise to all Princes. a letter to euery one vnder a common name of all, of this tenour. That the old complaint of pious men against the vices of the Clergie, noted by Iohn Gerson, Nicolas Clemangis, and others in France, and of Iohn Collet in England and of others elswhere, was knowen vnto their Maiesties, which also happe∣ned in Germanie in these last yeers, by occasion of the detestable & infamous gaine which some Friars made by publishing Indulgences. And passing from this to relate whatsoeuer happened vntill the last Diet, they said that their aduersaries endeuoured to incite the Emperor and other Kings against them, vsing diuers calumnies; which as they haue withstood in Germanie, so they will more easily confute in a generall Councel of the whole world; wherunto they will referre themselues, so that it may be such a one, in which preiudices and passion may take no place. That amongst the Calumnies laid vpon them, this is the principall, that they condemne all Magistrates, and vilifie the dignitie of Lawes: which is not onely not true, but, as they haue shewed in the Diet of Augusta, their doctrine honoureth Magistrates, and defendeth the strength of Lawes, more then euer hath been done in o∣ther ages, teaching Magistrates that their state and kinde of life is most ac∣ceptable to God, and preaching to the people that they are bound, by Gods commandement to giue honour and obedience to them, and that he wil not leaue vnpunished the disobedient, because the Magistrate hath his gouerne∣ment by diuine ordination. That they haue desired to signifie these things to them, Kings, and Princes, for cleering of themselues before them, praying them not to beleeue the calumnies, and to suspend their iudgements, vntill those that are accused haue place to acquite themselues publiquely. And therefore they will desire the Emperour that hee would call a godly and free Councell in Germanie, as soone as might bee, and not to vse force, vntill the matter be disputed, and lawfully defined. The French King answered with very courteous letters, in substance, gi∣uing The answere of the French King to the Protestants. them thankes for communicating vnto him a businesse of so great weight: he shewed them that he was glad to vnderstand of their innocen∣cie, and did approoue the instance they made, that the vices might bee a∣mended, wherein they shall finde his Will to concurre with theirs: that their requiring of a Councell was iust and holy, yea, necessary, not onely for the affayres of Germany, but of the whole Church: that it was not ho∣nest to vse Armes, where the controuersies may bee ended with treaties. The letters of the King of England were of the same Tenour, but that hee The answere of the King of England. declared in particular, that himselfe also desired a Councell, and that hee would mediate with Charles, to find out a meanes of composition. The Emperours Decree being knowen throughout all Germanie, they began immediatly to accuse the professors of the new Religion, in the cham∣ber Sentences were made in the chamber of Spirae, a∣gainst the Protestants, and contem∣ned. of Spira, some for zeale, others for reuenge, and some also to possesse the goods of their aduersaries. Many sentences were made, many declara∣tions, and many confiscations against Princes, Cities, and priuate men, and none tooke place, but some against priuate men, whose goods were within the territories of Catholiques. By others the sentences were contemned, with great diminution of the honour, not onely of the Chamber, but of the Emperour also; who soone perceiued that the remedie was not fitted to themaladie, which increased dayly. For the Protestant Princes and Ci∣ties (besides that they esteemed little the iudgements of the Chamber) com∣bined themselues together, prepared for their defence, and fortified them∣selues with forraine intelligences: so that it appeared, that in case things went on, a Warre would arise, dangerous for both parties, and whatsoeuer the issue was, pernitious for Germany. Wherefore he was willing that some Princes should interpose, and find out a way of agreement. To this end ma∣ny heads and conditions of composition were negotiated all this yere 1531, and to giue them some conclusion, a Diet at Ratisbon was appointed for the next yeere. In the meane space, all things remained full of suspitions, and the Zuinglius ta∣keth armes, and is slaine. diffidences betweene the one part and the other, rather increased. And this yeere also, there happened a notable euent among the Suisses, which com∣posed the disputes between them. For though the controuersie in religion, betweene Zuric, Berne, and Basil on the one side, and the Popish Cantons on the other, was often composed, by the mediation of diuers, yet at that time the hatred was so great between them; and new causes of distasts arising dai∣ly, the contentions were often renewed. And this yeere they were greatest of all, those of Zuric and Berne attempting to hinder the victualling of fiue Cantons, which caused both parties to arme. With those of Zuric, Zuinglius tooke armes, though his friendes perswaded him to remaine at home, and leaue that charge to others. Whereunto he would by no meanes yeeld, that 1532 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. he might not seeme to incourage the people in the Church onely, and for∣sake them in time of danger. The eleuenth of October they came to a set battell, in which, those of Zuric had the worst, and Zuinglius was slaine; for which the Catholikes more reioyced, then for the victory. They did diuers disgraces to the corps, and the death of that man was the chiefest cause of Whose death caused a com∣position be∣tweene the Cantons. a new composition betweene them, both the parties retaining their owne religion. The fiue Catholike Cantons assured themselues, that hee being remoued, who, by his Sermons changed religion in the Countrey, all would returne to the old. In which hope, they were confirmed the more, because And maketh Ecolampadius, die with griefe Ecolampadius, a Minister in Basil, of the same opinion with Zuinglius, dyed within a few daies after with griefe, for the losse of his friend, the Catholikes attributing the death both of the one and the other, to the prouidence of God, who, compassionating the Heluetians, had punished and taken away the Authors of their discord Surely it is a pious and religious thought, to at∣tribute the disposition of euery euent, to the prouidence of God: but to de∣termine to what end those euents are directed, by that high Wisedom, is not farre from presumption. Men are so straightly and religiously wedded to their owne opinions, that they are perswaded that God loueth and fauoureth them, as much as themselues. But the things that happened afterwards, shewed that the Cantons called Gospellers, made greater progresse in the doctrine receiued, after the death of these two: a manifest Argument, that it came from a higher cause then the labours of Zuinglius. An agreement betweene the Protestants and the others, was negotiated 1532 in Germanie, by the Electors of Ments and the Palatine, and many writings An agreement betweene the Protestants and the Ca∣tholikes was negotiated, but could not be effected. were made and changed, because they gaue not full satisfaction to either of the parties. This made the Emperour resolue, that a Councell was exceeding necessary; and hauing imparted his opinion to the French King, he sent one to Rome by post, to treat thereof with the Pope and Colledge of Cardinalls. The Emperour made none account of the place prescribed, nor of any other special condition, in case Germany were so satisfied that the Protestants would The Emperor doth seriously negotiate a Councell. be present, and submit themselues, which satisfaction the King also thought to be iust, and offered to ioyne with him. The Ambassage was deliuered to the Pope in these tearmes, that the Emperor hauing vsed all means to reunite the Protestants to the Church, by imploying authority, threats, treaties, and iustice also, nothing now remaining, but either warre, or a Councell, in re∣gard he could not take armes, by reason of the Turkes preparations against him, he was constrained to take the other resolution, and therefore did be∣seech his Holinesse, that, imitating his Predecessours, hee would bee content to graunt a Councell, whereunto the Protestants would submit themselues without difficultie, hauing offered diuers times to stand to the determinati∣on of one that is free, in which the Iudges might bee men without partia∣litie. The Pope, who by no meanes would haue a Councell, hearing the re∣quest, and not being able to giue a plaine negatiue, made a grant, but so as The Pope consenteth to the Councell vpon such a condition as hee knew would not bee accepted. that hee knew it would not bee accepted. For the place hee proposed one of the Cities of the Churches State, naming Bolonia, Parma, Piacenza, ci∣ties capable to receiue and feed a multitude, healthfull, with a large territory round about: whither the Protestants ought not to make difficultie to got, because they should bee heard: vnto whom hee would giue a full and ample safe conduct, and himselfe would be there in person, that euery thing might bee handled with Christian peace, and no man wronged. That hee could by no meanes consent to celebrate it in Germanie, because Italie would not indure to be neglected, and Spaine and France, who in Ecclesiasticall matters yeeld vnto Italie, for the prerogatiue of the Papacie, which is proper vnto it, would not giue place vnto Germanie, and the authoritie of that Councell would bee little esteemed, where onely Duch-men were present, and some few of another nation. For vndoubtedly the Italians, French-men, and Spa∣niards would not bee induced to goe thither. The medicine is not in the power of the sicke, but of the Physitian. Therefore Germanie corrupted with the multiplicitie and varietie of opinions, could not giue right iudge∣ment in this subiect, as Italie, France, and Spaine, which are vncorrupted as yet, and wholly perseuere in subiection to the Apostolicall Sea, which is mo∣ther and mistris of all Christians. For the manner of defining things in the Councell, the Pope said there needed no words, because no difficultie could arise therein, except they would make a new forme of a Councell, neuer vsed in the Church. That it was manifest, that none had voice in a Councell, by right of the Canon, but Bishops, and Abbats by custome, and some others by the Popes priuiledge: the others that desire to bee heard, ought to submit themselues to the determination of these; euery Decree being made in the name of the Synod, if the Pope bee not present in person: but when hee is there, euery Decree passeth vnder his name, onely with the approbation of the Fathers of the Synod. The Cardinals likewise spake in the same key, The Cardi∣nals will not beleeue that a Councell is necessary. but alwayes interposed some reason, to shew that a Councell was not necessa∣rie, so long as the determination of Leo stood in force, which being execu∣ted, all would be remedied; and hee that will not referre himselfe to the de∣termination of the Pope, especially accompanied with the counsell of the Cardinals, will much more despise all Conciliarie Decrees. That it was ma∣nifest that the Protestants call not a Councell, but onely to gaine time, and to hinder the execution of the Edict of Wormes. For they well know that the Councell cannot choose but approoue that which Leo hath determined, except they would bee a conuenticle, or vnlawfull assembly, as all those bee, who haue separated themselues from the doctrine and obedience of the Pope. The Emperours Ambassadour, to finde out a meane, had many audien∣ces The Empe∣ors Ambassa∣dous labou∣reth to per∣swade the Pope to chuse a place in Ger∣manie for the Councell, but cannot ob∣taine it. with the Pope, and with two Cardinals, deputed by him ouer this mat∣ter. He put him in minde, that neither hee, nor France, nor Spaine, had neede of a Councell, nor did desire it; and that therefore it was to no purpose to haue respect vnto them: that it was sought for, to cure the diseases of Germa∣nie, vnto which, because it ought to bee proportionated, it was fit to chuse a place, where all that Nation might bee present. That, for other Countreys, the principall subiects were sufficient, because nothing was to bee handled concerning them; that the Cities proposed; were in all respects exceeding fit, but only that they were farre distant from Germanie; and though the safe con∣duct of his Holinesse ought to secure euery one, yet the Protestants were suspicious, for diuers reasons, both old, and new, amongst which, they estee∣med not the least, that Leo the tenth, his cousin, had condemned them al∣readie, and declared them heretikes. And although all their reasons are re∣solued with this onely, that euery one ought to relie vpon the Faith of the Pope, yet his Holinesse, by his great wisedome and experience, might know that it was necessarie to yeeld to the imperfection of others, and for pitie, to accommodate himselfe to that, which though in rigour is not due, yet in equitie is conuenient. And concerning the deliberatiue voyces of the Coun∣cell, Who ought to haue voices in Councell. hee discoursed, that they being brought in, partly by custome, and part∣ly by priuiledge, a large field was opened vnto him, to exercise his benignitie, by introducing another custome, more fit for the present times. For if the Abbots were formerly admitted by custome, because they were more lear∣ned and intelligent in religion, it is reason to grant the same now, to persons of equall or greater learning, though they haue not the title of Abbats. But the priuiledge ministreth matter to giue satisfaction vnto all. For by gran∣ting the same priuiledge to euery one that is able to doe God seruice in that congregation, there will bee a Councell exactly pious and Christian, such as the world desireth. Vnto these reasons answere being made, with the motiues before named, the Emperour could obtaine nothing of the Pope; whereby the businesse remained vnperfect for that time, and the Emperour applied himselfe to sollicite the treatie of peace alreadie begun: which be∣ing brought to a good conclusion, and the Turkish warre drawing neere, at the last a composition was published the three and twentieth of Iulie, that A peace of re∣ligion conclu∣ Germa∣ni, Iuly 23. called the IUterim. there should bee common and publike peace betweene the Emperours Ma∣iestie, and all the States of the Empire of Germanie, as well Ecclesiasticall as secular, vntill a generall, free, and Christian Councell, and in the meane space, that none should make warre against another for cause of religion, nor take spoile, or besiege him, but that there should bee true amitie, and Christian vnitie amongst all. That the Emperour should procure the inti∣mation of the Councell, within sixe moneths, and the beginning within a yeere; Which if it bee not possible, all the States of the Empire should bee called together, to resolue of what is fit to bee done, as well for the Councell as for other necessarie things. That the Emperour should suspend all the iudiciall processes, in cause of religion, made by his Fiscall, or others; against the Elector of Saxonie, and his adherents, vntill the future Councell, or the forenamed resolution of the States. On the other side, the Elector of Saxonie, and the other Princes and Ci∣ties, should promise faithfully to obserue this publique peace, to giue due o∣bedience The Emperor pro the calling of a oú with∣in 6. moneths. to the Emperour, and conuenient ayde against the Turke. This peace the Emperour ratified, and confirmed by his letters, dated the second of August, and suspended also all processes, promising to doe his ende∣uour for the calling of a Councell within sixe moneths, and for the begin∣ning of it within a yeere. Hee gaue also an account to the Catholike Prin∣ces, of the ambassage sent to Rome, for that end, adding that some difficulties of weight could not as yet bee accorded, concerning the manner and place. But he would continue his endeuours that they should bee resolued, and that the Pope should grant the conuocation; hoping that hee would not be wan∣ting to the necessitie of the Common-wealth, and his owne duetie: but in case this succeeded not, hee would intimate another Diet to finde a reme∣die herein. This was the first libertie of Religion, which those that adhered to Lu∣thers confession, called the Augustan, obteined by publique decree: whereof the world talked diuersly. At Rome the Emperor was reprehended, for put∣ting The first li∣bertie of the Augustan confession. his sickle (as they sayd) into another mans haruest, euery Prince being obliged, by the strictest bonds of censures, to the extirpation of those that are condemned by the Pope: wherein they ought to spend their goods, state, and life: and the Emperours much more, because they doe so solemn∣ly sweare vnto it. This not being performed by Charles, an example not heard of, there was cause to feare a sudden reuenge from heauen. But others commended the pietie and wisedome of the Emperour, who laboured more to preuent the danger, imminent to Christendom, by the armes of the Turke, a direct opposer of Religion; against whom hee could not haue made resi∣stance without securing the Protestants, who are Christians too, though dissenting from others, in some particular rites, which is a tolerable diffe∣rence. That the Maxime, so renowned in Rome, that it is more meete to perse∣cute heretikes, then infidels, was wel fitted to the Popes dominion, but not to the benefit of Christendome. Some also, not regarding the Turkes, said that Kingdomes and Principalities, ought not to bee gouerned by the lawes and interests of Priests, who are more partiall, for their owne greatnesse and profits, then any other, but according to the exigence of the publike good, which requireth now and then, the tolerating of some defect. That it was the duetie of euery Christian Prince, to indeuour equally, that his Subiects maintaine the true faith, as also that they obserue all the Commandements of God, and not this, more then that. But when a vice cannot bee rooted out, without the ruine of the State, it is acceptable to the Maiestie of God to permit it: neither is the obligation greater to punish heretikes, then forni∣cators; who if they be tolerated, for publike quiet, it is no greater inconue∣nience, if those bee permitted, who defend not all our opinions. And though it bee not easie to alleadge examples of Princes, which haue done this with∣in these 800. yeeres, yet hee that will consider the times before, will see it done by all, and laudably too, when necessitie hath required. If Charles ha∣uing attempted to compose by all meanes the differences in religion, hath not beene able to bring any thing to passe, who can reprehend him, if, to try what can be done by a Councell, hee hath established peace in the meane time in Germanie, that he may not see her ruine? None knoweth how to go∣uerne a territorie, but the Prince himselfe, who alone knoweth all the neces∣sities of it. Hee will ouerthrow his State, whosoeuer will gouerne with re∣spect vnto the interests of others, and it would bee to as much purpose to gouerne Germanie, as the Romanes desire, as to gouerne Rome as the Dutch-men please. No man that shall reade this occurrence, ought to marueile, if these and The Roma∣nists would haue euery countrey go∣uerned accor∣ding to their interests. many more discourses did runne in the minds of men, it being a thing which did inwardly touch them. For the case was, whether euery Christian Coun∣trey ought to bee gouerned, according to its owne necessitie and profit, or was a slaue of one onely Citie, to maintaine the commodities whereof, all others should spend themselues, and become desolate. The times following 1533 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. haue taught, and will teach perpetually, that the Emperours resolution was conformable to the lawes of God and man. The Pope, who was more trou∣bled herein then all others, as one who was most intelligent in State affaires, saw very well that he had no reason to complaine; but hee concluded here∣withall, that his interests could not concurre with those of the Emperour, and The Pope is aliened againe from the Em∣perour. therefore his minde was wholly aliened from him. The Turke being chased out of Austria, the Emperor passed into Italy, & had conference with the Pope in Bolonia, where they treated of all the common affaires: and though the league was renewed betweene them, yet the Pope was not fully satisfied, both for the liberty of Religion granted in Germanie, as The league is renewed be∣tweene them, but suspicions remaine in the Popes minde. hath been said, and because they agreed not concerning the Councell, as might cure the mala∣dies of Germany, (in conformity to his Ambassadors proposition the yeere be∣fore) which was impossible if the Protestants had no part therein. The Pope continued in his resolution, not to admit of a Councell by any meanes, but in case of necessitie, and which should not be celebrated out of Italy, and wherein none should haue a deliberatiue voice but those vnto whom the Popes lawes did allow it. The Emperor would haue condescended to the Popes will, if there had been meanes to giue the Protestants contentment; wherein that he might giue his Holinesse certaine information, he proposed vnto him that he The Pope and Emperour re∣solue to send a Nuncio and an Ambassa∣dor into Ger∣manie. should send a Nuncio into Germany, & himselfe an Ambassador, to find out a forme & temper for these difficulties; promising that his Ambassador should gouerne himself as the Nuncio would. The Pope accepted the match, though he were fully satisfied of the Emperor, assuring himselfe, that in case the ne∣gotiation of both those ministers had taken none effect, Charles would haue The Pope re∣solueth to make an alli∣ance with France, to be able to with∣stand the Em∣perour. 15 3 gone about to haue giuen Germanie satisfaction; and from that time Clement resolued to make a straight alliance with France, to be able, by that meanes, to hinder whatsoeuer the Emperour should propose. The Pope after Easter 1533. sent Hugo Rangone, Bishop of Rheggio, to execute the proposition accepted by him: who comming with the Emperors Ambassador to Iohn Frederic, Elector of Saxony, (who had succeeded his decea∣sed father a few moneths before) as chiefe of the Protestants, declared his com∣mission; that Clement from the beginning of his Papacie, had alwayes an extra∣ordinary desire to compose the differences in Religion, sprung vp in Germany, and for that end had sent thither many learned persons; and though their paines tooke not effect, the Pope notwithstanding had hope, that at the Em∣perours going thither after his coronation, all would be brought to perfecti∣on. But hauing not obteined the end he desired, the Emperor returned into Italy, and shewed him that there was no fitter meanes then a generall Coun∣cell, which the Princes of Germany desired also. With which the Pope being well pleased, as well for the publique good, as to giue the Emperour con∣tentment, had sent him, to agree with them, concerning the manner of the future Councell, and of the time and place. And for the forme and order thereof, the Pope proposed some necessary conditions. The first, that it should bee free and generall, as the Fathers were woont to celebrate it in former times. Then, that those that demand a Councell, should promise and giue assurance to receiue the decrees that shall be made. For otherwise it would bee labour in vaine, it being to no purpose to make lawes, which would not be obserued. Thirdly, that he hat could not be pre∣sent should send Ambassadors to make promise, & put in caution. After this, that it was necessary, that in the meane while, all things remained as they are, The conditi∣ons of the Councell re∣quired by the Pope. and that no innouation were made before the Councel. The Nuncio added, that for the place the Pope had not long, frequent, and great considerati∣on. For it was necessary to prouide one that should bee fertill to afforde victuals to so famous a concourse, and of an healthfull ayre too, that the pro∣gresse may not bee hindered by sickenesse. And in conclusion Piaconza, Places for the Councel pro∣posed by the Nuncio. Bolonia, or Mantua seemed vnto him very commodious, leauing it to the choice of Germanie to elect which of these places they would. But he added that if any Prince would not come, or not send Ambassadours, it would beeiust for all the others to defend the Church. In the end hee concluded, that if Germanie would giue a fit answere to the propositions, the Pope would immediately treate with other Kings, and would intimate the Councell within sixe moneths, to begin a yeere after, that prouision of victuals might be made, and that all, especially the farthest distant, might prepare themselues for the voyage. The Nuncio gaue vp his proposition in writing, and the Emperours The Empe∣rours Am∣bassadour ma∣keth the same negotiation. Ambassadour made the same negotiation with the Elector; who, hauing re∣quired time to answere, the Nuncio was infinitely pleased. For hee desired nothing but delay, and tooke the answere for a presage of the happy successe of the businesse: and hee could not refraine to commend him, for not be∣ing too hastie in a deliberation which deserued time. Yet the Elector an∣swered within few dayes, that hee was very glad that the Emperonr and the Pope were resolued to call a Councell, where, according to promise, of∣tentimes made vnto Germanie, the controuersies might lawfully bee handled, by the rule of the word of God. That himselfe for his owne part, would willingly make present answere to the things proposed; but because there are many Princes, which haue receiued the same confession in the Diet of Ausbug, it was not fit, nor profitable for the cause, to answere alone: but an assembly being intimated against the 24. of Iune, hee desired hee would bee contented to grant this short delay, that he might receiue a more common, and resolute conclusion. The ioy and hope of the Nuncio was much in∣creased, The Nuncio is pleased with the delatory answere. The answere of the Prote∣stants assem∣bled in Smal∣calde. who desired the delay had been rather of yeeres then moneths. But the Protestants, assembled at the aforesaid time in Smalcalde, answered, than∣king the Emperor, that, for the glory of God, and safetie of the common-wealth, hee had taken paines to cause a Councell to bee celebrated; which would bee in vaine, if conditions were not obserued, necessary for the cu∣ring of the diseases of Germanie: which desireth that her controuersies may be defined with due order: and hopeth to obtaine it, for that the Emperour hath in many imperiall Diets promised such a one, which, by the mature deliberation of the Princes and States, hath been resolued should be celebra∣ted in Germanie; in regard that many errors being reuealed, by occasion of the Indulgences, published in Sermons, Pope Leo condemned the doctrine and the Doctors, who discouered the abuses. But that sentence was oppo∣sed by the testimonies of the Prophets and Apostles. Whence did arise the controuersie, which cannot be decided but in a Councell, where the Popes sentence, or the power of whosoeuer, may not preiudice the cause, and where iudgement may be giuen, not according to the Popes lawes, or opinions of the Schooles, but according to the holy Scripture. If this be not performed, this so great a labour would bee taken in vaine, as may appeare by the exam∣ples of some other Councels, celebrated before. Now the propositions of the Pope were contrary to this end, to the pe∣titions of the Diet, and promises of the Emperour. For though hee propose And their ex∣ceptions a∣gainst the propositions of the Pope. a free Councell in words, yet in effect hee would haue it tied, so that vices and errors may not be reprehended, and himselfe may maintaine his power. That that was not a reasonable demand that any man should bind himselfe to obserue the decrees, before he know by what order, maner, or forme they are made, whether the Pope desire to haue the supreme authoritie in him, and his; whether hee will haue the controuersies discussed according to holy writ, or according to humane lawes and traditions. That that clause also see∣med captious, that the Councell should bee made according to the old cu∣stome. For it being vnderstood of that old, when all was determined by the holy Scriptures, they would not refuse it. But the Councels of the next preceding age were much different from the other that were more ancient, where too much was attributed to the Decrees of Popes, and other men. That the propose was glorious, but it tooke absolutely away the libertie which was demanded, and was necessary for the cause. That they desired the Emperour to bee a meanes that all might passe lawfully. That all men were in attention, and stood in hope of a Councell, and demanded it with vowes and prayers, which would bee turned into great sorrow and vexation of minde, if this expectation should bee deluded, by giuing a Councell, but not such a one as is desired and promised. That there is no doubt but that all the States of the Empire, and other Kings and Princes also will bee of the same opinion, to auoid those snares and bonds, with which the Pope think∣eth to binde them in a new Councell: to whose will if the managing of the affaires shall be permitted, they will referre the whole to God, and thinke of what they haue to doe. Yet for all this if they shall bee cited, with good and lawfull assurance, in case they see themselues able to doe some thing for the seruice of God, they will not refuse to appeare; but with condition, not to consent to the Popes demands, nor to a Councell which is not confor∣mable to the Decrees of the imperiall Diets. In the end they prayed the Emperour not to take their resolution in ill part, and to endeuour that the power of those be not confirmed, who long since haue waxed cruell against the innocent. The Protestants resolued, not onely to send the answere to the Pope, and the Emperour, but to print it also, together with the Nuncio his propositi∣on, which by the same Pope was iudged indiscreete, and too open. There∣fore The Pope re∣calleth Hugo Rangone B. of Rheggio, his Nuncio, and putteth Ver∣gerius in his place. vnder colour that hee was old and vnable to beare that charge, he recal∣led him, and wrote to Vergerius, Nuncio with King Ferdinand, that he should take vpon him that place, with the same instructions, admonishing him to re∣member not to swarue by any meanes from his will, or to giue eare to any 1534 CLEMENT 7. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 2. moderation, though the King desire it, that vnaduisedly he cast him not in∣to some strait, and constraine him to call a Councell, which was not profita∣ble for the Church, or for the Apostolicall Sea. While these things were in handling, the Pope who fore-saw the answere which would come out of Germany, & before in Bolonia had conceiued but small confidence in the Emperour, wholly aliened himselfe from his friend∣ship. For in the cause of Modena and Rheggio, betweene his Holinesse and the Duke of Ferrara, referred to him by the parties: hee pronounced for the Duke. For all which causes, the Pope negotiated a confederation with the French King; the which was concluded, and established also by the mariage The confede∣ration be∣tweene the Pope and the French King, is confirmed by marriage. of Henry the Kings second sonne, with Catherine de Medici, the Popes great grand-child. And to giue a compleat perfection to the whole businesse, hee went to Marseilles in person, to speake with the King. But vnderstanding that this iourney was reprehended by all, as not addressed to any publike re∣spect, but onely to make his house great, hee iustified himselfe, by saying hee vndertooke it, to perswade him to fauour the Councell, and to abolish the Lutheran heresie. And tis true that there, beside other treaties, hee per∣swaded his most Christian Maiestie, to deale with the Protestants, especially with the Landgraue of Hassia, who was to come to him into France, to cause them to desist from demaunding a Councel, proposing vnto them, that they would seeke out any other way to accommodate the differences, and pro∣mising his owne faithfull and effectuall helpe, when time should serue. The King did thus negotiate, but could obtaine nothing. For the Land∣graue alleadged, The French King treateth with the Landgraue of Hassia, at the Popes request about the Councell. that there was no other meanes to hinder the desolation of Germany, and that not to speake of a Councell, was willingly to runne into a ciuill warre. In the second place, the King treated with them, that they would be contented with a Councell in Italie. But neither did the Ger∣mans agree vnto this; for they sayd, that this match was worse then the first: because that constrained them onely to make warre, but this cast them into a seruitude both of body and soule: whereunto resistance could not be made, but by a Councell, in a free place: yet condescending for his Maiesties sake, to whatsoeuer they were able, they would cease to demand to haue it celebrated in Germany, so that another free place were appointed out of Italie, though it were neere vnto it. In the beginning of the yeere 1534. the King gaue the Pope an account 1534 of what hee had done, and offered to bring to passe, that the Protestants should bee contented with Geneua. The Pope hauing receiued the aduise, The Pope is displeased with the Pro∣pose of Gene∣ua for the place of the Councell. was vncertaine, whether the King, though his confederate and kinsman, would be glad to see him in troubles, or if, in this particular, hee wanted that discretion which he shewed in other affaires: But hee concluded, that it was not good to vse him in this matter. And writing vnto him, thanked him for his paines, without answering to the particular of Geneua: and hee incouraged many of the Courtiers, whose mindes were troubled, assuring them, that by no meanes he would consent to such a folly. But this yeere the Pope, in stead of regaining Germanie, lost the obedience He looseth the obedience of England. of England, by proceeding rather with choler and passion, then with wise∣dome necessarie in so great negotiations. The accident was of great impor∣tance, and greater consequence, which to declare distinctly, it is necessary to begin from the first causes, whence it had its originall. Catherine Infanta of Spaine, sister to the mother of Charles the Emperour, was married to Henry the eight, King of England, and was before, the wife of Arthure, Prince of Walles, Henryes eldest brother; after whose death, their fa∣ther gaue her in marriage to Henry, who remained successor, by the dispen∣sation The cause. of Pope Iulio the second. This Queene was with child often, and al∣wayes either miscaried, or brought foorth a creature of a short life, except one only daughter, King Henry, either for displeasure against the Emperor, or for desire of issue male, or for some other cause, conceiued a scruple in his mind that the mariage was not good; and taking counsell of his Bishops, separated himselfe from her company. The Bishops treated with the Queene, that shee would be contented with a diuorce, saying that the Popes dispensation was neither good nor true. The Queene would not giue eare to them, but had recourse to the Pope: to whom, the King also sent to craue a diuorce. The Pope, who was still retired in Oruieto, and hoped for good conditions in his affaires, if the fauours of France and England, which still they performed, were continued, by molesting the Emperour in the kingdome of Naples, sent into England the Cardinal Campeggio, delegating the cause vnto him, and the Cardinall of Yorke. From these, and from Rome, the King had hope gi∣uen him, that in the end, the sentence should bee on his side: Yea, to facili∣tate The Cardi∣nals Campeg∣gio and Wol∣sie were dele∣gated by the Pope to heare the cause of the Kings di∣uorce. the resolution, that the solemnities of the iudgement, might not draw the cause in length, a briefe was framed, in which, hee was declared free from that marriage, with the most ample clauses, that euer were put into any Popes Bull, and a Cardinall sent into England, with order to present it, after some few proofes were past, which he was sure would easily be made. And The Pope caused his Briefe which he had made in fauour of the diuorce to be burned. this happened in the yeere 1524. But Clement, iudging it fitter for compassing his designes vpon Florence, as hath beene declared in its proper place, to ioyne himselfe with the Emperour, then to continue in the friendship of France and England, in the yeere 1529. hee sent Francis Campana vnto Campeg∣gio, with order to burne the Briefe, and to proceed slowly in the cause Cam∣peggio began first to draw the cause in length, and after, to make difficultie of performing the promises made to the King. Whereby beeing assured that the Iudge and his aduersaries did collude, hee sent to the Vniuersities of Italie, France, and Germanie, for a consultation in his cause; where a∣mongst A consultati∣on about the cause of di∣uorce. the Diuines, some were contrary, and some fauourable to his pretension. The greater part of the Parisians were on his side, and some beleeued that the Kings giftes more perswaded them, then reason. But the Pope, either to gratifie the Emperour, or for feare, that in Eng∣land by meanes of the Cardinall of Yorke, something might happen, not ac∣cording The Pope to gratifie the Emperour, re∣calleth Cam∣peggio. to his minde, as also to giue occasion to Campeggio to part from thence, called the cause to himselfe. The King impatient of delay, either, be∣cause he knew their cunning, or for some other cause, published the diuorce with his wife, and married Anne Bullen in the yere 1533. yet still the cause de∣pended before the Pope, in which, he was resolued to proceede slowly, to The King in yeth Bulle . satisfie the Emperour and not offend the King. Therefore some by points rather were handled, then the merits of the cause. And the disputation grew vpon the Article of the Attentats, in which the Pope gaue sentence against the King; declaring, that it was not lawfull for him, by his owne authoritie, without the Ecclesiasticall Iudge, to separate himselfe from his wife. For which cause, the King in the beginning of this yeere 1534 denied the Pope obedience, commanding all his subiects, not to carry any money to Rome, The King causeth the Peter-pence to be denied the Pope. nor to pay the ordinary Peter-pence. This infinitely troubled the Court of Rome, and dayly they consulted of a remedie. They thought to proceede against the King with censures, and to interdict all Christian Nations all commerce with England. But the moderate Counsell pleased best, to tempo∣rize with him, and to mediate a composition by the French King. King Francis accepted the charge, and sent the Bishop of Paris to Rome, to negoti∣ate a pacification with the Pope; where they still proceeded in the cause, but gently, and with resolution, not to come to censures, if the Emperour did not proceede first, or at the same time, with his forces. They had diuided the cause into three and twenty Articles, and then they handled, whether Prince Arthure had had carnall coniunction with Queene Catherine; in this they spent time vntill mid-lent was past, when, the nineteenth of March, newes came, that a Libell was published in England, against the Pope, and the whole Court of Rome, and that besides, a Comedie had beene made in pre∣sence of the King and Court, to the great disgrace and shame of the Pope, and of euery Cardinall in particular. For which cause all being inflamed with choler, they ran head-long to giue sentence; which was pronounced in the Consistorie, the foure and twentieth of the same moneth, that the mariage betweene Henry and Queene Catherine was good, that he was bound to take her for his wife, and that, in case he did it not, he should be excommu∣nicated. The Pope was soone displeased with this precipitation. For sixe dayes after, the French King his letters came, that the King of England was con∣tented to accept the sentence concerning the Attentates, and to render obedi∣ence, with condition, that the Cardinals whom hee mistrusted should not meddle in the businesse, and that persons not suspected, should bee sent to Cambray to take information. And the King had sent his Proctors before, to assist in the cause at Rome. Wherefore the Pope went about to deuise some pretence, to suspend the precipitated sentence, and againe to set the cause on its feete. But Henry so soone as he had seene it, sayd it was no matter. For the Pope should be Bishop of Rome, and himselfe sole Lord of his kingdome: and that he would doe according to the ancient fashion of the Eastern Church, not leauing to be a good Christian, nor suffering the Lutheran heresie, or any other to be brought into his kingdome. And so he did. Hee published an Edict, wherein hee declared himselfe head of the Church of England, and punished capitally, whosoeuer said that the Pope of Rome had any authoritie there: he chased out the Collector of the Peter-pence, and caused the Par∣liament to approoue all these things: where it was determined, that all Bishoprickes of England, should bee conferred by the Archbishop of Canter∣burie, without sending to Rome, and that the Clergie should pay to the King one hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling yeerely, for the defence of the Kingdome against whosoeuer. This action of the King was variously expounded. Some thought him wise, for freeing himselfe from the subiection of Rome, without any innoua∣tion in Religion, and without putting his subiects in danger of sedition, How the acti∣on of K Henry was expo n∣ded and without referring himselfe to a Councell, a thing which they saw hard to be effected and dangerous also for him, it being impossible that a Coun∣cell, composed of Ecclesiasticall persons, should not mainetaine the Popes power, which is the maine pillar of their order: because by the papacie it is aboue all kings and the Emperour, but without it is subiect to them, there being no Ecclesiasticall person that hath superioritie but the Pope. But the Court of Rome maintained that it could not be said, that there was no change in Religion, the first and principal Article being changed, which is the supre∣macie of the Pope, and that seditions would arise as well for this onely, as for all the rest. Which the euent shewed to be true. For the King was faine to proceede seuerely against some of his subiects, whom he loued and esteemed. It cannot be expressed what griefe was conceiued in Rome, and by all the Clergie, for the alienation of so great a Kingdome from the Popes subiecti∣on: and it discouered the imbecillitie of humane affaires, wherein, for the most part, great damages proceed from those things, from which the grea∣test The Popes haue gained much by ma∣trimoniall dis∣pensations. benefits were formerly receiued. For by matrimonial dispensations, and by sentences of diuorce, as well granted as denyed, the Papacie hath gained much in former times, sheltering the Princes with the name of the Vicar of Christ, whom it concerned with some incestuous mariage, or by dissoluing one to contract another, to vnite some other territory to their owne, or to drowne the title of diuers pretendants, making, for this cause, straight alli∣ance with them, and interesting their power to defend that authoritie, with∣out which their actions would be condemned and hindred: yea, interest∣ing not those Princes onely, but all their posteritie, to maintaine their legiti∣mation. But the misfortune which then arose, might be ascribed to the pre∣cipitation of Clement, who, in this case, knew not how to manage his autho∣ritie: and if it had pleased God to haue giuen him in this fact the vse of his vsuall wisdome, he might haue gained much, where now his losse was great. But the Emperour at his returne into Germany, being informed of the negotiation of the Nuncio Rangone, concerning the Councell, wrote to Rome, complaining that himselfe hauing promised a Councell to Germany, and treated with the Pope in Bolonia, in what sort the Princes should be dealt with in this matter, yet the Nuncij of his Holinesse had not procee∣ded in that manner that was agreed of, but had so treated, that the Pro∣testants thought themselues deluded: praying him in the ende, to finde some way to giue Germany satisfaction. The eighth of Iune the Emperours letters were read in the Consistorie; and because there came aduice, a little before that the Landgraue of Hassia had taken the Dukedome of Wittenberg from King Ferdinand, by force of armes, and restored it to the Duke Vlrick, the lawfull Lord of it, and that Ferdinand also was inforced to make peace with them, many of the Cardinals sayd, that the Lutherans hauing atchie∣ued 1534 PAVL. 3. CHARLES . HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. so great a victorie, it was necessarie to giue them some satisfaction, and not to proceede any more by Art, but to make some demonstration of effects, because the Emperour hauing promised a Councell, it was necessa∣rie hee should not be deluded, and sayd, that if the Pope could not finde a way, there was danger, That his Maiestie would be constrained to yeelde to some other thing of greater preiudice and losse to the Church. But the Pope and maior part of the Cardinals, seeing it was impossible to make the Lutherans accept such a Counsell, as might bee seruiceable to the Court of Rome, and being resolute not so much as to hearken to any speach of making it otherwise, they resolued to answere the Emperour, that they knew very well the importance of the times, and what great need there was of a generall Councell: which they were most readie to intimate, in case it might be so celebrated, that it might produce good effects, as need re∣quireth: but seeing new discords arise betweene him and France, diuers o∣pen dissentions betweene other Christian Princes, it was necessarie they should cease, and mindes should bee reconciled, before the Councel were called. For, during the discords it could not produce any good effect, and now least of all, the Lutherans being in armes, and made proud by the victory of Wittenberg. But it was necessary to leaue discoursing with the Pope of a Councell: For hee fell into a long and mortall infirmitie, whereof he dyed in the end Clement the 7. dieth. of September, with no small ioy of the Court. For though they admi∣red his vertues, which were a naturall grauitie, exemplary parsimony, and dissimulation, yet they hated more his auarice, rigiditie, and crueltie, encrea∣sed, or more manifested, after he was oppressed by his infirmitie. In the vacancies of the Sea, the Cardinals vse to compose certaine Capitulations alwayes com∣posed in the vacancie of the Popedom. capitulations, to reforme the Papall gouernement, which all sweare to per∣forme, if they shall be assumed to the Popedome, though it appeare by all precedent examples, that euery one sweareth with a mind not to keepe them, in case he shalbe Pope. For so soone as he is elected, he saith, he could not bind himselfe, & that he is at liberty by gaining the Papacie. After the death of Cle∣ment, the capitulations were set downe, according to custom, amongst which one was, that the future Pope should bee bound to call a Councel within a yere. But the capitulations could not be established & sworn, because the same Card. Farnese is created Pope, h st cal∣led Honorius. 5 and in the co∣ronation na∣med Paulus 3. Whose chie∣fest vertue was dissimulation. day, the 12. of Octob in which the Conclaue was locked vp, Cardinal Farnese was suddenly created Pope, first called Honorius 5. in the creation, and after in the coronation Paulus 3. A Prelate indowed with good qualities, & among all his vertues, made more esteeme of none then of dissimulation. He being a Cardinall practised in sixe Popedomes, Deane of the Colledge, and much conuersant in negotiations, shewed that he did not feare the Councel, as Cle∣ment did, but thought it profitable for the Papacie, to make shew by al means of desiring it, being assured that hee could not bee enforced to call it in such maner, and in such a place where hee could haue no aduantage, and when there was cause to hinder it, the contradiction which the Court and Clergie would make, was sufficient. He thought also that this might serue to main∣taine peace in Italie, which he esteemed very necessary, that hee might go∣uerne in quiet. Hee saw very well that this colour of a Councell might serue to couer many matters, and to excuse him in not doing those things which were contrary to his will. Therefore soone after his Creation he let them knowe, that though the capitulations were not sworne, yet hee was resolued to obserue that of the conuocation of a Councell, knowing it to be necessarie for the glory of God, and benefite of the Church: and the 16. of the same moneth he made a generall congregation of the Cardinals, which is not called a Consistory, the Pope not being crowned as yet, where hee proposed this matter. Hee shewed, by potent arguments, that the inti∣mation He maketh shew that he desireth a Councell. could not bee deferred, it being otherwise impossible to make true amitie betweene Christian Princes, and to extirpate the heresies: and that therefore all the Cardinals ought maturely to consider how it should bee celebrated. Hee deputed also three Cardinals to aduice of the time, and place, and other particulars, with order to deliuer their opinion in the first Consistory after the coronation. And to make contradictions arise, which might serue him in occasions, hee added, that as he would reforme the Cler∣gie in the Councell, so it was not conuenient there should be need to re∣forme the Cardinals, but that it was necessarie they should then begin to re∣forme Perswadeth the Cardinals to reforme themselues. themselues, because he was resolued to draw fruit from the Councell, the precepts whereof would bee of small force, if the effects appeared not first in the Cardinals. The custom is, that in the first daies the Cardinals, especially the great ones, obtaine fauours easily of the new Pope. Therefore the Cardinal of Lorraine, And resuseth to grant the nomination of Bishops and Abbats to any Prince. and other French, in the name of the King, desired him to grant to the Duke of Lorraine the nomination of the Bishoprickes, and Abbacies of his domi∣nion: which demand also it was thought the Venetians would make for theirs. The Popes answere was, that in the Councell, which should be cal∣led shortly, it was necessarie to take away the facultie of nomination from those Princes that already had it; which was some blemish to the Popes his Predecessors, who had granted them. Therefore it was not reasonable to augment the heape of errours, and to grant that now which shortly should bee reuoked with small reputation. In the first Consistory, which was the twelfth of Nouember, hee dis∣coursed againe of the Councell, and sayd, that first it was necessary to ob∣taine an vnion of Christian Princes, or assurance of suspension of armes, The Pope maketh shew to desire an vnion of Prin∣ces, and a re∣formation of the Court. while the Councell should endure. Therefore that hee would send Nuncij to all Princes to negotiate this point, and other particulars, of which the Cardinals put him in minde. Hee called also Vergerius out of Germany, to be well informed of the State of those Prouinces, and deputed three Car∣dinals, Vergerius is recalled out of Germany. one of euery order to consult of the things to bee reformed. These were the Cardinall of Siena, of S. Seuerino, and Cesis. Neither was there euer any Consistory where he entred not, and spake much of this matter, and often said, it was necessarie for this end, that the Court, and especially the Cardinals should first be reformed. This was expounded by some, to bee spoken with good zeale, and desire of effect, by others, that the Court and Cardinals, might finde meanes to hinder the Councell, that there might not bee any reformation. And the ground of this their opinion was, that ha∣uing deputed three Cardinals, hee elected neither the most zealous, nor the 1535. PAVL 3. CHARLES . HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Two of the Popes ne∣phewes are created Car∣dinals, both very yong. most practicall, but the slowest and most quiet of all the Colledge. But the next moneth of December, hee gaue more ample matter of discourse. For hee created Cardinals, Alexander Farnese his owne grandchild, by Peter A∣loisius his bastard, and Guido Ascanius Sforza, grand-child by his daughter Con∣stanza, the former of foureteene yeeres of age, and the other of sixteene. To those that told him of their youth, hee answered, that his owne decre∣pite olde age did supply it. The hope of reforming the Cardinals, and the feare of some of them vanished immediately, because it did not appeare how it could begin, but from the age, and lawfull birth of those which were to be created. The Pope also gaue ouer to speake thereof any more, hauing done that, which would not suffer him to maske any longer. Yet the pro∣position of calling a Councell was currant still. And in the Consistorie of the sixteenth of Ianuarie 1535. hee made a long 1535 and vehement Oration, exciting the Cardinals to resolue in that matter. For by proceeding so slowly, the world did thinke that the Councell was not truely intended, and that they had nothing but words, and Court holy wa∣ter. And he deliuered his minde with such graue sentences, that the whole The Pope sendeth Nun∣ci to all Prin∣ces, to treate with them concerning the Councel. auditorie was mooued. In that consistorie it was resolued to dispatch Nuncij to the Emperour, to the French King, and other Christian Princes, with commission to declare, that the Pope and Colledge had determined absolutely, for the benefit of Christendome, to celebrate a Councell, exhor∣ting them to fauour it, and to procure peace and tranquillitie, while it shall last, but to tell them, that for the time and place, his Holinesse was not re∣solued as yet. And the most secret instruction was, that they should cun∣ningly finde out, what the Princes thought concerning the place, to the end, that all their interests and purposes being knowen, hee might hinder them, by opposing one against another, and so worke his owne will. Hee charged also the Nuncij to complaine of the actions of the King of Eng∣land: and, when they saw opportunitie, to incite them against him, and to offer them also that Kingdome for a prey. Among these Nuncij Vergerius Vergerius is sent backe in∣to Germanie with speciall instructions. was one, sent backe into Germanie with more speciall Commissions, to pene∣trate the minde of the Protestants, concerning the forme of proceeding in the Councell, that hee might draw from thence such conclusions as were necessarie. He gaue him also particular charge to treat with Luther, and the other principall Preachers of the reformed doctrine, vsing all kindes of pro∣mises and offers, to reduce them to some composition. The Pope reprehen∣ded in all occasions the rigidnesse of Cardinall Caietan, who in the Diet of Ausburg 1518. refused Luthers offer, that silence being imposed to his aduer∣saries, hee would also bee contented to hold his peace: and hee condemned the acerbitie of that Cardinall, who, by vrging obstinately a recantation, cast that man headlong into despaire, which had cost, and would cost the Church of Rome, as much as the halfe of her authoritie is worth. That hee would not imitate Leo, in beleeuing that the Friars are good instruments to sup∣presse the Preachers of Germanie. For reason, and experience haue declared the vanitie of that cogitation. That there were but two meanes, force and treaties; both which he would vse, being readie to agree to any condition, so that the Popes authoritie might remaine intire. For which end hee said hee had neede of able men, fit for negotiation, and therefore the one and twentieth of May, hee created sixe Cardinals, and the seuenth, a few dayes after all which, were men much esteemed in the Court. Among these was Iohn Fisher Bishop of Rochester, then prisoner in England, for refu∣sing to obey the Kings Decree, which tooke away the Popes authoritie. The Pope in making choice of him, considered that hee honoured this promo∣tion, The Pope creaseth seuca Cardinals. by putting in that number a learned man, and well deseruing, for the persecution which hée endured: and that hauing increased his dignitie, hee In which number was Iohn Fisher B. of Rochester. would haue more respect with the King, and more credit with the people. But that Cardinals Cap profited that Prelate in nothing, but to hasten his death, which was giuen him 43. dayes after, by cutting off his head in publike. But howsoeuer the Pope made open demonstrations to desire such a Councell, as might giue satisfaction, and reduce Germanie, yet all the Court, and the Popes neerest friends, who treated most secretly with him of these The Court was of opini∣on that Man∣tua was the: fittest place for the Coun∣cell. things, said that it could not any where bee celebrated but in Italie, because in no other place it could bee free, and that in Italie, no place could be chosen but Mantua. Ʋergerius, at his returne into Germanie, deliuered the Popes Ambassage, first to Ferdinand, and then to those Protestants that came to that King a∣bout the present occurrences, and at last hee made a iourney to treate with the others also. He had no other answere from any of them; but that they would consult together, and resolue by common consent in their assembly, which should bee called in the ende of the yeere. The proposition of the The negotia∣tion of Verge∣rius in Ger∣manie. Nuncio contained, that that was the time for the Councels, so much de∣sired, the Pope hauing treated with the Emperour, and all the Kings to call it seriously, not as formerly, in appearance onely; and that it may not bee deferred any more, hee determined to chuse Mantua for the place, ac∣cording to the resolution taken with the Emperour, two yeeres since: Which being a Citie of the Emperours vassall, placed neere his confines, and the Venetians, they might holde it for secure: besides that the Pope and the Emperour would giue any greater caution whatsoeuer. That it was not necessarie to resolue or speake of the manner and forme of treating in the Councell, because this would better bee done in the Councell it selfe, when it shall bee called. That it could not bee celebrated in Germanie, which abounded with Anabaptists, Sacramentaries, and other sects, for the most part, both foolish and furious. Therefore that it would not bee secure for other nations, to goe where that multitude is potent, and to condemne their doctrine. That to the Pope it is all one to call it in any other Country what∣soeuer; but hee would not seeme to bee inforced, and to haue that authoritie taken from him which he hath inioyed so many ages, to prescribe the place of generall Councels. In this iourney Vergerius found Luther at Wittenberg, and treated with He treateth with Luther. him very courteously, vpon these tearmes, inlarging, and amplifying them very much. And first, hee assured him, that the Pope, and Colledge of Car∣dinals, esteemed him exceedingly, who were infinitely grieued for the losse of one, who, if he had been employed in the seruice of God, and the Apo∣stolicall Sea (which are ioyned together) might haue brought foo in∣estimable fruit; and that they would doe whatsoeuer they could to regaine him. Hee told that the Pope blamed the rigiditie of Caietan, and that the Cardinals did no lesse that hee might expect all fauour from that holy Sea, and that the rigor of Leo, which hee vsed by the instigation of others, not of his owne disposition, displeased all men. Hee added also that hee would not dispute with him of the controuersies, because hee professed not Diuinitie, but that by common reason hee could shew him that it was good to reunite himselfe with the head of the Church. For considering that his doctrine, comming to light, and being published within these eighteene yeeres had raysed innumerable sects, of which the one detesteth the other, and so many popular seditions, with the death and banishment of so great multitudes, it could not bee concluded that it came from God. But one might well assure himselfe, that it was pernitious to the world, because so much mischiefe proceeded from it. Ʋergerius said, that it was too great a selfe-loue, and too great a conceipt of ones owne worth, when a man would trouble the whole world to sowe his owne opinions. If you haue innouated in the faith, (said Ʋergerius) in which you were borne, and bred vp 35. yeeres, for your conscience and saluations sake, it was sufficient to keepe it within your selfe. If the loue of your neighbour mooued you, why did you trouble the whole world vnnecessarily, seeing that, without it men did liue, and God was serued in tranquillity? Hee added that the con∣fusion was gone on so farre, that the remedie could not be deferred. The Pope is resolute to applie it by calling a Councell, where all the learned men of Europe meeting together, the trueth shall bee cleered, to the confu∣sion of vnquiet spirits, and for the place, hath destinated the Citie of Mantua. And although the chiefest hope consisteth in the goodnesse of God, yet put∣ting to that account the endeuours of men, it was in Luthers power, to make the remedie easie, if hee will bee present, treat with charitie, and oblige to himselfe also the Pope, a munificent Prince, who taketh speciall notice of persons of merit. Hee put him in minde of the example of Eneas Siluius, And propo∣seth vnto him the example of Aentas Sil∣uius. who following his owne opinions with much slauery and labour, could get no further preferment, then to be Canon of Trent, but, beeing changed to the better, became Bishop, Cardinall, and finally Pope Pius the second. Hee called to his memorie Bessarion of Nice, who of a poore Caloier of And of Bessa∣rion. Trapizonda, became a great renowmed Cardinall, and wanted not much of being Pope. Luthers answers were, according to his nature, vehement and fierce, Luthers an∣swere. saying, that hee made no account of the esteeme which hee had with the Court of Rome, whose hatred hee feared not, nor regarded their good will; that hee applied himselfe to the seruice of God, as much as hee could, though vvhen he had done all, he vvas but an vnprofitable seruant; that hee savv not hovv the seruices of God vvere ioyned vvith those of the Papacy, but as dark∣nesse vvith light; that nothing in all his life vvas more profitable to him, then the rigor of Leo, & the rigidity of Caietan, vvhich he could not ascribe to them, but to the prouidence of God. For not being as yet in those times illuminated in all the trueth of Christian faith, but hauing onely discouered the abuses of Indulgences, hee was ready to haue kept silence, in case his aduersaries had done the like. But the writings of the master of the holy palace, the insul∣ting of Caietan, and the rigor of Leo constrained him to studie, and to de∣scriemany other lesse tolerable abuses, and errors of the Papacie, which he could not dissemble, nor refraine to declare them vnto the world with a good conscience. That the Nuncio had ingenuously confessed that hee vn∣derstood not Diuinitie; which appeared cleerely by the reasons which hee proposed because none could call his doctrine new, but hee that belee∣ued that CHRIST, the Apostles, and the holy Fathers liued, as now the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops doe. Neither can any argument be drawen against the doctrine, from the seditions happened in Germanie, but by him that hath not read the Scriptures, and knoweth not that this is proper to the word of God, and the Gospel, that it stirreth vp troubles and tumults, euen to the separation of the father from the sonne, wheresoeuer it is prea∣ched. That this was the vertue of it, to giue life to them that hearken to it, and to bring greater damnation to whosoeuer reiecteth it. Hee added, that it was a great fault of the Romanists, to establish the Church with gouerne∣ments taken from humane reasons, as if it were a temporall State. That this is that kind of wisedome, which S. Paul saith, is accounted foolishnesse with God, as not to esteeme those politique reasons, by which Rome doth gouerne, but to trust in Gods promises, and to referre to his Maiestie the managing of the Church affaires, is that humane folly, which is wisedome with God. That to make the Councell take good effect, and to bee profi∣table for the Church, was not in the power of Martin, but of him that can make it free, that the Spirit of God may rule there, and guide it, and the ho∣ly Scripture may bee the rule of the resolutions, not bringing thither inte∣rests, vsurpations, and artifices of men: which in case it should happen, yet himselfe would there vse all sinceritie, and Christian charitie, not to binde the Pope or any other vnto him, but for the seruice of Christ, and peace and libertie of the Church. But that hee could not hope to see so great a good so long as it appeared not that the wrath of God was appeased, by a serious conuersion from hypocrisie. That no sound argument could bee taken from the assembling of learned men, seeing that so long as the anger of God is kindled, there is no error so absurd and vnreasonable, which Satan can∣not perswade, especially to those great wise men, who thinke they know much, whom the Maiestie of God will confound. That nothing can be re∣ceiued from Rome compatible with the ministery of the Gospell. That the examples of Eneas Siluius, and Bessarion mooued him not. For hee esteemeth not those cloudy glitterings, and, in case hee would exalt himselfe, he might truely reply that which facetely was spoken by Erasmus, that Luther beeing poore and base, maketh rich, and aduanceth many. That it was well knowen to the Nuncio himselfe, (not to goe farre) that the last May himselfe had a great part in the creation of the Bishop of Rochester, and was the totall cause of the creation of Scomberg. That if the life of the first was so soone ta∣ken away, this was to bee ascribed to the prouidence of God. Ʋergerius Vergerius could not moue Luther. could not perswade Luther, to remit any thing of his constancie, who so stedfastly maintained his doctrine, as if it had beene apparant to the eyes, and said that the Nuncio, yea and the Pope himselfe, should sooner embrace his faith, then he would abandon it. Ʋergerius assaied also to perswade some other Preachers in Wittenberg, and elsewhere in the iourney, according to the Popes commission; but found no inclination, as hee thought hee should, but rigiditie in all that were of ac∣count; Not any of the other Lu∣therans, ex∣cept some few of small e∣steeme. The answere of 15. Printes and 30 Cities assembled in Smalcalda. Mantua is re∣fused by the Germans. and those that rendred themselues were of small worth, and preten∣ded much, so that they were not for his purpose. But the Protestants, vnderstanding Vergerius his proposition, there beeing fifteene Princes, and thirtie Cities assembled in Smalcalda, answered that they had declared their resolution concerning the Councell in many Diets, and last of all to the Nuncio of Pope Clement, and the Emperours Ambassadours, two yeeres since, and that still they desired a lawfull Councell as they were sure that all godly men did, and that they would goe to it, as many times hath beene determined in the Imperiall Diets. But for the Councell which the Pope hath appointed to bee in Mantua, they hoped that the Emperour would not breake the decrees of the Diet, nor his owne promises, so often made vnto them, that the Councell should bee celebrated in Germany; and that they saw not how there could bee any danger there, seeing that all the Princes and Cities obey the Emperour, and are so well gouerned, that all strangers are receiued and entertained with all humanity. But that the Pope should prouide for the securitie of those that went to the Councel they could not see how, especiall considering what things haue happened in the pre∣cedent age. That the Christian Commonwealth hath neede of a godly and free Councell, and that to such a one they haue appealed. And where∣as the Nuncio sayd, that they ought not to treat of the manner and forme first, it signified nothing but that there should bee no libertie, and that all should bee referred to the Popes power, who already hauing so often con∣demned their religion, the Councell cannot bee free, if hee shall bee Iudge. That the Councell is not the tribunall of the Pope and Priests onely, but of all the orders of the Church, not excluding the Seculars. That to preferre the Popes power before the authoritie of the whole Church, is an vniust and tyrannicall opinion. That the Pope defending the opinion of his owne men, yea with cruell edicts, making himselfe a party to the cause, it is iust that the manner and forme of the processe should bee determined by the Princes. The Kings of England and France, sent Ambassadours to the assembly of The King of England and the French King send Ambassadors to Smalcalda. Francis Sfor∣za dieth. Smalcalda: the French King (who had a disseigne to make warre in Italy, Francis Sforza Duke of Milan; beeing now dead) desired them not to accept of any place for the Councel, without the aduise of him, and of the King of England, and that they would accept of none without them. The King of England aduised them to be aware that they called not such a Councel, where, in stead of moderating the abuse, they should more establish the Popes au∣thority, and desired them to approoue his diuorce. On the other side they dealt with him to receiue the Augustan confession: Which things, being treated of in diuers assemblies, had no conclusion at all. But Vergerius, in the beginning of the yeere 1536. returned to the Pope, to 1536 relate the effect of his Ambassage. Hee deliuered in summe, that the Pro∣testants 1536 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. would not receiue any Councell, except it were free, and in a fitte place, within the confines of the Empire, grounding themselues vpon the Emperours promise, and that of Luther and his complices there was no hope at all, nor any other way to be thought of, but to oppresse them with warre Vergerius for his reward had the Bishopricke of Capo d'Istria, his owne Coun∣trey, and was sent by the Pope to Naples, to make the same relation to the Vergerius re∣turneth and deliueceth to the Pope the effect of his negotiation. He is rewar∣ded and sent to the Empe∣rour. Emperour, who hauing beene victorious in Africa, was passed into the king∣dome, to settle the affaires thereof. The Emperour hearing the narration of the Nuncio, went to Rome. Hee had priuate conference with the Pope, concerning the affaires of Italy, and the pacification of Germanie. The Pope, according to Ʋergerius counsell, said there was no meanes to bee vsed but warre. But the Emperor, seeing the time not ripe as yet, to reape from thence The Empe∣rour goeth to Rome to con∣ferre with the Pope. that good fruit, as others were perswaded he might, and himselfe also intang∣led in Italy, without possibility of being free, but by yeelding Milan, which he resolued, by all meanes to make his owne, whither all his actions did prin∣cipally tend, alleaged for a reason to deferre that warre, that it was more ne∣cessary to defend Milan from the French men. On the other side the Pope, whose thoughts were wholly bent to make an Italian Lord of that State, and therefore proposed the warre of Germanie, not so much to suppresse the Lu∣therans (as hee said openly) as to diuert Caesar from possessing Milan, which was his principall end, though secret, replyed that himselfe and the Veneti∣ans, what by armes, and what by treaties, would more easily make the King desist, in case his Imperiall Maiestie did not meddle. The Emperour hauing discouered the inward thoughts of the Pope, The Pope and Emperor haue contrary ends and dissemble one with ano∣ther. with as much dissimulation, made shew hee was perswaded, and inclined to the warre of Germanie; yet hee said, that it was fit to iustifie the cause well, that the whole world might not be against him, and to shew, by intimating a Councell, that hee had first vsed all other meanes. The Pope was not sory that, being necessarily to intimate a Synode, it should be done in a time, when, in regard the French King had inuaded Sauoy and Piemont, all Italy would bee set on fire with warre; whereby an apparent pretence was giuen him to en∣uiron the Councell with armes, vnder colour of custody and protection. He The Emperor is puffed vp with the Afri∣can victorie. shewed himselfe to bee contented, so that such conditions were set downe which might not derogate from the authority and reputation of the Aposto∣lique Sea. The Emperour, who, by reason of the victory atchieued in Africa, was lifted vp in minde, and swollen with vast thoughts, beleeued hee should make an end of the warre in Lombardy within two yeeres at the most, and that hauing immured the King of France beyond the mountaines, hee might apply himselfe to the affaires of Germany, without any impediment. His meaning was the Councell should serue him for two things. First to bridle the Pope, in case, during the warre of Italy, hee should according to the cu∣stome of other Popes, put himselfe on the French side when that should bee the weaker, to counterpoise him that was victorious. Secondly to re∣duce Germany to his obedience, which was the marke he shot at. But for the Popes obedience, hee esteemed it but an accidentall thing. For the place, Mantua pleased him; and for the rest hee cared not what condition the Pope might adde, considering that when the Councell were assembled, he should be able to change whatsoeuer pleased him not. Therefore he concluded that he was contented with any condition, so that the Councell might bee cele∣brated, alledging that he hoped to perswade almost all Germanie to consent vnto it. Wherefore the resolution was established by the Pope, and the whole colledge of Cardinals. A resolution established for calling the Councell. Therefore the Emperour, entering into the publike Consistorie the 28. of April, thanked the Pope and Colledge, for hauing readily and without delay resolued to call a generall Councell, and then desired them that the Bull The Emperor entereth into the publike Consistorie. might be dispatched before hee parted from Rome, that himselfe might giue order for the rest. The Bull could not be framed so soone, because it was necessarie to consider of fit words to be put into it, such as might giue as much hope of libertie as was possible, and yet not preiudice the Papall power. Sixe Cardinals, and three Bishops were deputed for this businesse; The Bull for Conuocation of the Coun∣cell is made. and finally the Bull was finished the twelfth of Iune, published in the Con∣sistory, and subscribed by all the Cardinals. The tenor was as followeth. That from the beginning of his Papacie hee had desired nothing more then to cleanse the Church, recommended by God to his care, from heresies and errors, and to restore the discipline to its former state: for which finding no way more commodious then that which alwayes hath bene vsed in like occurrences, that is, a generall Councell, he had often written concerning it to the Emperour and other Kings, with hope not onely to obtaine this end, but also, that all discords being appeased betweene Princes of Christen∣dome warre might bee made against the Infidels, to free the Christians from that miserable slauerie; and also to reduce the Infidels themselues to the faith. Therefore by the fulnesse of authoritie which he hath from God, by the consent of his brethren the Cardinals, hee doth intimate a generall Councell of all Christendome, against the 27. of May the next yeare 1537. The Councell is to begin in Mantua, May 27. 1537. in Mantua a rich place, and commodious for the celebration of the Councel. Therefore he commandeth the Bishops and other Prelats, of what place so∣euer, by vertue of their oath, and vnder the paines set downe by the holy canons and decrees, that they tender their presence there at the day prefixed. He prayeth the Emperour, French King, and all other Kings and Princes to be there in person, or in case they cannot, to send honourable and ample ambassages, as the Emperour, French King, and other Christian Princes haue often promised both to Clement, and to him: and to cause the prelats of their Kingdomes to goe thither, and there remaine vntill the end, to deter∣mine that which shall be fit to reforme the Church, extirpate heresies, and to make warre against the Infidels. The Pope published another Bull also, to correct (as he sayd) all the vices A Bull for the reformation of Rome. and defects of the Citie of Rome, the head of all Christendome, mistris of learning, manners and discipline; that his owne house being first purged, he might more easily cleanse the rest. But not being able fully to performe this businesse by himselfe, he deputed the Cardinals Ostiense, Saint Seuerino, Ge∣nutio, and Simoneta, commanding all men vnder the most grieuous paines, to yeeld them absolute obedience. These Cardinals, together with other Pre∣lats, deputed also by the Pope, applyed themselues immediatly to reforme the penitentiarie and Datarie Courts, and the manners of the Courtiers: yet no∣thing 1537 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. tooke effect. But the intimation of the Councell seemed very vnfit to euery man of any meane capacitie, in a time when warres were on foote in Picardie, Prouence, and Piemont, betweene the Emperour and the French King. The Protestants when they had seene the bull, wrote to the Emperour, The Prote∣stants doe not approoue the Bull of the Conuocation. that it appeared not what should be the forme and maner of the Councell. They desired it should be pious, free, and in Germanie, and such a one was e∣uer promised vnto them, and said they hoped that his Maiestie would pro∣uide that their demaunds should bee satisfied, and his promise fulfilled. But in the beginning of the next yeere 1537. the Emperor sent to the Pro∣testants Matthias Eldo his Vice-Chancellor, to exhort them to receiue the 1537 The Emperor exhorteth thē to accept the Councell. Councel, for the calling whereof he had taken so great paines, and where he meaned to affoord his personall presence, if some great warre constrained him not to be elsewhere. He put them in mind that they had appealed to a Councell, and therefore that it was not conuenient that now they should change their purpose, and refuse to meete all other Nations, who haue fixed therein all their hope for reformation of the Church. Concerning the Pope, the Emperor sayd there was no doubt but that hee would gouerne himselfe as was fit for the principall head of the Church, and that in casethey had a∣ny complaint against him, they might modestly prosecute it in the Councel. For the manner and forme, that it was not conuenient they should prescribe it to all Nations, but should rather thinke that not their diuines onely were inspired from God, and vnderstood holy mysteries, but that men may elsewhere be found, who want neither learning, nor sanctitie of life. For the place, though they haue demanded it in Germanie, yet the should consider what was fit for other Nations. Mantua is neere to Germany, rich, health∣full, and the Duke thereof vassall of the Empire; so that the Pope hath no power there; and if they desired any further caution, himfelfe was ready to giue it them. Hee spake also apart with the Elector of Saxonie, exhorting him to send his Ambassadours to the Councell, without vsing exceptions or excuses, which would hatch nothing but inconueniences. Concerning the And they an∣swere. Councell, the Protestants answered, that hauing read the Popes letters, they saw well, that hee and the Emperour were not of one mind; and, hauing re∣peated what was treated of with Adrian, Clement, and Paul, they concluded that they had all the same end. They went on to alledge their reasons, why the Pope should not be iudge in the Councell, nor yet those, who were by oath tyed vnto him. And for the place appointed, beside that it was against the Decrees of the Imperiall Diets, no safe conduct could free them from danger, if they went thither. For the Pope hauing adherents throughout all Italy, who bitterly hate the Protestants doctrine, there was great danger of treachery and secret plots. Besides, in regard that many Doctors and Mini∣sters ought to goe in person, because it is not fit to handle a matter of that importance by deputies, their Churches would be left desolate. And how can they consent to the iudgement of the Pope, who hath no other ayme but to roote out their doctrine, which hee calleth heresie, and cannot re∣fraine from saying so much in all his Buls, yea, in that, by which hee inti∣mateth the Councell: and in the Bull, which, dissemblingly, hee made for reformation of the Court of Rome, hee hath often repeated, that hee hath called a Councell to extirpate the Lutheran heresie, and maketh demonstra∣tion thereof by effects, exercising bloudie torments and punishments, a∣gainst poore innocent people, who adhere to that religion, for conscience sake. And how shall they be able to accuse the Pope and his followers, when himselfe will be iudge? And to appoue his Briefe, is nothing else but to con∣sent to their owne condemnation. And therefore that they haue alwayes demanded a free and Christian Councel, not onely that euery man may free∣ly speake, the Turkes and infidels being excluded; but that those that are linked together by oathes, and other Couenants, may not bee Iudges, and that the word of God may gouerne, and define all the controuersies. That they well know, that there are learned and godly men in other Nations: but withall they assure themselues, that if the vnlimited power of the Pope shall be moderated, not their Diuines onely, but many others, who now by reason of oppression hide themselues, will labour for reformation of the Church. That they will not dispute of the situation and fitnesse of Mantua, but they may well say, that so long as there is warre in Italie, they cannot want matter of suspition. That it is sufficient to say of the Duke of that Ci∣tie, that he hath a brother a Cardinall, one of the prime men of the Court. That in Germany, there are many Cities as commodious as Mantua, where Iustice and equitie doe flourish: and in Germanie those secret wiles to take away mens liues, are neither vsed nor knowne, as they are in other places. That in the ancient Councels, the securenesse of the place hath euer been first sought for, which would not be sufficient there, though hee the Empe∣rour were personally present in the Councell. For it is knowne that the Popes grant him place in consultations, but for power of determining, they reserue it to themselues onely. That it was knowne what happened to the Emperour Sigismond, in the Councell of Constance, whose safe-conduct was violated by the Synod: and himselfe constrained to put vp so great an af∣front. Therefore they prayed his Maiestie to consider the importance of these reasons. There appeared in this same Diet the Bishop of Aix, sent by the Pope to inuite them to the Councell. But hee did no good, and some of the Princes Some of the Protestant Princes would not so much as heare thé Popes Nuncio would not so much as heare him. And to make their reasons knowne to the world they printed and published a writing, where they laboured prin∣cipally to answere that obiection, that they would not submit themselues to any Iudge, that they despised other nations, that they refused the supreame They iustifie their actions to the world by writing. tribunall of the Church, that they had renewed heresies formerly condem∣ned, that they were glad of ciuill discords, that the faults which they found in the manners of the Court of Rome, were small, and tolerable. They al∣leadged the causes why it was not fit, that the Pope alone, nor yet together with his adherents should be iudge: they brought the examples of many Councels refused by diuers of the Fathers, and in fine, implored the ayde of all Princes, offering that whensoeuer a lawfull Councell shall bee called, they will therein defend their cause, and render an account of all their acti∣ons. They sent also an expresse Ambassadour to the French King, to giue him a particular account of the same things: who answered, that for the Councell he was of their opinion, not to approoue it, except it were lawfull, and in a secure place, assuring them that his sonne in-law, the King of Scotland was of the same mind. The Duke of Mantua to gratifie the Pope, granted his Citie for the Coun∣cell, without considering what he did, thinking as others, that it could not The Duke of Mantua mak∣eth a grant of his Citie and afterwards re∣calleth it. be effected, there being warres betweene the Emperour and French King, and Germany opposing it, for whose sake it was called, But when hee saw the intimation, he began to thinke how to secure the place, and sent a propositi∣on to the Pope, that, in regard of the great number of those that would come to the Councel, there was need of a great garrison, which he would not haue depend vpon any but himselfe; and that hee was not able to maintaine it. Therefore in case his Holinesse would celebrate the Councell in that Ci∣tie; he must allow him money for soldiers pay. The Pope answered that the multitude would not consist of men of armes, nor professed for the war, but of Ecclesiasticall and learned persons, which one magistrate, whom hee would depute to render iustice, with a small court and gard, was able to keepe in order; that a garrison of souldiers would breed a generall suspicion, and became not the place of the Councell, where all should appeare and bee truely peaceable; and that in case a garrison were necessary, it were not rea∣sonable to put it into the hands of any but of the Councel it self, that is, of the Pope, who is head thereof. The Duke, considering that iurisdiction draw∣eth The Pope claymeth right to ad∣minister iu∣stice where the Councell shall be ce∣lebrated. with it absolute soueraigntie, replyed, that by no meanes hee would haue iustice administred in his Citie, but by his owne officers. The Pope, a very wiseman, who seldome receiued any answere which hee did not fore∣see, was much amazed, and answered the Dukes man, that hee would neuer haue beleeued that by his Lord, a Prince of Italy, whose family hath beene so much aduanced by the Apostolicall Sea, who had a brother a Cardinall, that would bee denied him of which neuer any made doubt before, which the Law of God and man doth giue him, which the very Lutherans cannot denie, that is, to be supreame iudge of the Clergie; a thing which the Duke denieth not to his owne Bishops, to iudge the causes of Priests in Mantua. That in the Councel none should be present but the Ecclesiastiques, who are exempted from the secular power, both themselues and their families. Which Priests concu∣bines are of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction. is so cleere, that the Doctors of Diuinitie affirme that the very concubines of Priests are of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction; and yet he would denie him a Ma∣gistrate to render iustice to those men, during the time of the Councell. The Duke, for all this, was constant, aswell in refusing the Popes Magistrates, as also in demaunding pay for souldiers. These conditions seeming hard to the Pope, contrary (as he sayd) to the auncient custome, and against the dignity The Pope re∣solueth not to call the Coun∣cel at Mantua. of the Sea and Ecclesiasticall libertie he would not yeeld vnto them, and resolued not to call the Councell at Mantua. He remembred very well what happened to Iohn 23. for calling a Councell where another was stronger then hee. His purpose therefore was to prolong the time, and excused him∣selfe in a publique Bull, saying in substance, that though with griefe hee was constrained to depute an other place for the Synod, yet hee endured it with patience, because another was in fault and not himselfe: and because hee could not resolue so suddenly vpon a conuenient Citie, hee deserred the celebration thereof vntill the first of Nouember the same yeere. At that time the King of England published a manifest in his owne name, and of his nobilitie, against the Popes Conuocation, as by a person that had no power, in a time when Italie was set a fire with warre, and in a place not secure, adding that hee much desired a Christian Councell, but that to The King of England op∣poseth the Councel by a publique ma∣nifest. the Popes he would neither goe nor send Ambassadours, hauing nothing to doe with the Bishop of Rome, or his Edicts, more then with the edicts of any other Bishop. That the auncient Councels were called by the authori∣tie of Kings, which custome ought now the rather to be renewed, be∣cause the defect of the Court of Rome are called into question. That it was not vsuall with Popes to breake their faith, which himselfe had more cause to consider then others, beeing most bitterly hated by him, for hauing denyed him authoritie in his Kingdome, and the reuenew which was payd him. That to blame the Prince of Mantua, because hee will not receiue so many people into his Citie without a garrison, is to mocke the world; as also to prorogue the Councel vnto Nouember; not saying in what place it shall be celebrated. And if the Pope choose the place, without doubt it will be in his owne State, or of some Prince that is obliged to him. There∣fore, it being impossible that any man of iudgement should hope for a true Councel, the best way was for euery Prince to reforme Religion at home: concluding in the end that if any man could giue him better directions, hee would not refuse to follow them. The care of reforming the Court, was committed to 4. Cardinals, but nothing was done, which made the Italians suspect the Popes actions. In Italy also there was a generall disposition to interpret the Popes acti∣ons in the worser sense: and it was spoken freely, that though the Duke of Mantua were blamed, yet he was not the cause why the Councell was not called, whereof there was a manifest argument, because the Pope had pub∣lished a Bull for reformation of the Court, and committed the care thereof to foure Cardinals at the same time; which notwithstanding was buried in silence, though neither the Duke, nor any bodie else hindered it from beeing in his power: and hauing proposed it immediately after it was assumed to the Papacie, it was not so much as spoken of for three yeeres after. The The reforma∣tion is set on foot againe. Pope to withstand these defamations, resolued to set the businesse on foote againe, first reforming himselfe, the Cardinals, and the Court, that none might obiect against him, nor make bad construction of his actions; and he elected foure Cardinals, and fiue other Prelates, whom he so much estee∣med that the yeere following hee made foure of them Cardinals, giuing charge to those nine to collect the abuses, which deserued amendment, and withall to adde the remedies, by which they might quickly, and easily be re∣mooued, and to reduce all to a good reformation. The Prelates made the collection, as the Pope commanded, and committed it to writing. The fountain of the abuses of the Court. In the beginning they proposed for the fountaine and source of all the abuses, the Popes readinesse in giuing eare to flatterers, and his facility in dis∣pensing with Lawes, with neglect of the Commandement of Christ, not to receiue gaine for spirituall things. And descending to particulars, they no∣ted twenty foure abuses in the administration of Ecclesiasticall matters, and foure in the speciall gouernment of Rome: they touched the ordination of The particular abuses. Cleargie men, Collation of Benefices, Pensions, Permutations, Regresses, 1538 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. Reseruations, Pluralitie of Benefices, Commendoes, Exemptions, deforma∣tion of the regular order, ignorance of Preachers, and Confessors, libertie of printing pernicious Bookes, the reading of them, toleration of Apostates, Pardoners. And, Passing to dispensations, first they touched that, for mariage of those that are in orders, for marriages in degrees forbidden, dispensati∣ons granted to Symoniacall persons, facilitie of graunting Confessionals and Indulgences, dispensation of vowes, licence to bequeath by will the Church-goods, commutation of wils and testaments, toleration of harlots, negligence of the gouernement of hospitals, and such other things, which they exactly handled, expounding the nature of the abuses, the causes and originall of them, the consequences of the euils which they carry with them, the meanes to redresse them, and to keepe hence forward the body of These things are set downe at large in the 12. Booke of Sleidan. the Court in Christian life: a worke worthy to be read, and which deserued to be set downe word by word, if it had not beene too long. The Pope hauing receiued the relation of these Prelats, caused many Cardinals to consider of it, and after, that he might resolue what to doe, pro∣posed it in the Consistory. Fryar Nicholas Scomberg, a Dominican Cardinall of S. Sistus, alias of Capua, shewed in a long discourse, that that time compor∣ted The Cudinall of S. Sistus would haue no reformat∣on at al made. not any reformation at all. First, hee put them in mind of the malice of man, which being stopped in one course, findeth a worse, and that it is bet∣ter to tolerate a knowen euill, which, because it is in vse, is not so much mar∣ueyled at, then by redressing that, to fall into another, which, being new, will appeare greater, and be more reprehended. Hee added that it would giue occasion to the Lutherans, to bragge that they had inforced the Pope to make that reformation; and aboue all he considered that it would bee a beginning to take away not onely the abuses, but the good vses also, and to endanger the whole state of religion. For by the reformation it would be confessed that the things prouided against were deseruedly repre∣hended by the Lutherans, which would be a great abetting to their whole Cardinall Ca∣raffa desireth the reforma∣tion. doctrine. On the other side, Iohn Peter Caraffa, Cardinal Theatino, shewed that the reformation was necessarie, and that it was a great offence to God to leaue it, and answered that it was a rule in Christian actions, that as euill is not to be done that good may follow, so no good of obligation is to be omitted, for feare that euill may ensue. The opinions deliuered were di∣uers, The Pope co∣mandeth the remonstrance of the Prelats to be concea∣led, but a copie of it is sent in∣to Germany by Cardinall Scomberg, The King of Denmarke be∣commeth a Protestant. and the finall conclusion was not to speake any more of it vntill ano∣ther time; and the Pope commanded that the remonstrance of the Pre∣lats should be concealed. But Cardinall Scomberg sent a copie thereof into Germanie, which some thought was done by the Popes consent, that it might appeare there was some designe in Rome, and some paines taken also for re∣formation. The coppy was suddenly printed, and published, throughout all Germany, and many wrote against it, both in Dutch and Latine. And the number of the Protestants increased dayly in that Countrey, the king of Den∣marke, and some princes of the house of Brandeburg being entred into their league. Nouember drawing neere, the Pope sent out a Bull for conuocation of The Councell is intimated at Vicenza, and three Legates appointed. the Councell at Vicenza, and alledging the necessitie to prorogue the time, because winter was at hand, hee did intimate it, for the first of May, the next yeere 1538. and appoynted three Cardinals Legats for that place; Lo∣renzo Campeggio, Legate before for Clement the seuenth in Germanie; Iomes Si∣moneta, and Ierom Aleander created Cardinals by himselfe. So soone as this Bull went out the King of England published another Ma∣nifost, against this new conuocation, and addressed it to the Emperor; Kings, Another ma∣nifest publi∣shed by the K of England. and Christian people, dated the eight day of April, the same yeere 1538. that hauing before declared to the world, the manifold causes, why hee had resu∣sed the Councell, which the Bishop of Rome fained hee would celebrate in Mantua, prorogued afterwards, without assignation of any certaine place, it seemed not conuenient to protest, as often as hee did excogitate a new way, and to refuse that Councell, which the Pope de a colourable shew that he would celebrate. Hee said that that declaration desended his, and his King∣domes cause, against all the attempts, that either Paul, or any other Pope could make, which he was willing to confirme with this Epistle, to excuse him∣selfe for not going to Ʋicenza, more then hee would haue done to Mantua, though no man desired a publike assembly of Christians more then him∣selfe, so that the Councell bee generall, free, and picus, such as hee hath de∣scribed in his protestation against the Councell of Mantua. And as nothing is more holy then a generall Conuocation of Christians, so nothing is more preiudiciall and pernicious to religion, then a Councell abused for gaine and profit, or confirmation of errours. That it is called a generall Councell, be∣cause all Christians may speake their opinions; and that it cannot bee called generall, where onely they are heard, who are resolued to put themselues on the Popes side, in all matters, and where the same men are plaintifes, defen∣dants, aduocates, and iudges. That all may bee sayd of Viconza which, in his declaration, hath been said of Mantua. And briefly repeating a short con∣tents thereof, hee sayd, if Frederick Duke of Mantua hath not yeelded so much to the Popes authoritie, as to grant him his Citie in that manner that he would; why should we so much esteeme it, as to goe whither hee plea∣seth? If the Pope hath power from God to call Princes whither hee will, why can hee not choose what place hee listeth, and make himselfe obeyed? If the Duke of Mantua can, with reason, denie the place which the Pope hath chosen, why cannot other Kings and Princes refuse to goe thither? And if all Princes should denie him their Cities, where would be his power? what a thing would it haue beene, if all men had put themselues into the iourney, and being arriued there, should haue beene shut out of doores by the Duke of Mantua? That which happened for Mantua, may happen likewise for Vicenza. The Legats went to Vicenza at the time appointed, and the Pope to Nizza, The Legates toe to Vi∣cenza. in Prouence at the same time, to speake personally with the Emperour, and French King, which hee gaue out was onely to make peace betweene those A conference in Nizza be∣tweene the Pope, French K. and King of Spaine. two great Princes, though his principall ende was to draw the Dukedome of Milan into his house. I here the Pope, amongst other things, desired them both to send their Ambassadours to the Councell, and to cause the Prelates which were in their traines to goe also, and to giue order that those that were at home in their Kingdomes should begin their voyage thither. For gluing the order they both excused, and said, that first it was fit to informe themselues by the Prelates, of the necessities of their Churches; and for sen∣ding those that wore present, that it would bee hard to perswade them to goe before they had consolted with others. The Pope was so easily satisfied with the answere, that it was doubted, whether hee more desired the affir∣matiue, or the negatiue. Therefore this Treatie being vnprofitable, as were all his other in that meeting, hee went his way, and, being at Genua, in The Councel is defened vnull Easter. his returne, receiued letters from his Legates, who were at Ʋicenza, yet alone without any Prelate; wherefore hee recalled them, and by his Bull, dated the eight of Iulie, prolonged the terme of the Councell vntil the next Easter day. This yeere, the Pope brake the wise patience, or rather dissimula∣tion, which, for foure yeeres together, hee had vsed towards England, and sent against the King a terrible thundering Bull, such as neuer was The Pope thundereth a∣gainst the K. of England. vsed by his predecessours, nor imitated by his successours. Which ful∣mination, hauing its originall from the Manifests, published against the Councel of Mantua, and Ʋicenza; my purpose requireth, I should make men∣tion thereof. Besides, for the vnderstanding of many accidents which shall bee related heereafter, it is necessary to repeate this euent, with the parti∣culars of it. The King of England hauing denied his obedience to Rome, and decla∣red himselfe head of the English Church, the yeere 1534. as hath beene said in its place, Pope Paul, immediately after his assumption, was continually instigated by the Emperour for his owne interests, and by the Court, which thought by that meanes, either to regaine England, or set it on fire, to fulmi∣nate against that King: which hee, as a man well experienced in the world, iudged would bee to little purpose; considering, that if the thunders of his predecessors neuer had good successe, when they were beleeued and fea∣red by all, there was lesse hope they could effect any thing, after a do∣ctrine was published, and receiued by many, which did contemne them. Hee thought it wisedome to hold a weapon within the scabberd, which had no other edge, but what was giuen by the opinion of those against whom it was vsed. But the beheading of the Cardinall of Rochester happening in the yeere 1535, the other Cardinals were earnest in remonstrating vnto him what a shame, and how great a danger it was to the Order, which euer was esteemed most sacred and inuiolable, if such an example should bee suffe∣red to passe. For the Cardinals defend the Popedome boldly with all Prin∣ces, because they are assured of their liues: which assurance, when it shall be taken away, and made knowen to the Seculars, that the Cardinals may bee iusticed, they should doe their businesse with too much feare: Notwithstan∣ding, the Pope forsooke not his resolution, but found a temper, neuer vsed by any of his predecessors, to lift vp the thunderbolt with his hand and to threa∣ten to shoote, yet to hold it without flinging it abroad, and so to satisfie the Cardinals, the Court, and others, and not to put the Papal authoritie in ha∣zard. Therefore he framed a Processe and most seuere sentence against that King the thirtieth of August 1535. and withall suspended the publication, during his pleasure. Yet secretly he let the copie goe into the hands of some that hee knew would cause it to bee deliuered to the King, dispersing the rumor of the Bull that was framed, and the suspension, with fame, that ve∣ry suddenly hee would remooue the suspension, and come to publication, yet with deseigne neuer to proceede so farre. And though hee wanted not hope, that the King either for feare of the excommunication framed, or by the inclination of his people, or by the sa∣tietie of punishments, vsed against those that disobeyed his Decree, would induce himselfe, or by the mediation of the Emperour, or French King, (when by reason of the occurrences of the world, hee should bee constrai∣ned to vnite himselfe with either of them) would bee induced to yeeld, yet he was principally mooued by the forenamed cause, that he might not shew the weakenesse of his weapons, and more confirme the King in his sepa∣ration. But in the end of three yeeres hee changed his purpose, by reason of the prouocation which the King seemed to vse against him, by sending out manifests against all his callings of the Councell, and by opposing his acti∣ons, though without particular offence of his person, and lastly, by hauing prosecuted, cited, & condemned S. Thomas of Canterbury, for a traitour to the The King of England sen∣teneeth S. Thomas Bec∣ . kingdome, with confiscation of goods, whom Alexander the third canoni∣zed in the yeere 1171. for being slaine in defence of the Ecclesiasticall power and liberty, whose solemne feast the Church of Rome doth annually obserue: which sentence was executed by taking the bones out of the graue, which were publikely burned by the hangman, and the ashes sprinkled in the riuer, putting his hands into the treasures, ornaments and reuenues of the Churches dedicated to him, which was to touch a secret of the Popedome, of farre greater importance then the matter of the Councel. Whereunto ioy∣ning some hope which hee conceiued from the conference with the French King, which was, that he would assist the malecontents of England, so soone as hee was free from the warres with the Emperour, the 17. of December, he brandished the thunder-bolt of excommunication, made three yeeres be∣fore, and opened his hand to cast it forth, which all this while was readie to doe it. The causes alleadged were in substance these. The diuorce, obedience The causes of the excom∣munication, and the pu∣nishments. taken away, the death of the Cardinall of Rochester, and the proceeding a∣gainst S. Thomas. The punishments to the King were, depriuation of his Kingdome, and to his adherents, of whatsoeuer they possessed, comman∣ding his Subiects to denie him obedience, and strangers to haue any com∣merce in that kingdome, and all to take armes against, and to persecute both himselfe and his followers, granting them their states and goods for their prey, and their persons for their slaues. But how much the Popes Briefe was esteemed, and his commandements The excom∣munication was generally contemned. obserued, the leagues, confederations, peaces, treaties, which by the Empe∣rour, French King, and other Catholique Princes, were made with that King, doe euidently declare. In the beginning of the yeere 1539, new controuersies being raised in 1539 Germanie about religion, and perhaps by men ofbad intentions, who vsed it but for a pretence, there was an assembly held in Francfurt, whither the An assembly is helde in Francfurt a∣bout religion. Emperour sent a commissioner; and after long disputation there, it was by his consent concluded, the 19. of April, that there should bee a conference in Noremberg the first of August, to create quietly and louingly of Religion, 1539 PAVL 3. 1. C 15. HENRY 8. 3. F where on the one side and the other, besides the Doctors, other persons of wisedome were to be present, sent by the Emperour; King Ferdinand, and o∣ther Princes, to superintend at the colloquie, and deale betweene the parties: and what was determined by common consent, should be signified to all the orders of the Empire, and ratified by the Emperor in the next Diet. The Ca∣tholikes would haue the Pope intreated to send also some person to the con∣ferent but the Protestants thought it contrary to their protestation; and therefore it was not done. This newes of the assembly being arriued at Whereat the Pope was much offen∣ded. Rome, the Pope was offended, as well because there should be a treatie about Religion in Germanie, as because it derogated from the credit of the Coun∣cell intimated, though hee cared very little to haue it celebrated, and more particularly because there was a dispute to admit of one to bee sent by him, and in the end his authoritie wholly reiected. Therefore hee suddenly dis∣patched into Spaine the Bishop of Monte Pulciano, whose principall message was to perswade the Emperour not to confirme, yea, rather to annihilate the Decrees of that Diet. The Nuncio had a great and long instruction, first, to complaine grie∣uously He sendeth a Nuncio to the Emperor. of the demeanor of Iohn Ʋessalius, Archbishop of London, his Commis∣sary, who forgetting his oath made to that Sea, and infinite Benefits receiued from the Pope, and the instruction giuen him by the Emperour, had con∣sented to the demands of the Lutherans, with preiudice of the Apostolique Sea, and dishonour of his imperiall Maiestie. That London was corrupted with gifts and promises, the Citie of Ausburg hauing giuen him 250. thou∣sand Florins of gold, and the King of Denmarke promised him 4. thousand Florins yeerely, out of the fruits of his Archbishoprique of London, which was taken from him. That he thought to take a wife, and forsake the Church, A Citie in Denmarke. and had neuer entred into holy orders. The Nuncio had commandement to shew to the Emperour, that if the things which London had graunted, were confirmed by him, they would shew that hee was not a sonne of the Apostolique Sea; and that all the Catholique Princes of Germanie complai∣ned thereof, and were of opinion that his Maiestie would not confirme them. Hee gaue order also to propose vnto him his interests concerning the Dutchie of Ghelderland, and the election of the King of the Romans, to moue him the more; putting him also in minde that hee could not haue Germanie at his disposition, by tolerating the Lutheran heresies, as London and others did perswade. For it is a thing long since knowen, that principalities can∣not in likelihood be preserued where Religion is lost, or where two religions are suffered. That this happened to the Emperors of the East, who hauing a∣bandoned the obedience due to the vniuersall Bishop of Rome, lost their for∣ces & Kingdoms. That the cunning of the Lutherans was manifest, who haue proceeded maliciously with his Maiestie, and that, vnder the colour of esta∣blishing their Religion they doe euer procure something else. That an exam∣ple thereof was the Diet of Spira in the yeere 1526, of Noremberg 1532, and of Calano 1534. when the Duke of Wittenberg regained the Dutchie, which shewed that those commotions of the Landgraue and the Lutherans were not for religion, but to take that state from the King of the Romanes. That hee should put him in minde that, when hee made an accord with the Lutherans, the Catholique Princes would not endure such a disorder, that his Maiestie should haue more power ouer them then ouer the Protestants, and would thinke vpon new remedies. That there are many other lawfull and honest wayes to reduce Germanie, the Pope being resolued to afford him all possible ayde, according to the proportion of his forces. And when his Maiestie shall haue well thought thereon, he will finde that these capitulati∣ons cannot bee approoued, without making all Germany Lutheran; which were wholly to depriue himselfe of authority. For that Sect excludeth all superiority, extolling liberty, or rather licence aboue all. That he should put into the Emperours head to augment the Catholique League, and to take from the Lutherans their adherents, as much as hee could, and to send as much money as was possible into Germanie, to promise, and really to giue it to those that follow the Catholique league. That it were good also, vnder colour of Turkish affaires, to send a competent number of Spaniards or Ita∣lians into those parts, lodging them within the territories of the King of the Romans. That the Pope was resolued to send some person to the Catho∣lique Princes, with money, to gratifie those that shall be fit for his purpose. That he should exhort Caesar, to make such an Edict, as the King of England made in his Kingdome, causing a rumour to bee spread cunningly, that his Maiestie negotiated with the sayd King, to reduce him to the obedience of Rome. The Pope gaue commission also to the sayd Montepulciano to com∣plaine to the Emperour, that his sister, Queene Mary, Gouernesse of the low Countries, secretly fauoured the Lutherane part, that shee purposely sent The Nuncio complaineth against the Emperors si∣ster, Gouer∣nesse of the low Coun∣tries. men vnto them, that, when the Catholique league was to be established, shee wrote to the Elector of Triers, that hee should not enter into it, and so that good worke was crossed; that shee hindered the Lord of Lauaur, the French Ambassadour, from going into Germanie, to consult with the King of the Romanes, and the Legate of his Holinesse about religion: which hee did be∣leeue proceeded notfrom her owne will, but from the counsell of her bad ministers. But because mention is made of the Edict of the King of England in mat∣ter The Edict of religion made by K. Henry the 8. of Religion, it will not bee amisse to recount heere, how Henry the eight in the time of the Diet of Francfort, either because he thought to doe God ser∣uice by not permitting innouation of religion within his Kingdome, or to shew constancie in what hee had wrote against Luther, or to giue the Pope the lie, who laid an imputation vpon him in his Bull, that hee had publi∣shed hereticall doctrine in his Kingdome, made a publique Edict, whereby hee commanded that the reall presence of the true and naturall body and blood of our Lord Iesus Christ, vnder the kindes of bread and wine, there remaining no substance of those elements, was to bee beleeued throughout all England, as also that Christ was wholly contained vnder the one and the other kinde; that the communion of the Cup was not necessary; that it was not lawfull for Priests to marry; that religious men, after their profes∣sion and vowes of chastity, were bound alwayes to keepe them, and to liue in Monasteries; that secret and Auricular confession was not onely profita∣ble but also necessary; that the celebration of Masse euen priuate, was an holy thing, which hee commanded should bee obserued in his Kingdome. He prohibited all to doe or teach any thing contrary to these articles, vpon paine to be punished as heretiques. It is to bee marueiled at, how the Pope, who a little before thundered against that King, was constrained to prayse his actions, and to propose him to the Emperour for an ensample to be imi∣tated. So a mans proper interest makes him commend and blame the same person. But the Pope, after hee had dispatched Montepulciano; seeing that by cal∣ling the Councell, and after deferring it, though hee entertayned the world, yet hee lost reputation, thought it necessary to leaue that ambiguous pro∣ceeding, which howsoeuer it had giuen men satisfaction heeretofore, yet in A consultati∣on about the Councel. progresse of time it might produce some sinister effect. And hee made a secret resolution, to declare himselfe, and to forsake ambiguities; and in the consistory, hauing related what had happened, and proposed that it was necessary to make a constant and firme resolution, hee put the matter in consultation. Some of the Cardinals, to deliuer themselues from feare, which euery other day amazed them, did not approoue the suspension, but desired an expresse declaration that there should bee no Councell at all, be∣cause it appeared not how the difficulties could bee ouercome, before there was a reconciliation betweene Princes, a necessary meanes, without which there was no hope it could bee celebrated. But the wiser sort were balan∣ced betweene this and another feare, that there might bee Nationall Coun∣cels, or other remedies vsed, more offensiue to them then a generall Synode; and therefore the maior part gaue consent for the suspension during pleasure: thinking that when it should seeme not fit to bring it to effect, it might bee continued, by pretending the discord betweene Princes, or some other thing; and that if there happened any danger of a Nationall Councell, or of Col∣loquies, or ought else, it might bee remooued by promoting the Generall Councell, and assigning vnto it place and time; and afterwards it might bee called, or let alone, as time should aduise. The match was made, and a Bull The Councel intimated is suspended du∣ring pleasure. was framed the thirteenth of Iune, by which the Councell intimated was suspended during pleasure of the Pope and the Apostolicall Sea. But Montepulciano the Nuncio, who went into Spaine, executed his com∣missions with the Emperour; who, either for the cause alledged by the Nun∣cio, or for some respects of his owne, declared not himselfe whether hee dis∣sented or assented to the Colloquie, appointed to be held at Noremberg in Au∣gust. Afterwards, by reason of his wiues death, and the rebellion of Gant, with part of the low Countries, hee had occasion, by pretending affaires of greater importance, to leaue the matter in suspence, and so the whole yeere 1539. passed. When I set my selfe to write this Story, considering the number of Collo∣quies, some onely intimated, and some held, to compose the differences in religion, I doubted whether it was fit to make mention of all, hauing con∣cluding reasons for the one part and the other. In the end, considering that I haue proposed to my selfe to relate all the causes of the Councell of Trent, and obseruing that none hath beene intimated or held, but to hinder, or di∣uert, or delay, or to hasten and accelerate the Councell, I resolued to make mention of euery one, especially for the fruit which may be gathered from 1540 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1 1540 the knowledge of the notable particulars which happened in them: as in that which was appointed the yeere following, which had his begin∣ning thus. The Emperour went to the low Countries by the way of France, to ac∣commodate those seditions, and Ferdinand mett him there where one of the most principall businesses, conferred of betweene them both, was to finde a way of composition for matters of religion in Germanie, which being exact∣ly handled by the body of the Emperours Councell, all did incline to insti∣tute a Colloquie herein. This comming to the eares of Farnese, who was Legate there, and had ac∣companied Cardinal Far∣nese the Popes Legate dissua∣deth the Col∣loquie. the Emperour in the voyage (which Cardinall, though a youth, vnder the age of twentie yeers, yet had in his company many persons fit for businesse, and amongst others, Marcellus Ceruinus, Bishop of Nicastro, who after was Pope, and called Marcellus the second) hee opposed this resolution, and treating with the Emperour, Ferdinand, and with al those of the Councel he put them in mind, that the Protestants had beene often dealt withall, for peace, beginning ten yeeres since in the Diet of Ausburg, but still without ef∣fect: And in case any conclusion had beene made, it would haue beene vaine and fruitlesse. For they dayly change their opinion, not following any cer∣taine doctrine, and haue opposed euen their owne Augustan confession. That they are slipperie as Eeels. First they were desirous that the abuses and vices should be remooued; now they will not haue the Papacie amended but ex∣tinguished, and the Apostolicall Sea, rooted out; and all Ecclesiasticall iuris∣diction abolished. And if euer they were petulant, they would be then much more, when the peace was not well confirmed with France, and the Turke threatned Hungarie. That there was no hope to perswade them, because the controuersies were vpon innumerable doctrines. And because there are ma∣ny Sects among them, it is impossible to accord with all; besides, that the greater part of them hath no other end, but to possesse the goods of others, and bereaue the Emperour of his authoritie. It was true that the instant Turkish warre perswaded an agreement in Religion; but this was not to be done in particular or Nationall Diets; but in a generall Councell, which might immediately be intimated. For where Religion is in question, no mu∣tation can be made without common consent. That Germany is not onely to bee respected, but France, Spaine, Italie, and other people, without whose counsell if Germany shall make a change, there will arise a dangerous diuision of that Prouince from the rest. That it was a most ancient custome; euen from the time of the Apostles, to compose controuersies with a Councell onely, and that now all Kings, Princes, and godly men desired it. That peace may now easily be concluded betweene the Emperor and the King of France, & immediatly after a councel called, and in the meane space indeauours may be vsed to increase the number and power of the Catholique league of Ger∣many, which, by intimidating the Protestants, will cause them to submit themselues to the Councell, or at the least they will bee enforced by the Ca∣tholiques; and when it shall be necessary to resist the Turke, the Catholique league, being strong, may constraine the Protestants to contribute: which in case they will not doe, it was necessarie of two euils to chuse the lesser, it be∣ing a greater fault to offend God by abandoning the cause of Religion, then to want the assistance of one part of a Prouince. And the rather, because it is not easie to iudge who are more contrary to Christ, the Protestants or the Turkes. For these desire to inthrale our bodies, but those, both bodyes and soules together. All the discourses and parlies of the Cardinal had for their conclusion, that it was fit to call a Councell, and to begin it that same yeere, and not to treate of Religion in the Diets of Germanie, but to labour or augment the Catholique league, and to make peace with the King of France. The Emperour after much deliberation, concluded that he would labour for a concord, and gaue order for a Diet to be held in Germany, where Fer∣dinand thought good, inuiting the Protestant Princes to be there in person, and promising publike securitie vnto all. Cardinall Fernese, hearing of this The Legate departeth. conclusion, made without his knowledge, went immediately away, and pas∣sing by Paris, obtained of the King a seuere edict against the heretiques, and Lutherans, which being published, was executed in that citie, and after throughout all France with much rigour. In Germanie the Diet was called by Ferdinand in Aganoa, where the Catho∣ligue The Diet of Aganoa about Religion. Doctors, and many Protestant Preachers and Ministers met together; and the Elector of Triers, the Palatine, Duke Lewis of Bauaria, and William, Bishop of Argentina, were deputed for mediators betweene the parties. The Protestants being required to present the heads of the doctrine in controuer∣sie, answered that they had giuen vp their cōfession in Ausburg, ten yeers since, and an Apologie in defence of it; that they perseuered in that doctrine, and were ready to giue an account thereof vnto all men: and not knowing what the aduersaries reprehended, they had no more to say, but expected to vnder∣stand from them what it was they esteemed contrary to trueth, for so the matter will come to a conference, and themselues wil not faile to set peace be∣fore their eies. The Catholiques tooke them suddenly at their word, & assen∣ting to what the others proposed, inferred that it was fit to esteem for appro∣ued all things passed in that Diet, and to account the Decree firme and stable which was published in the Recesse, and to lay before them the forme of re∣conciliation begun in that Diet. The Protestants, knowing their disaduan∣tage, in case they followed that forme, and the preiudice which that decree would haue inferred, vrged for a new forme, and to haue all the preiudices taken away. On the other side the Catholiques demaunded, that in regard all preiudice was to be remoued, those things that the Protestants had done should be rectified, and the Church goods, taken by them restored. The Protestants replyed, that the goods were not taken away, but, by renouati∣on of the true doctrine, were reapplyed to those lawfull and honest vses, vnto which they were destinated in their first institution, from which the Cler∣gie had degenerated, and therefore that it was necessarie to decide the points of the doctrine before they talked of the goods. And the contentions in∣creasing, Ferdinand cōcluded that a new forme, not preiudicial to any, should be instituted, that the Doctors that treated on both sides should be equall in number, and that it should be lawfull for the Pope to send his Nuncij thither, & that the place of the Colloquie should be changed, which should begin in Wormes, the eight and twentieth of October next if the Emperour thought good. The Protestants accepted the Decree declaring that they refused not the presence of the Nuncij, but intended not to attribute thereby any primacie to the Pope, nor authoritie to them. The Emperour confirmed the Decree, and gaue order for the assembly; and appointed Granuel for his Commissioner there: who going thither with his sonne, the Bishop of Arras, who after was Cardinall, and three Spa∣nish Colloquie in Wormes without effect. Diuines, began the Colloquie, and made a very godly discourse, and fit for pacification. A few dayes after, there arriued Thomas Campeggio, Bishop of Feltre, Nuncio to the Pope. For his Holinesse, though he saw that euery To which the Pope sendeth a Nuncio. treatie of religion in Germanie was pernicious to his affaires, and therefore had vsed all diligence to breake off that conference, yet hee thought it lesse hurt to giue consent vnto it, then suffer it to bee done against his will. The Nuncio, according to the Popes instruction, at his entrie, made a discourse, that the quiet of Germany was alwayes procured by the Popes, and especi∣ally by Paulus 3. who for that cause, had intimated a generall Councell in Viconza, howsoeuer he was constrained to deferre it, vntill another time, because man went thither, and now was resolued to intimate it againe in a more conuenient place: in which, that the matter of religion might be han∣dled with fruit, hee had graunted to the Emperour, that a Colloquie might bee held in Germanie, which might bee an entrance; to dispose them to the resolution of the Councell, and had sent him to bee present there, and to assist. Therefore hee prayed them all to aime at concord, promising that the Pope would doe whatsoeuer with pietie hee could. There arriued also The Pope sendeth ano∣ther Nuncio vnder a false name. the forenamed Bishop of Capo d'Istria, who, though sent by the Pope, as one who well vnderstood the humors of Germany, yet came as sent from France, that he might doe the Pope better seruice vnder another name. Hee caused an Oration to be printed, the subiect whereof was, the vnitie and peace in the Church, but the scope to shew that a Nationall Councell, was not the meanes to attaine thereunto. And this hee distributed amongst as many men as hee could, to interrupt the Colloquie, which had a resemblance of it. Much time was spent, in giuing forme to the conference, as well for se∣crecie, as for the number of the Doctors which were to speake. And there were some who studiously protracted the time, as well for the diligent in∣deuours of the Nuncio Campeggio, as the secret negotiations of Vegerius. Fi∣nally it was ordered that Iohn Ecchius should speake for the Catholikes, and Philip Melancthon for the Protestants, and that the subiect should bee original sinne. While these things went on in Wormes, the Popes Nuncio, residing with the Emperour, ceased not to perswade his Maiestie, that the Colloquie would bring foorth some great schisme, and make all Germanie Lutheran, and not onely take obedience from the Pope, but weaken his owne also. Hee repeated the same conceits which Monte-Pulicano, vsed to hinder the Collo∣quie appointed in the Diet of Franckfort, and those that were vsed by Cardi∣nall Farnese to hinder that of Aganoa. In conclusion, the Emperour, consi∣dering these reasons, and the aduices giuen him by Granuel, of the difficulties which he incountered, thinking to doe the worke better in his owne person, hee resolued the Colloquie should not proceed. Wherefore Ecchius and Me∣lancthon hauing spoken three dayes, the conference was interrupted. For 1541 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. 1541 The Diet of Ratisbon. letters came from the Emperour, which recalled Granuel, and referred the rest to the Diet in Ratisbon. That began in March 1541. The Emperour was personally present, with great hope to end all discords, and to vnite Germany in one Religion. For which purpose hee also had desired the Pope to send a Legate, a man learned and discreete, with most ample authoritie, that there might bee no neede to send to Rome for any thing, but all might be there immediately de∣termined, which by the Diet and the Legate should bee thought conueni∣ent; saying, that for this end hee had yeelded to the great importunitie of the Nuncio residing with him, to breake off the Colloquie of Wormes. The Pope sent for his Legate Iasper Cardinall Contarini, a man much e∣steemed, Iasper Conta∣rini the Popes Legatin Ra∣tisbon. for his singular honesty and learning, and put also into his com∣pany men instructed in all the interests of the Court, with Notaries to make Instruments of whatsoeuer should bee handled or spoken: hee gaue him Commission, that if he foresaw that they went about to doe any thing His instructi∣on. which might tend to the diminution of the Papall authoritie, hee should interrupt it, by propounding a generall Councell, the onely and true re∣medie; and in case the Emperour were forced to yeeld to the Protestants in any preiudiciall matter, he ought to forbid it, by the Postolique authori∣tie, and, if it were done, to condemne it, and to declare it voyde, and, to leaue the Diet, but not the Emperours company. Being arriued at Ratisbon, the first thing hee had to doe with the Em∣perour, The first ne∣gotiation with the Emperour. was to excuse the Pope, that hee had not giuen that ample autho∣ritie, and absolute power which his Maiestie desired. First, because it is so annexed to the very bones of the Papacie, that it cannot be granted to any other; secondly, because neither words nor clauses are found; by which the authoritie of determining controuersies of Faith can bee communicated by the Pope, the Priuiledge of not being able to erre being giuen to his per∣son onely; in those words, I haue prayed for thee, Peter: But that the Pope had giuen him all manner of power to agree with the Protestants, so that they deny not the Principles, which are, the Primacie of the Apostolique Sea, instituted by CHRIST, the Sacraments, as they are taught in the Church of Rome, and what else is determined in the Bull of Leo, offering in other things to giue Germany satisfaction. And hee desired his Maiestie not to giue eare to the propose of any thing not fit to be granted, without the priuitie of other Nations, to auoyd all dangerous diuision in Christendome. It is necessa∣rie to make particular mention of the things that passed in that Diet, be∣cause that was the principall cause, which induced the Pope not onely to consent, as before, but to vse all endeuours that the Councell might be cele∣brated; and which assured the Protestants, that neither in Councell, nor in any other place, where any Minister of the Pope was present, they could hope to obtaine any thing. The first action began the fifth of April; and it was deliuered in the Em∣perours name, that his Maiestie, seeing the Turke entred into the bowels of Germany (the cause whereof was the diuision of the States of the Empire for the difference in religion) had alwayes sought a meanes of pacification; and that of the Councel seeming vnto him most commodious, he went pur∣posely into Italy to treat thereof with Pope Clement: and after, not being able to bring it to effect, he returned, and went in person to Rome, to make the same negotiation with Pope Paul, in whom he found much readinesse. But not being able to effect any thing, by reason of diuers impediments of warre, hee had finally called that Diet, and besought the Pope to send a Le∣gat thither. The first acti∣on of the Diet in Ratisbon. Now he desired nothing but that some composition might be made, and that some small number of godly and learned men might bee chosen on either side, to conferre vpon the controuersies, in friendly maner, without preiudice of either of the parties, and propose to the Diet the means of concord, that all being consulted with the Legate, the wished conclu∣sion might be attained. Suddenly there arose a controuersie betweene the Catholiques and Protestants, about the manner of choosing those that should treat. Wherefore the Emperour beeing desirous that some good should bee done, demanded, and obtayned of either partie, power to nomi∣nate the persons, desiring them to beleeue he would do nothing but for the common good. For the Catholiques he elected Iohn Ecchius, Iulius Flugius, The names of the disputants. and Iohn Groperus; and for the Protestants, Philip Melancthon, Martin Bucer, and Iohn Pistoria: whom he called to him, and grauely admonished them to abandon all passion, and to ayme onely at the glory of God. He made Frede∣rique, the Prince Palatine, and Granuel Presidents of the Colloquie, adding vnto them some others, that all might passe with the greater dignity. When the assembly was made, Granuel published a booke, and said it was giuen to A booke gi∣uen to the Emperour as a for the future concord. the Emperor, by some godly and learned men, as a direction for the future concord, and that his will was they should read and examine it, that it might serue for an argument and subiect of what they ought to treat, that that which pleased all, might be confirmed, that which displeased all, might bee corrected, and in that wherein they assented not, meanes might be vsed to reduce them to an agreement. The booke contained 22. Articles. The cre∣ation of man, the integrity of nature, free will, the cause of originall sinne, Iustification, the Church, her signes, the signes of the word of God, penance after sinne, the authoritie of the Church, the interpretation of the Scripture, the Sacraments, Order, Baptisme, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Matrimony, extreame Vnction, charitie, the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie, the articles determined by the Church, the vse, administration, and ceremonies of the Sacraments, Ecclesiasticall discipline, and discipline of the people. It was read and examined, and some things were approoued, some things a∣mended by common consent, and in others they could not agree. And these were, the ninth, of the power of the Church, the foureteenth, of the Sa∣crament of Penance, the eighteenth of the Hierarchie, the 19. of the ar∣ticles determined by the Church, the 21. of single life. In these they differed, and either partie wrote his opinion. This being done in the assembly of all the Princes, the Emperour required the opinions of them all concerning the things agreed on, and the different opinions of the Collocutors, and withall proposed the amendement of the state of the Common-wealth, as well ciuill as Ecclesiasticall. The Bishops re∣iected absolutely the Booke of the concord, and whatsoeuer was done in the Colloquie, vnto whom the other Electors and Catholike Princes, desirous of peace, agreed not: and it was concluded, that the Emperour; as aduocate of the Church, together with the Apostolike Legat, should examine the things agreed on, and if any thing were obscure, should cause it to bee expounded; and should treat with the Protestants, that concerning the things in contro∣uersie, they should consent to some Christian forme of concord. Caesar im∣parted all to the Legat, and vrged him that the Ecclesiasticall State ought to be reformed. The Legat, after he had considered of all the businesse, an∣swered in writing not more perspicuously then the ancient Oracles; in this The Legate speaketh like Oracle. manner. That hauing seene the Booke presented to the Emperour, and what was written by the deputies of the Colloquie, as well the explications of ei∣ther partie, as the exceptions of the Protestants, it seemed that the Protestants, differing in-certaine articles from the common consent of the Church (in which not withstanding he despaired not, that, with the helpe of God, they might be induced to agree) nothing should be ordered concerning the resi∣due, but referred to the Pope, and the Apostolicall Sea, who, either in the generall Councell, or some other way, if there shall bee cause, will define them according to the Catholique trueth, with regard vnto the times, and what shall bee expedient for the Christian Common-wealth, and for Germanie. But for reformation of the Cleargie, hee promised all readinesse, and, to The exhorta∣tation of the Legat Conta∣rini made to the Pr s. that end, called into his house all the Bishops, and made them a long exhor∣tation. First for their manner of liuing, that they should abstaine from all scandall, and appearance of luxurie, auarice, and ambition. For their familie, that they should vnderstand that from it the people made coniecture of the manners of the Bishop, that, the better to keepe their flocke, they should re∣maine in the most inhabited places of the Diocesse, & haue diligent watch∣men else-where, that they should visite the Diocesses, giue the Benefices to honest and fit men, spend their reuenues vpon the necessitie of the poore, flying not onely luxurie, but all superfluous pompe, make prouision of godly, learned, discreet, and not contentious Preachers, procure that the yonger sort be well brought vp, because by this meanes the Protestants draw all the Nobilitie vnto them. Hee committed this Oration to writing, and gaue it to the Emperour, to the Bishops, and the Princes: which gaue occa∣sion to the Protestants to taxe the answere made to Caesar, together with the exhortation made to the Prelats, alledging for their motiue, that the wri∣ting being published, they should seeme to approoue it, if they dissembled the knowledge of it. His answere made to the Emperour pleased not the Catholiques, because it appeared that he did approue the things agreed on in the Conference. But the Emperour related in publique Diet whatsoeuer was done vntill The Empe∣rours opinion concerning Religion, to which the La∣g doth a∣gree. that time, and communicated vnto them the writing of the Legat, and con∣cluded, that hauing vsed all possible diligence, hee saw not what more could be done, but only to deliberate, whether (sauing the recesse of the Diet of Ausburg) the articles agreed on in this conference, ought to bee receiued, as being Christian, nor any more to be disputed of, at the least vntill a generall Councell, which shall be held very shortly, (of which opinion the Legat see∣med to bee) or, in case there were no Councell, vntill a Diet, where all the controuersies of religion may bee exactly handled. The Electors approoued for good, and vndoubtedly profitable, that the Articles agreed on in the conference, should by all be receiued, vntill the time of the Councell; in which they may bee examined againe, or, in case that faile, in a Nationall Councell, or Diet, because it would serue to make a per∣fect The answere of y e Electors. reconciliation in the Articles, not accorded as yet. But yet they prayed his Maiestie to goe on, if there were any hope to make any further agreement in that Diet: and if opportunity serued not, they thought it good, that, by his fauour, a generall or Nationall Councell, might bee called in Germanie, as soone as might bee, that the vnion might wholly be established. The Pro∣testants The answere of the Pro∣testants. made the same answere, onely declaring themselues, that as they de∣sired a free and Christian Councell in Germanie, so they could not consent to any, where the Pope and his Ministers, had power to heare and iudge the causes of religion. But the Bishops and some few other Catholike Princes, The answere of the BB. and of the Catho∣like Princes. answered after another manner; first, confessing that in Germanie, and other Nations, there were many abuses, sectes, and heresies, which could not bee extirpated without a generall Councell; adding, that they could not assent to any change in religion, ceremonies, and rites, seeing that the Popes Legate offereth a Councell within a short time, and that his Maiestie will treate with his Holinesse thereof. But in case the generall Councell could not bee celebrated, they desired that the Pope and Emperour would ordaine a Na∣tionall Councell in Germanie; which if they would not doe, another Diet should bee assembled, to roote out the errours; and that they were resolued to adhere to the old religion, as it is contained in the Scripture, Councels, doctrine of the Fathers, and also in the Imperiall Recesses, especially in that of Ausburg. That they will neuer consent to receiue the Articles accorded in the Colloquie, because some of them are superfluous, as are the 4. first, and because there are words in them, not conformable to the custome of the Church; besides some positions, which are partly damnable, and partly to be tempered; and because the Articles accorded, are of lesse moment, and those of consequence remaine in controuersie: and because the Catholikes of the Col∣loquie had granted too much to the Protestants, whereby the reputation of the Pope, & the Catholike states was wounded. They concluded it was better the acts of the Colloquie were left to their place, and whatsoeuer belonged to religion, deferred to a generall Councell, or Nationall, or a Diet. Not the opi∣nion only of the Catholikes, that the Emperors proposition was too aduan∣tagious for the Protestants, caused them to make this answere, but also because the three Catholike Doctors of the Colloquie dissented amongst themselues. But the Legate vnderstanding that the Emperour had named him, as consenting to the establishment of the things accorded, as well for feare, as at the instance of the Ecclesiastikes of the Diet, he went to the Emperour and complained, that his answere was ill interpreted, and that hee was bla∣med The Legate complaineth that his an∣swere was mistaken. for hauing giuen consent, that the things accorded, should be tolerated vntill the Councell; that his minde was, that nothing should be resolued on, but all sent to the Pope, who promised by the faith of a good Pastour, and Vniuersall Bishop, that all should bee determined by a generall Councell, or by some other way, equiualent, sincerely, and without passion, not hastily, but maturely, alwayes ayming at the formed of God. That his Holinesse had to the same end, in the beginning of his Papacie, sent letters and Nuncij to the Princes, to celebrate the Councell, and after did intimate it, and sent his Legats to the place; and if hee had endured so many ireaties of religion in Germanie, with small reuerence of his authoritie, to whom onely it apper∣taineth to make them, it was vpon his Maiesties purpose, and promise that all should bee for the beste, that it was vnreasonable, that Germanie should as∣sume that to her selfe, with iniurie to the Apostolik Sea, which belongeth to all nations of Christendome. Wherefore the Popes clemencie was no lon∣ger to be abused, by concluding that in a Diet, which belongeth to him, and the Church vniuersall, but sayd, that the booke, and all the actes of the Colloquie, together with the opinions of both parties, was to bee sent to Rome, and the determination of his Holinesse to bee expected. And not sa∣tisfied with this, hee published a third writing, in which hee sayd, that his writing giuen to the Emperour, concerning the treatie of the Colloquie be∣ing diuersly interpreted, some expounding it, as if hee had consented to the Articles accorded of, vntill the generall Councell, and others vnderstanding that hee had referred both these, and all other things to the Pope, to the end there may remaine no doubt heerein, he declareth that in the writing he had no intention to decide any thing in this businesse, nor that any Article should bee receiued or tolerated vntill the future Councell, and least of all did then decide or define them, but had referred the whole treatie, and all the Articles thereof vnto the Pope, as hee did referre them still. Which ha∣uing declared to the Emperour by word, hee would also declare and con∣firme it to the whole world in writing. And hee was not contented with this, but, considering that all the Ca∣tholike Princes, euen the Ecclesiastikes, did agree in demanding a Nationall Councel, and that, in his instruction, he had straight charge from the Pope to oppose himselfe when that should bee vrged, though they would doe it with his authoritie, and with the presence of the Apostolicall Legats to shew what danger it would be to mens soules, and iniurie to the Popes authoritie, from whom would be taken the power which God hath giuen him, and granted to one Nation; to put the Emperor in mind how himselfe, being in Bolonia, dete∣sted a Nationall Councel, knowing it to be pernicious to the Imperiall autho∣ritie, because the Subiects, incouraged by seeing power giuen them to inno∣uate in matter of religion, would thinke to doe the like in the temporall state, and that his Maiestie, after the yeere 1532. would neuer haue an Imperiall Diet celebrated in his presence, lest he should giue occasion of demanding a Nationall Councell: he treated most seriously with the Emperour, and with euery one of the Princes, and besides published a writing addressed to the Catholikes. Hee said therein that hee had diligently considered what a pre∣iudice it would bee, if the controuersies of doctrine should bee referred to The Legate publisheth a writing to disswade all treaties about rel ion in a Nationall Councell. the Councell of a Nation, and thought it his duetie to admonish them, that they should by all meanes remooue that clause, for that it was most mani∣fest that questions of faith could not bee determined in a Nationall Coun∣cell, because it concerned the Vniuersall state of the Church; and if any thing were determined therein, it would bee voyde and of no force. And, as in not celebrating such a Councell (as hee was perswaded they would not) they should doe a thing most acceptable to his Holinesse, who is head of the Church, and of all Councels, so the celebration of it would bee most offensiue to him. That it was a cleere case; that by this meanes greater ∣ditions would arise in matter of Religion, as well in other Nations, as in that most noble Prouince. That hee would not omit this duetie, both to obey the instruction of his Holinesse, and not to bee wanting to the charge of Legation layd vpon him. The Princes answered this writing of the Legate, that it was in his The answere of the Prin∣ces to the wri∣ting. power to remedie all the inconueniences which might arise, by perswading his Holines; that a generall Councel might be intimated and celebrated with∣out any more procrastination. That by this meanes all occasion of a Nati∣onall Councell (which all the States of the Empire desired and prayed for) would bee remooued. But if the generall Councell, so often promised, and last of all by himselfe, were not brought to effect, the manifest necessi∣tie of Germanie required, that the controuersies should bee determined in a nationall Synod, or in an imperiall Diet, with the assistance of the Popes Legate. The Protestant Diuines answered also in a long writing, and said, The answere of the Prote∣stant Diuines. that neither greater seditions, nor any at all could arise, when the contro∣uersies of Religion shall bee composed according to the word of God, and manifest vices corrected according to the doctrine of the Scripture, and the vndoubted Canons of the Church. That to determine of faith hath ne∣uer been formerly denied to Nationall Councels, because CHRIST hath pro∣mised his assistance, where two or three shall bee assembled in his Name. That the number was great, not onely of Nationall Councels, but euen of a very few Bishops, which haue determined the controuersies, and ordered the manners of the Church in Syria, Greece, Affrique, Italie, France, and Spaine against the errours of Samosatenus, Arrius, the Donatists, Pelagius, and other heretiques; whose determinations cannot bee called voyde, of no force, and vaine, without impietie. That it hath beene granted to the Sea of Rome to bee the first, and to the Pope to haue the chiefest authoritie a∣mongst the Patriarkes; but that it is not found in any Father, that hee hath beene called head of the Church, or of the Councels. CHRIST onely is head; Paul, Apollos, and Cephas are but Ministers of the Church. That what may bee expected from Rome the discipline there obserued so many ages, and the tergiuersation to celebrate a lawfull Councel doe declare. But the Emperour, after long discussion, the 28 of Iuly made the Re∣cesse of the Diet, remitting the whole action of the Colloquie vnto the generall Councell, or National Synod of Germanie, or a Diet of the Em∣pire. He promised to goe into Italie, and to treate with the Pope for a Coun∣cell; which if hee could not obtaine either generall or Nationall, hee would intimate a Diet of the Empire within eighteene moneths, to settle the mat∣ters of Religion, and bee a meanes that the Pope should send thither a Le∣gate. Hee commanded the Protestants to receiue no new opinions, but those that were agreed on, and the Bishops to reforme their Churches. Hee commanded that the Monasteries should not bee destroyed, nor the goods of the Church vsurped, nor any man sollicited to change religion. And, to 1542 PAVL 3 CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. giue the Protestants greater satisfaction, hee added, that, concerning the do∣ctrines not as yet accorded, he prescribed them nothing; but that they ought not to destroy the Cloysters of the Monkes, but reduce them to a holy and Christian amendment, that the Ecclesiasticall goods should not bee v∣surped, but, left to the ministers; without regard of diuersitie of religions that no man should bee mooued to change his religion, but those receiued who change it willingly. Hee suspended also the Recesse of Ausburg, for as much as concerned religion, and the things depending thereon, vntill the controuersies were determined in a Councell or Diet. After the Diet was ended, Caesar passed into Italie, and discoursed with A conference betweene the Pope and Em∣perour in Lucca. the Pope in Lucca, concerning the Councell, and the Turkish warre, and concluded that the Pope should send a Nuncio into Germanie, to take reso∣lution both in the one matter and the other, in the Diet which should bee held in Spira in the beginning of the next yeere, and that the Councell should bee held in Ʋicenza, as was before appointed. The Pope signified the conclusion to the Senate of Ʋenice, who thought not fit, for diuers re∣spects, that so great a multitude should meete in the Citie, and should treate of the Turkish warre, as certainely they would haue done, either with a purpose to effect it, or at the least to make a faire shew. Whereupon they The Veneti∣ans will not suffer the Councell to be held in Vi∣cenza. answered, that, the case being altered by reason of an accord which they lately had made with the Turke, they could not continue in the same opi∣nion, because Soliman would suspect that they mooued the Christian Prin∣ces to conspire against him. Hereupon the Pope was constrained to al∣ter his deseigne. But the Cardnall Contarini was much calumniated in the Court of Rome, where an opinion arose, that hee was somewhat affected to The Legate Contarins was suspected of Lutheranisme Lutheranisme; and those that spake least hurt of him, sayd, that hee oppo∣sed not as much as hee ought, and that hee had put the Popes authoritie in hazard. The Pope also distasted his seruice, though hee were mightily defended by the Cardinall Fregoso. But at his returne to his Holinesse, whom hee found in Lucca expecting the Emperour, hee rendred an account of his Legation, and gaue absolute satisfaction. The yeere 1541. ended thus: and in the next the Pope sent Iohn Morone, Bishop of Modena, to Spira, where the Diet was held in presence of Fer∣dinand: 1542 Iohn Morone is sent Nun∣cio to the Di∣et of Spira. who, according to his commission, declared, that the Popes minde concerning the Councell, was the same as before; that is, that it should one day bee celebrated; that hee had suspended it by Caesars consent, to make way first to some concord in Germanie: but seeing this to bee in vaine, hee returned to his former opinion, not to deferre the celebration of it. But that hee could not consent to make it in Germanie, because hee meant to bee there in person, and that his age, and length of the way, and so great a change of the ayre hindered his going into that countrey. And that it seemed not more commodious for other Nations. Beside, that there was a great pro∣babilitie to feare, that the differences could not be handled without commo∣tions. Therefore, that Ferrara, Bolonia, or Piacenza (all great and most oppor∣tune cities) seemed to him more fit. But in case they liked them not, hee was contented to call it in Trent, a Citie at the Confines of Germanie. That his will was to begin it at Whitsontide, but for the straightnesse of the time hee had prorogued it to the thirteenth of August. Hee prayed them all to bee present there, and, laying aside all hatred, to handle the cause of God with sinceritie. Ferdinand, and the Catholike Princes thanked the Pope, and sayd, that, not being able to obtaine a fit place in Germanie, as Ratibon or Col∣len, they were contented with Trent. But the Protestants would not agree Trent is na∣med for the place of the Councel, but the Prote∣stants would not consent. ther that the Councell should be intimated by the Pope, or that Trent should be the place, which was the cause why nothing was determined in that Diet concerning the Councell. Howsoeuer, the Pope sent out a Bull of the intimation, the two and twentieth of May this yeere; wherein, hauing declared his desire to pro∣uide The Pope publisheth the Bull of the int against the euils of Christendome, hee sayd, hee had alwayes thought vpon the temedies: and finding none more fit then a Councell, hee was constantly resolued to call it: and, making mention of the Conuocation at Mantua, then of the suspension, after of the Conuocation at Vicenza, and of the other suspension made in Genua, and finally of that other during plea∣sure, hee went on to shew the reasons that induced him to continue the same suspension vntill then. These were, Ferdinends warre in Hungary, the rebellion of Flanders against the Emperour, and the things that happened in the Diet of Ratubon, expecting a time appointed by God for this worke. But considering in the end, that euery time is acceptable to his diuine Maie∣stie, when holy things are handled, hee resolued to expect no other consent of the Princes; and because hee could not haue Ʋicenza, beeing willing to giue satisfaction to Germanie concerning the place, and vnderstanding they desired Trent, though a Citie more within Italy seemed to him more com∣modious, yet his fatherly charity inclined his will to yeeld to their demands; and hee chose Trent to celebrate there an Oecumenicall Councel the first of Nouember next; and that he interposed that time, that his Decree might be published, and the Prelates haue time to arriue at the place. Therefore, by the authoritie of the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost, and the Apo∣stles Peter and Paul, which himselfe exerciseth on earth, by the counsell and consent of the Cardinals, all suspensions being remooued, hee intimateth an holy, Oecumenicall, and generall Councell in that Citie, a fit place, free, and opportune for all Nations, to bee begun the first of that moneth pro∣secuted, and ended: calling all Patriarches, Arch-bishops, Bishops, Abbats, and those who by law or priuiledge, haue voyce in generall Councels, and commanding them by vertue of the Oath made to him and the Apostolique Sea, and by holy obedience, and vnder the punishments, by law or custome to bee inflicted vpon the disobedient, to bee there in person, or, in case they shall bee hindered, to make faith of the hinderance, or send proctors: pray∣ing the Emperour, the most Christian King, and all other Kings, Dukes, and Princes, to bee personally present, or, in case they cannot, to send Am∣bassadours, men of grauitie and authoritie, and to cause the Bishops and Prelates of their Kingdomes and Prouinces to goe thither: desiring further of the Prelates and Princes of Germany, for whose sake the Councell is inti∣mated in the place they wished, that the things may bee handled which be∣long to the trueth of Christian religion, to the correction of manners, to the peace and concord of Christian Princes and people, and oppression of the Barbarians and Infidels. The Bull was presently sent from Rome to allso inches, but went not forth in a fit time. For Francis the French King, hauing in Iuly denounced warre, in threatning tormes; against the Emperour and published it by a booke which boo hee made it at the same instant in Brabant, The French King maketh warre against the Emperor. The Emperor excepted a∣gainst the Bul, and complay∣neth of the French King. nt, and . The Emperour, hauing receiued the Bull of the Councell, answered the Pope, that he was not satisfied with it. For hauing neuer refused any paines, danger, or dost, that the Councel ght bee ended and contrarily the French King hauing alwayes endeauoured to hinder it, reseemed strange vnto him that they were compared and made equall in the Bul; and, rehearsing, all the iniuries which he protended to haue receiued from the King, added also that, in the last Diet at Spira, he had laboured by his Ambassadours to cherish the discords of religion, by promising friendship and fauour to either party. In fine, he referred it to his Holinesse to consider, if the actions of that King did ferue to remedie the mischiefes of the Christian Common-wealth, and to begin the Councell, which hee did euer crosse, for his priuate gaine, and had constrained him, who did perceiue it, to finde a way to reconcile the differences of religion. Therefore, in case the Councel shall not be celebra∣ted, that his Holinesse ought not to blame him, but the King, and denounce warre against him, if hee meant to assist the publique good: because this is the onely way, to call the Councell, establish religion, and regaine peace. The King, presaging what imputations would bee layd vpon him, for The French King waxeth cruell against the Prote∣stants, to free himselfe from the imputati∣ons laid vpon him by the Emperour. making a warre to the hurt of religion, and hinderance of the seruice of God, which might bee expected from the Councel, preuented it by publishing an Edict against the Lutheranes, commanding the Parliaments to execute it in∣uiolably, with seuere charge that all should bee appeached, who had bookes differing from the Church of Rome, that made secret conuenticles, that trans∣gressed the commandements of the Church, and especially that obserued not the doctrine of meates, or prayed in any tongue but the Latine; and comman∣ded the Sorbonists to be diligent spies against them. Afterwards vnderstan∣ding the Emperours cunning, who assayed to incite the Pope against him, he coused the Lutheranes to be really proceeded against, and commanded that a forme to discouer and accuse them, should bee instituted in Paris, proposing punishments to the councealors of them, and rewards to the delators. After∣wards hauing full notice what Caesar had written to the Pope, he wrote also He writeth al∣so to the Pope against the Emperour. vnto him a long apologie for himselfe, and an inuectiue against the Empe∣rour, vpbraiding him with the surprise and sacke of Rome, and with the de∣rision added to the losse, by making processions in Spaine for the Popes deli∣uery, whom himselfe kept prisoner. Hee discoursed of all the offences be∣tweene himselfe and the Emperour, and laid all the blame on him. Hee con∣cluded that it could not bee ascribed to him, that the Councel of Trent was hindered or foreslowed, because hee gained nothing by it, and that this was farre from the examples of his ancestors, by whose imitation hee vsed all en∣deauours to preserue religion, as the edicts and executions made in France did very well demonstrate. Therefore hee prayed his Holinesse, not to be∣leeue the calumnies, and to assure himselfe that hee should finde him ready to assist him in all occasions, either of his owne, or of the Church of Rome. The Pope not to preiudice the office of a common Father, whereof his predecessours did euer make ostentation, sent Legats to both the Princes, to mediate a pacification, Cardinall to the Emperour, and to The Pope as deth to or paci . the French King to pray them to forget priuate iniuries, for the publique cause, and to bee reconciled, that their discords may not hinder the peace of religion. To Cardinall Contarini, who immediatly dyed, he substituted Car∣dinall Cardinal Con∣tarini dieth. Viseus, whereat the Court led because hee was not gracious with the Emperour, to whom he was sent. And though the warre waxed hote in so many places, yet the Pope thinking that the wronged his reputati∣on The Pope sen∣deth 3., Legats to Trent. 154 if he went not on with the Councell, the 26 of August, this yeere 1542. sent his Legats to Trent, to the Synode which he had intimated, Peter Paule Parisius, Iohn Morone, and Reginald , the first as a learned, and practised Canonist, the second, as a man fit for negotiation, the third, to shew that, howsoeuer the King of England was alienated from the subiection of Rome, yet the kingdome had a great part in the Councel. To these he dispatched the mandat of the Legation, commanding them to goe thither, and to enter∣taine the Prelates and Ambassadours who came vnto them, without making any publike act before they had receiued instructions, which hee meant to send them in time conuenient. The Emperour also vnderstanding the deputation of the Legats, though The Emperor sendeth Am∣bassadours and Prelats to Trent, and so doth the Pope; but the Coun∣cell doth not begin. as the case did then stand, he hoped for no good, yet that the Pope might do nothing to his preiudice, he sent thither for his Ambassadours, Don Diego, his resident in Ʋenice, and Nicholas Granuel, together with his Sonne Anthony, Bi∣shop of Arras, and somefew Bishops of the kingdome of Naples. The Pope, besides his Legats, sent thither some Bishops, whom he esteemed most faith∣full, with order not to make too much hast in their iourney. As well the Popes men as the Emperours, arriued at the time appointed. These presen∣ted to the Legats the Emperours mandat, and desired that the Councel should be opened, and the businesse begun. The Legats make delay, and said, that it would be a dishonour to the Councell, to begin it with so small a number, especially where Articles of so great importance were to be handled, as were those which the Lutherans did question. The Imperialists replied, that the matter of reformation might well bee handled, which was more necessarie, and not subiect to so many difficulties. The others alleaged, that it must bee applyed to the vse of diuers Nations, so that the assistance of all was more necessarie therein. In fine they passed to protestations, to which the Legates not answering, but referring the answere to the Pope, no conclusion at all was made. Granuell is sent to the in No∣remberg, and Don Dieg, re∣maineth in Trent. The end of that yeere approching, the Emperor gaue order to Granuell to go to the Diet, which was to be held in Noremberg in the beginning of the next, and to Don Diego to remaine in Trent, and to labour that the Councel should begin, or at the least, that those that were assembled should not depart, that in the Diet he might make vse of that shadow of the Councell. In Noremberg Granuel proposed the warre against the Turkes, and that the Emperor might bee assisted against the French King. The Protestants replied, demanding that 1543 PAVL 3. C HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. the differences of Religion might be composed, and the oppressions which the ludges of the Chamber vsed against them vnder other pretences, though indeed for that cause, might be taken away. Granuel answered, that it neither could, nor ought to be done in that place and time, because a Councell was assembled in Trent to that end. But the excuse was in vaine, because the Pro∣testants The Prote∣stants refuse to go to Trent and D. Diego returneth to Venice. approued not the Councell, and sayd plainely, that they would not be there. The Diet ended without conclusion, and Don Diego returned to his Ambassage at Ʋenice, though the Legats intreated that, to giue reputation to the businesse, he would entertaine himselfe there, vntill they receiued answer from the Pope. The Emperours Ambassadour being gone, the Bishops of the Empire fol∣lowed; The Legats being left a∣lone were re∣called. and all the others, hauing leaue to depart vnder diuers colours; at the last, the Legats, after they had beene there seauen moneths, without doing anything, were recalled by the Pope. And this was the end of that Congre∣gation. The Emperor, being parted from Spaine by sea to go into Germany by the way of Italy, the Pope resolued to speake with him some where, and de∣sired it should be in Bolonia. And to this end he sent Peter Aloisius his sonne to Genua, to inuite him. But because his Maiestie would not goe out of his way; not loose time in his voyage, he sent the Cardinall Farnese to meet him, and pray him to goe by the way of Parma, where the Pope might expect him. But after there being difficultie how the Emperour might enter into that Citie the twenty one of Iune 1543. they met in Busseto: a Castle belonging to the Palauicini, scituate vpon the riuer Tarus, betweene Parma and Pia∣cenza. 1543 The Pope and Emperour meete in Bus∣seto. The ends of them both suffered not that the businesse of the Coun∣cell, and of Religion should be the principall treatie betweene them. But the Emperour being wholly bent against the French King laboured to incite the Pope against him, and to haue money from him for the warre. The Pope, seruing himselfe vpon this occasion, was wholy set vpon the gaining The Pope see∣keth to gaine Milan. of Milan for his Nephewes; wherein hee was assisted by Margarite, bastard daughter to the Emperour, married to Octauius Farnese, the Popes Nephew, and in that respect, made Dutchesse of Camerino. The Pope promised the Emperour to combine with him against the French King, to make ma∣ny Cardinals of his nomination, to pay him for some yeeres 150000. crownes, leauing also in his hands the Castles of Milan and Cremona. But because the Imperialists required a million of ducats for the present, and an∣other million vpon short dayes of payment, nothing could bee concluded: and in regard the Emperour could not longer tarrie, it was agreed to conti∣nue the treatie, by meanes of the Popes Ministers, who should follow the Emperour. Caesar shewed he was satisfied with the Councell, that by the sending of Legats, and assistance of those few Prelats, the Catholiques of Germany at the least had knowen his ready mind: and, because the impedi∣ments might be imputed to the French King, he concluded that the remedie He mistrustes the Emperour and turneth to the French King. was not to be thought vpon, vntill it did appeare how the warre proceeded. They parted with great demonstrations of mutuall satisfaction; yet the Pope mistrusted the Emperour, and from that time turned his mind toward the French King. But while he was thus doubtfull, the league betweene the Emperour and the King of England against France, was published, which constrained the Pope wholly to alienate himselfe from him. For hee saw how much that league preiudiced his authoritie, being contracted with one excommunica∣ted, anathematized by him, cursed, destinated to eternall damnation, a schis∣matique, depriued of his Kingdome and dominions, whose confederation A league be∣tweene the Emperour and King of Eng∣land. made with whom soeuer was void, against whom also all Christians, Princes were bound by his commandement to take armes, and, which most impor∣ted, that still remaining more contumacious, and openly despising his au∣thoritie, The Pope was much of∣fended with the league. this euidently shewed to the world that the Emperour bare no re∣spect vnto him, neither spirituall nor temporall, and gaue example to all, to make no account of his authoritie. And the affront seemed to him the greater, because Clement, who might easily haue temporized in that cause, to please the Emperour, and for his interests, had proceeded against that King, who otherwise was well affected, and deserued well of the Apostolike Sea. To weigh downe these offences, the Pope put in the other ballance, that the French King had made so many lawes and edicts before named, to preserue religion and his authoritie. Vnto which was added that the Pa∣risian Diuines the first of August, assembling the people by the sound of a Trumpet, published fiue and twentie heads of Christian doctrine, propo∣sing the bare conclusions and determinations, without adding reasons, perswasions, or grounds, but onely prescribing, as it were by authoritie, what they would haue beleeued; which were printed, and sent through all France, confirmed by the Kings letters, vnder most grieuous punishments, against whosoeuer spake or taught other wise, with another new Decree to make inquisition against the Lutherans. These things the rather plea∣sed the Pope, because he knew the King did them, not so much for the rea∣son related before, that is, to iustifie himselfe to the world that hee made not warre with the Emperour to fauour the Lutherans doctrine, nor to hin∣der their extirpation, but principally to please him, and for reuerence of the Apostolicall Sea. But the Emperour knowing the Popes complaints, answered, that the The Empe∣rors answere to the Popes complaints. French King hauing made a League with the Turke to the preiudice of Christians (as the siege of Nizza in Prouence, made by the Ottoman Armie, guided by Polinus the Kings Abassadour, and the spoiles taken in the riuers of the Kingdome, well shewed) it was lawfull for him to vse, for his de∣fence, the helpe of the King of England, a Christian, though he acknowledge not the Pope; as also, by the same Popes leaue, himselfe and Ferdinand vsed the assistance of the Protestants, more auerse from the Apostolike Sea then that King; that the Pope, vnderstanding the League of the French King with the Turke, should haue proceeded against him. But hee saw well what difference was made. For the Turkisharmie, which had so much dam∣nified all the Christians wheresoeuer it went, passed friendly by the Popes riuers, yea going to Ostia to take in the fresh water on S. Peters day at night, for which all Rome, was in confusion, the Cardinall of Carpi, who commanded in the Popes name that was absent, put them out of feare, being secure by the intelligence which he had with the Turkes. The warre and these complaints put to silence the treaties about the 1544 PAVL. 3. CHARLES HENRY FRANCIS. councel for this yeere, which the next 1544 returned into the field, & began in the Diet of Spira, where the Emperour rehearsing the paines which he for∣merly took to remedy the discords in religion & finally the care & diligence vsed in Ratisbon, be put them in mind how, it not being then possible to com∣pose the controuersies, all was finally referred to a general or National Coun∣cel 1544. The treaty a both the Cou ∣cell began a∣gaine in the Diet of . or a Diet, and that afterwardes the Pope at his instance had intimated the Councel where himself resolued to be in person & would haue performed it if the war of France had not hundered him. But now in regard the discord in re∣ligion remaineth the same & is accompained with the same inconueniences; it is not time to deferre the remedy any longer, for which he gaue order they should consider, and propose to him what way they thought to be best. The businesse of religion was much considered on But because the affayres of the warre pressed them more, it was referred to the Diet; which was to bee ce∣lebrated in December, and in the meane space, a Decree was made, that the Emperour should giue charge to some honest and learned men to write a forme of reformation, and that all the Princes should doe the same, that all being conferred together, that might bee determined in the Diet by common consent, which was to be obserued vntil the future generall Coun∣cell, to be held in Germany, or vntill a Nationall. In the meane space that all should remaine in peace, without raising any tumult for Religion, and the Churches of the one and the other should enioy their goods. This Recesse did not generally please the Catholikes; but some of them, because they in∣clined to the Protestants opinion, approoued this middle way. Those that were not contented, seeing their number to be small, resolue to endure it. But the warre went on still; and the Popes disdaine conceiued for the league with England, did waxe greater, for that the Emperour had neuer The Popes disdaine a∣gainst the Emperour is increased. assented to any of those maine and ample matches offered him by the Car∣dinall Farnese, whom he sent Legate with him into Germany, concerning the grant of the Dutchie of Milan to the Familie of the Farnesi; and, that be∣ing to assist in the Diet of Spira, he would not suffer the Cardinall Legate to follow him thither for feare of offending the Protestants. And finally, considering the Decree made in the Diet, so preiudiciall to him and the A∣postolique sea, he was more offended, because hee saw his hopes lost, and his authoritie and reputation much diminished, and iudged it necessarie to shew he was sensible of it. And though on (the other side hee considered that his partie in Germany was weakened, and was counselled by his most inward friends to dissemble, yet finally, beeing assured, that by declaring himselfe openly against Caesar, hee did more straitly binde the French King to maintaine his reputation, hee resolued to begin from wordes to take occasion to passe to deeds, as the coniunctures should comport. And the fifth of August he wrote a great long letter to the Emperor; the substance whereof was; That hauing vnderstood what decrees were made The Pope writeth a long angry letter to the Empe∣rour. in Spira, his duty and fatherly charitie did inforce him to tell him his opini∣on, that he might not follow the example of Ely the Priest, whom God se∣uerely punished for his too much indulgence towards his sonnes. That the Decrees of Spira were dangerous for the Emperours soule, and extream∣ly troubled the Church; that hee should not violate the rules obserued by Christians, which command that, in the cause of religion, all should bee re∣ferred to the Church of Rome: and yet hee, not esteeming the Pope, who onely, by the law of God and man, hath power to call Councels. And to de∣cree in spirituall matters, was willing to thinke of assembling a Generall of Nationall Councell; and hath suffered Idiots and Heretiques to iudge of re∣ligion: hath made decrees concerning sacred goods, restored to honour the rebels of the Church, whom he had condemned by his owne Edicts: that he is willing to beleeue that hee hath not done these things by his owne inclination, but by the pernicious counsell of those that beare ill will to the Church of Rome, and that he complaineth of this, that he hath yeelded vnto them; that the Scripture is full of examples of the wrath of God, against the vsurpers of the office of the High Priest, of Vzza, Dathan, Abiron, and Core, of King Ozias, and others. That it is not a sufficient excuse to say, the De∣crees are but temporary, vntill the Councel onely. For though the thing done be holy, yet in regard of the person that did it, it not belonging to him, it is wicked. That God hath alwayes exalted those Princes, that haue beene deuoted to the sea of Rome, Head of all Churches, Constantine, the Theodosij, and Charles the Great: and contrarily hath punished those that haue not gi∣uen due respect vnto it. Examples hereof are Anastasius, Mauritius, Constan the 2. Pilip, Leo, and others; and Henry the 4. was for this cause chastised by his owne sonne; as also Fredericke the 2. by his. And not Princes onely, but whole Nations haue beene punished for it; the Iewes for putting to death Christ the Sonne of God; the Grecians for hauing many wayes contemned his Vicar: which things he ought the more to feare, because he is descended from those Emperours, who haue receiued more honour from the Church of Rome, then they haue giuen it. That he commendeth him for desiring the amendment of the Church, but withall doth aduise him to leaue the charge thereof to him, to whom God hath giuen it. That the Emperour is a Mini∣ster, but not a Gouernour, nor an Head. He added, that hee desired the re∣formation, and hath declared it often by intimating the Councel, whensoe∣uer any sparke of hope hath appeared that it might be assembled, and though in vaine vntill then, yet hee had not beene wanting to his duety, desiring much a Councel, which is the only remedy against all mischiefes, as well for the generall good of Christendome, as the particular of Germany, which hath more neede thereof. That it hath beene intimated already, though de∣ferred vntill a more commodious time, by reason of the warres. That it be∣longeth to the Emperour himselfe, to giue way that it may bee celebrated, by making peace, or deferring the warre, while matters of religion are handled in the Councel. That hee should obey these fatherly commandes, exclude from the Imperiall Diets all disputes about religion, and referre them to the Pope, ordaine nothing concerning Ecclesiasticall goods, reuoke the grantes made to the rebels against the Sea of Rome; other∣wise to performe his owne duety, that he shall be forced to vse greater seuerity against him then hee would. THE HISTORIE OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. THE SECOND BOOKE. T He Warre betweene the Emperour and the French The Emperor is wholly incli∣ued to peace, which was cō∣cluded the 24. of September. King lasted not long. For the Emperor saw plainely, that while he was busied in that, and his brother in the other against the Turke, Germanie so much increased in libertie, that the Imperiall name would not be e∣steemed within a short time; and that so long as hee made Warre in France, he imitated Esops dogge, who following the shadow, lost both it and the bodie. Whereupon he hearkened to the propositions of peace made by the French men, with designe not onely to be freed from that impediment, but, by the Kings meanes, to accommodate the Turkish affaires, and applie himselfe vnto Germanie. The foure and twentieth of September the peace was con∣cluded betweene them, and amongst other things they both capitulated to defend the old Religion, and to labour for the vnion of the Church, and re∣formation of the Court of Rome, from whence all the dissensions are deri∣ued, and that, for this purpose, the Pope should ioyntly be requested to call the Councell, and the French King should send to the Diet of Germanie, to perswade the Protestants to accept it. The Pope was not afraide of the ca∣pitulation for the Councell, and reformation of the Court, being assured that whensoeuer they began that enterprise, by reason of their diuers ends and interests, they would not long agree: neither did he doubt, but that the designe being to be executed by a Councell, he would so accommodate euery treatie, that his authoritie should be amplified. But he thought that in case he should call the Councell at their request, the world would imagine he was constrained, which would bring much dishonour to his reputation, and incouragement to him that designed the moderation of the Papall power. Therefore not expecting to be preuented by any of them, and dis∣sembling The Pope dis∣sembleth his suspicions. the suspicions conceiued against the Emperour, euen those that were most important (which the peace made without his knowledge, with points preiudiciall to his authoritie put into his head) he set forth a Bull, in which he inuited the whole Church to reioyce for the peace, by which the onely impediment of the Councell was remooued, which he established a∣gaine in Trent, giuing order it should begin the 15. of March. He saw the terme was straight, and not sufficient to giue notice through∣out, much lesse to giue the Prelates space to put themselues in order, and make the iourney: Yet he thought it aduantage, that, in case it were to bee celebrated, it should beginne with few, and those Italians, Courtiers, and his dependants, whom hee had solicited to bee there first, because the man∣ner of proceeding in the Councell should bee handled in the beginning The Popes Bull of the conuocation of the Coun∣cell. (which is the principall, yea the onely thing to preserue the Pontificall au∣thoritie) vnto whose determination they who daily arriued would be con∣strained to stand. That it was no maruaile that a generall Councell should begin with a few: for so it was in that of Pisa and Constance, which neuerthe∣lesse had an happie progresse. And hauing penetrated the true cause of ma∣king the peace, he wrote to the Emperour, that he had vsed preuention and celeritie to intimate the Councell, to doe him seruice. For knowing that his Maiestie was constrained, by reason of the French warre, to permit, and pro∣mise many things to the Protestants, by intimating the Councell he had now giuen him a meanes to excuse himselfe in the Diet, which was to be in September, if, the Councell approaching, hee performed not what hee had promised to grant vntill the Councell. But the Popes hastinesse pleased not the Emperour, nor the reason gaue him satisfaction. He desired, for his reputation, to be the principall cause, The Emperor was displeased with the sud∣den intimation of the Coun∣cell. to make Germanie accept the Councell more easily, and for many other re∣spects. And therefore being able to doe nothing else, hee vsed all those termes, which might shew himselfe to be the Author, and the Pope the ad∣herent. He sent Ambassadors to all Princes to signifie the intimation, and to pray them to send Ambassadors to honour the meeting, and to confirme the Decrees which should there be made. And he set himselfe to make seri∣ous preparations, as if the enterprise had been his owne. He gaue diuers orders to the Prelates of Spaine and the Low Countries, and commanded, a∣mongst other things, that the Diuines of Louaine should assemble themselues together, to consider of the doctrines which were to be proposed; which 33. Points of doctrine col∣lected by the Diuines of Lo∣uaine. they reduced to three and thirtie heads, without confirming them by any place of Scripture, but explicating magisterially the conclusion only. These Heads were after confirmed by the Emperors Edict, & published, with com∣mand, that they should be defended and followed by all. And the Emperor The Emperor sheweth his distast against the Pope. concealed not his distaste against the Pope, in his speeches to the Nuncio, as well vpon that occasion, as in other audiences: yea, the Pope hauing created thirteene Cardinals in December, amongst which were three Spaniards, he forbad them to accept the armes, or vse the name or habit. The French King also assembled at Melun the Parisian Diuines, to con∣sult of the necessarie positions of the Christian Faith, to be proposed in the Councell: where there was much contention. For some desired to propose the confirmation of whatsoeuer was constituted in Constance and Basil, and the reestablishment of the pragmaticall Law; and others, doubting that the King would be offended by destroying the Concordate, made between him and Leo, which would necessarily follow, gaue counsell not to set that dis∣putation on foote. And afterwards, because there were diuers opinions in that Schoole concerning the Sacraments, vnto which some giue effectiue ministeriall vertue, and others not, euery one desiring that his opinion should bee an Article of Faith, nothing could be concluded, but that they should keepe themselues within compasse of the fiue and twenty Heads pub∣lished two yeeres before. But the Pope, signifying to the French King how little good will the Em∣peror bare him, desired him, for the maintenance of the Apostolike Sea, to send Ambassadors to the Councell as soone as might be, and charged his Nuncio residing with the Emperor, that, attending all occasions when the Protestants gaue him any distaste, he should offer all assistance from him, to recouer the Imperiall authoritie, with Spirituall and Temporall aydes. Whereof the Nuncio hauing had too many occasions, he so wrought, that The Emperor is reconciled to the Pope. the Emperor, finding he might haue need of the Pope both the one and the other way, remitted his rigiditie. And he gaue an argument thereof, by gran∣ting the new Cardinals leaue to assume the name and armes, and by giuing the Nuncio more gratefull audiences, and by conferring with him of the af∣faires of Germanie more then he was wont to doe. The Pope made great haste, not onely to call the Councell, but to dis∣patch The Pope dis∣patcheth the Legates to Trent. the Legates, whom he charged, that, for maintenance of their digni∣tie, they should not first send some substitute to receiue the first Prelates, as some aduised, that afterwards they might make their entrie with meetings and ceremonies, but would haue themselues to be the first, and to be there before the time. He deputed for his Legates, John Maria de Monte, a Bishop, Cardinall of Palestrina, Marcellus Ceruinus, Priest of the Holy Crosse, and Reginald Poole, Deacon of S. Mary in Cosmedin. In this man he chose Nobili∣tie of blood, and opinion of pietie, which commonly was had of him, and the rather for that he was an English man, to shew that all England did not rebell: in Marcellus constancie, and immoueable and vndaunted perseue∣rance, together with exquisite knowledge: in Monte, reallitie, and opennesse of minde, ioyned with such fidelitie to his patrons, that he could not prefer their interests before the safetie of his own conscience. These he dispatched with a Briefe of Legation, without giuing them, as the custome is, a Bull of Facultie, or any instruction in writing, being vncertaine, as yet, what com∣mission He giueth them no in∣structions. to giue them, meaning to gouerne himselfe, as the successes, and the Emperors proceeding should counsell him. So he made them depart with the Briefe onely. But besides the care the Pope had for the affaires of Trent, another of no lesse moment troubled his minde, concerning the Diet to be celebrated in Wormes, where he thought the Emperour would not be present, and doubt∣ing Cardinall Per∣nese is sent to the Diet of Wormes, and to the Emperour. that, being prouoked by the letter written vnto him, he would vnder∣hand cause some Decree to be made, more preiudiciall to his affaires then the former, or at the least giue way vnto it; he thought it necessarie to haue in that place a minister of authoritie and reputation, with title of Legate. But he feared an affront that way, in case the Diet should not receiue him with due honour. He found out a temper, to send to the Emperor the Cardinall Farnese his nephew, and make him passe by VVormes, and there to giue instru∣ctions to the Catholikes, and, after he had made the treaties that were con∣uenient, to goe forward toward the Emperour, and in the meane space to send Fabius Mignanellus of Siena, Bishop of Grosseto, for his Nuncio to reside with the King of the Romanes, with order to follow him to the Diet. Afterwards applying his minde to Trent, hee caused a consultation to be begun concerning the faculties to be giuen to the Legats. This had some difficultie, because they had no examples to follow. For in the Lateran Coun∣cell next preceding, the Pope was personally present; before in the Florentine A consultati∣on about the faculties to be giuen to the Legats. Eugenius the fourth was present, and that of Constance, where the Schisme was taken away, began with the presence of Iohn the 23. one of the three deposed Popes and ended with the presence of Martin the fifth. Before that, the Councell of Pisa was called by the Cardinals, and concluded by Alex∣ander the fifth. And in more ancient times, Clement the fifth was present in the Councell of Vienna; in the two Councels of Lions, Innocence the fourth, and Gregorie the tenth; and before these in the Lateran, Innocence 3. Onely the Councell of Basil, at that time when it obeyed Eugenius the fourth, was ce∣lebrated by Legats. But to imitate any thing that was there obserued was too bad a presage. Hee resolued to frame the Bull, with this clause, that he sent The Con∣tents of the Bull. them as Angels of peace to the Councell, which before hee had intimated in Trent: and gaue them full and free authoritie, that, for want of that, the celebration and continuation might not bee hindred, with facultie to pre∣side there, and to ordaine any Decrees or Statutes whatsoeuer, and to pub∣lish them in the Sessions according to custome: to propose, conclude, and execute whatsoeuer was necessary, to condemne errours and roote them out of all Prouinces and Kingdomes: to take knowledge, heare, decide, and determine the causes of heresie, and whatsoeuer else concerneth the Catho∣like faith: to reforme the State of the holy Church in all her members, aswel Ecclesiasticall as Secular: to make peace amongst Christian Princes, and to determine any thing else which may bee for the honour of God the increase of Christian faith: with authoritie to bridle, with censures and Ecclesiasti∣call punishments, all contradicting and rebellious persons, of what state or preeminence soeuer, though graced with Pontificall or Regall dignity; and to doe any thing else necessary and fit for the extirpation of heresies and er∣rours, and the reducing of those people that are aliened from the obedience of the Apostolique Sea, preseruation, and restauration of Ecclesiasticall li∣bertie; yet with condition, that in all things they proceede with consent of the Councell. But the Pope, considering not onely how to set the Councell forward, but of the meanes to dissolue it when it was begun, in case his seruice did The Bull for the dissoluti∣on of the Councell. require it, to prouide for himselfe in good time, he followed the example of Martin the fifth, who for feare of those encounters which happened to Iohn the 23. in Constance, when hee sent Nuncij to the Councell of Pania, gaue them a particular Briefe, with authoritie to prolong, dissolue, or translate it to what place they would; A secret to crosse all deliberation which was con∣trary to the interests of Rome. A few dayes after hee made another Bull, giuing the Legates power to transferre the Councell. This bare date the 22. of February, the same yeere, of which being to speake hereafter, when the The thirteenth of March 1545. the Cardinals of Monte and Santa Croce 1545 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. The Legates grant an Indul∣gence without authoritie. arriued in Trent, and were receiued by the Cardinall of that place. That day they made their publike entrie, and granted three yeeres, and so many times forty dayes of Indulgence, to those that were present. They had not this au∣thoritie from the Pope, but hoped he would ratifie the fact. They found no Prelate there, though the Pope had caused some to part from Rome, that they might be present at the prefixed time. The first thing the Legates did, was to consider of the contents of the Bull of Faculties giuen them, and resolued to keepe it secret, and sent aduice to Rome, that the condition, to proceede with consent of the Councell, tied them too much, and made them equall to euery pettie Prelate, and would breed great difficulties in the gouernment, in case it were necessarie to com∣municate euery particular vnto all; and said it was to giue too much libertie or rather licence to the multitude. It was perceiued in Rome that the reasons were good, and the Bull was corrected according to the aduice, and absolute The Bull was corrected. authority was giuen them. But the Legates, while they expected an answere, appoynted out the place for the Session, capable of 400. persons, within the Cathedrall Church. Don Diego de Mendoza, the Emperors Ambassador with the Republique Don Diego re∣turneth to Trent. of Ʋenice, arriued in Trent ten dayes after the Legates, to assist at the Coun∣cell, with large commission giuen him from Bruxels the twentieth of Fe∣bruarie, and was receiued by the Legates, assisted with the Cardinall Ma∣druccio, and three Bishops, who onely were then arriued; whose names are not to be omitted, because they were the first. And they were, Thomas Cam∣pegio Bishop of Feltre, the Cardinals nephew, Thomas of S. Felicius, Bishop of Caua, Friar Cornelius Mussus, a Franciscan, Bishop of Bitonto, the most e∣loquent Preacher of those times. Foure dayes after, Don Diego made his pro∣position in writing; which shewed the Emperors good disposition concer∣ning the celebration of the Councell, and that order was giuen to the Pre∣lates of Spaine to be there, who he thought were already in their iourney; he excused himselfe by reason of his indisposition for not being there be∣fore, desired that the actions of the Councell, and the reformation of man∣ners might begin, as was proposed two yeeres before in the same place, by the Lord Granuel and himselfe. The Legates answered in writing, com∣mending the Emperour, receiuing his personall excuse, and shewing their desire of the Prelates comming thither. And the proposition and answere were receiued by the parties vnto whom it belonged, in the points not pre∣iudiciall to the rights of their Princes respectiuely. A caution which giueth a manifest argument, with what charitie they treated in the proposition and answere, where there were onely words of pure complement, except the mention of reformation. The Legates not knowing which way to treate, made demonstration to The Legates desire to haue two sorts of let∣ters and a ci∣pher. proceed ioyntly with the Ambassadors and Prelates, and to communicate to them their most inward thoughts; whereupon when letters came from Rome or Germanie, they assembled all to reade them. But perceiuing that Don Diego equalized himselfe to them, and the Bishops presumed more then they were wont to doe at Rome, and fearing some inconuenience would arise when their number did encrease, they sent aduise to Rome that alwaies one letter should be written to bee shewed, and the secret things apart, because of the letters which they had receiued vntill then, they had made no vse but by their wit. They demanded also a cipher, to communicate the matters of greater moment. All which particularities, with many more that shall bee spoken of, hauing taken out of the Register of the letters of the Cardinall of Monte, I haue not beene willing to conceale them, because they serue to penetrate the depth of the treaties. The moneth of March beeing past, and the time, prefixed in the Popes Bull, to beginne the Councel expired many dayes, the Legates consulted a∣mongst themselues concerning the opening of it, and resolued to expect ad∣uise from Fabius Magnanellus, Nuncio with Ferdinand of what was handled in Wormes, and order from Rome, after the Pope had heard of the arriuall and proposition of Don Diego; and the rather, because they were ashamed to make so great a beginning with three Bishops onely. The Ambassadours of the King of the Romanes arriued the eight of April, and a solemne con∣gregation was made to receiue them. In that Don Diego would haue prece∣ded the Cardinall of Trent, and sate next the Legates, saying that in regard he represented the Emperour, he ought to sit in the same place where his Maie∣stie D. Diego would haue preceded the Cardinall of Trent. should. But not to hinder the businesse, they found out a way to place them so that it could not appeare who had the precedence. The Kings Ambassadours presented onely their Prince his letter, and de∣clared by word of mouth, his obseruance towards the Apostolique Sea and the Pope, his readinesse to fauour the Councell, and large offers: and they The Ambas∣sadours of the K. of the Ro∣manes are re∣ceiued in con∣gregation. added that hee would send a commission in forme, and persons better in∣structed. After this, the wished for aduise came to Rome and Trent, of the proposi∣tion made in the Diet the 24. of March by King Ferdinand, who was Presi∣dent there in the Emperours name, and of the negotiation which followed thereupon. The Kings proposition was, that the Emperor had made peace with the French King, that he might apply himselfe to cōpose the differences of religion, and prosecute the warre against the Turkes; from whom he had The proposi∣tion of Ferdi∣nand in the Diet. promise of assistance, and an approbation of the Councel, with a resolution to be there in person, or by his Ambassadors. That for this end, it being be∣fore prorogued, hee had dealt with the Pope to intimate it againe, and solici∣ted him to giue ayde against the Turkes. That he had obtained the intimati∣on of his Holinesse, and that Ambassadors sent from the Emperor and him∣selfe were already in Trent. That all the world knew what paines Caesar had taken to cause the Councel to bee celebrated; first with Clement in Bolonia, then with Paul in Rome, Genua, Nizza, Lucca, and Busseto. That according to the Decree of Spira, he had giuen order to men of learning and good con∣science, to compose a forme of reformation; which was accordingly perfor∣med. But it being a thing of great deliberation, and the time short, and the Turkish warre threatning them, the Emperour was resolued not to speake of this any more, but to expect how the Councel would proceed, and what might bee hoped from it, because it was suddenly to beginne, and in case no fruit appeared, hee might before the end of that Diet, intimate another to handle all that businesse, applying himselfe how to that which is of more importance, that is, the Turkish warre. This proposition made the Protestants very suspitious. For the peace of religion being to last vntill the Councell, they were in doubt that when they were exhausted, by contributions against the Turkes, they should be assailed, vpon pretence that the peace was ended by opening the Councel in Trent. The suspition of the Prote∣stants. Yet they demanded that the treatie begun should bee continued, alleadging that the time was long enough to him that feared God; or at least that a new peace should be established vntill a lawfull Councel, so often promised, such as that of Trent was not, for the reasons so many times rehearsed be∣fore. And they declared that they could not contribute, if they had not assurance of peace, not ed to the Popes Councell, which they had refused whensoeuer it was spoken of. And though the Ecclesiastiques did consent absolutely, that the cause of religion should be wholly remitted to the Coun∣cel, yet it was resolued to expect the Emperours answere before the con∣clusion. Three particulars in this action displeased the Pope and Legate which The Pope and the Legates were displea∣sed with three particulars in the proposi∣tion. were at Trent. One, that the Emperour arrogated to himselfe, to haue indu∣ced the Pope to celebrate the Councell, which argued small care of Religion in his Holinesse. The second, that he had induced the French King to con∣sent vnto it, which was no honour to his sanctitie, to whom this belonged. The third, that hee would still keepe the bit in his mouth by a future Diet, that, in case the Councel went not forward, hee should alwayes feare, that things concerning Religion should be treated of in the Diet. The Pope was perpetually troubled, not so much for the iniuries receiued from the Prote∣stants, as for the Emperours actions, which, as hee was wont to say, though they seemed fauourable, yet were more pernicious to religion, and his autho∣ritie, which could not be separated. Besides, it seemed he was alwayes in dan∣ger, that the Emperour would make some accord with the Dutch-men, to his preiudice. And thinking how to prouide a remedie, hee could finde none, but to set on foote a warre for Religion, because the Protestants would bee curbed, and the Emperour likewise intangled in a dangerous enterprise, and all speech of reformation and the Councell would bee buried in silence. He had great hope it would succeede, by that which his Nuncio wrote vnto him, that hee found in the Emperour great disdaine against the Protestants, and that he hearkened to his propositions to subdue them by force. For this re∣spect, beside that which was before related, and to hinder that no preiudiciall thing might bee done in the Diet, and to encourage and giue strength to his followers, another cause was added, more vrgent, because it belonged to his priuate interest. For being resolued to giue Parma and Piacenza to his son, The Pope is resolued to giue Parma and Piacenza to his sonne but feareth the Emperour. hee thought he could not doe it without great danger, if the Emperour con∣sented not; because he might find pretences, either for that those cities were formerly members of the Dutchie of Milan, or might say, the Church should not be damnified, whereof he was aduocate. To dispatch these businesses, he sent Cardinall Farnese into Germanie, with instructions necessary. But the Legats in Trent had commission from the Pope, to open the Coun∣cell with those few Prelats that were there, without expecting a greater num∣ber, in case they vnderstood that they would treate of Religion in the Dier; but if not, to gouerne themselues as other respects should aduise. They saw that the proposing of the Diet did not binde them, but, on the other side, that the small number of Prelates (who then were not more then foure) perswa∣ded a prorogation. Notwithstanding, they were in doubt that the danger of the Turkish armes would constraine Ferdinand to make the Recesse, and, The Legate know not what to re∣solue about the opening of the Coun∣cell. according to promise, to intimate another Diet, in which Religion should be treated of: casting the blame vpon them, by saying that notice was giuen them of the proposition, that, knowing what was promised with good in∣tention, they might haue hindered the execution of it by opening the Coun∣cell. For this cause they sent in diligence to the Pope, to receiue order from him what to doe in this doubtfull consultation, seeing themselues on the one side constrained by a potent respect to make haste, and on the other en∣forced to desist, because they were almost alone in Trent. They declared to the Pope that they had many coniectures, and signes, that the Emperour re∣garded not the celebration of the Councell; that Don Diego, after his first comparition, had neuer spoken so much as one word, and did shew, as it were, in his countenance, that he was pleased with that leasure and spending of time. For his appearance onely was sufficient to excuse and iustifie his Master, that hauing, by himselfe and his Ambassadors, continually desired and sollicited the Councell, and brought the businesse to that passe, and not seeing a conuenient progresse, hee might and ought to intimate another Diet, to determine the cause of Religion, as by reason deuolued vnto him by his owne diligence, and negligence of the Pope. They resolued to take a It is resolued that the coun∣cell should be opened, onely by singing a Masse of the holy Ghost. middle course: that is, to sing a Masse of the holy Ghost, before the Emperor arriued in the Diet; which might stand for a beginning of the Councell, and preuent whatsoeuer the Emperour could doe in the Recesse, and, on the other side, remoue all occasion of saying, that the matters of the Councell were begun to be handled with foure persons; remaining in libertie to enioy the benefit of time, and to be able to goe on, or desist, or transferre, or shut vp the Councell, as the occurrences should aduise. They wished him to consi∣der, that if the Councell were opened, after that Cardinall Farnese had spo∣ken with the Emperor, one might thinke that Cardinall was sent to entreate that it might not be opened, and could not obtaine it. Besides, the fame of the Turkish Armie increasing, it would be said it was opened when necessitie compelled to thinke of other matters, and when it was knowne it could not be done. The Cardinall Santa Croce desired much that signes of deuotion The desire of the Cardinall Santa Croce. should be shewed, and the people made to runne together with the vsuall ce∣remonies of the Church; and therefore perswaded that all should write to the Pope, to demaund a Briefe, with authoritie to giue Indulgences, dated from the time of their parting, that the Indulgence which they granted at their entrie, might be made good. That Cardinall was serupulous, that the people which were present at that entrie, should not be defrauded of those three yeeres and thrice fortie daies which they granted, and would supplie it by this; not considering that a difficultie did arise, whether he that hath au∣thoritie to grant Indulgences, can make good those which another hath granted without authoritie. The Cardinall, Bishop and Lord of Trent, considering that that Citie, lit∣tle in it selfe, and not much inhabited, would remaine at the discretion of Strangers, and in danger of seditions, in case the Councell proceeded, gaue the Pope to vnderstand, that there was need of a garrison, of, at the least, an hundred and fiftie footmen, especially if the Lutherans came, which expence himselfe was not able to beare, being exhausted by paying his Predecessors The Cardinal et Trent esi∣r h a garison. debts, The Pope answered, that, if he put a garrison into the towne, the Lu∣therans would haue a pretence to publish that the Councell was not free; that it was in vaine to make doubt, so long as none but Italians were in Trent; and that he had no lesse care of the quiet of the Citie, then the Cardinall him∣selfe, because the securitie of the Councell more imported the Pope, then the Bishop of the place; therefore that hee should leaue the care thereof vnto him, and assure himselfe, that he will be vigilant to prouide against dangers, for his owne interest, and will not burthen him with any expence. Hauing well considered all the reasons which perswaded and disswaded to begin the Councell, for disswasion hee saw no weightie reason but this, that when the Councell should be opened, hee would be intreated to leaue it so, vntill the impediments of the Turkish warre, and others, did cease: which was to put a bridle in his mouth, which would turne him whither he pleased that held the raines: a thing dangerous to his affaires. This made him resolue firmely in himselfe, by no meanes to let the Councell stand idly open, and not to de∣part from this disiunctiue, either to celebrate the Councell if he could, or, if he could not, to shut it vp, or suspend it, vntill he had published another day The Pope gi∣ueth commis∣sion to open the Councell on Holiroode day. Card. Farnese passeth by Trent. to reassume it. Hauing established this point, he wrote to the Legats, to open it vpon Holiroode day; which order they published to the Emperours Am∣bassador and the rest, without naming the particular time. A little after Cardinall Farnese, in his iourney towards, Wormes, arriued in Trent, and brought the same commission; and all being consulted of betweene him and the Legats, they resolued to continue, notifying vnto all, the Commission to open the Conncell in generall, without descending to the particular day, more then this, that it should bee when hee had spoken with the Emperour in Wormes. And they conceiued good hope; because they vnderstood that his Maiestie, knowing the dispatch of the Legation, was much satisfied with the Pope, and declared that hee would ioyntly proceede with him; and therefore they would not go on to any new action, without his knowledge, for feare of disturbing him; and the rather because Don Diego, and the Car∣dinall of Trent aduised the same. Don Diego renewed his pretence, to precede all but the Legates, alleadg∣ing, Don Diego re∣neweth his pretence for precedence. that if, when the Pope and Emperour met, no man could sit betweene them, the same ought to bee obserued in those that represented the one and the other; and said hee had the aduice of learned men heerein. The Legates answered in generall termes onely, that they were ready to giue euery man his place, expecting orders from Rome; which pleased Don Diego, hoping that decisions and examples thereof would bee found in the publike Records; shewing hee was readie out of the Councell, to giue place to euery pettie Priest, but adding that, in the Councell, none after the Pope, had more au∣thoritie then his Prince. Some that reade this relation may thinke it super∣fluous, because it containeth matter of small weight: but, contrarily, the writer of the Storie hath thought necessarie to make knowne, from how small riuers so great a lake, which possesseth all Europe, hath been raised; and he that shall see how many letters went to and fro before the opening was concluded, would wonder at the esteeme was made of it, and at the surmises that did flie abroad. In Italie, because they saw the Councell went on, and hoped that now it would be celebrated, the Bishops thought of their iourney. The Vice-roy of Naples tooke care that all his should not goe. His will was to send The Vice-roy of Naples would send but foure bi∣shops to the Councell, and those of his owne nomi∣nation and is much opposed. foure of his owne nomination, with commission from the rest of the King∣dome, which are aboue an hundred. Therefore the great Chaplaine of the kingdome assembled the Prelates in his house, and intimated vnto them, that they should make a proxie. Many opposed, and said they would goe in per∣son, because they were so bound by oath: but in case they could not, it was reasonable that euery one should name a Proctor, according to his owne conscience, and not one for all. The Vice-roy was angrie, and gaue order againe to the great Chaplaine to call them, and command them to make the proxie, and sent the like order to all the gouernours of the Kingdome. This troubled the Pope and Legates very much, because they knew not whether it came from the Viceroy his owne fantasie, to shew himselfe a suf∣ficient man, or from want of wit, or whether some other had made him doe it, and proceeded from a deeper roote. To discouer from whence this mo∣tiue came, the Pope made a seuere Bull, that none, without exception, should The Pope ma∣keth a seuere Bull, that none should appeare in Councell by Proctor. appeare by Proctor. This the Legates concealed, as being too seuere, be∣cause it contained all the Prelates of Christendome, euen the most remote, and those that had lawfull impediment, who could not possibly obserue it: and also because it was too rigid, constituting that they incurred ipso facto, the punishment of suspension from their Ministerie. And they feared it would cause many irregularities, nullities of actes, and vndue receiuings of fruits, and that by this meanes some discontented Nation might be stirred vp to appeale and contest for iurisdiction. Wherefore they wrote, that they ought not to publish it without new commission, thinking the rumor that the Bull was made would suffice, though it were not shewed. What end this Bull had, shall be declared in its fit place. Another businesse remained, though of smaller moment, yet no lesse troublesome. The Legats, vntill then, had receiued but small store of money The Legates require money for the expen∣ces of the Councell. for their expences, and were too poore to supplie out of their owne, as was fit for them to doe in some particular; in so much, that if they so continued, they should not be able to maintaine themselues. Whereupon they did com∣municate it to Farnese, and wrote to the Pope, that it was not for his repu∣tation to hold a Councell without necessarie and accustomed ornaments, with that lustre that so great an assembly required; for which it was necessa∣rie to send some person, to vndergoe this charge only: and therefore it would be good to appoynt a Depositarie, with a summe of money, to discharge the occurring expences, to assist some needie Prelate, and to cherish some man of account: a thing necessarie to procure a good end of the Councell. The third of May, ten Bishops being then arriued, they made a congre∣gation The first con∣gregatiō spent in ceremonies. to establish the things that should goe before; in which they publike∣lie intimated the Popes commission to open the Councell, adding, that they would not determine of the day, vntill they had imparted it to the Emperor. This Congregation, for the most part, was spent in matters of ceremonie, that the Legates, though of diuers Orders, one being a Bishop, another a Priest, and the third a Deacon, should notwithstanding haue the same orna∣ments, wearing Rochets all three alike, as their office and authoritie was e∣quall in one Legation and one Presidencie; that the place for the Sessions should be beautified with hangings of Arras, that it might not seeme an As∣sembly of mechanicall men. They proposed whether it were fit to make seats for the Pope and Emperor, which should be adorned and remaine emptie: they treated whether it were fit to giue Don Diego a more honorable place then the other Ambassadours. It was considered that the Bishops of Ger∣manie, who are Princes of the Empire, doe pretend right of preceding all o∣ther Prelates, euen Archbishops, alle aging that it is not onely so obserued in the Diets, but also that the Bishops which are not Princes stand bare before them. It was remembred, that the yeere before, there was a difference in the same Citie, where the Bishop of Heicstat, and the Archbishops of Corsu and Ottranto met together at a Masse. Some also alleaged, that in the Popes chap∣pell, the Bishops that are Ambassadours for Dukes, and other Princes, doe precede the Archbishops, and therefore that the Princes themselues should doe it much more. And they concluded to resolue nothing herein vntill the Councell were more frequent, that they might see how the French men and Spaniards did vnderstand it. They thought fit to renew the Decree of Basil, and of Iulius the second, in the Laterane Councell, that it should preiudice no man to sit out of his place. The resolution to expect the aduice of Farnese, to determine the day of opening the Councell, gaue much satisfaction to Don Diego; and those few Bishops shewed much deuotion and obedience to the Pope, as did also the Bishop of Ʋercells, who arriued the same day after the Congregation ended, together with Cardinall Poole the third Legate. While they met in Trent to conuince heresies by a Councell, in France they did the same by force of armes, against a small remainder of the Waldenses, inhabitants of the Alpes of Prouence, who (as hath been said before) maintai∣ned a separation from the Sea of Rome, with a diuerse doctrine and rites, ve∣ry imperfect and rude. These men, after the reformations of Zuinglius, en∣larged their doctrine by his, and reduced their rites vnto some forme, at the same time when Geneua embraced the reformation. Sentence was pronoun∣ced against these many yeeres before, by the Parliament of Aix, which had neuer been executed. The King now commanded to execute the sentence. The President mustered together as many Souldiers as he could in the pla∣ces bordering vpon them, and in the Popes State of Autgnion, and went with A miserable slaughter of the Waldenses made by the French men. an armie against those poore creatures, who neither had weapons, nor thought, otherwise then by flight, to defend themselues, those that could. They went not about to teach them, or by threats to make them leaue their opinions and rites: but first of all, filling all the Countrey with rapes, slew asmany as stood to their mercie, because they could not flie, without spa∣ring old or yong, of what age or condition soeuer. They destroyed, or ra∣ther razed the Countries of Ca riers in Prouence, and of Mernidolo in the County of Ʋiinoisin, belonging to the Pope, and all other places in those precincts. It is certaine that more than 4000. persons were slaine, who, with∣out making defence, desired mercy. But in Germany, the Emperour arriued in VVormes the 16. of May, and Cardinall Farnese the day following, who treated with him, and with the Cardinall Far∣nese his nego∣tiation with the Emperour in Wormes. King of the Romans apart. He deliuered his commissions particularly con∣cerning the Councell, declaring that the Pope had giuen the Legats power to open it: which they meant to doe when they should vnderstand from him, what was done in the Diet. Hee told the Emperour, that it was not necessary to regard the oppositions of the Protestants, seeing that the im∣pediment, alleaged by them, was not new, but was foreseene from the day the Councell was first spoken of: that he might assure himselfe, that they, ha∣uing cast off the yoke of obedience, the principall foundation of Religion, and proceeded to so impious & wicked innouatiōs, against the rites, obserued many hundreds of yeres, by the approbation of so many famous Councels, they would, with the same boldnesse, spurne against the Councell, which was to begin, though lawfull, generall, and Christian, assuring themselues to be condemned by it. Therefore that nothing remained, but that his Ma∣iesty should induce them to obedience by authority, or constraine them by force. Which, in case it were not done, and they so much regarded, as not to bee condemned, or, after condemnation, not constrained to lay aside their errours, all the world would know that the heretiques command, and the Pope and Emperour obey. That his Holinesse as he thought fit to vse mildnesse at the first, so he thought it necessary to shew really, that after it would follow force of Armes. That he offered him a grant of part of the Ec∣clesiastical reuenues of Spaine, and power to sell the plate of those Churches, to assist him with his owne money, and to send him out of Italy 12000. foot, and 500. horse paide, and to endeuour that he might likewise be assisted by other Princes of Italy, and to proceed, during the time of the warres, with spirituall and temporall Armes, against whosoeuer should molest his terri∣tories. Farnese declared also to the Emperour the attempt of the Vice roy of He complain∣eth of the Vice roy of Naples. Naples, who would haue sent foure Proctors in the name of all the Bishops of the Kingdome, shewing it was neither reasonable nor lawfull, and that it was a dishonour to the Councell: For if Bishops, dwelling so neere, and be∣ing so many, might be excused by sending foure, France and Spaine might doe it much rather, and so a Generall Councell should be held with twenty Bishops. And he prayed the Emperour not to tolerate a thing so contrary to the authority of the Pope, and dignity of the Councell, whereof himselfe is Protector, desiring him to giue some remedy heerein. The Cardinall al∣so treated with him concerning the promise made in his Maiesties name, in the proposition sent to the Diet; that is, that to determine the controuersies of Religion, in case the Councell did not proceed, another Diet should be held; and desired him to consider, that if neither his Holinesse, nor his Le∣gats and Ministers, nor the Court of Rome, were in fault that the Councell were not celebrated, nor proceeded, he could not by any meanes intimate in the Recesse another Diet, vnder this colour. And he inculcated this poynt exceedingly, because hee had strait commission therein from Rome; and because the Cardinall of Monte, a man very free, not onely spake but also wrote vnto him thereof, in his owne name and his colleagues, after that hee parted from Trent, saying in plaine termes, that this was the most impor∣tant point at which he should euer ayme, without forgetting it in his whole negotiation, taking care not to admit any excuse, because this onely would produce any other good agreement. And for his owne part, hee would put his Holinesse in minde rather to abandon the Sea, and restore the keyes to Saint Peter, then suffer the Secular power to arrogate authoritie to determine causes of Religion, vnder pretence and colour that the Eccle∣siasticall hath failed in celebrating a Councell or otherwise. Concerning the attempt of the Viceroy, the Emperor said it proceeded from his owne proper motion, from which, in case hee had not great reason to the contrary, hee would bee remooued. For opening the Councell hee The Empe∣rors answere to the Legat. gaue no resolute answere, but spake diuersly, sometimes that it would bee good to begin it in a more fit place, sometimes that it was necessary to make sundry prouisions first. Whereby the Cardinall saw plainely that his ayme was onely to hold the matter in suspence, and to gouerne himselfe as occa∣sion serued, either opening or dissoluing it. For not intimating another Diet to treate of religion, he gaue a generall and vnconcluding answere, that hee would alwayes make as much esteeme as was possible of the Popes au∣thoritie. But to the proposition of making warre against the Lutherans, he answered that the Popes counsell was the best, and that the onely way was proposed by him, which he was resolued to imbrace; yet that hee would proceede with due caution, and first conclude a truce with the Turke, which hee then did mediate diligently, and most secretly, by the French King, and that hee knew well, that the number and power of the Prote∣stants was great, and insuperable, and that in case they were not diuided or surprised at vnawares, the warre would prooue doubtfull and dangerous. That his designe was to conceale his purpose vntill opportunitie serued, and then to treate with the Pope. In the meane while hee accepted the offers made vnto him. Beside these publike businesses, the Cardinall had one priuate for his The Legats priuate nego∣tiation con∣cerning his owne family. owne house. The Pope thinking it too little to giue to his familie the Duke∣dome of Camerino, and Nepi, thought to giue them also Parma and Piacenza; which because they were a little before in the possession of the Dukes of Mi∣lan, he desired the Emperours consent, to establish his gift the better. The Cardinall treated with the Emperour hereof, shewing it were better for his Maiestie that those Cities, so neere to the Dutchie of Milan, were in the possession of a familie so deuoted and allied vnto him, then in the power of the Church, in which if an ill affected Pope should succeede, diuers inconue∣niences might arise; that this would not bee an alienation of the patrimonie of the Church, because they first came into the hands of Iulius 2. neither was the possession of them well confirmed but vnder Leo; that it would bee more profitable for the Church, because the Pope would giue it Camerino in exchange and that detracting the charge of maintaining the garrisons of those two Cities, and adding eight thousand crownes, which the new Duke would pay, the Church would receiue more rent by Camerino, then by them. To these expositions the Cardinall ioyned his daughters letters, who effectu∣ally prayed the Emperour for her owne interest; vnto whom the matter was not displeasing, as well for the affection hee bare to his daughter and ne∣phewes, as because it would bee more easie to recouer them from a Duke, then from the Church. Yet hee neither denied nor granted, but said onely hee would not oppose. The Empe∣rors answere. The Legate treated with the Catholikes, and the Ecclesiastikes especially, incouraging them to defend the true Religion, & promising them all fauour from the Pope. The Protestants suspected the negotiation of the warre, though handled secretly, because a Franciscan Friar, preaching before Charles, The Prote∣stants suspect that warre would bee made against them. Ferdinand, and the Legat, after a great inuectiue against the Lutherans, turned to the Emperour, and said it was his office to defend the Church with armes; that vntil then he had not performed that which was necessary to be effected; that so many benefits which God had bestowed vpō him, deserued he should make acknowledgement of them by setting himselfe against that contagion of men, who ought not to liue any longer; and that he ought not to make a∣ny further delay, because many soules did dayly perish by this meanes, for whom God will aske an account of him, if he gaue not some sudden remedie. This Sermon not onely begat suspition, but raysed discourses also that it had been commanded by the Legat, and by the publike exhortations, they conclu∣ded what the priuate were. To remedy which rumor, the Cardinal parted se∣cretly The Legate doth secretly and suddenly returne into Italie. by night, & returned quickly into Italy. Yet the suspicion of the Prote∣stants increased, by the aduises sent from Rome, that the Pope, when he dismis∣sed some Captaines, gaue them hope he would imploy them the next yeere. But the B. of Sidonium arriued in Trent the 18 of May, with a Friar, a Diuine, and a secular Doctor, as Proctors of the Elector Cardinall & Arch-bishop of Mentz. The B. made a short oration of the Electors obedience to the Pope, and Apostolike Sea, much commending the celebration of the Councell, as the onely necessary remedy to those wauerings of faith, and Catholike religion. The Legates, in their answere, commended the pietie and deuotion of that Prince; and for admitting his commission, they said, it was necessary to see it first, because his Holinesse had made a new prouision, that none could giue voice by proxie, and that they were in doubt, whether it comprehended a Car∣dinall, and a Prince; that they well knew the prerogatiue which his excellen∣cie deserued, whereunto they were most ready to giue all honour and respect. These three men perceiuing the difficultie, were in a confusion, and thought The Proctors of the Arch-bishop of Mentz are a∣bout to leaue the Councell. to depart. The Legats repented them of the answere, knowing of what impor∣tance it would be if the prime Prince and Prelate of Germanie, for dignitie and riches should bee aliened from the Councel. And they wrought by way of mediation, dexterously made by the Cardinall of Trent, by the Ambassadours and others, that they would remaine, saying the Bull spake only of Italian Bi∣shops, and that the Legats were deceiued: which imputation they were con∣tented to beare, that they might withstand so great a disorder. Wherefore they wrote to Rome, giuing an account of the successe, & deman∣ding whether they should receiue them while the Bull was in force, adding that it seemed hard to repell the Proctors of so great a personage, who shew∣ed himselfe zealous and fauourable to the Catholike partie, who by this meanes might grow luke-warme: they were instant to haue an answere, because the determination hereof would serue for a president, for that the other great Bishops of Germanie might send Proctors likewise, whom it were better they went not to Trent in person, because being accustomed to ride with great traines, the Citie would not bee able to receiue them all: and they The Legates doe earnestly demand a re∣solu about admitting Proctors. wrote that, aboue all things, it was not fit to scorne the Dutchmen, who are naturally suspicious, and easily resolue themselues; and especially those that are louing and well-deseruing, as Cocleus, who is already in his iourney, as Proctor for the Bishop of Heicstat; who hath written so much against the Heretiques, that one would bee ashamed to say that hee could not haue a voyce in the Councell. The Pope thought it not fit to write precisely here∣of, The Pope knew not what to an∣swere. considering the difficulties of Naples. For the Vice roy continuing in his resolution, a commission was made to foure to bee present there, in the name of all. These being prepared for their iourney, passed by Rome, concealing they were elected for the rest, saying they went for themselues; and that the others would follow. But hee wrote to the Legates to enter∣taine the Proctors with good words, vntill hee gaue another resolution. The Neapolitans spake also in the same tenor at their arriuall in Trent, and as well the Pope as the Legates dis embled the same, deferring to speake of it vntill they were resolued of the time to open the Councell. In the end of May 20. Bishops, fiue Generals, and one Auditor of the Rota were come to Trent, all much wearied with expectation. These com∣mended the rest, who, not caring to be hastie, expected to see a more reaso∣nable occasion to part from their home, and were by them called, to their great distaste, headlong fooles, for being so easily perswaded. Therefore The Prelates desire to de∣part from Trent. And D. Diego returneth to Venice. they asked the Legates leaue to goe for fifteene or twenty dayes to Ʋenice, Milan, or elsewhere, to auoide the incommodities of Trent, pretending want either of health, or apparell, or other respects. But the Legates, knowing how much it concerned the reputation of the Councell, entertained them, partly by saying they had not power to giue leaue, and partly by giuing hope that the Councell should begin within few dayes, Caesars Ambassadour re∣turned to his Ambassage at Ʋenice, vpon pretence of ind position, leauing the Legates doubtfull whether it were by the Emperours commission vp∣on some tricke, or for being wear to bee idle and incommodated. Hee promised a speedie returne, adding that in the meane while the Ambassa∣dours of the King of the Romanes remained there to assist the seruice of God; and yet hee desired the Councell should not bee opened vntill his returne. But in the end of the next moneth the greater part of the Bishops, moued, some by pouertie, and some by incommoditie, made grieuous complaints, and raised as it were a sedition among themselues, threatning that they would depart, and had recourse to Francis Castel-Alto, gouernour of Trent, whom Ferdinand had appointed to hold his place, together with Gine a. This man came before the Legats, and desired them in the name of his King, that now at last they would begin, it being plaine how much good would ensue by the celebration, and how much euill by temperizing th . The Legats held themselues offended herewith, because they thought it was to shew the world that which was contrary to the trueth, and to attribute to them the delay, which proceeded from the Emperour. And though they among themselues resolued to dissemble, and to answere in generall termes, yet the Cardinall Monte could not bridle his libertie, but in making answere, con∣cluded in the end with perswasion to expect Don Diego, who had more par∣ticular commissions then hee. It was hard to entertaine and comfort the Prelates, who ill endured that idle delay, and especially the poore ones, who wanted money, and not wordes. Wherefore they resolued to giue at the Popes charge, fortie Ducats a yeere to the Bishops of Nobili, Bertinoro, and Money is gi∣uen to the poore Bishops Chioza, who complained more then the rest, and fearing that the munifi∣cence might giue pretence hereafter, they declared themselues that it was for a subsidie, and not for prouision. They gaue the Pope an account by letter of what they had done, shewing him the necessitie to assist them with some greater ayde: but telling him withall, that it was not good to giue it as a firme prouision, that the Fathers might not seeme the stipendaries of his Holinesse: which would cherish the Protestants excuse, not to submit themselues to the Councel, because it was composed only of those that depen∣ded on, and were obliged to the Pope. At the same time the Emperor, in Wormes, cited the Archbiship of Collen The Archbi∣shop of Collen is cited by the Emperour in Wormes. to appeare before him within thirtie dayes, or to send a Proctor, to answere to the accusations and imputations layd vpon him, commanding him in the meane space not to make any innouation in Religion and Rites, but to re∣duce the things innouated to their former state. Hermannus Bishop of Col∣len, desiring to reforme his Church, in the yeere 1536. called a Councell of the Bishops his Suffragans, where many Decrees were made, and a booke printed, composed by Iohn Groperus, a Canonist, who, for seruice done to the Church of Rome, was after created Cardinall by Pope Paul the fourth. But whether the Archbishop, and Groperus himselfe were not satisfied with the reformation, or whether hee changed his opinion, hee assembled the Clergie and Nobility, and chiefe men of his state in the yeere 1543. and esta∣blished another reformation. This, though it were approoued by many, pleased not the whole Clergie, yea, the maior part opposed it, and made Gro∣perus their head, who before had giuen counsell for it, and promoted it. They entreated the Archbishop to desist, and expect a generall Councell, or at the least, an Imperiall Diet; which not being able to obtaine, in the yeere 1545 they appealed to the Pope, and to the Emperour, as supreme aduo∣cate and protectour of the Church. The Archbishop published by a wri∣ting, that the appeale was friuolous, and that hee could not desist from that which belonged to the glory of God, and amendment of the Church; that hee had not to doe either with the Lutherans or others, but that hee obser∣ued the doctrine agreeable to the holy Scripture. The Archbishop going on in his reformation, and the Clergie of Collen insisting vpon the contrary, the Emperour receiued the Clergie into his protection, and cited the Arch-bishop, as hath beene said. This newes comming to Trent, gaue matter to passe the time at the least with discourses. The Legates were much mooued, and amongst the Prelates which were present those that were of any vnderstanding blamed the Empe∣rour, for making himselfe Iudge of faith and reformation; the most gentle word they spake was, that the Emperours proceeding was very scandalous. They began to know they were not esteemed, and that to bee idle, was to be scorned by the world. Therefore they did discourse that they were con∣strayned to declare themselues to be a Councel lawfully called, and to be be∣ginne The Emperor is blamed, for the Citation, by the Fathers of Trent. the worke of God, proceeding first against the foresayd Archbishop, the Elector of Saxony, the Landgraue of Hassia, and likewise against the King of England. They grew into so great spirits that they seemed not the same, who a few dayes before thought themselues confined in prison. The Mini∣sters of the Archbishop of Mentz abated this heat, putting them in minde of the greatnesse of those Princes and their adherents, and the danger to make them vnite themselues with the King of England, and so to make a greater fire in Germanie: and the Cardinall of Trent spake in the same forme. The Italian Bishops, thinking it a great matter to meddle in such eminent subiects, said it was true that all the world would be attentiue at such a processe, yet that all the importance was to begin and ground it well: They incited one ano∣ther, saying it was necessary to redeeme the slownesse past with celerity here∣after. That they should demand of the Pope, some man of worth to pero∣rate against the accused, as did Melehior Baldassino, against the Pragmatique, in the Laterane Councel; beeing perswaded that to depriue Princes of their States had no other difficultie, then to vse well the formes of Processes. But the Legates, as well for this as for other occurrences, knew it to be necessarie to haue such a Doctor, and wrote to Rome to be prouided of one. The Pope vnderstanding the Emperors action, was astonished, and doub∣ted The Pope was wonder∣fully distasted with the Ci∣tation. whether to complaine or be silent. To complaine, when no effect would succeed he thought friuolous, and a demonstration of his small power. And this mooued him exceedingly. But on the other side, considering well how much it imported him not to passe ouer a matter of that moment, hee resol∣ued not to giue words, as they did in Trent, but to proceed to facts, and an∣swere the Emperour afterwards, if hee should speake of it. Therefore hee The Archbi∣shop is cited by the Pope. made another citation against the Archbishop, the eighteenth of Iuly, that within sixtie dayes he should appeare before him. Hee cited also the Deane of Collen, and fiue of the principall Canons, leauing the world to dispute how the Archbishop could appeare before two which cited him for the same cause, in diuers places, at the same time, and how a dispute of the com∣petencie of the place of iudicature belonged to the honour of Christ. But how this succeeded, and what ende the cause had, shall bee said in its place. To returne to that which more neerely concerneth the Councel, the Em∣perour assayed in the Diet diuers wayes, to make the Protestants grant him The Emperor demandeth assistance a∣gainst the Turkes of the Protestants, who giue a conditionall answere. assistance against the Turkes, not mentioning Religion. Whereunto they still answered, that they could not resolue without they were secured, that the peace should be kept, and that, by the conuocation in Trent vnder the name of a Councell, it was not vnderstood that the time of the peace was ended, according to the Decree of the former Diet, but declared that the peace cannot be interrupted, nor themselues enforced by any Decrees made in Trent; because they cannot submit themselues to that Councel, where the Pope, who hath condemned them already, hath free power. The Emperor sayd, hee could not giue them peace which might exempt them from the Councel, to whose authority all are subiect that he had no way to excuse him∣selfe to other Kings and Princes, if it were granted to Germanie alone not to obey the Councell, assembled especially for her sake. But if, as they sayd, they pretended a cause why they would not submit, let them goe to the Councel, and alledge their reasons why they suspect it; that they should be heard, and if it appeared they had wrong, they might then refuse; that it was not pertinent to preuent, and to suspect that which appeared not, pre∣tending grieuance of things to come, and iudging of that which is not seene as yet. They replyed, they spake not of things to come but past, their Reli∣gion being condemned already, and persecuted by the Pope and all his ad∣herents. Therefore they were not to expect any future iudgement, because it was past already. That it was iust that the Pope, and his adherents of Ger∣many, and of all other places, should make one part in the Councell and them∣selues the other and for the difficulty about the manner and order of procee∣ding, the Emperour, Kings, and Princes should bee Iudges, but for the merits of the cause, the Word of God onely. They could not be remooued from this resolution, though the Ambassa∣dour of France, there present, did very much, and with menacing termes, en∣treat them to consent to the Councel; which threats the Ministers of that K. the Popes fauourers, did dictate to the Ambassadour, when hee parted from France. The Imperialists proposed the translation of the Councel into Ger∣many, vnder the Emperors promise to labour effectually, that the Pope should condescend; which the others accepted, vpon condition the peace were esta∣blished vntill the Councel were assembled there. But Charles, being sure that the Pope would neuer agree, saw that this was to giue them a perpetual peace, and therefore he thought it better to leaue things in suspence, granting it on∣ly vntill another Diet, seeing hee was constrayned, hauing not concluded truce with the Turkes as yet, and esteeming more that warre; thinking that by occasion of a Colloquie, other reasonable meanes would bee offered hereafter; to make them consent anew to the Councel of Trent, or, in case of refusall, to hold them contumacious, and to make warre against them. There∣fore the fourth of August hee ended the Diet, and ordained another in Ra∣tubon, Another Diet is ordained in Ratubon for Ianuary. for Ianuary next, whereat the Princes should be personally present, and instituted a Colloquie in matter of Religion, of foure Doctors, and two Iudges for a side. This was to begin at December, that the matter might be digested before the Diet. Hee confirmed and renewed the former Edicts of peace, and set downe a manner to pay the contributions for the war. How the Colloquie did proceede, shall be said in its place. The Protestants, being departed from Wormes, set forth a booke, where The Prote∣stants do pro∣test against the Triden∣tine councel. they said in summe, that they esteemed not the Tridentine for a Councell, being not assembled in Germanie, as Adrian and the Emperour promised; whereunto to make shew of giuing satisfaction by making choice of Trent, was to mocke the world, because Trent cannot bee said to bee in Germanie, but onely because the Bishop is a Prince of the Empire: but for securitie, that it was aswell in Italie, and as much in the Popes power as Rome it selfe. And the rather they esteemed it not lawfull, because Pope, Paul would bee presi∣dent in it, and propose by his Legats; that the Iudges were tyed vnto him by oath; that the plea being against the Pope, himselfe ought not to be Iudge; that it was necessarie to treat first of the forme of the Councell, and of the authorities, whereupon to ground. But the Emperours resolution displea∣sed The Emperor is taxed againe for medling in Religion. alike in Trent and at Rome, as well because a secular Prince medled in Re∣ligion, as because, it seemed the Councell was casseered, in regard, that ap∣proaching, order was giuen to handle else-where the controuersies of do∣ctrine. The Prelats in Trent blamed the Decree, as it were with one voyce, saying it was worse then that of Spira, and maruelling that the Pope, who shewed himselfe so quicke against that, had and did tolarate this, after that the Councell was intimated, and already assembled. From this they drew a manifest Argument, that their remaining in Trent was vaine and dishonou∣rable. The Legats tryed their wits to consolate, and perswade them, that all The Prelats in Trent are discontented, and most of them doe de∣part. had beene permitted by his Holinesse for a good end. But they replyed, that whatsoeuer the end was, and what thing soeuer doth follow, the blemish, not onely of the Pope and Apostolique Sea, but of the Councell and the whole Church will neuer be taken away. Neither could the Legats resist their complaints, which ended in demanding leaue to depart, some alled∣ging necessary and important affaires of their own, and some to retire them∣selues into some of the next cities for infirmitie or indisposition. And though the Legats gaue leaue to none, yet some of them dayly tooke it, so that before the end of the moneth, there remained very few. But in Rome, though this successe was foreseene by the negotiation of Cardinall Farnese, yet after it happened they began to thinke more exactly of it. They considered that the Emperors ends were much different from the Popes; for he, holding things in suspence, dispatched his businesse well in Germany, giuing the Protestants The Emperor desireth to hold the Councell in suspence. hope, that if they pleased him, he would not suffer the Councell to bee ope∣ned, and putting them in feare, that in case they did not, it should begin and proceed against them. Therefore he euer caused some new emergents to arise, which might hold things in suspence, passing the time pleasantly vnder diuers colours, and sometimes also proposing that it were better to transferre it to another place, giuing hope hee could bee contented it were translated into Italie, euen vnto Rome, that the Pope and the Prelates of that Nation might more easily hearken to the proposition, and draw the Coun∣cell in length. The Pope was in great straits. Sometimes hee had the ancient desire The Pope is doubtfull what course to take. of his predecessors that the Councell should not be celebrated, and condem∣ned himselfe for hauing proceeded so farre, yet hee saw that it was scanda∣lous and dangerous to him, to shew openly that hee would not haue it, by dissoluing that small congregation which remained in Trent. He saw cleere∣ly that it was not a good remedie to extinguish heresies. For concerning that which belonged to Italie, it was better to prouide against it by force, and by the office of the Inquisition, whereas the expectation of the Coun∣cell hindereth that which is the onely remedie. For Germany, it appeared plainely that the Councell did rather make difficult, then facilitate those things. Besides; in ease it were celebrated, hee doubted whether hee should grant the Emperour the halfe fruits and vassalages of the Monestaries in Spaine. For if hee did not, his Maiestie would bee angry, and if hee did it, hee doubted that the Spanish Prelates would discouer in the Councell that they were alienated from him and the Apostolike Sea, for giuing that to o∣thers which belonged to them. He saw likewise that the Prelates of the king∣dome were if satisfied, who would think it intolerable to pay the tenths, and be at charges in the Councel. Hee thought that those of France would ioyne with them; and incourage them, not for charitie, but to hinder the Emperors profit. Therefore he began to incline to the translation, so that it were not caried further into Germany, as was treated of in Wormes, whereunto he sayd he would neuer consent, though hee had an 100. hostages, and as many pawnes: and the rather because by transferring it more into Italy, into a place more fertil, commodious and secure, he thought he auoyded the inconueni∣ence of continuing in that state, and letting the Councell lie at anchor, and be drawen in length from season to season; the worst resolution that could be made, for infinite and perpetuall preiudices which might insue. Besides, by the time which the translation required, the present mischiefe was cured, which was to haue Councell, and a Colloquie, and Diet instituted for re∣ligion concurre together, not knowing what end the one or the other might haue; a thing dishonourable, and dangerous, and of bad example; and the Prelats would be satisfied by parting from Trent. Beeing thus resolued, that The Bull of translation. he might be prouided to put it fitly in execution, he sent to the Legates the Bull of faculty to translate it, dated February 22. of which it hath beene spo∣ken before. These thoughts did not possesse either the whole, or the principall part of the Popes mind, but he thought much more of infeoffing his son in Parma and Piacenza, which he had imparted to Caesar, & did effect it in the end of Au∣gust, There is much mur∣muring at the donation of Parma and Piacenza to a bastard. not respecting the generall murmuring, that, while the Clergie was to bee reformed, the head of it should bestow principalities vpon a sonne of a damned coniunction. This the whole Colledge tooke ill, though onely Iohn Dominicus de Cupis, Cardinall of Trani, with some few more, opposed it; Iohn Ʋega, the Emperours Ambassador, refused to bee present, and Marga∣rite of Austria, his nephewes wife, shewed herselfe discontented, because shee desired the inuestiture in the person of her husband, for that shee lost the title of the Dutchesse of Camerino, and got nothing, Afterwards, beeing wholly imployed in freeing himselfe from the difficulties and dangers which the Councell brought with it standing thus, neither opened nor shut, but so as it might serue the Emperours turne against him, hee resolued to send the Bishop of Caserta to treate with his Maiestie, proposing either to The Pope sendeth a Nuncio to the Emperor. haue it opened and begunne, or suspended for a time, and in case that plea∣sed not, he was to propose the translation of it into Italy, to giue conueni∣ent time to what should be handled in the Colloquie and Diet, or some o∣ther match, which were not sodishonourable and dangerous for the Church, as to haue the Councell remaining still on foote, and the Legates and Prelats idle. This negotiation had many rubs. For the Emperour was resolute, not to consent either to suspension or translation; not holding it good for his ends to begin it, he did not absolutely denie any of the things proposed; and ha∣uing no other course to take, he knew not what to do, but to interpose diffi∣culties to the three propositions. Finally, in the middest of October, hee found out a temper, that the Councell should bee opened, and the reforma∣tion treated of, forbearing to speake of heresies and points of doctrine, lest they should prouoke the Protestants. The Pope aduised heereof by the The Pope is much often∣ded with thē Emperours answere. Nuncio his letters, was touched at the very heart. For hee saw plainely that this was to giue the victorie into the hands of the Lutherans, and to robbe himselfe of all authoritie, making him depend of Colloquies and Imperiall Diets, ordaining in them treaties of religion, and forbidding the Councell tomeddle with them, and so to weaken him by alienating his dependants, and to strengthen the Lutherans, by supporting, or not condemning their heresies. And beeing assured that his and the Emperours interests were so contarie, as that they could not be vnited, he resolued to conceale his owne ends, and to proceede as best befitted his affaires. Therefore, without shew∣ing any distaste of the answere, he presently replyed to Caserta, that, for his Maiesties sake, hee resolued to open the Councell immediately, comman∣ding that the acts thereof should begin, and all should proceed with full libertie, and in fit manner and order. This the Pope sayd in such generall termes, because he would not expresse himselfe, what should bee first, or what last, or what treated of, or What wholly left out. For hee was resolute to handle the matter of religion and points of doctrine principally, without alleadging other reason, incase he should bee constrained to alleadge any, but that to treat of reformation onely, was a thing neuer vsed before, con∣trary to the reputation both of himselfe and of the Councell. Therefore, the last of October, hauing imparted all to the Cardinals, by their counsell and aduise, he ordained, and wrote also to Trent, that the Synode should be opened the next Sunday, called Gaudete in Aduent, which was to bee the 13. He giueth or∣der to begin the Councell the 13. of De∣cember. of December. The Prelats shewed great ioy for the newes, seeing themselues deliue∣red from the imminent danger, to remaine long in Trent, and doe nothing. But a little after the ambiguities were on foot againe. For letters came from The 3. Fren Prelats are re∣called, but two of them are perswaded to remaine. the French King to his Prelates, which were three, that they should depart. This seemed to the Legates a thing of the greatest importance, being as it were a declaration. that France and the King approoued not the Coun∣cell. They vsed all meanes to hinder their departure, telling the Prelates, that the King gaue that order when the case was otherwise, and that they ought to expect another, because his Maiestie was now informed of the pre∣sent state, putting them in minde of the scandall that would ensue, in case they did otherwise, and of the offence which other Nations would take. The Cardinall of Trent, and the Spanish and Italian Prelats protested against their departure. Therefore in conclusion they tooke a middle course, which the King commended when he knew it, that the Lord of Renes should goe to giue the King account, and the other two remaine. The last of Nouember, the time prefixed for the opening of the Councel approaching, the Legates wrote to Rome, that, to preserue the authority of the Apostolique Sea, it were fit, in opening of it, to read and register a Bull, which might command it to bee done; and they made a dispatch in all dili∣gence that it might come in time. The answere, together with the Bull, arriued the eleuenth of December. Therefore the Legates commanded a fast and Procession the next day, and made a Congregation of all the Pre∣lates, where first the bull was read, and then all treated of, which was to bee done the next day, in the Session. The Bishop of Estorga proposed after a plea∣sing manner, that it was necessary to read in the Congregation the Briefe of the Legation and Presidencie, that all might make profession of their obe∣dience, and subiection to the Apostolique Sea. The request was approo∣ued The Legates would not suffer the Bull of their Lega∣tion to bee read. by almost all the Congregation, and accompanied with the particular instance of euery one. But the Legate Sancta Croce, considering how farre the demand might reach, and that to publish the authoritie of the Presi∣dencie, might breede danger to haue it limited, thinking it better by keeping it secret, to vse it as occasion serued, answered readily, that in the Councell all were but one bodie, and that it was equally necessarie to reade the Buls of euery Bishop, to shew hee was such a one, instituted by the Apostolique Sea; which would be tedious, and, by reason of those who dayly will come, would spend the time of all the Congregations, and so hee stopped the re∣quest, and retained the dignitie of the Legation, which consisted in beeing vnlimited. The thirteenth of December came at last, when in Rome the Pope publi∣shed a Bull of Iubilie, where hee declared that hee had intimated a Councel The Councel is opened in Trent, and a Iubilie publi∣shed in Rome. to heale the wounds of the Church, caused by impious heretikes. There∣fore hee exhorted euery one to assist the Fathers assembled therein, with their prayers to God: which to doe effectually and fruitfully, they ought to confesse themselues, and fast three dayes, and during that time, to goe in pro∣cessions, and then to receiue the most blessed Sacrament; granting pardon of all his sinnes to whosoeuer did so. The same day the Legates in Trent, with all the Prelates, in number 25. in pontifical habit, accompanied With the Di∣uines, Clergie and people of forreine parts, and of the City, made a solemne procession, from Trinitie Church to the Cathedrall; where Monte, the The Ceremo∣nies vsed. prime Legate, did sing the Masse of the holy Ghost, in which the Bishop of Bitonto made a long copious eloquent Sermon. That being ended, the Le∣gats caused a long written admonition to be read, the summe whereof was: that it was their charge during the whole course of the councel, to admonish the Prelats in occurrences, and that it was fit to begin in that Session, vnder∣standing The admoni∣tion of Card. Monte. that this admonition & all the rest, were as wel made to themselues as to others as being of the same condition, with them that the Councel was assembled for three causes; for the extirpation of heresie, restitution of Ec∣clesiastical discipline, and regaining of peace. To execute which things it was fit to haue first a true & inward sense, what it was to be the cause of all those three calamities. Of heresies, not that they had raised them, but that they had not performed their duetie in sowing good doctrine, and rooting out the cockle. Of manners corrupted that there was no neede to make men∣tion, it beeing manifest, that the Clergie and Pastours onely were corrup∣tors, and corrupted. For which things God had also sent the third plague, which was the war, forraine of the Turkes and ciuill of the Christians. That without this inward and true acknowledgement, their enterance into the Councell, and calling vpon the holy Ghost were in vaine. That the iudge∣ment of God was iust to punish them so deepely, though it were lesse then they deserued. Therefore they exhorted euery one to know his owne faults, to mitigate the wrath of God, replying that the holy Ghost, which they had inuocated, would not come, if they refused to heare of their owne sinnes, and like Esdras, Nehemiab, and Daniel, confesse them. He added that it was a great blessing of God, that there was such an occasion giuen to beginne a Councel, for reformation on all hands. And though contradi∣ctors will not bee wanting, yet it was their duetie constantly to goe on, and, as Iudges, to auoyde passion, and aime onely at the glory of God, in regard they are to performe this duety before him, the Angels, and the whole Church. In fine, they admonished the Bishops sent by the Princes, to doe their Masters seruice with faith and diligence; yet preferring the honour of God before all. Afterwards the Bull of the intimation of the Councel in the yeere 1542. was read, and a Briefe of the simple deputation of the Legates, together with a Bull of the opening of the Councel; and immediately Al∣fonso Zorilla, Secretarie to Don Diego, stepped forward, and reproduced the Emperours Commission presented before to the Legates, and shewed a let∣ter of Don Diego, in which he excused his absence, by reason of his indispo∣sition. For his excuse the Legates sayd it was worthy to bee admitted. For the Commission, though they might insist vpon the answere giuen before, yet they were pleased for greater reuerence to receiue it againe, and examine it, and make answere afterwards. These things being done, according to the rite of the Roman Ceremo∣niall, all kneeled downe to pray softly, as the vse was in all the Sessions, and then they sayd aloud, Adsumus Domine, &c. Sancte Spiritus, &c. Which the President spake with an high voice, in the name of all. The Letanie being sung, the Gospel was read by the Deacon, Si peccauerit in te frater tu s, &c. And lastly the hymne, Veni Creator spiritus, beeing sung, and all sate downe in their places, the Cardinall of Monte pronunced the Decree, with inter∣rogatorie words; reading, whether it pleased the Fathers, for the praise of God, extirpation of heresies, reformation of Church and people, depression of the enemies of Christ, to determine and declare that the holy Tridentine and Generall Councel should begin, and be begun; whereunto all answered, first the Legates, then the Bishops, and other Fathers by the word Place , He then added, whether in regard of the Feasts of the old and new yeere, it The decree for opening the Councels and holden the next Ses∣sion. pleased them that the next Session should be the seuenth of Ianuary; and they answered likewise that it pleased them. This being done, Hercules Seuerallo, Speaker of the Councel, desired the Notaries to make an instrument of all. The himne, Te Deum laudamus, was sung, and the Fathers putting off their Pontificall habits, and putting on their common, accompanied the Legates, the Crosse going before. These ceremonies being vsed in the Sessions fol∣lowing, shall be repeated no more. Germany and Italy were very curious to know the first actions of this as∣sembly, which was begun with so many difficulties, & the Prelats in Trent, and those of their family, were charged by their friends to aduise them of it. Therefore immediatly after the Session, a copie of the Legats admonition, and of the oration of Bitonto was sent into euery place; which were quickly printed. Whereof that I may the better tell what was commonly spoken, it is necessarie to relate briefely the contents of the Oration. It began with shewing the necessitie of the Councell, because it is an hundred yeeres since that of Florence, and because things of difficultie belonging to the Church, The contents of the orati∣on, made by the Bishop of Ritonto. cannot well be handled but in it. For in them the Creeds haue beene made, heresies condemned, manners amended, Christian Nations vnited, armies sent to conquer the holy land, Kings and Emperours deposed, and schismes rooted out. And that for this cause the Poets introduce the Councell of the Gods. And Moyses writeth that they were conciliarie voyces, the Decree to make man, and to confound the tongues of the Giants. That Religion hath three heads, Doctrine, the Sacraments, and Charitie; and that all these three call for a Councell. Hee declared the corruptions entred into them, for re∣stauration of which, the Pope, by the fauour of the Emperour, Kings of France, of the Romanes, and of Portugall, and of Christian Princes, hath assembled the Synod, and sent his Legats. He made a long digression in com∣mendation of the Pope, and another, not much shorter in praise of the Em∣perour; then he praised the three Legats, deriuing their commendation from the name and surname of each of them; and added that the Councel being assembled, all ought to meet in it, as in the Troian horse. Hee inuited the woods of Trent, to sound foorth through the world, that all should sub∣mit themselues to that Councel; which if they doe not, it will be iustly sayd, that the Popes light is come into the world, and men haue loued darknesse better then the light. He lamented that the Emperour was not present, or, at the least Don Diego, who represented him. He congratulated the Cardinall Madruccio, that the Pope had assembled in his City the dispersed and wande∣ring fathers. Hee turned to the Prelats, and sayd, that to open the gates of the Councel, was to open the gates of Paradise from whence would descend liuing water to fill the earth with the knowledge of the Lord. Hee exhor∣ted the fathers to amendment, and to open their hearts, as dry ground, to re∣ceiue it; adding, that if they doe it not, yet the holy Ghost will open their mouths, though their mindes bee possessed with an euill spirit, as hee did the mouths of Caiphas and Balaam, lest, if the Councel should erre, the Church should erre also. Hee exhorted them to lay aside all passion, that they may truely say, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to vs. Hee inuited Greece, France, Spaine, Italy, and all Christian Nations to the Marriage. In fine, hee turned himselfe to Christ, praying him, by the intercession of Saint Vigilius, (the turelarie Saint of the valley of Trent) to assist that Councell. The Legats admonition was accounted pious, Christian, modest, and The censure of the oration. worthy of Cardinals, but the Sermon of the Bishop was iudged farre other∣wise. His vanitie and ostentation of Eloquence was noted by all. But men of vnderstanding compared, as an holy sentence to a wicked, those ingeni∣ous and most true words of the Legats, that without a good inward ac∣knowledgement, the holy Ghost would in vaine be called on, with the saying of the Bishop quite contrary, that, without that, their mouth should bee o∣pened by the holy Ghost, though their heart remained replenished with a wicked spirit. It was thought arrogancy to affirme, that, in case those few Prelates erred all the Church would erre; as if other Councels of seuen hundred Bishops had not erred, and the Church refused their doctrine. O∣thers added that this was not conformable to the doctrine of the Roman∣ists, who grant not infallibilitie but to the Pope, and to the Councell by ver∣tue of the Popes confirmation. But to compare the Councell to the Tro∣ian horse, an insidious inuention, was noted of folly, and reprehended for irreuerence. To haue retorted the words of the Scripture, that Christ and his doctrine, the light of the Father is come into the world, and men haue preferred darknesse before the light, making the Councell and doctrine thereof, to bee the Popes light, appeared to the world, which if it were not receiued, it should be said, men haue loued darkenesse more then light, was esteemed a blasphemie, and it was wished that at the least hee had not taken the formall words of the holy Scripture, that hee might not haue shewed so openly to haue disesteemed it. But in Trent, the beginning being made, neither the Prelates, not Legats The Legates not knowing how to pro∣ceed, write to Rome. themselues knew what should bee handled, nor what order obserued. Ther∣fore the Legates wrote to Rome a letter, worthie to bee repeated at large, to giue an account of what was done before. First they said they bee appointed the next session the day after the Epiphanie, as a terme which could not bee taxed neither of too long delay, nor too much breuitie, that in the meane time they might be aduised how to gouerne themselues in the other sessions, wherein they desire to haue light; and because they might euery houre be in∣terrogated of diuers things, for which they could not haue space to aduise and expect an answere, they desired that as particular an instruction, as was possible, should be sent them. Aboue all they desired aduertisement concer∣ning the manner and forme to proceede, to propose, to resolue, and what matter should be handled. They demanded especially if the cause of here∣sies should be the first, or should be treated of in generall, or in particular, condemning the false doctrine, or the persons of the principall heretikes, or the one and the other together: if the Prelates propose an Article of refor∣mation, where at all seeme to ayme, whether it should bee handled together with the Article of Religion, or before or after: if the Councell ought to in∣timate its beginning to all people and nations, inuiting the Prelats and Prin∣ces, and exhorting the faithfull to pray God for it; or if his Holinesse will doe it himselfe; when there shall be occasion to write some letter, missiue or responsiue, what forme is to be vsed and what Seale; likewise what forme is to bee vsed in the extention of re s if they should take notice of the Colloquie and Diet which will be held in Germany, or dissemble it, if they shall proceede slowly or swiftly, as well in determining the sessions , as in proposing the matters. They informed that some Prelates thought fit to proceeded by nations; which they held to be seditious; that it would make the Prelates of euery one oonutin, and that the greater number of Italians, who are most faithfull to the Sea of Rome, would helpe nothing, when the suffrage of them altogether would be of equall value with the suffrage of a few French men, or Spaniards, or Dutchmen. They sent aduise also it was perceiued that some had a designe to dispute of the authority of the Councell, and Pope; a thing dangerous to raise a schisme amongst the Catholikes them∣selues; and that in the congregation of the 12. all the Prelats ioyntly and ear∣nestly desired to see the commission of their facultie, which they were con∣strained artificially to auoide, not knowing as yet how their presidencie ought to be vnderstood and how farre his Holinesse would haue it extended. They demanded also that order might be taken for the rodes, that euery day and houre they might send and receiue aduise, as occasion serued; they desi∣red some order about the precedencie of Ambassadors of the Princes, and prouision of money, in regard those 2000. crownes, sent them a little be∣fore were spent vpon some poore Bishops. The Prelates were earnest that the worke might beginne; wherefore the Legates to giue them some satisfaction, and to shew they were not idle, cal∣led a congregation the 18. day, without proposing any thing but the manner of liuing, and conuersing, and gouerning their families. Much was saide a∣gainst the vse brought in, especially in Rome, to weare the habit of a Pre∣late in the ceremonie onely, and at other times of a secular. Sumptuous apparrell, as also base and sordide, were equally reprehended: and much was saide of the age of their seruants, but all was referred to bee resolued in another congregation, which was held the two and twentieth, and was wholly spent in discoursing vpon such ceremonies, concluding that a good reformation of the minde was principally necessary: wherefore ayming at the seemelinesse which belongeth to their degree, and edification of the people, euery one will see what hee hath to redresse in himselfe, and his familie. The Pope, vnderstanding the Councell was begun, deputed a congrega∣tion of Cardinals and Courtiers to superintend, and aduise concerning the affaires of Trent. Consulting with these, hee resolued that things were not as yet ripe enough to see cleerely what matters were to bee handled, and in what order. Hee caused an answere to bee sent to the Legates that it besee∣med The Popes answere. not the Synode to inuite either Princes or Prelates, and least of all to desire any one to assist them with prayers, because this hee had sufficiently done himselfe by the Bull of the Iubile, and that by the Letters for the con∣uocation of the Councell: that they ought not to thinke that the Synod should write to any, the Legats hauing power to supply that, by their owne letters written in all their names. Concerning the extension of the Decrees, the title ought to be. The most holy Oecumenicall and generall Synode of Trent, the Apostolicall Legats being Presidents. But for the forme of giuing voyces, that their reasons were very good not to doe it by nations; the rather because it was neuer vsed in ancient times, but was introduced by the Coun∣cell of Constance, and followed by that of Basill; which are not to be imitated. But the forme vsed in the last Later as Councel being the best and most decent, they should follow that, by which late example, which succeeded well, they might stop the mouth of whosoeuer proposed any to the contrary. And con∣cerning the condemnation of the heretikes, & matters to be handled, & other things demanded by them, order should be giuen in time conuenient: in the mean space they should spend the time inpreābulary things, according to the custome of other Councels. That they should maintaine their presidencie with that comlinesse that beseemeth the Legats of the Apostolike Sea, yet so as that they may giue satisfaction vnto all; but, aboue all, should vse diligence that the Prelats should not exceed the bounds of honest liberty, and reue∣rence towards the Apostolike Sea. It was a matter of greater importance to assist the Prelates that they might bee able to maintaine themselues. There∣fore hee sent a Briefe, by which hee exempted all the Prelates of the Councell from payment of Tenths, and granted them the participation of all fruits, as well in absence as presence: he sent also two thousand crownes to helpe the needie Bishops, giuing order they should not care to haue it published; be∣cause, in case it were knowen, it could not bee expounded but for a louing courtesie of the head of the Councell. This place requireth, by reason of that which hath been, and will be spo∣ken The manner of giuing voi∣ces in the Councell in all ages. in diuers occasions, about the manner of speaking their opinions in the Councel called, Giuing of voyces, that it should be declared, what the custome was of old, & how this, which is vsed in these times, came first vp. The assem∣bling of a whole Church, to handle in the Name of God the occurrences of doctrine and discipline, is a thing most profitable, vsed by the holy Apostles in the choyce of Matthias, and the seuen Deacons: and the Diocesan Coun∣cels are much like to this. But of the meeting of Christians from many re∣mote places to consult together, there is a famous example in the Acts of the Apostles, when Paul and Barnabas, with others of Syria, met the Apostles and other disciples in Ierusalem, who were assembled about the question of kee∣ping the Law. And though it may bee said that it was a recourse of the new Churches of the Gentiles, vnto the old mother Church, frō whence their faith was deriued, a custom much vsed in those first ages, & often rehearsed by Ire∣nie and Tertullian, & though the letter were written by the Apostles, Elders, & brethren of Ierusalem only, yet in regard that not they only, but Paul & Barna∣bas also did speake, it may well be called a Councel; by example whereof the succeeding Bishops thought all Christian Churches to bee but one, and like∣wise all Bishoprickes to be but onely one, so framed, that euery Bishop held a part thereof, not as his owne, but so, as that all ought to gouerne the whole, and euery one to employ himselfe most in that which was particularly re∣commended to him; as S. Cyprian, in his little golden booke of the vnity of the Church, doth piously demonstrate. In case of necessity of any particular Church, though the persecutions sometimes waxed warme, as many as could assembled themselues, to make prouision in common. In which assemblies CHRIST and the holy Ghost being president, and charity chasing away all humane passion, they aduised and resolued of what was fit, without ceremo∣nies or formes prescribed. But after a certaine time, passions of men and cha∣ritie beeing mingled together, and there beeing a necessity to gouerne them with some order, the chiefest man amongst those that were assembled in Councell, either for learning, or for greatnesse of the Citie or Church where∣of he was, or for some other respect of eminencie, tooke vpon him the charge to propose and guide the action, and collect the voyces. But after that it plea∣sed God to giue peace to the Christians, and that the Romane Emperours re∣ceiued the holy faith, there happening more difficulties in doctrine and disci∣pline which, by reason of the ambition or other bad affections of those that had followers and credite, troubled the publike quiet another sort of Episco∣pal assemblies had beginning, congregated by Princes or their Lieutenants, to remedie the troubles. In these the action was guided by those Princes or Magistrates which did call them together, who also were personally present, proposing and gouerning the treatie, and decreeing interlocutorily, the oc∣curring differences, but leauing the decision of the principall point, for which the Councell was congregated, to the common opinion of the assem∣blie. This forme appeareth in the Councels, whose actes doe remaine. The Colloquie of Catholikes and Donatistes before Marcellinus and many others may serue for example. But to speake onely of generall Councels, this was done in the first Councel of Ephesus before the Earle Candidianus, sent Presi∣dent by the Emperour; and more cleerely in that of Calcedon before Martia∣nus and the Iudges by him appointed, in that of Constantinople in Trullo before Constantine surnamed Poganatus, where the Prince or Magistrate that was President, commanded what should bee handled, what order obserued, who should speake, and who be silent, and did decide and accommodate the diffe∣rences in these things. And in the other generall Councell, the actes whereof are not extant, as of the first of Nice, and the second of Constantinople, the historians of that Age doe witnesse, that Constantine and Theodofius did the like. Yet in those times, when the Bishops themselues did assemble of their owne accord and others medled not, the action was gouerned as hath been said, by one of them, and the resolution taken according to the common con∣sent. Sometimes the matter was so easie, that it was dispatched in one mee∣ting. Sometimes, by reason of the difficulty or multiplicitie thereof, it was necessarie to reiterate the businesse, whence proceeded the many Sessions in the same Councel. Not one of them was about ceremony, or only to publish what was digested elsewhere, but to vnderstand the opinion of euery one, and the colloquies, discussions, disputes, and whatsoeuer was done or spoken, were called the actes of the Councel. It is a new opinion, and seldome practi∣sed, though established in Trent, that the Decrees onely are called Actes of the Councel, and ought onely to bee published; but in the ancient Councels all was giuen vnto all. Notaries were present to collect the voyces, who, when a Bishop spake and was not contradicted, wrote not his proper name, but thus, The Holy Sinode saith. And when many said the same thing, it was written, The Bishops acclaymed, or affirmed, and the things so spoken were taken for decisions; if they spake in a contrary sense, the contrary opinions were no∣ted, and the names of the authours, and the Iudges or Presidents did pro∣nounce. Sometimes some impertinencie did vndoubtedly happen by reason of some mans imperfection; but charitie, which excuseth the defects of ones brother, did couer it. A greater number of the Prouince, where the Coun∣cell was held, and of the borders was present; but without emulation, eue∣ry one rather desiring to obey, then to giue a law vnto others. After the Easterne and Westerne Empires were separated, there remained still in the West some marke of the ancient Councels, and many were celebrated in Councels go∣uerned by Princes. France, and Germany, vnder the posterity of Charles the Great, and not a few in Spaine, vnder the Kings of the Gothes. At last, Princes being absolutely debar∣red to intermeddle in Ecclesiastical matters, that kind of Councel grew in dis∣use, 1546 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5.—HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. & that alone remained which was called by the Ecclesiastikes themselues; the conuocation of which Prouinciall Councels was almost wholly assu∣med by the Pope, by sending his Legates to bee Presidents, wheresoeuer hee heard there was a treatie to hold a Councell. And after a certaine time hee tooke that power to himselfe which the Romane Emperours vsed, to con∣uocate a Councell of the whole Empire, and to be President himselfe, if hee were present, or, in his absence, to send Legates to be Presidents; and to go∣uerne the action. But the Prelats, assembled in the Synod, being deliuered from the feare of a Secular Prince, which kept them in awe, as worldly re∣spects, the causes of all mischiefes, did exceedingly increase, which caused also the multiplying of many indecencies, they beganne to digest and order the matters in priuate, that they might obserue a decencie in the publike meeting. Afterwards this was obserued for a forme, and in the Councels, besides the Sessions, they beganne to make Congregations of some Depu∣ties, to set in order the matters to bee treated of, which in the beginning, if they were many, were diuided, and a proper Congregation assigned to eue∣ry one. And this beeing not sufficient to remooue all the indecencies, be∣cause those that were not present, hauing different interests, made difficul∣ties in publique, besides the particular Congregation, they made a generall before the Session, where all were present; which according to the ancient rite, is the Conciliarie action, because the Session, euery thing being done be∣fore, remayneth but a pure ceremonie. But a little more then one Age being past, priuate interests caused a contention to arise amongst the Bishops of diuers Nations. Whereupon those that were remote beeing few, and not willing to bee ouercome by the borderers, who were more in number, to make the ballance equall, it was necessary that euery Nation should assemble by it selfe, and resolue according to the number of voices, and that the ge∣nerall decision should be established, not by the suffrages of particular men, but by the plurality of the voyces of the Nations. So it was obserued in the Councels of Constance, and Basil: which vse as it was good where the go∣uernment was free, as it was when the world had no Pope, so it ill befitted Why the Ro∣manists made so great a matter of the forme of pro∣ceeding. Trent, where they desired a Councell subiect vnto him. And this was the reason, why the Legates at Trent, and the Court of Rome, made so great a matter of the forme of proceeding, and of the quality and authority of the Presidencie. But the answere being come from Rome, they called the Congregation the fifth of Ianuary 1546. where the Cardinall of Monte hauing saluted and bles∣sed 1546 them all in the Popes name, caused the said Briefe of exemption from pay∣ment of tenthes to be read. The three Legates made as it were three enco∣miasticall Orations, one after another, declaring the Popes good affection towards the Fathers. But some Spaniards saide that this fauour of the Pope brought greater dammage then benefit, because the accepting of it implied a confession that the Pope might lay burthens vpon other Churches, and that the Councell had not authority to hinder him, nor to exempt those who by right were not to be included. The Legates were not only displeased at this, but returned also some biting termes. Some of the Prelates demanded that the grace might bee extended to those of their families also, and to as many as were present in the Councel. The Generals of the religious Orders deman∣ded likewise the same exemption, alledging the charge of the Monasteries for the Friars which they brought to the Councel. Catalanus Triultius, Bishop of Piacenza, who arriued two dayes before, related publikely that hee was rifled as he passed neere to Mirandula, and desired an order should be made in the Councel against those that hindered or molested the Prelates, or others that went to the Councel. The Legates, ioyning this propose with the fore∣said pretence of exemption, considering of what importance it might bee, if the Councel should meddle in such a businesse, making Edicts for their owne exaltation, and that this was to touch the secrets of the Ecclesiasticall Hie∣rarchie, put it aside with much dexteritie, alledging it would seeme strange to the world, and too great a desire of reuenge, offering to labour with the Pope, that hee would prouide for the security of their persons, and haue consideration of the families of the Prelates, and of the Friars. And so they appeased all. And going on to the Conciliary actions, the Cardinall of Monte related what forme was obserued in the last Laterane Councel, where himselfe was present, as Archbishop of Siponto. Hee said, that treating then of the French Pragmatique, of the schisme against Iulius 2. and of the warre betweene Christian Princes, three deputations of Prelates were made for those mat∣ters, that each Congregation beeing employed in one onely, it might better digest it; that the Decrees being framed, a generall Congregation was called, where euery one spake his opinion, and that by those the resolutions were better reformed, so that all things passed in the Session with great concord and comlinesse; that the businesse to bee handled by them was more various, the Lutheranes hauing moued euery stone, to ouerthrow the building of Card. Monte prescribeth an order for dis∣cussing mat∣ters in Coun∣cel. faith; therefore that it will bee necessary to diuide the matters, and for euery one to ordaine a particular Congregation to dispute it, to cause the Deputies to frame the Decrees which are to bee proposed in the generall Congregati∣on, where euery one shall deliuer his opinion: which that it might bee abso∣lutely free, themselues the Legates did resolue to be proposers onely, and not to giue their suffrage but in the Session. That all should bethinke themselues what was necessary to be handled, that some beginning might be made in the Session which approached. They proposed then, whether they were pleased that a Decree already A great diffe∣rence about the title of the Councel. framed, concerning Christian conuersation while the Councel lasted in Trent should bee published in the Session. Which beeing read with the title, The most holy, as the commandement from Rome was, the French men desired this addition, Representing the Church Vniuersall: which opinion many Bi∣shops did follow with a ioynt consent. But the Legates considering that that title was vsed onely in the Councel of Constance and Basil, and that to imitate them, was to renew their memorie, and to giue them some authority, and to open a gap to the difficulties which then troubled the Church of Rome; and which imported more, considering that after they had said (Representing the Church Vniuersall) some also might thinke to adde the words following, that is, which hath power immediatly from CHRIST whereunto euery one, though of Papall dignitie, is bound to obey, they opposed strongly, and (as they wrote to Rome in plaine termes) they whetted themselues against it, without declaring to the fathers the true causes, but onely saying they were froathy and inuidious words, and that the heretikes would haue made a bad interpretation of them. And they all so laboured, without discouering the se∣cret, first by art, then by saying plainely they would not permit it, that they appeased the generall commotion, though the French men and some few more remained firme in their proposition. And Iohn de Salazzar, Bishop of Lanciano, a Spaniard by Nation, assisted the Legats very much, who hauing commended in ample termes the first Councels of the Church, for antiquity and sanctitie of those that assisted, he desired they should bee imitated in the title vsed by them, which was very plaine, without expressing representation, or what, or how great authoritie the Councell had. But hee pleased them not, when he said, that, by their example the name of Presidents ought to be laid aside, because it was neuer vsed by any ancient Councell, but begun onely by that of Constance, which The name of Presidents was neuer v∣sed in Coun∣cell before the Councell of Constance. by reason of schisme, changed Presidents often: adding, that if that ex∣ample were to be followed, it would also be necessary to nominate the Em∣perours Ambassadour. For then the King of the Romans was named, and the Princes with him. But this pride was farre remote from Christian humility: and he repeated the discourse of the Cardinall Santa Croce, which hee made the twelfth of December, by which also hee concluded, that they should de∣sist to make mention of Presidencie. This proposition troubled the Legats more then the former; yet the Cardinall Monte suddenly answered, that Councels haue spoken diuersly, according to the occurrences of the times: that formerly the Pope hath alwayes beene acknowledged, for head of the Church, nor euer any Councell hath beene demaunded, with condition it should not depend on the Pope, as the Duch-men now doe with great bold∣nesse; vnto which hereticall temeritie it was fit to resist in euery action, shewing they were ioyned with the head, which is the Pope, by making mentions of his Legats. Hee spake much in this matter, and knowing hee could better maintaine it by diuersion, then perswasions, hee was a meanes they should passe to another thing. The contents of the Decree was appro∣ued by all; but there being one particle in it, in which euery one was exhor∣ted to pray to God for the Pope, Emperour, and Kings, the French Prelats desired there should speciall mention bee made of the French King. This the Cardinall Santa Croce commended, but added, that the like specification would be expected by all in their place, which would proue a long businesse, and full of danger, by reason of precedencie. The French men replied, that in the Bull of the conuocation, the Pope had made mention onely of the Emperour and French King; and therefore by that example they should name them both, or neither. The Legats tooke time to thinke of it, being desirous to giue euery one satisfaction. The seuenth of Ianuary all the Prelats, clad in their ordinary habit, assem∣bled The session Ianuary 7. themselues in the house of the prime Legat, from whence they went to the Cathedrall Church with the crosse before them. Out of the Countrey of Trent were collected into the Citie three hundred foote, armed partly with pikes, and partly with harquebushes, and some horse. These put themselues in file on either side the way, from the house of the Church; where the Le∣gats and Prelats beeing entred, the Souldiers returned to the market place, and discharged their harquebushes, and remained there to guard the Session. Besides the Legats and Cardinall of Trent, there were present foure Arch-bi∣shops, twenty eight Bishops, three Abbats of the congregation of Cassina, and foure generals, who sat in the place of the Session. These forty three per∣sons made the generall Councel. Of the Archbishops, two were titular only, neuer seene in the Churches, from which they had their name, which the Pope gaue them, only to do them honor; the one was Olaus Magnus, Archbi∣shop of Vpsala in Gothland, the other Robert Venante, a Scottish-man, Arch-bishop of Armagh in Ireland; who, though he were pore-blinde, was com∣mended for his vertue, to ride post the best in the world. These two men, hauing beene releeued certaine yeeres in Rome, by the Popes almes, were sent to Trent to increase the number, and to depend on the Legats. About the number of twenty Diuines stood on their feete; the Ambassador of the King of the Romans, and the Proctor of the Cardinall of Ausburg were pre∣sent, and sate vpon the Ambassadours bench, and neere vnto them, vpon the same bench, sate ten Gentlemen, chosen out of the bordering places by the Cardinall of Trent. Iohn Fonseca, Bishop of Castelamare said Masse, and Co∣riolanus Martiranus, Bishop of S. Marke, made the Sermon. When the Masse was ended, the Prelats put on their Pontificall habits, and then the Letanie and Prayers were said, as in the first Session. After this all sate downe, and the Bishop that said Masse, mounting into the Pulpit, read the forenamed Bull, against admitting to giue voyce the Proctors of those that were absent, without mentioning the other, where those of Ger∣manie were excepted. Then he read the Decree, in which the Synod exhor∣ted all the faithfull assembled in Trent, to liue in the feare of God, and dayly to pray for the peace of Princes, and vnitie of the Church, and those of the Councell to say Masse, at the least on Sundaies, and to pray for the Pope, Emperour, Kings, and Princes, and all to fast, giue almes, to be sober, and to instruct their families. It exhorted also all men, especially the learned, to bethinke themselues exactly how to resist heresies, and in the assemblies to vse modestie in speaking. And it ordained beside, that if any sat not in their place, or gaue not voice, or was not present in their congregations, he should not receiue any preiudice, or gaine any new right. The fathers being inter∣rogated, after this was read, they answered, it pleased them. But the French men added, that they approued not so bare a title, and required an addition of Representing the vniuersall Church. In fine, the next session was appointed the fourth of February, and the fathers had leaue to depart; who putting off their Pontificall habits, did, in their ordinarie apparell, accompanie the Le∣gats home in the same order they came to Church; which was obserued in all the sessions afterward. After the session there was no congregation held vntill the thirteenth of Ianuary, because Peter Pacceco, Bishop of Iahen, lately created Cardinall, who expected the hat from Rome, without which the ceremonie gaue him not leaue to goe abroad, had a desire to be there, because order was to bee taken therein, that no inconueniences should happen in the session. The congre∣gation being assembled, the Legats complained of those, who in the session had opposed the title; they shewed it was not seemely to cause diuersitie of opinions to appeare in that publike place; that the congregations were made that euery one might deliuer his mind more priuatly, and all agree in that which was to bee published; that nothing would more daunt the here∣tiques, and encourage the Catholiques, then the fame of vnion. They de∣scended to the matter of the title, and said, that none was more fit then that which the Pope had giuen in the Conuocation, and in so many other Bulls, where it was called, Oecumenicall and vniuersall; vnto which it was super∣fluous to adde (representation) in regard whole bookes declare what a Coun∣cell lawfully called, and begun, is, and doth represent; that by doing other∣wise they should seeme to make doubt of the authority thereof, and resemble it to some other Councell, vnto which they gaue that title, being willing to supplie with words the lawfull authority which they knew it wanted, glan∣cing at that of Basil and Constance, but to make a firme resolution they would haue euery one deliuer his opinion. The Cardinall Pacceco began to say, the Councell was adorned with very many titles, which if they were vsed in all occasions, the expression of them would bee greater then the body of the Decree. But as a great Emperour A dispute a∣bout the title of the Coun∣cell. possessour of many kingdomes and states, vseth in his Edicts the title onely from whence they haue force, and often putteth his owne name to them without any title at all, so this Councell, according to the Subiects that shall be handled, ought to vse many titles to expresse its authoritie; but now that they are in the preparatories, there is no necessitie to vse any of them at all. The Bishop of Feltre put them in minde, that the Protestants desired a Coun∣cell where themselues might haue a decisiue voice, so that if this title be giuen to the Councell, that it representeth the Church vniuersall, they will draw an argument from hence, that some of euery order of the vniuersall Church ought to be present. These being two, the Clergie and the Laitie, it cannot be intirely represented, if the Laitie be excluded. But for the rest, those also of the Councell who assented to the simple title, were of opinion that it ought to bee supplied. The Bishop of Saint Marke said that the Laikes are most improperly called the Church. For the Canons determine that they haue no authority to command, but necessitie to obey, and that this is one of the things which the Councell ought to decree, that the Seculars ought humbly to receiue that doctrine of faith which is giuen them by the Church, without disputing or thinking further on it; and therefore that it is very meete to vse the title, that the Synode representeth the Church vniuersall, to make them vnderstand that they are not the Church, but ought to hear∣ken to, and obey the Church. Many things were spoken and they went on without any firme conclusion but onely that the simple title should bee vsed in the next session, as it was in the last. When this was ended, because certaine Prelates desired, that at the last they might come to matters substantiall, the Legats, to giue them satisfacti∣on, proposed that they should consider of the three heads contained in the Popes Bulls; that is, the extirpation of heresies, reformation of discipline, and establishing of peace; how they should beginne these treaties, what course they should holde, and how proceede; that they should pray God to illuminate them all, and euery one should speake his opinion in the first congregation. In the ende some commissions from absent Bishops were presented; and the Arch-bishop of Aix, the Bishops of Feltre and Astor∣ga were deputed to consider of their excuse, and relate in the Congre∣gation. The next day the Legates wrote to Rome, that it appeared that the ampli∣fication of the title, with addition of Representing the Church Vniuersall, was a thing so popular and so pleased all, that it might easily be spoken of againe: and therefore they desired to know his Holinesse pleasure if they should persist in denying it, or yeeld vnto them, especially vpon occasion of ma∣king some Decree of importance, as to condemne heresies, or the like. They gaue aduice also, that they had made the proposition for the next Congrega∣tion so generall, that they might yeelde to the desire of the Prelates, which was to enter into the substantiall points, and yet enterpose time that they might receiue instruction from his Holinesse. They added that the Cardi∣nall Pacceco had aduice, that the Emperor had giuen order to many Spanish Bishops, men of exemplary liues, and learning, to goe to the Councel. There∣fore they thought it necessary, that his Holinesse should send ten or twelue Prelates, whom hee might trust, men fit to appeare for their other qualities, that the number of the Oltramontans increasing, especially men rare, of ex∣emplaritie The Legates desire to make their partie strong. and learning, they might in some part bee incountred. For a∣mongst those that vntill then were in Trent, those that had good mindes had little learning, and lesse discretion; and those that had vnderstanding, were discouered to haue deseignes, and hard to be gouerned. In the next Congregation, assembled the eighteenth, to vnderstand the The Imperia∣lists desire to beginne with reformation. mindes of all, concerning the Propositions made in the last, the opinions were foure. The Imperialists said, that the points of doctrine could not bee touched, with hope of any fruit, because it was first necessary to remooue the transgressions, from whence the heresies arose, by a good reformation, enlarging themselues very much in this field, and concluding that so long as the scandall which the World receiueth, by the deformation of the Clergie, ceaseth not, nothing that they can say or preach will euer bee beleeued, all beeing perswaded that deedes ought to bee regarded, and not words. And that they ought not to take example by the ancient Councels, because in them either there was not corruption of maners, or that was not cause of heresie; and in fine, that to deferre the treatie of reformation, was to shew themselues incorrigible. Some few others thought fit to beginne with doctrine, and then to passe to reformation, alledging that faith is the ground and foundation of Christi∣an life; that no man begins to build from the roofe, but from the founda∣tions; that it is a greater sinne to erre in faith then in other humane actions; and that the point of rooting out heresies was put first in the Popes Buls. A third opinion was, that the points of reformation and faith might ill bee separated, because there was no doctrine without abuse, nor abuse which drawed not after it the bad interpretation and bad sense of some doctrine. Therefore it was necessarie to handle them at the same time, for that the world hauing their eyes fixed vpon this Councell, and expecting a remedie as well in matters of faith as maners, it would be satisfied better by handling them both together, then one after another: especially if according to the proposition of the Cardinall of Monte, diuers deputations were made, and one handled this matter, and the other that, which should be done quickely, considering that the time present, when Christendome had peace, was preci∣ous, and not to bee lost, not knowing what impediments the time to come might bring. And the rather, because they should study to make the Coun∣cell as short as they could, that the Churches the lesse while might remaine depriued of their Pastours, and for many other respects, intimating that which might arise in length of time, to the distast of the Pope and Court of Rome. Some others, among whom were the French men, demanded, that that of the peace might be the first: that they should write vnto the Emperour, the most Christian King, and other Princes, giuing them thankes for the conuocation of the Councel, for continuance whereof that they would esta∣blish peace, and helpe the worke forward, by sending their Ambassadours and Prelates; and likewise should write friendly to the Lutheranes, inuiting them charitably to come to the Councell, and ioyne themselues with the rest of Christendome. The Legates, vnderstanding the opinions of them all, and commending their wisedome, said, that because it was late, and the con∣sultation of weight, and the opinions various, they would thinke of what euery one had said, and, in the first Congregation, propose the points to bee determined. Order was taken that there should bee two Congregations euery weeke, Two Con∣gregations e∣uery weeke, without in∣timation. on Munday and Friday, without warning: and in the end the Archbishop of Aix, hauing receiued letters from the most Christian King, saluted the Sy∣node in his Name, and promised that his Maiestie would suddenly send an Ambassadour, and many Prelates of his Kingdome; and so the Congregati∣on ended. The Legates sent aduice of all to Rome, and wrote that they had drawen in length the resolution of the things that were handled, vnder the pretences before related, but in truth to gaine more time, that they might receiue in∣structions and orders how to gouerne themselues; beseeching his Holinesse againe to make his will knowne, and to consider aboue all, that to prolong the Councell, and hold it open, when he might make it short, was not good for the Apostolique Sea: adding that they were constrained to hold two Congregations euery weeke, to keepe the Prelates in exercise, and to take oc∣casion from them to make them by themselues. But they said that this would draw on the businesse very fast, and therefore that it was necessary to take some course to resolue their proposes quickely, and not to deferre to answere them, as hitherto hath beene done, but to aduise them what they ought to do presently, and to foresee, as much as might be, what could happen. And see∣ing they had written oftentimes, that many poore Bishoppes came to the Councell, for the hope and good promises which his holinesse and Cardinall Farnese had giuen them, they then repeated it, adding, it was an error to think to vse them as homely in Trent, as in Rome, where, hauing no authority, they are humble and in subiection; but when they are in the Councell, they thinke they should be esteemed and maintained, which if it be not done, it were bet∣ter not to haue them in that place, then to haue them there ill satisfied, and distasted; concluding that that enterprise could not succeed Well, without diligence and cost. It may generally seeme strange, that the Pope, a wise man, and skilfull in the affaires of the world, should not giue answere vnto two particulars, of such importance and necessitie, in so long a time, after so many instances of his ministers. But his holinesse grounded not his hopes vpon the Councell; all his cogitations were turned toward the warre, which the Cardinall Farnese The Pope is more intent vpon the war against the Protestants, then vpon the Councell. treated with the Emperour the yeere before, and could not forbeare to make demonstration thereof: neither did the Emperour desire the Councell should proceed, it being sufficient for his ends that it was opened onely. But the Prelates, who desired to begin with reformation, and leaue the do∣ctrine behind, assisted by the Emperours Ministers, assayed to draw the o∣thers A controuer∣sie how to be∣gin, whether with reforma∣tion or doc∣trine, or with both together. to them: which thing being very easie, because the reformation was generally desired, and not much beleeued, their number grew so great, that the Legats were confounded. Therefore by themselues and their friends they often dealt priuatly with diuers, and lastly, in the congregation of the 22. day, all three one after another set themselues to ruine the foundations which were laid in fauour of the reformation. One reason, drawen from the Emperours proposition in the Diet of Wormes the last May, made a great impression, when he said they ought to expect what the Councell would doe in the definitions of doctrine, and in the reformation; and, that if nothing were done, he would intimate another Diet, to accommodate the differences of religion, and correct the abuses: arguing from hence, that if they handled not the points of doctrine, the determinations of the future Colloquie and Diet would bee canonized; neither could they with reason hinder them to treat of religion in Germanie, which themselues refused to doe in the Councell. There was a great rich Prelate in the congregation, who, with a premedi∣tated speech, went about to shew, that they ought onely to ayme at the refor∣mation, aggrauating much the common deformation of the whole Clergie, and inculcating, that so long as our vessels were not cleansed, the holy Ghost would not dwell in them, and by consequence, that no right iudgment could be expected in matters of faith. But the Cardinall Santa Croce taking from hence occasion to speake, said, that there was no reason to deferre the reformation of themselues, who were to manage the Councell, but that was easie and ready, and might suddenly be executed, without delaying the points of doctrine, which were intricate of themselues, and of long digestion. He much commended that prelate for making mention of a thing so holy, and of so good example: for beginning from themselues, they might easily reforme all the rest of the world; and hee earnestly exhorted all to come to the practise thereof. This opinion was much commended by all, but not followed; for many soid, the reformation ought to bee generall, without loosing time in that particular. Therefore they all concluded, except two, that the Articles of Religion and reformation should be handled together, as they are alike desired, and deemed necessarie by the whole world, and ioyntly proposed in the Popes Bulls. The Legats were content with this resolution, though they rather desired to treate of faith, and leaue the reformation. But so great was their feare that they should be constrained to handle reformation alone, that they thought it A resolution made to han∣dle doctrine and reforma∣tion together. a great victorie to ioyne them together. And they thought also that their opinion to leaue the reformation was dangerous, because they should re∣sist all the Prelates and States of Christendome, who desired it, which they could not doe without much scandall, and infamie. If this course which they tooke, being constrained thereunto by meere necessitie, should not please those at Rome, they could not complaine of any but them∣selues, who were so often solicited to answere the letters, and send necessary instructions. Afterwards it was resolued to write to the Pope to thanke him for cal∣ling and opening the Councell, and to desire him to maintaine and fauour it, and to bee a meanes vnto Christian Princes to continue peace among themselues, and excite them to send Ambassadors to the Councell. They resolued also to write to the Emperour, the French King, Kings of the Romans, of Portugal, and other Catholike Princes, to preserue peace, to send Ambassadours, secure the wayes, to mooue their Prelates to ap∣peare personally in the Councell. The care of writing these letters was com∣mitted to the Bishop of Saint Marke, and were to be read and sealed in the next congregation. The Legates published two points to bee considered of by the Fathers, whereof they were to giue their voices. The first, whether in the next ses∣sion the heads of faith, and those of reformation which were correspondent, should bee handled together. The second how to proceed in making choice of the two heads, and in handling and examining them. The Legats thought they had by these propositions disburthened themselues of the importunate quest made by some, to establish some substantiall point in euery con∣gregation, and withall to haue shewed that they held the Prelates in esteeme. The next congregation was spent in reading many letters, and disputing A Congre∣gation. what Seale to vse. Some proposed they should bee sealed in leade, with a Bull proper to the Synode, in which some would haue on the one side the image of the holy ghost in the forme of a Doue, and the name of the Synod on the other, and some desired other formes, all which were glorious. But the Legats, who had another order from Rome, suffering the fathers to dispute heereon, diuerted the proposition by saying it sauored of pride, and protracted the time, because they must send to Ʋenice to make the forme of it, in regard no Artisan in Trent was able to doe it; adding that it might bee better thought of afterwards, and that it was necessarie to dis∣patch the letters now, which might bee done by the name and seale of the Prime Legat. That which remained was put off vntill the next Congre∣gation. In the which, the two points before proposed were discussed, and con∣cerning A Congre∣gation. the first, there were two opinions. One that the Decree should bee framed and published: the other that it was not good to tie themselues with a Decree, but to keepe their libertie, and resolue as occasion should serue. They tooke a middle course; to make mention onely that the Synode was principally assembled for these two causes, without going any further. But for the second point the maior part were of opinion, that they being as∣sembled to condemne the Lutheran heresie, they should follow the order of their confession; which others contradicted, because it was an imitation of the Colloquies in Germanie, which would debase the dignitie of the Councel. And the two first heads of the Augustan confession being of the Trinitie, and incarnation, in which there was no substantiall difference, though they were expressed after a new maner, and vnusuall in the Schooles, if they should bee approoued, reputation would bee giuen them, and they could not so well condemne the rest; and in case they would neither approoue nor con∣demne them, and speake of them not with the termes of that confession, but of the Schooles or others, there was danger to raise new disputes and new schismes. The Legates, who aimed at nothing but to driue out the time, were glad to heare the difficulties, and did carefully cherish them, sometimes incouraging one; and sometimes another. The time prefixed for the session approaching, the Legats, hauing recei∣ued The Legates were perplex∣ed for want of instructi∣on. no instruction from Rome, were much perplexed. For to passe that session, as the former, in ceremonies only, was to loose all reputation; and to handle any matter was dangerous, because they had not their marke prefixed where∣at to aime. That which seemed to haue least perill, was to frame a decree vpon the resolution taken in the congregation, to handle the points of faith and reformation together: whereunto opposition was made, that it was to bind themselues, and to determine that in the congregation, which was vndecided by the Pope. In this ambiguitie it was proposed that they should make a dela∣tory decree, vnder pretence that many Prelats were in their iourny, and would shortly come thither. Cardinal Poole told them, that in regard a confession of faith hath been made in all the ancient Cauncels, the same should be done in that session, publishing that of the Church of Rome. At the last it was resolued to make the Decree with a simple title, and to make mention therein that they ought to treat of religion, and reformation; but in such generall termes, that the Creed might be recited, and passed ouer, making another Decree to deferre the materiall points vntill another session, alleadging for a reason that some Prelates were ready to set forward, and some in their iourney already: and to prolong the terme of the next session as long as they could, for feare of being brought into the like straits: yet so as not to put it off vntill after Easter. When this was framed, they imparted it to the Prelates they trusted most, amongst whom the Bishop of Bitonto put to their consideration, that to make a session to establish a Creed, made 1200. yeeres before, and continu∣ally beleeued, and now absolutely accepted by al, might be laughed at by those that were enuious, and ill expounded by others. That they cannot say they follow the Fathers example in this: because they haue either made aconfes∣sion against the heresies they did condemne, or repeated the former made against the heresies already condemned, to giue them greater autho∣ritie, adding some thing for declaration, or to reduce it into memorie, or to secure it against obliuion. But now neither a new confession was compo∣sed, nor a declaration adioyned. To giue them more authoritie belonged not to them, nor to that age. To recall it into memorie, in regard it was repeated euery weeke in all Churches, and was in the fresh memorie of eue∣ry one, was a thing superfluous, and affected. That the heretikes ought to bee conuinced by the confession, was true of those who erred against it: but it was not so of the Lutherans, who beleeued it as the Catholikes. If when this preparation shall bee made, the confession bee neuer vsed to this purpose, it will bee thought to bee done to no other end then to enter∣taine the time, and to sprinkle Court-holy-water, not daring to touch the poynts of doctrine, nor being willing to meddle with the reformation. He thought it better to interpose delay, in regard of the expectation of the Pre∣lates, and so to end the Session. The Bishop of Chioza added, that the reasons alleadged might serue the heretikes turnes, by saying, that if the confession can serue to conuert infi∣dels, ouercome the heretikes, and confirme the faithfull, they could not en∣force them to beleeue any thing besides. The Legat iudged not these reasons to be so strong as the contrary, that not to make a Decree was losse of reputa∣tion. Therefore they resolued on that side, and fitted some words better, according to the aduertisements of the Prelates, and proposed the Decree in the Congregation of the first of February. Of this many things were sayd; and though it was approued by the maior part, yet in the end of the congre∣gation it gaue distaste, and some of the Prelates said, reasoning among them∣selues, it will be said, that by a worke of twenty yeeres time, it hath beene con∣cluded, that we should be brought to heare the Creed repeated. The fourth day, destinated for the Session, they went to Church with The Session. the same ceremonies and company; in which Peter Tragliania, Archbishop of Palermo, sang Masse, Ambrose Catarin of Siena, a Dominican Friar, Archbi∣shop of Torre, read the Decree: the substance whereof was, that the Synod, The Decree is read. considering the importance of the two points to be treated of, that is, the extirpation of heresies, and reformation of manners, exhorteth all to trust in God, and arme themselues with spirituall weapons, and that their diligence may haue both beginning and progresse from the grace of God, it determi∣neth to begin from the confession of faith, imitating the examples of the Fathers, who in the principall Councels, in the beginning of the actions, haue opposed that buckler against the heresies, and sometimes haue conuer∣ted the infidels, & ouercome the heretikes with that alone; in which all that professe Christianitie doe agree. And here the whole was repeated word by word, without adding any other conclusion. And the Archbishop asked the Fathers, whether the Decree pleased them. All answered affirmatiuely, b some with conditions and additions of no great moment, yet such as displea∣sed the Cardinall of Monte; who liked not they should descend to particu∣lars in the Sessions, fearing that when some matter of weight was to bee The eighth of Aprill is ap∣pointed for the next Ses∣sion. treated of, some inconuenience might arise. Afterwards the other Decree was read, intimating the Session for the eighth of Aprill, alleadging for a cause of the delay, that many Prelates were in a readinesse to come, and some were in the iourney, and for that the deliberations of the Synod will be more esteemed when they shall bee strengthened by the counsell and presence of of more Fathers; yet so as that they would not deferre the discussion and exa∣mination of what seemed fit to be handled presently. The Court of Rome, who stood all amazed at the very name of reformati∣on, was well pleased to heare that the Councell entertained it selfe in pream∣bles, hoping that time would bring foorth some remedie. And the Courti∣ers that had intemperate tongues, exercised their gibing, publishing diuers bitter Pasquins, as then the custome was in all accidents, some commending Pasquins made against the Session. the Prelates assembled in Trent, for making a most noble decree, worthy of a generall Councel, and some exhorting them to vnderstand their owne worth and knowledge. The Legates in giuing the Pope an account of the Session held, sent also aduise, that it would be hard to oppose, and ouercome those who desired to fi∣nish The Legates giue the Pope an account of the Session. the title, with the representation of the Church vniuersall; yet they would endeauour to remooue the difficulties. But that it was impossible to entertaine the Prelates any more without comming to, and doing some essentiall matter; and therefore that they expected the order and instruction which they so often had demanded. That for their parts they thought it fit to handle those points of the holy Scripture, which were in controuersie betweene them and the Lutherans, and the abuse brought into the Church in that matter; which things would much satisfie the world, and offend no man: and they would expect an answere for this, there beeing space enough to examine those matters, and many occasions to driue out the time vntill the beginning of Lent. But though the Councell was then opened, and still celebrated, the af∣faires of Germanie continued the same. In the beginning of the yeere the E∣lector The affaires of Germanie continue the same, And the Palatine embraceth the reformed religion. Palatine brought in the vse of the Chalice, the popular tongue in pub∣lique prayers, the marriage of Priests, and other things which were refor∣med before in other places. And those that were appointed by the Empe∣rour to bee present in the meeting, to finde out a way to compose the diffe∣rences of Religion, met together at a Colloquie in Ratisbon. The Emperor deputed for Presidents the Bishop of Eicstat, and the Conte of Furstemberg: but no good fruit grew thereof, by reason of the suspicions which one part conceiued against the other, and because the Catholikes omitted no occasi∣ons to giue greater iealousies to the other side, and to faine them of their owne, which finally made the Colloquie to dissolue. The fifteenth of February Martin Luther died also. These newes being Martin Lu∣ther dieth sent to Trent and Rome, there was not so much griefe for the change of Re∣ligion in the Palatinate, as ioy that the Colloquie succeeded not well, but ten∣ded The Roma∣nists reioyce at his death and at the dis∣solution of the Colloquie without fruit. to dissolution, and that Luther was dead. The Colloquie seemed ano∣ther Councell, and gaue great iealousie; because, if any thing had beene ac∣corded, they saw not how the Councell could after reiect it, and, if it had beene accepted, it would seeme that the Councell receiued lawes from ano∣ther place. And by all meanes the Colloquie being on foote, and the Em∣perours ministers there present, it brought small reputation to the Councell and the Pope. The Fathers in Trent, and the Court in Rome conceiued great hope, seeing that so potent an instrument, to contradict the doctrine and rites of the Church of Rome, was dead; who was the principall, and almost the totall cause of the diuisions and innouations introduced, and held it for a presage of the good successe of the Councell; and the rather because that death was diuulged throughout Italy, with many prodigious and fabulous circumstances, which were ascribed to miracle, and the vengeance of God, though there were but the vsuall accidents, which doe ordinarily happen in the deaths of men of sixtie three yeeres of age: for in that age Martin Luther Fables raysed vpon Luthers death. died. But those things that happened afterwards euen vntill our age, haue declared that Martin was onely one of the meanes, and that the causes were more potent and secret. The Emperour beeing arriued in Ratisbon, complained grieuously that The Empe∣rors letters concerning the Colloquy were laughed at. the Colloquie was dissolued, and wrote letters thereof throughout all Ger∣many; which were laughed at, because it was too much knowne that the se∣paration was wrought by the Spaniards and Friars, and by the Bishop of Eic∣stat, whom hee had sent. And when the workemen are knowne, it is not hard to iudge whence the beginning of the motion doth proceed. But the wise Emperour was willing to vse the same thing to satisfie the Pope and the Councel, and to finde an occasion against the Protestants; which the euent shewed to bee true. For the same complaints beeing renewed in the Diet, and meanes of agreement beeing sought by those that were assembled, the Ministers of Ments and Triers separating themselues from the other Electors, and adhering to the other Bishops, approoued the Councell, and desired the Emperour to protect it, and to cause the Protestants to be there, and submit themselues to it. But they did resist and remonstrate that that Councell had not those qualities and conditions so often promised, and desired that the peace might bee kept, and the differences in religion accorded in a lawfull Councel in Germanie, or in an Imperiall Diet. But in the end the maskes The prouisi∣ons for warre were knowne were remooued, and the prouisions for war could no longer be hid; where∣of mention shall bee made in its proper place. The Pope considered very much of the letter written from Trent, weighing the inconueniences that would follow, if hee kept the Councell at anchor, with the ill satisfaction of the Bishops that were there, and the mischiefe that might arise if the refor∣mation should begin. In fine, perceiuing that it was necessary to put some∣thing to the hazard, and that it was wisdome to auoid the greater euill, he re∣solued to write backe to Trent,, to begin the action as they had aduised, ad∣monishing them not to broach any new difficulties in matter of faith, nor to determine any of the things controuersed amongst the Catholiques, and to proceed slowly in the reformation. The Legates, who vntill then had in the Congregations entertained themselues in generall matters, hauing re∣ceaued power to goe on, proposed in the Congregation of the 22. of Febru∣ary, that the first foundation of faith beeing established, they ought in the next place to handle another more ample, which is the holy Scripture, where∣in are points belonging to the doctrines controuerted with the Lutheranes, and others, for reformation of those abuses which are most principall, and necessary to be amended; and so many, that perhaps the time vntill the next Session will not bee sufficient to finde a remedy for all. They discoursed of the controuersies with the Lutherans in this subiect, and of the abuses, and much was spoken hereof by diuers Prelates. The Diuines, who were thirty in number, and almost all Friars, had vntill then serued in the Councell onely to make Sermons on Holy-dayes, in exal∣tation of the Councell and the Pope, and to make light skirmishes with the Lutheranes; but now that controuerted doctrines were to bee decided, and the abuses of learned men rather then of others to bee reformed, their worth The Diuines begin to be esteemed. beganne to appeare. And order was taken that in the points of doctrine to be decided; articles should be extracted out of the bookes of the Lutheranes contrary to the orthodox faith, to bee studied and censured by the Diuines, that euery one speaking his opinion of them, the matter might bee prepared to frame the Decrees, which being proposed in the Congregation, and ex∣amined by the Fathers, when euery mans voyce was knowen, that might bee established which was to bee published in the Session. And for the abuses, euery one should call to mind what hee thought worthy of amendment, to∣gether with the remedy fit for it. The articles for matter of doctrine, drawen out of the Lutheranes bookes, were, 1. That the necessary doctrine of Christian faith, is wholy conteyned in the holy Scripture, and that it is an humane inuention, to adde vnto them vn∣written Traditions, as left vnto the holy Church by Christ and his Apostles, deriued vnto vs by meanes of the continuall succession of Bishops, and that it is sacrilege to defend that they are of equall authority with the old and new Testament. 2. That amongst the bookes of the old Testament, none should bee rec∣koned but those that haue beene receiued by the Iewes, and in the New the sixe Epistles, that is, that vnder the name of S. Paul to the Hebrews, that of S. Iames, the 2. of S. Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. Iohn, one of S. Iude, and the Apocalyps. 3. That to vnderstand the Scripture well, or to alledge the proper words, it is necessary to haue recourse to the texts of the originall tongue in which it is written, and to reprooue the Latine translation; as full of errors. 4. That the diuine Scripture is most easie and perspicuous, and that to vnderstand it, neither glosse nor comment is necessary, but onely to haue the spirit of a sheepe of Christs pasture. 5. Whether Canons, with Anathematismes adioyned, should be framed a∣gainst all these Articles. Vpon the two first, the Diuines discoursed in foure Congregations; and in the first all agreed, that the Christian faith is contayned partly in the Scrip∣ture, and partly in Traditions; and much time was spent in alledging for this places of Tertullian, who often speakes of them; and many were num∣bred out of Irenie, Cyprian, Basil, Austin, and others; yea some said more, that Tradition was the onely foundation of the Catholique doctrine. For the Scripture it selfe is not beleeued but by tradition. But there was some diffe∣rence how this matter might fitly be handled. Vicenzo Lunello, a Franciscan Friar, was of opinion, that, in regard the holy, Scripture and traditions were to be established for ground of faith, they ought first to treat of the Church, which is a more principal foundation. For the Scripture receiueth authority from it, according to the famous say∣ing of Saint Augustine: I would not haue beleeued the Gospel if the authori∣tie of the Church had not compelled me; and no vse can be made of traditi∣ons, but by grounding them vpon the same authority. For if a controuer∣sie Discourses a∣bout the au∣thoritie of traditions. arise about a tradition, it will bee necessary to decide it either by the testi∣mony, or by the determination of the Church. But this foundation being laid, that euery Christian is bound to beleeue the Church; one may securely build thereon. He added, that they should take example from all those that haue substantially written against the Lutherans, as Fryar Siluester, and Ec∣chi s, who haue more alleadged the authoritie of the Church, then any other argument; neither is it possible to conuince the Lutherans otherwise. That it is contrary to the end proposed, (that is to lay all the foundations of Chri∣stian doctrine) to leaue out the principall, and perhaps the onely ground, but certainely that without the which, the residue cannot subsist. This opinion had no followers. Some opposed against it, that it was subiect to the same difficulties which it made to others. For the Synagogues of the heretiques also would arrogate to bee the true Church, vnto whom this authoritie was giuen. Others holding it to be a thing most knowen and vndoubted, that by the name of the Church the Cleargie ought to bee vnderstood, and more properly the Councell and the Pope as head, said they ought to main∣taine, that the authority of the Church is already decided, and that to treat of it now were to shew there was difficultie, or at the least, that it was a thing newly cleered, and not most ancient, euer beleeued since Christianitie began. But Anthonius Marinarus, a Carmelite Fryar, thought fit to refraine spea∣king of traditions, and said, that for decision of the first Article in this mat∣ter, it was meete first to determine whether the question were facti, or iuris: that is, if the Christian doctrine haue two parts, one which was written by the will of God, and the other which was forbidden to bee writ, but onely taught by word of mouth; or if in the whole body of doctrine it hath acci∣dentally happened, that all hauing beene taught, some part hath not beene committed to writing. Hee added, that it was a cleere case that the Maiestie of God ordaining the law of the Old Testament, appointed it should be ne∣cessary to haue it in writing; and therefore wrote the Decalogue in stone with his owne finger, commaunding it should be laid vp in the Cabinet, cal∣led the Arke of the Couenant. That he often commaunded Moyses to write the precepts in a booke, and that one copie should bee kept in the Arke, and the King haue another to reade it continually. This fell not out in the Gospell, which the Sonne of God wrote in the hearts, for which neither tables, nor chest, nor booke is necessary: yea, the Church was most perfect before any of the Apostles wrote; and though they had writ nothing, the Church would haue wanted nothing of its perfecti∣on. But as Christ founded the doctrine of the New Testament in the hearts, so hee forbad it not to bee written, as in some false Religions, where the my∣steries were kept secret, nor was lawfull to write them, but onely to teach them by word of mouth. And therefore that it is an vndoubted truth, that whatsoeuer the Apostles haue written, and whatsoeuer they haue taught by word of mouth, is of equall authority, because they wrote and spake by the instinct of the holy Ghost, which notwithstanding, as, by assisting them; it hath directed them to write and preach the trueth, so it cannot bee said it hath forbidden them to write any thing, to the end to hold it in my∣sterie; wherefore the Articles of faith cannot bee distinguished into two kinds, some published by writing, others commaunded to bee communica∣ted onely by voyce. Hee said, that whosoeuer thought otherwise, must fight against two great difficulties; the one, to tell wherein the difference is, the other, how the Apostles successors haue beene able to write that which was forbidden by God: adding, that it was as hard to maintaine the third, that is, how it hath accidentally happened, that some particulars haue not beene written, because it would derogate from the prouidence of God in directing the holy Apostles to compose the Scriptures of the New Testament. There∣fore The Fathers neuer made traditions of equall autho∣rity with the Scripture. hee concluded, that to enter into this treatie, was to saile betweene Scriptu e. and Caribdis, and that it was better to imitate the fathers, who serued them∣selues of this place, onely in case of necessitie, neuer thinking to make of it an Article of competition against the holy Scripture. Hee added, that it was not necessary to proceede now to any new determination, because the Lu∣therans, though they said they would be conuinced by the Scripture onely, haue not made a controuersie in this article, and that it is good to keep them∣selues onely to the controuersies which they haue promoted, without set∣ting new on foote, exposing themselues to the danger of making a great di∣uision in Christendome. The Fryars opinion pleased but few; yea, Cardinall Poole reprehended it, The opinion of Marina∣rus was very distastefull. and said, it better beseemed a Colloquie in Germanie, then a Councell of the vniuersall Church: that in this they should ayme at the sincere veritie it selfe, not as there, where nothing is handled but the according of the parties, though to the preiudice of the truth; that to preserue the Church, it was ne∣cessarie that the Lutherans should receiue all the Romane doctrine, or that as many of their errors as was possible might be discouered, the more to make manifest to the world, that there was no agreement to be made with them. Therefore if they haue framed no controuersie concerning traditions, it was necessary to frame it now, and to condemne their opinions, and to shew, that that doctrine not onely differeth from the true, in that wherein it doeth pur∣posely contradict it but in all other parts: that they should endeauour to con∣demne as many absurdities as can be drawen out of their writings, and that the feare was vaine to dash against Scilla or Caribdis for that captious reason, whereunto whosoeuer gaue ear would conclude there was no tradition at all. In the second Article they all agreed in this, that a Catalogue should bee Concerning the canon cal bookes of the Scripture. made, (as it was in former times) of the Canonicall bookes, in which all should be registred which are read in the Romane Church, euen those of the Old Testament, which were neuer receiued by the Hebrewes. And for proofe of this, they all alledged the Councell of Laodicea, Pope Innocence the first, the third Councell of Carthage, and Pope Gelasius. But there were foure opi∣nions. Some would haue two rankes made; in the first onely those should be put, which without contradiction haue beene receiued by all: in the other those, which sometime haue beene reiected, or haue had doubt made of them; and it was said, though formerly this was neuer done by any Coun∣cell or Pope, yet alwayes it was so vnderstood. For Austin maketh such a di∣stinction, and his authority hath beene canonized in the Chapter In Cano∣nicis. And Saint Gregorie, who was after Gelasius, writing vpon Iob, sayeth of the Maccabees, that they are written for edification, though they bee not Canonicall. Aloisius of Catanea, a Domican Fryar, said that this distinction was made by Saint Hierome, who was receiued by the Church, as a rule and direction, to appoint the Canon of the Scriptures; and he alleadged Cardinal Caietan who had distinguished them, following Saint Hierom, as an infallible rule, giuen vs by the Church; and so hee wrote to Pope Clement the seuenth, when hee sent him his exposition vpon the Historicall bookes of the Old Testament. Some thought fit to establish three rankes. The first of those which alwayes haue beene held for Diuine; the second, of those whereof sometimes doubt hath beene made, but by vse haue obtained Canonicall authority, in which number are the sixe Epistles, and the Apocalyps of the New Testament, and some small parts of the Euangelists. The third, of those whereof there hath neuer beene any assurance; as are the seauen of the Old Testament, and some Chapters of Daniel and Hester. Some thought it better to make no di∣stinction at all, but to imitate the Councell of Carthage and others, making the Catalogue, and saying no more. Another opinion was that all of them should bee declared to bee in all partes, as they are in the Latine Bible, of di∣uine and equall authoritie. The Booke of Baruc troubled them most, which is not put in the number, neither by the Laodiceans, nor by those of Carthage, nor by the Pope, and therefore should be left out, as well for this reason, as because the beginning of it cannot be found. But because it was read in the Church, the Congregation (esteeming this a potent reason) resolued, that it was by the Ancients accounted a part of Ieremie, and comprised with him. In the Congregation on Friday the fifth of March, aduise being come The Bishop of Bitonto, as∣sisting in Councell, is in danger of excommuni∣cation in Rome for not paying his Pensionaries. that the Pensionaries of the Bishop of Bitonto had demanded in Rome to be paide, and for this cause had cited him before the Auditor, requiring hee should bee compelled by excommunications and other censures, ac∣cording to the stile of the Court, to make payment, hee lamented his case, and said that his Pensioners were in the right, and yet himselfe was not in the wrong. For so long as hee was in the Councell hee could not spend lesse then sixe hundred crownes by the yeere, and that his pensions being de∣tracted, hee had left but foure hundred: wherefore it was necessarie that hee should bee disburthened or assisted with the other two hundred. The poore Prelates laboured herein, as in a common cause, and some of them passed to high wordes, and said it was an infamie to the Councell, that an officer of the Court of Rome should bee suffered to vse censures against a Bi∣shop assisting in the Councell; that it was a thing monstrous, and would make the world say that the Councell was not free; that the honour of that assembly required that the Auditor should be cited to Trent, or some reuenge taken against him, that the dignity of the Synod might be preserued. Some al∣so proceeded so farre as to condemne the imposition of pensions, saying, that it was iust and anciently obserued, that the rich Churches should assist the poore, not by constraint, but by charity, without taking things necessary from themselues, and that S. Paul taught so But that poore Prelates should be constrained to giue to the rich, some of that which is necessary for their owne sustenance, was a thing intolerable; and that this was one of the points of re∣formation to be handled in the Councel, reducing it to the ancient, and truely Christian vse. But the Legats, cōsidering how iust the cōplaints were, and whi∣ther they might tend, appeased all, & promised they would write to Rome, and cause the iudiciall processe to surcease, and to endeuor that the Bishop should in some sort be prouided for, that he might maintain himselfe in the Councel. All the Diuines hauing made an end of speaking the eighth day, a Con∣gregation A Decree made on the day of Carno∣ual, that Tra∣ditions are of equall autho∣rity with the Scriptures. was intimated for the next, though it was no ordinary day, not so much to establish quickly a Decree vpon the disputed Articles, as for a grace of the Councell, that in that day, dedicated to a profane feast of the Carnoual, the Fathers should busie themselues in the affaires of the Councell. And then it was approued by all, that the Traditions should bee receiued as of e∣quall authority with the Scriptures. But they agreed not in the manner of making the Catalogue of the Diuine bookes; and there were three opini∣ons: One, not to descend to particular bookes; another, to distinguish the Catalogue into three parts; a third, to make onely one, and to make all the bookes of equall authoritie. And not beeing all well resolued, three draughts were made, and order giuen that they should exactly consider which of them should be receiued in the next Congregation; which was not held the twelfth day, by reason of the arriuall of Don Francis of Toledo, sent Don Francis of Toledo arri∣ueth in Trent, Ambassadour to the Empe∣rour. Ambassadour by the Emperour, to assist in the Councell, as Colleague to Don Diego: who was met on the way by the maior part of the Bishops, and families of the Cardinals. At this time Ʋergerius, who often hath beene named before, came to Vergerius fli∣eth to the Councell for refuge, but findeth none. Trent, not so much with desire to assist in the Councell, as to flie the rage of his people raised against him, as cause of the barrennesse of the land; by the Inquisitor, Friar Hannibal, a Grison. For he knew not where to remaine with more dignity, nor to haue greater commoditie to iustifie himselfe against the imputations of the Frair, who published him for a Lutheran, not onely in Istria, but before the Nuncio of Venice, and the Pope. Whereof the Le∣gates of the Councell beeing aduertised, suffered him not to bee present at the publique Actes, as a Prelate, if first hee were not iustified before the Pope, to whom they effectually exhorted him to goe; and if they had not feared to raise talke against the libertie of the Councell, they would haue gone beyond exhortation. This Bishop, seeing hee was more disgraced in Trent, departed a little after, with purpose to returne to his Bishopricke, ho∣ping the popular sedition was appeased. But when he came to Venice, he was forbidden by the Nuncio, to goe thither, who had order from Rome to make his processe; for disdaine whereof, or for feare, or for some other cause, hee quitted Italie within a few moneths after. Vergerius forsaketh Italie. The fifteenth day, the three draughts beeing proposed, though euery one was maintayned by some, yet the third was approoued by the maior part. In the Congregations after, the Diuines discoursed vpon the other Articles, and in the third there was much difference about the Latine translation of the Scripture, betweene some few who had good knowledge of the Latine, and some taste of the Greeke, and others who were ignorant in the Tongues. Friar Aloisius of Catanea, said that, for resolution of this article, nothing could Discourses a∣bout the La∣tin translation be brought more to the purpose, or more fit for the present times and occa∣sions, then the indgement of Cardinall Caietane, a man very well read in Di∣uinitie, hauing studied it euen from a childe; who for the happinesse of his wit, and for his laborious diligence, became the prime Diuine of that and many more ages, vnto whom there was no Prelate or person in the Councel who would not yeelde in learning, or thought himselfe too good to learne of him. This Cardinall, going Legate into Germanie, in the yeere 1523. stu∣dying exactly how those that erred might be reduced to the Church, and the Arch-heretiques conuinced, found out the true remedy, which was the lit∣terall meaning of the text of the Scripture in the originall tongue in which it is written, and all the residue of his life, which was 11. yeeres, hee gaue him∣selfe onely to the study of the Scripture, expounding not the Latine transla∣tion, but the Hebrew rootes of the old, and the Greeke of the new Testa∣ment. In which tongues, hauing no knowledge himselfe, he imployed men of vnderstanding, who made construction of the text vnto him word by word, as his workes vpon the holy bookes doe shew. That good Cardinall was wont to say, that to vnderstand the Latine text, was not to vnderstand the infallible word of God, but the word of the translatour, subiect and ob∣noxious vnto errors. That Hierome spake well, that to prophesie and write holy bookes proceeded from the holy Ghost, but to translate them into ano∣ther tongue, was a worke of humane skill. And hee complayned and said; Would to God the Doctors of the former age had done so, and then the Lu∣therane heresie would neuer haue found place. Hee added that no translati∣on could bee approued without reiecting the Canon, Vt veterum, d. 9. which commandeth to haue the Hebrew text to examine the relitie of the bookes of the old Testament, and the Greeke for a direction in those of the new. To approoue a translation as authenticall, was to condemne S. Hierome, and all those who haue translated. If any be authenticall, to what end serue the rest which are not? it would bee a great vanitie to produce vncertaine copies, when there are some infallible. That they should bee of the opinion of 9. Hierome and Caietane, that euery Interpreter may erre, though he haue vsed all arte not to vary from the originall. But sure it is, that if the holy Councell should examine, or correct an interpretation according to the true text, the holy Ghost, which assisteth Synods in matters of faith, would keepe them from erring; and such a translation, so examined and approoued, might bee called authenticall. But that any could be approoued without such an exami∣nation, with assurance of the assistance of the holy Ghost, hee durst not say, except the Synode did determine it, seeing that in the Councel of the holy Apostles a great inquisition was made before. But this beeing a worke of tenne yeeres, and impossible to be vndertaken, it seemed better to leaue things as they had remained 1500. yeeres, that the Latine translations should be ve∣rified by the originall Texts. On the contrary, the maior part of the Diuines said, that it was necessary to account that translation, which formerly hath beene read in the Chur∣ches, and vsed in the schooles, to be diuine and authenticall; otherwise they should yeeld the cause to the Lutherans, and open a gate to innumerable he∣resies hereafter, and continually trouble the peace of Christendome. That the doctrine of the Church of Rome, mother and mistresse of all the rest, is, in a great part, founded by the Popes, and by schoole Diuines, vpon some passage of the Scripture, which if euery one had liberty to examine whether it were well translated, running to other translations, or seeking how it was in the Greeke or Hebrew, these new Grammarians would confound all, and would be made Iudges and arbiters of faith: and in stead of Diuines and Canonists, Pedanties should be preferred to be Bishops and Cardinals. The Inquisitors will not be able to proceede against the Lutherans, in case they know not Hebrew and Greeke, because they will suddenly answere, the text is not so, and that the translation is false: and euery nouity, or toy, that shall come into the head of any Grammarian, either for malice, or want of knowledge in Diuinity, so that he may but finde some grammaticall tricke in those tongues to confirme it, will be sufficient to ground himselfe thereon, and he will ne∣uer make an end. That it doth appeare, since Luther began to translate the Scripture, how many diuers and contrary translations haue seene the light, which deserue to bee buried in perpetuall darkenesse, and how often Martin himselfe hath changed his owne translation; that neuer any hath beene re∣printed without some notable change, not of one or two passages, but of an hundred in a breath: that if this libertie bee giuen to all, Christianitie will soone be brought to that passe that no man will know what to beleeue. To these reasons, which the maior part applauded, others added also, that if the prouidence of God hath giuen an authenticall Scripture to the Synagogue, and an authenticall New Testament to the Grecians, it cannot be said, without derogation, that the Church of Rome, more beloued then the rest, hath wanted this great benefit, and therefore that the same holy Ghost, who did dictate the holy bookes, hath dictated also that translation which ought to be accepted by the Church of Rome. Some thought it hard to make a Prophet or Apostle onely to translate a booke; therefore they mo∣derated the assertion, and said, that he had not a Prophericall or Apostolicall Spirit, but one very neere. And if any should make dainty to giue the spirit of God to the Interpreter, yet he cannot deny it to the Councell; and when the vulgar edition shall bee approued, and an anathema thundered against whosoeuer will not receiue it: this will be without error, not by the spirit of him that wrote it, but of the Synode that hath receiued it for such. D. Isidorus Clarus, a Brescian, and a Benedictine Abbat, a man well seene in this studie, went about to remooue this opinion by an historicall narrati∣on; and said in substance, that in the Primitiue Church there were many Greeke translations of the Old Testament, which Origen gathered into one volume, confornting them in sixe columnes; the chiefe of these is called of the Septuagint; from whence diuers in Latine were taken: and many were taken from the Greeke text of the new Testament, one of which, most fol∣lowed and read in the Church, and esteemed the best by Saint Austin; is called Itala; yet so as that the Greeke text ought vndoubtedly to bee prefer∣red. But Saint Hierom, a man (as all doe know) skilfull in the knowledge of tongues, seeing that of the olde Testament to swarue from the Hebrew trueth; by the fault partly of the Greeke interpreter, and partly of the Latin, made one immediately out of the Hebrew, and amended that of the new Testament according to the trueth of the Greeke text. Hieroms credit made his translation to bee receiued by many; but was reiected by some, either be∣cause they loued more the errours of antiquitie, then new trueths, or, as him∣selfe complaineth by reason of emulation. But a few yeeres after, when enuie was laid aside, that of S. Hierom was receiued by all the Latins; & so they were both in vse, one being called the olde, and the other the new. Saint Gregorie, writing to Leander vpon Iob, testifieth that the Apostolike Sea vseth them both, and that himselfe, in the exposition of that booke made choice to fol∣low the new, as conformable to the Hebrew text: yet in the allegations he would vse sometimes one, sometimes another, as it best befitted his purpose. The times following, by the vse of them both, composed one; taking part of the new, and part of the olde, according as the accidents required, and to this the name of the vulgar Edition was giuen. The Psalmes were all of the olde; because, being dayly sung in the Churches, they could not be changed. The lesser Prophets are all of the new, & the greater mixt of both. This is ve∣ry true that all hath happened by the ordinance of God, without which no∣thing can succeede. But yet it cannot be said that there was in it greater knowledge then humane. Saint Hierome saith plainely that no interpreter S. Ierom saith that no inter∣preter hath spoken by the holy Ghost. hath spoken by the holy Ghost. The Edition which wee haue is his for the most part: it would bee strange to attribute the assistance of God to him that knoweth and affirmeth hee hath it not. Wherefore no translation can bee compared to the text in the originall tongue. Therefore his opinion was that the vulgar edition should bee preferred before all, and allowed, yet so as that it should bee corrected by the originall, and all men forbid to make any other: only that should be amended and the others extinguished: and so all inconueniences caused by new interpretations, which haue iudici∣ously been noted, and reprehended in the Congregations, would cease. Andrew de Ʋega, a Franciscan Friar, going as a Mediator betweene these two opinions, approoued that of Saint Hierom, that the qualities of an interpreter are not any Propheticall, or other speciall diuine spirit, which gi∣ueth them infallibilitie, and the opinion of the same Saint, and of Saint Austin, to correct the translations by the texts of the originall tongue. But added that it was not contrary to this to say withall, that the Latin Church holdeth the vulgar edition for authenticall, because it is thus to bee vnder∣stood, that concerning faith and manners there is no errour in it, though in some small matter, or expression of wordes there may be a mistaking, it being impossible that all the words of one language should bee transplanted into another, but that there will bee some restriction or inlargement of sig∣nifications or metaphore, or other figure. That the vulgar edition hath beene examined heeretofore by the whole Church during the space of 1000. yeeres, and knowne that there is no errour in it, in matter of faith or manners; and in this account it hath beene held and vsed by the ancient Councels, and so ought still to bee held and approoued, and declared as authenticall, that is, that it may bee read without danger, not hindering those that are more dili∣gent to haue recourse vnto the Hebrew and Greeke originals, but forbidding so great a number of whole translations, which beget confusion. About the Article of the sense of the holy Scripture, the doctrine of Cardinall Caietan gaue occasion to speake diuersly; who taught, and practi∣sed the same himselfe, that new conceits, when they agree to the text, and Discourses a∣bout the ex∣position of the Scripture. are not aliene from other places of the Scripture, and doctrine of faith, are not to be reiected, though the streame of the Doctors runne another way, in regard the Maiestie of God hath not tied the sense of the Scripture to the old Doctors: otherwise there would remaine no more power to those that liue now, nor to posteritie, then to transcribe the same things againe; which some of the Diuines and Fathers approoued, and some opposed. To the first it seemed a spirituall tyrannie to forbid the faithfull to make vse of their proper ingenie, according to the grace which God hath giuen them: and that this was iust a prohibition to exercise the talent giuen vs by God. That men ought to bee inticed, with all allurements, to the reading of the holy writ, from which when that pleasure, which nouitie bringeth, shall bee remooued, all men will euer abhorre it, and such strictnesse will make men apply themselues to other studies, and abandon this, and by consequence all studie and care of pietie. That this varietie of spirituall gifts belongeth to the perfection of the Church, and is found amongst the Fathers, in whose writings there is great diuersitie, and oftentimes contrari∣etie, yet ioyned with assured charitie. Why should not that libertie bee graunted to this age which others haue inioyed with spirituall fruit? The Schoole-men though, in the doctrine of Theologie, they haue no disputes about the meaning of the Scripture, yet they haue as many differences in points of religion, and no lesse dangerous. That it is better to imitate an∣tiquitie, which hath not restrained the exposition of the Scripture, but left it free. Those of the contrarie opinion sayd, that popular licence being worse then tyrannie, it was then fit to curbe the vnbrideled wits, otherwayes they could not hope to see an end of the present contentions. That anciently it was allowed to write vpon the holy Bookes, because there was neede, in re∣gard there were but few expositions. And the men of those times were of an holy life, and setled minde, from whom no confusions could bee feared, as now. And therefore the Schoole-men, seeing there was no more neede of other expositions in the Church, and that the Scripture was not onely suf∣ficiently, but aboundantly declared, they tooke another course to treate of holy mysteries; and seeing that men were inclined to disputings they thought good to busie them rather in examining of the reasons & sayings of Aristotle to keepe the holy Scripture in reuerence; from which much is derogated, when it is handled after a common fashion, and is the subiect of the Studies and exercises of curious men. And this opinion went on so farre, that Richard of Mans, a Franciscan Friar, sayd that the doctrines of faith were now so cleered, that wee ought no more to learne them out of Scripture: which, it is true, was read heretofore in the Church for instruction of the people, whereas now it is read in the Church onely to pray, and ought to serue eue∣ry one for this end onely, and not to studie. And this should be the reuerence and worship due from euery one to the word of God. But, at the least, the studying of it should bee prohibited to euery one that is not first confirmed in schoole Diuinitie; neither doe the Lutherans gaine vpon any but those that studie the Scripture. Which opinion wanted not adherents. Betweene these opinions there went two others in the middle: One, that it was not good to restraine the vnderstanding of the Scripture, to the Fathers onely, in regard their expositions are allegoricall for the most part, and seldome literall; and those that follow the letter, fit themselues to their owne time, so that, the exposition agreeth not to our age. That Cardinall The opinion of Cusanus; that the expo∣sition of the Scripture must be fitte to the time. Cusanus, a man excellently learned and honest, said iudicially, that the vn∣derstanding of the Scripture must bee fitted to the time, and expounded ac∣cording to the current Rites: and that it is not to bee maruciled at, if the Church in one time expoundeth in one fashion, at another in another. And this was the meaning of the Lateran Councell, when it decreed that the Scripture should bee expounded according to the Doctors of the Church, or as long vse hath approoued, that new expositions should not bee forbid∣den, but when they varie from the common sense. But Dominicus Soto, a Dominican Friar, distinguished the matter of faith and manners from the others, saying, it was meete in that onely to keepe eue∣ry wit within limits, but in others it was not inconuenient to let euery one, so that pietie and charitie bee preserued, to abound in his owne sence. That the Fathers desired not to bee followed of necessitie, but onely in things ne∣cessary to beleeue and to doe. Neither did the Popes; when in their De∣cretals they expounded some passage of the Scripture in one sense, meane to canonize that, so that it should not bee lawfull to vnderstand it otherwise, though with reason. And S. Paul ment so, when hee said, that prophecying, that is, interpretation of the Scripture, should bee vsed according to the ana∣logie of faith, that is, with reference to the Articles thereof. And if this di∣stinction were not made, they must needes fall into notable inconueniences, by reason of the contrarieties which are found in the diuers expositions of the ancient Fathers, which doe oppugne one another. The difficulties were not so great, but that the vulgar edition was appro∣ued, The vulgar edition is ap∣prooued. almost by a generall consent, the discourse hauing made deepe impres∣sion in their mindes, that Grammarians would take vpon them to teach Bi∣shops and Diuines. Some few thought it fit, in regard of the reasons brought by the Diuines, to leaue the point for that time, but seeing the resolution was otherwise, they desired them to consider, that hauing approued it, they should command it to be printed and corrected, and in that case, that it was necessary to frame a copie by which to make the impression. Whereupon sixe were deputed by common consent, and commanded to be diligent in making that correction, that it might bee published before the end of the Councell, reseruing power to themselues to augment the number, if amongst those that were to come, any were fit for the worke. But in giuing voyces vpon the fourth Article, after Cardinall, Pacceco had said, that the Scripture was expounded by so many and so excellent men in goodnesse and learning, that there was no hope to adde any good thing more, and that all the new heresies sprang from the new expositions of the Scripture, and therefore that it was necessary to bridle the saucinesse of mo∣derne wits, and to make them content to be gouerned by the ancients, and by the Church, and that if any had some singular spirit, he should be enforced to conceale it, and not to confound the world by publishing it, almost all runne into the same opinion. The Congregation of the 29. was all spent in the fift Article. For the Diuines hauing spoken irresolutely, and with reference to the Synod, to which it belongeth to make Statutes, the Fathers were doubtfull also. To leaue out the Anathema wholly, was to make no decree of faith, and in the very beginning to breake the order set downe, to handle the two heads to∣gether. To condemne euery one for an heretike who would not accept the vulgar Edition in some particular place, perhaps of none importance, or should publish some inuention of his owne vpon the Scripture, through va∣nitie of minde, seemed too rigorous. After long discussion they found a temper, which was to frame the first Decree, and comprehend in it that onely which concerneth the Catalogue of the holy Bookes, and the Tradi∣tions, and to conclude that with an anathema. Then in the second, which be∣longeth to reformation, to comprehend the translation and sense of the Scripture, as if the Decree were a remedie against the abuse of so many in∣terpretations, and impertinent expositions. It remayned to speake of the other abuses, of which euery one had colle∣cted The abuses are spoken of. a great number, and many wayes to redresse them, as humane weaknesse and superstition vseth holy things, not onely beyond, but also contrary to that for which they are appointed. Of inchantments to find treasures, and to bring lasciuious deseignes to passe, or to obtaine things vnlawfull, much was said, and many remedies proposed to roote them out. Amongst in∣chantments some put, carying the Gospel about one; names of God to pre∣uent infirmities, or to be healed of them, or to bee kept from euils and mis∣chiefes, or to bee prosperous; likewise to reade them for the same ends, and to write them with obseruation of times. In this catalogue were numbred Masses, said in some Countries vpon red hot Iron, vpon boyling waters, or vpon cold, or other matters for vulgar purgations; to recite the Gospel ouer Armes, that they may haue more force against the enemies. In this ranke were put the coniurations of dogges to make them not bite, of serpents to make them not offend, of harmefull beasts in the field, of tempests, and o∣ther causes of the barrennesse of the land, requiring that all these obseruati∣ons might bee condemned, forbid, and punished as abuses. But in diuers particulars there were contradictions and disputes. For some defended as things deuout and religious, or, at the least, permitted, and not damnable, which others did condemne for wicked and superstitious. The like happe∣ned speaking of the Word of God by casting of lots, or diuinations, or ex∣tracting schedules with verses of the Scripture, or obseruing those they met, when they opened the booke. To vse sacred words in scandalous libels, and other detractions, was generally condemned, and much was sayd of the meanes how to remooue the Pasquins of Rome; wherein the Cardinall of Monte shewed great passion in desiring a remedie, because he was often made a subiect of the saucinesse of the Courtiers tongues, by reason of his naturall liberty and pleasantnesse of wit. All agreed, that the Word of God could ne∣uer bee reuerenced enough, and that to vse it to mens commendations, though Princes and Prelates, is not seemely, and generally that all vaine vse of it is a sinne. But yet the Councell ought not to busie it selfe in this, in re∣gard they were not assembled to prouide against all faults; neither was it to beforbid absolutely, to draw the words of the Scripture to humane matters, because S. Antoninus, in his storie, condemned not the Sicilian Ambassadors, who, asking pardon of Martin the fourth, deliuered their Ambassage in no other termes, but saying three times, Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis. Nor the Popes answere who likewise said thrise, Aue Rex Iudeorum, Et dabant illi alapas. Therefore that it was the malice of the Lutherans to re∣prehend the Bishop of Bitonto, who in his sermon made in the publike Sessi∣on, said that to him that refused the Councel, it might bee replied, Pap lux venit in mundum, & dilexerunt homines magis tenebras quam lucem. So many Congregations were spent heerein, and the number so increased, and the weakenesse of the remedies proposed did so much appeare, that the common opinion inclined to make no particular mention of any of them, nor to des∣cend to the proper remedies, or particular punishments, but onely to forbid them vnder generall heads, and leaue the penalties to the discretion of the Bishops. Of the abuses of the Prints there was not much to be spoken; for all agreed that the Printers should bee brideled, and prohibited to Print any sacred thing before it was allowed; but for this the Decree of the last Lateran Councel was sufficient. But about readings and preachings there were terrible controuersies. A great con∣tention be∣tweene the Regulars and Prelats, about readings and preachings. The Regulars beeing already in possession of them, as well by the Popes priuiledges, as by the practise of 300 yeeres, laboured to preserue them with all their might: and the Prelates alledging that they belonged to them, and were vsurped, pretended restitution. And because the contention was heere, not of opinions, but of profit, they vsed on both sides not onely reasons, but deedes also. Which differences were set on foote that at the time of the Sessi∣on nothing might be decided. Therefore the Legates resolued, to deferre these two points vntill another Session. Two Decrees were framed, as for∣merly was resolued, and were read in the last Congregation, and approoued; yet with some exceptions in the point of the vulgar Edition. In the ende heereof the Cardinall of Monte, after hee had commended the learning and wisedome of them all, admonished them of the seemely behauiour which was fit to vse in the publique Session, shewing one heart, and one minde, in regard the points were sufficiently examined in the Congregations: and the Congregation beeing ended, the Cardinall Santa Croce assembled those that had opposed the vulgar Edition, and shewed they could not complaine, be∣cause it was not prohibited but left free to correct it, and to haue recourse to No errors of faith in the vulgar Edi∣tion. the originall; but that onely it was forbid to say there were in it errors of faith, for which it ought to be reiected. The eight of April, appoynted for the Session, being come, the Masse of the holy Ghost was said by Saluator Alepus, Archbishop of Torre in Sardinia, and the Sermon was made by Friar Austin of Aretium, Generall of the Serui, the Pontificall habiliments put on, the accustomed letanies and prayers made, and the Decrees read by the Archbishop that said Masse. The first conteined in substance; that the Synode, ayming to preserue the purity of the Gospel, promised by the Prophets, published by Christ, and preached by the Apo∣stles, Two Decrees read in the Session. as the fountaine of all trueth, and discipline of maners (which trueth and discipline are contained in the bookes, and vnwritten traditions, receiued by The contents of the former. the Apostles, from the mouth of Christ, and dictated to them by the holy Ghost, and passed from one to another) doeth according to the example of the Fathers, receiue with equall reuerence, all the bookes of the old and new Testament, and the traditions belonging to faith and manners, as procee∣ding from the mouth of Christ, or dictated by the holy Ghost, and preserued in the Catholique Church. And setting downe the Catalogue of the bookes, concludeth, that if any will not receiue them all, as Sacred and Canonicall, in all parts, as they are read in the Catholike Church, and contained in the vul∣gar Edition, or shall wittingly and purposely despise the traditions, let him be Anathema; that euery one may know what ground the Synode will vse in confirming the points of doctrine, and reforming of maners in the Church. The substance of the second Decree was; that the vulgar Edition should be The substance of the second Decree. held for authenticall in publike Lectures, Disputations, Sermons, and expo∣sitions, and that none should dare to refuse it. That the holy Scripture can∣not bee expounded against the sense held by the holy Mother the Church, nor against the common consent of the Fathers, though with purpose to conceale those expositions, and that the offenders should be punished by the Ordinaries: that the vulgar Edition should be most exactly printed. That no bookes of religion bee printed, sold, or kept, without the authors name, and that the approbation appeare in the frontispice of the booke, vpon paine of excommunication, and pecuniary punishment, constituted by the last Late∣ran Councell. That none should dare to vse the words of the holy Scripture in scurrility, fables, vanity, flatteries, detractions, superstitions, inchantments, diuinations, castings of lots, libels, and that the transgressors should bee puni∣shed at the discretion of the Bishops. And it was determined to hold the next The next Ses∣sion is to be he d the 17. of Iune. Session the 17. of Iune. Afterwards the Commission of Don Diego de Mendoza, and Francis de Toledo, the Emperours Ambassadors, was read by the Secretarie of the Coun∣cel. The Com∣mission of the Emperours Ambassadors is read. Don Diego was absent; and the other, hauing, in the Emperours name, saluted the Fathers in few words, said in substance; That all the world knew that the Emperour thought nothing to befit him more, then not onely to de∣fend the flocke of CHRIST from enemies, but to free it from tumults and seditions; therefore that he reioyced to see the day when the Councell, pub∣lished by the Pope, was opened, and that being willing to fauour that occasion with his power and authoritie, he had sent thither Mendoza, vnto whom, in regard of his indisposition, himselfe was ioyned. So that nothing remained but to pray God vniformely, that he would fauour the enterprise of the Coun∣cell, and which is the Principall, would preserue peace betweene the Pope and Emperour, for the establishing of the trueth of the Gospel, restoring the Church to her puritie, & weeding the cockle out of the Lords field. Answere was made by the Councell, that his Lordships comming was most accepta∣ble, both for the dutie they did owe the Emperour, and for the fauour hee promised them, hauing also much hope in the realtie & religion of his Lord∣ship. That they imbraced him with all their heart, and did admit, as farre as they could with reason, the mandates of Caesar. That they were sorry for the indisposition of his Colleague, and thanked God for the peace betweene the Pope and the Emperour, praying him to fauour the desires of them both, for the increase of Christian religion, and peace of the Church. These things being done, with the vsuall ceremonies, the Session ended; the Decrees whereof were sent to Rome by the Legates, and a little after printed. But after they were seene, especially in Germany, they ministred great A few Prelats and not lear∣ned, do decide the greatest points of re∣ligion. matter of discourse. Some thought it strange that fiue Cardinals, and 48. bishops, should so easily define the most principall and important points of Religion, neuer decided before, giuing Canonicall authoritie to Bookes held for vncertaine and apocryphall, making authenticall a translation diffe∣ring from the original, prescribing and restraining the manner to vnderstand the word of God; neither was there amongst these Prelates any one remark∣able for learning; some of them were Lawyers, perhaps learned in that pro∣fession, but of little vnderstanding in Religion; few Diuines, but of lesse then ordinary sufficiencie; the greater number Gentlemen or Courtiers; and for their dignities some were onely titular, and the maior part Bishops of so small Cities, that supposing euery one to represent his people, it could not be said that one of a thousand in Christendome was represented. But par∣ticularly of Germany there was not so much as one bishop or Diuine. Was it possible that amongst so many no man should be sent! Why did not the Em∣perour cause some of them to goe, who assisted in the Colloquie, and were informed in the differencies? Amongst the Prelats of Germany onely the Car∣dinall of Ausburg had sent a Proctor, and him a Sauoyard. For the Proctors of the Cardinall and Elector of Ments, vnderstanding their masters death, went away two moneths before. Others said, that the things decided were not of so great moment as they Nothing is certainely de∣fined concer∣ning traditi∣ons. seemed. For the point of traditions, which seemed most important, was of no consequence. First because it was nothing to ordain they should be receiued, if it were not declared which they were, & how they should be knowen: thē because there was no commandement to receiue them, but onely a prohibiti∣on to contemne them wittingly and deliberately. So that he that reiected them with reuerend termes, contradicted not; and the rather, because there is an example of the adherents of the Church of Rome, who receiue not the ordination of Deaconesses, graunt not to the people the election of the Minister, which certainely was an Apostolical institution, continued more then eight hundred yeeres, and which more importeth, obserue not the communion of the Chalice, Instituted by Christ, preached by the Apostles, obserued by the whole Church, vntill within two hundred yeeres, and now also by all Christian Nations but the Latine; that if this be not a tradition, it is impossible to shew whatother is. And for the vulgar edition declared au∣thenticall, nothing at all was done, because among so many copies, it can∣not be knowen which is the true. But this last opposition was made, be∣cause the deputation to make a corrected copie of the vulgar edition, was not knowen. The which, for what cause it was not effected, shall be said in its place. But the Decrees of the Session being seene in Rome, and the importance Nor concer∣ning the vul∣gar edition. of the things treated of considered, the Pope began to thinke he ought more to regard the businesse of the Councell, then vntill that time hee had done; and he enlarged the congregation of Cardinals and Prelats, who were to consider of the occurrences of the Synode, and to relate them. By the ad∣uice of these, after their first assembling, he admonished the Legats of three things. One not to publish hereafter in Session any decree, before they had communicated it at Rome, and to auoyd too much slownesse in proceeding, The Pope ad∣monisheth the Legates of three things. but to beware much more of two much celeritie, which might make them resolue of some indigested matter, and want time to receiue orders from him, what they should propose, deliberate, and conclude. The second; not to spend time in matters not controuersed, as they had done in those that were handled for the last session; wherein all agree, that they are vndoubted principles. The third, to take heede, that by no meanes the Popes authoritie be disputed on. Whereunto they readily answered that they would obey his Holinesse To whom the Legates make a ready an∣swere. commandement; but that it seemed to them, that in the things defined, there is small difference betweene Catholiques and Heretiques, and that some of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, receiued by the third Councell of Carthage by Innocentius the first, by Gelatius, by the sixt Synod of Trullus, and the Florentine Councell are called into question by the He∣retikes, and which is worse, by some Catholikes and Cardinals, and also that the vnwritten Traditions are impugned by the Lutherans, who intend nothing more then to annihilate them, declaring that all things necessary to saluation, are written. And therefore though these two heads bee princi∣ples, yet they are the most controuersed conclusions which are to bee deci∣ded in the Councell, and of the greatest importance. They added that vntill then there was no occasion to speake of the Popes authoritie, or of the Councell, but in treading of the title, when the addition of Representation of the vniuersall Church was required. That many desire it still, but that they will auoyd it as much as possibly they can. And in case they shall be brought to it by force, they will desire (thinking it will not bee denyed them) to ex∣pound the manner how it doth represent, that is, by meanes of the head, and not otherwise; whereby there will bee rather gaine then losse. For the rest because they think the maior part will alwayes beare al reuerence to his Ho∣linesse, being vnited, as Head, with the bodie of the Councell, (which will be so long, as they shall agree in the reformation) hee may set his heart at rest that his authoritie shall not be questioned. After this the Pope sent Ieronimo Franco Nuncio to the Swisses, giuing him The Pope sendeth a Nuncio to the Swisses. letters to the Bishops of Sion and Coira, to the Abbat of S. Gallo, and other Abbats of those Nations; to whom hee wrote, that, hauing called all the Prelates of Christendome to the Generall Councell of Trent, it was fit that they, who represent the Heluetian Church, should assist also, in regard hee much loued that nation, as especiall sonnes of the Apostolike Sea, and main∣tainers of the Ecclesiasticall libertie. That Prelates out of Italie, France, and Spaine were arriued alreadie, and the number increased dayly. That it was not seemely that they, being borderers, should bee preuented by those that dwelt further off. That their Countrey was infected with heresies, and therefore had more need of a Councell. In fine hee commanded them, vpon their allegiance and oath, and paines prescribed by the lawes, to goe thither as soone as was possible; referring the rest to bee tolde them by his Nuncio. And at the many instances of the Clergie and Vniuersitie of Collen, assisted And giueth sentence a∣gainst the Arch-bishop of Collen. by the Bishops of Liege, and Ʋtrect, and Vniuersitie of Louaine, he pronoun∣ced sentence against the Arch-bishop and Elector of Collen, declaring him excommunicated, depriuing him of all benefices and priuiledges Ecclesia∣sticall, absoluing his subiects from their oath of fidelitie, and commanding them not to obey him, because he had incurred the censures of the Bull of Leo the tenth, published against Luther and his adherents, as hauing held, de∣fended and published that doctrine against the Ecclesiasticall rules; traditi∣ons of the Apostles, and vsuall rites of Christian religion. And the sentence The Pope ma∣keth a Bull in fauour of A∣dolphus. was after printed in Rome. He made also another Bull, giuing order that A∣dolphus Count of Scauemburg, assumed before by the Arch-bishop for his Co∣adiutor, should be obeyed. And hee earnestly desired the Emperour, that the sentence might be exe∣cuted; The Emperor will not exe∣cute the Popes sentence. who thought not this nouitie fit for his purpose, because it would make the Arch-bishop, who vntill then had absolutely obeyed him, to vnite himselfe with those that were combined against him. And therefore he held him still for an Arch-bishop and treated with him, and wrote to him, with∣out regard of the popes sentence. This vexed the Pope at the heart, but see∣ing The Prote∣stants are cō∣firmed in their opiniō by this sentence. there was no remedie, hee thought it follie to complaint in vaine. That sentence produced another bad effect, because the Protestants tooke occasion to confirme their opinion that the Councell was intimated only to insnare them. For if the controuersed doctrine of faith ought to bee examined in the Councell, how could the Pope, before the definition thereof, proceede to sentence, and condemne the Arch bishop of heresie? Therefore it appeareth that in vaine they should goe to that Councell, where the Pope dominee∣reth, who cannot dissemble, though hee would, that hee esteemeth them as men condemned. That it was manifest also that the Pope made no ac∣count of that Councell, because, after it was begun, hee proceeded defini∣tiuely in that which belongeth to the Councel, without imparting any thing vnto it. The Duke of Saxonie signified this to the Emperour by his Am∣bassadours, and after sayde vnto him, that the Popes minde being now made manifest, it would bee high time to prouide for Germany, by a Nationall Councell, or by handling seiorusly, the points of Religion in a Diet. But to returne to the businesse of the Councell there remained (as hath beene sayde) as remnants of the things, handled before in the last Session, the two points, to prouide for the Lectures of the holy Scripture, and prea∣ching of the word of God. For this was handled in the first Congregation; and (to begin the matter of faith) it was proposed to treat likewise of origi∣nall sin. Wherunto the Spanish Prelats opposed, and sayd, that to prouide a∣gainst the abuses of preaching & reading, was matter enough for one session. Which opinion also was followed by the Italian Prelates who were on the Emperors side. And the Legats thought they had discouered that this was plotted by Caesars ministers, who at the very instant had seriously treated with those Prelats. Therfor they sent aduice thereof to the Pope, from whom they had answere, that they should take heed to go on warily, vntil he were able to giue them a resolution. Therefore they vsed artificiall diligence, entertai∣ning themselues with part of the Abuses, without comming to the conclu∣sion of them, and without making demonstration whether they would pro∣ceede in the matter of originall sinne. And thus the case stoode vntil Easter. Which being past, the Pope wrote they should proceede, and propose Don Francis of Toledo per∣swadeth that the refor∣mation should be handled without do∣ctrine. that matter. This being deliuered the second of May, came to the know ledge of Don Francis; who going to visite the Legats vsed much arte, some∣times making shew to giue them counsell, sometimes proposing his opinion for the prosecuting of the reformation onely, to know their mindes, and to perswade them obliquely to embrace his deseigne. But seeing that did no good, hee began to speake as plainely as was needfull, that hee had letters from the Emperour, by which hee was charged to be a meanes that they should not enter into the points of doctrine, but should handle the reforma∣tion only. The Legats brought many reasons to the contrary; & amongst o∣thers they said, they could not doe it without contradicting the Popes Buls, which proposed these two things together; and that which was established in the Councell, that they should goe forward cheeke by iowle; adding, that they had written to his Holinesse, that they would begin eight dayes after Easter. Diuers discourses and replyes were made on both sides, and in conclusion the Legats said they were commanded by the Pope, and could not be wanting to their duetie. Don Francis sayd, it was the dutie of good ministers to maintaine amitie betweene Princes, and sometimes to expect the second Commission. This was not denyed by the Legates; but they answered that more was not to be expected from them then they were able to doe with their honour. They gaue the Pope an account of all this, ad∣ding, that the Cardinall of Trent told them, that if the Article of originall sing were proposed, the Emperor would be discontented; and therefore on the one side being desirous to make peace and concord, and on the other to obey his Holinesse commandements, they thought good to send away this aduise in diligence, beseeching him not to let them erre; adding that if no o∣ther aduise came, they would follow his last commandement, and would la∣bour to perswade Don Francis and the Cardinall of Trent, that this Article of originall sinne was no more questioned in Germany, but accorded, as was manifest by the last Colloquie of Ratisbon, where his Maiestie for the first Article to bee accorded, caused that of iustification to be taken. But to giue as much more time as is possible, they will entertaine themselues, as many dayes as they honestly can, in dispatching that which remaineth of the last Session. A Congregation was made for this onely, to giue a better forme how they should more orderly proceede then they formerly had done, as well in handling the doctrine of faith, as the matter of reformation. And they distinguished two sorts of Congregations, one for Diuines, to discourse on the matter of faith which should be proposed, whose opinions should bee written by one of the Notaries of the Councel, to whom should bee added A forme to proceed in Councell is set downe. Canonists, when reformation was spoken of: (which Congregations were to bee held in the presence of the Legates, in which any of the Fathers that would might be present.) Another sort of Congregations should consist of Prelates to frame the heads of Doctrine and reformation, which, beeing examined, and set in order, according to the most common opinion, should be proposed in the generall Congregation, to vnderstand euery ones voyce that by the determination of the maior part, the decrees might be establi∣shed, which are to be published in the Session. According to this order, they treated of Lectures and Sermons, framing The diff between the Prelates and Regulars, a∣bout lectures and sermons doth returne. and reforming diuers draughts of Decrees; neither was it possible to finde a way to please al, because the Prelats that were much interessed to desire that all might depend vpon the Episcopall power, without exemption of any. But on the other side, the Legates desired to maintaine the priuiledges giuen by the Pope, especially to the Mendicants and Vniuersities. And after ma∣ny disputes, when the matter was sufficiently debated, they thought that, in the Congregation of the tenth of May, all would agree. But it prooued to the contrary, for though it lasted till night, yet in some points, they could come to no conclusion, for the diuersitie of opinions amongst the Prelats themselues, and in others, because the Legates would not yeelde to the ge∣nerall opinion, to remooue, or at the least, to moderate the priuiledges. They alledged against the Bishops, that they were more moued by their pro∣per interest, then by reason; that they made none account to preiudice the re∣gulars; that they were too bold in correcting the former Councels, & in med∣ling with the priuiledges granted by the Pope. And they could not agree, not onely for the varietie of Opinions and interests of the Bishops, but also because the Imperialists did endeauour to make a difference, to hinder the proposing of the points of Doctrine Neither was this temporizing vngrate∣full to the Legates, who were resolute, if they were not forbid in the answer, which they expected from Rome, to propose the doctrines, and, as their in∣ward friends sayde, to cleere themselues afterwards of whatsoeuer should ensue. But to make some end of the things handled, they caused a briefe of the opinions of the Diuines and Canonists, deliuered in diuers preceding Con∣gregations, to be read; saying, that in regard the voyces were long, they had collected the summe of them, that they may examine them, and speake their opinions thereon. But Bracius Martellus, Bishop of Fiesole, hearing the ex∣tract read, opposed it in a continued speech, and said it was necessary that the The Bishop of Fiesole oppo∣seth the Le∣gates. generall Congregation should know the voyces and reasons of all, without reading collections and summes; and inlarged himselfe by amplifying the authoritie of the Councel, & the necessity to informe it wel, & the smal con∣ueniencie, that some few should be Iudges of the determinations, or that the resolutions should come from any other place: whereat the Legates were much offended, and reprehended the Bishop with affected modesty, but by∣tingly enough. And so the Congregation brake vp. The next day the Legats sent to the B. to demand a copie of his discourse, and sent it to Rome, taxing it as irreuerent and seditious; adding, that they had modestly and seuerely reprehended him, and would haue gone further Who com∣plaine to the Pope both of him, and of the Bishop of Chioza. (because he deserued no lesse) but that they feared to mooue some vnseaso∣nable dispute, which might make a rent; But that he ought not to escape vn∣punished, least he should be emboldened to do the like in euery congregati∣on, or worse: representing to his Holinesse, that by all meanes he should bee chased out of Trent, and order taken that the Bishop of Chioza, (not much vnlike vnto him, though in another course) should neuer returne. This Bi∣shop parted immediatly after the session, vpon pretence of indisposition, but in trueth by reason of wordes which passed betweene him and Cardinall Poole in Congregation, in the matter of traditions. For hauing spoken in de∣fence of Fryar Antonius Marinarus, and thereupon contested with the Car∣dinall, and so hauing complained that the Councell was not free, he saw, he was not in the Legats fauour, and obnoxious to danger. The Legats not con∣tent with what they had done, to mortifie the Bishop of Fiesole, and to keep the matter intire vntill there came aduise from Rome, that they might goe on with it, or dissemble, as they should be commanded, in the next Congrega∣tion. Monte gaue him a nip by the way, and concluded that he left him then to consider of his owne affaires, because himselfe was to be imployed in mat∣ters of greater importance. The Pope answered concerning the two Bishops, that he would giue a remedie in time conuenient. But for the matters to be handled, he sayd, that The Popes answere to the Legates. if they regarded the desires of Princes, they would make the Councel more tumultuous, and the resolutions more long and hard, because euery one sought to crosse what liked him not and by putting difficultie in one thing, to promote another. Therefore that without any more to doe, they should begin with originall sinne, aduising them to omit the excuse which they purposed to vse to D. Francis, that is that the article of originall sinne is not questioned in Germany; but should rather vse generall termes, and all reue∣rence to the Emperour. He further commanded them, that concerning the correction of the The Councell in Tr is go∣uernd by cer∣t ne pu tes Rome. vulgar edition, they should proceed no further, vntill the Deputies ouer the Councell in Rome, had determined what course should be held. The Legats resoluing, for execution of those orders, to propose originall sinne, made a congregation two dayes together, to determine of the two heads of reading and preaching, before they published their purpose to handle matters of faith, least those two points, being vndecided, might cause the Imperia∣lists to dinert from this. And they caused the Deputies for the vulgar editi∣on, to bring to them all they had done, charging them to proceed no fur∣ther vntill they had receiued new order. Such was the libertie of the Coun∣cell depending on the Pope, in leauing of things begun, and beginning new. In treating of the Lectures and Sermons, there was a generall complaint of the Bishops, especially Spanish; that, CHRIST hauing commanded that his doctrine should be taught, which is exercised in the Church by preaching and reading to the more capacious, that they may be fit to teach the people, the care to superintend, ouer all that exercise these functions, ought to bee pro∣per to the Bishop. That the Apostles haue so instituted, and the holy Fathers so practised. That now this office is absolutely taken from the Bishops by A complaint against the re∣gular orders. priuiledges, so that no iot thereof remaineth. That this is the cause why all is out of order, because the order instituted by CHRIST is changed. The Vniuersities are withdrawen with exemptions, that the Bishop cannot know what they teach; the Sermons are by priuiledge giuen to the Friars, who by no meanes acknowledge the Bishop, nor suffer him to meddle: so that the office of a Pastour is quite taken from the Bishops. And on the contrary; those who anciently were appointed to weepe for sinnes, and expressely and seuerely forbid to preach and teach, haue assumed this power vnto them, or, at the least, it is giuen them for their proper function. And so the flocke remaineth without either shepheard or hireling, because these ambulatorie Preachers, who to day are in one Citie, to morrow in another, know neither the need, nor the capacitie of the people, and least of all the occasions to teach and edifie them, as doth the proper Pastour, who liueth alwayes with the flocke and knoweth the necessities and infirmities of it. Besides the ende of those Preachers, is not to edifie; but to take almes either for themselues or their Cloisters; which that they may the better obtaine, they ayme not to benefit the soule, but to delight the care, and soothe men in their pleasures, that thereby they may draw more profit; and the people, in stead of learning the doctrine of CHRIST, learneth either nouitie, or vanitie at the least. Luther was one of these; who if hee had remained weeping in his Cell, the Church of CHRIST had not stood in these termes. That the abuse of the Pardoners was more manifest, who goe about preaching Indulgences, whose scandals, formerly giuen, cannot bee related without teares. That it is a cleere case, that they exhort the people to nothing but to giue money. The onely remedie for these disorders, is to take away all the priuiledges, and to restore to the Bishops, the charge to teach and preach, and to elect those for their fellow labourers whom they shall know worthy of that mi∣nistery, and disposed to exercise it with charity. On the contrary side, the Generals of the Regulars, and others saide, An Apologie of the regular orders. that the Bishops and Curates hauing wholly abandoned the office of a Pa∣stour, so that for many hundreds of yeeres the people remained without Sermons in the Church, and without the doctrine of Diuinitie in Schooles, God had raised the begging orders to supplie these necessary ministeries; into which notwithstanding they intruded not themselues, but entred by the graunt of the Supreame Pastour; vnto whom it principally appertai∣ning to feede all the flocke of CHRIST, it cannot bee saide that men depu∣ted by him, to supplie the defects of him that had the care of the flocke and did aband on it, haue vsurped the office of another. But it may bee say de, that if they had not vsed that charitie, there had now remained no signe of Christianitie. Now that they haue applyed themselues more then three hun∣dred yeeres to that holy worke, with such fruit as appeareth, they haue pre∣scribed those functions, and made them their owne, by a lawfull title, gi∣uen by the chiefe Pastour, the Bishop of Rome; and that the Bishops haue no lawfull right vnto them, nor can alleadge the vse of antiquity to regaine that office, which so many hundred yeeres since they haue forsaken. That they haue a desire of gayning for themselues or their Monasteries is a meere calumnie, because the almes are gathered onely for their necessary foode, and apparell, and the residue being spent for the worship of God, in masses, buildings, and ornaments of Churches, turneth to the benefit and edification of the people, and not to their owne profit, that the seruices done by their orders to the holy Church, and doctrine of Diuinitie (which is no where to bee found but in their Cloisters) deserue the continuance of that charge which others are not able to exercise. The Legates, importuned by both parties, by the Councell of their most The Legats relate this dif∣ference to Rome and ex∣pect an an∣swere. inward friends resoluted to relate to Rome, and expect an answere. The Pope referred it to the Congregation; where presently it was seene whither the pretence of the Bishops tended; that is, to make themselues so many Popes in their Diocesses. For when the Popes priuiledge and exemption should bee remooued, and euery one should depend on them, and none on the Pope, all cause of going to Rome would cease. They considered that the Popes The Deputies in Rome take part with the Mendicants, for reasons of Policie. haue anciently had for a principall secret to preserue the Primacie giuen them by CHRIST, to exempt the Bishops from the Arch-bishop, the Ab∣bats from the Bishops, and so to oblige men to defend him. That it is a cleere case, that after the sixe hundredth yeere, the Primacie of the Aposto∣like Sea hath beene vpheld by the Benedictine Monkes exempted, and after by the Congregations of Clunie, and Cistercium, and other monasticall assemblies, vntill God raised the Mendicant orders, by which it hath beene maintained vntill now. Wherefore to take away their priuiledges, were di∣rectly to oppugne the Papacie, and not those orders; to remooue the exemp∣tions, were a manifest depression of the Court of Rome, because they should want meanes to keepe a Bishop within compasse, that hee exalt not himselfe too high. Therefore that the Pope and Court were compelled by necessitie to maintaine the Friars cause. But to doe these things smoothely, they con∣sidered also that it was necessary to conceale this reason; and they resolued to answere the Legates, that by all meanes they should preserue the state of The Popes answere. the Regulars, and cause the Bishops to surcease, setting before them the ex∣cessiue number of the friars, and the credit which they haue with the people, and aduise them to take a moderate course, and not make a Schisme, by desi∣ring too much. That it was iust they should receiue some satisfaction, but they should also bee content to giue it; and when they came to the point, they should grant any thing concerning the Pardoners, but should doe nothing concerning the Friars, without communicating it to the Gene∣ralls, and should giue the Bishops some satisfaction which might not take away the priuiledges. That they should doe the like for the Vniuersities; because it was necessary that both these and those should depend on the Pope, and not on the Bishops. After these letters came to Trent, those of the Councell had three diuers endes. For the other particulars proposed in these two matters, by those who were not interested either to fauour or disfauour the exemptions, were but little considered of. For the Lectures, some proposed the restitution of the ancient vse when Monasteries and Canons cloisters were but Colledges and Schooles. Whereof some remainder appeareth in many Cathedral Chur∣ches, where there is the dignitie of a Schooleman, Head of the readers, with a Prebend. These men now doe not performe the duetie, and indeede are vnable. All thought it honest and profitable to restore the Diuinitie Le∣cture in Cathedral Churches, and Monasteries. For the former they thought it easie to make prouision, by committing the care of the execution thereof to the Bishops; but for the latter very difficult. The Legates opposed the Superintendencie of Bishops, euen in this also, though it were ouer Monkes onely, not Mendicants, for feare of leauing a gate open to them, to meddle with priuiledges granted by the Pope. But Sebastianus Pighius, Auditor of The inuenti∣on of the Au∣ditor of the Rota. the Rota, found a temper for this, that the superintendencie should be giuen to the Bishops, as Delegates of the Apostolique Sea. The inuention plea∣sed, because it was in fauour of the Bishops, without derogation of the pri∣uiledge, for the Bishop was to superintend, not as Bishop, but as the Popes Delegate. And this gaue a paterne to accommodate other difficulties; one in giuing authoritie to the Metropolitans, ouer Parishes vnited to Mona∣steries, not subiect to any Diocesse; another, in giuing power to Bishops ouer exempted Preachers, who faile; and serued also very much in the Decrees of the Sessions that were after. The Canonists proposed that the Schoole subtiltie was not fit in these Politique rea∣sons to vp∣hold the Popes au∣thoritie. times, and that it beseemed rather naturall things, and Philosophie, that these new Lectures should bee introduced to handle the Sacraments, and the authority of the Church, as Turrecremata, Augustinus Triumphus, & after them S. Antoninus, and others haue done with great fruit. But the Fryars contradi∣cting, and opposing that this doctrine was as necessary as that, they found a temper, and ordered that the Lecture should bee for exposition of the Scrip∣ture, and that the matter should be fitted to the exigence of the text read, and the capacitie of the auditors. After many Discourses in many Congregations, they came to establish the Decrees for the Sermons, and to ouercome the difficulties, they caused the Prelates, who were their assured friends, to negotiate with the Italian Bishops, wishing them to consider how much they were bound, for the honour of their nation, to vphold the dignitie of the Papacie, whose au∣thoritie was treated of by medling with the priuiledges, and what they might hope for from the Pope and Legates, applying themselues to that which is iust, and not depriuing the Friars of that they haue enioyed so long. That it was dangerous to despise so many learned men, now when heresies doe trouble the Church. That the authoritie of Bishops should be enlarged, by granting them power to allow or disallow the Preachers when they preach out of the Churches of their Order; and when they preach in them, by making them acknowledge the Prelate, first asking his benediction. That the Bishops might punish the Preachers for heresie, & forbid them to preach, to auoyd scandall. That they should bee contented with this, and that other things should bee added, as occasion serued. By this meanes they gained so many, that they were secure to establish the Decree with those conditions. But there remained another difficulty; because the Friars and Generals were not satisfied, and to distaste them was not secure, and expresly forbid by the Pope. They endeauored to shew them, that the grant made to the Bishops, was iust and necessary, whereof themselues were cause, by extending their priuiledges too much, and by passing the bounds of honesty. In fine, by ad∣monishing the Bishops to proceed so, that the Friars might not haue cause to complaine, the Generals also were pacified. When they made knowne their resolution to condemne in the same Sessi∣on the Lutheran opinions of originall sinne, they alleadged, that, to keepe the order of putting both the matters together, it was necessary to handle some poynt of faith, and that they could not begin from any other poynt. And they proposed the Articles extracted out of the Protestants doctrine in that matter, to bee examined and discussed by the Diuines in the Con∣gregations, whether they ought to bee condemned for hereticall. The Cardinall Pacceco said, that the Councell was to handle Articles of faith, onely to reduce Germanie, the which hee that would doe out of season, should not onely faile of his ende, but make matters worse. When there is opportunitie to doe it, it cannot bee knowen to those in Trent, but onely to him that sitteth at the sterne of that Countrey, who, seeing all parti∣culars, knoweth when to applie the medicine. Therefore hee aduised that they should craue by letters the opinion of the principall Prelates of the Nation, before they went any further, or that the Popes Nuncio should speake thereof with the Emperour. To which opinion the Emperours Prelates, induced by the Ambassadour, did adhere. But the Legates, commending their iudgement, and promising to write to the Nuncio, added, that, not∣withstanding this, the Articles might bee disputed by the Diuines, to gaine time; whereunto the Cardinall also, and the others, adhered, hoping that many difficulties might come acrosse, to cause a delay, and the Ambassadour Toledo was contented, so that the Summer might bee past before the defini∣tion were made. The Articles proposed, were. 1. That Adam, by transgressing the precept, hath lost iustice, and incurred the The points of originall sinne to bee discussed. wrath of God, and mortalitie; and though hee bee impaired both in soule and bodie, yet no sinne is transferred from him to posteritie, but onely cor∣porall punishments. 2. That Adams sinne is called originall, because it is deriued from him to po∣steritie, not by transmission, but by imitation. 3. That originall sinne is ignorance, or contempt of God, or want of feare, without confidence in his Maiestie, without diuine loue, and with con∣cupiscence, and bad desires; and generally a corruption of the whole man in his will, soule, and body. 4. That in children there is an inclination to euill, proceeding from the corrupted nature, so that after the vse of reason, it bringeth forth a loathing of diuine things, and an immersion in matters of the world; and that this is originall sinne. 5. That children, at the least borne of faithfull parents, though they are baptized into the remission of sinnes, yet they haue no sinne by descending from Adam. 6. That originall sinne is not cancelled in Baptisme, but not imputed, or so razed, that it beginneth to diminsh in this life, and is wholly rooted out in that to come. 7. That the sinne remayning in the baptized, hindereth his entrance into heauen. 8. That concupiscence which cherisheth sinne, and remayneth after bap∣tisme, is truely sin. 9. That the principall punishment due to originall sinne, is hell fire, besides corporall death, and other imperfections, vnto which man is subiect in this life. The Diuines in the Congregation agreed, that to discusse those Articles, it was necessary not to proceed in that order, but to examine all the matter methodically, and see what was sinne in Adam, and what, deriued from him to posterity, is sin in all men, called originall, how it is transmitted, and how remitted. In the first point also they agreed, that Adam being depriued of righte∣ousnesse, The discussi∣on of origi∣nall sinne. his affections rebelled against reason; which the Scripture vseth to expresse, saying, the flesh rebelleth against the spirit, and by one onely name, calleth his defect Concupiscence. That hee incurred the wrath of God, and corporall mortalitie, threatned by God, together with the spirituall death of the soule; and yet that none of these defects can be called sinne, but punishments that follow. For sinne is formally the transgression of a diuine precept. And here many enlarged themselues, to finde out the kinde of this fault. Some said it was pride, some gluttony, some infidelity, and some more soundly, that it might bee drawne to all these, and more. But hee that will take S. Pauls words for his ground, can put it in no other kinde, but of pure disobedience. But seeking to know what thing deriued from Adam is sin in vs, the opinions were more diuers. For S. Austine, who first sought into the essence thereof, following S. Paul, said it is concupiscence. And S. Anselmus, many hundred yeeres after, holding that sin is cancelled in the baptized, con∣cupiscence still remayning, maintayned that it is the priuation of originall righteousnesse, which in Baptisme is renewed, by a thing equiualent, which is grace. But S. Thomas, and S. Bonauenture, desiring to reconcile these two opinions, considered that in our corrupted nature there are two rebellions; one of the soule against God, the other of the sences against the soule; and that this is concupiscence, and that vnrighteousnesse, and therefore both to∣gether are the sin. And S. Bonauenture gaue the first place to concupiscence, saying that this is positiue, and the other negatiue. And S. Thomas contrari∣ly made concupiscence the materiall part, and the priuation of righteous∣nesse the formall. Whereupon he said, that this sinne in vs is concupiscence, destitute of originall righteousnesse. The Master of the Sentences, and the old Schoolemen followed S. Austins opinion, which was maintained in the Councell by two Hermite Friars. But because Iohn Scotus defended the opi∣nion of his countrey-man Anselmus, the Fransciscans maintained it in the Councel, and the greater part of the Dominicans that of S. Thomas. So it was declared what was the sinne of Adam, and what originall sinne in other men. But they were more troubled to discourse how it was transmitted from him to posterity, and successiuely from father to sonne. For Saint Austin, who opened the way vnto others, pressed with the obiection of Iulianus the Pe∣lagian, who asked him of the manner of transmitting originall sinne when man is conceiued, seeing that Matrimony and the vse thereof is holy, neither How original sinne is trans∣mitted to po∣steritie. God the first authour sinning, nor the parents, nor he that is borne, by what chinke sinne entred, answered onely, that chinkes were not to bee sought where a gate stood wide open, the Apostle saying, that by Adam sinne entred into the world. And in many places where he was to speake hereof, he shew∣ed himselfe doubtfull, and was irresolute whether as the body of the childe is deriued from the body of the father, so the soule from the soule. For the fountaine being infected, the riuer must needs bee defiled. The modestie of this Saint, was not imitated by the Schoolemen; who, being resolued that euery soule is created immediately by God, said, that the infection was prin∣cipally in the flesh, contracted by our fore-fathers in the earthly Paradise, either from the poysoned qualitie of the fruit, or the venimous breath of the Serpent. Which contamination is deriued into the flesh of the children, which is a part of their parents flesh, and is contracted by the soule in the infusion, as a liquor contracteth the ill qualitie of an infected vessell; and the infection is caused in the flesh, by the lust of the parents in the genera∣tion. But the variety of opinions made no difference in the censure of the Articles: For euery one cleauing to his owne, shewed that it was decided by it, that the first article was hereticall, which vndoubtedly was condem∣ned for such in the Councell of Palestina, and in many of Africa against Pe∣lagius. And it was reexamined in Trent, not as it was found in the writings of Luther, or his followers, but as it was auerred by Zuinglius: who, not∣withstanding seemed to some of the Diuines, who discussed his words well, to thinke rather that in the posteritie of Adam it was no sinne of action, but a corruption and transformation of nature, which hee called a sinne in the kinde of substance. The second Article was esteemed hereticall by all, and was by the same Pelagius long since inuented; who, because hee was not condemned in the Councell of Palestina, for saying that Adam had not hurt his posteritie, hee recanted, and confessed the contrary, and after, together with his followers, declared himselfe that Adam had damnified his posterity, not by transmissi∣on of sinne, but by giuing them a bad example, which hurteth those that doe imitate it. And Erasmus was noted to haue renewed the same assertion, in∣terpreting the place of Saint Paul, That by Adam sinne entred into the world, and passed into all, in regard all haue imitated, and doe imitate his trans∣gression. The third Article for the first part, was censured in Trent, as also in many Colloquies in Germany, by saying that those actions could not bee originall sinne, seeing they are not in children, nor alwayes in those of ripe age: so that to say there was no sinne but that, was wholly to deny it, and not to satisfie the excuse of those in Germany, who vnder the name of actions, vnderstand a naturall inclination to ill, and an inability to good. For, if they vnderstood it so, it was sit to say it, and not to speak euill, but so as that others may vnder∣stand them well. And though Saint Austin spake thus when hee said, that o∣riginall righteousnesse was to obey God, and not to haue concupiscence, hee would alter his speech if he had beene in these times, because it is very law∣full to name the cause for the effect, and the effect for the cause, when they are proper and adequate. But it is not so in this case for originall sinne is not the cause of those bad actions, except a bad will, as principall, be added. But for the second part of the Article, they said, that if the Protestants vnder∣stood a priuatiue corruption, the opinion may be tolerated; but they vnder∣stand a corrupted substance, as if the proper nature of man were changed in∣to another forme, then that in which it was created, and reprehend the Ca∣tholiques, when they call the sinne a priuation of Iustice, as a fountaine without water; but they call it a fountaine from whence corrupted waters doe issue, which are the acts of incredulity, distrust, hatred, contumacie, an in∣ordinate loue of ones selfe, and worldly things: and therefore that it was fit absolutely to condemne the Article. And the fourth also was censured by the same reason, saying that inclination to bee the punishment of sinne, and not sinne formally; and without alleadging ought else, it was absolutely denied to bee a sinne. It must not bee omitted that in this poynt, the Franciscans could not con∣teine The Francis∣cans exempt the Virgine Mary from sinne, and are opposed by the Domini∣cans. themselues from exempting the Virgine, the mother of GOD, from this law by a speciall priuiledge, endeauoring to enlarge themselues in the question, and to prooue it; and the Dominicans laboured to comprehend her by name, vnder the common law, though the Cardinall of Monte omitted no occasion to make them leaue that controuersie, saying, they were assembled to condemne the heresies, not the opinions of the Catholiques. No man resisted the condemnation of the articles. But Fryar Ambrosius The opinion of Catarinus. Catarinus noted the reasons for vnsufficient, in that they declared not the true nature of this sinne; and shewed it in a long discourse. The substance whereof was; that it is necessary to distinguish the sinne from the punish∣ment; that concupiscence and priuation of righteousnesse, is the punish∣ment of sinne; therefore that it is necessary the sinne should bee another thing. He added, that which was not a sin in Adam, it is impossible it should be a sinne in vs: but neither of these two were sinne in Adam, because neither priuation of righteousnesse, nor concupiscence were his actions; therefore neither are they in vs; and if they were effects of sinne in him, of necessitie they must be so in others also. By which reason, it cannot be said that sinne is the enmitie of GOD against the sinner, nor the sinners enmitie against GOD, seeing they are things that follow sinne, and come after it. Hee op∣pugned also the transmission of sinne, by meanes of the seed and generation, saying, That as, if Adam had not sinned, righteousnesse would haue beene transfused, not by vertue of the generation, but onely by the will of God, so it is fit to finde another meanes to transfuse sinne. And hee explaned his opinion in this forme; that as God made a Couenant with Abraham and all his posteritie, when he made him father of the faithfull, so when he gaue originall righteousnesse to Adam and all mankinde, hee made him seale an ob∣ligation in the name of all, to keepe it for himselfe and them, obseruing the commandements; which because he transgressed, he lost it as well for others as himselfe, & incurred the punishments also for them; the which as they are deriued into euery one, so the very transgression of Adam belonged to euery one; to him as the cause, to others by vertue of the Couenant; so that the action of Adam is actuall sinne in him, and imputed to others, is originall; because when hee sinned, all mankind did sinne with him. Catarinus groun∣ded himselfe principally, for that a true and proper sinne must needs bee a voluntary act, and no other thing can bee voluntary but the transgression of Adam imputed vnto all. And Paul saying that all haue sinned in Adam, it must bee vnderstood that they haue all committed the same sinne with him. He alleadged for example, that St. Paul to the Hebrewes affirmeth, that Leui paid tithe to Melchizedek, when hee paid it in his great Grandfather Abraham; by which reason it must bee said, that the posteritie violated the commande∣ment of GOD, when Adam did it, and that they were sinners in him, as in him they receiued righteousnes. And so there is no need to run to lust which infecteth the flesh, whence the soule receiueth infection. For it cannot bee vnderstood, how a spirit can receiue a corporall passion; and if sinne were a spirituall blemish in the soule, it could not first be in the flesh, and if it be cor∣porall in the flesh, it can work none effect in the spirit. That the soule, by ioy∣ning it selfe with an infected body, doth receiue spirituall infection, is an vn∣conceiueable transcendencie. He prooued the couenant of God with Adam, by a place of the Prophet Osea, by another of Ecclesiasticus, and by many pla∣ces of Saint Austin. That the sinne of euery one is the act onely of the trans∣gression of Adam, hee proued by Saint Paul, when hee saith, That by the dis∣obedience of one man, many are made sinners; and because the Church hath euer vnderstood that sinne is nothing else but a voluntary action against the law, of which kind there was none but that of Adam; and because Saint Paul saith, That death entred by originall sinne, which entred onely by actu∣all transgression. And hee brought for the principall proofe, that though Eue did eate the apple before Adam, yet she knew not she was naked, nor that shee had incurred the punishment, but onely after Adam had sinned. There∣fore Adams sinne, as it was not his alone, but of Eue too, so was it also of all his posteritie. But Fryar Dominicus Soto, to defend the opinion of Saint Thomas, and of the other Diuines from the obiections of Catarinus, brought a new exposition, Dominicus Soro crosseth the opinion of Catarinus. and said, that Adam sinned actually in eating of the forbidden fruit, but after he remained a sinner by an habituall qualitie, caused by the action, as by eue∣ry bad action such a disposition is bred in the minde of the actor, by which, though the act be past, he remaineth, and is called a sinner; that Adams acti∣on was transitory, nor had existence, but while hee wrought; that the habitu∣all qualitie remaining in him, passed into the posteritie, and is transfused as proper vnto euery one; that Adams action is not originall sin, but that con∣sequent habit which the Theologues call priuation of righteousnesse, which may be wel expounded, cōsidering that man is called a sinner, not only when hee transgresseth actually, but after also, vntill the sinne bee cancelled, not in regard of the punishments, or other consequences of sinne, but in regard of the preceding transgression it selfe; as that which maketh a man crooked, vntill hee bee straightned againe; who is said to be so, not by an actuall acti∣on, but by that effect which remaineth after the action is past. Hee com∣pared originall sinne to crookednesse, as it is indeede a spirituall obliquitie; for the whole nature of man being in Adam, when hee made himselfe croo∣ked by transgressing the Precept, the whole nature of man, and by conse∣quent, euery particular person remained crooked not by the curuitie of Adam, but by his owne, by which hee is truely crooked and a sinner, vn∣till hee bee straightened by the grace of God. These two opinions were sharpely disputed, and euery one pretended that his owne should be receiued by the Synode. But in the consideration how originall sinne was remitted, they agreed How original sin is renutted all, that it is cancelled by baptisme, and the soule restored pure into the state of innocencie, though the punishments which follow sinne bee not remoo∣ued, that they may bee an exercise for the iust. And this all of them expoun∣ded by saying, that the perfection of Adam consisted in an infused qualitie, which adorned the soule, made it perfect and acceptable to God, and exemp∣ted the bodie from mortalitie. And God, for the merit of CHRIST, gi∣ueth vnto those that are regenerated by baptisme another quality called iu∣stifying grace, which wiping out euery blemish in the soule, maketh it pure, as was that of Adam; yea in some it worketh greater effects then originall righteousnesse, but onely that it worketh no effect in the bodie, whereby mortalitie, and other naturall defects are not remooued. Many places of Saint Paul and the other Apostles were alleadged, where they say, that bap∣tisme washeth, cleanseth, illuminateth and purifieth the soule, so that no con∣demnation, spot or wrinkle remaineth. It was exactly discoursed, how, if the baptised haue no sinne, sinne can passe into their children? Whereunto Augustinus answered with examples onely: as of a circumcised father the sonne is borne vncircumcised, and of a blinde man one that can see, and of a pure graine, one clad in straw. Catarinus answered, that the Couenant was made with Adam onely, and that euery one hath sinne by imputation of that of Adam; so that the intermediate Parents haue nothing to doe there∣in: and if the forbidden fruit had beene eaten, not by Adam, but by one of his sonnes, his posterity had not sinned; and if Adam had sinned after hee had begotsonnes, his sinne had beene imputed to them though borne before. Soto disputed against it, that if Adam had sinned after his sonnes were borne, those would not haue beene obnoxious vnto it, but their posterity should. The common voyce was, that the sixt Article was hereticall, for saying there remaineth in the baptized something worthy of death: and the seuenth for leauing remainders of sinne in the baptized: and the eight most cleerely, for making concupiscence a sinne in the baptised. Only Antoninus Marinarus, a Carmelite Friar, affirming, as the others, that sinne is cancelled by baptisme, and that concupiscence is before sinne, yet, for condemning the contrary of heresie, hee considered that Saint Austin being olde, writing heere of to Boni∣facius, sayd plainely that concupiscence was not a sinne but a cause and an ef∣fect of sinne: and writing against Iulianus hee said in as plaine termes, that it was sinne, and the cause, and effect thereof: and yet in his retractions hee neuer made mention of either of these two contrary propositions, because hee thought hee might speake both wayes of it, in regard it was not a matter of faith, the difference being rather verball then otherwise. For it is one thing to aske if a thing bee a sinne, or if it bee a sinne to a person ex∣cused. As hee that goeth foorth to hunt for things necessary for his su∣stenance, if hee thinke to kill a wilde beast, and, by inuincible ignorance, slaye a man, the Lawyers say that the action is murder, and a sinne: but the hunter is excused, so that vnto him it is not, by reason of his ignorance. So concupiscence, beeing the same before and after baptisme, is sinne in it selfe; and Saint Paul sayth, that it resisteth the Law of God, euen in the regenerate, and whatsoeuer doth that is sinne. But hee that is baptized is excused; because hee is cladde with CHRIST: so that the Article is true one way, and false another; and it is not iust to condemne a proposition, which is true in one sence, without distinguishing it first. This opinion was reiected by all, and it was said that Saint Austin made two sortes of concupiscence; one before baptisme, which is a repugnancie of the will to the Law of God, which hee sayd was sinne, and abolished in Baptisme; another, which is the repugnancie of the sence to reason, which remaineth after baptisme, which S. Austin called the cause and effect, but ne∣uer sinne: and when hee seemeth to say otherwise, it must bee defended that his minde is; that concupiscence is a sinne, which by baptisme leaueth to bee so, and becommeth an exercise of vertue and good workes. To this opini∣on of Soto they ioyned what hee had said in his sermons, made in the Masse on the fourth Sunday of the last Aduent, and in that of the Lent, exhorting to repose all confidence in God, condemning all trust in workes, and affir∣ming that the heroicall Actes of the ancients, so renowned by men, were truely sinne; that hee spake of the difference of the Law and the Gospel, not as of two times, but as if the Gospel had beene euer, and the Law ought to be euer, and also of the certaintie of Grace, though with ambiguous and doubtfull clauses, for feare they might so reprehend him, that he could not bee defended. This made the Friar suspected by some, that he was not whol∣ly Soto is suspe∣cted of Lu∣theranisme. auerse from the Protestants doctrine. When they came to the Article of the punishment, though Saint Austin, grounding himselfe vpon Saint Paul, held expresly, that the paines of hell fire belonged vnto it, euen in little children, whereunto none of the holy Fathers contradicted, yet the master of the sentences, with the Schoolemen, who follow most of all Philosophicall reasons, distinguished two kindes of eternall punishments; one the priuation onely of celestiall blessednesse, the other, a chastisement: and they assigned the first onely to originall sinne. Onely Gregorie of Arimini forsooke the generall opinion of the Schoolemen, who by that meanes gayned the name of Tormenter of children. But neither he nor Saint Austin were defended by the Theologues in the con∣gregations. Yet there was another diuision amongst them. For the Domi∣nicans A difference betweene the Franciscans and Domini∣cans about Limbo. sayd that children dead, without baptisme before the vse of reason, re∣maine after the resurrection in a Limbo and darkenesse vnder the earth, but without fire: the Franciscans sayd they are to remaine vpon the earth, and in light. Some affirmed also, that they should bee Philosophers, busying them∣selues in the knowledge of naturall things, not without that great pleasure which happeneth when curiositie is satisfied by inuention. Catarinus said fur∣ther, that they shall bee visited and comforted by the holy Angels and Saints. And in this so many vanities were deliuered, that they might giue great mat∣ter of entertainement. But for reuerence of Austine, and not to condemne Gregory of Arimini, the Augustinians made great meanes, that the Article, though false, as they thought, might not bee condemned for hereticall; though Ca∣tarinus imployed all his force to the contrary, to represse (as he said) the bold∣nesse and ignorance of some Preachers, who, to the great scandall of the peo∣ple, publish that doctrine, affirming that Saint Austine had said so onely in heate of disputation against the Pelagians, and not because hee was cleare in that opinion. Whereupon, since the truth is declared to the contrary by common consent of the Schooles, and that the Lutheranes haue raised the same errours, and the Catholiques themselues fall into it, the declaration of the Synode is necessary. The censure of the Diuines being ended, and the points treated of by the The Prelates did scarcely vnderstand the discourses of the Diuines Fathers, to resolue vpon the forme of the Decree, the Bishoppes (amongst whom very few had knowledge in Theologie, but were either Lawyers, or learned men of the Court) were confounded with this scholasticall and crab∣bed manner of handling the Articles; and amongst so-many opinions, knew not what to thinke of the essence of originall sinne. That of Catarinus was best vnderstood, because it was expressed by a politicall conceit of a bargaine made by one for his posteritie, which being transgressed, they are all vn∣doubtedly bound; and many of the Fathers did fauour that. But perceiuing the contradiction of the other Diuines, they durst not receiue it. For re∣mission of the sin, this onely they held to bee cleare, that euery one hath ori∣ginall sin before baptisme, and is perfectly purged of it by baptisme. There∣fore they concluded that this should bee established for faith, and the contra∣ry condemned for heresie, together with all those opinions which deny ori∣ginall sin, in what sort soeuer: but what that sin is, there being so many diffe∣rences amongst the Diuines, they said it was not possible to set downe so cir∣cumspectly, that it might satisfie all, and not condemne some opinion, which might cause a schisme. Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sinigaglia, Fryar Ierom Generall of S. Austin, Andreas Vega a Franciscan, opposeth the common in∣clination to condemne the opinion of the Luthe∣ranes without declaring the opinion of t Catholiques and Andreas Vega, a Franciscan Diuine, were opposite to this generall incli∣nation. This last shewed more then the others, that it was not conuenient, nor euer vsed by any Councel, to condemne an opinion for hereticall, with∣out declaring first which is Catholique; that no true negatiue hath in it selfe the cause of its truth, but is so by the truth of an affirmatiue; nor euer any proposition was false, but because another is true: neither can the falsity of the one be knowne, but by him who knoweth the truth of the other. There∣fore the opinion of the Lutherans cannot bee condemned of heresie, vntill the opinion of the Church be set downe. He that shall obserue the maner of proceeding in all Councels, which haue handled matter of faith, will see, that they haue laid first an Orthodoxe foundation, and by that condemned the heresies; and so it is necessary to doe now. For when it shall be read that the Councel of Trent hath condemned the Lutheranes, for saying originall sinne is ignorance, contempt, distrust, an hate of heauenly things, and a cor∣ruption of the whole man in the will, soule and body, who is there that will not demand, what is it then? and will not say in himselfe, if this opinion bee hereticall, which is Catholike? And when he shal see the opinion of Zuinglius condemned, that children the sonnes of the faithfull, are baptized into remis∣sion of sinnes, though nothing bee transmitted from Adam but the punish∣ments, and the corruption of nature, will not suddenly aske, what else is then transmitted? In summe, he concluded, that the Councel was assembled prin∣cipally to tell the Catholique trueth, not onely to condemne heresies. The Bishop said, That these Articles hauing been so often disputed in the Diets The Bishop of Sinigaglia, & Friar Ierom Generall of the Augustins speake to the same purpose. of Germanie, euery one would expect from the Councell a perspicuous do∣ctrine, cleared from all difficulties. The Generall also, who was somewhat suspected to bee suborned by the Ambassador Toledo, added, that the true Ca∣tholique doctrine of originall sinne is contained in the writings of S. Austin; that Egidius Romanus had wrote a booke thereof; that whensoeuer the Fa∣thers would take but a little paines, they might bee able to vnderstand the truth, and iudge of it; that they should not suffer a fame to bee spread, that in Trent that was resolued in foure dayes, which in Germanie hath beene so long discussed without conclusion. These aduertisements were not hearkened vnto, because the Prelates had no hope to bee able by studie to bee well informed in the crabbed schoole∣poynts, neither durst they goe about to make triall of it; and because the Le∣gats had receiued absolute command from Rome to define this matter in the next session, they were constrained to auoid the difficulties, especially because the Cardinall of Monte was resolued to make this great iumpe by all meanes. And therefore calling vnto him the Generals of the Orders, and the Diuines, Catarinus and Vega, who spake more then the rest, he charged them to passe by the difficulties, and helpe forward the dispatch. The Prelates deputed to frame the decree, with the assistance of the Di∣uines, deuided the matter into fiue Anathematismes. The first, of the personall sin of Adam: the second, of the transfusion into posterity: the third, of the re∣medy by baptisme: the fourth, of the baptisme of children: the fifth, of con∣cupiscence remaining. After this, the opinions of the Zuinglians were cōdem∣ned in the foure first, and of Luther in the fifth. They conferred on these Ar∣ticles almost all, adding and taking away what they thought fit with much concord, but onely that the Franciscan Bishops and Fryars approoued not, The Francis∣cans desire that the Vir∣gine Mary should be excepted. that it should be generally sayd, that the sinne of Adam passed into all man∣kinde, because the blessed Ʋirgine, the mother of our LORD, was compre∣hended, if shee were not particularly excepted; and they desired the excepti∣on. The Dominicans said on the contrary, that the proposition so gene∣rall, and without exception was Saint Pauls, and all the holy Doctors, and therefore that it was not fit to alter it with an exception: and that contradi∣ction waxing warme, they fell into the question which the Legates had often diuerted. They said, that though the Church had tolerated the opinion of the conception, yet hee that would examine the matter well, might find that shee was not exempted from the common infection. And the others oppo∣sed, that it would bee as much as to condemne the Church, who celebrateth the conception as immaculate, and a kinde of ingratitude, derogating from the honour due vnto her, by whom all the graces of CHRIST passe vnto vs. The disputations turned into contention, so farre, that the Emperours Am∣bassadour had hope to obtaine his designe, that the matter might not be pro∣posed in the next Session. Many things were proposed vpon that occasion, which caused them to A discourse of the Author to shew how the blessed Virgin came to be worshipped. proceede to the Decree, which shall bee rehearsed; which because it affor∣ded matter of discourse, for the entire vnderstanding of all, it is necessary to relate from the beginning the originall of this controuersie. After that the impietie of Nestorius had diuided CHRIST, making two sonnes, and denying him to be God who was borne of the blessed Ʋirgin, the Church, to incul∣cate the Catholike trueth in the mindes of the faithfull, made often mention of her in the Churches as well of the East as of the West; with this short forme of wordes in Greeke, Maria in Latin, Maria mater Dei. This beeing instituted onely for the honour of CHRIST, was by little and little communicated also to the mother, and finally applyed to her alone; and therefore when images began to multiplie, CHRIST was painted as a babe in his mothers armes, to put vs in minde of the worship due vnto him, euen in that age. But in progresse of time, it was turned into the worship of the mother without the sonne, hee remayning as an appendex in the picture. The writers and Preachers, especially those that were contemplatiue, caried with the torrent of the vulgar, which is able to doe much in these matters, lea∣uing to mention CHRIST, inuented with one accord new prayses, Epithites, and religious seruices; in so much that about the yeere 1050. a dayly Office was instituted to the blessed Virgin, distinguished by seuen Canonical houres, in a forme which anciently was euer vsed to the honour of the Diuine Ma∣iestie, and in the next hundred yeeres, the worship so increased, that it came to the height, euen to attribute that vnto her, which the Scriptures speake of the Diuine wisedome. And amongst these inuented nouities this was one, her totall exemption from originall sinne. Yet this remayned onely in the breasts of some few priuate men, hauing no place in Ecclesiasticall ceremo∣nies, or amongst the learned. About the yeere 1136. the Canons of Lions dared to bring it into the Ecclesiasticall Offices. Saint Bernard, who liued in those times, esteemed the most learned and pious of that age, who was most frequent in the prayses of the blessed Virgin, so farre as to call her the necke of the Church, by which euery grace and influence passeth from the head, in∣ueighed seuerely against the Canons, and wrote vnto them, reprehending them for introducing a dangerous nouitie without reason, or example of an∣tiquitie; that there want not places to praise the Ʋirgin, who cannot be plea∣sed with a presumptuous nouitie, mother of rashnesse, sister of superstition, daughter of lightnesse. The next age had Schoole-Doctors of both the or∣ders Franciscan and Dominican, who in their writings refuted this opini∣on, vntill about the yeere 1300. when Iohn Scot, a Franciscan, putting the matter into disputation, and examining the reasons, did flie to the omnipo∣tencie, saying that God had power to free her from sinne, or to cause sinne to remaine in her onely for an instant, or for a certaine time: that God onely knoweth which of these three is true; yet it is probable to attribute the first to Marie, in case it bee not repugnant to the authoritie of the Church, and of the Scripture. The doctrine of this famous Diuine was followed by the Franciscan order. But in the particular of the conception, seeing the way layd open they affirmed absolutely for true, that which hee had proposed as possible and probable, vnder this doubtfull condition, if it bee not repugnant: to the Orthodoxe Faith. The Dominicans did constantly re∣sist; and followed Saint Thomas, one of their order, famous for his lear∣ning, S. Thomas is canonized by Pope Iohn the, 22 to disgrace the Francis∣cans. and for the approbation of Pope Iohn the two and twentieth, who, to depresse the Franciscans, who did for the most part adhere to the Em∣perour Lewis of Bauaria, excommunicated by him, did canonize that Doctour and his doctrine. The shew of pietie and deuotion made the Franciscan opinion generally more accepted, and more tenaciously receiued by the Vniuersitie of Paris, which was in credite for eminent learning; and after long ventilation and discussion, was afterwards approoued by the Councell of Basill, which forbade to preach and teach the contra∣rie. This tooke place in those Countreys which receiued the Councell. Finally Pope Sixtus the fourth, a Franciscan, made two Bulles in this matter; one in the yeere one thousand foure hundred seuentîe sixe, ap∣proouing a new Office, composed by Leonard Nogarola Protonotarie, with Indulgences to him that did celebrate it, or assist: the other in the yeere one thousand foure hundred eightie three, condemning the assertion, as false and erronious, that it is heresie to hold the conception, or a sinne to celebrate it, excommunicating the Preachers and others who noted that opinion of heresie, or the contrarie, because it was not as yet deci∣ded by the Church of Rome and the Apostolike Sea. But this did not appease the contentions, which betweene the two orders of Friars still waxed sharper, and were renewed euery yeere in December; so that Pope Leo the tenth thinking to giue a remedie by deferring the contro∣uersie, made letters bee written vnto diuers. But afterwards he had more important cogitations, by reason of the nouities of Germanie, which in these contentions wrought that which happeneth in States, that the Citie being beleaguered, the factions doe cease, and all ioyne against the com∣mon enemie. The Dominicans grounded themselues vpon the Scrip∣ture, the doctrine of the Fathers, and the most ancient Schoole-men, where not one iot was found in fauour of the others; but they alleadged for themselues miracles, and contentment of the people. Iohn of Vdine, a Dominican Friar, sayd, either you will that Saint Paul and the Fathers haue beleeued this exemption of the Ʋirgine from the common condi∣tion, or not. If they haue beleeued it, and yet haue spoken generally without euer making mention of this exception, imitate them also now. But if they haue beleeued the contrarie, your opinion is a nouitie. Iero∣lamus Lombardellus, a Franciscan Friar, sayd, that the authoritie of the present Church, was no lesse then that of the Primitiue; if the consent of that in those times made men speake without exception, the consent of this, which appeareth in celebrating the Feast throughout, ought to induce vs not to omit it. The Legate wrote to Rome of the marueilous agreement of all against the Lutheran doctrine, and the resólution taken to condemne it, and sent a copie of the Anathematismes framed, giuing aduise withall of the contention raised about the conception. Whereunto it was answered from Rome, that by no meanes they should meddle with a matter, which may cause a schisme betweene Catholikes, but should striue to reconcile the parties, and giue The Pope commandeth that the con∣tention about the concepti∣on should be omitted for feare of ma∣king a schisme them both satisfaction, and aboue all to preserue in strength the briefe of Sistus 4. The Legates hauing receiued the order, did by themselues, and by the wiser sort of Prelates perswade both parties to lay aside the contenti∣ons, and apply themselues ioyntly against the Lutherans. They were on both sides contented to be silent, so that their opinion were not preiudiced: yet the Franciscans said that the Canon was against them if the Virgin were not excep∣ted, and the Dominicans that they were condemned if shee were. It was ne∣cessary to finde a way how it might bee declared that shee was neither com∣prehended, nor affirmatiuely excepted; which was by saying, they had no intention either to comprehend or except her. Afterwards at the great in∣stance of the Franciscans, the others were content it should bee sayd onely they had no meaning to comprehend her. And to obey the Pope it was ad∣ded, that the constitutions of Sistus 4. should be obserued. While these things are handled in Trent, the Diet being assembled in Ra∣tisbon, The Diet of Ratisbon. the Emperour shewed great displeasure that the Colloquie was dissol∣ued without fruit, and required that euery one should propose what hee thought fit to appease Germanie. The Protestants desired that the difference of Religion might bee composed, according to the Recesse of Spira, by a na∣tionall Councell, saying it was more fit then a generall, because by reason of the great difference in opinions betweene Germanie and other Nations, it is impossible to auoyde the raising of a greater contention: and whosoeuer will enforce Germanie to change opinion, must first slay many thousands of men; which would be a dammage to the Emperour, and a ioy to the Turkes. The Emperors ministers answered, that his Maiestie was not the cause why the Decree of Spira was not executed; and that it was knowen vnto all, that, to make so necessarie a peace with the French King, hee was constrained to yeeld to the Pope in matters of Religion; that the Decree was fitted to the necessities of that time, which being changed, it was also necessarie to change opinion; that in National Councels somtimes maners are amended, but Faith and Religion neuer handled, that in Colloquies one hath to doe with Theo∣logues, who, for the most part are vntractable & obstinate; so that with them one cannot come to such moderate counsels as is necessary; that none loued Religion more then the Emperor, who would not swarue one iote from that which is iust and honest, to please the Pope: but he knew wel, that in a Natio∣nall Councel he should neither be able to reconcile the parties, nor find whom to make iudge. The Ambassadour of Mentz and Triers diuided themselues from the other foure, and being vnited with all the Catholikes, approoued the Tridentine Councell, and besought Caesar to protect it, and to perswade the Protestants to goe thither and submit themselues vnto it. They answe∣red that the Councell in Trent was not free, as was demanded and promised in the Imperiall Diets: they desired againe that the Emperour would obserue the peace, and ordaine that Religion might be established in a lawfull Coun∣cell of Germanie, or an Imperiall Diet Job a Colloquie of learned men both . In this Interim, the Emperour had made secret prouision, for warre, which not being able longer to concedles knowen to the Protestants in the Diet, and because peace was concluded with the French King, and The prouisi∣ons for warre against the Protest no lon∣ger be con∣cealed. truce with the T , euery one did easily perceiue the cause especially, for that a fame was spread the Pope also and Ferdinand did arme, where∣by all was in confusion. And the Emperour seeing hee was discouered, the ninth of Innosent, the Cardinall of Trent Post to Rome, to demand of the Pope the succours promised, and sent Captaines with money into Italie and Flanders to leuie Souldiers, and sollicited the Princes, and Protestant Ger∣man Captaines, not combined with those of the league of Smalcalda, to fol∣low his colours, affirming, and promising bee would not make warre for Religion, but suppresse the rebellion of some, who, vnder that pretence, would not acknowledge the Lawes, nor the Maiestie of the Prince, By this promise he quieted many of the Cities, who before had receiued the reno∣uation in the Rites of the Church, promising all beneuolence to the obedi∣ent, and securitie for their Religion. But in the Councell there being no more difference amongst the Fathers concerning the things discussed, and the decrees of faith and reformation being framed, the Emperours Ambassadour, being not able any longer to resist the Legats resolution, the seuenteenth of Iune being come, the day appoynted for the Session, Alexander Pichalhomini, Bishop of Pianza, sang, Masse: Marcus Laureus, a Dominican Friar, preached; and when the vsual ceremonies were ended, the decree of faith, with fiue Anathematismes, was read. 1. Against him that confesseth not, that Adam, by transgressing hath The Decree of faith with 5. a t in the Session. lost sanctitie and iustice, incurred the wrath of God, death and thraldome to the Deuill, and is infected in soule and body. 2. Against him that auer∣reth that Adam by sinning hath hurt himselfe onely, or hath deriued into his posteritie the death onely of the body, and not sinne, the death of the soule. 3. Against him that affirmeth that sinne, which is one in the beginning, and proper to euery one, transmitted by generation, not imitation, can bee abo∣lished by any other remedie then the death of CHRIST: or denieth that the merit of CHRIST is applied as well to children, as to those that bee of ripe yeeres, by the Sacrament of Baptisme, ministred in the forme and rite of the Church. 4. Against him that de eth that children which are newly borne ought to be baptized though the sonnes of Christians, or saith they are bap∣tized for remission of sinnes, but not because they haue contracted any origi∣nall sinne from Adam. 5. Against him that denyeth that by the grace of Baptisme the guilt of originall sinne is remitted, or saith that all is not remoo∣ued which hath the true and proper nature of sinne, but that it is razed and not imputed, concupiscence still remaining in the baptized for an exercise, which cannot hurt but him that consenteth to it: the which beeing called sinne by the Apostle, the Synod declareth that it is no true and proper sinne, but is so termed because it ariseth from sinne, and inclineth to it. That the Synod meaneth not to comprehend in the decree the blessed Virgin, but that the constitutions of Sistus 4. ought to be obserued, which it doth renew. The Decree of the reformation containeth two parts, one in matter of the Lectures, the other of the Sermons. For the Lectures it was ordered, that in the Churches where there is a stipend allotted for reading Diuinitie, the Bishop should prouide that the holy Scripture should bee read by the Sti∣pendary, it he be fit, and not being fit, the Bishop should depute a substitute, The Decree of reforma∣tion. to performe the charge: but for hereafter that the benefice should not bee conferred but vpon a sufficient person. That in the Cathedrall Churches of populous Cities, and collegiate Churches of great Castles, where no such stipend is assigned, the first Prebend that falleth void, should bee applyed to that vse, or some simple benefice, or a contribution of all beneficed men, to institute the Lecture. That in poore Churches, there should bee at the least a Master to teach Grammer, who shall enioy the fruits of some simple bene∣fice, or haue a stipend from the Capitular or Episcopall table, or the Bishop shall finde some other way to effect it. That in the Cloysters of Monkes there should be a Diuinitie Lecture, if it may bee, wherein if the Abbats shall bee negligent, they shall bee constrained to doe it, by the Bishop as the Popes Delegate. That in the Conuents of the Regulars, there should bee deputed Masters of sufficiencie to performe this charge. That in publique studies, where a Diuinitie Lecture is not instituted, it shall bee instituted by the cha∣ritie and pietie of Princes, and Republiques; and where it hath beene insti∣tuted and neglected, it shall bee restored. That none shall bee made a Lectu∣rer, either publike or priuate, before hee bee approoued by the Bishop, as fit for his life, manners, and knowledge, except those that reade in the Cloysters of Monkes. That the priuiledges granted by law, to Publique Readers in Diuinitie, and schollers, for the enioying of the fruits of their benefices, in their absence shall be preserued. Concerning Sermons the Decree containeth, that the Bishops and Pre∣lates bee bound, if they bee not hindered, to preach the Gospel in person, and if they bee, to substitute men of sufficiencie. That the inferiour Curates ought to teach things necessary to saluation, either by themselues, or others; at the least on Sundayes and solemne Feasts: whereunto they shall bee con∣strained by the Bishops, any exemption notwithstanding. And the Curates of the Parishes subiect to Monasteries, which are in no diocesse, shall be con∣strained to the same by the Metropolitanes, as Delegates of the Pope, in case the Regular Prelate shall be negligent. That the Regulars shall not preach, except they be approoued, for their life, maners and knowledge, by their su∣periours: and in the Churches of their Order, they shall demand the bene∣diction of the Bishop before the Sermon begin: but in other Churches they shall not preah without the Bishops licence, which shall bee giuen them gra∣tis. If the Preacher sow errours or scandals, the Bishop shal prohibite him; if heresies, he shall proceede against him according to law and custome: and if the Preacher bee a priuiledged person, hee shall doe it as delegate; yet ta∣king care that the Preachers bee not molested by false imputations, and ca∣lumnies, and haue no cause to complaine of them. That they permit not that either Regulars who liue out of Cloysters, or secular Priests, except they be knowen and allowed by them, doe preach vntill an account be giuen thereof to the Pope. That the Pardoners shall not preach, nor cause any to preach, and in case they doe, they shall be compelled to obey by the Bishop, notwithstanding the priuiledges. In fine, the 29. of Iulie, was assigned for the next Session. The Decrees beeing pronounced by the Bishop that sayd Masse, the Se∣cretary of the Councel read the letters of the French King, in which hee de∣puted for his Ambassadour in the Councel Peter Danesius; who made a long The 29. of Iuly is ap∣pointed for the next Ses∣sion. Peter Dane∣siu is Ambas∣sador for the French King, and maketh an Oration in the S on. and eloquent Oration to the Fathers, saying in substance; That the King∣dome of France since the first most Christian King Clodoueus, hath alwayes preserued Christian religion most sincere. That S. Gregory the first gaue the title of Catholique to Childebert, in token of his incorrupt religion. That the Kings haue neuer suffered any sect in any part of France, nor any but Catho∣liques; yea, haue procured the conuersion of Strangers, Idolaters, and He∣retiques, and haue constrained them with pious armes to professe the true and sound religion. Hee shewed how Childebert compelled the Visigothes, who were Arrians, to ioyne themselues with the Catholique Church: and how Charles the Great made warre thirty yeeres with the Saxons, to reduce them to Christian religion. Then he declared the fauors done to the Church of Rome. He recounted the enterprises of Pipin and Charles the Great against the Lumbards; and how, in a Synode of Bishops, it was granted by Adrian to Charles, to create the Pope, and to approoue the Bishops of his Dominion, and inuest them after they had receiued the oath of fidelity. He added, that though his sonne Ludouicus Pius, surrendred that authority to create the Pope, yet he reserued that Legats should be sent vnto him, to preserue amitie, which hath beene euer maintayned with mutuall offices. For which confidence, the Popes, in times of difficultie, either chased out of their Sea, or fearing se∣dition, haue retired themselues into that Kingdome. That it cannot bee told how many dangers the French men haue runne, and how much money and blood they haue spent, to enlarge the lists of the Christian Empire, or to reco∣uer that which hath bene vsurped by the Barbarians, or to restore the Popes, or to deliuer them from danger. Hee added, that King Francis descending from these, in the beginning of his reigne, after the victory atchieued in Lum∣bardy, did, with the same piety, goe to Bolonia, to meete Leo the tenth, to con∣firme a peace with him; which hath continued with Adrian, Clement, and Paul: and in these 26. yeeres the points of faith being brought into great ambiguities in diuers regions, hee hath taken most exact care, that nothing should be innouated in the common Ecclesiasticall vse, but all reserued to the publique censures of the Church. And though hee bee of a quiet, pleasing, and not bloody disposition, yet hee hath vsed seueritie, and made grieuous Edicts; and hath brought to passe, by the diligence and vigilancie of his Iudges, that in so great a tempest, which hath subuerted many Cities, and whole Nations that most noble Kingdome should not bee shaken, in which the ancient doctrine, rites, ceremonies, and manners, doe remaine: so that the Councel might ordaine what they thought to bee true and fitte for the Christian Common-wealth. He said further, that the King knew how pro∣fitable it was to Christendome to haue the Pope for Head, and that, beeing tempted and inuited, with most gaineful profers, to follow the example of another, would not forsake his opinion, and thereby hath lost his neighbors loue, with some disaduantage. That vnderstanding the Conuocation of the Councell, he presently sent some of his Bishops, and when hee saw it went on in earnest, and that the authoritie thereof was established by many Sessi∣ons, he hath sent him for his Ambassadour, to assist them, and to procure, that at the last, they would constitute and propose the doctrine which ought e∣uery where to be professed by all Christians, and rectifie the Ecclesiasticall discipline, by the square of the Canons; promising that the most Christian King will cause all to be obserued in his kingdome, and protect the decrees of the Councell. Then he added, that, the merits of the French King being so great, his priuiledges, granted by the ancient Fathers and Popes, ought to be preserued, which Ludouicus Pius, & all the Kings of France since haue posses∣sed: and the rights, priuiledges, and immunities confirmed to the Churches of France, of which hee is defender, Which if the Councell will doe, the French-men will be thankfull, and the Fathers will not repent them of their deede. And is answe∣red by Hercu∣les Seuerollo. Hercules Seuerollo, Proctour of the Councell briefely answered, in the name of the Synod, thanking the King; shewing that the Ambassadors pre∣sence was most acceptable, promising all diligence in the establishing of faith and reformation of manners, offering all fauour to the Kingdome and Church of France. But the Decrees of the Session being printed, and gone into Germanie, af∣foorded The censure of the decrees in Germany. matter of discourse. It was sayd that the Pelagian impietie was su∣perfluously handled, being by so many Councels, and the common consent of the Church, more then a thousand yeeres since, condemned, that it had beene tolerable if the ancient doctrine had beene confirmed; that in con∣formitie vnto it, they had well proposed a true vniuersall proposition, by say∣ing that the sinne of Adam did passe into all his posteritie, but after had de∣stroyed it, by an exception; that it helped thē not, that the exception was not assertiue, but ambiguous: for as one particular maketh false the contradicto∣rie vniuersall, so one ambiguons particular, maketh the vniuersall vncertaine. And who seeth not that so long as this exception remaineth, though with ambiguity, euery one may conclude, that it is not certaine that sinne is passed into all the posterity, because it is not certaine whether it be passed into the Ʋirgin: and the rather, because the reason which perswadeth that excepti∣on, may perswade many more. That Bernard concluded well, that the same reason which induced to celebrate the Conception of the Virgin, will conclude the like for her father and mother, Grand-fathers, and great Grand-fathers, and all her Genealogie since Adam. But when they came to Abraham they should goe no further; because there is great reason to exempt from origi∣nall sinne none but him. For vnto him the promise of the Redeemer was made; CHRIST is euer called the seed of Abraham, and Abraham the Fa∣ther of CHRIST, and of all that beleeue, a paterne of the faithfull. These be greater dignities then to beare CHRIST in the belly; according to that diuine answere, that the Virgin was more blessed in hauing heard the word of GOD, then in hauing borne CHRIST, and giuen him sucke. And he that will not for preheminencie except Abraham, but onely esteeme for sound the ancient reason, that CHRIST IS without sinne, because he was borne of the holy Ghost, without the seed of man, will say it is better to follow the coun∣cell of the wise man, and containe ones selfe within the bounds set downe by the Fathers. They added, that the world was much bound to the Coun∣cell, for being contented to say that it confesseth, and thinketh that concu∣piscence remaineth in the baptized; or else men would be compelled to de∣ny to feele that which they do. In the decree of reformation, it was expected that order should haue been taken with the schoole-men and Canonists, with these for giuing diuine proprieties to the Pope, euen to call him God, attributing vnto him infallibilitie and making the same tribunall of both, say∣ing also, that he is more mercifull then CHRIST: with the Schoole men, who leauing the Scripture, or making it all doubtfull, haue made Aritostles Philosophy the foundation of Theologie, euen making a question whether there be a GOD, and disputing of it on both sides. It seemed strange that it was vnknowen vntill then, that to preach was the office of Bishops: that the abuse of preaching vanities, or any thing but CHRIST was not remooued; that prouision was made against the open merchandizing of Preachers vn∣der the name of almes. Newes beeing come of these decrees to the Empe∣rours The D es a in the Emperors Court. Court, it was taken in ill part that light matters, not required by Ger∣many, were handled, and that in matter of faith the disputes were awaked by the decree. For the controuersie of originall sinne, being almost agreed in the Colloquies, from the Councell, from whence composition was expe∣cted, a decree did proceed against the things accorded and it was written in the Emperours name, to his Ministers in Trent, that they should promote the reformation, and endeauour that the controuersie of faith should be deferred vntill the Protestants came, whom the Emperour was perswaded hee could bring thither; or, at least, vntill the Prelates of Germany did arriue, who would put themselues into the iourney, so soone as the Diet was ended But they talked but a little while of these affaires of the Councell because other accidents happened, which drew all mens eyes and mindes vnto them. For in Rome the 26. of Iune, the Cardinall of Trent concluded a league The Cardinall of Trent con∣cludeth a league the 26. of June, be∣tweene the Pope and the Emperour, a∣gainst the Protestants. betweene the Pope and Emperor, against the Protestants of Germanie, the treaty whereof was begun the yeere before in Wormes by Cardinall Farnese, as hath been said, and afterwards continued by other Ministers. The cau∣ses alleadged, and the conditions were; because Germany had a long time perseuered in heresie, for remedie whereof the Councell was assembled in Trent, and already begun, whereunto the Protestants refusing to submit, the Pope and Emperour, for the glory of GOD, and safetie of Germanie, doe a∣gree, The causes and capitula∣tions of this league. that the Emperour shall take armes against those that refuse it, and re∣duce them to the obedience of the holy Sea: and for this, the Pope shall lay in Venice an hundred thousand crownes in trust, beside the hundred thou¦sand laid there all ready, to spend in this vse onely, and shall send to the war at his owne charges, twelue thousand Italian foote, and fiue hundred light horse, for sixe moneths, shall giue the Emperour for this yeere, halfe the rents of the Churches of Spaine, and power to alienate, of the reuenewes of the Monasteries of those kingdomes, to the valew of fiue hundred thousand crownes: that during the sixe moneths, the Emperour shall not make an ac∣cord with the Protestants without the Pope, who also shall haue a certaine portion of whatsoeuer is gained by the war and if the war continue longer new capitulations, which shall seeme fit to both parties; shall be treated on and place shall be left for other to enter into the league bearing part of the charges, and receiuing part of the profits. There was one capitulation apart, which was kept secret, concerning the French Kings that if any Christian; Prince during the warre, did mooue latines against the Emperour, the Pope should bee bound to persecute him with spirituall and temporall forces. A few dayes after the Pope wrote to the Suisses inuiting them to assist The Pope writeth to the Suissès: him; first shewing in ample termes his beneuolence towards them, and the griefe he felt for that some of them had ostranged themselues from his obe∣dience, and thanking God for those, who perseuered and commonding; them all for that in this difference of religion they keep themselues in peace, whereas in other places diuers tumults did arise for the same cause he added, that to prouide, against them hee had ordained the Counsell of Trent, ho∣ping that no man would refuse to submit himselfe and hee was assured that those amongst them, who vntill then in the Apostolicall obedi∣ence will obey the Councell and the others not conteinneth. Hee inuited them also to come thither, complayning that; many in Germanie, who are called Princes, did proudly disdaine and despise the Councell; whose autho∣ritie is rather Diuine then humane. This hath compelled him to thinke of force and Armes. And because it hath happened that the Emperour hath made the same resolution, hee hath beene constrained to ioyne With him, and assist him with his owne and the Churches power, to restore reli∣gion by warre, That hee was willing to signifie his purpose and minde vnto them, that they may ioyne their prayers with him, render the auncient honour to the Church of Rome, and assist him in so pious a cause. But the Emperour made shew he vndertooke the warre, not for religion, The Emperor would not haue it thought that this war is made for reli∣gion. but for matters of State, for that some denied him obedience, plotted with strangers against him, and refused to obey the Lawes, vsurped the possessi∣ons of others, especially the Churches, going about to make Bishoprikes and Abbacies, hereditarie: and that hauing prooued diuers gentle meanes to re∣duce them, they euer became more insolent. On the other side the Protestants laboured to make manifest to the And the Pro∣testants shevv the contrary. world, that all proceeded from the instigation of the Pope, and of the Coun∣cell of Trent. They put the Emperour in minde of the Capitulations which he swore in Frankfurt, when hee was created Emperour; and they made protestation of the iniurie. But many of the Protestants kept themselues on his side, because they could not beleeue, that hee had any other respects then of State. And the Arch-bishop of Collen (of whom wee haue spo∣ken The Arch-b of Collen sen∣tenced by the Pope is obey∣ed by his peo∣ple, and fol∣loweth the Emperour, before) who though hee were sentenced, and depriued by the Pope, continued in gouerment, and was obeyed by his people, followed the Emperour; who also acknowledged him for Election and Arch-bishop, and wrote vnto him, that none of his subiects might beare armes a∣gainst him: wherein the Arch-bishop imployed his endeuours sincerely. The Elector of Saxonie, and the Landgraue seeing this, they published a Ma∣nifest the eleuenth of Iuly, declaring that the warre was vndertaken for Re∣ligion, and that the Emperour couered his meaning with a cloake of taking reuenge against some few for rebellion, to disioyne the confederates, and op∣presse them by degrees. They alleadged that Ferdinand and Granuell, and o∣ther ministers of his Maiestie, had said, that the cause of this warre was the The Elector of Saxonie and the Landgraue of Has a pub∣lish a Manifest against the Emperour. contempt of the Councell; they called to minde the Popes sentence against the Elector of Collen; they added that the Spanish Prelates would not haue contributed so much of their proper reuenewes for any other cause; they shewed that in other things the Emperour could pretend nothing a∣gainst them. But while the Pope and Emperour prepared against the Lutherans some thing beside Anathematismes, the day after the Session, the eighteenth of Iune, a Congregation was made, where after the accustomed prayers and inuo∣cation Iustification is to be hand∣led, in the next place. of the holy Ghost, the Secretary read, in the Legates name, a writing, framed by the principal Theologues, in which it was proposed, that hauing, by diuine inspiration, condemned the heresies concerning originall sinne, the order of the things to bee handled did require, that the doctrine of the modernes, in the point of diuinegrace, which is the medicine of sinne, should be examined; and that the rather it was fit to follow the order, be∣cause it was obserued by the Augustane Confession; all which the Councell meaneth to condemne. And the Fathers and Diuines were intreated to haue recourse by prayer vnto the diuine assistance, and to be assiduous, and exact in their studies, because all the errours of Martin were resolued into that point. For hauing vndertaken from the beginning to oppugne the Indul∣gences, he saw hee could not obtaine his purpose, except hee destroyed the workes of repentance, in defect whereof Indulgences doe succeede. And iu∣stification by faith onely, a thing neuer heard of before, seemed to him a good meanes to effect this; from whence he hath collected not onely that good workes are not necessary, but also that a dissolute liberty in obseruing the Law of GOD, and of the Church will serue the turne: hath denyed efficiencie in the Sacraments, authority of Priests, Purgatorie, sacrifice of the Masse, and all other remedies for remission of sinnes. Therefore by a contrary way, he that will establish the body of the Catholike doctrine, must ouer∣throw this heresie of iustice by faith onely, and condemne the blasphemies of that enemie of good workes. When the writing was read, the Emperours Prelates said, that the more principall and important the point proposed was, it should bee the more maturely, and opportunely handled, that the sending of the Cardinall Ma∣druccio to the Pope shewed, that some businesse was on foote, the which it was not fit to disturbe, but in the meane space to handle some thing of the reformation. The Papalins did, on the other side, inculcate, that it was no honour to interrupt the order begun, to handle together, in euery Session, doctrine and reformation, and that after originall sinne no other matter could be handled. The Legates, hauing heard all their opinions, concluded that to discusse the points, and prepare them, was not to define them, but that they could not bee determined without preparation before, (Which they said onely to gaine time, and after to put themselues in order, to execute what should bee resolued at Rome, betweene the Pope and the Cardinall, in the Emperours name. That to digest that matter, was not to hinder the reformation, because in that the Diuines would bee imployed, and in this the Fathers and Canonists. With this resolution it was concluded, that the Articles to bee discussed and censured, should bee collected out of the bookes of Luther, out of the Colloquies, Apologies, and out of the wri∣tings of the Lutherans and Fathers. And three Fathers, and as many Diuines were deputed to set downe what should bee discussed, and to frame the Articles. The next Congregation was held to order the matter of Reformation; The discourse of the Card. Monte concer∣ning residen∣cie. where the Cardinal of Monte sayd, that the world hath complayned long since of the absence of Prelats and Pastoures, dayly demanding residence: that the absence of the Prelats and other Curats from their Churches, is the cause of all the mischiefes of the Church. For the Church may bee compa∣red to a ship, the sinking whereof is ascribed to the absent Pilot, that should gouerne it, if he were present. He shewed to them, that heresies, ignorance, and dissolution doe reigne in the people; and bad manners and vices in the Clergie, because the Pastours being absent from the flocke, no man hath care to instruct those, or correct these. By the Prelates absence it is come to passe, that ignorant and vnlearned Ministers haue beene promoted, and per∣sons assumed to bishoprickes, that were more fit for any other charge; for in regard they neede not execute their duety in person, no fitnesse is necessary. So he concluded, that to establish the point of residencie, was a generall re∣medy for all the maladies of the Church; which also hath sometimes beene vsed by Councels and Popes, but either for that the transgressions were then but few or for some other cause, it was not applyed with such strong and strait bonds, as is necessarie now that the disease is come to the height: that is with a more seuere commandement, with more greiuous and fearefull pu∣nishments, and by meanes more easie to be executed. This was approued by the first voyces of the Prelates. But when Iacomo The Bishop of Vesone spea∣keth in fauour, of nonresi∣dency. Cortesi, a Florentin, Bishop of Ʋesone, was to speake, commending what had beene sayd by others, he added, that as hee beleeued that the presence of the Prelats and Curats in times past, was the cause of maintayning purity of faith in the people, and discipline in the Clergie, so hee could cleerely shew, that their absence in these latter times, hath not beene the cause of the contrary subuersion, and that the custome of not residing hath beene brought in, be∣cause residence hath beene wholy vnprofitable. For the Bishops could not then preserue sound doctrine amongst the people, when the Friars and Par∣doners had authoritie to preach against their wills. It is well knowen that the innouation in Germany, sprang from the Sermons of Fryar Iohn Techel, and of Friar Martin Luther; among the Suisses from the Sermons of Friar Samson of Milan. And the residing Bishop was able to doe nothing, but fight with disaduantage, against these, who were armed with priuiledges. The Bishop is not able to make the Clergie liue honestly, for that, besides the ge∣nerall exemption of all the Regulars, euery Chapter hath one, and there bee few particular Priests that want it. The Bishop cannot prouide that fit men bee promoted to that charge, for the licences to promote, and the faculties which the titular Bishops enioy, who suffer him not to vse so much as the ministery of the Pontificals. And it may be said in one word, that the Bishops doe not reside, because they haue nothing to doe, or rather that they may not make greater inconueniences to arise, which would happen by their concurrence, and contention with priuiledged men. Hee concluded, that as he thought it fit to restore residency, so they ought to treat how to restore the Episcopall authoritie. The Bishops that spake after this Prelate followed his opinion, that it was necessary to commaund residency, and to remooue the exemptions which do hinder it. And the Legats were enforced to cōsent, that both should be considered of, and that euery one speake his opinion of them, and that some Fathers should be deputed to frame the Decree, that it might be examined. The deputies for collecting the Articles of iustification, hauing receiued The Deputies for collecting the Articles dissent about the manner of proceeding. the extracts of the propositions noted by euery one to be censured, were not all of one opinion. One part desired that foure or sixe fundamental Articles of the new doctrine might bee chosen, and condemned, as was done in the matter of originall sinne; alleadging that it was fit to follow the stile begun, and the example of the ancient Councels, which, hauing declared the prin∣cipall Article, condemned the heresie, neuer descending to particular propositions, but condemning the bookes of the heretiques, in that vniuer∣sall they comprehended all the pernitious doctrine; and so the honour of the Councell required. But the other part, aymed to put vnder censure all the propositions, which might receiue a bad construction, that those might be condemned, which in reason did deserue it: saying, that it was the office of a Pastor to discerne intirely the wholesome grasse from the hurtfull, and not to suffer the flocke to taste of this. And if the example of ancient Coun∣cels ought to be imitated, they should imitate that of Ephesus, which made so many, and so famous Anathematismes against the doctrine of Nestorius, that they did containe whatsoeuer the heretique had saide, and the Coun∣cels of Africa, which descend to the condemnation of all the propositions of the sectes. The first opinion did vndoubtedly propose a more easie way, and would 25. Articles concerning iustification. haue pleased whosoeuer desired a speedie ende of the Councell, and left a chinke open for agreement, which future times might produce. Yet the se∣cond was embraced, which said it was good to examine all the propositions of the Lutheran doctrine, to censure and condemne that, which, after mature deliberation, should seeme necessarie and conuenient. And 25. Articles were framed. 1. Faith without workes, is sufficient to saluation, and a∣lone doth iustifie. 2. Iustifying faith is a sure trust, by which one belee∣ueth that his sinnes are remitted for CHRIST; and those that are iustified are bound to beleeue certainely that their sinnes are remitted. 3. By faith onely wee are able to appeare before God, who neither regardeth, nor hath need of our workes: faith onely making vs pure, and worthy to receiue the Eucharist, beleeuing that in it wee shall receiue grace. 4. Those that doe honest things, without the holy Ghost, do sinne, for that they do them with awicked heart, and it is sinne to keepe the Commandements of God with∣out faith. 5. The best repentance is a new life, and the repentance of the life past is not necessary, neither doth the repentance of actuall sinnes dispose vs to receiue grace. 6. No disposition is necessary to iustification; neither doth faith iustifie because it disposeth vs, but because it is a meanes or instru∣ment, by which the promise and grace of God is laid hold on, and recei∣ued. 7. The feare of hell helpeth not in gaining of iustice; yea, hurteth, and is sinne, and maketh the sinners worse. 8. Contrition which ariseth from the discussion, calling to minde, and detestation of sinnes, weighing the grieuousnesse, multitude, and filthinesse of them, or the losse of eter∣nall happinesse, and gaine of perpetuall damnation, maketh a man an hypo∣crite and a greater sinner. 9. The feares by which sinners are terrified ei∣ther internally by God, or externally by Preachers, are sinnes, vntill they are ouercome by faith. 10. The doctrine of the dispositions destroyeth that of faith, and taketh consolation from the consciences. 11. Onely faith is necessary, and other things are neither commanded nor forbid, neither is sinne any thing but incredulity. 12. Hee that hath faith is free from the precepts of the Law, and hath no neede of workes to bee saued; for faith giueth all abundantly, and alone fulfilleth all the Commandements, and no worke of a faithfull man is so bad as may accuse or condemne him. 13. A man baptized cannot lose saluation by reason of any sinne whatso∣euer, except hee will not beleeue, and no sinne, but infidelity, separateth vs from the grace of God. 14 Faith and workes are contrary, and workes cannot be taught without shipwracke of faith. 15. Externall workes of the second Table are hypocrisie. 16. The iustified are set free, from guilt, and punishment, and satisfaction neither in this life nor after death is neces∣sary; and therefore there is no Purgatory, or satisfaction, which is part of Penance. 17. The iustified, though they haue the grace of God, cannot fulfill the Law, or auoide sinnes, though mortall. 18. Obedience vnto the law in the iustified is weake, and vnpure in it selfe, not acceptable to God, but accepted for the faith of the person reconciled, who beleeueth that the remainders of sinne are forgiuen him. 19. The iust sinneth in euery good worke, and no worke maketh the sinne veniall. 20. All the works of men, yea, of the most sanctified, are sinne: the workes of the iust are veniall by the mercie of God, but in the rigor of his iudgement are mortall. 21. Though the iust ought to doubt that his workes bee sinnes, yet hee ought withall to be assured that they are not imputed. 22. Grace and iustice are nothing but the will of God, neither haue the iustified any inherent iustice in them, and their sinnes are not abolished, but onely remitted, and not imputed. 23. Our iustice is nothing but the imputation of the iustice of CHRIST, and the iust haue neede of a continuall iustification, and imputation of the iu∣stice of CHRIST. 24. All the iustified are receiued into equall grace and glory, and all Christians are equally great with the mother of God, and as much Saints as shee. 25. The workes of the iustified deserue not bles∣sednesse, neither can any confidence be put in them, but onely in the mercie of God. When the Articles were published, it was not so easie to set downe a course to handle them in the Congregations, as when originall sinne was disputed on. For in that matter they found the Articles already handled by the Schoole-men; but the opinion of Luther concerning iustifying faith, that it is a confidence and certaine perswasion of the promise of God, with the consequences that follow, of the distinction between the Law & the Gospel, and of the quality of workes depending on the one, and the other, was ne∣uer thought of by any Schoole writer, and therefore neuer confuted or dis∣cussed: so that the Diuines had worke enough, first to vnderstand the mea∣ning of the Lutheran propositions, and that difference from those that are determined in the Schooles, and then the reasons, by which to distinguish them. It is certaine that in the beginning some of them, and the Fathers for the most part, did beleeue that the Protestants, denying Free-will, held opi∣nion, that man, in externall actions, is like a stone, and when they attribute iustice to faith onely, without the concurrence of workes, thought him iust who beleeued only the Story of the Gospel though, in other respects, he were neuer so wicked; and other such absurdities; the which, by how much the more they are aliene from common sense, so much the harder they are to confute: as is vsuall in all opinions contrary to manifest appearance, and the generally receiued perswasion. The maior part of the Diuines, who then were ascended to the number of fiue and fourty, was very tenacious of the opinions generally receiued in the Schooles, impatient of contradiction, where the Schoole men agreed, but where they agreed not, they did very much stand in defence of their owne opinion; and the Dominicans, more then the rest, were wont to vaunt, that, for the space of three hundred yeeres, the Church ouercame heresies by their paines. Yet there wanted not some wise men, who suspended their iudge∣ment, vntill the reasons were weighed. In this number was Ambrosius Cata∣rinus of Siena, a Dominican Friar, after created Bishop of Minori, Andreus de Vega a Spaniard and Frauciseane and Antonius Marinarus, a Carmelite. The Heremites, because they were of the order which Martin Luther quitted, did affect to shew themselues more contrary to him then all others, and especial∣ly Ierolamus Seripandus the Generall. In examining the Articles, the Theoloques that began (to facilitate the vnderstanding of the three first) laboured to set downe what that faith which iustifieth is, and what workes it excludeth, distinguishing them into three sorts; preceding grace, whereof the seuen following Articles vntill ten doe speake, concurrent in the very moment with the infusion of it, and subse∣quent after grace receiued; of whicht he other eleuen doe speake. That faith iustifieth must be presupposed as vndoubted, for that it is sayd and repeated by Saint Paul. To resolue what that faith is, and how it maketh a man iust, the opinions were different in the very beginning. For the Scripture attri∣buting many vertues to faith, which some knew not how to apply to one onely, they thought the word was equiuocall, and did distinguish it into ma∣ny significations, saying that sometimes it is taken for an obligation to keepe promises: in which sense Saint Paul sayd, that the incredulity of the Iewes The significa∣tions of faith. made not vaine the promise of God: sometimes for the vertue to doe mira∣cles, as when it is said, if I shall haue so much faith as to remooue mountaines; somtimes for the conscience, in which sense it is said, that, that worke, which is not conformable to faith is ; sometimes for a trust and confidence in God, that his Maiestie will keepe his promises; so Saint Iames willeth vs to pray in faith, without doubting: Lastly, for a perswasion and firme assent (though not euident) to the things reuealed by God. Others added other significations, some to the number of nine, some to the number of fifteene. But Frior Dominicus Soto, opposing himselfe against all, said, that this Soto maintai∣neth a singu∣lar opinion. is a renting of faith, and a giuing of victory to the Lutherans, and that there were but two significations; one, the trueth and reality of him that affir∣meth or promiseth, the other, the assent in him that heareth: that the first is in God, the second is onely in vs: and of this last all places of the Scrip∣ture, which speake of our faith, are vnderstood: but to take faith for a trust and confidence, is not onely an improper kinde of speaking, but abu∣siue, neuer receiued by Saint Paul: that trust differeth little or nothing from hope; and therefore the opinion of Luther ought to bee held for an vndoub∣ted errour, or rather heresie, that iustifying faith is a trust and certainty in the minde of a Christian, that his sinnes for CHRIST, are remitted. Soto added, and was followed by the maior part, that that trust could not iusti∣fie, because it was temeritie, and a sinne: for that no man, without pre∣sumption, could assure himselfe that hee was in grace, but ought alwaies to doubt. For the other part Catarinus held, and had many followers, The opinions of Catarinus, and of Andre∣us Vega. that iustification proceeded not from that trust, yet that the iust might and ought to beleeue by faith, that hee is in grace. Andreus Ʋega set a third opinion on foote, that it was neither temerity, nor certaine faith, yet that one might haue a coniecturall perswasion without sinne. And this con∣trouersie could not be quitted, because in it consisted the point of the cen∣suring the second Article. Therefore it was first lightly discussed, then (the parties beeing warmed) it diuided, and held long in dispute all the Coun∣cell, for the reasons and causes which shall bee declared. But all agreed, that iustifying faith is an assent to whatsoeuer is reuealed by God, or deter∣mined by the Church to be beleeued; which, sometimes being ioyned with charity, sometimes remaining without it, they did distinguish into two sortes; one which is found in sinners, which the Schooles call vnformed, solitary, idle, or dead, the other, which is onely in the good, working by cha∣rity, and therefore called Formed, efficacious, and liuely. And heere ano∣ther controuersie arose. For some thought that faith, vnto which the Scrip∣tures ascribe saluation, iustice, and sanctification, was onely the liuely faith, (as also the Catholiques of Germany held in the Colloquies) and included the knowledge of the things reuealed, the preparation of the will, and charity, in which the fulfilling of the whole Law is contained. And in this sense it cannot be said, that onely faith iustifieth, because it is not alone, but formed with charity. Among these, Marinarus liked not it should bee sayd, that faith is formed with charity, because that kind of speach is not vsed by Saint Paul, but onely that faith worketh by charity. Others vnderstood, that iustifying faith was faith in generall, not say∣ing it was either liuely or dead, because they doe both iustifie after diuers manners; either compleatly, as the liuely, or as a beginning or foundation, as the historicall faith, and of this Saint Paul speaketh when he attributeth iustice vnto it, no otherwise then as Philosophie is contained in the alpha∣bet; that is, as in a basis; which is as it were nothing, the principall re∣maining, that is to set the statue vpon it. This second opinion was ioint∣ly maintained by the Dominicans and Franciscans, the other by Marinarus and his adherents. But the principall point of the difficulty was not touched; that is, whether a man is iust, and then doth iustly, or, by doing iustly, becom∣meth iust. They all agreed in one opinion, that to say onely faith doeth iu∣stifie, was a proposition of many fenses, and all absurd. For God and the Sacraments doe iustifie, as causes in their seuerall kindes: so that the propo∣sition hath that and many other exceptions. The preparation also of the soule to receiue grace, is a cause in its kinde, so that faith cannot exclude that sort of workes. But the Articles concerning workes that goe before grace, all which Luther condemneth for sinne, the Diuines censured for hereti∣call, rather by way of inuectiue then otherwise, condemning likewise of heresie the opinion taken in generall, that humane workes, without faith, are sinne: thinking it a cleare case, that many actions of men are indifferent, neither good nor euill; and that others there are, which though they bee not acceptable to God, yet are morally good, as the honest actions of Infi∣dels, and Christians which are sinners, which to call honest and sinnes im∣plieth a contradiction; and the rather, because in this ranke are included the heroicall actions, so much commended by antiquity. But Catarinus maintained that man, without the speciall helpe of God, can doe no worke, which may truely bee good, though morally, but sin∣neth Catarinus his opinion con∣cerning the value of workes. still. Therefore the workes of the Infidels, who are not excited by God to beleeue, and of the faithfull who are sinners before God stirreth them vp to conuersion, though they seeme honest to men, euen heroicall, yet are truely sinnes, and hee that commendeth them, doth consider them in generall, and according to externall appearance; but hee that shall examine the circumstances of euery one, shall finde they are peruerse: and that for this Luther was not to bee condemned; notwithstanding hee sayd that the Articles ought to bee censured, as they speake of workes that follow pre∣uenting grace, which are a preparation to iustification, as an abomination of sinne, feare of hell, and other terrours of conscience. For confirmation of his opinion, hee brought the doctrine of Saint Thomas, that to doe a good worke, the concurrence of all circumstances is necessary, but the want of one onely is sufficient for an ill. So that howsoeuer among the workes con∣sidered in generall, some are indifferent, yet in the singular there is no medi∣um betweene hauing all the circumstances, and wanting some. Therefore euery particular action is good or euill, neither is there to bee found any one indifferent. And because amongst the circumstances the end is one, all workes referred to a bad end are infected; so that the Infidels referring all to a bad end, their actions are sins though they seeme heroicall, to him that knoweth not their intention. Neither doth it make any difference whether the relation to a bad end be actuall or habituall, because the iust doth merit, though hee referreth not the worke actually to God, but habitually onely. He said further, alleaging Saint Austine, that it is sinne not onely to refer the action to a bad end, but also not to referre it to a good; and because hee de∣fended that, without the speciall preuenting assistance of God, a man cannot referre any thing to God, he concluded, that no good morall worke can bee before. For this he alleadged many places of Saint Austine, to shew that hee was of this opinion. He alleadged also places of Saint Ambrose, Saint Prosper, S. Anselmus, and of other Fathers. He produced Gregory of Arimini, the Car∣dinall of Rochester, who, in his booke against Luther, was cleerely of the same opinion, saying, it was better to follow the Fathers, then the Schoole-men, who are diuided, and rather to take the Scriptures for a ground, from whence true Theologie is taken, then the subtilties of Philosophy, which the Schooles haue vsed: that himselfe also was of that opinion, but hauing studied the Scriptures and Fathers, had found the trueth. Hee alleadged the passage of the Gospel; A bad tree cannot beare good fruit, with the amplifica∣tion which our Sauiour added, saying, Either make the tree good and the fruit good, or the tree euill and the fruit euill. He vsed also other arguments, and espe∣cially the place of Saint Paul, that nothing can be cleane to Infidels, because their minde and conscience is spotted. This opinion was very sharpely impugned by Soto, proclaiming it hereti∣call, Soto proclay∣meth the opi∣nion of Cata∣rinus to bee hereticall. for inferring that man had not libertie to doe well, nor could obtaine his naturall end, which was to denie Free-will with the Lutheranes. Hee maintained a man might, by that strength of nature, obserue euery precept of the Law, in regard of the substance of the worke, though not in regard of the end; which was enough to auoid sinne. Hee said there were three sorts of humane actions; one, the transgression of the Law, which is sinne; another, the obseruation thereof, hauing charity for the end, which is meri∣torious and acceptable to God; the third mixt, when the Law is obeyed for the substance of the precept; which worke is morally good and perfect in its kinde, because it accomplisheth the Law, making euery worke good ac∣cording to morality, auoiding, by that meanes, all sin. But he moderated this great perfection of our nature, by adding, that it was one thing to take heede of any one particular sinne, and another to beware of all together; and sayd that a man might auoid any one, but not all; by the example of him that had a vessell with three holes, who could not stoppe them with two hands, but could stop which two of them he would, one remaining open of neces∣sity. This doctrine did not satisfie some of the Fathers. For though it clear∣ly shewed that all workes are not sinnes, yet it did not wholly salue Free-will, because it will necessarily follow, that it is not free in auoiding all sinne. But Soto giuing the title of good workes vnto these, knew not how to determine whether they were preparatory to iustification. It seemed to him they were, in regard of the goodnesse of them: and it seemed they were not, conside∣ring the doctrine of Saint Austine, approoued by Saint Thomas, and other good Diuines, that the first beginning of saluation proceedes from the voca∣tion of God. He auoyded these straits by a distinction, that they were prepa∣ratory a farre off, but not neerely, as though giuing a remote preparation to the force of nature, the first beginning was not taken away from the grace A new distin∣ction inuen∣ted by Soto. of God. The Franciscans thought that not onely this kinde of workes were good and did truely and properly prepare to iustification, but also that they were truely meritorious in the sight of God. Therefore Scotus, the authour of their doctrine, inuented a kinde of merit, which hee attributed to workes done by the force of nature onely, saying that in congruitie they deserue grace by a certaine law, and infallibly and that a man, by naturall power on∣ly, may feele a sorrow for sinne, which is a disposition, and merit of Congru∣ity, to abolish it: approouing a common saying of his times, that God ne∣uer The doctrine of the Fran∣ciscans con∣cerning meri∣torious works faileth him that doth as much as hee is able. And some of that Order, passing those bounds, did adde, that if God giueth not grace to him that doth what he can, hee would be vniust, vnrighteous, partiall, and an accep∣ter of persons. They clamoured with much stomacke and indignation, that it would bee a great absurdity, if God made no difference betweene one that is naturally honest, and another drowned in all vices, and there would be no reason why hee should rather giue grace to one then another. They also al∣ledged, that Saint Thomas was of this opinion, and that otherwise a man is put into desperation, and made negligent to doe well, and wicked men may excuse their bad workes, and attribute them to the want of the assistance of God. But the Dominicans did confesse that Saint Thomas was of this opinion, when hee was yong, and after did retract it, when he was old. They did re∣prehend Is contradi∣cted by the Dominicans. it, because in the Councell of Orange, it is determined that no kinde of merit goeth before grace, and that the beginning should bee attributed to God; saying, that the Lutherans hauing made such exclamations for this congruous merit, it ought wholly to be abolished, as indeede it was neuer heard of in the Church in ancient times, in so many controuersies with the Pelagians. That the holy Scripture doth attribute our conuersion to God, and that it is not fit to leaue the forme of speach which it vseth. For the preparations there was no difference in the substance of the do∣ctrine. All held that after God doth stirre vs vp, feare and other considerati∣ons of the malignity which is in sinne doe arise. They said that the opinion, that these things are bad, was hereticall, because God exhorteth the sinner, yea, mooueth him to these considerations, and it must not be sayd that God mooueth to sinne; and which is more, it is the office of a preacher to terrifie a sinner by these meanes: and because by the same meanes, all passe from the state of sinne to that of grace, it seemed very strange that one cuuld no tpasse from sinne to iustice, without the meanes of another sinne. But for all this, they could not free themselues from the difficultie on the contrary part; be∣cause all good workes may stand with grace, but that feare and other prepa∣rations cannot, and therefore are sinnes. Friar Antonius Marinarus thought the difference was verball, and said, that as passing from a great cold to a heat, one must passe by a lesse degree of cold, which is neither a heat nor a new cold, but the same diminished, so one goeth from sinne to iustice by ter∣rors and attritions, which are neither good workes, nor new sinnes, but old sinnes extenuated. But he was compelled to retract, because all were against him Of the workes done in grace there was no difficulty amongst them. For they all sayd they were perfect, and merited saluation; and that Luthers opinion, that they are all sinnes, is wicked and sacrilegious: and holding it to be blasphemie to say, that the blessed Virgine hath committed the least ve∣niall sinne, they could not endure to heare that shee sinned in euery action, and said, that the earth and hell would open themselues against so great blas∣phemies. For censure of the 22. and 23. Articles, in the point of the essence of Di∣uine grace, it was a common consideration, that the word Grace, in the first All agreed to condemne Luther con∣cerning works after grace. signification, was vnderstood for a beneuolence or good will, which, when it is in him that hath power, necessarily bringing foorth a good effect, that is, a gift or benefit, which is also called Grace. That the Protestants thought so meanly of the Maiesty of GOD, that it could doe no more then make vs partakers of his good will: but his omnipotencie required that we should haue the benefit thereof in effect. And because some man might say, that the diuine will onely, which is GOD himselfe, can haue no greater thing to bestow, and that to haue giuen vs his Sonne was the greatest benefit, and that Saint Iohn, to shew the great loue of GOD towards the world, allead∣ged nothing else but that he had giuen vs his Sonne, they said that these bene∣fits are common to all, and that it was fit he should bestow a particular pre∣sent to euery one. Therefore the Diuines haue added an habituall grace, gi∣uen to euery iust man in particular, which is a spirituall qualitie created by GOD, infused into the soule, whereby it is made gratefull and acceptable to the diuine Maiesty, wherof though the Fathers speake not in expresse termes, nor the Scripture, yet it is cleerely deduced from the word Iustifie; which be∣ing effectiue, doth necessarily signifie to make iust, by the impression of reall Iustice: which reality, because it is no substance, can bee nothing else but a qualitie and habite. And vpon this occasion there was much spoken against the Lutherans, who will not haue the verbe Iustificare to be effectiue, but iudiciall and decla∣ratiue, grounding themselues vpon the Hebrew word Tsadak, and the Greeke which signifie to bee pronounced iust; and vpon many places of the New and Old Testament, and that it is vsed in that signification in the Latine translation, alleadging for it places to the number of fifteene. But Soto excluded all those of Saint Paul, which spake of our iustification, which he said must needes be vnderstood in an effectiue sense: whereupon arose a great dispute betweene him and Marinarus, who said, one should not ground himselfe vpon so light a matter. But he said the Article of habituall Grace could not be doubted of, as being decided in the Councell of Vienna, and by the common opinion of all Theologues: that this was to make sure foun∣dations, which cannot be destroyed, and not to say that Saint Paul to the Romanes, when he saith that GOD iustifieth, doth not meane declaratorily: for it is manifestly against the Text, which maketh a iudiciall processe, and saith, that none can accuse or condemne GODs Elect, because GOD doth iustifiethem: where the iudiciall words, to accuse and condemne, doe shew that the word Iustifie, is iudiciall also. But the Franciscans approued habituall grace, because charity it selfe is an habit. And here was a sharpe disputation betweene them and the Domini∣cans, whether the habit of Grace be the same with the habit of Charity, as Scotus would, or distinct, as Saint Thomas, and neither party yeelding, they debated whether, besides this Grace or inherent Iustice, the Iustice of CHRIST also bee imputed to the iustified, as if it were his owne; which they did in regard of the opinion of Alvertus Pighius, who confessing the inherent, added, that we must not trust in that, but in the imputed iustice of CHRIST, as if it were ours. None doubted that CHRIST had merited for vs; but some blamed the word to Impute, and would haue it abolished, be∣cause it was not to bee found in Fathers: who contented themselues with the words, Communication, participation, diffusion, deriuation, applicati∣on, computation, and coniunction. Others said, that, agreeing vpon the thing, they ought not to differ vpon the word, because it signifieth precisely the same that the others doe, which though not by all and often, yet some∣times was vsed. For this the 109. Epistle of Saint Barnard was brought, and Ʋega defended, that, though the word be not found in the Scriptures, yet it is a most proper Latine word, to say that the iustice of CHRIST is impu∣ted to mankind for satisfaction and merit, and that it is continually imputed to all that bee iustified, and doe satisfie for their owne sinnes: but hee would not haue it sayd, it was imputed as if it were ours. Whereunto it be∣ing opposed that Saint Thomas vseth to say, that the passion of CHRIST is communicated to the baptized for remission, as if himselfe had sustained it and died, there was a long and great contention vpon his words. The He∣remite Generall held an opinion, that, in the Sacrament of Baptisme, the Iu∣stice of CHRIST is imputed, because it is communicated wholly and in∣tirely; but not in penance, when our satisfactions are also required. But Soto sayd, the word Imputation, was most popular and plausible, because it signified, at the first sight, that all should bee acknowledged from CHRIST; but yet that he did euer suspect it, in regard of the bad consequences which the Lutheranes draw from thence. That is, that this onely is sufficient, with∣out inherent righteousnes: that the Sacraments doe not conferre grace: that the punishment is abolished together with the guilt: that there remaineth no place for satisfaction: that all are equall in grace, iustice, and glorie: whence they deduce also that abominable blasphemie, that euery iust man is equall to the blessed Virgin. This admonition begat such a suspicion in the hearers, that there appeared a manifest inclination to condemne the word for hereticall, though reasons were effectually replyed to the contrary. The contentions betweene the Theologues, did certainly arise from the immo∣derate affection they bare to their owne sect, and were cherished by diuers, for diuers ends. By the Imperialists, to constraine them to abandon iustifi∣cation. By the Courtiers, to find a way to separate the Councell, and so to auoid the imminent reformation. And by others, to free themselues from incommodities, which they feared would be greater, by reason of the dearth, Contentions in the Coun∣cell are cheri∣shed by diuers for diuers ends. A Iubily is published in Rome, in which religi∣on is declared to be the cause of the war e against the Protestants: and of the warre which approached: and the rather because they had little hope to doe good. But while they thus dispute in Trent, the Pope published a Iubile in Rome, the fifteenth of Iuly: by which he eased the Princes of Germany of the paines to find out, or perswade others, the true cause of the warre. For hauing large∣ly declared, in that Bull, his pastorall affection and care for the saluation of men, relating the perdition of soules by the increase of heresies, and that to roote them out, the Councell was alreadie begun, hee bewailed, aboue mea∣sure, the obstinacie of the heretikes, who contemne and refuse to obey it, and to submit themselues to the determination thereof. For remedie whereof he had made a League with the Emperour, to reduce them to the obedience of the Church by force of Armes. Hee therefore wished them all to haue re∣course vnto GOD by prayers, fastings, confessions, and communions, that GOD of his Diuine Maiestie, would giue a good issue to this warre, vn∣dertaken for his glory, exaltation of the Church, and extirpation of he∣resies. The Emperour, in conformity to his purpose of concealing the cause of The Empe∣rours Band against the Sax on and Landgraue. Religion, the twentieth of the same moneth, published a Bando against the Saxon and Landgraue, laying to their charge that they had alwayes hindered his designes, had neuer obeyed him, made conspiracies against him, mooued warre against other Princes of the Empire, seased vpon Bishoprickes, and other gouernments, dispossessed many of their goods, and couered all these things with the glorious and sweet name of Religion, peace, and liberty, but hauing indeede rather any other end. Therefore hee doeth prescribe them, as perfidious, rebels, seditious, guilty of high treason, and enemies of the publike peace: and commandeth that none doe assist them, or be linked with them, absolueth the nobility and people of their dominions from their Oath of fidelitie, including all those in the Bando who perseuere to obey them. The cause of the warre alleadged by the Emperour grieued the Pope, and The Pope and the Emperour are offended one with an∣other for al∣leadging di∣uers causes of the warre. that of the Pope grieued the Emperor, because both their ends were hindred. For though the Pope pretended that he had published this Manifest, that all the people of Christendome might implore the ayde of God, to fauour the Emperours Armes, yet both he and euery man of iudgement knew very well that it was to giue notice to Germany, and the whole world, that the warre was for Religion: which the simpler sort also did know a little after. For his letter to the Suisses before mentioned, and a copie of the Capitulations made with Madruccio, were published. The Pope crossed Casar in this, because hee desired the suppression of the Protestants, without the exaltation of the Em∣perour, and therefore to ballance them well, hee meant to constraine all the professors of the new Religion to vnite against him. And it is certaine that the Popes action hindered the Emperours designes. For desiring the Suisses to continue their league with the house of Austria and Burgundy, and not as∣sist the rebels, the Euangelikes answered that they would first be sure that the warre was not for Religion. So it hapened, that, the warre being but newly begun, diseords were already sowed betweene the Princes, lately confede∣rated. The Potentates of Italie were amazed, and saw the Popes vsuall wisdome The Princes of Italie doe censure the Pope for ma∣king this warre. was wanting to keepe warre farre from Italie, and the Princes beyond the mountaines in an equall ballance of strength; who in the same instant had fayled in both. For if the Emperour had subdued Germanie, Italie had re∣mained at his discretion, and France not been able to resist. If the Emperor had been ouercome, the Dutchmen would haue passed into Italie. And per∣haps these reasons running in the Popes minde, perswaded him when hee had concluded the leagte, to secure himselfe against the Emperour with the counterpoose of Germany. But Caesar, besides his distaste for the Iubelie, suspected also that the Pope, hauing obtained his end of making warre against the Protestants; would dissolue the Councell, vnder pretence to deferre it vntill the warre was ended, or for scare of the armes which the Protestants prepared in Sue∣uia. Hee knew this was the aime of all the Court, negotiated with him more then fiue and twenty yeeres, and that the Bishops assembled in Trent, euen his owne, had the same minde, for the incommodities which they suf∣fered there. Hee feared the Lutherans would say, if the Councell were se∣parated, that it was assembled onely to finde a pretence of making warre a∣gainst them; and that the Catholiques of Germanie would thinke, that, the interests of religion and reformation being layd aside, hee would endeuour onely to subdue them. Hee doubted also, that going on to handle the Con∣trouersed points, as already they had originall sinne, and meant to handle (as he was aduertised) iustification, hee might bee hindered in some com∣position, which otherwise hee might haue made, giuing hope to the Cities that their reasons should be heard, to separate them from the Princes of the league. He saw clearely it was necessary the Councell should remaine open, and yet meddle only with reformation: but that it was impossible to obtaine it without the Pope consented with him. Therefore hee sent to certifie him in diligence, that hee would imploy all his spirit and forces to make Trent The Emperor doth earnest∣ly intreat the Pope that on∣ly reformati∣on may bee handled in the Councell, and that it might not be dissolued. secure, though there went a fame of the Protestant armies in Sueuia. That it was necessary to maintaine the Councell, that they might answere the backebitings and calumnies, which would bee spred against them both, if it were dissolued. Hee earnestly prayed him to keepe the Councell open and not to handle the controuersies, because his purpose was to compell the Pro∣testants, his adherents, by authoritie, and his enemies by force of armes, to be present, and submit themselues. But in the meane time he desired him not to hinder his excellent deseigne, shutting the doore vpon them, with con∣trary decrees, made in their absence. That this could not continue long, and that hee hoped to see the end of this summer. Therefore, that hee should bee contented that now reformation onely should bee treated of, or, if re∣ligion were, they should touch matters of small weight onely, that, when they were defined, they might not offend the Protestants. Hee ordained also, that his Ambassadour in Trent should make the same instance to the Le∣gates. And being informed that Santa Croce was inclined to any kinde of dissolution of the Councell, hee charged his Ambassadour to giue him a nip, and tell him, that if, in this, hee did crosse his Maiestie, hee would cause him He threat∣neth the Le∣gate Santa Croce. to be throwen into the riuer Adice. This was knowen to all, and written by the Historians of this time. The Pope, though hee would faine haue beene free from the Councell, which the Court desired also, yet hee thought it necessary to gratifie the Em∣perour, in keeping it open, and not handling controuersies. But to treat one∣ly The Pope & Court did not like that refor∣mation onely should bee handled. of Reformation neither pleased him nor the Courtiers. Therefore hee wrote to the Legates that they should not suffer the assembly to dissolue, nor make a Session vntill himselfe had giuen order, but should entertaine the Prelates, and Theologues with Congregations, and such businesses and exer∣cises, as seemed to them best. The 25. day the Iubelie was solemnely publi∣shed in Trent, in pretence of the Legates, and all the Councell. And that they might apply themselues to fastings, and other workes of Penance accor∣ding to the of the al, the Session was deferred it should bee intimated all the Congregations in tted for 15 dayes. The Iubely is published in Trent. At the same time the Protestant A y came neere to Tirost, to stop the passage of the of Italy, to the Emperours seruice and Chiusa was taken by For which cause the Countrey was all The Prote∣stant army maketh the Prelates in Trent afraid. in armes, to finde their progresse, and Francesco Castela o, who guarded the Councel, went person to Ispru , and fortified that Citie, to preuent the pos∣session of the passages, and planted himselfe seuen miles about it. This made men doubt, at that Countrey would be the feet of the war, and that the wholly be disturbed. The Prelates, who desired a pre∣tence to retire, amplified the dangers and incommodities; whereunto the Legates not not opposing in the beginning, caused a suspition, that the Pope had no mind to continue the Councell. Some of the most timerous Prelats, who had no desire to remaine in Trent, departed; and so would more haue done, if the Cardinall of Trent, lately returned from Rome, had not assured them, that the Pope would haue been much displeased therewith and the timerous had not been comforted by him, and the Emperours Ambassadour, secu∣ring them that the great number, which came out of Italy, would compel the Protestants to be gone: and also if the Popes letters to the Legates, which came in the middest of these stirres, had not ioyned the Popes authority and theirs, to the intreaties of others. But though the Protestants enterprise did not succeed, and Tiroll remay∣ned The Italian troopes passe by Trent, vn∣der the con∣duct of Octa∣nius Farnese. secure, so that there was no doubt on that side, yet there was confusion in Trent, by reason of the great number of souldiers, which continually pas∣sed out of Italy into Germanie, who, according to the capitulations of the league, were in all to the number of twelue thousand foote, and fiue hundred horse, beside two hundred from the Duke of Tuscany, and one hundred from the Duke of Ferrara. The most famous Captaines of Italy came with them, vnder the conduct of the General Octanius Farnese, and his brother Alexander Farnese, Cardinall and Legate, both grandchildren to the Pope, by his sonne; and sixe thousand Spaniards, the Emperours owne souldiers, taken out of Naples and Lumbardy. And so long as the souldiers passed, which was vntill the middle of August, though the publike actions of the Councell were not wholly omitted, yet the meetings were not so many, nor so frequented. But that the Bishops and Diuines might haue entertainment, the Cardinall San∣ta Croce held an assembly of learned men in his house, where they treated of the samethings, but familiarly, and without ceremony. The Protestants combined with the Emperour, did then publish a wri∣ting, The Prote∣stants combi∣ned with the Emperor doe raile against the Pope. addressed to their subiects, full of raylings against the Pope, calling him Antichrist, instrument of Satan, imputing vnto him that, before, hee had sent to kindle a fire in diuers places of Saxonie, and now was authour and moouer of the warre, and had sent into Germany to poyson the wells, and standing waters, aduising all to bee diligent in taking and punishing those poysoners. This very few did thinke to be probable, and was esteemed a calumnie. The Popes men being come into the armie, which was in Landisuth, the 15 of August, the Emperour gaue the collar of the golden Fleece, vnto his Sonne in law Octauius, which hee had bestowed on him in the celebration of the assembly of that Order, held vpon Saint Andrewes day, and he saw the The Emperor giueth the collar of the golden Fleece to his sonne in law Octa∣nius Farnese. muster of the Popes men, with much approbation and content, to haue the flower of the Italian Souldiers. Yet the ends of the Pope and Emperour be∣ing diuers, they produced occasions of distastes. The Cardinall Farnese desi∣red to cary the crosse, as Legate, before the armie, and had order from the Pope so to doe, publishing Indulgences, as formerly was vsed so to be done in The Emperor will not suffer Card. Farnese the Legate to cary the crosse before the armie. Crasadoes, declaring it was the war of the Catholique Church. But he could obtaine neither of these from the Emperour, whose end was quite contrary, to entertaine the Lutherane Princes who were with him, and that the Cities might not waxe obstinate against him for it. The Cardinall perceiuing hee could not tary in the field in any other quality, with the Popes dignity, and his owne, he remained in Ratisbon, and faining himselfe to be sicke, expected his Grandfathers answere, whom he had aduertised of all. They now being in a readinesse on both sides, though either had a great armie, and forced one another, presenting also the battaile when they saw their aduantage, and though each of them had many good occasions to ac∣chieue some notable victory, yet they were not embraced by the Prote∣stants, because the Elector and the Landgraue had equall authority ouer The equall authority of the Saxon and Landgraue bringeth great disaduantage to their army. them: a gouernment which euer succeedeth ill in armes: and because the Emperour knowing this, that he might be Conquerour without blood, and not giue the enemies occasion to set their affaires in better order, expected that time should put into his hand a certaine victory, in stead of one that was doubtfull, exposing himselfe to the hazard of a battell, whereby nothing of moment or consequence was done. The Legats in Trent, now freed from the Souldiers, did regulate the Con∣gregations, according to the first stile, reducing them to ordinary dayes, and be thinking themselues how to driue the time, according to the purpose of the Pope. They found no other meanes, but to shew that the importance of the matter required an exact discussion, and to prolong the disputations of the Diuines, giuing an entrance to new matters; whereof there could not want occasion, in regard that by reason of connexion, or intemperancie of wit, Doctors do euer easily passe from one subiect to another. They resolued also to cherish the differences and varietie of opinions; a thing easie to bee done, aswell for the naturall inclination of man to ouercome in disputations, as because in the Schooles, especially of the Fryars, too much obstinacie in o∣pinion of their owne sect, is very vsuall. Monte, who was of an ingenuous Card. Monte cannot dis∣semble so wel as the other Legate Santa Crace. disposition, thought it would be hard, and could not promise to be constant in so long a dissimulation, as he saw was necessary. But Santa Croce, a man of a melancholy and close nature, offered to take vpon him the charge of go∣uerning the businesse. Fathers are deputed to compose the Anathema∣tisines. In the Congregation of the twentieth of August, it seeming that as much had been spoken vpon the twenty fiue Articles, as was sufficient to frame the Anathematisines, it was proposed to depute Fathers to compose them. And there were named three Bishops, and three Generals, and Sonta Croce first of all. Who hauing made a modell of the Canons, and proposed it to be discus∣sed in the Congregations following, the same disputations did returne, of the certaintie of Grace, of the morall workes of Infidels and sinners, of the merit of congruitie, of imputation, of the distinction of Grace and charitie; and those that were interested in the opinions spake more earnestly, because the Cardinall gaue them an edge, by shewing that the matters were of impor∣tance, Santa Croce cherisheth the diuision a∣mongst the Diuines. and ought to bee discussed well, and that without the resolution of them, it was impossible to make a good determination. The controuersie of the certaintie of Grace onely, held the disputants in exercise many dayes, and made obstinate, and diuided into two parts, not onely the Diuines, but the Prelates also. Yet the question was not cleered by the disputation, but more obscured. In the beginning (as hath beene deliuered) one part said that certaintie A difference in opinions a∣bout certain∣ty of Grace. of Grace was presumption; the other, that one might haue it meritoriously. The ground of the first was, that Saint Thomas, Saint Bonauenture, and gene∣rally the Schoolemen thought so, for which cause the maior part of the Do∣minicans were of the same opinion. Besides the authoritie of Doctors, they alleadged for reasons, that God would not that man should be certaine, that hee might not bee lifted vp in pride, and esteeme of himselfe, that hee might not preferre himselfe before others, as hee that knoweth himselfe to bee iust would doe, before manifest sinners: and a Christian would so become drow∣sie, carelesse, and negligent to doe good. Therefore they said that incertaine∣tie was profitable, and meritorious besides, because it is a passion of the mind, which doth afflict it, and being supported, is turned to merit. They alleadged many places of the Scripture also; of Solomon, that a man knoweth not whether hee bee worthie of hate or loue; of Wisedome, which commandeth not to bee without feare of the sinne pardoned, of Saint Peter, to worke out our saluation with feare and trembling; of Saint Paul, who said of himselfe, though my consci∣ence accuse mee not, yet am I not thereby iustified. These reasons and testimo∣nies The opinion of Seripandal, Vega, & Soto. together with many places of the Fathers, were brought and amplified, especially by Seripandus, Ʋega, and Soto. But Catarinus, and Marinarus, had other places of the same Fathers, to the The opinion of Catarinus & Marinarus contrary; which shewed they had spoken accidentally in this particular, as the occasions made most for their purpose, sometimes to comfort the scru∣pulous, sometimes to represse the audacious. Yet they kept them close to the authoritie of the Scripture. They said that to as many as it is read in the Gos∣pel that CHRIST hath forgiuen sinnes, to all them hee sayd, Beleeue that your sinnes are forgiuen. And it would bee an absurditie that CHRIST should giue an occasion of temeritie and pride, or, if the contrary were profi∣table, or a merit, that hee would depriue all men of it. That the Scripture bindeth vs to giue God thankes for our iustification, which cannot be giuen except wee know wee haue obtained it; for to giue them when wee are vn∣certaine, would bee most foolish and impertinent. That Saint Paul doeth plainely confirme the certaintie, when hee putteth the Corinthians in mind to know that CHRIST is in them, except they bee reprobates. And when hee saith, we haue receiued from God the Spirit to know what is giuen vs by his Diuine Maiestie; and more cleerely: that the boly Spirit doeth beare witnesse to our spirit, that wee are the sonnes of God: and it is much to accuse them of rash∣nesse, who beleeue the holy Ghost that speaketh with them. For Saint Am∣brose saith that the holy Ghost doeth neuer speake vnto vs, but doth make vs know that it is he that speaketh. After this hee added the words of CHRIST in Saint Iohn, that the world cannot receiue the holy Ghost, because it seeth him not, nor knoweth him, but that the Disciples shall know him, because he shall dwell in them. Catarinus did fortifie himselfe strongly, by saying, that it was the opinion of a man in a dreame, to defend that grace is voluntarily receiued, when wee know not whether wee haue it or not; as if, to receiue a thing willingly, it bee not necessary that the willing receiuer should know it is giuen him, that he doeth really receiue it, and that, after it is receiued, he doeth possesse it. The force of these reasons made them first retire a little, who censured the opinion of temeritie, and yeeld that there might bee a coniecture, though not an ordinary certainetie. Yet they acknowledged a certaintie in the Martyrs, in the newly baptized, and in some by speciall reuelation; and from coniecture they were brought to call it morall faith: and Ʋega, who, in the beginning, admitted probability onely, ouercome by these reasons, and beginning to fauour the certaintie, for feare of conforming himselfe to the Lutheran opinion, sayd, that there was so much certaintie as did ex∣clude all doubt, and could not be deceiued, yet that it was not Christian faith, but humane and experimentall. And as hee that is hote, is sure hee is so, and should want sense if hee doubted, so hee that hath grace in him, doeth per∣ceiue it, and cannot doubt; yet it is by the sence of the minde, not by Diuine reuelation. But the other defenders of certaintie, constrained by the ad∣uersaries to speake plainely, whether they thought a man might haue it, or whether hee were bound vnto it, or whether it were a Diuine or humane faith, they came to say, that it being a faith giuen to the Testimonie of the holy Ghost, it could not bee sayd to bee in our liberty, euery one being bound to beleeue Diuine reuelations, and that it must needes bee called Di∣uine faith. And they being pressed with the obiection, that if that faith bee not equall to the Catholike faith, it doeth not exclude all doubt, if it bee equall, then the iust ought as much to beleeue he is iustified, as the Articles of faith, Catarinus did answere, that that faith was diuine, of equall certaintie, exclu∣ding all doubt, as well as the Catholike; but that it was not the Catholike it selfe. Hee affirmed that the Faith which one giueth to Diuine reuelations, made vnto ones selfe, in particular, was diuine, and excluded all doubt, but when it is receiued by the Church, then it is made Vniuersall, that is, Catho∣like, and that this onely concerneth the Articles of faith; which notwithstan∣ding, in regard of certainty and exclusion of doubt, is not superiour to pri∣uate faith, but exceedeth it onely in vniuersality. So all the Prophets had first priuate faith of the things reuealed to them by God, of which, after they were receiued by the Church, they had a Catholike faith. This opinion see∣med hard at the first hearing, and the adherents of Catarinus, who were all the Carmelites, because Iohn Bacon, their Doctour, was of that opinion, and the Bishops of Sinigaglia, Worcester, and Salpi, did willingly goe so farre; but afterwards, the reason beeing weighed and discussed, it was strange how it was receiued by a principall part of the Prelates, Soto crying out that it was too much in fauour of the Lutherans, & others defending that Luther ought not to be censured if he had said that, after iustification, that kind of faith doth follow, but because he saith that is the faith which iustifieth. They answered the reasons of the other part, that the Schoolemen ought not to bee regarded, who ground themselues vpon Philosophicall reasons; that one cannot iudge of diuine motions; that the authority of Salomon was not to the purpose; for saying none knoweth whether hee bee worthy of loue or hatred, applying it heere, it would conclude, that the most wicked sinner, who perseuereth, cannot know that hee is in disgrace with God: that the saying of Wisedome cannot bee applied to this, and the translation doeth deceiue, because the Greeke word doth not signifie sinne pardoned, as the translation is, but expiation or pardon, and the words of the wise man are an admonition to the sinner not to lay sinne vpon sinne by too much confidence of pardon to come, or past: that it was not fit to ground an Ar∣ticle of faith vpon an error of an interpreter. Thus did the same men, who then had made the vulgar edition authenticall, speake of it; which euery one may also obserue out of the bookes printed by them, who assisted at the de∣cree of the approbation. They said, that to worke with feare & trembling was an Hebrew phrase, which signifieth not ambiguitie, but reuerence, because feare & trembling are vsed by seruants to their masters, euen when they are commended by them, and know they are in fauour; that the place of S. Paul did fauourthem, when he spake of iustification. For saying I am not consci∣ous of any want, yet thereby am I not iustified, he would inferre, but I am iu∣stified by something else, and so would prooue the certaintie. But the true sense is, that Paul speaketh of defect in the office of preaching, and saith, my conscience doth not accuse me of defect in any thing, yet I dare not say I haue wholly satisfied, but I reserue all to the iudgement of God. Hee that had not seene the memorials of those who had part in these dis∣putations, and how farre different that was which they printed, would not beleeue how much was spoken vpon this article, and with how much heate, not onley by the Diuines, but the Bishops also, all seeming to vnderstand the trueth, and to haue it on their side: so that Santa Croce saw there was more neede of a bridle, then spurres, who desired to make an end of it by intreating them to passe to something else, and to diuert the controuersie. It was twice proposed in congregation of the Prelates to leaue this question, as ambiguous, long, and troublesome; yet they returned to it, being drawen by their affections. At last the Cardinall, shewing they had said enough, and that they should consider againe of the things spoken, to resolue on them more maturely, obtained of them to speake of preparatiue workes, and ob∣seruation of the Law: vpon which occasion the matter of Free will was brought in by many, and not neglected by the Cardinall, & he proposed whe∣ther they would haue that particular also handled together with the rest, be∣cause it did so cohere with thē, that it could not be handled seuerally. Therfore Prelates and Diuines were deputed to collect Articles, out of the workes of the Lutherans, that they might be censured. The Articles were, 1. God is the totall cause of our workes, good and euill: and the adultery of Dauid, the cruelty of Manlius, and the treason of Iudas, are workes of God, as well as the vocation of Saul. 2. No man hath power to thinke well or ill, but all commeth from absolute necessi∣tie, and in vs is no free will, and to affirme it, is a meere fiction. 3. Free Articles con∣cerning Free will. will, since the sinne of Adam, is lost, and a thing onely tirular, and when one doeth what is in his power, hee sinneth mortally; yea, it is a thing fained and a title without realitie. 4. Free will is onely in doing ill, and hath no power to doe good. 5. Free will mooued by God, doeth by no meanes cooperate, and followeth as an instrument without life, or as an vnreaso∣nable creature. 6. That God conuerteth those onely whom hee will, though they will not, and spurne against it. Vpon the two first Articles they rather spake in a tragicall manner, then The discussiō of the articles. Theologicall; that the Lutheran doctrine was a frantique wisedome; that mans will as they make it, is prodigious; that those wordes, a thing of title onely, a title without realitie, are monstrous; that the opinion is impious and blasphemous against God; that the Church hath condemned it against the Manichees, Priscillianists, and lastly, against Aballardus, and Wigleffe, and that it was a follie, against common sence, euery one proouing in himselfe his owne libertie; that it deserueth not confutation, but, as Aristotle saith, chastisement, or experimentall proofe. That Luthers Schollers perceiued the folly, and to moderate the absurditie, sayd after, that man had libertie in ex∣ternall, politicall, and oecumenicall actions, and in matters of ciuill iu∣stice, that which euery one but a foole knoweth to proceede from coun∣sell and election, but denied libertie in matters of diuine iustice onely. Marinarus sayd, that as it is foolish to say, no humane action is in our power, so it is no lesse absurd to say that euery one is, euery one finding by experience that hee hath not his affections in his power, that this is the sence of the Schooles, which say, that wee are not free in the first motions; which freedome because the Saints haue, it is certaine, that some freedome is in them, which is not in vs. Catarinus, according to his owne opinion, that without Gods speciall assistance, a man cannot doe a morall good, said there was no liberty in this, and therefore that the fourth Article was not so easily to bee condemned. Ʋega, after hee had spoken with such am∣biguitie, that hee vnderstood not himselfe, concluded, that betweene the Di∣uines and the Protestants there was no difference of opinion. For these concluding now that there is liberty in Philosophicall iustice, and not in supernaturall, in externall workes of the Law, not in internall and spirituall, it is to say precisely with the Church, that one cannot doe spirituall workes, belonging to religion, without the assistance of God. And though hee said that all indeuour was to be vsed for composition, yet hee was not gratefully heard, it seeming in some sort a preiudice, that any of the differences might bee reconciled; and they were wont to say, that this is a point of the Col∣loquies, a word abhorred, as if, by that, the Laitie had vsurped that authority which is proper to Councels. A great disputation arose amongst them, whether it bee in mans power to beleeue or not beleeue. The Franciscans following Scotus, did denie it; say∣ing, that as knowledge doth necessarily follow demonstrations, so faith doth arise necessarily from persuasions, and that it is in the vnderstanding, which is a naturall agent, and is naturally mooued by the obiect. They alledged experience, that no man can beleeue what hee will, but what seemeth true; adding that no man would feele any displeasure, if hee could beleeue hee had it not. The Dominicans said, that nothing is more in the power of the will then to beleeue, and, by the determination and resolution of the will onely, one may beleeue the number of the starres is euen. Vpon the third Article, whether free will bee lost by sinne, very many au∣thorities of Saint Austine being alledged, which expressely say it, Soto did inuent, because hee knew no other meanes to auoyd them, that true liberty is equiuocall; for either it is deriued from the Noune, Libertas, freedome, or from the Verbe Liberare, to set free: that in the first sence it is opposed to necessity, in the second to seruitude; and that when Saint Austine sayd, that free-will was lost, hee would inferre nothing else, but that it is made slaue to sinne and Satan. This difference could not bee vnderstood, because a seruant is not free, for that hee cannot doe his owne will, but is compelled to follow his Masters; and by this opinion Luther could not bee blamed for intitling a booke, of seruile will. Many thought the fourth Article absurd; saying, that liberty is vn∣derstood to be a power to both the contraries: therefore that it could not bee said to bee a liberty to euill, if it were not also to good. But they were made to acknowledge their error, when they were told that the Saints, and blessed Angels in heauen, are free to doe good, and therefore that it was no inconue∣nience that some should bee free onely to doe euill. In examining the fifth and sixt Articles, of the consent which free-will gi∣ueth to diuine inspiration, or preuenting grace, the Franciscans and Domi∣nicans were of diuers opinions. The Franciscans contended that the will beeing able to prepare it selfe, it hath liberty much more to accept or refuse the diuine preuention, when God giueth assistance, before it vseth the strength of nature. The Dominicans denied that the workes preceding the vocation are truely preparatory, and euer gaue the first place to God. Not∣withstanding there was a contention betweene the Dominicans themselues. For Soto defended, that although a man cannot obtaine grace, without the speciall preuenting assistance of God, yet the will may euer some way resist and refuse it, and when it doth receiue it, it is because it giueth assent, and doth will so: and if our assent were not required, there would bee no cause why all should not be conuerted. For, according to the Apocalyps, GOD standeth alwayes at the gate, and knocketh: and it is a saying of the Fathers, now made common, that God giueth grace to euery one that will haue it, and the Scripture doeth alwayes require this consent in vs; and to say other∣wise were to take away the libertie of the will, and to say that God vseth violence. Friar Aloisius Catanea said to the contrary, that God worketh two sorts of preuenting grace in the minde, according to the doctrine of Saint Thomas, the one sufficient, the other effectuall; to the first the will may consent or re∣sist, but not to the second, because it implieth cōtradiction that efficacity can be resisted. For proofe hee alledged places of Saint Iohn, Saint Paul, and ve∣ry cleere expositions of Saint, Austine. Hee answered, that it ariseth hence that all are not conuerted, because all are not effectually preuented. That the feare of ouerthrowing free-will is remooued by Saint Thomas, that things are violently mooued by a contrary cause, but neuer by their owne: and God being the cause of the will, to say it is mooued by God, is to say it is mooued by it selfe. And hee condemned, yea mocked the Lutherans manner of speech, that the will followeth, as a dead or vnreasonable creature; for bee∣ing reasonable by nature, mooued by its owne cause, which is God, it is mooued as reasonable, and followeth as reasonable. And likewise that God conuerteth, though men will not, and spurne at him. For it is a contradicti∣on that the effect should spurne against the cause. That it may happen that God may effectually conuert one, that before hath spurned against sufficient preuention; but afterwards cannot, because a gentlenesse in the will moued, must needes follow the efficacie of the diuine motion. Soto said, that euery diuine inspiration was onely sufficient, and that that whereunto free-will hath assented, obtaineth efficiency by that consent, with∣out which it is vneffectuall, not by the defect of it selfe, but of the man. This opinion hee defended very fearefully, because it was opposed, that the distinction of the reprobate from the elect, would proceede from man, con∣trary to the perpetuall Catholique sence; that the vessels of mercy are di∣stinguished by grace, from the vessels of wrath. That Gods election would be for workes foreseene, and not for his good pleasure. That the doctrine of the Fathers, and of the African and French Councels against the Pelagians, hath alwayes published, that God maketh vs to will, which is to say, that hee maketh vs consent. Therefore giuing consent to vs, it ought to bee at∣tributed to the diuine power; or else he that is saued would no more be obli∣ged to God, then he that is damned, if God should vse them both alike. But, notwithstanding all these reasons, the contrary opinion had the ge∣nerall applause, though many confessed, that the reasons of Catanea were not resolued, and were displeased that Soto did not speake freely, but said that the will consenteth in a certaine maner, so that it may in a certaine maner resist: as though there were a certaine maner of meane betweene this affirmation and negation. The free speech of Catanea, and the other Dominicans, did trouble them also, who knew not how to distinguish that opinion, which attributeth iustification to consent, from the Pelagian: and therefore they wished them to take heede of leaping beyond the marke, by a too great de∣sire to condemne Luther; that obiection beeing esteemed aboue all, that, by this meanes, the diuine election or predestination, would bee for workes foreseene; which no Diuine did admit. This drew them to speake also of Predestination. Therefore it was determined, by reason of the connexion, to draw Arti∣cles, Articles con∣cerning Pre∣destination, drawen out of the writings of the Zuin∣glians. in this subiect, also from the doctrine of the Protestants. In the bookes of Luther, in the Augustan confession, and in the Apologies, and Colloquies, there was nothing found that deserued censure: but much in the writings of the Zuinglians; whence these following Articles were drawen. 1. For Prede∣stination and reprobation, that man doth nothing, but all is in the will of GOD. 2. The Predestinated cannot be condemned, nor the Reprobate sa∣ued. 3. The elect and predestinated onely are truly iustified. 4. The iu∣stified are bound by faith to beleeue they are in the number of the Predesti∣nated. 5. The iustified cannot fall from grace. 6. Those that are called, and are not in the number of the Predestinated, doe neuer recelue grace, 7. The iustified is bound to beleeue, by faith, that hee ought to perseuere in iustice vntill the end. 8. The iustified is bound to beleeue for certaine, that in case he fall from grace, he shall receiue it againe. In examining the first of these Articles, the opinions were diuers. The The discussi∣on of the Ar∣ticles. most esteemed Diuines amongst them thought it to be Catholique, and the contrary hereticall; because the good Schoole Writers, Saint Thomas Scotus, and the rest, do so thinke, that is, that GOD, before the creation, out of the masse of mankind, hath elected by his onely and meere mercy, some for glory, for whom he hath prepared, effectually, the meanes to obtaine it; which is called to predestinate. That their number is certaine and determi∣ned, neither can there be any added. The others not predestinated cannot complaine, for that GOD hath prepared for them sufficient assistance for this, though indeed none but the elect shall be saued. For the most princi∣pall reason, they alleadged, that Saint Paul to the Romans, hauing made Ia∣cob a paterne of the predestinated, and Esau of the Reprobate, he produceth the decree of GOD, pronounced before they were borne, not for their workes, but for his owne good pleasure. To this they ioyned the example of the same Apostle, that as the Potter of the same lumpe of clay, maketh one vessell to honour, another to dishonour, so GOD of the same masse of men, chuseth and leaueth whom he listeth. For proofe whereof S. Paul bring∣eth the place, where GOD saith to Moses; I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy, and I will shew pitty, on whom I will shew pitie. And the same Apostle concludeth, that it is not of him, that willeth, or of him that runneth, but of God who sheweth mercy: adding after, that God sheweth mercy on whom hee will, and hardeneth whom he will. They sayd further, that for this cause the counsell of the diuine predestination, and reprobation is called, by the same Apostle, the height and depth of wisedome, vnsearchable, and incomprehensible. They added places of the other Epistles, where he saith; We haue nothing but what wee haue receiued from God, that wee are not able of our selues, so much as to thinke well; and where, in giuing the cause why some haue reuolted from the faith, and some stand firme, he said, it was because the foundation of God stan∣deth sure, and hath this Seale; the Lord knoweth who are his. They added di∣uers passages of the Gospel of Saint Iohn, and infinite authorities of Saint Austin, because that Saint wrote nothing in his old age, but in fauour of this doctrine. But some others, though of lesse esteeme, opposed this opinion, calling it hard, cruell, inhumane, horrible, impious, and that it shewed partialitie in GOD, if, without any motiue cause, he elected one, and reiected another; and vniust, if he damned men for his owne will, and not for their faults, and had created so great a multitude to condemneit. They say it destroyed free wil, because the elect cannot finally doe euill, nor the reprobate good; that it casteth men into a gulfe of desperation, doubting that they bee reprobates, that it giueth occasion to the wicked of bad thoughts, not caring for pe∣nance, but thinking that if they bee elected, they shall not perish, if repro∣bates, it is in vaine to doe well, because it will not helpe them. They con∣fessed, that not onely workes are not the cause of Gods election, because that it is before them, & eternall, but that neither works foreseen can moue GOD to predestinate, who is willing, for his infinite mercie that all should bee sa∣ued; and to this end prepareth sufficient assistance for all, which euery man, hauing free-will, receiueth or refuseth, as pleaseth him: and GOD, in his e∣ternitie, foreseeth those who will receiue his helpe, and vse it to good, and those who will refuse; and reiecteth these, electeth and predestinateth those. They added, that otherwise there was no cause why GOD in the Scripture should complaine of sinners, nor why hee should exhort all to repentance and conuersion, if they haue not sufficent meanes to get them: that the suf∣ficient assistance, inuented by the others, is vnsufficient, because in their opi∣nion, it neuer had or shall haue any effect. The first opinion as it is mysticall and hidden, keeping the mind humble and relying on GOD, without any confidence in it selfe, knowing the de∣formitie of sinne, and the excellencie of diuine grace, so this second was plausible and popular, cherishing humane presumption, and making a great shew; and it pleased more the preaching Fryars, then the vnderstanding Di∣uines. And the Courtiers thought it probable, as consonant to politique rea∣sons. It was maintained by the Bishop of Bitonto, and the Bishop of Salpi shewed himselfe very partiall. The defenders of this, vsing humane reasons, preuailed against the others, but comming to the testimonies of the Scrip∣tures, they were manifestly ouercome. Catarinus holding the same opinion to resolue the places of Scripture, which troubled them all, inuented a middle way: that GOD of his good∣nesse, hath elected some few, whom he will saue absolutely, for whom hee hath prepared most potent, effectuall, and infallible meanes; the rest he desi∣reth for his part they should be saued, and to that end hath prouided suffici∣ent meanes for all, leauing it to their choice to accept them, and bee saued, or refuse them and be damned. Amongst these there are some who receiue them & are saued, though they be not of the number of the elect; of which kind there are very many. Others refusing to cooperate with God, who wish∣eth their saluation, are damned. The cause why the first are predestinated, is onely the will of GOD; why the others are saued, is the acceptation, good vse, and cooperation with the diuine assistance, foreseene by GOD; why the last are reprobated, is the foreseeing of their peruerse will, in refusing, or a∣busing it. That Saint Iohn, Saint Paul, and all the places of Scripture allead∣ged by the other part, where all is giuen to GOD, and which doe shew in∣fallibilitie, are vnderstood onely of the first, who are particularly priuiled∣ged; and in others, for whom the common way is left, the admonitions, exhortations, and generall assistances are verified, vnto which hee that will giue care and follow them, is saued, and he that wil not, perisheth by his own fault. Of those fewe who are priuiledged aboue the common condition, the number is determinate, and certaine with God, but not of those who are saued by the common Way depending on humane libertie, but onely in re∣gard of the foreknowledge of the workes of euery one. Catarinus said hee wondred at the stupidity of those, who say the number is certaine and deter∣mined, and yet they adde that others may bee saued, which is as much as to say that the number is certaine, and yet it may bee inlarged; and likewise of those who say, that the reprobates haue sufficient assistance for saluation, though it be necessary for him that is saued to haue a grat er, which is to say, a sufficient vnsufsicient. Hee added that Saint Austins opinion was not heard of before his time, and himselfe confesseth, it cannot be found in the works of any, who wrote before him, neither did himselfe alwayes thinke it true, but ascribed the cause of Gods wil to merits, saying, God taketh compassion on, & hardeneth whom he listeth. But that will of GOD cannot bee vniust, because it is caused by most secret merits; and that there is diuersitie of sinners, some, who though they be iustified, yet deserue iustification. But after the heate of dis∣putation against the Pelagians transported him to thinke, and speake the con∣trary. Yet when his opinion was heard, all the Catholikes were scandalized, as S, Prosper wrote to him. And Genadius of Marscilles 50. yeeres after, in his iudgement which he maketh of the famous writers, said that it happened to him according to the words of Salmon, that in much speaking one cannot auoyd sinne, and that by his fault, exaggerated by the enemies, the question was not then risen, which might afterwards bring forth heresie; whereby the good Father did intimate his feare, of that which now appeareth, that is, that, by that opinion, some Sect, and diuision might arise. The censure of the second Article was diuers, according to the three re∣lated opinions. Catarinus thought the first part true, in regard of the efficacie of the Diuine will, toward those who are particularly fauoured, but the se∣cond false, concerning the suffiencie of Gods assistance vnto all, and mans libertie in cooperating Others ascribing the cause of Predestination in all to humane consent, condemned the whole Article, in both parts. But those that adhered to S. Austin, and the common opinion of the Theologues, did distin∣guish it, and said it was true in a compounded sence, but damnable in a diui∣ded: a subtiltie which confounded the mindes of the Prelates; and his owne, though hee did exemplifie it, by saying; hee that mooueth cannot stand still, it is true in a compound sence because it is vnderstood, while hee moueth; but in a diuided sence it is false, that it is in another time. Yet it was not well vnderstood, because applying it to his purpose, it cannot bee said, that a man predestinated can bee damned, in a time when he is not predestinated, seeing hee is alwayes so: and generally the diuided sence hath no place where the ac∣cident is inseparable from the subiect. Therefore others thought to declare it better, saying that God gouerneth and mooueth euery thing, according to its proper nature, which in contingent things is free, and such, as that the Act may consist together with the power to the opposite; so that with the act of predestination, the power to reprobation and damnation doeth stand. But this was worse vnderstood then the first. The other Articles were censured with admirable concord. Concer∣ning the third and sixt, they sayd it hath alwayes beene an opinion in the Church, that many receiue diuine grace, and keepe it for a time, who after∣wards doe lose it, and in ine are damned. There was alleadged the exam∣ple of Saul, Solomon, & Iudas, one of the twelue, a case more euident then all, by the words of CHIST to the FATHER; I haue kept in thy Name al that thou hast giuen mee, of which not one hath perished but the sonne of perdition. To these they added Nicholas, one of the seuen Deacons, and others first commended in the Scriptures, and then blamed; and for a conclusion of all, the fall of Luther. Against the sixt they particularly considered, that vocation would be an impious derision, when those that are called, and nothing is wanting on their side, are not admitted: that the Sacraments would not bee effectu∣all for them, all which things are absurd. But for censure of the first, the authoritie of the Prophet was brought, directly contrary in termes, where God saith, that, if the iust shall abandon iustice, and commit iniquitie, I will not re∣member his good workes. The example of Dauid was added, who committed murther and adultery; of Magdalene and Saint Peter, who denied CHRIST. They derided the follies of the Zuinglians, for saying the iust cannot fall from grace, and yet sinneth in euery worke. The two last were vniformely condemned of timeritie, with exception of those vnto whom God hath gi∣uen a speciall reuelation, as to Moyses and the Disciples, to whom it was re∣uealed that they were written in the booke of heauen. The examination of the Diuines, concerning Free-will and Predestinati∣on, beeing ended, and the Anathematismes in those matters framed, they were ioyned to those of iustification, according to their fit places. Where∣unto opposition was made by some in one part, by some in another, where there appeared any word which might preiudicate their opinion. But Ia∣cobus Coccus, Arch bishop of Corfu, considered, that, by the Theologues, the Articles were censured, with many limitations and amplifications, which ought to be inserted in the Anathematismes, that the proposition might not absolutely be condemned, which might receiue a good construction; and the rather, because it is humanitie, to make the most fauourable interpreta∣tion, and charitie, not to thinke euill. Diuers did contradict; first in regard of the practise of the ancient Councels, which haue condemned hereticall propositions without limitation, naked, as they haue been deliuered by the heretikes; especially because it is sufficient in matter of faith, for condemning an article, that it hath one false sence which may cause the vnaduised to erre. Both the opinions seemed reasonable, the first, because it was fit to knowe which sence was condemned, the second, because it was not for the honour of the Councel, to limit the propositions of heretikes. Hereunto was added, that all the Canons were thus composed, reciting the opinion which was to be condemned, and alleadging, for cause thereof the places of Scripture, and doctrine of the Church, vnto which it was opposite. The Canons were made, according to the forme of the Councell of Orange, like to those of originall sinne, in the preceeding Session. But the reading of them proouing long and tedious, and the mixture of trueth and falshood, of things reproo∣ued and approoued not very intelligible; the Bishop of Sinigaglia put them fitly in minde of a remedie for both inconueniences; that it was better to separate the Catholike doctrine from the contrary, and make two Decrees; in one to make a continuated declaration, and confirmation of the doctrine of the Church, in the other to condemne, and anathematize the contrary. The aduise pleased all, and so it was resolued; and first the anathematismes were framed apart; and then paines taken to make the other Decree. And this they called the Decree of the doctrine, and that the Canons; which The Decree of the doct and the Ca∣nons. stile was after followed in the second and third Conuocation of the Councell. Sancta Croce tooke incredible paines to make the Decrees, auoyding, as much as was possible, to insert any thing controuersed among the Schoole-men, Santa Croce tooke great paines to giue euery o sa∣tisfaction in making the Decrees. and so handling those which could not be omitted, as that euery one might be contented; in euery Congregation he obserued what was disliked by any, and tooke it away, or corrected it, as hee was aduised: and hee spake not onely in the Congregations, but with euery one in particular, was infor∣med of all the doubts, and required their opinions; he diuersified the matter with diuers orders, changed sometimes one part, sometimes another, vntill hee had reduced them to the order in which they now are, which generally pleased and was approued by all. It is certaine, that to determine those things, Congregations were held, consisting partly of Theoloques, partly of the Prelates, to the number of one hundred, and that, from the beginning of September vntill the end of Nouember, there passed not a day, in which the Cardinall did not meddle with that which was done before, and change something. The memoriall of these mutations remaineth: whereof I will rehearse two, as a tast of many, which it would bee tedious to recount. In the first point of doctrine, it was first written, by common consent, that nei∣ther the Gentiles, by vertue of Nature, nor the Iewes, by the law of Moyses, could free themselues from sinne; and because many did hold that circum∣cision did remit sinnes, they suspected that these words might preiudice their opinion, though S. Paul hath, in expresse termes, said the same, in more then one place. The Cardinal, to satisfie these men, in the place where it was sayd (Per ipsam etiam legem Moysi) changed, and said (Per ipsam etiam litterant legis Moysi ) & euery ordinary Diuine might easily iudge, how well the word literam did befit that place. In the beginning of the eight point, those that manetained certainety of grace, were not contented it should be sayde, A mans sinnes are not omitted by the certainetie of remission, and because one is confident in it. And the Cardinall gaue them satisfaction, by excluding the reall certainety, and putting in the roome, boasting, & confidence in that onely. And in the conclusion of that point, euery one might plainely see, that the cause ought to haue beene giuen, for that no man can certainely know that he hath obtained grace. But to satisfie one part, hee added, cer∣tainety of faith; and the Dominicans, thinking this was not enough, vrged him to adde Catholique. But because the adherents of Catarinus were not contented, in stead of those words, Catholique faith, it was said, Faith, which cannot be subiect to falshood. This contented both sides. For one party inferred, then, that certainty of faith which can be had herein, may bee false, and therefore is vncertaine, the other inferred, that this certainety could haue no doubt of falsehood while it remained, but by changing from the state of of grace to the State of sinne, it may become false; as all contingent truthes, by alteration of their subiects are made false. But the Catholike faith is not onely certaine, but vnchangeable, because the subiect of it things neces∣sary, or past, which cannot be altered. And truly, concerning these particulars, it is not fit to robbe the Cardinall of his due praise, who knew how to satisfie men, euen obstinate in contrary opinions. And those that would be better informed therein, may vnderstand, that, immediatly after the Session, Friar Dominicus Soto, principall of the Do∣minicans Dominicus So∣to Principall the Domini∣cans, and An∣dreas Vega, of the publish books as commenta∣ries of the De∣cree, contra one to an . wrote three bookes, and did intitle them, of Nature and Grace, for commentary of this Doctrine, and in his expositions, all his opinions are found when this worke was published, Fryar Andrew Vega, the most estee∣med of the Franciscans, fet foorth fifteene great bookes for Commentaries vpon the eene points of that decree, and did expound it all according to his owne opinion. These two opinions do not only differ, almost in all the Articles, but in many of them, are expresly contrary. Both which workes were printed in the yeere 1548. and hee that shall reade them, obseruing that they doe giue very often, interchangeable and doubtfull sences to the words of the Councell, wil maruaile how these two persons, the chiefe for learning, and estimation, who had greater part therein then others, did not know the onely sence and true scope of the Synode: of which also, some few others, of those which were interested, hauing written diuersly, I could neuer finde, whether that assembly did agree in one sence, or whether there was vnitie of words onely. But to returne to the Cardinall, when the Decree was appro∣ued The Decree is sent to Rome, and approued there. by all in Trent, he sent it to the Pope, and the Pope gaue it to the Fryars, and learned men of Rome, to be consulted of and it was approoued by them, because euery one might vnderstand it in his owne sence. I haue rehearsed altogether what was done in matter of faith, that I migh not diuide things that are connexed. But in the meane time, some dayes Reformation is handled. were spent about the reformation; and in those congregations it was pro∣posed to set downe the qualities, requisite in the promotion of the greater Prelats, and Ministers of the Church. And very graue sayings were deliue∣red with great ostentation, but there was no way found how those things, whereof they spoke might be obserued. For where the Kings haue the pre∣sentation, they saw not with what bonds to tie them: where election hath place, the chapter doth consist of great and mighty persons: for the residue, all dignities are conferred by the Pope, and more then two thirds of the be∣nefices The point concerning the qualities of the Prelats is omitted. are reserued to the Apostolike Sea; vnto which it is not fit to prescribe a law. Whereupon, after many and long discourses, it was concluded, that it was better to leaue the businesse. The discourses in point of residency, were neither fewer nor shorter; The point of residence is handled. which ended not in the resolution which was necessary, & desired by many, and made some confusion then, and prepared matter for other times. For the vnderstanding whereof, it is necessary to resume this matter from the be∣ginning. The Ecclesiasticall Degrees were not originally instituted as dignities, preheminencies, rewards, or honours, as now they are, and haue beene, many A discourse of the author concerning residency. hundred yeeres, but as ministeries, and charges, otherwise called by Saint Paul, works, and those that exercise them, are called by CHRIST our LORD in the Gospel, Worke-men; and therefore no man could then enter into co∣gitation to absent himselfe from the execution thereof in his owne person: and if any one (which seldome happened) retired from the worke, it was not thought reasonable, he should haue either title or profit. And though the ministeries were of two sorts, some anciently called, as now they are, with care of soules: others of temporal things, for the sustenance and seruice of the poore and sicke, as were the Deaconries, and other inferiour workes, all held themselues equally bound to that seruice, in person; neither did any thinke of a substitute, but for a short time, and for great impediments, much lesse to take another charge, which might hinder that. The Church being in∣creased, where there were many Christians, and free from persecutions, ano∣ther sort of Ministers was instituted, to serue in the Ecclesiasticall assemblies, aswell in reading the diuine Scriptures, as in other functions, to stirre vp de∣uotion. There were instituted also Colledges of Ministers, which might in common apply themselues to some charge, and others as Seminaries, from whence to take Ministers instructed already. These of the Colledges, not hauing any personall charge, seeing the Congregation did administer, as well with one more, as with one lesse, sometimes, by reason of studie, or greater instruction, or for some other cause, were absent from the Church, one for a short time, another for along, without hauing title, charge, or profit. So Saint Ierom, a Priest of Antioch, but without any particular Cure, and Ruffi∣nus, in the same manner, of Aquileia, and Saint Paulinus, ordained Priest of Barcellona, did reside but little. But when the number of them increased, they did degenerate, and were called vagabond Clerkes, because that manner of liuing made them odious, who are often spoken of in the Lawes and no∣uell constitutions of Iustinian. But neuer any thought to holde the title of an office, or inioy the profit, without doing seruice, but onely, after the yeere seuen hundred, in the West Church, when the Ecclesiastical ministeries were changed, and made dignities, and honours, and rewards for seruices done. And as before a person was chosen fit for the necessitie of the Church, so afterward a degree, dignitie, or emolument was fitted to the qualitie of the person; from whence arose the exercising of the ministery by a substitute. This abuse hath drawen in another by consequence; that is, to thinke ones selfe disobliged, not onely to minister, but to bee present, and assist him that laboureth in his place. And indeed where the industry of the person is not chosen for the worke, but a place and degree is prouided for the person, there is no reason hee should bee bound to labour for himselfe, or assist him that doeth. The disorder proceeded so farre, that it would haue ouerthrowen the Clergie, if the Popes had not in part resisted, commanding that Prelates and other Curates, though they might exercise the charge by substitutes, yet should be tied to assistance in the place, which they called residence. Where∣unto also they bound the Canons, without constraining other beneficed Clerkes vnto it, not so much as speaking of them, but leauing them to the custome, or rather abuse brought in: by which silence it came to passe, that they thought themselues obliged. Neither did this voluntarie deceipt displease the Pope, who saw very well that it would end in the greatnesse of the Court. And hence arose the pernicious, and neuer sufficiently detested distinction, of Benefices of residence, and not residence; which followed as well in deed as in doctrine, without any blush of absurditie, which it did euidently bring with it: that is, to giue a title and salarie without Obligation. And to palliate it, or rather to make it more shamefull, whereas the Canonists haue a maxime conuincing this absurditie, that is, that euery Benefice is gi∣uen for an office, they haue expounded it, vnderstanding by office, the houres or prayers of the Breuiarie: so that a reuenue of a thousand or tenne thou∣sand, or more crownes is giuen for this onely, to take a Breuiarie in hand, and read as fast as one can, in a low voice, not marking any thing but to pro∣nounce the words. But the distinction of the Doctours, and the prouision of the Popes augmented the abuse in the short time: For without those some of the beneficed men might perhaps haue made conscience of it, but with them, they thinke the abuse is iustified, as a thing lawfull. And for the Curates, the Popes dispensation was neuer denyed to any, that sought it by that way by which euery thing is obtained at Rome. So that the poore onely doe reside, and those that gaine by it: and the abuse, first a little re∣medied by the Popes lawes did, by the dispensations, not onely leape to the height, but spread it selfe abroad, and infected the earth. After the stirres of Germanie for Religion; which gaue occasion to speake of and desire refor∣mation, euery one ascribing the mischiefe to the negligence, and small care of the Prelates, desiring to see them at the gouernement of their Churches, de∣testing the dispensations, which caused them to be absent, discourses were made of their Obligation; and some Pious men, amongst whom was Friar Thomas Caietan, Cardinall, affirmed that the Obligation of residence was by the Law of GOD. And it happened, as it doeth, in all things, that the pre∣ceding passion perswaded the more rigid opinion, and more strict Obliga∣tion, and made the disobligation more hard. This caused them to adde vn∣to it, the vigor of the Law of GOD. The Prelates, seeing the mischiefe, and desiring it should be excuseable, and a small fault, would needes beleeue, that they were not bound by GOD, but by the Pope, whose dispensation, or silence, did saue them. With these preuious dispositions of doctrine, the mat∣ter Great contro∣uersies in the Councell a∣bout residence was proposed in the Councell, as hath beene said: which because it pro∣duced a small controuersie in the beginning, a greater in the progresse, and in the end (which was in the yeeres 1562. and 1563.) greatest of all, it will not be vnseasonable to make some recapitulation, and to recount some parti∣cular occurrences. Therefore though the Articles first proposed, were but to adde greater bonds, and punishments, to the precepts, to remooue the impediments, and A controuer∣sie whether residence be de iure Di∣uine. facilitate the execution, and all agreed, alleadging perswasions out of the old and new Testament, Canons of the Councels, doctrine of the Fathers, and out of the inconueniences which sprang from the non-residencie, yet the maior part of the Diuines, especially the Dominicans, did determine that the obligation was by the Law of God. Friar Bartholomew Caranza, and Friar Dominicus Soto, Spaniards, were the most principall authors. The most grounded reasons they brought were, that Bishoprickes are founded by CHRIST, as ministeries and workes, and so require a personall action, which a man absent cannot performe, that CHRIST, describing the qualitie of a good shepheard, saith, that hee giueth his life for the flocke, knoweth the sheepe by their names, and walketh before them. The Canonists and Ita∣lian Prelates did dispute, that the obligation was by the Ecclesiasticall law, alleadging that anciently neuer any non-resident was reprehended as a transgressour of the Law of God, but of the Canons onely. That Timothie, though Bishop of Ephesus, was long in his iourney, by order of S. Paul. That it was sayd to Saint Peter, Feede the Lambes; which is vnderstood of all, and yet hee cannot bee euery where present: so the Bishop may fulfill the com∣mandement of feeding; without residence. They answered the contrary reasons, that the conditions of a Pastor, proposed by CHRIST, doe agree to none but CHRIST himselfe. Friar Ambrosius Catarinus, though a Dominican, was contrary to the rest. He sayd, the Bishopricke instituted by CHRIST is one onely, which the Pope hath: the institution of the others is by the Pope; who, as hee diuideth the quantity and number of the sheepe to bee fed, so hee prescri∣beth also the manner and qualitie. Therefore it belongeth to the Pope, to appoint euery Bishop, to attend the flocke, by himselfe, or his substitute, and may allot vnto him either much or little, and depriue him also of the power of feeding. Thomas Campeggius, Bishop of Feltre, answered another way, that the Bishop, as Saint Ierom testifieth, is the institution of CHRIST, but the diuision of Bishoprickes was after instituted by the Church: that CHRIST gaue the charge of feeding to all the disciples, but tied them not to a place, as the actions of the Apostles, and of their Disciples doe shew; the assig∣ning of this portion of the flocke to one, and that to another, was an Ec∣clesiasticall institution, to gouerne better. These things were handled by the Bishops with much passion. The Spaniards did not onely adhere to, but cherish the opinion, that it was de The Spanish secret in this point. iure diuino, hauing a secret, which they communicated onely amongst them∣selues, to make great the Episcopall authority. For if it were once deci∣ded that they had the charge from CHRIST to gouerne their Church, it would bee decided also, that they haue from him authority necessarie for it, which the Pope could not restraine. These designes were smelled out, by those that leaned to the Court, therefore in regard of the importance of the matter, they also incouraged the maintainers of the contrary opini∣on. The Legats thought it better to withstand the danger, by dissembling their knowledge of it: and, aiming at this marke, said for the present, that the matter was hard, and had need of greater examination; that where the controuersie is betweene the Catholikes, they ought not to condemne one part, for feare of making a schisme, and sowing contentions, that they may ioyntly indeauour to confute the Lutherans. Therefore, that it were better to deferre the declaration, by what right it is due, vntil another Session. Some thought it sufficient to renew the old Canons and Decretals in this matter, and sayd, they were seuere enough, because they inflicted depriuation for a punishment, and reasonable enough, because they admitted lawfull excuses. There remained to find a way that dispensations might not be granted, and that was sufficient. Others thought it necessary to adde new punishments, and remoue the impediments; which was of the greatest importance, be∣cause those being taken away, residencie would follow; and that it was no matter from whence the obligation came, so it were executed; and that this being done, the matter would be better discussed. It pleased the maior part that the one and the other should be done: whereunto the Legates g ; vpon condition, that the dispensations should not bee spoken against, but, to cause them not to be desired, that the impediments should bee taken away, which come by exemptions wherein there was as much spoken, and with no lesse con , between those which held euery exemption for all abuse, and those who thought them necessary in the Church, and repro∣ued onely the excesses. S. Ierom witnesseth, that in the first beginnings of Christianity, the Chur∣ches A discourse of the Authour concerning exemptions. were gouerned by a kinde of Aristocracy, by the common counsell of the Presbytery: but to withstand the diuisions which were brought in, the monarchicall gouernement was instituted, giuing all the superinten∣dency to the Bishop, whom all the orders of the Church did obey, nei∣ther any one thinke to withdraw himselfe from vnder the authority. The neighbour Bishops, whose Churches, because they were vnder one Pro∣uince, had commerce, did gouerne themselues also in common by Synods; and to make the gouernement more easie, attributing much to the Bishop of the principall City, they made him as it were Head of that body: and by a more ample communion, which all the Prouinces of one perfecture or great gouernement held together, the Bishop of the City where the Ruler did reside; gained a certaine superiority, by custome. These prefectures were, the Imperiall City of Rome, with the Cities adioyning; the prefecture of Alexandria, which gouerned Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis: of Antioch, for Syria, and other Prouinces of the East: and in the other lesser prefectures, cal∣led in Greeke, the same was obserued. This gouernement, brought in, and approoued by custome onely, which found it commodious; was esta∣blished by the first Councell of Nice vnder Constantine, and ordained by a Ca∣non that it should continue: and euery one was so farre from putting him∣selfe out of this order; that the Bishop of Ierusalem hauing many honourable preheminences, perhaps because it was the place where our Sauiour Christ conuersed in the flesh, and was the fountaine of Religion, the Councell of Nice did ordaine that those honours should still remaine, but so that nothing was detracted from the Metropolitan, then Bishop of Cesarea. This gouernement; which hath bin euer held in all the Churches of the East; was altered in the Latine, because many great Monasteries being built, go∣uerned by Abbates of great fame and worth, who by their conspicuous vir∣tues, made the Bishops afraid, there arose some emulation betweene these and those: and the Abbates, to free themselues from these inconueniences, whe∣ther reall, or fained, and to couer their ambition, to withdraw themselues from the subiection which they owed, did obtaine of Popes to bee receiued vnder the protection of Saint Peter, and immediately vnder the subiection of the Pope. This being profitable for the Court of Rome, because he that obtaineth priuiledges, is bound to maintaine the authority of him that granteth them, suddenly all the Monasteries were exempted. The Chap∣ters also of Cathedrall Churches, consisting for the most part of Regulars, by the same pretences, did obtaine exemption. Finally, the Cluniacensian and Cistersian Congregations were all wholly exempted, With great inlarge∣ment of the Popes authority, which came to haue subiects in all places, de¦fended and protected by the Papacie, and interchangeably defenders and protectors. The inuention was not commended by Saint Bernard, who li∣ued in that time, and was of the Cistersian Congregation: yea, hee admoni∣shed Pope Eugenius; to consider thereof, that all were abuses, that it ought not to be well taken if an Abbat did refuse to obey the Bishop, and the Bishop the Metropolitane: that the militant Church should take example by the tri∣umphant, where no Angel euer said, I will not be vnder the Archangel. But Bernard would haue said more, if hee had liued in the times following, when the Mendicant Orders, obtained, not onely a generall exemption, from the Episcopall authority, but power also to build Churches, in any place what∣soeuer, and to administer the Sacraments in them. But in these last ages the abuse went on so farre, that euery petty Priest did obtaine, with a smal charge, an exemption from the superiority of his Bishop, not onely in causes of cor∣rection, but also to be ordained by whom he listeth, and in summe, not to ac∣knowledge the Bishop at all. This beeing the state of the cause, and the Bishops requiring remedie, some that were more vehement, returned to the things spoken in the Con∣gregations, that were before the other Session, against the exemption of Fri∣ars. But the wiser sort thinking it impossible to obtaine any thing, so long as the number and greatnesse of the Regular Orders continued, and fauour of the Court, they were contented to remooue onely the exemptions of the Chapters; and particular persons, and demande a reuocation of them all. But the Legates, treating with them in particular, and putting then in mind that all the reformation could not bee made by that Session, that it was fit to begin, and leaue something for future times, made them rest contented, that the exemption of particular Priests, Friars, not inhabiting in the Cloysters, A smal refor∣mation in matter of ex∣emption is made. and of Chapters, only in criminall causes, should be remooued (from whence the greater disorders doe arise,) as also faculties to giue Clericall Orders to him that resideth not in his owne diocesse: promising to prouide against the other abuses in another Session. While these things were handled in Trent, the Pope hauing receiued ad∣uice Card Farnese the Popes Le∣gate with the Emperour, is recalled. from the Cardinall Farnese, considering with how small reputation an Apostolique Legate did remaine in Ratisbon, when his souldiers were in the field, he recalled him: and, with him, a great number of Italian Gentlemen, which were of the Popes troupes, did depart. In the middest of October, the two armies were so neere, at Santhem, that there was but a little riuer be∣tweene them. And standing so, Octauius Farnese, sent by the Emperour The two Ar∣mies are neere together, and Daueuert is taken by O∣ctauius Far∣nese. with the Italians; and some Dutchmen, tooke Daueuert in the sight of the enemie, who hauing done nothing while he was in Sueuia but hindered the Emperour, was constrained in Nouember to abandon the Countrey, by reason of a great diuersion, made by the Bohemians, and others of the Impe∣riall High Germa∣ny is left to the Emperors discretion. faction, against Saxonie, and Hassia, places belonging to the two Prote∣stants Heads; who retired to defend their owne Countreys, leauing High Germanie at the Emperours discretion; and this was the cause why many Princes and Cities combined, did incline to composition with him, hauing honest caution to hold their religion. But he would not make mention ther∣of in writing, lest the warre should seeme to bee made for that cause, which would offend those that followed him, make others more vnwilling to ren∣der themselues, and giue suspicion to the Ecclesiastiques of Germanie, who hoped to see the Romane Rites restored in euery place. Yet his Ministers promised them all, that they should not bee molested in the exercise of religi∣on, excusing their Master, if, for many respects, he could not satisfie them, to make a capitulation thereof: and hee so caried himselfe, that his resolution appeared to giue them content, by conniuencie; By these deditions the Em∣perour gained much artilery, drew much money from the Cities, to the va∣lue of many hundred thousands, and, which was of greatest importance, was absolute Lord of all High Germanie. This happinesse made the Popeiealous, and thinke to prouide for him∣selfe The pope is iealous of the Emperor, and recalleth▪ his forces. before all Germany were subdued. His souldiers vnder the conduct of his grand-child Octauius, were much diminished in number, by reason of those who parted with the Cardinall Farnese, and of others who did runne away by whole rankes, for the incommodities they suffered. The residue, in the mid∣dest of December, the Emperours Armie being lodged neere the Village of Sothen, departed, by order from the Pope, from whom Octauius had comman∣dement to returne into Italy, and to tell his Vncle, that the sixe moneths bee∣ing ended, the Pope could no longer beare so great a charge: that the time of the obligation was ended, and that effected for which the league was made, that is, Germany brought into obedience. The Emperour complayned, that Whereof the Emperour complaineth. he was abandoned when he had most need of helpe. For nothing was done, so long as the Heads were not oppressed, who could not bee said to be sub∣dued, but retired onely, to defend their owne Territories; and being deliue∣red from feare, it was to bee doubted they would returne with greater forces, and better order then before. But the Pope iustified his not continuing in the The Pope iu∣stifieth his action. league, and the departure of his men, by saying, that hee was not made parta∣ker of the composition with the Cities and Princes, which could not be esta∣blished without him; and especially, because it was made with much preiu∣dice of the Catholique faith, tolerating heresie, which might haue been roo∣ted out. That according to capitulation, hee had not been partaker of the profits of the warre, nor of the money the Countreys paid which did com∣pound; that the Emperour complained, when himselfe was offended and disesteemed, euen with dammage of religion. Nor content with this, hee forbade the Emperour to receiue money of the Churches of Spaine, longer then the sixe moneths: and though the Emperours Ministers made many ef∣fectuall treaties with him, shewing that the cause continuing, for which they were granted, it required that the grant also should continue, and that all would be in vaine, and without fruit, if the warre were not ended, yet they The Fiesehi make a cōspi∣racie against the D rij in Genua, for which the Pope is bla∣med by the Emperiour. could not remooue him from his resolution. In Genua, the family of the Fiesehi, making a dangerous conspiracy (which had almost taken effect) against that of the Dorij, which followed the Empe∣rors side, the Emperor was assured that the Popes son, the Duke of Piacenza was author of it, and beleeued that it came from the Pope, and refrained not 1547 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. HENRY 8. FRANCIS 1. to adde this complaint to the others. The Pope beleeued the Emperour would be busied in Germanie a long time, and not be able to offend him with temporall forces: but feared he might trouble him by making the Protestants goe to the Councell. To separate the Councell seemed too violent and scan∣dalous a remedy, especially hauing continued seuen moneths in a treatie, whereof nothing was published. He was of opinion to publish the things already digested, seeing that by that declaration, either the Protestants would The Popes resolution concerning the proceed∣ing in Coun∣cell. refuse to goe thither, or, if they went, would be constrained to accept it; wherein the principall point of all the controuersies consisting, the victory would be his owne. And if there were no other reason to doe it, this was sufficient to prooue it was good for him, because the Emperour would not haue any controuersies decided. For the counsels of those that haue contra∣ry ends, ought to be contrary. Hee saw well, that the Emperour would not take it for an affront. But the distastes betweene them were already so great, that little could be added to them; and the Pope, when hee was pressed with reasons, which did perswade and disswade, was wont to vse the Florentine saying, A thing done hath an head; and so to execute that which was ne∣cessary. Therefore he wrote to the Legates in Christmas, that they should hold a Session, and publish the decrees already framed. This commande∣ment being receiued, they called a Congregation the third of Ianuary, in 1547 which hauing determined, by the vniforme consent of all, to imitate a Ses∣sion for the thirteenth, in regard it was tedious to all, to remaine there so long, and resolue of nothing; the Legates did propose the publication of the Decrees framed. For those of faith, the Emperours Prelates opposed, and said, that there was no opportunity as yet, and that it sufficed to publish the reformation. But the Papalins vrged the contrary; alledging it was knowen to all the world, that the point of grace and iustification had been discussed seuen moneths together, and that the Decree was established; and that it would be a derogation to the faith, if the Councell should seeme to feare the publishing of the trueth, which was decided. And because these were more in number, their opinion, assisted by the Legates, preuailed. The two next Congregations were spent, in reading againe the Decrees, as well of faith as The Session is held the 13 of Ianuary, and the De∣crees of faith and reforma∣tion are pub∣lished. reformation: the which, some small matters beeing corrected, by the ad∣uice of those who were not present at the first, pleased them all. The Le∣gates, accompanied with the Prelates, went to the Church with the vsuall ceremonies, on Thursday the thirteenth of Ianuary, and held the Session; where Andreas Cornarus, Archbishop of Spalato, sang Masse, Thomas Stella; Bishop of Salpi, did preach; and the Decrees of faith and reformation were read. The first conteined sixteene heads, with their prohemes, and thirty three anathematismes. After it had forbid to beleeue, preach, or teach, otherwise then was constituted and expressed in that Decree, it declared in substance: 1. That neither Gentiles, by naturall meanes, nor Iewes, by the letter of Moy∣ses, hath been able to free themselues from sinne. 2. Whereupon GOD sent his Sonne, to redeeme the one and the other. 3. Who, though he died for all, yet those onely enioy the benefit, vnto whom his merit is commu∣nicated. 4. That the iustification of the wicked, is nothing but a transla∣tion, from the state of the sonne of Adam, into the state of the adopted sonne of God, by IESV CHRIST, which, after the publication of the Gospel, is not done without Baptisme, or the vow thereof. 5. That the beginning of iustification, in men of age, proceedeth from preuenting grace, which in∣uiteth to dispose themselues, consenting, and cooperating with it freely: which they doe willingly and might refuse. 6. The manner of the pre∣paration, is first to beleeue, willingly, the diuine reuelations, and promises, and knowing ones selfe to bee a sinner, to turne from the feare of Gods Iu∣stice to his mercie, to hope for pardon from him, and therefore to begin to loue him, and hate sinne: and finally, purposing to bee baptized, to begin a new life, and keepe the commandements of God. 7. That iustification followeth this preparation, which is not onely a remission of sinnes, but san∣ctification also; and hath 5. causes: the finall, the glory of God, and eternall life: the efficient, God: the meritory, CHRIST: the instrumentall, the Sa∣craments: and the formall, iustice, giuen by God, receiued according to the good pleasure of the holy Ghost, and according to the disposition of the re∣ceiuer, receiuing, together with remission of sinnes, faith, hope, and chari∣tie. 8. That when Saint Paul saith, that man is iustified by faith, and gratis, it ought to be vnderstood, because faith is the beginning, and the things that precede iustification are not meritorious of grace. 9. That sinnes are not pardoned to him that vaunteth, and reposeth himselfe onely in the confi∣dence, and certainty of the remission. Neither ought it to be said, that one∣ly faith doth iustifie, but euery one as hee should not doubt of the mercie of God, the merits of CHRIST, and efficacie of the Sacraments, so, in regard of his owne indisposition he may doubt, because he cannot know by certainty of infallible faith, that he hath obtained grace. 10. That the iust are more iustified by obseruing the Commandements of God and the Church. 11. That it cannot be said, that the Commandements of God are impossible to the iust, who, though he fall into veniall sinnes, yet ceaseth not to be so; that no man ought to relie on faith onely, nor say, that the iust sinneth in euery good action, or committeth sinne, if he do any thing for reward. 12. That no man should presume hee is predestinated, beleeuing that the iustified can sinne no more, or sinning, can promise himselfe repentance. 13. That no man can promise to himselfe absolute certaintie to perseuere vntill the end, but should put his hope in the assistance of God, who will continue, if man faile not. 14. That those that are fallen into sinne may againe receiue grace, beeing stirred vp from aboue to recouer it by repentance, which differeth from baptisme, because it containeth not only contrition, but sacramental con∣fession, Priestly absolution, at the least in vow, and satisfaction besides for the temporall punishment, which is not alwayes remitted altogether, as in bap∣tisme. 15. That the grace of God is lost, not onely by infidelity, but by any mortall sinne, though faith bee not lost by it. 16. It proposeth to the iust the exercise of good workes, by which eternall life is gained, as grace promised by the mercie of God, and a reward due to good workes by the diuine promise. And it concludeth that this doctrine doth not establish any iustice of our owne, refusing the iustice of God, but the same is said to bee ours, because it is in vs, and of GOD, being infused by him for the merit of CHRIST. In fine, to make euery one vnderstand, not only the doctrine to be followed, but that also which is to be auoided, it addeth Canons, against him that saith. 1. That a man may bee iustified without grace, by the strength of humane nature, and doctrine of the Law. 2. That grace is giuen to liue well with greater facilitie, and to merit eternall life, as if free The Canons will can doe it, but with difficultie. 3. That a man may beleeue, loue, hope or repent, as he ought, without the preuention, or assistance of the holy Spi∣rit. 4. That free will, excited by GOD, doeth not cooperate, to dispose vs to grace, nor can dissent, though it would. 5. That after the sinne of Adam free will is lost. 6. That it is not in the power of man to doe ill, but as well bad as good workes, are done, not onely by Gods permission, but by his owne proper working. 7 That all workes, done before iustification, are sinnes, and that a man sinneth the more, by how much the more hee labou∣reth to dispose himselfe vnto grace. 8. That the feare of hell, which ma∣keth vs abstaine from sin, and to flie to the mercy of GOD, is sin. 9. That the wicked is iustified by faith onely, without preparation, proceeding from the motion of his will. 10. That man is iustified without the iustice by which CHRIST did merit for vs, or is formally iust by that. 11. That he is iustified onely by the imputation of the iustice of CHRIST, or onely by remission of sinnes without inherent grace and charitie; or that the grace of iustification is onely the fauour of GOD. 12. That iustifying faith is nothing but confidence in the mercy of GOD, who remitteth sinnes for CHRIST. 13. That, for remission of sinnes, it is necessary to beleeue they are remitted not doubting of ones own indisposition. 14. That man is absolued and iustified, because he doeth firmely beleeue it. 15. That he is bound by faith to beleeue that hee is in the number of the predestinated. 16. That one may be certaine he hath the gift of perseuerance, without spe∣ciall reuelation. 17. That onely that the predestinated obtaine grace. 18. That the Commandements of God are impossible to the iust. 19. That there is no other Euangelicall precept but of faith. 20. That the iust and perfect man is not bound to obserue the Commandements of God and the Church, or that the Gospel is a promise without condition of obseruing the Commandements. 21. That CHRIST is giuen for a redeemer, not for a law-maker. 22. That the iustified may perseuere without the speciall as∣sistance of GOD, or cannot with it. 23. That the iust cannot sinne, or can auoyde all veniall sinnes, without a speciall priuiledge, as the Church holdeth of the Virgin. 24. That iustice is not preserued and increased by good workes, but that they are fruits onely or signes. 25. That the iust sinneth mortally, or venially, in euery worke. 26. That the iust ought not to expect a reward for his good workes. 27 That there is no mortall sinne but infi∣delity. 28 That grace being lost, faith is lost also; or that the faith re∣mayning is not true nor of a Christian. 29 That man sinning after bap∣tisme, cannot be lifted vp by the grace of God, or may recouer it by faith onely, without the Sacrament of penanace. 30. That euery fault and pu∣nishment is wholly remitted to euery penitent man, there remaning no tem∣porall punishment, to bee indured in this life, or in Purgatorie. 31. That the iust sinneth, if hee doe good, onely in hope of an eternall reward. 32. That the good workes of the iust, are the gifts of God, and are not withall the merits of the iustified. 33. That this doctrine is derogatory to the glory of God, and merits of CHRIST, or that their glory is not made more illustrious by it. When I had made this short narration of the Decree, I began to thinke it superfluous, seeing all the decrees of that Councel are printed in one volume, The authors reason why he rehearseth the decrees though they be printed in a volume apart. and in euery mans hands, and that in the composition of the Actes that fol∣low, I might referre my selfe to that booke: and I was about to teare this leafe. But considering that some might desire to reade the whole continua∣tion in one booke only, and that if any thought it better to see the originall, hee might omit this mine abbreuiation, I resolued not to change, but to ob∣serue the same stile in the matters following: and the rather, because I am grieued, when, in Zenophon and Tacitus, I see the narration of things, most knowen to their times, omitted, which remaineth vnknowen to mee, be∣cause there is no meanes to know it againe: and I hold it for a maxime, that one ought neuer to referre himselfe to another. Therefore I come to the summe of the Decree of reformation. Which did containe in substance; 1. That the Synod being willing to The Decree of reforma∣tion. amend the depraued manners of the Clergie and people, thought fit to be∣gin with the gouernours of the greater Churches. Therefore trusting in God, and his Vicar on earth, that, that charge shall be giuen to worthy men, exercised from their youth in Ecclesiasticall discipline, it doth admonish them to performe their duety, which cannot bee executed without residing in the place, where it is to bee done: Yet many, leauing the flocke, and care of the lambes, wander in Courts, and apply themselues to secular businesse. Therefore the Synod doth reuiue all the ancient Canons against non-resi∣dents, and doth constitute besides, that euery gouernour of a Cathedrall Church, of what title or preeminencie soeuer, who shall remaine sixe mo∣neths together out of his Diocesse, without a iust and reasonable cause, shall lose the fourth part of the reuenues, and if he perseuere sixe moneths more, shall lose another fourth part, and the contumacie increasing, the Metropo∣litane, vpon paine of not entring into the Church for three moneths, shall de∣late him to the Pope, who, by his supreame authoritie, may inflict greater punishment, or prouide the Church of a more profitable Pastor. And if the Metropolitan shall likewise offend, the most ancient Suffragan shall bee bound to denounce him. 2. But others, inferiours to Bishops, tyed to residence either by law or cu∣stome, shall be compelled thereunto by the Bishops, abrogating euery pri∣uiledge which giueth a perpetuall exemption from residing. But dispensa∣tions granted for a time, for a reasonable cause, true, and prooued before the Ordinary, shall remaine in force, and the Bishop, as Delegate of the Apo∣stolike Sea, shall take care that a sufficient Vicar bee prouided for the charge of soules, with a conuenient portion of the reuenues, notwithstanding any priuiledge or exemption. 3. Beside that no Clerke, by personall priuiledge, or regular dwelling out of the Monasterie, by priuiledge of his order, shall bee exempt from beeing punished, if hee offend, or visited, or corrected by his Ordinary. 4. Likewise that Chapters of Cathedrall and other Collegiate Churches, shall not, by vertue of exemption, customes, oathes, and agreements, bee freed from the visitation of their Bishops, and greater Prelates, when there shall be neede. 5. In fine, it did ordaine that no Bishop might exercise Pontificall actes in the diocesse of another, by pretence of priuiledge, without his leaue, and The next Ses∣sion to bee held the third of March. onely ouer his subiects. And the day of the next Session was appointed the third of March. In Rome, the Decree of faith ministred no matter of discourse, in re∣gard it was not new, as well because it had beene seene, and examined pub∣likely (as hath beene sayd) as because all men knew that the Germane opi∣nions were to bee condemned. But the Court Bishops, who had beene a∣fraid a long time of the Article of residencie, which was handled, did rest content, assuring themselues that the Decree of the Councell, could worke no greater effect, then the Popes Decretals had done before. But the inferi∣our The inferiour Courtiers are discontented with the re∣formation. Courtiers were discontented, seeing the Bishop had power to compell them. They lamented their owne misery, who were to serue all their life to gaine their liuing, and after so much paines taken, for a reward, must be con∣fined in a village, or, by a base Canonry, subiected to a greater slauery, in obeying the Bishops, who will not onely keepe them, as it were, tied to a stake, but with visitations, and pretence of corrections, will bring them to a miserable subiection, or hold them in perpetuall vexations, and charge. But elsewhere, and especially in Germanie, when the Decrees were seene, The Decrees are censured in Germany. that of faith was more spoken of: which must bee read ouer and againe, with much attention and speculation, because it could not bee vnderstood without a perfect knowledge of the inward motion of the mind, and with∣out knowing in whom it is actiue, in whom passiue, things most subtile, and, for the diuers appearance they make, euer accounted disputable; all the do∣ctrine of the Councel turning vpon this hinge, whether the first obiect of the will worke vpon the will, or the will vpon the obiect, or whether they bee both actiue and passiue. Some pleasant wits said, that if the Astrologers, not knowing the true causes of the celestiall motions, to salue the appearances, haue inuented Eccentriques, and Epicicles, it was no wonder if the Councell, desiring to salue the appearances of the super-celestiall motions, did fall into excentricitie of opinions. The Grammarians did not cease to admire and scoffe the artifice of that proposition, which is in the fifth Chapter; Neque homo ipse nihil omnino agat; which they sayd was not intelligible; and without exam∣ple. For if the Synode would signifie: Etiam homo ipse aliquid agat; it might say so plainely, as is fit to doe in matter of faith, where the more simple ex∣pression is the better; and if they would vse an elegancie, they might say, Etiam homo ipse nihil agat. But the word (omnino) beeing interposed, that speech is incongruous and without sence, as all are which haue two nega∣tiues that cannot be resolued into an affirmatiue. For to resolue that, one must say, Etiam homo ipse aliquid omnino agat, which is incongruous, and not to bee vnderstood, what aliquid omnino may signifie heere. For it would say that a man hath an action in a certaine kinde, which in another kinde is no action. The Fathers were defended, by saying, that to examine the forme of Speech so seuerely, was nothing but to cauill. Whereunto they replyed, that a gentle interpretation was due vnto vsuall formes of speach, but that it is a publique vtility to discouer the artifice of him, that, leauing the cleere and vsuall phrases, inuenteth those that are incongruous, and containe in them contradiction, to cauill, and to play on both sides. Those that vnderstood Theologie said, that the doctrine, that a man may alwayes refuse diuine inspirations, was contrary to the publike, and ancient prayer of the Church. Et ad te nostras etiam rebelles compelle propitius Uolunta∣tes: Which is not fit wee should say is a vaine desire, but that it is made by faith, as S. Iames saith, and granted by God to his elected. They added that one could no more say with S. Paul, that it commeth not from man which doth separate the vessell of wrath from those of Gods mercie, that which separateth being that humane, Non nihil omnino. Many did consider that place of the seuenth Chapter, where it is sayd, Iustice is giuen by measure, ac∣cording to the good pleasure of God, and the disposition of the receiuer; both which things cannot bee true. For if it pleased God to giue more to him that were lesse disposed, it would not bee by measure of the dispositi∣on; and if it bee by the measure of that, there is alwayes the motiue by which God worketh, and doeth not vse his good pleasure. They maruei∣led that those were condemned, who sayd that the Precepts of God were impossible to bee kept; seeing that the same Councell, in the Decree of the second Session, exhorteth the faithfull assembled in Trent, that, repenting, confessing, and communicating, they should obserue the Commaunde∣ments of God, Quantum quisquis poterit. Which modification would bee im∣pious, if the iustified could keepe them absolutely; and they noted that the same word, Praecepta, was there, to take away all cauill. Those that were read in the Ecclesiasticall Story, sayd, that in all the Councels, held in the Church, from the Apostles time vntill now, there were neuer so many Articles decided, as in this Session onely; in which Aristo∣tle had a great part, by hauing exactly distinguished all the kindes of causes, which if hee had not done, wee had wanted many Articles of Faith. The Polititians also, though they ought not to examinematters of Reli∣gion, but simply follow them, yet found matter of discourse in this Decree. For seeing in the tenth Chapter, the Obligation of obeying the Commande∣ments of GOD and the Church, and the same replied in the twentieth Ca∣non, they were scandalized, because there was no mention of Obligation to the commandements of Princes and Magistrates. They said that obedience vnto these is more plainely set downe in the Scripture; that the old Law is full of it; that the doctrine is cleere in the new Testament, expressed, and handled at large by CHRIST himselfe, by Saint Peter, and Saint Paul. That there is found an expresse Obligation to heare the Church, but none expresse to obey it. Hee is obeyed who commandeth of his owne power, and hee is heard who doeth promulgate that which belongeth to another man. Nei∣ther were these men satisfied with the excuse, that the commandements of Princes are included in those of God, and that obedience is due vnto them, because God hath commanded they should bee obeyed. But they replyed that, by this reason, the Church rather ought to bee omitted; and said that the Church was expressed, and the Princes passed ouer in silence, to breede (according to the ancient scope of the Ecclesiastiques) that pernicious opi∣nion, that men are bound to obey them for conscience sake, and Princes and Magistrates onely for feare of temporall punishments, and that other∣wise their commandements may be transgressed without respect, and so to cause euery gouernment to be hated, accounted tyrannicall, and subuerted, and, by describing the subiection vnto Priests to be the only principall way to gaine heauen, to draw all iurisdiction to themselues, and by consequence, all authority. The Decree of reformation was said to bee a meere illusion. For to trust in God and the Pope that prouision should bee made of persons worthy to gouerne the Churches, belongeth rather to him that prayeth, then to him that reformeth. To renew the ancient Canons with one word onely, and one so generall, was more to confirme the disuse of them: but if they would restore them in earnest, they should remooue the causes which haue buried them in silence, giue them strength by penalties, and deputation of those that should put them in execution, and should vse other meanes which doe re∣uiue, and preserue Lawes. In fine it was said to haue done nothing but e∣stablish that one might bee absent all the yeere, by loosing halfe the reue∣newes, or rather one was taught how hee might not reside eleuen moneths and more, without any punishment, by interposing those thirty dayes or fewer, in the midst of the other time of the yeere; and that the Decree was wholly destroyed, with the exception of iust and reasonable causes, which no man is so simple as not to find, being to haue Iudges for whom it will be profitable not to haue residencie practised. This place requireth that mention should bee made of a particular acci∣dent, which, then begun, though it ended not vntill after foure moneths, belongeth wholly to the present Session, & maketh knowen what the Coun∣cell was, and in what estimation it was had, by those that assisted in it. For the vnderstanding whereof, I will repeat that Friar Dominicus Soto, who had (as hath been sayd) a great part in the Synod, in framing the Decrees of origi∣nall sinne, and iustification, hauing noted all the opinions and reasons vsed in Soto and Ca∣tarinus pub∣lish Bookes one again another, con∣cerning the meaning of the Councell, and the Fa∣thers are much diuided. those discussions, thought to communicate them vnto the world, and to draw the words of the Decree to his owne meaning, printed a booke con∣taining the whole together, and did intitle it; De natura & gratia: and did dedicate it, with an Epistle, to the Councell, to bee (as hee sayd in the dedi∣cation) a Commentary of the two foresaid Decrees. Comming to the Ar∣ticle of the certainety of grace, hee said in a long discourse; that the Synode had declared, that a man cannot know hee hath grace by so great certain e, as is that of faith, excluding all doubt. Catarinus, newly made Bishop of Mi∣nori, hauing defended the contrary, and still perseuering, did print a little booke, with an Epistle Dedicatory to the same Synode; the scope whereof was, to maintaine that the Councels meaning was not to condemne the opinion of him that saith a iust man may know hee hath grace, as certainly as hee knoweth the Articles of Faith to bee true: yea, that the Councell hath decided that hee is bound to beleeue it, because, in the sixe and twentieth Ca∣non, it hath condemned him that saith that the iust man ought not to hope for, and expect a reward, it being necessary, that hee that ought to hope as a iust man should know hee is so. In this contrariety of opinions, both wri∣ting affirmatiuely to the Councell, either of them did not onely say, that his opinion was the opinion of the Synode, but afterwards wrote also and prin∣ted Apologies, and Antipologies, making complaints to the Synode the one of the other, of attributing that to it, which it neuer said, bringing diuers testimonies of the Fathers to proue their owne opinion: who bare witnesse; some for one, some for another; so that the Fathers were all diuided into two parts, except some good Prelates, who as neutrals, said, that they vnder∣stood not the difference, but gaue consent to the Decree, in the forme as it was published, because both the parties were agreed. The Legate Santa Croce did testifie for Catarinus. Monte said, hee was of a third party. This seemed to put all men out of hope to vnderstand the meaning of the Councel, seeing the principall men that were present in it, did not agree. And it doth raise a difficulty, what that Synode was that determined the Article, vnto which, Soto and Catarinus did write and appeale, each thinking it was on his side; so that it was necessary, that either one of them, or both should bee deceiued And what shall one thinke of the others, when it so happened to these? It might bee sayd, it was the aggregate of all together, vnto which the holy Ghost giuing assistance, made it to determine the Trueth, though not vnderstood by him that did determine it, as Cataphas did prophesie, be∣cause hee was high Priest, not vnderstanding the prophesie, as the Bishop of Bitonco said in his Sermon. But this answere had two oppositions, the one, that God made the reprobate and infidels prophesie, without vnder∣standing, but the faithfull, by illuminating their minde; the other, that the Di∣uines doe vniformely say, that Councels doe not deliberate of faith by diuine inspiration, but by humane disquisition, which the Spirit doth assist, to keepe them from errors, so that they cannot determine, without vnderstanding the Councels doe deliberate of faith, not by diuine inspira∣tion, but by humane dis∣quisition. matter. Perhaps he should hit vpon the trueth, that should say, that, debating the contrary opinions in framing the Decree, euery party did refuse wordes contrary to his opinion and all rested in those which he thought might be fit∣ted to his owne meaning: so that the expression of the matter became capea∣ble of diuers interpretations. But this would not serue to resolue the doubt proposed, and to find what the Counsell was: because it is to giue it vnity of words, and contrariety of meanings. But that which hath been related in this All agreed in condemning the Lutheran opinions. particular, and perhaps did happen in many matters, occurred not in condem∣ning the Lutheran opinions, did agree, with an exquisite vnitie. One aduertisement of the sante Catarinus concerning his ma writ∣ten An aduertise∣ment giuen by Catarinus. to the Synode in the booke, is not to bee the Author uing not to be defrauded of his ) that it was pug∣nancie, to say that cer∣taine he hath it, because no man can receiue a thing , which hee knoweth not to be giuen him, and without being sure he hath receiued, it But to returne to the Councell, the day after the Session a generall Con∣gregation was assembled, to deliberate of, and put in order the matter to be digested in the next Session, and, for matter of faith, it being already deter∣mined to follow the confession of Ausburg, the first point was of Ecclesia∣sticall ministery, which the Lutherans say is authoritie to preach the Gos∣pel, and to administer the Sacraments; and some resting vpon the first part, did propose that the Ecclesiasticall authoritie should bee handled, decla∣ring all those functions, spirituall and temporall, which God hath giuen them ouer the faithfull, and are denied by the Lutherans. And this did generally please the Prelates, because it was a matter of an easie vnderstanding, with∣out any crabbednesse of the Schoole, and where themselues might haue a part. But it was not gratefull to the Diuines, because those things were not handled in the Schooles; so that they should haue nothing to dispute, and must referre themselues for the most part to the Canonists. They said that the Augustanes doe not handle all Ecclesiasticall authoritie, but that onely of preaching; whereof there was as much decreed in the last Session as was sufficient; but in the second part there was matter that did cohere with iu∣stification, The subiect of the next Session is the Sacraments. The Legates desire to pre∣uent y e hand∣ling of the au∣thoritie of the Councell and Pope. that is, the Sacraments, which are the meanes to be iustified, and said it was more fit to make these the subiect of the next Session. The Legats, and their dependants adhered hereunto, in shew for the same reasons, but indeede for another more potent, because, in the other consideration, they might haue handled the authoritie of Councels, and of the Pope, and propo∣sed many hard matters, not fit to bee mooued. Hauing resolued to handle the matter of the Sacraments, it was conside∣red that it was various and ample, not possible to bee comprehended in a Session, nor easie to bee determined into how many parts it ought to bee diuided. The Augustans made it short by taking away foure Sacraments, of which they ought to treate more exactly, to reestablish them: therefore that it was good to begin to discusse the Sacraments in generall, & charge was gi∣uen to put in order the Articles drawen out of the Lutheran doctrine, descen∣ding also to the Sacraments in particular, of as many as seemed easie to dis∣cusse: and that the reformation might follow the definition of faith and do∣ctrine, the abuses, occurring in the minister of the Sacraments, should be put together, ordaining a Congregation of Prelates and Canonists to discourse of the remedies, and to frame the Decrees, with order, that if they both hap∣ned on the same day, Santa Croce should bee President of the Theologues, and Monte of the Canonists, and both together in the generall Congregati∣on. But beside this, in regard of the promise to continue the matter of resi∣dencie, some of the most principall Articles thereof were to bee handled. In this it was not so easie to agree, because the Legates and their adherents had contrary ends to the other Bishops. These began to hope, and to ayme, almost all, but especially the Spaniards, The Spanish Prelates hope to regaine E∣piscopall au∣thoritie. to regaine the Episcopall authoritie, which anciently euery one did exercise in his owne Diocesse, when the reseruations of Benefices, of Cases, or of Ab∣solutions, Dispensations, and the like were vnknowen, which they were wont to say in priuate discourse, when few were present, that ambition and auarice had made proper to the Court of Rome, vnder a fained colour to mannage them better, and more to the publike seruice of God, and the Church, throughout all Christendome, then the Bishops could doe in their owne Cities, in regard of their imperfection and ignorance. But it was not so, because dissolution and ignorance did not enter into the Episcopal order, vntill they were compelled to goe as seruants to Rome. But if bad gouerne∣ment were then seene in the Bishops, which caused their authority to bee ta∣ken Card. Monte doth cūning∣ly diuert the decision of residence. away, now it may bee seene to bee worst of all in the Court of Rome; so that, by the same reason, that mannagement ought to bee taken away which is not proper to it, but much abused by it. The decree, that residencie was required by the Law of God, was esteemed by these Prelats the best remedie for the disease past, and preseruatiue against hereafter. For if God hath commanded Bishops to reside perpetually with the flocke, it followeth necessarily that hee hath also prescribed them the charge, and giuen them power to exercise it well. Therefore the Pope cannot call them, or busie them in ought else, nor dispence with them, nor restraine their authoritie, giuen them by God. Therefore they desired to proceede to the determination, saying, it was necessary to resolue the Article, because it was sufficiently discussed. The Cardinall of Monte hauing premeditated before, let them speake who were most earnest, that part of the heate might ex∣hale; then he opposed himselfe dexterously, and said, it was necessary to doe it, because the world did expect it, but that they ought to doe it in a fit time; that the difficultie was handled with too much heate, and that in some it had stirred more passion then reason; so that it was necessary to let the feruor bee cooled, and to interpose a little time, that, the contentions being forgotten, and charitie reuiued, place may bee giuen to the holy Ghost, without which the trueth cannot be decided. That the Popes Holinesse, who hath vnder∣stood, to his griefe, the former contentions, desireth the same, that himselfe also may discusse the matter in Rome, and assist the Synod with his counsell. He concluded, with more resolute termes, then so modest a beginning ought to inferre; that no more speach should bee had of it before the Session, be∣cause the Popes will was resolutely so, but that they should attend to re∣forme the inconueniences which haue caused the abuse of not residing. This mixture of remonstrances and power made some of the Fathers, who af∣terwards did print treaties concerning this matter, say, and put in print, that the Legates did forbid to speake of this question; and others denied it, with an inuectiue against the first, saying, they derogated from the libertie of the Councell. In the end of the Congregation it was resolued to resume the things that remained to bee discussed in the last Session, and to treate of remoouing the impediments, which are the causes of not residing. A∣mongst which the most principall beeing pluralitie of Benefices, in re∣gard it was impossible to reside in many places, it was resolued to treate of that. But to auoid confusion, I will relate withall that which belongeth to the Sacraments, where the consideration, for the most part, was speculatiue and doctrinall, not to interrupt the order of the matter of Benefices, wherein some things hapned which did open a way to important and dangerous actions. Articles were framed by the deputies in matter of the Sacraments, and the manner of speaking of them was prescribed to the Diuines, communicated to all in a sheete of paper, with order that they should say, whether they were all hereticall or erroneous, and ought to be condemned by the Synode; and if any deserued not that sentence, they should alleadge their reasons and au∣thority; and after should declare what was the opinion of Councels, and of the holy Fathers, in all those, and which of the Articles haue beene reproo∣dued already, and which remaine to bee condemned: and if in this matter any one should finde out some other Article worthy of censure, hee should giue notice thereof, and auoyde impertinent questions in all, wherein one might dispute on both sides, without preiudice of faith, and all other superfluity and tediousnesse of words. Of the Sacraments in generall there were foureteene Articles, 1. That Fourteene Articles of the Sacramēts in generall. the Sacraments of the Church are not seuen but fewer, which may bee cal∣led truely Sacraments. 2. That the Sacraments are not necessary, and that men may obtaine the grace of God without them, by faith onely. 3. No Sacrament is more worthy then another. 4. That the Sacraments of the new Law doe not giue grace vnto those, who doe not resist. 5. That the Sacraments haue neuer giuen grace or remission of sinnes, but onely the faith of the Sacrament. 6. That immediatly after the sinne of Adam, the Sacraments were instituted by God, by meanes whereof grace was giuen. 7. By the Sacraments, grace is giuen to him onely, who beleeueth that his sinnes are remitted. 8. That grace is not giuen alwayes in the Sacraments, nor vnto all, in respect of the Sacrament it selfe, but onely when and where it pleaseth God. 9. That in no Sacrament a Character is imprinted. 10. That a bad Minister doth not conferre the Sacrament. 11. That all Christians of what sexe soeuer, haue equall power in the ministery of the Word of God and Sacraments. 12. That euery Pastour hath power to make long, or short, or change at his pleasure, the formes of the Sacraments. 13. That the intention of the Ministers is not necessary, and worketh nothing in the Sacraments. 14. That the Sacraments haue beene instituted onely to che∣rish faith. Of Baptisme there were seuenteene Articles. 1. That in the Romane Seuenteene Articles of Baptisme. Catholique Church, there is no true Baptisme. 2. That Baptisme is free, and not necessary to saluation. 3. That it is not true Baptisme which is giuen by Heretiques. 4. That Baptisme is repentance. 5. That Baptisme is an externall signe, as the red marke in the Lambes, and hath no part in iu∣stification. 6. That Baptisme ought to be renued. 7. That true Baptisme is faith, which beleeueth that sinnes are remitted to the penitent. 8. That in Baptisme sinne is not rooted out, but onely not imputed. 9. That the Baptisme of CHRIST and Iohn, haue the same vertue. 10. That the Bap∣tisme of CHRIST hath not made voyd that of Iohn, but hath added the pro∣mise vnto it. 11. That in Baptisme the immersion onely is necessary, and all other things being free, may bee omitted without sinne. 12. That it is better to omit the baptisme of children, then baptize them while they doe not beleeue. 13. That children ought not to bee baptized, because, they haue not proper faith. 14. That those that are baptized in their childhood, comming to the age of discretion, ought to be rebaptized because they haue not beleeued. 15. That those that haue beene baptized in their infancie, when they come to age, ought to be interrogated, whether they will ratifie that Baptisme, and, if they deny, ought to be left in liberty. 16. That sinnes committed after Baptisme are remitted, onely by the memory and faith that one hath beene baptized. 17. That the vow of Baptisme hath no other condition but of faith, yea, nullifieth all other conditions. Of Confirmation there were foure Articles. 1. That Confirmation is not a Sacrament. 2. That it is instituted by the Fathers, and hath no pro∣mise Foure Arti∣cles of Con∣firmation. of the grace of God. 3. That now it is an idle ceremonie, and former∣ly was a Catechisme, when children, comming to age, gaue an account of their faith, before the Church. 4. That the Minister of Confirmation is not the Bishop onely, but any Priest whatsoeuer. In the Congregations, all the Diuines agreed, in affirming the number of seuen; and condemning the contrary opinion as hereticall, in regard of All agree that there are seuen Sacraments, but not that there are no more. Reasons to prooue the number of seuen. the generall consent of the Schooles, beginning from the Master of the Sen∣tences, (who spake definitiuely thereof) vntill this time. To this they ioy∣ned the Decree of the Florentine Councell for the Armenians, which deter∣mineth that number, and; for greater confirmation, the vse of the Romane Church was added; whence they concluded, that it ought to be held for an Apostolicall tradition, and article of Faith. But, for the second part of the Article, all did not agree, some saying it was enough to follow the Florentine Councel, which passed no further. For to decide that the proper Sacraments are neither more nor fewer, doeth presuppose a decision of the true and pro∣per essence, and a definition of the Sacrament; a thing difficult, in regard of the many definitions, brought not onely by the Schoole-men, but by the Fathers also, of which one will make that to bee a Sacrament, which another doth not. That it is a question also amongst the Schoole-men, whether the Sacrament can be defined, whether it haue vnitie, whether it bee reall, or in∣tentionall: and that it is not reasonable, in such ambiguity, to tie conclusi∣ons with so strong a bond. It was remembred, that Saint Bernard, and Saint Cyprian, accounted the washing of feete a Sacrament, and that Saint Austine made euery rite, by which GOD is honoured, to bee a Sacrament: and else-where vnderstanding the word more strictly then the propriety doth com∣port, maketh Sacraments onely those, which are expressely mentioned in the New Testament; which are Baptisme, and the Eucharist onely, though hee doubteth in one place, that there is another. For the other part it was said, that it was necessary to establish for an Ar∣ticle, that the proper Sacraments, are neither more nor lesse, to represse the boldnesse as well of the Lutheranes, who make them sometimes two, some∣times three, sometimes foure, as also of those who exceede seuen; and if some∣times a greater number, and sometimes a lesse, be found in the Fathers, it was because then, before the determination of the Church; it was lawfull to vse the word in a more large, or more strict signification. And here, to establish the sufficiencie of this number of seuen, as the Schoole-men speake, that is, that they are neither more nor lesse, they were tedious in recounting the reasons deduced from seuen naturall things, by which life is gained and pre∣serued; from the seuen vertues; from the seuen capitall vices; from the se∣uen defects, which came from originall sin; from the sixe dayes of the crea∣tion of the world, and seuenth of rest; from the seuen regions of Egypt; from the seuen Planets; from the famousnesse of the number of seuen, and other congruities, vsed by the principall Schoole-men, for proofe of the con∣clusion; and many reasons why the consecration of Churches, of the vessels of Bishops, Abbats, Abbesses, and Monkes, are not Sacraments, nor holy water, nor the washing of feet, as Saint Bernard sayd, nor Martyrdome, nor the creation of Cardinals, nor the Coronation of the Pope. Some sayde, that, to bridle the Heretiques, it was not sufficient to con∣demne the Article, if euery one of the Sacraments were not particularly na∣med, for feare some bad spirit might exclude some of the true, and substi∣tute some false. Afterwards, another essentiall point, for the Article, was called to minde, that is, to determine the Institutor of all the Sacraments; which is CHRIST; to condemne the heresie of the Lutherans, who ascribe to CHRIST, the ordination of Baptisme, and the Eucharist only. And that CHRIST ought to be held, by faith, for the Institutor, Saint Ambrose Saint Austine, and aboue all, the Apostolicall Tradition was alleadged: from which no man dissented. But some sayd, they ought not goe on so farre, and that it was enough, to keepe within the bounds of the Florentine Councell; and the rather, in regard that the Master of the Sentences held, that Extreame Vnction was instituted by Saint Iames, and Saint Bonauenture, with Alexan∣der, that Confirmation beganne after the Apostles. And the same Bonauen∣ture, with other Diuines, maketh the Apostles authors of the Sacrament of Penance. And many haue sayd of Matrimony, that it was instituted by God in Paradise. And CHRIST himselfe, when hee spake of it, in a place fit to name the authour, doth attribute the institution thereof, not to himselfe, but to the FATHER in the beginning. For these respects, they aduised not to adde that point, for feare of condemning the opininion of the Catho∣liques. The Dominicanes on the contrary, did affirme, with some bitternesse of words, that those Doctors might bee expounded and salued, with diuers distinctions, and that they would euer haue referred themselues to the Church; but the Lutherane boldnesse ought not to passe without condem∣nation, who haue brought in those falsities, with contempt of the Church; and that was not to be tolerated in the rash Lutherans, which might bee in∣dured in the holy Fathers. In the second Article, of the necessitie of the Sacraments, some would The necessi of the Sacra¦ments. not haue the condemnation to be absolute, but a distinction made, in regard it is certaine, that all are not absolutely necessarie. There was another opini∣on also to be condemned, which said, That the Sacraments were not neces∣sarie in the Church, because it is certaine, they are not necessary to euery one, yea, that some are incompatible, as Order, and Matrimonie. Yet the more common opinion was, that the Article should bee condemned absolutely, for two reasons: one, because the necessitie of one is sufficient to make the Article false, as it lieth; the other, because they are all necessary in some sort some absolutely, some by supposition, some by conueniencie, and some for greater vtilitie. But many maruailed, that Articles of Faith should bee esta∣blished, in such multiplicity of equiuocation. For whose satisfaction, when the Canons, were composed, there was added, condemning him that held the Sacraments not to be necessarie, but superfluous; inlarging by this last terme the signification of the first. Many were of opinion that the other part of the Article ought to bee omitted, because it was defined in the last Session, that faith onely was not sufficient: and Marinarus sayd that the distinction of the Sacrament in vow, was vsed by the Schoolemen, but was vnknowen to antiquitie, and full of difficulties. For in the Acts of the Apostles, when Cornelius the Centurion was instructed, the Angel sayd, his prayers were acceptable to God before hee knew the Sacrament of Baptisme, and other particulars of Faith; and all his familie, hearing the Sermon of Saint Peter, receiued the holy Ghost before they had been instructed in the Doctrine of the Sacraments: and after the holy Ghost receiued, they were instructed concerning Baptisme, by Saint Peter; so that hauing no knowledge of it, they could not receiue it in vow; and the Thiefe vpon the Crosse, then onely illuminated by the vertue of CHRIST, knew not the Sacraments, nor could make any vow of them. And many holy Martyrs, conuerted in the heate of persecution, by seeing the con∣stancie of others, and presently taken and put to death, one cannot say, but by diuination, that they knew the Sacraments and could make a vow. There∣fore it was better to leaue that distinction to the Schooles, and to put it in the Articles of faith. The common opinion was to the contrarie, saying, that although the words of the distinction were new and scholasticall, yet one must beleeue that the thing signified was taught by CHRIST, and is an Apostolicall tradition: and for the examples of Cornelius, the Thiefe, and Martyrs, it is to bee vnderstood, that there are two sorts of vowes of the Sacrament; the one explicite, the other implicite; and, at the least, this se∣cond is necessarie: that is, that they had not the vow actually, but would haue had it, if they had been informed. These things the others granted to be true, but not obligatorie, as Articles of faith. The difficulties, in which they could not agree, where referred to the Synod, that is to the generall Congregation. As it hapned also in the third Article; which, though euery one thought to be false, yet all did agree, that, in regard of the necessitie and vtilitie, Bap∣tisme Concerning the dignity of the Sacra∣ments. doth proceede; in regard of the signification, Matrimony; in regard of the dignitie of the Minister, Confirmation; in regrad of diuine worship, the Eucharist: but because one cannot say, without a distinction, which is more worthy, it is better to omit the Article, which cannot bee vnderstood with∣out subtiltie. Another opinion was, that all the respects of dignitie ought to bee expressed. And another, that the clause should bee added to the Article; that is, according to the diuers respects. This opinion was most followed, but did much displease those, who could not endure that the Synode should abase it selfe to these scholasticall fooleries, (for so they called them) and beleeue that CHRIST would haue these weake opinions brought into his faith. Although that the fourth Article ought to bee condemned; yea, that it was necessary to amplifie it, condemning the doctrine of Zuinglius in par∣ticular; The fourth Article is ge∣nerally con∣demned. who will haue the Sacraments to bee but signes, by which the faith∣full are discerned from infidels; or Actes, and exercises of the profession of Christian faith, hauing no other relation to grace, but as signes that one hath receiued it. After they treated of condemning those who denye that Sa∣craments doe conferre grace, to him that putteth not a barre, or doe not con∣fesse, that grace is contained in the Sacraments and conferred, not by vertue of faith, but Ex opere operato. But comming to expound how they are con∣tained, and their causalitie, euery one did agree, that grace is gained by all Whether the Sacramēts do confer grace Ex opere ope∣rato. those actions that excite deuotion, which proceedeth not from the force of the worke it selfe, but from the vertue of deuotion, which is in the worker; and these are said in the Schooles, to cause grace, Ex opere operantis. There are other actions which cause grace, not by the deuotion of him that wor∣keth, or of him that receiueth the worke, but by vertue of the worke it selfe. Such are the Christian Sacraments, by which, grace is receiued, so that there be no barre of mortall sinne, to exclude it, though there bee not any deuotion. So by the worke of Baptisme, grace is giuen to the infant, whose minde is not mooued toward it, and to one borne a foole, because there is no impediment of sinne. The Sacrament of Chrisme doeth the like, and that of extreame vnction, though the sicke man hath lost his me∣morie. But hee that hath mortall sinne, and doth perseuere actually, or ha∣bitually, cannot receiue grace, by reason of the contrarietie, not because the Sacrament hath not vertue to produce it Ex opere operato, but because the receiuer is not capeable, being possessed with a contrarie qualitie. Though they all agreed in this, yet they differed, because the Dominicans did affirme, that how be it grace is a spirituall qualitie, created immediately by GOD, yet it is an instrumentall and effectiue vertue in the Sacraments, which causeth a disposition in the soule to receiue it. And therefore it is said that they containe grace; not that it is in them as in a vessell, but as the ef∣fect in the cause, alleadging a subtill example, as the chezill is actiue, not onely in scabling the stone, but in giuing forme to the Statue. The Fran∣ciscans The Francis∣cans and Do∣minicans can∣not agree a∣bout the manner ho the Sacra∣ments doe containe grace. said that it could not be conceiued, how God, being a spirituall cause, can vse a corporall instrument, for a spirituall effect, as is grace; they did ab∣solutely deny all effectiue or dispositiue vertue in the Sacraments; saying they haue no vertue, but by the promise of God, that so often as they shal be ad∣ministred, he will giue his grace to them. Therefore it is sayd they doe con∣taine it, as in an effectuall signe, not by any vertue of their owne, but by a Di∣uine promise, of infallible assistance to the ministerie. Therefore it is a cause, for that the effect doeth follow, not by any vertue of its owne, but by the promise of God, to giue grace at that time; as the merite is cause of the reward without any actiuitie. This they prooued not onely by the autho∣ritie of Scotus, and Saint Bonauenture, their Diuines, but by Saint Bernard also who saith that grace is receiued by the Sacraments, as a Canon is inuest∣ed by the booke, and a bishop by the ring. The reasons were expounded on both sides, with great prolixitie and sharpenesse. And they censured one an∣other. The Dominicans said, that the other opinion was neere to Luthe∣ranisme, and the others, that theirs, being impossible, gaue occasion to the heretikes to calumniate the Church. Some good Prelates desired though without effect) to make peace, saying, that in regard they agreed in the con∣clusion, that the Sacraments conteine and are cause of grace, it did little im∣port in what manner, and that it was better, not descending to particulars, to stand in the generall. But the Fryars replied that they spake not of words, but of establishing, or annihilating the Sacraments. There would neuer haue been an end, if the Legate Sancta Croce had not giuen order that they should passe to that which remained, and that afterwards they should returne to examine whether it were necessary to decide the point, or to leaue it. The Legates called vnto them the generals of the orders, and prayed The Legates vse meanes to represse the dangerous libertie of the Fryars. them to cause the Fryars to treat with modestie and charitie, without par∣tialitie to their owne sect, shewing they were called to speake against here∣sies, and not to make new arise by disputes. And they wrote thereof to Rome, shewing how dangerous the libertie was which the Friars did assume, and to what it might come. And they told the Pope that a moderation was necessary. For there being a fame spred of those dissensions, and censures which one partie pronounced against the other, it must needs raise scandall, and small reputation of the Councell. It was thought fit to omit the fifth Article, as decided in the former Ses∣sion. But Friar Bartholmew Miranda called to minde that Luther, by that pa∣radox of his, that the Sacraments doe not conferre grace, but by exciting faith, drew also a conclusion, that those of the old, and of the Euangelicall law, are of equall vertue; which opinion was to bee condemned, as con∣trary to the doctrine of the Fathers, and the Church; all hauing said, that the olde Sacraments were onely signes of grace, but the new conteine it and cause it. No man did contradict the conclusion, but the Franciscans pro∣posed: that it should not bee sayd of the old Law, but of Moses Law, in re∣gard that Circumcision it selfe did cause grace: but it was not a Mosaicall Sacrament; for CHRIST also said, it was not of Moses, but of the Fathers; and also because other sacrifices, before Abraham, did conferre, and cause grace. The Dominicans replyed that Saint Paul sayd plainely, that Abra∣ham had receiued the Circumcision onely for a signe; that hee being the first vnto whom it was giuen, it is as much as to say it was instituted onely for a signe. And the questions of the manner of conteining, and causing grace, re∣turned into the field. Friar Gregorie, of Padua, said hereupon, that it was a cleere case in Logique, that things in the same kinde haue identitie and diffe∣rence among themselues. If the old Sacraments and ours had onely dif∣ference, they would not all bee Sacraments, but equiuocally; if onely iden∣titie, they would bee absolutely the same thing. Therefore they must be∣ware to put difficultie in plaine matters for some diuersitie of wordes; and that Saint Augustine had sayd, that these and those, are diuers in the signe, but equall in the thing signified. And in another place, that they were diuers in the visible species, but the same in the intelligible signification; and that else where he puts a difference, that those were promissiue, and these demon∣stratiue: which another doth expresse in another terme, that those were pre∣nunciatiue, and these contestatiue. Whence it plainely appeareth, that they agree and differ in many things; which no sensible man can deny: and therefore it was wisedome, not to put that Article in the beginning, neither was it to any purpose to touch it in the present Decree. Another opinion came forth, that the opinion of the Lutherans, and Zuinglians, was to bee condemned, without descending to the particulars. For they say, there is no diffe∣rence, betweene the old and new Sacraments, but in the Rites. But it hath beene shewed, that there are other differences; and therefore, they are to be condemned for this onely, without descending to shew what those differen∣ces are. But the sixt was censured by the Dominicans, who said it was proper to the Euangelicall Sacraments to giue grace, and that the old did not giue it, but onely by the vertue of deuotion: and that this was the opinion of Saint Thomas. They alleadged, for a principall ground, the determination of the Florentine Councell, that the Sacraments of the old Law did not cause grace, but did figure, that it must bee giuen by the passion of CHRIST. But Because S. Bondaenture, and Sootus did maintaine, that the Circumcision did conferre grace Ex opere operato, Scotus adding, that, immediatly after the sinne of Adam, a Sacrament was instituted, in which a grace was giuen to babes by vertue of it, that is, Ex opere operato, the Franciscans said the Article was true, and could not be censured, and that if, as Saint Thomas said, children, before CHRIST, were saued by the fathers faith, the state of Christians was worse. For now the fathers faith doth not helpe the children, without Baptisme; and Saint Austine saith, that the childe that is caried by the father to be bap∣tized, if hee die in the way, is damned. So that if faith onely did then suf∣fice, the condition of the sonnes of Christians is now worse. In these diffi∣culties, many did propose, that the Article, as probable, should bee o∣mitted. To leaue out the seuenth and eighth, there was a great agreement. But in Concerning the Character imprinted by the Sacra∣ment. the ninth of the Chalacter, Friar Dominicus Soto, endeauoured to declare, that it hath foundation in the holy Scripture, and hath euer bin held in the Church for an Apostolicull Tradition: and though the name hath not been vsed by the Fathers, yet the thing signified is most ancient. Others did not grant him so great a scope, because it did not appeare, that Gratian, or the Master of the Sentences, had made any mention thereof. Yea, Iohn Scotius said, that it was not necessary, by the words of the Scripture, or of the Fathers, to af∣firme it, but onely by the authority of the Church; a thing vsuall with that Doctor, to denie things with a kinde of courtesie. It was worth the know¦ing what thing they meant it should be, and where situated, in such multi∣plicity of Schoole-opinions: some making it a quality; and amongst those were foure opinions, according to the foure kindes of the qualities; some a spirituall power; some an habite or disposition; others a spirituall figure; and the opinion that it was a sensible metaphoricall quality, did not want abettors. Some would haue it a call relation, some, a fabrique of the minde; who were to declare how farre it differed from nothing. The same variety, of opinions concerning the subiect, was trouble some; some placed it in the effende of the soule; some in the vnderstanding; some in the will, and there wanted not, who gaue it place in the hands and tongue. Ierome of Portu∣gall, a Dominican Friar, thought that the Sacraments did imprint a spirituall quality, before the comming of grace; and that it was of two sports: one bib which can neuer bee abolished, the other which may bee lost, and regained; the former whereof is called a Character, and the later a certaine ornament. The Sacraments which giue the first, cannot bee reiterated, because their ef∣fect euer remaineth; the others may, when their effect is lost. This caried a faire shew, but was not approoued by many, because there was no other author to be found of that ornament, but Saint Thomas; who also, though he begat it, yet did not thinke it worthy of education. But howsoeuer, all agreed in this generall, that three Sacraments haue the Character; yet some did say modestly, that it was to bee approoued as more probable, not as ne∣cessary: Three Sacra∣ments haue a Character. others on the contrary, that it was an Article of Faith, because In∣nocentius the third, made mention of it, and was so defined by the Councell of Florence. The Article, that the honesty of the Minister was not necessary, was so discussed by Saint Austine, in so many bookes, against the Donatists, that the Diuines did all agree: and besides it was alleadged, for a principall ground, that the Article was condemned, by the Councell of Constance, amongst the errors of Iohn Wickliefe. They all condemned the eleuenth Article, as contrary to the Scripture, Tradition, and vse of the vniuersall Church. The twelfth, of the formes of the Sacraments, was distinguished, as re∣ceiuing two sences: vnderstanding by forme, either the essentiall words, as it is sayd, that euery Sacrament hath, for matter, the sensible element, and, for forme, the word; or vnderstanding, by forme, all the forme and rite of the Ministery, which includeth many things not necessary, but decent. And they thought fit to make two Canons thereof; by the first, condemning him of heresie, that sayth, that the forme may be changed, being instituted by CHRIST. But, for the second sense, though accidentall things may receiue mutation, yet when any rite is brought in by publike authority, or recei∣ued and confirmed by common vse, it should not be in euery mans power to change it, but onely in the Popes, as Head of the Church vniuersall, when it is conuenient for some new respect. In the thirteenth, of the intention of the Minister, they could not dissent from the Councell of Florence, which holds it necessary: but what intention Concerning the intention of the Mini∣ster in the ad∣ministration of the Sacra∣ment. was required, was hard to expresse, in regard of the variety of opinions a∣bout the efficacie and vertue of the Sacraments: because there cannot bee the same intention of two, who haue diuers opinions. The common an∣swere was, that the intention to doe as the Church did, was sufficient. Not∣withstanding this exposition, the difficulties remained, for that mens opi∣nions what the Church is, beeing diuers, their intention in administring the Sacrament, would prooue various also. It seemed they might say, it was not different, when all had the same aime, to doe that which hath been in∣stituted by CHRIST, and obserued by the Church, though a false Church be taken for a true so that the rite of the one and the other be the same. In this particular, the Bishop of Minori proposed a thing worthy to be re∣peated A discourse of the Bishop of Minori about the intention of the Mini∣ster. heere, and esteemed by all to deserue great consideration. Hee sayd, that to the Lutherans, who giue no other vertue to the Sacraments, then to excite faith, which notwithstanding may bee stirred vp some other way, it did little import to receiue the true Sacrament. Whereupon they say it is not necessary, and thinke it not conuenient, that the malice of a wicked Mi∣nister, who hath no intention to conferre the true Sacrament, should bee able to hurt, because wee are to regard what the faithfull receiueth, and not what is giuen. But amongst the Catholikes, who doe truely attribute to the Sacrament power to giue grace to him that doeth not resist it, seeing it happeneth very seldome, that grace is obtained by any other meanes, sure∣ly little children, and many who haue but small vnderstanding, are saued no other way. And ordinary men haue so weake a disposition, that it would not suffice without the Sacrament. And those few, who, as Phonixes, haue a perfect disposition, yet doe receiue greater grace by the Sacrament. Therefore it much concerneth a Christian to bee assured, that hee recei∣ueth that which is true and effectuall. If a Priest, hauing charge of foure or fiue thousand soules, were an infidell, but a formall hypocrite, and in ab∣soluing the penitent, baptizing of children, and consecrating the Eucharist, had an intention not to doe what the Church doeth, it must bee sayd that the children are damned, the penitent not absolued, and that all remaine without the fruit of the Communion. Neither is it enough to say, that faith supply∣eth; because it doth not helpe children at all, according to the Catholike do∣ctrine, nor others, so much as the Sacrament: and to attribute so great ver∣tue to faith, were to take all vertue from the Sacraments, and to fall into the Lutheran opinion. Hee considered how a tender Father would be afflicted when his sonne was about to die, if hee doubted of the intension of the baptizing Priest. So hee that feeleth himselfe of a weake disposition, and is to bee baptized, what anxietie will he haue, that perhaps the Priest is a counterfeit Christian, and mocketh him, not meaning to baptize him, but onely to wash him in iest. And the same may bee feared in confession, and receiuing the Eucharist. He added, if any sayd these cases were rare, would to God it were so, and that, in this corrupt age, wee had not cause to doubt they were many. But suppose they are very few, or but one onely. Let there bee a knaue Priest, who fay∣neth, and hath not an intention to administer the true Baptisme to a childe, who after, being a man growen, is created Bishop of a great Citie, and liueth many yeeres in that charge, so that hee hath ordained a great part of the Priests; it must bee said, that hee, being not baptized, is not ordained, nor they ordained, who are promoted by him. So, in that great Citie, there will bee neither Eucharist, nor Confession, because they cannot bee without the Sacrament of order, nor order without a true Bishop, neither can hee receiue order who is not baptized. Behold millions of nullities of Sacraments, by the malice of one Minister, in one Acte onely. And hee that thinketh that God supplyeth by his omnipotency, and prouideth against these dayly occur∣rences by extraordinary remedies, will sooner make one beleeue that God, by his prouidence, hath prouided that such accidents should not happen. Therefore the Bishop said to euery inconuenience; God hath made proui∣sion heerein, by ordaining that to bee a Sacrament which is administred, ac∣cording to the rite instituted by himselfe, though the Minister haue another inward intention. And hee added that this doeth not crosse the common doctrine of the Diuines, or the determination of the Florentine Councell, which requireth intention, because the inward intention is not to bee vnder∣stood, but that which is manifested by the externall worke, though inwardly it bee contrary. And so all inconueniences are remooued, which otherwise are innumerable. Hee brought many reasons for proofe, and at last the example written by Sozomene; That the children of Alexandria, being at play by the Sea side, did imitate, in iest, the actions vsed in the Church, and Athanasius, created Bishop of the play, did baptize other children not baptized before; whereof Alexander, of famous memorie; Bishop of Alexandria, being Athanasius being a child did baptize other chil∣dren. aduertized, he was troubled at it, and called the children, and asked what their Bishop had done, and said vnto them: and vnderstanding that all the Ecclesi∣asticall rite was obserued, by the Counsell of other Priests, did approoue the baptisme; which could not bee maintained, if such an intention, as others spake of, were required, but might well bee in that manner that himselfe did expresse it. The Diuines did not approoue this doctrine, yet were troubled, and The opinion of the Bishop of M was not receiued. But a yeere af∣ter he publi∣shed a little Booke to shew that the Synod was of his minde. knew not how to resolue the reason: But they still defended that the true intention of the Minister was necessary, either actuall, or virtuall, and that without it the Sacrament was not of force, notwithstanding any externall demonstration. I must not refraine to shew also (though it bee an antici∣pation of the fit time) that howsoeuer the Synode did after determine ab∣solutely that the intention of the Minister is necessary, yet this Prelate re∣mained firme, and, in a little Booke that hee wrote of this Subiect a yeere af∣ter, did say that the Synode of Trent was of his opinion, and that the deter∣mination ought to bee vnderstood in his sence. There was no difficultie in condemning the last Article, by reason of that which hath beene said by others. The matter of Baptisme, in the third Article, gaue them greater trouble, what that Baptisme is, which is giuen by the heretikes. All grounded them∣selues vpon the Schoole-doctrine, receiued by the Florentine Councel, that a Sacrament requireth matter, forme, and intention, and that water is the mat∣ter, the expression of the Act in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, the forme; and to doe what the Church doeth, the intention. Whereupon they established an vndoubted conclusion, that those heretikes haue true baptisme, and agree with vs in these three things; which they sayd was receiued by an Apostolicall tradition, established long before by Pope Stephanus the first, in the beginning of the third age, and approoued by all the Church following. But those that vnderstand antiquitie doe know, that this was not the opinion of Stephanus, in whose time, matter, forme, and in∣tention were not heard of. For that Pope did thinke absolutely that those who were conuerted from any heresie whatsoeuer, ought not to bee rebap∣tized; though, in those times, the heretikes, except some few Montanists, were Gnostiques, who vsed extrauagant baptismes, by reason of the exorbitant opi∣nions which they held, of the diuinitie, and person of CHRIST. And it is certaine that those Baptismes had not the forme which is vsed now, and yet the Church of Rome did the receiue to repentance, euery sort of here∣tikes indifferently, without rebaptizing them. The Bishops of Africa and Cappadocia were directly opposite, saying, that all were to be rebapti∣zed. In the Councel of Nice a middle course was is, that the Cathari should not bee rebaptized, but the Paulianists and ists should: The Councell of Constantinople did name many heretikes which were to bee re∣baptized; and others to bee receiued to baptisme with them, in whom it would bee hard to shew that the same forme was vsed. But (which is of more importance) Saint Bernard doeth witnesse, that the Nouations, Eucra∣tiques, Saccofors were not rebaptized in Rome, whom notwithstanding hee did rebaptize; neither did that Saint thinke this diuersitie to bee absurd: onely hee said, it would bee good to assemble many Bishops to resloue vp∣on an vniforme proceeding. But giuing no more heede to these things then to fables, they held the current doctrine, that an heretike doth truely bap∣tize, if he vseth the words, and hath the intention of the Church. The fourth Article; that Baptisme was Repentance, in regard of the force of the speech, was held by many not to bee false, alleadging the E∣uangelist, who saith, that Iohn preached the Baptisme of Repentance; and that Paul, in the sixt to the Hebrewes, calleth Baptisme by the name of Repentance. And so many Fathers haue sayd the same, that the Article could not bee condemned, except it did say: that Baptisme was the Sacrament of Penance. But because it seemed in this sence to bee the same with the sixteenth Arti∣cle, many thought fit to leaue it. The 9. and 10. belonging to the Baptisme of Iohn, many were of opi∣nion that they ought to bee omitted. For not speaking of those of the old law, it was lesse fit to speake of that which was in the middle, in regard their scope was to handle the Sacraments of the new law. But others said, that the heretikes minde was, not to exalt the Baptisme of Iohn, and to make it equall Whether the Baptisme of Iohn & Christ be equall. with that of CHRIST, but to abase that of CHRIST, and to make it equall with Iohns baptisme; inferring, that, as this did not giue grace, but was a pure signification, so was ours also, which is a most formall heresie. In the eleuenth of the Rites, some would haue the substantials distin∣guished from others, and said, that those onely cannot be omitted without sinne. Others would exclude the case of necessitie onely, and that other∣wise it was not lawfull to omit any whatsoeuer; for in regard the Church, gouerned by the holy Ghost, hath ordained them, they are necessary by the precept, though not by the substance of the Sacrament. They alleadged many Chapters of the Popes, and Councels, all which would prooue vaine, if euery one might change as he listeth. That part which speaketh of immer∣sion, though it bee a more expresse figure of the death, buriall, and resurre∣ction of CHRIST, yet it was condemned by all, and many places of the Pro∣phets were alledged, where aspersion, or effusion of water is spoken of, all which, they sayd, ought literally to be vnderstood of baptisme. All set themselues against those three which speake of the baptisme of children, alleadging the doctrine of the ancient Fathers and Schoolemen; and many inuectiues were made against Erasmus, attributing vnto him the Erasmus is taxed. inuention of the fifteenth, saying, it was impious and pernicious, and would open a way to abolish all Christian Religion: adding, that if the children of the vncircumcised Iewes, comming to age, were bound to keepe all the law, and were punished for transgressing it, it was compell the sonnes of the faithfull to obserue the Christian law; that th had deseruedly condemned the Article, and so ought the Synod to ded. They concluded, that the sixteenth was conteined in the former Articles, because it did take away Penance, one of the seuen sacrament. But all said, that the last was contrary to the proper ministry of baptisme, in the very be∣ginning whereof the catechized is admonished; that if hee will haue eternall life, it is necessary to obserue all the commandements. In the Articles about confirmation, there was no difference; and all, Of Confirma∣tion, Chrisme, and Vnction. for their ground, did alleadge the Councel of Florence. And that which is said in the third Article, that yong men did formerly giue an account of their faith in the presence of the Church, was generally decided, that, not beeing vsed in these times, one ought to beleeue it was neuer vsed before; for the Church would neuer haue intermitted that ceremonie. Many places of Councels and ancient writers were alleadged, making mention of Chrisme, and Vnction, which cannot agree to instruction or examination. There∣fore they concluded, that it was a most vaine ignorance, to change so princi∣pall a Sacrament, against the common meaning of all the Church, into a rite perhaps vsed in some particular place, but neuer vniuersally, as the Vnction of the Chris Vpon the last article there was much difficultie, in regard Saint Grego∣rie, Whether one∣ly the Bishop be minister of Confirmation. the Pope, did graunt the ministery to simple Priests. The Franciscans, according to the doctrine of Saint Bonauenture, followed by Iohn Scotus, and their order, which doeth attribute the ministery to the Bishop onely, as Pope Adrian the sixt did also maintaine, answered, that it was a permission onely for that time, and against the Popes will, to auoide the scandall of those people: or else that the Vnction, permitted by Gregorie, was not the Sacra∣ment of confirmation. Which answere not pleasing Saint Thomas; because it did not wholly free the Pope from hauing erred, hee found a temper, and said, that though the Bishop bee the minister of Confirmation, yet, with the Popes permission, it may bee administred by the Priest. Others opposed, and said that the doctrine of the Romane Church was absolute, that the ministers of Sacraments are instituted by CHRIST, whom though the Pope can command to the exercise of the ministerie, yet hee cannot make the Sacrament to be of force that is administred by others, nor nullifie that which is conferred by the minister, instituted by CHRIST, though against his commandement. And therefore if CHRIST hath instituted the Bishop for minister, the Pope cannot make that grant to the Priest; if CHRIST hath granted that the Priest may doe it, the Pope cannot hinder him. For it would seeme a strange thing, that in the other Sacraments, being all of grea∣ter necessitie, CHRIST should prescribe the minister, without leauing any libertie vnto men, and in this, which may at any time bee deferred, vse a singularitie, whereof, for sixe hundred yeeres, vntill the time of Gregorie, no man had made any mention, building an Article of faith vpon foure words, spoken by occasion: and if the epistle had been lost, no man would euer haue inuented that distinction, vnusuall in such a matter, nor to bee applied to any thing but to this place of Gregorie. Others, being not satisfied with the resolution of either party, did pro∣pose, that the words of the Florentine Councell should bee taken. Some thought fit, onely to condemne him that would say, that the Priest, and not the Bishop onely, is the ordinary Minister; giuing by the word (ordinary) power to inferre, therefore there is another extraordinary, or to say, that there can bee no other, because the Sacraments haue no Minister, but Or∣dinarie. While the forenamed Articles, were discussed by the Diuines, in the Con∣gregation A Decree of Reformation conteyning sixe heads. of the Canonists, assembled to collect, and remedie the abuses, concerning the Sacraments in generall, and, in particular, of Baptisme, and Confirmation, a Decree was made conteyning sixe heads: which said thus in substance. That the Synode, desiring to remooue the abuses, brought in by men or time, and to teach the Ministers of Churches, and all the faith∣full, how to gouerne themselues in obseruing, ministring, and receiuing the Sacraments, doeth ordaine. 1. That the Ecclesiasticall Sacraments, shall bee freely conferred, without taking or demanding any thing for them, vnder any pretence whatsoeuer, and no chest, vessell, cloath, or any such thing shall bee shewed, by which a demand may bee intimated; nor the Sa∣crament shall bee denied, or deferred, vpon pretence of any long and ancient custome, not to conferre them before some certaine stipend bee paid, or sa∣tisfaction of some debt, considering that neither custome, or length of time, doeth diminish the sinne, but rather increaseth it: and the offenders shall bee punished according to the lawes, made against symoniacall persons. 2. The Sacrament of Baptisme, shall not bee conferred in prophane places, but in Churches onely, except in case of necessitie, and when the children of Kings, and Princes are to be baptized, according to the constitution of Clement the fifth; which shall not take place in all that haue dominion, but onely in great Princes. Neither shall the Bishop giue the Chrisme, but in seemely ornaments, and in the Churches, sacred places, or Episcopall houses. 3. The Sacrament of Baptisme shall bee administred by able Priests, in the mother Churches onely, except, by reason of great difficulty to goe to them, the Bishop thinke fit to grant it to other Churches, or that it hath been gran∣ted time out of minde: in which Churches, holy water, taken from the mo∣ther Church, shall bee kept in a cleane and decent vessell. 4. In Baptisme and Chrisme, there shall bee allowed but one God-father, who shall neither bee infamous, nor excommunicated, nor interdicted, nor vnder age, nor a Monke, nor any that cannot performe what he promiseth. And in Chrisme, hee shall not bee receiued for a god-father, who hath not receiued Chrisme himselfe. 5. To take away the abuse, practised in many places, to carry about the water of Baptisme, or christened children, with their forehead bound, to make many god-fathers, by washing of the hands, or loosing the forehead, the Priests, in regard no compaternity is contracted by these meanes, shall not permit the water of Baptisme to bee carried out of the Church, but shall cause it to bee cast into the Sacrary, and the Font to bee shut vp. And the Bishops, when they giue the Chrisme, shall make two clerkes stand at the Church doore, to vntie and wash the foreheads, of those that haue receiued the Chrisme, not suffering any that is tied to goe out of the Church. 6. The Bishops shall bee diligently carefull, not to confirme any who is excommunicated, interdicted, or in mortall sinne. And though the Canonists did more easily agree in these Decrees, then the Theologues in their discussions, yet some differences were amongst them; for resolution whereof, because after long disputation, they could not agree, they put them informe, and referred the decision to the generall Congregation. The first doubt was, whether vnto these wordes, that Difficulties referred to the generall Con∣gregation. is, that nothing shall be required or demanded, it should bee added, or recei∣ued. The second, whether they should adde these words; vnder pretence of any custome whatsoeuer. The third, whether they should vse some words, to signifie, that the Synode doeth not prohibite valuntary oblations, or doth prohibite them onely, when they are giuen in regard of the Sacra∣ment, and not for other respects of pietie, or whether the Decree should bee left in its vniuersality. But there was the same difficulty, in the generall Congregation, impossi∣ble In which they could not be decided. to bee reconciled. Those that required the additions, not to receiue, or pretend custome, alleadged the Gospel; Freely you haue receiued, freely giue; and many Canons, anathematizing him that giueth or receiueth a temporall thing, for a spirituall. That custome, against the law of God and nature, is corruption, and cannot take place. That in the title of simonie, the custome of giuing, or receiuing, for possession of benefices, benedictions of marri∣ages, for burials, benediction of the Chrisme, for oyle, or for the ground of the buriall, is reprehended and condemned. Which the rather ought to be applyed to the Sacraments, in regard, if that bee not prohibited, nothing is done, because the corruption is vsed in all places, and euery one will ex∣cuse himselfe with it. That as the custome of receiuing any thing before, is condemned in the Decree, so the custome to receiue after, ought to bee con∣demned, by the same reason; or else, by condemning that, this is approoued. And for voluntary oblations, they would haue it generally forbid, to giue or receiue any thing a little before, or a little after, for any respect whatsoe∣uer; because, in respect of the time, one may presume that it is giuen for the Sacrament. And heere the glosse was alledged, which saith, that howsoeuer it is a worke of pietie, to put money into the boxe, yet to doe it in time of receiuing the Sacrament, breedeth suspition of simonie: and therefore that the time is to bee respected, which may make a thing seeme euill, which o∣therwise may bee accounted good. That God doeth command, to take away all occasion of scandall, and to absteine from all appearance of euill. And therefore that the Sacraments may bee purely administred, they would haue voluntary oblations absolutely forbid, in time of administring the Sacraments, exhor∣ting the faithfull, to vse them, in other times and occasions. On the other side was alleadged, that the fourth Councell of Carthage granteth the receiuing of what is offered for baptizing of Children; and that the Diuines, hauing determined that no temporall thing shall be receiued for the Sacrament, doe consent withall, that one may receiue for the paines in administring them, and much rather when it is giuen or receiued, not in re∣spect of the Sacrament, but by way of almes, or else the Laity would haue no occasions to exercise workes of charity, and the poore Curates would not be able to liue. They alleadged the authoritie of Saint Paul, That it is not lawfull to muzzel the Oxe that treadeth the corne, and that he that serueth at the altar should liue by it. That it should neuer be confessed that any custome is introduced to giue or receiue any thing, for the ministring of the Sacra∣ments; because it being generally vsed, it would bee as much as to say, that a pernicious abuse hath beene tolerated, yea approued in the Church vniuer∣sall. Therefore that they ought not to speake of breaking a custome that was neuer in vse; least thinking to remedy that which is not euill, but so e∣steemed by the tendernesse of some mens consciences, the Church should receiue a mortall wound. Their principall reason was that Innocentius the third, in the generall Councell, in the Chapter, Ad Apostolicam, doeth not onely declare the custome of making oblations, in the administration of Sa∣craments, to be lawfull, and ordaine it should bee obserued, but that the Bi∣shop should be punished, in case he should go about to change it. Therefore to determine the contrary now, would be to condemne, very scandalously, a Pope & a general Councel, as approuers and defenders of a pernicious error. It was replyed by the other side, that the Statute of the Councell of Car∣thage doth condemne, seuerely, the exaction, and doth tolerate the voluntary oblation: but that it was amended by the Councell of Heliberum, which for∣biddeth the vse, obserued in those times, that the baptized should put some money into the font. That the inuentiō of the Diuines, distinguished the mi∣nistery of the Sacrament from the paines in administring it, and the distin∣ction to receiue in respect of the Sacrament, or of some thing else, and that of the first and second intention, are metaphysicall, and chimericall, consi∣dering the words of the Gospell, are deliuered in absolute termes, not sub∣iect to cauill, or glosses, which doe marre the Text: That God by Moyses and Saint Paul, prohibiting the muzzell, doth meane that food should not bee denyed to the hungry beast, yet that he should not be filled with superfluity. That the pouertie of the Cleargie could not be pretended, hauing not onely competent, but abundant reuenues. That the abuse is that the gouernors of Churches reside not in their benefices, and yet will receiue all the fruites, hiring the incertaintie to poore seely Priests, who are forced to sell all to keepe themselues aliue. That they should rather make prouision that all should reside, by which meanes they would haue more then enough for their maintenance, and should not need to sell the Sacraments. And by this occasion they began againe to dilate of residencie, and of the good that would follow declaring it to bee, De iure diuino. That if any benefice with cure of soules bee small, prouision should bee made, by vniting other simple benefices, and in case there were no other way, by causing the people to con∣tribute for their maintenance. That it is better, and pleaseth God more to confesse the error past, and to redresse it, then to defend it, and perseuere. And the Cardinall of Monte, who otherwise did not seeme inclined to refor∣mation, was peremptory in this, answering those that alleadged the au∣thoritie of Innocentius the third, and the generall Councel, that they did great wrong to that Pope and those Fathers, to say they defended so great an a∣buse, and that they shewed their ignorance. For if they reade the 3 chapter of the same Councell, which is the third before that which they haue alledged, they might haue seene the meaning very plainely, and how those Fathers did forbid all exactions, condemning also the custome to the contrary. And, in that Chapter, the customes to giue any thing for administring the Sacra∣ments are not allowed, but others, being lawfull, honest, and in fauour of the Church, are permitted, as tenthes, first fruites, oblations vsually made to the altars, canonicall portions and such other laudable vsances; alleadging that the Chapter was so vnderstood by Bartolus and Romanus. The Fathers deputed to make the decrees in matter of faith considering Anathema∣tismes framed. the opinions of the Diuines, and the conclusions in which they agreed, lea∣uing and distinguishing the Articles according to their direction, and ran∣ging them in a better order, framed 24. Anathematismes, concerning the Sacraments in generall, ten of Baptisme, and three of Chrisme: which were expressed in such a forme, as that no Catholique opinion was condemned, and all parties satisfied. But in composing the Heads to expresse the doctrine, It was hard to expresse the doctrine, and to displease no persons, as was done in iustification, it was not possible to vse the tearmes of one opi∣nion, but that another seemed to be disallowed; which neither pleased the Doctors for the affection they bare to their owne sect, nor the Legates and Neutrals, for feare of sowing new diuisions: But not beeing able to expresse the doctrine so nicely, but that more then one of the parties would bee lost, they referred it to the generall congregation, to define how the Sacraments doe containe and cause grace. The Congregation was no lesse perplexed then the Deputies. One part inclined to omit wholy the matter of doctrine, and to passe with the Ana∣thematismes onely, as they did in originall sinne. Another part would haue the doctrine by all meanes, alleadging the reasons vsed, when they treated of iustification; that it was necessary to follow the example then begun: and that all diligence should be vsed to satisfie all parties. But at the last they sayd it must be done, and that there was no danger of diuision. For the Di∣uines, present in Councel, though they sharply defend their owne opinions, yet they doe referre themselues to the Synode, which the absent will assured∣ly doe also. Therefore they should not refraine to doe the businesse exactly, that the heretiques may be conuinced. This opinion had preuailed, but that Iohn Baptista Cigala, bishop of Albenga, and Auditor of the Chamber, did strongly oppose: who said, it was neuer found in any Story, that euer any man was willing to haue his opinion condemned, and though all the Ca∣tholiques referre themselues to the iudgement of the Church of Rome, yet, if their opinion were reiected, they would not referre it, but defend it more obstinately, fortifying thēselues the more by reason of opposition; by which meanes, of sectes, heresies doe spring. Therefore that the best way was to tolerate all the opinions, and to take care that none condemne another, but that all may liue in peace. Neither is there such contrarietie betweene them, that vsing this moderation, any inconuenience can arise; whereas, without it, euery verball difference or little trifle is able to deuide the whole world. That many opinions of the moderne innouators might haue been tollerated, if they had beene modestly maintained, without condemning the Church of Rome, and the doctrine of the Schooles. This constrained Leo to retor against Luther those arrowes, which he had first shot against the Apostolike Sea. In sum, the wife Prelate said, that the vsuall protestations of the Doctors to referre themselues to the Church, were termes of good maners and reue∣rence, which should be answered with as much respect, by keeping theselues neutrall between the contrarieties. That it is fit, that he that would bee re∣spected should giue respect againe: and one ought neuer to beleeue that hee that saith hee doth referre himselfe and submit, hath a purpose to doe it, if The protesta∣tions of Do∣ctors, that they referre them∣selues to the Church are but termes of good maners. occasion were offered. Of this Luther is a manifest example, who, while he had to doe onely with the Fryers, who were Pardon mongers in Germany, in matter of Indulgences, as also with the doctors of Rome, did alwayes say he referred himselfe to the Pope. And when Leo tooke the promise for reall, which was made onely in shew, Martin did not onely keep it, but inueighed more against his Holinesse, then hee had done against the Pardoners in Germanie. The Legates sent a copie to Rome of all things that were deliberated, and The Legates send to Rome. of the difficulties remaining, as well in matter of Faith, as in reformation of the abuses, desiring to haue order what they should resolue, reexamining in the meane space the same maters; but most seriously the matter of the plu∣ralitie of Beneficies, proposed long before, as hath beene sayde, and handled in part at the same time, all the substance whereof I will continuately relate in this place. In the Congregation of the fifteenth of Ianuarie, when the Articles of the Sacraments were giuen out, the matter, begun the day before, continu∣ing still, in regard many doe not reside because they are not fit to exercise the charge, with the pluralitie of Benefices they handled the qualities and condi∣tions required in Bishops. They began with that which Saint Paul requi∣reth in bishops and Deacons, insisting much vpon the words, irreprehensible, The qualities and conditi∣ons required in Bishops. giuen to hospitalitie, not couetous, not new in Religion, and esteemed by strangers. Afterwards other conditions, required by many Canons, were alleadged, wherein there was no difficultie, all vniformely declaiming against the vices and defects of the Prelates and Clergie. This displeased not the Legates, being content to see the Prelates entertaine themselues with this shadow of libertie. But in the heate of speaking, Iohn Salazar bishop of Lanciano, attributed the beginning of all to the Court of Rome, which, in di∣stributing bishoprickes, regarded not the sufficiencie of the persons, but ser∣uices performed. Whereunto the bishop o Bitonto, who spake a little after, replyed with much feeling, and sayd, that the fault of others was vniustly at∣tributed to the Court. For in Germanie bishoprickes are giuen by election, in France, Spaine, and Hungarie, by the Kings nomination; and in Italie many doe belong to particular Patrons; and to those that are free, the princes doe recommend, and will not be denyed, taking all libertie from the Pope. But he that will not bee transported by opinion, but iudge sincerely, will see that those who are made freely at Rome are the best of all Europe. Pluralitie of benefices, vnknowen to the first ages, hath not beene brought in by the Court of Rome, but by bishops and Princes, before the Popes tooke vpon them to regulate the matter of benefices throughout all Christendome: and, but for the prouisions which are to bee found in the bodie of the Canon Law, the disorder would haue beene alreadie mounted to the height. Some were pleased, and some displeased at is ontention▪ according▪ to their affections. But euery one discouered that the matter could not bee handled without danger, as the treaties of the next Congregations did shew. But because this particular deserueth to bee well vnderstood, it v ill bee fit to shew how the abuse began, & came to this growth▪ Yet I will not speak A discourse of the Author concerning pluralitie of Benefices. of those happie times when the name of the Church was common to all the congregation of the faithfull, vnto which did belong the vse & propriety of the goods which are called Ecclesiasticall, when the poore, & their ministers had their foode and apparel from one common Masse, and those were more principally prouided for then these. Neither will I mention the time when they did fall one degree, and of one Masse made 4 parts, putting that of the poore in the lowest place, which, according to the former vse, ought to bee in the first. But I will begin from the time when the Name of the Church was appropriated to the Clergie onely, all other Christians beeing excluded; when that was applyed to few, which belonged to all, and to the rich, that which first serued for the poore. I say in the beginning of those times, the Clergie hauing diuided amongst themselues all the reuenewes of the Church, the charges, which before were called ministeries and offices of spirituall care, the temporalitie beeing now most esteemed, were named benefices. And yet so long as the old Canons remained, that one man should not bee ordained vnto two titles, none could haue more then one Benefice. But the reuenues being by warres or inundations diminished, and become not sufficient for their maintenance, one man might hold two, yet so as that hee should attend them both. This was begun in fauour not of the man beneficed, but of the Church, which, because it could not haue a proper minister, might haue at the least some other seruice. Vpon pre∣tence of the insufficiencie of the Benefices, and that none could be found to serue in them, they began to grant more of them vnto one, though no ne∣cessitie appeared, for the seruice of the Churches, and the maske being taken away by little and little, they were not ashamed to doe it in fauour of the man beneficed. But the world beeing scandalized hereat, there was a mo∣deration vsed; wherevpon the distinction began of men tyed to residencie, and not tied, and of benefices compatible and not compatible calling those of residencie incompatible one with another, and the other compatible with these and with themselues. Yet the glosse of the Canonists alwayes decla∣red How the di∣stinction of Benefices compatible & incompa∣tible began. (to make a shew of honestie) that many benefices should not bee giuen to one, but when one is not sufficient for maintenance. But they cut this sufficiencie very large, proportioning it not to the person but to the qualitie, not esteeming it sufficient for an ordinary Priest, if it were not enough for himselfe, the family of his parents, three seruants, and an horse: and more, if hee were noble or learned. And it is strange how much they allowed for a Bishop, in regard of the Decorum hee is to keepe. For Cardinals, it is suffici∣ent to note the common saying of the Court, that they are equall vnto Kings; by which they conclude, that no reuenew is too much for them, except it be more then enough for a King. The custome being begun, and neither the world, nor equitie being able to resist it, the Popes reserued to themselues power to dispense with the incompatible▪ and to haue more then two of the others. But to finde a colourble way to put this in practise, they layd hold on Commendaes, a thing instituted at the first to good purpose, but after vsed to this end onely. For when, by reason of warres, pestilence, and other such causes, the election or prouision could not be made so soone, the superiour did recommend the vacant Church, to some honest and worthy man, to go∣uerne How Com∣mendaes be∣gan▪ it, besides the care of his owne, vntill a Rector were prouided; who then had nothing to doe with the reuenues, but to gouerne them, and con∣signe them to another. In progresse of time the Commendataries, by diuers pretences of honesty and necessitie, made vse of the fruits, and, to enioy them the longer, sought meanes to hinder the prouision. For remedy whereof, order was taken, that the Commenda should not last longer then six months▪ But the Popes, by the plenitude of their power, did passe these limits, and commended for a longer time, and at the last, for the life of the Commenda∣tarie, giuing him power to vse the fruits, besides the necessary charges. This good inuention; so degenerated, was vsed in the corrupted times, for a cloake of pluralitie: obseruing the words of the law, to giue but one bene∣fice to one man, contrary to the sence; in regard that a Commendatarie for life, is the same in reality with the titular? Great exorbitances were com∣mitted, in the number of the benefices commended; so that, after the Lu∣therane stirs began, and all men demanded reformation, Clement the seuenth in the yeere 1534. was not ashamed to commend vnto his Nephew Hippoli∣tus, Cardinall de' Medicis, all the benefices of the world, secular, and regular, dignities, and parsonages, simple, and with cure, being vacant, for sixe mo∣neths, A large Com∣menda gauen to Hippolitus, Cardinal de Medicis Cle∣ment the 7. to beginne from the first day of his possession, with power to dis∣pose of, and conuert to his vse all the fruits. This exorbitancie was the height of all, which in former times the Court durst not vse, though it gaue in Com∣menda a very great number vnto one. Therefore the Vnion, formerly vsed for a good end, was inuented to pal∣liate Of Vnion Benefices Pluralitie. This was practized when a Church was destroyed, or the reuenues vsurped, that little which remained together with the Charge, bee∣ing transferred to the next, and all made one benefice. The industry of the Courtier found out, that besides these respects, benefices might bee vnited, so that by collation thereof, Pluralitie was wholly couered, though in fauour of some Cardinall or great personage, thirty, or fortie in diuers places of Christendome were vnited. But an inconuenience did arise, because the number of benefices did decrease, and the fauour done to one, was done af∣terwards to many, without merit or demand, to the great dammage of the Court and Chancery. And this was remedied, with a subtile and wittie inuen∣tion, to vnite as many benefices as pleased the Pope, onely during the life of him vpon whom they were conferred, by whose death the vnion was vn∣derstood to bee dissolued, ipso facto, and the benefices returned to their first state. So they shewed the world their excellent inuentions, conferring a benefice, which was but one in shew, but many in deed; as one confessed hee had stollen a bridle, concealing it was vpon a horse head, which hee stole with it. To remedy pluralitie, it was necessary to remooue the abuse of these three pretences. This the wiser sort of Prelates vnderstanding, agreed vniformely at the first propose, to inhibite all, of what condition soeuer, to haue more then three benefices. And some added, when two amount not to the val∣lew of foure hundred ducats of gold: and that if one were worth so much, no man whatsoeuer should haue any more, nor more then three, though they were not worth so much. Of this there was much disputation; and A dispute a∣bout the re∣medy of Plu∣valitie. much more when Aluise Lipomano, Bishop of Verona, proposed that this decree might touch them also, who were now possessors of more; who, without exception of any, should bee constrained to renounce those that were supernumerary, within sixe moneths if they were in Italy, and within nine if in other places: which if they did not they should bee depri∣ued, without any further declaration, notwithstanding the benefices were Ʋnited, or commended, or possessed by any othertitle. To this opinion the Bishop of Feltre did adhere, but did moderate it, by distinguishing Dispensa∣tions, Commendaes, and Vnions: saying, that some were made for the good of the Churches, and some in fauour of the possessor: desiring that the former should remaine in force, and the other should be regulated. The Bishop of Lanciano did not admit this distinction: saying, that hee that would make a lasting law, must not put exceptions into the body of it, in regard the ma∣lice of man is apt to inuent them, and to free themselues from the rule. The Byshop of Albenga made a long oration to shew, that good lawes doe regu∣late Lawes ought to looke for∣ward onely, and not back∣ward. the future onely, and that hee, who, not containing himselfe within the bounds of reason, will amend that which is past, doth euer raise tumults, and in stead of reforming, make a greater deformation: that it were strange to depriue men of their possessions, and perswade them to be content. Hee added, that he foresaw, that if such a Decree were made, either it would not be receiued, or if it were, would cause colourable and simoniacall resigna∣tions, and greater mischiefes then plurality could. For hereafter, the pro∣uision seemed vnto him superfluous: for no man beeing to haue more bene∣fices but by the Popes dispensation, it sufficed that he was resolued not to dispence. In that Congregation, amongst many tragicall exclamations, made by diuers men, Bernardus Dias, Byshop of Calabora, said that the Church of Ʋi∣cenza was so disordered, as all men knew, that it required rather an Apostle then a Bishop; taxing the Cardinall Ridolfi, who possessed that Bishopricke, besides many other benefices, not gouerning it, nor hauing the Episcopall order, neuer seeing it, nor knowing any thing but the rents. And euery one spake against the inconuenience, that famous Churches should neuer see their Bishops, because they were imployed in other Bishoprickes, or more benefi∣ciall dignities. Some said, that the Pope onely might prouide against this, and were of the opinion of Albenga, that he alone might make the reforma∣tion. This pleased the Legates, as well for the Popes dignity, as to free them∣selues from taking paines in this matter, which, in regard of the varietie of o∣pinions and interests, they thought would bee of an hard digestion: hoping that when they had gone so farre as to leaue this reformation to the Pope, they should easily leaue also vnto him the point of residencie, which was as hard to be concocted, for that it was popular, and drew with it the regaining of the Episcopall authoritie and iurisdiction. Therefore the Legates, being in hope that it might bee obtained, especially if it were proposed as a thing done, not to bee done, they presently sent the Pope word of it, who was glad of the newes, because both the Court and himselfe were doubtfull where the attempts and designes of the Prelates might end. And thinking fit to strike the yron while it was hote, hee made a greater stride then the Legates would haue had him, and dispatched a Bull, by which hee recalled vnto him∣selfe the whole businesse of the Reformation. But in Trent whilst an answere was expected from Rome, they proceeded in the treatie begun, and made a draught of the Decree, that no man should haue more then one Bishoprike, and hee that had more should quit the rest; that heereafter whosoeuer shall obtaine many inferiour incompatible Benefices, shall bee depriued without further declaration; and hee that formerly hath possessed more then one, shall shew his dispensations to the Ordinarie, who shall proceede according to the Decretall of Innocentius 4. Ordinarij. In giuing their voyces vpon these points, many desired to haue dispensations forbid. The shewing of the dis∣pensations, Of dispensati∣ons for Plu∣ralitie. and the proceeding according to the Decree of Innocentius, plea∣sed but few; because it was a kinde of approbation of them all, and an in∣creasing of the mischiefe. For Innocentius saith, that if the dispensations bee found good, they shall bee admitted, if there bee any doubt, recourse shall bee had to Rome, in which case no man doubted, but that any of them might bee doubted of, and receiue a declaration at Rome, conformable to the grant. Many feared that when they were examined and approued, there remayning no doubt, the abuse would bee confirmed; and therefore would haue had them prohibited absolutely. Others sayd they haue al∣wayes beene in the Church, and were necessary, and that all was in vsing them well. Marcus Ʋigerius, Bishop of Sinigaglia, was of an opinion, which, if it had beene receiued and beleeued, would easily haue reformed the whole Cler∣gie. Hee sayd the Synode might remooue all inconueniences, by decla∣ring, that a lawfull cause was necessary for a dispensation, and that whoso∣euer doeth otherwise grant it, doeth sinne, and cannot bee absolued, but by reuoking it; and that hee who obtaineth it, is not secure in his conscience, notwithstanding the dispensation, and continueth in sinne vntill hee quit∣teth the Benefices so gotten. This opinion wanted not contradictors. For some stood vp and said, that hee who granteth licence of Pluralitie, with∣out a lawfull cause, doth sinne, yet the dispensation is good, and the dispen∣sed is secure in his conscience, though hee knew the vnlawfulnesse of the cause. And the difference continued many dayes; these saying, that it was to take all authoritie from the Pope, and those, that the Popes authoritie stretched not so farre, as to make that euill should not bee euill. From this they went to another doubt, whether Pluralitie was forbid by the Law of A doubt mo∣ued by what law Plurality is forbid. God, or of man. Those who maintained residencie to be by the Law of God, sayd that Pluralitie was forbid by the same Law, and therefore that the Pope could not dispen e: others said it was forbid by the Canons onely. The Le∣gates did hardly appease the contradiction, and held it dangerous, as well for setting on foote the point of residencie, as because it touched the Popes au∣thoritie, though hee was not named: and the rather, because that subtill discussion of the force of them did put them all in hazard. There being much confusion, Diego di Alano, Bishop of Astorga, said that in regard they could not agree about Dispensations, they should prohibite Commendaes, and Ʋnions, which are pretences to palliate the abuse; and hee spake much a∣gainst the one and the other. Hee sayde that Ʋnions and Commendaes for terme of life were full of absurdities, because by them it was confessed, that regard was not had of the good of the Church, but of the person, that they were most scandalous to the world, inuented a little before, to satiate auarice and ambition, and that it was a great indignitie to maintaine an abuse so pernicious, and notorious. But the Italian Bishops, who were for the most part interested in one of these, did not willingly heare such absolute proposi∣tions, thinking fit some prouision should be made against them, but not such as should take them quite away. In the beginning of February, the Topes answere and Bull came from The Pope sendeth a Ball to the Legats which displea∣seth them. Rome; which the Legates thought was too ample. But yet to make vse of it, they proposed the matter againe, causing the same determination to bee re∣peated by their adherents, that, in regard of the difficulties and varietie of opinions, it were good to free themselues, and referre all to the Pope. The Imperialists, euen those who formerly seemed not auerse, did now strongly reply, and said it was not honourable for the Councell. To which opinion the maior part inclined, returning to that which was said before, and ray∣sing a greater confusion: in so much that the Legates saw that they could not make vse of the Bull, and wrote backe, that they were out of hope to re∣mit the whole reformation to his Holinesse, nor more then that which is pro∣per vnto him, that is, the moderation of the Dispensations and Priuiledges, and Reformation of the Cardinals: which if hee were resolued to make, it were good to vse preuention, and to publish a Bull in Rome, vnder the name of the Reformation of the Court. For no man could say that the Pope was not to reforme his owne Court, and that which belongeth to himselfe. Neither was it necessary to publish this Bull in the Councell, which, if it did handle all other matters, would bee fully satisfied. And they aduertized his Ho∣linesse, that the Synode would neuer bee quiet, vntill prouision were made, not onely against the future, but also against the present grants which are scandalous. When the Congregation was ended, the Spanish Prelates, with their fol∣lowers, to the number of twentie, the Cardinall Pacceco beeing the chiefe, The Spaniards doe desire that the maner of proceeding in Councell should bee changed. did vniformely conclude, that, as the Congregations were caried, no firme resolution could bee made. For all the good that was spoken, was either dis∣sembled by him, who gouerned the actions, or obscured by contentions. Therefore that it was necessary to change the manner, and to giue their de∣mands in writing, that so they may come to a conclusion. And they made a Censure vpon the points proposed, and put it in writing, presenting it to the Legates in the Congregation held the third of February. The Censure conteined eleuen Articles. 1. That betweene the quality of Bishops and Parish-Priests, all those conditions should bee put, which are The Spanish Censure. set downe in the last Lateran Councell, it seeming that too large a gate is o∣pened to Dispensations, which are necessarily to bee now quite remooued, by making a more strict Reformation, in regard of the heresies which they cause, and the scandals which they giue to the world. 2. That it bee plainely specified, that Cardinals are bound to reside in their Bishoprikes sixe moneths in the yeere at the least, as formerly hath been commanded to other Bishops. 3. That the residencie of Prelates bee first declared to bee iure diuino. 4. That the Pluralitie of Cathedrall Churches bee declared to bee a great abuse, and euery one admonished (specifying the Cardinals also) to bee content with one onely, and to quit the rest within some short time, and before the Councel ende. 5. That the Pluralitie of the lesser Churches bee taken away, prohibiting it not onely for the future, but for the time past also, reuoking all Dispensations granted, not excepting Cardinals or others, but for iust and reasonable causes to be produced and proued before the Or∣dinarie. 6. That Vnions for life, euen those that haue been made long since, bee all reuoked, because they induce Pluralitie. 7. That euery one who hath a Benefice with cure, or other Benefices which require Refidencie, bee depriued if hee reside not, without any Dispensation to bee granted, but in ca∣ses permitted by the Law. 8. That whosoeuer hath a Benefice with Cure, may bee examined by the Bishop, and being found to bee illiterate, vicious, or otherwise vnfit, may bee depriued, and the Benefice giuen to one that is worthy, by a rigorous examination, not at the will of the Ordinaries. 9. That hereafter Benefices with Cure bee not giuen before examination and inquisition. 10. That none bee promoted to a Cathedrall Church with∣out processe, to be made in Partibus, at the least concerning his birth, life, and manners. 11. That no Bishop may ordaine in the Diocesse of ano∣ther, without leaue of the Ordinarie, and, in that case, may ordaine persons of that Diocesse onely. The Legates were troubled, not onely for that many Articles were set The Legates are troubled with the ∣ter of the the manner. on foote, all ayming to restraine the authoritie of the Pope, and make that of the Bishops greater, but for the importance of the beginning, to giue their petitions in writing; and because many were ioyned in the same de∣mand, not shewing what their meaning was, but onely alleadging the weight of the things proposed. They tooke time to thinke of it, saying, they would not bee idle in the meane while, but establish other points of Reformation. And giue the Pope a ct account of all They gaue the Pope a strict account of all things past, adding, that the Pre∣lates did euery day take more libertie, not refraining to speake of the Cardi∣nals without respect, and to say openly, that it was necessary to moderate them, and with small reuerence of his Holinesse, that hee gaue nothing but words, and vsed the Councell to keepe the world in hope, and not to make a true Reformation; that hereafter it would bee hard to keepe them in or∣der, because they had many priuate assemblies amongst themselues. They proposed to his consideration, that it would bee good to make some effectu∣all Reformation in Rome, and publish it before the Session. They sent also the Censure of the Spaniards, desiring him to consider the importance of their attempt, and whither it might arriue, in regard it was not likely they would bee so bold, without they were vpheld, and perhaps incited by some great Prince. And they desired to receiue commandement what they should doe▪ saying, their opinion was to persist, and not to yeeld one lote, aswell for the importance of the matter, as not to open this passage, that the Prelates may obtaine, by sed on and force, that which is not willingly granted them. For that would bee to depend on their fauour, and incurre the dan∣ger of some sinistrous accident. That, for matter of dispensation, they would not suffer themselues to bee ouer come: but in the end, if the oppo∣sites will not yeelde, all must come to voyces, which are not weighed, but numbred. Therefore, not to hazard themselues, but to bee sure to ouer∣come in the Session, it would bee necessary to command straightly, those that are gone to Ʋenice, vpon pretence to spend the beginning of Lent in their owne Churches, but with intention to come no more, that they suddenly And desire him to send vnto them more of his dependants, that they may oue come by number. returne, without replie. For the whole importance of the Reformation will consist in the next Session, and as the Mutiners shall then succeede, they will resolue either to oppose in other occasions, or to remayne quiet and obe∣dient. This aduise beeing sent to Rome, the Legates, in the next Congregations, proposed the Reformation of diuers abuses. The first was of those who take a Benefice and title without orders, or consecration answerable to them. All detested the abuse, and desired a remedie. But the Cardinall Pacceco said, that all remedie would bee in vaine, if Commendaes and Ʋnions were not re∣mooued, it beeing manifest, that a Cathedrall Church might bee commen∣ded to a Deacon, and hee that would haue a Parish Church without orders, may cause it to bee vnited to a simple benefice, which requireth them not, and so wil hold the one in consequence of the other, without being consecra∣ted. The other Reformations were concerning diuers Exemptions from the Visitations of Bishops, from their examinations, from the hearing of ciuill cau∣ses, and from the reuision of the gouernement of Hospitals. Herein the Le∣gats thought to gaine the fauour of the Bishops, by enlarging their authority. But hee that pretendeth right to all, is commonly offended by the restituti∣on of halfe. So the Bishops, (especially the Spaniards) thought they were wronged, because the Reformation was not compleate. Yet they spake more reseruedly, in regard the number of the Italians, who adhered to the Legates, did increase, and because they expected an answere concerning their propo∣sitions from Rome, hauing discouered that they were sent thither. The Pope hauing receiued the aduise, wrote most effectuall, but, with∣all, most louing letters to his Nuncio at Venice, to make the Prelates returne, who were almost all in that Citie. Who performed the businesse in such sort, that all tooke the iourney for a fauour, in regard they were to doe his Holinesse so great seruice. The Pope commanded the Deputies to consult of the Spanish Censure; and the residue, which was of greater importance, together with other things, whereof he was aduertized before, he reserued to his owne determination. The Deputies, weig ing the businesse, did consider that the proposition The determi∣nation made in Rome con∣cerning the Spanish cen∣sure. made by the Legates, was more honourable, and more profitable, if it did succeede, but if not, more per cious: that it was not wisedome to ruune so great hazards, in matters of so great moment: and that to denie all, or to grant all, was equally dangerous. Their conclusion was, that if the Le∣gates were not more then certaine to ouercome, they might grant part of, or all the vnderwritten modifications, as occasion was offered in handling of the businesse: which were digested by way of answere to euery article of the Spanish Censure. To the first, to renue the Laterane Councel, in the two points, it seemeth that the Prelates may be satisfied, so that in the residue, the Canons that shall bee made be reasonable. To the second, to binde the Car∣dinals to residencie, for those who remaine in Rome, and actually serue the vniuersall Church, it is not conuenient, and for the others, his Holinesse will make prouision, as is said in the letters. To the third, to constitute that re∣sidencie is required by the word of God, first the Decree beeing applied to particular Churches, would perhaps not be true: then for the effect, it can∣not choose but make greater confusion, there beeing a contradiction, that the Decree should be made, and the contrary permitted, at the least tacitely, for halfe of the yeere. To the fourth, to declare the plurality of the Cathe∣drall Churches to bee an abuse, the same answere may bee made as vnto the third, and for the Cardinals, his Holinesse will prouide, as hath beene sayd before. To the fifth, of the plurality of the lesser Churches, the prouision proposed by the Legates, seemeth to bee sufficient, and yet, if for the time past it bee thought fit, to make it more seuere, his Holinesse is contented: who doeth aduertize them, that too much seueritie in this part, may worke a contrary effect, by the resistance which is like to bee made, by those who are in possession: and doth consider withall, that simply to leaue the iudica∣ture of the dispensations to the Ordinaries, may cause abuse, and bring forth no other effect, then the increase of their authority. To the sixth, to reuoke the Vnions for life, howsoeuer his Holinesse thought to make a fit prouision therein, yet if it be desired to take them all away, it may bee granted, so that a conuenient time bee giuen to the possessors, to dispose of the Benefices. To the seuenth, that non-residencie in Benefices with Cure, should precisely ca∣rie with it Depriuation, without any Dispensation to bee granted, but in cases permitted by the law, is too rigorous, and would bee obserued very hardly, in case it should be determined. To the eight, that hee that hath a Benefice with Cure, if it bee found hee is vnlearned, or vicious, may bee depriued by the Ordinary, it being vnderstood of such inhability, as by the law doeth de∣serue it, it may be granted; otherwise the demand is not honest, because all would be left to the conscience of the Ordinaries. To the ninth, that Benefices with Cure, be not giuen before diligent examination, in regard it is necessary to leaue the maner and quality thereof, to the conscience of him who is to conferre the Benefices, it seemeth that to make any other Decree herein, is superfluous or vnprofitable. To the tenth, to make the Processe in partibus, concerning those who are promoted to Cathedrall Churches, there appea∣reth no fruit of this diligence, it beeing as easie to finde a false witnesse in par∣tibus, as at Rome: where, because euery thing may be sufficiently examined, it is superfluous to seeke further. To the eleuenth, that none bee ordayned but by his owne Bishop, it seemeth that the Bull may suffice, because it doeth prouide many wayes, against the inconueniences, pretended in this point. The Pope, did presently dispatch the answere to Trent, leauing it to the dis∣cretion Is dispatch d to Trent▪ of the Legates to resolue, by the counsell of their friends, what they thought fit tog ant according to occasions, either, part, or all, so that they conteined themselues within the limits set downe by the Deputies in Rome: or to denie all, in case they found themselues able to doe it. He aduised them of the request made to those in Ʋenice, and that they should hold the Ses∣sion in the due time, wholy omitting the doctrine of the Sacraments, and publishing the Anuthematismes onely, in which they are all agreed, because the doctrine cannot be expounded without danger. That they should leaue wholy the Decree of the abuses of the Sacraments, of Baptisme and Con∣firmation, it beeing impossible to touch that string, without offending the whole order of poore Priests and Friars, and giuing the Heretikes too great a conquest, by confessing they had formerly approoued such notable absur∣dities. Hee concluded, that they should labour to make the Session as quiet as was possible, but yet with the honour of the Apostolique Sea. Afterwards the Pope, considering with himselfe and with his inward The Pope is troubled with the aduises sent from the Councel, and frō us Nun∣cio in Ger∣many. friends, the aduises sent vnto him from Trent, and from his Nuncio in Ger∣manie, was full of suspicion, that the Councell would produce some great monster, to the preiudice of himselfe, and the Papacio. Hee considered the factions amongst the Diuines, especially Dominicans and Franciscans, an∣cient enemies, and contrary in doctrine, and feared that, taking courage in the Councell, they would goe beyond the bounds of those contentions, which haue beene hardly composed by the wiser sort: whose differences beeing no lesse then those with the Lutherans, and themselues very bold in taxing one another, except paines were alwayes taken to make them agree, there would bee danger of some great inconuenience. Hee was much trou∣bled with the disputation of Residencie, whether it bee required iure diuino, and with the boldnesse of Friar Bartholomew Caranza, who, beeing encoura∣ged by many, dared to call the contrary opinion, the doctrine of deuils. Hee saw how easily such another mischiefe as that of Luther might arise, and that, if an article of faith were made of residencie, the Papacy was reduced to nothing. Hee considered, that all the reformations aymed to restraine the Popes authority, and to enlarge the power of the Bishops, and how lit∣tle himselfe was esteemed, in that, the Councel hauing giuen hope to referre the Reformation to him, whereof hee had framed a Bull, and recalled the whole matter to Rome, they had after treated thereof more sharpely, with∣out any respect of his authority. Hee had great suspicion of the spirit and courage of the Spaniards, considering the qualities of that wise Nation; that it doth not worke by chance, that it maketh greater shew of reuerence then it beareth, that it standeth vnited in itselfe, & steppeth not one foote for∣ward, without looking a great way before them. It seemed to him a great mat∣ter, that they met together, and had made a common censure; and thought it probable that this webbe was secretly spun by the Emperour, in regard his Ambassadour did dayly treate with them. Hee suspected the Emperour also for his present prosperitie, which ordinarily doeth make men not able to set boundes to their designes. Hee considered his conniuencie at religion, and thought it was to gaine the Lutherans fauour. Hee remembred the com∣plaints vsed not onely by the Emperour, but by his Ministers also, when the Italian Souldiers departed, that hee was abandoned in time of neede; and hee knew that he attributed the sedition of Genna to his sonne, the Duke of Piacenza But hee weighed aboue all, his wordes vsed to the Nuneio, that hee had no greater enemie then the Pope. Hee feared that when he had e∣stablished an absolute authoritie in Germanie, hee would thinke to doe the like in Italie, making vse of the Councell to suppresse the Papacle. He saw that all was in his power, in regard of the incurable indisposition of the French King, and his approching death. Of the Dolphin, being young, and not experienced, hee knew not what to promise himselfe: and was assured that the Prelates, who did vntill then, adhere to the Court of Rome, whensoe∣uer the Emperor should vnmaske himselfe, would professe to be on his side, either for feare of greater power, or for emulation at the Popes greatnesse: which they would discouer, when they should see a secure way laid open to moderate it. These respects made him resolue to secure himselfe in some sort of the And after consul ation resolueth to translate be Synode to Bolonia. Councell. To end it, did not seeme seasonable, in regard there did remaine so many things to be handled. The Suspensson did require some great cause, and would be to litle purpose, in regard hee should bee presently desired to take it away. To translate it to a place where himselfe had absolute authori∣tie, seemed the best counsell. And seeing this was to be done, heo would so do it, as that all danger should be preuented: which could not be, if the coun∣cel, were not celebrated within his owne territories. He did not thinke Rome was fit, because it would raise too much discourse in Germanie. Bolonia see∣med the best place, because it was neore the Mountaines, fertile, and of great receipt. For the manner, he resolued to conceale his owne person, and to cause it to be done by the Legates, by the authoritie giuen them in the Bull; dated the 22. of February, and sent vnto them in August. 1545. For doing so, if the Translation were opposed, the Legats would be blamed, and himself, as not interessed, might the more easily vphold them: and if, by accident, hee should change his opinion, he might doe it without dishonour. Being thus resolued, he sent a priuate Gentleman of the family of the Cardinall of Monte with letters of credit, to doe this ambassage to hoth the Legate : commaun ¦ding him, not to ariue there before the Session and then to giue them autho∣ritie to translate the Councell to Bolonia, making some apparant cause to arise, or making vse of some cause already in beeing; putting it in execution so quickely, that, after the enterprise begun, they should conclude before any impediment could be interposed. But in Germanie, a great part of those Cities about the Rhine, hauing made The Emperor doth leaue to temporize with the Archbishop, of Collen. composition with the Emperour, and the Elector Palatine caused h mini∣sters to de t, the Emperour seeing himselfe now able to exclude the Arch-bi∣shop of Collen, sent two Commissaries, to assemble all the orders of his Sate, and to cause them to abandon him, and to receiue for their Arch bi∣shop, Prince Adolphus, his coaiutour, ye lding obedience; and swearing side▪ litievnto him. The Cleargie was readie to doe it, for the causes before reci∣ted: but the Nobilite and Ambassadours of the Cities refusing, saying they could not abandon a Prince vnto whom they had sworhe. The Duke of Cloues bordering vpon him, sent to the Arch bishop, and caused of the Nobilitie to go thither also, to pray him to find a mea that the whole State might not bee dissolued, with the great dammage of the neighbour 1547 PAVL. 3. CHARLES 5. EDVVARD 6. FRANCIS 1. Who doth generously renounce his state. Countries. The Arch-bishop mooued with compassion, to free the State from warre, and that the innocent people might not suffer, did generously renounce the State, and absolue his subiects from the oath; and so Adolphus, was receiued for his successor, whom he had alwaies loued as his brother, and communicated to him whatsoeuer hee had done for reformation of the Church; who was now of another opinion, either because hee was truely changed, or for some other respect. In February, newes came to Trent of the death of the King of England, Thanks giuen to God, and great ioy in Trent, for the de th of the K. of England which happened the moneth before. The Fathers gaue thankes to GOD, and went almost all to the Bishop of Worcesten, congratulating that himselfe and the kingdome were (as they sayd) deliuered from the tyrannie of a cruell persecutor, saying, it was a miracle that he had left a sonne of but nine yeeres of age, that he might not be able to tread in his Fathers steps. And it is true that hee did not tread in them all. For Henry, though he had wholy taken a∣way the Popes authoritie, and punished his adherents capitally, yet hee did e∣uer constantly retaine all the residue of the doctrine of the Church of Rome. But Edward (for so his sonnes name was) gouerned by his Vncle on the mo∣thers side, the Duke of Somerset, who was inclined to the doctrine of the Protestants, changed religion, as shall be said in its place. The Popes letters being come, the Cardinall Sancta Croce was of opinion, that it was good to mollifie the Prelates combined, by granting some of the petitions, which were granted from Rome, thinking, they would easily bee pacified with that determination. The Cardinall of Monte sayd, that to con∣descend to an inferior (especially to a multitude) was to make them pretend a greater satisfaction; that first he would try his friends, & when he found he was fortified with the greater number, hee would not retire an inch; but if he found it otherwise, hee would vse art. After many discourses, as it hap∣neth betweene Colleagues, Sancta Croce yeelded to Monte, who was more pas∣sionate. They receiued aduise, that the absent Prelates would bee returned before the end of February, whose minds were sounded, and many of them were found to adhere to the Pope. These being confirmed with hope, and others ensnared with the same baite, that the Pope would take notice of eue∣ry A decree con∣taining 15. heads, is pro∣posed in Con∣gregation. ones merit, they caused the decree to be made, with fifteen heads, and pro∣posed it in Congregation. By this, greater difficulties were raised. In the Proheme, by this exception; Sauing alwaies the Apostolicall authoritie, in all things. Euery foole saw at what it aymed, and that it inferred a pertinacious obstinacie, in the abuses which they ought to remedie, by preseruing their causes. Yet none durst op∣pose, but the Bishop of Badacoz, who said, it had need of declaration, because And is there opposed. the Councell ought not, nor could impeach the authoritie of any, much lesse of the Apostolike Sea, acknowledged for Head of all the Catholiques. But it seemed that the words there placed did signifie, that in Rome the procee∣ding should be in those things as before, and that the moderation should not haue power ouer dispensations, and other inuentions, by which the autho∣ritie of the old Canons hath beene alwayes weakened. In defence of the ex∣ception it was said, that the Lawes of Councels are not as the Lawes naturall, where equitie and rigour are the same thing, that they are subiect to the com∣mon defect of all Lawes, which by reason of their vniuersalitie, ought to be moderated by equitie in cases not foreseene, when it would bee vniust to put them in execution. But because there is not alwayesa Councell, to which recourse may be had, nor it being possible to attend this, when there is one, the Popes authoritie is necessarie. It was replyed, that though all Lawes haue the defect of vniuersalitie, yet all were published without exceptions, that so they should now doe, or otherwise it were as much as to say, that ordinarily and not onely in rare cases, and not foreseene, the Pope might dispence with the contrary. This opinion was not openly approoued by all, who in their conscience But the oppo∣sers are ∣ced. thought it true; whereupon the Legat Monte taking courage, sayd it was a subtiltie, not to attribute as much to the Apostolike Sea, as they were bound, and so he made them all silent. The Bishop of Badacoz demaunded, that mention should bee made in that Proheme, that the Article of residencie was not quite left off, but deferred onely. The Legates answered, that this was a distrust of their promises, and a vaine Obligation to doe that which was alwayes in their power: Yet, to satisfie so great a desire, hee sayd it should bee added in the Proheme, that all was decreed in prose∣cuting the point of residencie, which they had begun; whereby it would appeare, that it was not ended in the other Session, and that part did remaine to be handled. Concerning the Heads of the qualities of Bishops and other Curates, the Discourses a∣boue the qua∣liues of Bi∣shops and Curates: Arch-bishop Torre saide, that they did not onely remedie the corruptions brought in, but did weaken the ancient remedies. For with such generall termes of age, manners, knowledge, abilitie and worth, euery one might bee canonized for an able man, and to alleadge the decrees of Alexander was to nullifie all other Canons, which prescribe other conditions. For when one is alwayes named and the others purposely concealed, it seemeth that there is some derogation to these, that it was necessarie to say plainely what this grauitie of manners, and knowledge of letters is: which if it Were done, euery Courtier would bee excluded for euer. That the manners re∣quisite are well repeated by Saint Paul, and yet not regarded. The learning and Doctorship, which Paul requireth is the knowledge of Christian Doctrine, and of the holy Writ: that Honori s the third is not to be imitated, who depriued a Bishop of the lower Sax e, because hee had not learned Grammar, nor euer read Donatu . For the glosse, saith he, could not teach the people grammer; as if Sermons were to be made by Grammer rules, and not according to the Gospel. The Bishop of Huesca added that neither the re∣ference to, nor the allegation of the Decretals or constitutions did please him. For it is done either to giue greater authoritie to them, or to receiued it from them, or to make one aggregate of these, and the Synode, of greater, force; and that all those wayes was vnfit because the authoritie of both would be diminished▪ That then it was fit to doe it when the constitution was too long to bee repeated: but when it did co ine but the same thing there was no cause for it, in regard it would cause vndeterminable conten∣tions, by disputing whether those constitutions bee approoued as the letter, doth simply found, or with the limitations and ampliations of the Doctors, & with the diuers interpretations; which is to confound the world. That they haue neede of Decrees which may cause peace, charitie, and poserious refor∣mation in the Church, not which may giue occasion of strifes, and new in∣conuenienc. To what purpose were it now to inflict vpon the Ordina∣ries, the punishments of the Chapter; Graue nimis, the execution whereof is committted to the Prouinciall Councels, which are disused, if order bee not taken to bring them in vse againe? Then the Benefices conferred by the Or∣dinary, by reason of diuers reseruations, being fewer then a tenth part, why should prouision be made in this, and the abuse suffered to run in the nine tenths, which the Court doth conferre? Likewise in matter of Pluralitie, to approue the constitution, De multa, is to establish it the more, because dispen∣sations are permitted in that. The Articles were much disputed on. The Spaniards did require, that the Cardinals should bee specified; but answere was made, that it was not A dispute whether the Cardinals ought to be specified in the reforma∣tion. conuenient, in regard of the greatnesse of the Order, being the chiefest in the Church, and replenished with men of singular merit, to shew so plainely that there were corruptions in it, worthy of amendment, and that they did not amend themselues. But it was sufficient to doe it in generall termes, which should include them also; as to command euery one, of what digni∣tie, degree, or preeminence soeuer. Others sayd to the contrary, that the Canonists haue declared, that the Cardinals are not conteined vnder any generall termes, if they bee not expressed by name, and therefore that there was no other way to prouide against the bad example which the world ta∣keth, but to reforme them in particular. That there is small need to reforme the inferiour Cleargie, whose corruptions are but small, and themselues, as it were, compelled to imitate the greater Prelates. That in curing a sicke body, one ought to begin with the greater diseases, and the more principall parts, which being healed, the others will heale of themselues, or will neede but light medicines. For the abuse of perpetuall Ʋnions, they sayd it was sufficiently prouided, by referring to the Bishops the examination of those which are already made, and by presuming them to bee surreptitious, which are not grounded vpon reasonable causes. But all was ouerthrowen by the modification following, that is, if the Apostolique Sea should not thinke otherwise: for this was to establish them, and to put the Bishop to trouble and charge. It was desired againe, that Ʋnions for life should bee prohibited, and those nullified which are already made. But the maior part did approue the Decrees as they were proposed, some for the good affection they bare to Rome, and some because they had beene perswaded, and some good men also, who were promised, that the Pope, by his Bull, would take away both these and many other disorders: but that, for reputation of the holy Sea, hee ought to doe it himselfe, and not seeme to be compelled to receiue lawes from the Synod, against his will. And these put together were three quarters of the whole number of the Sy∣nod. The time of the approaching, and the athematismes beeing read ouer againe, some required that the doctrine should be added, and some demanded why the Decree of the abuses was not resolued on. To these it was said, that the matter was not well discussed, and that it was more fit to han∣dle them after all the Sacraments, giuing remedie withall to the abuses oc∣curring in the ministery of euery one, and to the generall abuses of them all. In giuing a reason why the doctrine was omitted, the most concluding ar∣gument was, that so it was done in the Session concerning originall sinne, and that a doctrinall declaration is necessary, when the anathematismes cannot bee vnderstood without it; therefore that it was necessary in the Decree of iustification; but in this of the Sacraments, the anathematismes be so plaine of themselues, that they may serue also for doctrine. The approaching of the time, and the consent of the maior part, made them resolue for this opinion, and compelled them to be silent who demanded the doctrine, and the refor∣mation of the forenamed abuses. The Decrees being made, though with these difficulties, and the third The Session, March the 3. of March being come, and the Prelates, according to their vsuall order, assem∣bled in the Church, to celebrate the Session, Iames Coccus, Archbishop of Corfu, said Masse, Coriolanus Martiranus, Bishop of Saint Marke, was to make the Sermon, who for the distastes receiued in the Congregation, thinking he could not well bee present, and not persist in the same opinion, in regard it was not secure to contradict in publike Session, he made choise to faine some indisposition, and so to bee absent: by which meanes there was no Sermon that morning: as if amongst sixtie Bishops, thirtie Friars, exercised in prea∣ching, not one was able to speake foure words with premeditation of foure houres. And it was noted in the Actes, that there was no Sermon, because A iesting act concerning the Bishop of S. Marke. the Bishop of Saint Marke, deputed to, make it, was hoarse, and so it was Prin∣ted. Which as it ought to bee attributed onely to the pleasant vaine of the Secretary, who wrote it, so it is a sure argument, that they did not then thinke the time would come, when all the actions of that Assembly, should be estee∣med equall to those of the Apostles, when they met together, expecting the comming of the holy Ghost. When the Masse, and other ceremonies were ended, the two Decrees were read. The first concerning Faith, contained in substance. That for comple∣ment The Decrees are read. of the doctrine, defined in the former Session it was meate to handle the Sacraments; and, the better to extirpate the heresies, the Synode did for the present, constitute the Canons following, meaning to adde others afterward, when time should serue. The Canons, or the Anathematismes of the Sacraments in generall, were thir∣teene. The Canons of the Sacra∣ments in ge∣nerall. 1. Against him that saith, that the Sacraments of the new Law, haue not beene all instituted by CHRIST, or that they are more or lesse then seuen, or that any of them is not truely, and properly a Sacrament. 2. And that they differ not from those of the old Law, but in the ceremonies and rites. 3. And that none of them is, in no respect, more worthy then another, 4. That they are not necessary to saluation, and that the grace of God, may bee gained by faith alone, without them, or without any purpose to receiue them. 5. That they are ordained onely to nourish faith. 6. That they doe not conteine in them the grace signified, or doe not giue it to him that doth not resist, but are externall signes of iustice, and Characters of a Christi∣an profession, to discerne the faithfull from Infidels. 7. That grace is not alwayes giuen by the Sacraments, nor vnto all, for as much as belongeth to God, though they bee lawfully receiued. 8. That by Sacraments Grace is not giuen, in vertue of the administration of them; called, Opus operatum: but that it sufficeth onely to beleeue the promise. 9. That in Baptisme, Confirmation, and Order, no indeleble Character is imprinted in the soule, for which cause they can bee receiued but once. 10. That all Christians haue power to administer the Word and all the Sacraments. 11. That in mini∣string the Sacraments, the ministers intention, at the least to doe what the Church doth, is not necessarie. 12. That the minister, who is in mortall sinne, giueth not the true Sacrament, though he obserue all things necessary. 13. That the vsuall rites, approued by the Church may be despised, or omit∣ted, or changed for others, by euery Pastour. Of Baptisme there were fourteene Anathematismes. 1. Against him The Canons of Baptisme. that saith the baptisme of Iohn had the same vertue with that of Christ. 2. That true and naturall water is not necessarie to baptisme. 3. That in the Church of Rome, which is the Mother and Mistris of all the Churches, there is not to bee found the true doctrine of baptisme. 4. That Baptisme, giuen by heretiques, in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, with intention to doe what the Church doeth, is not true baptisme. 5. That the baptisme is free, that is, not necessary to saluation. 6. That the baptized cannot loose Grace, though he sinne, so that he leaue not to beleeue. 7. That the bapti∣zed are bound onely to beleeue, and not to obserue the Law of CHRIST. 8. That they are not bound to obserue the Lawes of the Church. 9. That by the memory of baptisme, all vowes made afterwards are of no force, but derogate from faith, and baptismall profession 10. That sinnes commit∣ted after baptisme, by faith and memory thereof, are remitted, or made ve∣niall. 11. That baptisme is to be renewed in him, who hath denied the faith. 12. That none should bee baptized but in the age of CHRIST, or at the time of death. 13 Against him who putteth not children baptized in the number of the faithfull, or saith they must be rebaptized at the yeeres of dis∣cretion, or that it is better to omit their baptisme vntill then. 14. That children baptized, when they come to age, ought to be required to ratifie the promise made in their name, and to bee left to their will if they refuse, not compelling them to Christian life, but by denying them other Sacraments. Of Confirmation there were three Canons. 1. Against him that saith it is an The Canons of Confirma∣tion. idle ceremony, not a Sacrament properly, or that it was formerly vsed, that children might giue a publike account of their faith. 2. That to giue vertue to the Chrisme, is to wrong the holy Spirit. 3. That euery simple Priest is the ordinary minister of Confirmation, and not the Bishop onely. After this, the decree of reformation was read, which, in the Actes bare The decree of Reformation. this title. A Canon concerning residencie. And it contained in substance; 1. That no Bishop be created but of lawfull matrimonie of ripe yeeres, lear∣ned, and of good behauiour. 2. That none may haue or keepe more Bi∣shoprickes then one, in Title, Commenda, or any other way, and whosoeuer hath now more then one, shall choose one, and quit the rest within sixe moneths, if they be of the Popes free collation, or else within a yeere: other∣wise all shalbe accounted void but the last. 3. That other benefices, especially with Cure, be giuen to worthy persons, able to take charge of soules: other∣wise the ordinary Patron is to be punished. 4. That hereafter whosoeuer shal receiue many incompatible Benefices, by way of Vnion for life, perpetuall Commenda, or otherwise; or shall keepe those that he hath receiued against the Canons, shall bee depriued of all. 5. That the dispensations of those who haue many Benefices with Cure, or incompatible, shall bee shewed to the Ordinaries, making prouision afterwards for the cure of soules, and other ob∣ligations. 6. That perpetuall Vnions, made within forty yeeres, shall be re∣viewed by the Ordinaries, as delegates, and those that are vniust shall be nulli∣fied, and those that haue not beene in possession, or shall be made hereafter, shall be presumed to be surreptitious, if they be not made for reasonable cau∣ses, and with citation of all that be interested; and nothing to the contrary of this, shall be declared by the Apostolique Sea. 7. That Benefices with cure, vnited, shall bee visited by the Ordinaries euery yeere, and shall haue Vicars a signed, perpetuall or temporall, with such a portion of the fruits as to them shall seeme meete, without respect of Appeales or Exemptions. 8. That the Ordinaries shall euery yeere by the Apostolique authority, visit the Churches exempted, prouiding for the care of soules, and other dueties, without respect of Appeale, Priuiledges, or Customes prescribed. 9. That Bishops shall be consecrated within the time set downe by the Law, and all prolongations for more then sixe moneths shall bee voyd. 10. That the Chapters of Churches, in vacancie of the Bishopricke, shall not grant Dimiso∣ries for Orders, but to him that is obliged to take them, because of a Bene¦fice. 11. That licences to bee promoted by any Bishop shall bee voyd, if a lawfull cause be not expressed, for which they may not bee promoted by their owne Bishop, and, in that case, they shall bee promoted by a Bishop that resideth in his Diocesse. 12. That Faculties not to receiue due Orders shall not serue for longer time then a yeere, but in cases expressed in the law. 13. That men presented to Benefices, by any Ecclesiasticall person whatso∣euer, shall not be instituted before examination; made by the Ordinaries, ex∣cept those who are presented by Vniuersities, Colledges, and generall Studies. 14. That in the causes of the exempted a certaine forme shall be obserued, and where the question is of reward, or concerning those who sue in forma, pauperis, the Exempted also, who haue a Iudge deputed, shall be conuented be∣fore the Ordinarie but those who haue no Iudge deputed, shal bee conuented in all causes. 15. That the Bishops shall take care of the Hospitals, that they be well gouerned by the administrators, though Exempted, obseruing a certaine forme. The Prelats who opposed in the Congregations, did the same in the Ses∣sion, A modest op∣position is made, but not regarded by the Legats. but with greater modesty: desiring that the degrees of the persons com∣prehended might be expressed, and that besides the prouisions against future euils, remedies might be added for the present, which are more hurtfull, and dangerous. But the Legats, hearkening vnto those words as vnto idle talke, concluded the Session, and appointed the next for the of April. The credence concerning the Transla∣tion is deli∣uered. The same day the Popes messenger, concealed vntill then, euen from the Legats, did appeare, and declared to them his credence; and immediatly went from Trent to Ispra The Card Santa Croce was confounded; but Monte, being without feare said, that he euer knew the Pope to be a wise Prince, and that he then saw in him the height of iudgement, that it was necessary to do so, if they would preserue the authority of the Sea▪ Apostolike: and therefore that it was fit to serue his Holines with fidelity, secrecy, and diligence. And it hapned fit∣ly that many in the families of the Prelats were sicke, either by the disorders of the Carnoual, or because the aire had been moist many daies before. Monte suborned some to aske the Physicians whether those infirmities were not The pretence for the Tran∣sl non. contagious. The Physicians, who in their Prognostiques, alwayes say the worst they can, because if they proue true, they seeme learned▪ in hauing fore∣seen them, if not, they seeme more learned in remedying or preuenting them, spake some ambiguous word, which was studiously spread abroad, and belee∣ued by some of the meaner sort Some others also were credulous of it, especi∣ally those who were willing to depart, and therefore wished it were true. And after the Session, a Bishop dying opportunely, interred with the obsequies of the whole Councel, made the matter more conspicuous. Whereupon all Trent was full, that the disease was con agious, and▪ the same was spread in all the bordering places. The Legats, to shew they had no finger in dispersing this fame, held a generall congregation the next day after the Session, to digest what should be discussed concerning the Eucharist, and, the weeke following, the Congregations of the Diuines did begin. But the fame being increased, Monte gaue order to Hercules Seuerolo, Proctor of the Councel, to make a Pro∣ces concerning the posti ent infirmity. The Physicians were examined▪ and Ie∣ronymus Fracastorius amongst others, who had the title of the Physician of the Councel, and other persons besides. It was reported that the neighbor places would haue no more commerce with the City: which made many Prelats aske leaue to depart, either for feare, or for desire to goe from thence by all meanes. Monte gaue leaue to some, that their departure might be alleadged as one of the causes; others, with whom he was more familiar, he perswaded to tarry, indeed, not to want adherents when he should propose the Translation of the Councel, but▪ in shew, that the councel might not dissolue; and there∣fore he wished them to require in the Congregations, that some order might be taken. The Proces was prosecuted vntill the 8. day, when newes came, ei∣ther true or fained, that Verona would traffique no more with them: which troubled them all, because they should be as it were all in prison. Therefore the, day a generall Congregation was held concerning this: in which the Proces was read, and a proposition made, what remedy might be found that they might not be confined, with a disease in their houses, and de∣priued of victuals and other necessaries. Many protested they would depart, and could not be hold, and, when much had bin spoken, Monte proposed the translation of the Councel, saying he had Apostolike authority to doe it from the beginning; and caused the Popes Bull to be read, directed to the 3. Legats, The Bull of the Transla∣tion is read. Monte, Santa Croce, and Poole. In which, hauing declared that he had established the Councell in Trent, & sent them hither, as his Legats, and Angels of peace to the end that so godly a worke might not bee hindered by the incommodi∣tie of the place, he giueth power to any two of them, in absence of the third, to translate it into some other citie, more commodious, opportune, and secure; and to command the Prelats, vpon censures and punishments, not to proceed any further in Trent, but to continue it in the City, vnto which they shal trans∣ferre it, & to call thither the Prelats, & other persons of the Councel of Trent, vpon paine of periury, & other censures, set down in the letters of the conuo∣cation, & that he will ratifie whatsoeuer they shall doe, any thing to the con∣trary notwithstanding. The Emperors Prelats answered immediatly, that the disease & the dangers were not so great, that the timorous might haue leaue to go, vntill the opinion were past, which, by the help of God, would vanish quickly, and if the Session were deferred, it was no matter: that many depar∣ted the yeere before, for the suspicions of warre, and the Session was deferred The Empe∣rors ministers doe discouer the plot. more then 6. moneths, and that they might doe so now, if there were occasi∣on. And other such reasons they brought. The disputation concerning this was long. When the Congregation was ended, the Imperialists, conferring a∣mong themselues, and seeking curiously that which before they cared not to know, they smelt out that it was not a generall disease, but a pretence. The next day a Congregation was called to consult vpon the same mat∣ter. It was found, that 11. Prelats were already parted, & they began to speake of the place whither to goe. That it should be in Germany, all did abhorre. It could not be in the State of any Prince, because they had treated with none. There remained onely the State of the Church. The Legats proposed Bolonia; which pleased all those that approued the Translation. The Imperialists did contradict, and some did almost protest: but the maior part consented. Some doubted the Pope would take the Translation ill, because it was made with∣out his knowledge. But Monte said, that sudden chances, and perils of life are free from these respects, and that hee would vndertake the Pope should bee contented. Consideration was had of the Emperour, and other Princes, and it was concluded, that if they made mention of them in the Decree, they gaue satisfaction to the reuerence which they did owe them: and to satisfie, in some sort, those, who approued not the translation, they made some men∣tion of returning. The Decree was proposed by way of deliberation. Doth it please you to declare that this disease is manifest, in regard of the predicti∣ons, and other things alleadged so notoriously, that the Prelates cannot re∣maine in this Citie, without danger of their life, nor can be kept here against their will; and because of the departure of many, and protestations of others, by whose departure the Councell would bee dissolued; and for other causes alleadged by the Fathers, notoriously true and lawfull; Dothe it please you to declare, that, for the security of the Prelats liues, and prosecution of the Coun∣cell, it ought to be transferred to Bolonia, and is now transferred, and that the Session intimated, for the 21. of April, shall be celebrated, and all things pro∣secuted there, vntill the Pope and Councell shall thinke fit to reduce it into this or some other place, by the aduise of the Emperour, the French King, and other Christian Kings and Princes? The next day the Session being held, and the Decree read, 35. Bishops, and A Session is held to reade the Decree of the Translati∣on to Bolonia. three Generals did assent. But the Cardinall Pacceco, and 17. other Bishops op∣posed. Among those that consented, there was not one of the Emperors Sub∣iects, but Michael Saracenus, a Napolitan, Archb. of Matera. But amongst those that consented not, there was Claudius della Guische, Bishop of Mirpois, and Martelli, Bishop of Fiesole, and Marcus Viguerius, Bishop of Sintgaglia, whom the Cardinall of Monte did vpbraid, that his vncle beeing drawen from a base e∣state to the height of the Cardinality, from whence the greatnesse of his house and his owne Bishopricke did proceed, he did ill requite the Apostolike Sea. For answere he vsed the words of S. Paul, God is not mocked. The Legates de∣parted, with the Crosse caried before them, accompanied with the Bishops of their faction, with ceremonies and prayers. The Imperialists were commanded by the Emperours Ambassadour, not to de∣part vntill his Maiestie were informed, and gaue them order. In Rome the Court was glad they were deliuered from danger. For there was already great confusion and sale made by the possessors of many Benefices, who sought to vnburthen themselues, but so as that they would lose no commoditie. The Pope said, that hauing giuen his Legates power to translate the Councell, and promised to ratifie what they should determine, and cause it to be executed, and they hauing iudged the infection of the ayre to bee a lawfull cause, hee Which is ap∣proued by the Pope. could not chuse but approoue it, and the rather, because the maior part of the Prelates did consent. But none was so simple, as not to beleeue that all was done by his com∣mandement, it being certaine that nothing, how little soeuer, was handled in the Councel, without order first had from Rome. For which purpose letters comming once euery weeke, and some weeks twice, it was not credible, that a matter of that importance, was hatched in the Legats braines. Besides, onely to bring so many persons into a Citie, so iealous as Bolonia, without consent of the Prince thereof, seemed to be a thing which the Legats would neuer haue The date of the Bull is sus∣pected by ma∣ny. attempted. Many did beleeue that the Bull had not a true date, but was new∣ly made, though the date were old, and with the name of Cardinall Poole, to giue greater reputation: otherwise that clause, in which authoritie is giuen vnto two of them, the other being absent, to translate the Councell, would seeme a kinde of Prophecie, that Poole should depart a yeere after; and the li∣bertie to trans erre it to what Citie they listed, seemed too large, and improba∣ble, considering the suspicion alwayes fixed in the minde of the Popes, that the Councell should bee celebrated in an vnfaithfull Citie, shewed more then euer by Pope Paul, when hee did call it. So that it was incredible that hee would, vnnecessarily, expose himselfe to the discretion of another, in a matter of so great weight. Yet, following the notes which I haue seene, as I haue said before, I assure my selfe, that it was made two yeeres, and sent 18. moneths be∣fore this time. But that which could not be concealed, and which did scanda∣lize It appeareth by the Bull, that the Coun∣cell was not free. euery one, was, that, by that Bull, it appeared that the Councel was in ser∣uitude. For if the two Legats could command all the Prelats, at once, to part from Trent, and compell them by punishments, and censures, let any man say that can, what liberty they had? The Emperor, hearing the newes, was much The Empe∣rour is offen∣ded with the Translation. displeased, because, it seemed, hee was despised, and because hee saw a weapon taken out of his hand, by managing whereof, according to opportunity, hee thought to set Religion at peace in Germanie, and so to put it vnder his The French King dieth. obedience. The newes came not to the French King, who the 21. of the same moneth, changed this life for a better. THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. I Am not ignorant of the lawes of Histories, 1547 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6. HENRY 2. and how they differ from Annals, and Diaries. I The censure of the Author concerning this worke. knowe likewise, that the narration of vniforme accidents, breedeth satiety in the Writer, and te∣diousnesse in the Reader: and that to recount small matters too particularly, deserueth the name of a foolish knowledge. Yet I obserue frequent replies, and little narrations, in Homer, and that, in the expedition of Cyrus the yonger, Xenophon doth more rauish and instruct the minde, by reciting the serious and merry discourses of the souldiers, then by relating the actions and counsels of Princes. I am of opinion, that euery matter hath his proper forme, and that this of mine, cannot bee composed with ordinary rules. I assure my selfe, that this worke will bee read by few, and is of a short life; not so much for want of forme, as for the nature of the Subiect. And I am so per∣swaded, by that which I see happen in the like things. But not regarding perpetuity, or continuance of time, it shall suffice me that it will please some one, to whome I will shew it, because I know hee will make vse of it; and I am assured that▪ for hereafter, that will happen to it which the coniunctures shall comport. The Prelates remaining in Trent, were in great suspence, vntill letters The Empe∣rors Prelats remaine in Trent. came from the Emperour, commending them for contradicting the Transla∣tion, and abiding in Trent, with expresse order not to part from the Citie. They consulted among themselues, whether they should doe any Concilia∣rie Writings passe betweene the Prelats of Trent and of Bolonia. act: and it was vniformely resolued, that it would make a schisme, and therefore was not to be attempted: but that they ought to study the points, and to expect what opportunity would bring. There passed some writings betweene the Diuines of Trent, and of Bolonia. These did, with affectation call it the Synode of Bolonia; and those, the holy Synode, bee it wheresoeuer it will. And some of them remaine still in Print in Bolonia. The Legates, and other Cardinals of Rome, made diuers requests in priuate, vnto some of those who remained in Trent, to cause them to goe to Bolonia, or, at the least, to make them depart from thence. But they gained none, but Galeatius Flori∣mante, Bishop of Aquila. They laboured to bring to the Session, all their friends that parted from Trent, and that more should come also: which was easie to doe by reason of the commodious passage from Rome thither. Di∣uers Congregations were made, in which nothing was handled, but how they might defend the Translation to bee lawfull, and to shew that those of Trent, were bound to ioyne with them. The 21. of April being come, the day appointed for the Session, with great concourse of all the people of Bolonia, and much solemnitie, the Legats, The first Ses∣sion in Bolo∣nia. accompanied with thirty foure Bishops, went to the Councel house; where nothing was done, but a Decree read, which sayd, that, it being resolued in Trent to translate the Synode to Bolonia, and to celebrate the Session that day, publishing Canons in matter of the Sacraments, and of reformation, yet considering, that many Prelates of the Councel, were imployed in their Churches, by reason of the holy dayes of Easter, hoping they will returne ere long, that all may be done with honour and grauity, the Synode hath defer∣red the celebration of that Session, vntill the second of Iune, reseruing pow∣er to themselues to abreuiate the terme. It was decreed also, to write letters in the name of the holy generall Synode, to the Fathers remaining in Trent, exhorting them to goe to Bolonia, and to vnite themselues with the Body, from which being separated, they cannot bee called an Ecclesiasticall Con∣gregation, but doe giue much scandall to Christendome. These letters, beeing receiued in Trent, were thought not to be discreet, and did rather ex∣asperate then mollifie their mindes. Therefore they resolued not to answere, for feare of making a contention, and so to let the attempt fall; which was ascribed to the Cardinall of Monte his too much liberty, not to the moderati∣on of that Assembly. The Emperour, who was in Saxonie with a puissant Army, in the very face The Elector of Saxony is taken prisoner in battell, and the Land∣graue of Has∣ th yeeld of that Elector, wholly busied in martiall affaires, had laid aside all thoughts of the Councell. And the 24 of the same moneth, hauing put his Armie in order, vpon the riuer Elb, called by the Latines Albi, came to a set battell; where the Duke Elector was wounded and taken prisoner, and his Armie de∣feated. The Protestant forces being weakened hereby, the Landgraue was The Saxon is condemned to , but his is uen vpon hard conditions. enforced to yeelde, and some few dayes after, by the mediation of his sonne in law Mauritius, and the Elector of Brandeburg, did wilingly make his per∣sonall appearance. The Duke was first condemned to die as a traytor, and then his life was giuen him, vpon diuers hard conditions; all which hee ac∣cepted, but his submission to the Councell, in matter of religion. And Cae∣sar was content, that the others beeing obserued, this should be omitted. Other conditions were proposed also to the Landgraue; amongst which one was to obey the Decrees of the Councell of Trent; whereunto he con∣sented not, but subscribed to referre himselfe to a godly and free Councell, where the Head and the members might be reformed, which also the Duke Maurice, and the Elector of Brandeburg would doe. They were both impri∣soned, the Saxon for euer, and the Landgraue during the Emperours plea∣sure. Caesar beeing made Lord of Germany by this victory, became Master of a great deale of Artilery, and drew much money from the Cities and Princes; and to giue a peaceable forme to what he had atchieued by warre, he orday∣ned a Diet in Ausburg. These things did much afflict the Pope, who considered that Italy was without helpe, and remained at the Emperors discretion. Yet he was comfor∣ted, The Pope is afflicted in mind with the Emperors prosperity. that hauing gotten the conquest by force, hee would bee compelled to maintaine it by the same meanes, and could not remoue his army from thence very soon. In the mean space he had time to treat & agree with the new French King, and the Italians, and to secure himselfe. In all these troubles he was con∣solated, being deliuered from feare of the Councell. Hee commended aboue measure, the resolution of the Cardinall Monte, to whom hee attributed this benefit. Hee resolued to send into France, Ieronymus Boccaferrius, a Romane, Maketh a confederation with the new French King. Cardinall of Saint George, in shew to condole with the King, for the death of his father, and to giue him ioy of the beginning of his kingdome, but with Commission to make intelligence, and confederation with him. The Pope gaue the Legate most ample power to grant the King all his demaunds, in matter of Benefices, without regarding the Decrees of the Tridentine Coun∣cel. And sendeth a Legat into Germany. And, to be ready to embrace all occasions, which might arise in Ger∣manie, to trouble the Emperour, and that no resolution might be taken in the Diet to his preiudice, he sent Francis, Cardinall Sfondrato, for Legate, with in∣struction to treat with the Clergie, and to keepe them in deuotion; to make diuers propositions to the Emperour, to establish the Councell in Bolonia; which, if it were not in a place of his owne subiection, hee feared more then the Emperours Armes in Italy. At this time there was a great sedition in Naples, because the Viceroy D. A great com∣motion is rai∣sed in Naples, by bringing in the Inquisi∣tion. Pedro di Toledo, desired to bring the Inquisition into the kingdome, according to the custome of Spaine. The Napolitans resisted, and made a seditious crie throughout Naples, God saue the Emperour, and confound the Inquisition: then, being assembled, they chose a Magistrate to defend them saying, That when they yeelded their obedience to the Catholique King, they made an expresse capitulation, that causes of heresie should bee censured by ordinary Ecclesia∣sticall Iudges, and that the particular office of the Inquisition should not bee brought in For this cause the Spaniards and Napolitans did seditiously take Armes, and many were slaine, and there was danger of rebellion. When all things were set in order, fifty thousand men beeing put in Armes, assembled by the sound of Bels, the Spaniards being retired into the Castles, and the people fortified with Artillery, in conuenient places, there was, as it were, a formall warre, betweene the Citie and the Castles. The tumult lasted from the end of May, vntill the midst of Iuly, and more then three hundred per∣sons were slaine on both sides. In which interim the Citie sent Ambassadors And nourish∣ed by the Pope. to the Emperour and the Pope, offering to yeeld, if they might bee receiued. It was enough for the Pope to nourish the sedition, which he did with much dexterity, hauing not forces to maintaine the enterprise. But the Cardinall Theatinus, Arch-bishop of that Citie, promising them the adherence of all his kinred, who were many, and potent, and his owne paines also, who, to that purpose, would goe in person, did effectually exhort them not to let slip an occasion, so profitable for the seruice of the Church, gaining vnto it so great a kingdome. The Spaniards, calling succours from diuers parts, became more potent, and letters came from the Emperour, that he was content there should be no Inquisition, and pardoned the Citie, except nineteene, all which he named but one, whom he would discouer when time serued: yet the City paid for a fine an hundred thousand crownes. These conditions were of ne∣cessity receiued, and those few of the nineteene who could be found, were put But appeased by the Empe∣rour. to death; and so the tumult was appeased. In Bolonia the Legats did not well know as yet what to doe; and the Pope The Councel in Bolonia proceedeth slowly. had commanded them not to proceed to any action, which might be oppo∣sed, or make a diuision, but to goe on slowly, deferring the Sessions, and making some Congregations, to shew they were not idle. But it was not easie to make them in a good forme, to discusse the point of the Eucharist, in regard the principall Diuines, accustomed to handle matters of faith in The reforma∣tion is wholly forgotten. Trent, were wanting. Yet some Congregations were held, and diuers Di∣uines did speake, but no Decree was framed. There is no cause to speake any more of the Reformation, because it was then buried in deepe silence. The second of Iuly being come, the Session was celebrated with the same The second Session is held and nothing done. ceremonies; where they did nothing but prorogue it, with a decree like to that of the forme, shewing that the Synode had deferred it vntill that day, because the Fathers were absent and expected: whereupon, beeing desirous to deale louingly with them, they added another Prorogation, vntill the fif∣teenth of September, not ceasing in the meane space to examine the points of doctrine and Reformation, reseruing to themselues power to abbreuiate or prolong that terme, though in a priuate Congregation. In France it was not hard for the Legate to obtaine of the King whatsoe∣uer A strong alli∣ance is made betweene the Pope and the French King. the Pope desired. For hee also was no lesse iealous of the Emperours for∣tune, and there was good intelligence betweene them, and very secret propo∣sitions did passe. Amongst the publique, one was, that the King should send to the Councell of Bolonia, as soone as might be, as many Prelats as was pos∣sible. Marriage was contracted betweene Horatius Farnese, the Popes Ne∣phew, and Diana the Kings bastard daughter, of the age of nine yeeres. The King sent nine French Cardinals, to remaine in the Court, to giue the Pope reputation; and to nourish friendship betweene them. The Pope created Two Cardi∣nals are crea∣ted at the Kings in∣stance. Cardinals the sixe and twentieth of Iuly, at the Kings instance, Charles di Guisa, Archbishop of Reins, and Charles of Ʋandosme, of the blood royall. In the end of August, Caesar went to Ausburg, to celebrate the Diet there, The Emperor holdeth a Diet in Aust∣burg. hauing about the Citie, the whole Armie of Spaniards and Italians, and some companies of foote within the Citie. It began the first of September, where the Emperor desiring principally to pacific Germany, did impart what he had formerly done in diuers Diets, to reconcile it, and how, for this end, he had caused the Counsell to bee called, and to begin in Trent: but that his paines auailing nothing, hee was constrained to passe to another remedie. And be∣cause it pleased God to giue a happy issue to his resolution, reducing Germany to those termes that he was assured to reforme it, hee had assembled the Prin∣ces for that end. But for that the difference of religion was cause of all those troubles, it was necessary to begin there. The opinions of the Princes in that Diet were diuers; for amongst the Electors the Ecclesiastiques desired, and vrged, that the Councell of Trent should be held, and demanded no con∣dition. The Seculars, adhering to the Lutherans, were content, with these con∣ditions, that it should be free, pious, that the Pope should not preside, neither in person, nor by his Ministers, should release the oath by which the Bishops In which the Princes differ in opinion. are bound vnto him, that the Protestant diuines should haue a deciding voice, and that the Decrees already made should be reexamined. The other Catho∣likes demanded that the Councell should be continued, and the Protestants haue safe conduct to go thither, and speake freely, and be inforced to obey the Decrees. While the Pope was in expectation of the successe of the Diet in Germanie, The Popes sonne is mur∣dered in his owne palace, and his citie Piacenza pos∣sessed by the gouernour of Milan. the 10. of September, his sonne, Petras Aloisius, Duke of Piacenza, was slaine in his owne palace, by conspiracie, and his body ignominiously exposed; and, some few houres after, souldiers came from Milan, sent by the Vice-Duke, Fer∣nandus Gonzaga, who made themselues Lords of the Citie. This afflicted the Pope aboue measure, not so much for the death of his sonne, and the igno∣minie, as for the losse of the Citie, and because hee saw plainely that all was done with the Emperours knowledge. But the Legats in Bolonia thought, that in this affliction and businesse of the Pope, it was not fit to write two letters euery weeke, of what did passe in the Councell, as they were wont, and therefore that it was conuenient to prorogue the Session for a long time, and to intermit all Actes of the Coun∣cell; which would bee done with honour enough, if the Session, intimated for the fifteenth, were celebrated, and the next deferred. Yet the publique griefe for the Dukes death, requiring that no solemnity should bee made, they deemed it was better to anticipate, and deferre it in a Congregation. Therefore the fourteenth, the Prelates being all called into the house, where the Cardinall of Monte was lodged, hee spake vnto them, thus in substance. C. Monte ma∣keth a speech to the Fathers in his owne lodging for prorogation of the Session. That the morrow was appointed for the Session; but euery one saw in what staits the Synode was; that not many Prelates are arriued, who are in their iourney, especially the French-men, and those who are lately come, are not well informed, yea, euen those who haue been present the whole Sum∣mer, at the disputation of the lesser Diuines, are not well in order: where∣unto was to bee added the cruell murder of the Duke, which held euery one in suspence, and themselues busied in prouiding for the security of the Cities belonging to the Church: that hee was glad hee had reserued power to prorogue the Session, that they may be freed from the paines of going to the Church to celebrate it: that his aduice was, yea, that it was necessary to make vse of that reseruation, prolonging the Session now, and not celebra∣ting it to morrow. The prorogation pleased all the Fathers. the Cardinall added, that, hauing considered much of it, they were not able to set downe a certaine day whereon to rest: that when they were in Trent, thinking to di∣spatch the Decree of Iustification in fifteene dayes, they were faine to sweate in the businesse seuen moneths together, oftentimes making two Congrega∣tions euery day: that where the question is of faith, and confounding the heretikes, one ought to goe with leaden feete, and often to employ much time in discussing a little word; that one cannot know whether it will be neces∣sary to celebrate the Session within few dayes, or not within many mo∣neths; therefore that his opinion was to prorogue it during pleasure of the Councell; and that this resolution was vndoubtedly the best. And if any say, that, the prefixed time beeing knowen, one might better dispose of his businesse, these may assure themselues, that it will appeare within few dayes, what course and progresse the Synode is like to haue. All were content it should be prorogued, during the Councels pleasure, and so they had leaue to depart. The Prelats of Germany, assembled in the Diet the very same day, wrote The Prelates assembled in the Diet write to the Pope to restore the Synode to Trent. to the Pope, for so the Emperours pleasure was, demanding that the Coun∣cell should be brought backe to Trent. In the letter was mixture of prayers and threats. It expounded the bad estate and danger of Germanie, against which prouision might haue been made, if the remedy of the Councell had been applyed in time, and held in Germany, as was desired. For hauing am∣ple iurisdictions, they could not long remaine in remote places, for which cause none went to Mantua, or Vicenza, and but few to Trent, a Citie which belongeth also rather to Italy, especially in time of warre. Now, all things beeing in peace, they conceiued great hope, that the shippe was safe in the hauen, when, beyond all expectation, they vnderstood the Councell, in which all their hope consisted, was translated to another place, or rather di∣uided. Therefore beeing depriued of this remedy, there did nothing re∣maine, but to haue recourse to the Apostolique Church, praying his Holy∣nesse, for the safetie of Germany, to restore the Councell to Trent; which if he did, there was no seruice which hee might not promise himselfe from them; and that otherwise they knew not whither to flee for ayde, against the mis∣chiefes and dangers that were imminent; that therefore hee would vouch∣safe to consider of their demaund, and thinke that if hee made not prouisi∣on, it was very possible they should thinke of other courses, to put an end to these difficulties: Praying his Holinesse to take their Letter in good part, being compelled to write thus, by their owne duety, and by the condition of the times. Moreouer, the Emperour vsed all diligence that all should submit to the The Empe∣ror obtaineth of the Princes and Granuel of the Cities a conditionall submission to the Councell. Councell, vrging, praying, and desiring them to relie vpon his credit. His prayers to the Elector Palatine were a kinde of threats, in regard of his for∣mer offence, lately pardoned. Maurice, Duke of Saxonie, was necessarily to yeeld, because of so great benefits, newly receiued from his Maiestie, and be∣cause hee desired the enlargement of the Landgraue, his wiues father. There∣fore the Emperor, hauing promised they should haue due satisfaction, and de∣siring them to trust vnto him, they finally consented, & were followed by the Ambassadors of the Elector of Brandeburg, and by all the Princes. The Cities refused (because they thought it very dangerous) to submit themselues indif∣ferently to all the Decrees of the Councell. Granuel did negotiate very much, and very long, with their Ambassadors, holding them obstinate, in refusing what the Princes had approued, adding some threats, to condemne them in a greater summe then they had already payd. Therefore they were compel∣led, in fine, to condescend to Caesars will, yet with caution of obseruing the promises. Being called before the Emperour, and demanded if they would conforme themselues to the resolution of the Princes, they answered, they should be too bold, if they went about to correct their answere, and, with∣all, gaue vp a writing, which conteined the conditions, with which they would receiue the Councell. This was taken, but not read, and they were commended, in the Emperours name, by his Chancellour, for that they had referred all to Caesar, as others had done, and relied vpon him: and the Em∣perour himselfe made shew to bee well pleased with it: so the one and the o∣ther party was willing to be deceiued. The Cardinall Sfondrato fayled not of his duety, in proposing many ad∣uantages The negotia∣tion of Card. Sfondrato, with the Em∣perour. to the Emperour, in case hee would consent to the Councell in Bo∣lonia; he shewed him in what confusions England was, beeing vnder a King who was a childe, whose gouernours were at variance, and people in di∣strust one of another, because of religion: he discouered vnto him the intel∣ligence which the Pope held in that Kingdome, all which should bee to his fauour, and that hee would assist him in that enterprise with men and ships, and would giue him leaue to make vse of the Ecclesiasticall rents of all his States. The Emperour knew the Popes aime was to intangle him in a new enterprise, and so to trouble him in that which hee had already brought to a conclusion. Therefore hee answered, that hee would bee vnited with the Pope in religion, but, in point of warre, was resolute to proceede alone, and not to be his Captaine, who would abandon him in the best time of seruice, as he had done in the warre of Germanie. And, on the other side, he proposed diuers aduantages to the Pope, in case hee would consent to the returne of the Councell to Trent. The Legate hauing answered, he had no commission herein, the Emperour sent, indiligence, the Cardinall of Trent to the Pope, to negotiate the restitution of the Councell, and other particulars, which shall bee related. The Pope, hauing heard him often, and not beeing able to discouer his intention, did finally answere him, that hee should speake hereof in the Consistery. The Cardinall hauing, the ninth of December, in presence of the whole And of the Cardinall of Trent with the Pope. Colledge, declared what paines and dangers, the Emperour had vndergone, onely to maintaine the dignity of the Councelll and how finally, by this dili∣gence and authority, hee had induced all the Princes and States of Germanie, to adhere, and submit themselues vnto it; hee prayed his Holinesse, in the name of Caesar, Ferdinand, and the whole Empire, that, for the loue of God, he would cause the Bishops who were at Bolonia, to returne to Trent, to finish the necessary worke beginne, and would bee pleased to send one or two Le∣gates into Germany, with full Pontificall power, not keeping from them any Faculty, that the manner of liuing, vntill the Councell began, might be set downe by their aduice, and the Clergie reformed, that he would haue con∣sideration, and determine, if the Sea were vacant, during the time of the Councell, whether the Fathers thereof, or Cardinals, should elect the Pope, that, in case it should happen, no new stirres might arise. This third The Pope is put in mind of his old age. point was added, to put the Pope in minde of his old age, and approaching death, and so to make him condescend more easily, that his posterity might not inherite the displeasure which the Emperour tooke at . The Pope, in answere of these propositions, commended the Emperors good will, and his paines, for publique seruice of the Church, concluding hee would haue such consideration of these propositions, as they deserued, and resolue, as GOD would inspire him. The Cardinall, hauing in diuers priuate audi∣ences, assayed in vaine to haue some good resolution from the Pope, leauing the instruction to Don Diego di Mendoza, whom the Emperour had caused to The Card of Trent retur∣eth, leauing Don Diego in his roome. goe for that purpose to Rome from Siena, where he was to accommodate the differences of that Republique, hee departed, and returned to Ausburg. Don Diego, in publique Consistory, assembled to giue the cap to the Cardinall of Guise, where all sorts of men might be present, presented himselfe before the Pope, and expounded vnto him the same things, which the Cardinall had done; adding, that he had commission, in case his Holinesse did interpose a∣ny delay or excuse, to protest that the Synode of Bolonia was not lawfull. The Pope answered, that he would first vnderstand the opinion, and the reasons The popes answere con∣cerning the returne of the Councell. of the Fathers of the Councell of Bolonia, and impart the proposition to the Kings and Princes of Christendome, that he might resolue maturely, for the seruice of God, and satisfaction of all. The Cardinall of Guise made a publique discourse in the same Consistory, The discourse of the Cardi∣nall of Guise in the consi∣story. in the name of the French King, and spake thus in substance. That King Francis had neuer spared any cost or danger, to maintaine the liberty of other Princes. In conformity whereof, Henry, not degenerating from the vertue of his ancestors, so soone as he left to mourne for his Fathers death, was wil∣ling to declare his obseruance towards the Sea of Rome. That the merits of the Kings of France towards the Pope, were famous, and exceeded all those of other Nations: but this was aboue all which the King now doth, promi∣sing all his forces to preserue the Papall dignity, now when it is so contem∣ned. He prayed the Pope to receiue the King for his sonne, and to promise to himselfe all assistance from him, and to take care that the Church should receiue no dammage or shame, in regard, that from small beginnings, great factions haue risen, which haue brought the Popes into great calamities. He exemplified in many Popes, afflicted, who were defended, and raised by the Kings of France, concluding that the present King will not yeeld to his ance∣stors, in preseruing the dignity of the Apostolique Sea. Many did thinke that the Pope made Guise speake so, to encourage the Car∣dinals his dependants, and to daunt the lofty spirits of the Imperialists, and to make them see they could not enforce him. And to execute what he had said to Don Diego, he wrote to Bolonia, to the Cardinall of Monte, the propo∣sition made vnto him, and his owne determination, giuing him order, that so soone as might be, inuocating the holy Ghost, hee should deliuer all to the Fathers and when he had vnderstood their opinion, should write backe what the Councell thought. The Legate, the Fathers being assembled, declared The manner how the spirit did worke in this Councel. the Commissions, and gaue his owne voice first, which all the others follow∣ed. For the spirit which was wont to mooue the Legates to thinke as the Pope did, and he Bishops to beleeue as the Legates, did worke as formerly it had done. The voices being collected, the Cardinall, by the consent and is the name of all, answered that the Synode, when the lawfull decree was made, to translate it from Trent to Bolonia, hauing admonished all to put themselues into the iourney, and, after that they were arriued in Bolonia, vn∣derstanding that some remained in Trent, hauing againe louingly exhorted them to part from thence, and ioyne with the body of the Councell, they made none account thereof, continuing still in that Citie, with contempt of the Councell, and scandall of many, as if they pretended to bee a lawfull Councell, or were not bonnd to obey this; and therefore that the Fathers The answere sent from Bo∣lonia concer∣ning the re∣turne of the Councell. did not know how the returne to Trent could bee treated of, with the honour and reputation of the Synode, if those who remaine there doe not first goe to Bolonia, to vnite with the rest, and acknowledge the power of the Councell. When this is done, the returne, in contemplation of Germanie, may bee hand∣led, if that Nation will giue sufficient securitie to obey the Decrees, as well to be made, as made already. He added that there was a fame spread, that when the Councell returned to Trent, the proceeding should bee popular, and licen∣tious. Therefore the Fathers thought it necessary to haue good securitie, that the order, continued in the celebration of Councels from the Apostles time; vntill this age, should be obserued; desiring also caution, to stand secure, and to be able to depart, and translate also the Councell, when it shall seeme fit to the maior part, and to end it when they shall iudge that they haue attai∣ned the end for which it was called; desiring his Holinesse not to com∣pell them to that which would bee against the honour of God, and libertie of the Church. The Pope hauing receiued these letters, when the Masse was ended on Which the Pope doeth communicito to the Cardi∣nals in Consi∣story; & to the Emperours Ambassador. Saint Iohn the Euangelists day, beeing returned to the Chamber of the robes, with the Cardinals, did communicate the Councels answere vnto them: which beeing approoued by the maior part, he caused Mendoza to bee called, and related vnto him the opinion of the Synode, approoued also by the Cardinals, adding that there was nothing that he was not willing to doe for Germanies sake: that the Emperour was a good witnesse hereof; that he was sure that the demand, which he the Ambassador had made, in the name of Caesar, Ferdinand and the Empire had a condition annexed, that is, if it may bee with the peace and profit of other Nations, and liberty of the Church: which being assembled in a generall Councell, seeing it hath iudged otherwise, and that the Colledge of Cardinals was of the same opinion, he could not choose but repute it iuridicall, and reasonable, and approoue it, as hee also did. That, for his fatherly affection, towards the Emperour, and the King, hee wished hee could giue a more acceptable answere; but from a Pope, Head of the Church, nothing could be expected, but what the well gouerning of the pub∣like did compell him to resolue: that hee knew the Emperours wisedome, and his filiall loue, and was confident he would receiue this for good, which was thought necessary by so many Fathers, and would command the Spa∣nish Prelates in Trent, to goe presently to Bolonia, and labour to make Germa∣nie receiue the conditions proposed by the Councell, and send, as soone as might bee, the Duch Prelates, and giue the Synode caution that the condi∣tions proposed should bee obserued. Mendoza, vnderstanding the Popes re∣solution by his answere, would instantly haue protested, that the assembly of Who would haue protest∣ed, if he had not been dis∣swaded by the Car. of Trent: Bolonia was not a lawfull Councell, and that his Holinesse, if he brought it not backe to Trent, would bee cause of all the mischances that should happen to Christendom, & that, he fayling, the Emperor, as Protector of the Church, 1548 PAVL 3. CHARLES 5. EDVVARD 6. HENRY 2. would make prouision. But the Cardinall of Trani, Deane of the Colledge, and some other Cardinals, interposing, hee was content to relate the answere to Caesar, and expect order from him. The Pope, considering the action of Mendoza, thought that this businesse might make some difference betweene him & the Emperor, in which case he thought it not fit to haue the Prelates of Germanie ill affected to him. At the receiuing of their letter, whereof mention was made before, he was offended with the last particle, that they would thinke of other course, holding it to be a plaine threat, and resolued to giue them no answere, and continued three moneths in that opinion: but now, better aduised, hee doubted, that, if they held themselues to bee contemned, they would take some rash resolution, to which the Emperor would giue way, that hee might bee intangled in greater difficulties. Therefore beeing resolued to preuent the danger, by honouring The Pope writeth to the Prelates of Germanie in answere of their letter. them with an answere, he made it very modest and artificiall, yet not with∣out a conuenient sence of his owne honour. The letter began with com∣mendation of their pietie, which appeared in their care to remedie the here∣sies, and seditions, and that himselfe was no lesse sollicitous, in regard of his pastorall office, so that hee hath not suffered, nor doeth suffer any time to passe without thinking of some remedie, and had, from the beginning of his Popedome, recourse vnto that which hath beene mentioned by them, that is, vnto the Councell. And heere relating what happened in the conuocation of it, and the impediments, why it came not presently to execution, he added that, it being assembled, many Decrees haue beene made as well to cōdemne a great number of the heresies, as to reforme a great part of the Church; that the Councell parted from that Citie without his knowledge, but the Synode hauing power to doe it, hee presupposeth the cause was lawfull, vntill the contrary doeth appeare: and that although some few haue dissented, yet it cannot bee said that the Councell is diuided. Hee added that it is not translated into a Citie farre remote, and not safe, and that the being of it subiect to the Church, doth make it secure for Germanie, which hath receiued Christian religion, and many other benefits from it. That hee cared not whether the Councell were celebrated there or elsewhere, and would not hinder the Fathers to chuse another place, so they were not forced. But what did hold them from returning to Trent, they might see by the let∣ters of Bolonia, whereof hee sent them a copie. That hee hath deferred to answere their letters, because the Cardinall of Trent comming vnto him in Caesars name, and afterwards Don Diego di Mendoza, hee was willing to an∣swere the Emperour first. That, by the letters of the Fathers of Bolonia, they will see what is fit to doe before the returne bee resolued on. Therefore hee prayed them to come or send Proctors to Bolonia, and to assist in the Coun∣cell. His conclusion was, that hee was not troubled with that point of their letters, where they intimate that new courses shall bee taken, beeing con¦scious to himselfe not to haue omitted any part of his duetie, and to haue imbraced Germanie with all charitie. That hee promised himselfe from them and Caesar, that they would doe nothing without maturitie; but if courses shall bee attempted against the authoritie of the Sea of Rome, hee cannot hinder it, CHRIST hauing foretold as much, when he founded it, yet hee feared not that their attempts would succeede, because it was grounded vp∣on a most sure rocke. That others had often-times endeuoured the like, but their plots were euer ouerthrowen: and that GOD gaue example in those, what others, who would tread in the same steps, might hope for. And if the miseries past, will not mooue those that are present to desist, yet hee is sure they will remayne constant in their ancient pietie and faith, and in their Congregations will not giue place to counsels contrary to the dig∣nitie of the Church. The Emperour, beeing aduised by his Ambassadour of the conditions The Empe∣rour percei∣ueth y e Popes cunning, and sendeth Am∣bassadors to Bolonia, Var∣gas, and Ve∣lasco. proposed by those of Bolonia, and the Popes resolute answere, though hee saw plainely that his Holinesse couered himselfe with the name of the Coun∣cell, and Fathers of Bolonia, who did notoriously depend on him in all mat∣ters, and receiue all motion from him, to let the world know that he omit∣ted no meanes to set the Councell on foote againe, hee sent Francis Ʋar∣gas, and Martino Ʋelasco to Bolonia. These comming into the assembly, the sixteenth of Ianuary, where there were no more Fathers with the Legates, the Cardinals of Monte and Santa Croce, then in the last Session, they presen∣ted the Emperors letters, which were thus addressed: Conuentui Patrum Boloniae. Which beeing read, and Ʋargas beginning to speake, Monte inter∣rupted him, and said, That though the holy Synod was not bound to heare him, in regard the letters were not addressed to it, because it was not a Con∣uent, Vargas is twice inter∣rupted in his speach. but a Councell, yet they refused not to giue him audience, with Prote∣station that it should not preiudice them, or giue aduantage to others, and that it should remaine free to the Fathers, to continue the Councell, and to goe on, and proceed against the obstinate and rebollious, by inflicting the punishments of the Lawes. Vargas required, that an instrument should bee made of the Protestation, before the Proposition was vnderstood; then hee prayed the Fathers, in the name of all Christendome, to proceede with e∣quitie, because, persisting in their opinion, not wisely and maturely imbra∣ced, it must needes end with some great publike calamitie; but yeelding to the Emperour, all would succeede well. Hee went about to shew how dan∣gerous an errour it would bee, not to change their determiination, and how well Caesar was affected to the seruice of God, and the Church. In these words he was againe interrupted by Monte, who said, I am heere President of this most holy Councell, and Legate of Paul the third, successor of Peter, and Vi∣car of CHRIST on earth, together with these most holy Fathers, to prose∣cute, for the glory of GOD, the Councell, lawfully transferred from Trent, and wee pray Caesar to change opinion, and to assist vs herein, and to curbe the perturbers of the Councel, in regard his Maiestie knoweth that he who hindereth holy Councels, bee he of what degree soeuer, incurreth most grie∣uous punishments of the Lawes; and we are resolued, that, whatsoeuer hap∣peneth, we will not care for any threats, nor will be wanting to the honour and libertie of the Church, of the Councell, and our owne. Then Valasco read the Protestation, which hee had written in his hand; The Empe∣rors protesta∣tion against the Counced in Bolonia. the summe whereof was. That Religion being shaken, manners corrupted, and Germanie separated from the Church, the Emperour had demaunded a Councel of Leo, Adrian, Clement, and at last of Paul the third, and shewing the impediments and difficulties in calling it, he touched the things handled in it, and added, that while his Masestie made warre, principally for Religion, and put Germanie in quiet with his vertue, hauing great hope to make them goe to the Councell, who vntill then had sed, they, most reuerend Le∣gates, against the expectation of all, without the Popes knowledge, making a light fained cause to arise, proposed to the Fathers the translation of the Councell, without giuing them time to thinke on it; whereunto some god∣ly Bishops opposing, protesting they would remaine in Trent, they, with the consent of a few Italians, decreed the said Translation, and parted the next day, and went to Bolonia. That the Emperour being victorious, sol∣licited the Pope many wayes, praying him to make them to returne to Trent, shewing the scandals and imminent dangers, if the Synode did not end in that Citie, and, in the meane space, endeauoured, in the Diet of Ausburg, to make all the Dutchmen submit themselues vnto it. Finally, that he sent the Cardinall of Trent to his Holinesse, to signifie this vnto him, and to pray him to make the Councel returne to Trent. That he caused also Mendoza to goe to Rome to negotiate the same thing: and that the Pope hath taken time to treate with them in their assembly; who haue giuen a vaine an∣swere, captious, full of deceipt, worthy to bee condemned by the Pope, who notwithstanding hath approoued it, calling the vnlawfull Congrega∣tion of Bolonia by the name of a generall Councell, giuing them so great authoritie, that hee knoweth not how to arrogate so much to himselfe. That it was certaine, that the Councell could not bee translated, but by vrgent necessitie, diligent discussion, and consent of all; that, for all this, they, who call themselues Legates, and others, did rashly runne out of Trent, fayning certaine Feuers, and infections of the ayre, and testimo∣nies of Doctours, which the euent hath shewed to bee causes not so much as of any vaine feare. That in case of any such necessitie, it was fit to treate first with the Pope, and the Emperour, who is Gardian of Councels. But their haste was so great that they did not so much as consult with themselues. That it was meete to heare and examine the contradictions and opinions of those Fathers who did speake for conscience sake; who, though not so many in number, ought to bee preferred, as more wise. That, in case it were fit to depart, they ought not to quit the Countrey, but, according to the De∣crees of the holy Councels to choose another place in Germanie. That the choyse of Bolonia, subiect to the Church, could no way bee defended, be∣cause it was certaine that the Germanes would not go thither; and that euery one might refuse it, for many reasons: which was to dissolue the Councell, without warning. Therefore the Emperor, to whom it belongeth to defend the Church, and protect generall Councels, to compose the dissentions of Germany, and also to reduce Spaine, and his other Kingdomes and States, to a true Christian life, seeing that the vnreasonable departure from Trent doth disturbe his whole purpose, hee desireth them, who call themselues Le∣gats, with the other Bishops, to returne to Trent, from whence they parted. That they cannot refuse this, because they promised to doe it when the suspi∣cions of the pestilence did cease: which if they will doe, it will bee most ac∣ceptable to all Christendome. But if not, they, the Emperours Proctors, by speciall mandate, doe protest that the Translation or recesse is vnlawfull, and void, together with all the things that doe, or will follow, and that the autho∣ritie of them, pretended Legats, and of the Bishops there present, is not suffi∣cient to giue a law to all Christendom, in matter of Religion, and reforma∣tion of manners, especially to those Prouinces whose manners and lawes are not knowen vnto them. Likewise they protest that the answere of his Holi∣nesse is not good, but vnlawfull, full of deceipt, illuforie, and that all the dammages, tumults, ruines, wastings of Countries which haue happened, doe, or may happen, ought not to be imputed to Caesar, but to that Congre∣gation which calleth themselues a Councell, it being able most easily and ca∣nonically to giue remedie thereto. Protesting also that the Emperour, in the defect, fault, or negligence of them, and the Pope, will make prouision with all his forces, not leauing the protection and care of the Church, which be∣longeth vnto him as Emperour, and King, according to the lawes, consent of the holy Fathers, and of the whole world. In fine, they demanded a pub∣lique instrument of whatsoeuer was handled by them, and to haue the Em∣perours mandate, and their protestation inserted in the acts of the pretended Congregation. Ʋalasco, after the protestation, presented the same writing which hee had Card. Monte answereth with great re∣solution. in his hand, and required againe that the instance should bee registred. The Cardinall of Monte with consent of the Synode, did most grauely protest, that they would rather die, then suffer such an example to bee brought into the Church, that the Secular power should call a Councell. That Caesar is sonne of the Church, not Lord, or Master. That himselfe, and his Colleague, are Legates of the holy Apostolique Sea, and refuse not to render an account to God and the Pope, of their Legation, and that they would answere, with∣in few dayes, the Protestation read vnto them. Mendoza in Rome, hauing receiued the Emperors answere, that he should The Empe∣rors Ambas∣sador in Rome protesteth also. goe on, and protest to the Pope, in presence of the Cardinals, and Ambassa∣dours of Princes, and vnderstanding what was done in Bolonia, by Vargas, and Velasco, appeared in Consistory, and kneeling before the Pope, read the Protestation, which he held written in his hand. Hee began with the Empe∣rors vigilancie and diligence, to reunite Christendome, diuided into diuers opinions of religion. Hee shewed what requests he had made to Adrian, Cle∣ment, and Paul himselfe, to perswade them to call the Councel; vnto which the rebels of Germany refusing to submit, hee had compelled them to obe∣dience, by force of armes; wherein, though the Pope (to shew he would not bee wanting to the publique cause) did contribute some small assistance of men, yet it may be said, that the warre is finished onely by the Emperours forces. In which, while hee was busied, behold the good worke begun in Trent, was interrupted by a pernicious attempt of transferring the Councel, vpon pretences, neither true nor probable, to this purpose onely, that publike quiet might be hindered, notwithstanding the more godly and sound part of the Fathers did oppose, and remaine in the place. That the name of the Councel should bee giuen to those, not to those, who are retired to Bolonia, honoured by his Holinesse, with the name of his adher nts, whose will hee preferre before the prayers of the Emperour; and Ferdinand, and Princes of the Empire, not regarding the good of Germany, nor the conuersion of those , to reduce who seeing they are content to submit to the Councell of Trent, remayneth nothing but to reduce it to that Citie▪ For which being requested, in the foresaid names, by him the Ambassador, he hath giuen an answerefull of c nning; but voyde of reason. Wherefore see∣ing that the Euangelicall requisitions, made by him, the Emperours Ambas∣sadour, to his Holinesse, the 14. and 27. of December, and, the 16. of Ianua∣rie, by other Proctors of his Maiestie in Bolonia, haue beene neglected in both places▪ hee did then protest, that the departure from Trent, and Tran∣slation of the Councel to Bolonia, were voyde and vnlawfull, will bring con∣tention into the Church, and put the Catholique faith and religion in dan∣ger, and doe for the present giue eandall to the Church, and deforme the state thereof. That all the ruines, scandals; and dissentions, which will arise▪ ought to be imputed to his Holinesse, who, though hee is bound to prouide against them, euen with the losse of his blood, yet doeth fauour and cherish the authours of them. That the Emperour, in defect and fault of his Holi∣nesse, will imploy all his forces, to make prouision herein, according to the forme set downe by the holy Fathers, and obserued by consent of the whole world. Then turning to the Cardinals, hee said, that, the Pope refusing to take care for the peach of religion, vniting of Germany, and reformation of manners if they also will be negligent, he made the same protestation vnto them; and leauing the writing, which he had in his hand, he departed. The Pope considering the Protestation of Mendoza, and aduising of the businesse with the Cardinals, saw he was in a strait, and that to be taken for The Pope te to make himselfe Neutrall and Iudge in the cause. a party, and to haue the contention turned against him, was much against his reputation; neither was there any remedy, but by finding a way to make himselfe Neutrall, and Iudge betweene them who approoue, and who op∣pugne the Translation. To doe this, it was necessary to decline the Prote∣station, that it might seeme not to bee made against him but, before him, a∣gainst those of Bolonia, in which not beeing able to dissemble sufficiently, hee resolued to lay to the Ambassadours charge, the transgressing of his Ma∣sters Manda , thinking that the Emperour, seeing his dexterity in blaming his Minister, that hee might not breake with his Maiestie, would imitate him, and proceede as if hee had protested against those of Bolonia, acknow∣ledging the Pope for Iudge. Therefore, on Wednesday, the first of Febru∣ary, calling Mendoza into the Consistory, hee made a very long answere, and sayd in substance. That to protest, was a thing of bad example, vsed by those who haue shaken off obedience, or are not constant in it: That him∣selfe and the Colledge of Cardinals, are sorry for that vnexpected action, in regard of the fatherly loue hee hath alwayes borne the Emperour, and be∣cause it was done when it was least looked for, hauing made warre, and gai∣ned The answere of his Holi∣nesse to the Protestation. the victory against his owne and the Churches enemies, and beene as∣sisted by the Popes men, maintayned with his immense charge: which succours were great, and came in fit time, and deserued not such a reward after victory; that is, that the end of the warre, should bee the beginning of protesting against him. But he did itigate his griefe, because the Ambassa∣dour had exceeded the bounds of the Emperours Commission, in which hee ha commanded his Proctors at Bolonia, to protest to the Legates; and to him, to protest against the Councel of Bolonia, in presence of the Pope and Cardinals▪ but not against the Pope, That the Emperour had done the of∣fice of a modest Prince, knowing the Pope to bee the onely lawfull Iudge in the cause of Translation, which if he should refuse to determine, then the Protestation against him should take place; and therefore that it was more fit, that if the Fathers, remaining in Trent, had cause of complaint against those of Bolonia, they should make the processe before him. But the Am∣bassadour had peruerted the order, leauing the petition which ought to bee made, and requiring an vndue proiudi e against the Councell, so that, the act of the Pro estation falling of it selfe, there was no need of an answere, Yet to cleere all mens minds, hee would make one. And first, for that hee taxeth him as negligent, and commend th the Emperour as industrious, he said hee would not detract from the good meaning and actions of his Ma∣iostie but yet, that hee did precede him, as in age, so in diligence. Hee said, hee had euer desired the Councell, and shewed it by effects. And here hee discoursed of all his actions, done to this end, and how others did crosse him and sometimes the Emperour himselfe, with diuers wars. Hee added, that to iudge whether the causes of the Translation bee lawfull or no, was re∣serued to himselfe. That to praise those of Trent, was to praise those who were separated from the Church. That he refused not, nor euer did, that they should returne to Trent, so that it might bee done lawfully, and without of∣fence of other Nations. That to thinke onely Trent fit to celebrate the Coun∣cel was to wrong the holy Ghost, which is worshipped, and present in all places▪ Neither ought regard to be had, that Germany hath need of a medi∣cine fo by that reason, there should be a generall Councel held in England, and also where. That a commodious place is not sought for those, for whom the lawes are make, but for those who make them, which are the Bi∣shops. That often times Councels haue beene made, out of the Prouinces where the heresies haue raigned. That hee knoweth why he was displeased with the answere giuen him, that is, that the Decrees made, and to be made, are receiued, and that the manner, vsed euer since the Apostles time, is ob∣serued▪ That he will auoid all negligence in prouiding for the Church, and if Caesar will be diligent, let him keepe himselfe within the limits, prescribed to him by the lawes and Fathers▪ The functions of them both being distinct; will be profitable to the Church. And concerning the Translation, whether it were lawfull or no, he called the cause to him, and deputed 4. Cardinals; , Burg is, Poole, and Crescentius, to heare it commanding euery one that; vntill it was ended, they should attempt no nouitie, giuing the terme of a mo to the Fathers of Bolonia and Trent to produce their reasons. And he ed this decree to be Written by the Secretary of the Consistory, in the ac∣customed iudiciall forme of the Court▪ inhibiting the Prelats of Bolonia and Trent▪ to innouate any thing, while the cause depended. The Imperialists did laugh extreamely at the Popes distinction, of prote∣sting against the Pope, and before him. But Diego made a new Protestation, saying hee had a speciall mandate from the Emperour, to protest as he had done. The Popes inhibition beeing receiued in Bolonia, and no more assem∣blies of Bishops, or Congregations of Diuines being made, all departed by little and little, except the Popes stipendaries, who could not doe it with their honour. Those of Trent mooued not, according to the Emperours wil, that Don Dieg mak th a new prot station. they might keepe there some signe of the Councell, and hold the Catholikes of Germany in hope, and the Protestants in their dutie and that their pro∣mise to obey the Councel of Trent, might not be voyd, there being none at al. The Pope caused his answere giuen to Mendoza, to come to the know∣ledge of the Fathers of Trent, and expected fifteene dayes that some ouerture would be made by him of them, that he should be Iudge, as hee had desseig∣ned. But seeing nothing succeeded, he wrote a Briefe to the Cardinall Pac∣ceco, The Pope wri eth to the Fathers in Trent by way of c ation. and to the Arch bishops and Bishops of Trent, in manner of a citation: in which hauing deliuered the causes, which mooued him to intimate the Councell, and the impediments and delayes, which happened in calling it, and the ioy he had to see it begun, which was increased by the happie pro∣ceeding, hoping that in a short time prouision would bee made against the euils of the Church, hee added, that he receiued as much sorrow from the contrary encounters; so that vnderstanding the departure of his Legates, and maior part of the Bishops from Trent, some remayning still there, hee was grieued, for that it might hinder the progresse of the Councell, and giue fcandall to the Church. This being as well knowen to them as to him, hee marueiled why, if the Translation of the Councell seemed iust vnto them, they went not in company with the others; if vniust, why they made not their complaint to him. That it was a cleere case, whereof they could not bee ignorant, that they were bound to doe the one or the other; either of which, if it had beene embraced, would haue taken away all occasion of scandal. That he could not choose but write to thē with griefe; that they were defectuous in the one or the other, and that hee was sooner aduised by the Emperour of their complaints, then by any of them, so much as by letter, or messenger: and that, for this negligence, he had more cause to complaine of the Cardinall, who was more obliged, by reason of his Cardinalitie. But be∣cause that which they should haue done, was preuented by Caesar, who hath complained by his Ambassadour, that the Translation is void and vnlawfull, he doth readily offer vnto them, that which should not haue beene denied, if they had made the case kowen, that is, to heare their complaints, and take knowledge of the cause, And though he ought to presuppose that the Tran∣slation is lawfull, yet to doe the part of a iust iudge, hee willingly offereth to heare them and their reasons, which they shall bring to the contrary: that herein hee would hold and esteeme of the Spanish Nation, and of their per∣sons, not suffering the great presumtions to preuaile, which ought to bee had against them. Therefore hauing by aduise of the Cardinals, called the cause of the Translation of the Councell vnto him, and giuen commission to some of them to relate it in Consistory, all that pretend interest being ci∣ted, and the Prelates of Bolonia and Trent inhibited to attempt any thing, while the cause dependeth, as was contained in the writing, whereof he sent them a copy, desiring to conclude the cause as soone as may be he comman∣deth them, that pretending the Translation to be of no force, they send three at the least; well instructed, to assist in iudgement, and to alleadge their pre∣tensions, and to render their presence, as soone as may bee; concluding, that the presentation of the Briefe to the Cardinall, or to two or three of them, af∣fixed at the Church doore of Trent, shall bind them all, as if it had beene per∣sonally Who answere thus. intimated to euery one. The Pope sent also to those of Bolonia to inti∣mate the same Decree, who sent immediatly to Rome. But the Cardinall Pacceco, and the other Spaniards in Trent, who were in number thirteene, hauing first sent to know the Emperours mind , answered the Popes letter the three and twentieth of March, thus in substance. That they trusted in his benignitie and wisedome, which will easily know that, in contracting the Translation, in being silent, in remayning in that Citie, they thought of nothing lesse, then of offending his Holinesse; yea, that the principall cause, why they dissented, was, because a matter of so great weight was handled, without his knowledge: wherein also they desired, that so small account should not be made of the Emperour. That it seemed cleere to them, that the Translation would not bee well ex∣pounded, nor easily approoued by his Holinesse, whom they prayed not to beleeue that the Emperour had preuented their complaint, exacted by his Beatitude, because they had complained first to him, but that hee did it of his owne motion, who thought the protection of the Church belonged to him: that they should neuer haue thought that his Holinesse would haue desired to haue beene assisted by them, to whom they beleeued an absolute account was giuen by his Legates, in regard what they spake was in publike, and written by Notaries; that it seemed enough for them to deliuer their opinion, and then to bee silent. Therefore they did not beleeue their presence was necessarie in ought else. That if there bee any defect, yet their plaine meaning is cleare. That they thought it enough to dissent from the Translation, and for modestie and humilitie, not to trouble his Holinesse, whom they supposed would not bee wanting, to performe what hee thought fit, for the good of the Church. That they saw not why they should depart with the Legates, who promised, in the ge∣nerall Congregation, and in the publike Session, to returne to Trent, so soone as the suspition of the sicknesse did cease, especially if Germany would sub∣mit to the Councell. That they remained there, beleeuing they would re∣turne, especially when they vnderstood, that, by the grace of God, and ver∣tue of the Emperour, Germanie did submit it selfe. And that some haue re∣ceiued scandall by their abiding in Trent, as his holinesse saith, it is sufficient for them that they haue not giuen it; and on the other side, the departure of others hath troubled many. That the successor of Saint Peter hath euer been very venerable to their nation; wherein themselues haue not beene defectu∣ous. They pray his Holinesse, that they may not bee blamed for what they haue done to a good end▪ and doe humbly beseech him not to consent they should bee put into a suite, in regard the cause is not theirs, but Gods; saying▪ that if it were theirs, they would be content to indure any wrong; but being Gods, and CHRISTS, as it is, it belongeth more to none then to his Vicar. In fine, they prayed his holinesse to set the interrupted Councel on its feete againe, and cause the Legats and Fathers to returne to the same place, and to doe this by a Briefe, without treating of Translation. They pray∣ed him to take their words in good part, not spoken to signifie what the dutie of his Holinesse was, but what they hoped from him. The Spaniards answere being receiued by the Pope, it was sent to the The reply of the Proctors of the Fathers of Bolonia the Spaniards answere. Cardinals, to whom the cause was committed; by whom it was communi∣cated to the Proctors of those of Bolonia, that they might proceede. These answered, that they were glad that the Spaniards do acknowledge the iudge∣ment and the Iudge, and that they will not bee a partie. Yet it was necessa∣ry to retort some things deliuered in their answere, to make the Trueth ap∣peare. In that they say his Holinesse should first haue been aduised with, it was superfluous, in regard a speciall Bull was then read. That the Empe∣rour had been neglected, it cannot be sayd, because so great esteeme hath been held of his Maiestie, as of the Pope, the cause it selfe not compor∣ting any delay, seeing it was necessary to dissolue, or translate the Coun∣cell, in regard of the progresse which the pestilent sickenesse made in the Citie, and borders, of the actuall and eminent departure of many Fathers, of the Doctors oath, especially of Fracastorius, who had a publike stipend, and of the feare that the commerce of the neighbour Cities would bee taken a∣way. All which appeareth in the actes transported to Rome, by his Holinesse commandement. That the Legates, after the Decree, exhorted them to goe to Bolonia, and being arriued there, did admonish them by letters, so that they cannot say they ought not to follow the Legats, because they confen∣ted not to the Translation, for the suffrages of all in the Councell being free, they might dissent with a safe conscience: but the maior part hauing made a Decree, it was meete the lesser part should yeelde, or else, neuer any thing would be determined. That the returne hath beene promised is true; but it may bee seene in the Decree, in what forme the promise was made. If they taryed, beleeuing that the others would returne, why did they not an∣swere the Legats letters, who admonished them to goe to Bolonia. But when they say the suspicion of the Pestilence was pretended, it is probable they spake it by chance; otherwise hauing nothing to say against the Translation, and not sending, according to the Popes Decree, they should incurre the Censures. Neither is that diuisiō ought worth, if the cause be theirs, or of God. For as it belongeth to them, no man will doe them wrong, as vnto CHRIST, seeing the question is of the fact, it is necessarie to cleere that which is not manifest in the fact. Whereupon the Emperour hauing calling the Legats pretended, and the Fathers of Bolonia not a Councell, but a priuate assem∣bly, and vttered many opprobrious termes against the Translation, it was rea∣sonable the Pope should assume the cause, not to cherish, but to appease con∣tentions. Whether scandals haue risen by the Translation, or by their remai∣ning in Trent, may be seene by this onely, that their remaining is the cause why the returne cannot be. And when they pray his Holinesse to cause the interrupted Councell to returne, if they vnderstand it of the vsuall Congre∣gations, they haue neuer beene intermitted; if of the publication of the Decrees, this hath beene referred for their sake: and so many things are already discussed in Bolonia, as well of faith as reformation, that a long Sessi∣on may bee made thereof. Therefore they pray his Holinesse, to giue sen∣tence, considering that no Councell, but in time of schisme, hath lasted so long as this, so that the Bishops are desired by their Churches, vnto which it is fit they should bee restored. This writing was presented in the ende of Aprill. After which there was no further proceeding in the cause, for that the deputed Cardinals knew not how to conclude. To pronounce the Transla∣tion The Cardi∣nals deputed in this cause, knew not how to pro∣ceed. lawfull, in the absence of the contradictors, was to make a schisme, hauing no meanes to enforce them to receiue the sentence; and they saw lesse meanes to force them to assist in the cause. The Pope was much troubled, seeing no way to compose the difficultie, without forme of iudgement. While these things were in question, after the death of the Duke his sonne, the Pope did continually demand the restitution of Piacenza, and of other places, vsurped in the District of Parma, making vse of the interests of the Emperours daughter, wife to Duke Octauius; sonne of him that was dead. But the Emperour, purposing to ioyne that Citie to the Dukedome of Milan, and to recompence his sonne in Law in something else, delayed the time with diuers answeres and offers, hoping that the Pope, beeing eighty yeeres of age; and grieued for his sonnes death, and hauing many other di∣stasts, would end all the controuersies by his death. But the Pope seeing he Differences betweene the Pope & Em∣perour, about the restitution of Piacenza. was deluded with delayes, molested with requests for the returne of the Councell to Trent, and offended by the remaining of the Spaniards in the Citie, to make a diuersion at the least, hee let the Emperour know, that the vsurpers of Piacenza, a Towne belonging to the Church, had incurred the Censures; to the declaration of which hee would proceed: fulminating also more of them, if within a certaine time prefixed, it were not restored to him. The Emperour wrote backe a sharpe letter, aduising the Pope not to cherish the fugitiues of Naples; shewing that all the practises were knowen vnto him, and that hee did vnderstand the calumnies raised against him, that he procured a schisme, when he demanded a Councel in Trent, to vnite Christendome; and for Piacenza, that it was a member of the Dutchie of Milan, many yeeres vniustly vsurped by the Popes: and if they haue title to it, let it bee shewed, and hee will not faile to doe iustice. The Pope seeing his spirituall weapons would doe no good, without the temporall, changed his opinion, and sought to make a strong League against the Emperour: wherein he found many difficulties, not being able to perswade the Veneti∣ans to enter into it, and the Frenchmen requiring the consent of the Consi∣story, in regard of the Popes decrepite age, and a pawne of money; which the Pope was not willing to lay downe, in regard of the great charge he was at, fearing it would be greater, for which cause, he had layd as great burthens His Holinesse endeauoureth to make a strong league against the Emperor, but finding diffi∣culties in it, knoweth not what to doe. on his subiects as they were able to beare, and sold and pawned as much as he could, and giuen order for granting of all sorts of dispensations, and fa∣uours, to whomsoeuer would giue money, to supply the wants of the Apo∣stolique Sea. For the Councel, he was most resolute not to let it bee out of his owne Territories, and besides other vrgent reasons, that of his owne and the Popedomes reputation was added, that the Emperour should not compell him. But he knew not how to induce him and Germany, to giue consent. To let it vanish, sometimes seemed good vnto him, and some∣times not, and he often discoursed thereof with the Cardinals, both in Con∣sistory, and priuately. But finally, hee resolued to put to hazard the deter∣mination, for which hee knew he was insufficient, not onely for the rea∣sons before alleaged, but for other weightie respects, which passed in Ger∣many. For Caesar, at the returne of the Cardinall of Trent to Ausburg, vnder∣standing the Popes minde, and the answere hee gaue to Mendoza, at the end of December, (which caused him to giue ouer for the Protestation, as hath beene sayd) and thinking that the Pope, by requiring the restitution of Pia∣conza, sought to diuert all speech of the Councell, was assured, that, so long as he liued, either the returne would not be, or the resolution would bee pro∣tracted, and therefore thought fit, before he disarmed, to set Germany at peace, in matters of religion. Hereof a proposition was made in the Diet, and or∣der taken, The Emperor resolueth to settle a peace of religion in the Diet. that choyse should be made of persons, fit for this good worke. Those were chosen who were esteemed the best; who not agreeing, all was referred to Caesar. Hee elected three, Iulius Flugius, Michael Sidonius, and Iohannes Islebius. These after long consultation, composed a forme of Reli∣gion, which was often examined, reuiewed, and changed, first by themselues, and then by diuers persons, vnto whom the Emperor caused it to be shewed; Therefore a forme is com∣posed, called the Interim. and some of the principall Ministers of the Protestants were also called, that they might approoue it. But it had so many alterations, additions, and diminutions, that it appeared to be the worke of many men, who had con∣trary ends. Finally, it was reduced into that forme in which it now is; & the Legate sent a copie thereof vnto Rome, by the Emperours consent, who was willing to vnderstand the Popes opinion, and by the counsell of the maior part of the Prelates, who seeing the controuersies betweene the Pope and the Emperour, feared that the Emperour would obey him no lon∣ger; a thing much abhorred by them, for the inbred, and inueterate opini∣on of the Dutchmen, to maintaine the dignitie of the Pope, which is the on∣ly counterpoise of the Emperours authoritie, whom without his assistance, they were not able to resist; if, according to the vse of ancient Christian Princes, they would keepe them within their bounds, and remooue the abu∣ses of the renowned libertie of the Clergie. The Booke contayned twentie fiue heads. Of the state of man in inno∣cencie. Of the state of man after sinne. Of the redemption by CHRIST. Which con∣temeth 25. heads. Of Iustification. Of the fruits thereof. Of the manner how it is re∣ceiued. Of charitie and good workes. Of beliefe of the remission of sinnes. Of the Church. Of the signes of the true Church. Of the au∣thoritie thereof. Of the Ministers of the Church. Of the Pope and Bi∣shops. Of the Sacraments. Of Baptisme. Of Confirmation. Of Pe∣nance. Of the Eucharist. Of extreame Vnction. Of Order. Of Mar∣riage. Of the Sacrifice of the Masse. Of the memory, intercession, and inuocation of Saints. Of the Communion. Of the Ceremonies, and vse of the Sacraments. To recite here the substance of them would be too long, tedious and vnprofitable, because the consequences which began from that Doeth not continue long booke, lasted not long. It had the name of the Interim, prescribing what to beleeue, vntill all was established by a generall Conncell. When the copie came to Rome, euery one was amazed; first in generall, that a temporall Prince, in a secular assembly, should meddle with religion, and not in one Article onely, but in all. The learned called to minde the of Zeno, the of Heraclius, and the of Constance, and what diuisions these Imperiall constitutions in matter of religion made in Chri∣stendome, And is censu∣red in Rome. and said, that, vntill then, there were three names, vnluckie to the Church, bringing into it many diuisions, vnder pretence of vnitie: to which might be added this fourth, the Interim of Charles the fifth. They doubted that this beginning of the Emperour would end, where Henry the eight, King of England did arriue, to declare himselfe Head of the Church: which would haue so much more compasse, as Spaine, Italy, Germany, and other ad∣iacent Countreys were greater then one Island, which, in appearance, did make shew to containe one Catholike doctrine, but was very farre from it. Descending to particulars, they reprehended that, in the points of originall sinne, iustification, the Sacraments, Baptisme, and confirmation, the doctrine determined by the Councell was not set downe: and that collection being made to bee obserued vntill the Councell, in regard the Councel, concerning those points, was made already, what else could bee said, but that it was pre∣cisely to be obserued? But to haue published another doctrine, was to an∣nihilate the Counsell, and that the Emperours cunning was more to be su∣spected then euer, seeing that hee made so earnest a request, that the Councell should returne to Trent, and did at the same time, take away all authority from whatsoeuer was constituted by it. They condemned the whole body of that doctrine, for that it contained ambiguous speeches, which superficially considered, did receiue a good sence, but, inwardly, were full of poyson, that, in some parts, it did purposely stand onely vpon the gene∣rall, that the Lutherans might expound it for themselues: but in the Article of concupiscence, it spake iust as the Lutherans did; as also of iustification, placing it in the beliefe of the promises, and attributing too much, yea, all, to faith. In the Article of good workes, nothing was said of the merit of condignitie, which is the principall point in that matter. In the Article of the Church that it hath not deriued vnity from the visible Head, which is essentiall; and, which is worse, hath made a Church inuisible by charitie, and then made the same visible. That it is a secret Artifice to destroy the Hierar∣chie, and establish the Lutheran opinion. That to haue made notes of the Church, soundnesse of doctrine, and the lawfull vse of the Sacraments, hath giuen a way to all sects to hold, obstinately, themselues to bee the Church; concealing the true marke, which is the obedience to the Pope of Rome. That the saying, that the Pope was appointed for remedie of Schisme, and Bishops by the Law of God, was not to be endured. That the Sacrament of Penance was made most Lutheran-like, in that it was sayd, that beleeuing to receiue with this Sacrament that which CHRIST hath promised, it happeneth to euery one as hee beleeueth. That the principall point of Sacrifice, is con∣cealed, that it is expiatorie, and propitiatory for the liuing and the dead. That hauing granted wiues to Priests, and the Cup in the Communion of the Laitie, euery one might see, that with those two abuses the whole Catholike faith was ouerthrowen. All the Court laid with one voice, that the princi∣pall point was in question; that the foundations of the Church were sha∣ken; that it was necessary to imploy all their forces, to excite all Princes, to send to the Bishops of all nations, and; by all meanes, to resist this begin∣ning, from whence would vndoubtedly follow, not the ruine of the Church of Rome (for that was impossible) but a greater deformation, and dishonour, then euer. But the old Pope, beeing most sensible, who, with the acutenesse of Where the Pope differeth in opinion from all o∣thers. his iudgement, saw more then them all, did immediatly penetrate to the bottome, and iudged that the enterprise would bee good for him, and perni∣cious for the Emperour. He maruelled much at the wisedome and counsell of so great a Prince; that, by one victory, hee should thinke hee was made iudge of all mankinde, and presuppose hee was able to contest with both par∣ties. That a Prince, adhering to one might oppresse another, but to contend with both, was too much boldnesse of vanity. Hee foresaw that the do∣ctrine would generally more displease the Catholikes, then the Court and the Protestants most of all, and that it would be impugned by all, and defended by none: wherein there was no neede of his paines, because his enemies would worke for him, more then himselfe could doe; and that it was better to permit the publication of it, then to hinder it; and rather being in this state in which it is, then when it is reformed, that it may more easily fall. Onely there was neede of three things. That the Emperour should not know this. That he should be put vpon the businesse as soone as might be. And that the first blow should be against the Protestants. To effect the first, it was fit to make a light opposition, in some things: for the second, to set on foote the interests of the Germane Prelates: and for the third to make it cunningly ap∣peare, that this doctrine was collected, not to vnite both parties, but onely to curbe the Protestants; by which meanes a great point was gayned, that is, that a secular Prince did not make Articles of faith for the faithfull, but for those that erred. Therefore hee sent instructions to Cardinall Sfondrato, to make some His instructi∣ons to his Le∣gate in Ger∣many. opposition, and, when the doctrine should bee published (that hee might not be present) to take leaue and bee gone. The Cardinall, according to his Commission, declared, in the Popes name, that the permission to continue the receiuing of the Cup in the holy Communion, though he that receiueth it is not to bee reprehended, (the custome of receiuing the Sacrament vnder both kindes being abrogated long since) was a thing reserued to the Pope; as also the granting of marriage to Priests: and the rather, because, it hath neuer been vsed in the Church: and the Greekes and Easterne people, who doe not binde them to a single life, doe graunt that married men may receiue Orders, and keeping their wiues, may exercise the ministery, but doe not, nor euer did, permit them to marry, who were in Orders before. He ad∣ded, that, without doubt, if his Maiestie would graunt these things to bee lawfull, he should grieuously offend the Maiesty of God: but holding them vnlawfull, hee might permit them to the heretikes, as a lesser euill. It is to∣lerable, and belongeth to the wisedome of a Prince, when all euils can∣not bee remooued, to suffer the least, that the greater may bee rooted out. That his holinesse perusing the booke, saw it was onely a permission to the Lutherans, that they may not without end, passe from one errour to ano∣ther: and that it is not granted to the Catholikes to beleeue or doe any thing, but according to the prescript of the holy Apostolike Sea, which onely, as Mistris of the faithfull, may make Decrees in point of Religion. And being assured that this was his Maiesties purpose, he told him it would be necessa∣ry to make an expresse declaration therof, and not to giue the raines so much to the Lutheranes, especially in the power of changing ceremonies, conside∣ring that, in the last point, hee seemed to giue them too much liberty, where hee graunteth, that the Ceremonies, which may giue cause of Superstition; should be taken away. Hee added, that the Lutherans would hold it lawfull to retaine the Ecclesiasticall goods, and iurisdiction vsurped, if they were not commanded to make restitution: wherein a Councell was not to be expe∣cted, but execution presently made, and that, the spoyles being notoriously knowen, he neede not obserue the nice points of Law, but proceed summa∣rily, and with his Princely power. This censure was imparted by Caesar to the Ecclesiasticall Electors, who The Ecclesi∣asticall Ele∣ctors approue the Popes cē∣sure of the In∣terim, especi∣ally concer∣ning restitu∣tion of goods vsurped by the Protestants. did approoue it; but, particularly, for the point of restitution of Ecclesiasti∣call goods, they affirmed it was necessary, without which the worship of God could not bee restored, nor Religion preserued, nor peace well assu∣red. And that because the spoile was manifest, iustice did require a short proceeding. All the Bishops were of the same opinion. The Secular Prin∣ces were silent for feare of offending the Emperour; and, by their example, the Ambassadors of the Cities spake but little, and of that little, little account Wherefore the Emperor maketh a pro∣heme to the Interim. was made. In regard of the Legates remonstrance, the Emperour caused a Proheme to bee made to the booke, to this purpose. That, ayming at the peace of Germanie, hee found it was impossible to make it, vntill the differen∣ces of Religion were composed, from whence all the dissentions and heart∣burnings haue risen; and perceiuing that a generall Councell in Germany, was the onely remedy herein, hee had caused it to begin in Trent, and perswaded all the States of the Empire to adhere, and submit vnto it: but thinking not to leaue things in suspence, and confusion, vntill the Councell be cele∣brated, a forme was presented to him by some great, and zealous persons, which, some learned hauing examined, by his appointment they haue found it not abhorring from the Catholike Religion, it beeing vnderstood in a good sence, except two Articles, the Communion of the Cup, and marri∣age of Priests. Therefore hee requireth the States, who vntill then haue ob∣serued the Lawes of the vniuersall Church, to perseuere in them, and, as they haue promised, not to change any thing; and those that haue innoua∣ted, either to returne to antiquity, or to conforme themselues to that con∣fession, if, in any thing, they haue exceeded it, and to bee contented with it, not teaching, writing, or printing to the contrary, but expecting onely the declaration of the Councell. And because, in the last point, leaue is giuen to take away superstitious Ceremonies, hee reserueth the declaration there∣of to himselfe, and of all other difficulties that should arise. The fifteenth of With which the Protestāts are distasted, though they accept it for feare. May the Booke was read in the publike assembly. The voyces were not ta∣ken according to the vse; but onely the Elector did rise, and thanked the Emperour in the name of them all; who tooke the thankes for a generall ap∣probation and assent. No man spake then a word: but the Princes, who did long since follow the confession of Ausburg, when they wereby them∣selues, did say they could not accept it: and some of the Cities spake words which signified the same, though not openly, for feare of the Emperour. The booke was printed in Latine and Dutch, by order from Caesar, and after∣wards translated, and printed in Italian and French. Besides this, the Emperour published, the fourteenth of Iune, a reformati∣on The Emperor publisheth a reformation of the Clegie conteining 23 heads. of the Clergie, which had been maturely digested and collected by lear∣ned and religious men. It conteined 23. points. Of ordination and election of Ministers. Of the office of the Ecclesiasticall Orders. Of the office of Deans and Canons. Of canonicall houres. Of Monasteries. Of Schooles and Vniuersities. Of Hospitals. Of the office of a Preacher. Of the admi∣nistration of the Sacraments. Of the administration of Baptisme. Of the administration of Confirmation. Of Ceremonies. Of the Masse. Of the administration of Penance. Of the administration of Extreame Vnction. Of the administration of Matrimonie. Of Ecclesiasticall Ceremonies. Of the discipline of the Clergie and people. Of plurality of Benefices. Of the discipline of the people. Of Visitations. Of Councels. Of Excommuni∣cation. In these points were conteined about an hundred and thirtie pre∣cepts, so iust, and full of equity, that if one should say, neuer any reformati∣on before was made more exact, and lesse partiall, without cauils and traps to ensnare the vnaduised, hee could not easily bee reprooued, and if it had been made by the Prelates only, it would not haue displeased at Rome, except in two points, where it giueth authority to the Councell of Basil, and in some other places, where it medleth with dispensations, and exemptions, and other things reserued to the Pope. But beeing made by the Emperours authoritie, it seemed more vnsupportable then the Interim. For it is a fundamentall Which being made by secu∣lar authority, is iudged in Rome more vnsupportable then the In∣terim. maxime of the Court of Rome, that the Seculars, of what degree or honestie soeuer, cannot giue a Law to the Clergie, though to a good end. But, because they could not choose, they supported the tyranny (for so they sayd) which they were not then able to resist. A little after the Emperour gaue order, that the Diocesan Synods should The Emperor giueth order for Diocesan Synods. be held at Saint Martins day, and the Prouinciall before Lent. And because the prelates desired that the Pope should consent, at the least to those points, which seemed not to diminish hisauthority, the Emperour offered them, by his hand-writing, dated the eighteenth of Iuly, to vse all diligence to per∣swade his Holinesse not to bee wanting in his duety. This reformation was printed in many Catholique places of Germany, and also in Milan, the same yeere, by Innocentius Ciconiaria. The Diet of Ausburg ended the last Concludeth the Diet. of Iune, and the Recesse was published; in which the Emperour promised that the Councell should be continued in Trent, and that hee would take or∣der And promi∣seth the re∣sumption of the Councel in Trent. that it should bee reassumed quickly; in which case hee commanded all the Ecclesiastiques to be present, and those of the Augustan confession to goe thither with his safe conduct, where all should bee handled according to the word of God, and doctrine of the Fathers, and themselues should bee heard. The Cardinall of and other Prelates, iealous be∣ginnings of confessions and reformations, made and , the Popes authority, would be out of Germany, Emp he Po to , the Decrees; it would bee to fa ili who still Pope, will willingly▪ when they see i▪ au ti The eeing ∣swaded that, when the stirres of eligion ▪ Germany is obedience▪ did , thin∣king th should be plea ed hi He ee to the Pope▪ of whats was done fo inuited nd the Bishop The Pope sendeth the Bishop of Fa∣n for his Nuncio into Germany. of to will ; pro∣pose the restitution of Pia , and to Spaniards froth Trent. But hauing receiued the first answere from , and cons Cardinals, hee soone resolued that it was not for him to send a Minister, to execute the Emperours ▪ Yet, for the reason, which mooued the Cardinall of Ausburg, he tooke a middle way, to send Nuncij, nor for that and, which the Emperour deseigned; but to grant absolutions and graces, thinking it would, doe miracles, for maintenance of his authority, without preiudice of consenting that another should assume the power, which he pretendeth to belong onely to himselfe. Therefore after ▪ he sent the Bishops of Verona; and Ferentino, for his And after∣wards two Bishops more to whom hee giueth ample Faculties by his Bull. Nuncij into Germany▪ to whom, by aduise of the Cardinals, hee directed a Bull, dated the last of August, giuing them commission, to declare to all that will returne to the Catholique truth, that he is ready to imbrace them, and will not bee hard in pardoning them, so that they will not giue, but receiue lawes referring to the conscience of his Nuncij, to remit something of the old discipline, if they thinke it may be done without publique scandall, gi∣uing them Faculty to absolue fully in both persons, though Kings and Princes, Ecclesiastical, and Regular, Colledges, and Communi∣ties, from all excommunications , and euen from tempo∣rall punishments incurred for , though they bee relapsed it and to dispence , for , and , absoluing the , and homag made▪ , for s ▪ and to absol the Re from▪ giuing to bi , fasting dayes; by the counsell the corporall Physition; or spirituall onely, or without any, if it and to moderate the number of feastes, and for those the communion of the Chalica, if they will humbly de is, that the Church doth not erre in denying it to the Laitie, to grant it vnto them for life, or for so long as they shall thinke fit, so that it be done neither in the same time nor place with that which is done by decree of the Church. Hee granted them power also, to vnite Ecclesiasticall Benefices to Studies, Schooles, or Hospitals; and to absolue the vsurpers of Ecclesiasticall mooue∣able goods, after the restitution of the immooueables, compounding also for the fruits vsurped and mooueables consumed, with authoritie to commu∣nicate these Faculties, to other persons of note. This Bull passed in all places, beeing printed vpon the occasion which Which is cen∣sured in Ger∣many. shall bee related, and affoorded matter of discourse. First for the proheme; where the Pope said, that, in the troubles of the Church, hee was comforted by the remedy left by CHRIST, that the Corne of the Church winnowed by Satan, should bee preserued by the faith of Peter, especially after hee had applyed the remedy of the generall Councell, as if the Church had no foun∣dation but vpon him, and sixty persons of Trent. Then they thought it a great presumption to restore Kings and Princes to honours, fame, and dig∣nity. There was also obserued a contradiction, to absolue from vnlawfull oathes, which need no absolution, and from true oathes no man can absolue. And it was thought another contradiction, to grant the Chalice onely to him, who beleeueth the Church doth not erre, in forbidding it to the La tie. For how is it possible to beleeue so, and to desire not to be comprehended in the prohibition? But they could not forbeare laughing, when they read the condition, to absolue the Friars who forsooke their cloysters, to weare the habite couered, as if the kingdome of GOD did consist in a colour, or vest∣ment, which being not worne in shew, yet it was necessary to haue it in se∣cret. But though the Nuncij were soone deputed, yet their dispatch was de∣ferred vntill the next yeere, because the Emperour was not pleased with the manner of it, in which no mention was made to assist, or authorize the pro∣uisions Why the dis∣patch of the two Nuncij was deferred. made by him; neither would the Pope euer bee perswaded that any minister of his should be present. The Emperour beeing parted from Ausburg, vsed all diligence, that the The Empe∣rors Interim doth please neither the Protestants nor the Ca∣tholiques. Interim might bee receiued, by the Protestant Cities; but found resistance and difficulty euery where, because they did detest it more then the Catho∣liques. They sayd it was a totall establishment of the Papacie. Aboue all, they found fault with the doctrine of Iustification, and that the communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priests was questioned. Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxony, though prisoner, said freely, that GOD and his conscience, vnto which hee was bound aboue all, did not permit him to receiue it. Where it was admitted, diuers accidents, varieties, and confusions did succeed, so that it was brought into some places diuersly, with so many limitations, and con∣ditions, that one may say, it was rather reiected by all, then accepted by any. Neither did the Catholiques care to helpe forward the businesse, because they did not approoue it themselues. That which did hinder the emperor most, was the modest liberty of a little weake Citie, which desired him, that, being Lord of their goods and life, hee would suffer that their conscience might be∣long to GOD: that if the doctrine proposed to them, were receiued by him∣selfe, they should haue a great example to follow. But if his Maiestie would compel them to accept of, and beleeue that which himselfe thought not true, they knew not how it could be done. In September the Emperor went in∣to low Germany, where he found greater difficulties. For the Cities of Saxonie vsed many excuses, and did oppose with a kind of scorne. Where∣fore it was by the Emperour, and sustained a long warre, that main∣tained the fire aliue in Germani , which burned his Trophees; as in its place shall bee saide. By reason of this confusion, and to giue order that the fle∣mings should sweare to his sonne, the Emperour, quitting Ger∣many, went into Flanders; and though he seuerely forbad, that the doctrine And against by both. of the Interim should be impugned by any, or written, taught, or preached a∣gainst, yet many Protestants did write against it. And the Pope, thinking it fit for his affaires to doe it, gaue order to , Generall of the Dominicans, that assembling the most learned men of his order, by their opi∣nion and paints, hee should make a strong, and sound confutation. Many in France wrote against it also: and in a short time there was, as it were a whole quodron of Writers against it, Catholiques, and Protestants, especial∣ly of the Hanse-townes. And that did follow which doth ordinarily happen to him that will reconcile contrary opinions, that he maketh them both a∣gree to impugne his, and euery one more obstinate in defending his owne. There was also some cause of diuision among the Protestants. For those A diuision a∣mong the Protestants. who had in part yeelded to Caesar against their wills, and restored the old ce∣remonies, excused themselues, and said, that the things done by them were indifferent, and by consequence, that did not concerne their saluation to re∣proue or receiue them, and that it was lawfull, yea, necessary, to tolerate some seruitude, when no impiety was ioyned with it; and therefore that, in these, the Emperour was to be obeyed. Others, whom necessitie had not com∣pelled, said it was true that indifferent things concern not saluation yet, by meanes of them, pernicious things are brought in; and, going on, they fra∣med a generall conclusion, that Ceremonies and Rites, though by nature in∣different; doe become then bad, when he that vseth them hath an opinion Which was neuer well reconciled. that they are good, And hence arose two Sects, and afterwards more differences amongst them which were well reconciled. And in England there were no lesse for Religion. For Edward Earle of Harford, , by the ▪ of King, hauing Troubles in England a∣bout religion. gained authority gether with Thomas , Archbishop of Canterbury, did the Pro∣testants, and brought in some of their owne Doctors▪ and hauing layd some foundation of doctrine, especially amongst the Nobility, they assembled the States of the Kingdome, which they call a Parliament, and by public de∣cree of the King, and of that, banished the Masse: For which a popular sedition beeing made by those who required the restitution of the Edicts of Henrys of the old Religion and arise in the Kingdome. Saint Martins day beeing come, were great, the Councel were held in many Cities▪ and the refor∣mation of the Emperour was receiued, changing th onely, as it med to agree best to the manner of decreeing in euery , yet without prouision made for the execution; and all for 1549 1549 The Dioce∣san Councels are held, and the Emperors reformation is receiued. The Councell of Collen. onely the of The The Decrees where of the the Low Cou∣treys, as being subiect to that Sea. of should charging the Magi∣ to . same stile, who, the third The Prouin∣ciall Councell of Mentz. w ke of▪ his Pr , made 48. Decrees in do∣ctrine of In the poynts decided by doctrine; in others, the more points are remarkeable, where In point to be , or haue D me∣ be doe shew how much the opinions of the after which may that Religion cannot be handled in a Nationall Councel. And though one may ground himselfe more vpon diuers Prouinciall Councels of Africa, E∣gypt, of Syria, and other parts of the East, yet this, being moderne, though not of such consequence, will perhaps more prouoke the Reader to marke it. The Elector of Triers did celebrate also his Synode: and other Metropoli∣tanes, not departing from the Communion of the Pope, did all publish the Imperiall Edicts of Ausburg, as well for the Interim of Religion, as for the Other pro∣uincial Coun∣cell are held. Ecclesiasticall reformation. The Nuncij, destinated by the Pope the yeere before, and deferred, for the The Nuncij goe into Ger∣many, and are despised in all places. causes aforesaid, began their iourney for Germany; who, in euery place where they passed, were despised, euen by the Catholikes themselues: so odious was the Popes name, and the very habit of his Ministers, in regard of his differen∣ces with the Emperour, and of the courses hee tooke. And finally, in the end of May, they went to Caesar into the Low Countreys, where, after long discussion how to execute the Popes commandements, there being difficul∣tie in euery proposition for one part or other, in fine the Emperor resolued, that, hauing faculty from the Pope to substitute, they should substitute the Bishops, euery one in his owne Diocesse, referring all to their consciences. This match was not readily made by the Nuncij; yet condescending at the last, a substitution was printed, in the name of the three Nuncij, leauing a place for the name of the Prelate, vnto whom it was to bee directed; and inserting first the tenor of the Popes Bull, and, alleadging for cause of the substitution, their not beeing able to bee in euery place, they did communi∣cate their authority, with aduice not to grant the Communion of the Cup, and vse of eating flesh, but with great maturitie and euident profit, prohibi∣ting that ought should be payd for those Graces. Caesar vndertooke to send them to whom, and where it was fit, and to what place soeuer hee addressed them, hee gaue them to vnderstand, that the proceeding should be with gen∣tlenesse, and dexterity. There was very little vse of these faculties; for those Their Facul∣ties did but little good. that continued in the Popes obedience, had no need of them, and those who were aliened, did not onely not care for them, but refused them also. A few dayes after, Ferentino departed, Fano, and Ʋerona remained with Caesar, vn∣till the Archbishop of Siponto was sent by Iulius the third, as shall be sayd in its place. At the same time the French King, making his first entry into Paris, the The French King maketh his first entry into Paris, & publisheth an Edict in fa∣uour of the Roman reli∣gion. fourth of Iuly, caused a solemne procession to bee made, and published an Edict, rendring a reason thereof, that hee did it to signifie vnto all, that hee receiued the protection of the Catholike religion, and of the Apostolike Sea, and the care of the Ecclesiasticall order: and that hee abhorred the nouitie of religion, and testified to all his will to perseuere in the doctrine of the Church of Rome, and to banish the new heretikes out of all his dominions; and hee caused this Edict to be printed in French, and sent it into all parts of his king∣dome. Hee gaue leaue also to his Prelates to make a prouinciall assembly to reforme the Churches; which being knowen at Rome was thought to bee a bad example, and might bee a beginning to make the French Church inde∣pendant And vseth much seuerity against the Lutherans. of the Church of Rome. Hee caused also many Lutherans to bee put to death in Paris, himselfe beeing present at the spectacle: and in the be∣ginning of the next yeere hee renewed the Edict against them, laying grie∣uous punishments vpon the Iudges, who were not diligent in detecting and punishing them. But the Councell in Bolonia hauing slept two yeeres, the seuenth of No∣uember, the Pope, seeing a letter of Duke Octauius, his nephew, that hee would make an agreement with Ferrandus Gonzaga, to enter into Parma, which Citie the Pope caused to bee held in the name of the Apostolike Sea, hee was so assaulted with perturbation of minde and anger, that hee swoo∣ned, The Pope dieth with passion. and, after some fewe houres, comming to himselfe, he fell into a Fea∣uer, whereof he dyed within three dayes. This made Monte part from Bo∣lonia, The election of the new Pope. to be at the Election of the new Pope, and all the other Prelats to retire to their houses. The custome is, that the Cardinals doe solemnize the Obse∣quies of the defunct Pope nine dayes, and enter into the Conclaue the tenth. Then, by reason of the absence of many, they entred not vntill the 28. of the moneth. The Cardinall Pacceco left not Trent vntill the Emperour, vnder∣standing of the Popes death, gaue him order to goe to Rome, where hee ar∣riued many dayes after the Conclaue was shut vp. The Cardinals being as∣sembled to create the Pope, and making capitulations, according to the cu∣stome, which euery one sweareth to obserue, in case hee shall bee elected, the first was to prosecute the Councel, Euery one thought the new Pope would haue been elected before Christmas. For the holy gate, for the Iubile of the next yeere 1550. beeing to be opened on the Eue of the Feast, at which the Popes presence was necessary, and there beeing that yeere a great concourse of people to that deuotion, euery one beleeued that this would mooue the Cardinals to proceed quickly to the election. These were diuided into three factions; Imperialists, French, and dependants on the dead Pope, and by con∣sequence, on his nephewes. The Imperialists would haue created Cardi∣nall Card Poole was named to be Pope. Poole; and the French, Saluiati: But neither of these parties was able to make the election of it selfe, nor to agree, in regard of the contrary ends of their Princes. The Dependants of the Farnesi were able to conclude the election, to which part soeuer they adhered: and they were contented to choose Cardinall Poole, for the goodnesse of his disposition, and his conti∣nuall obseruance of the Pope and the Cardinall Farnese. But Cardinall Thea∣tino opposing him, and saying hee was blemished with Lutheranisme, made But not ele∣cted for suspi∣cion of Lu∣theranisme. many retire. Farnese did not adhere to Saluiati, & was resolued not to consent, but vpon some creature of his vncle. The interests of the factious were so great, that the respect of the holy yeere, and the expectation of so much peo∣ple, who were assembled all that day vntill night, could not preualle. At the last, the partie of Farnese, assisted by the French-men, did ouer∣come Card Monte is created Pope. and Iohn Maria di Monte, Legate of the Councell in Trent and Bolonia, was created, vpon whom Farnese did concurre, thinking him a faithfull ser∣uant to him; and his grandfather, and the French-men thinking hee would fauour their King, and crosse the Emperour, in regard of the Translation of the Councell to Bolonia. Neither were the Imperialists against him, because Cosmo, Duke of Florence, made them beleeue that hee fauoured the French no more then his thankefulnesse to the Pope had constrained him, whose interests he thought he was bound to maintaine; so that this cause beeing remooued, hee would carry himselfe vprightly. Many did loue in him his 1550 IVLIV 3. CHARLES 5.—EDWARD 6. HENRY 2. naturall libertie, free from hypoerisie and dissimulation, and open to all. Im∣mediatly after the election, in conformitie to that which was capitulated, hee did sweare to prosecute the Councel. Hee was elected the eight of February, and crowned the 23. and the 25. he opened the holy gate. The Emperour, perceiuing that the affaires of religion in Germanie, did not goe as he would haue them, hoping to remooue the difficulty by his pre∣sence, 1550 did intimate a Diet for that yeere in Ausburg, and sent Lewis d Aulla The Emperor sendeth an Ambassadour to the Pope to congratu∣late, and to desire a resti∣tution of the Councel. to congratulate with the Pope for his assumption, and to desire him to set the Councell on foote againe. The Pope answering with as much courtesie, made great offers of his good will. For the Councel, his answere was in gene∣rall tearmes onely, beeing not as yet resolued in himselfe: and spake hereof with the same irresolution to the Cardinal of Guise, who was to returne into France, but affirmed that hee would not doe it, before hee had communica∣ted euery thing to the French King. And to Cardinall Pacceco, and other Imperialists, who often spake thereof with him, hee sayd, he would easily ac∣cord with the Emperour in this particular, so that the proceeding were sin∣cere, to confound heretiques, to fauour the Emperors desseignes, and not to disfauour the Apostolique Sea: whereof hee had many considerations, which, in fit time, hee would make knowen to his Maiestie. Hee presently gaue a taste what his gouernment would bee, spending whole dayes in gar∣dens, plotting out delicious buildings, and shewing himselfe more inclined to pleasure then businesse; especially when any difficultie was annexed. The Emperours Ambassadour, Don Diego, hauing curiously obserued these things, The new Pope is more Inclined to pleasure then businesse. wrote to the Emperour, that all the negotiations of his Maiestie with the Pope, would easily succeede; for that, being carried away with delights, one might make him doe what he would, by making him afraid. And the opi∣nion was more confirmed, that he would be more addicted to his priuate af∣fection, then to the publique good, by the promotion of a Cardinall, which he made the last of May, to whom hee gaue the Cap, according to the cu∣stome. Iohn Maria di Monte, when he was Bishop of Siponto, beeing gouernour of He createth a strange Cardinall. Bolonia, receiued into his house a boy of Piacenza, of vnknowen parents, and loued him as if hee had been his owne sonne. It is recorded, that, beeing sicke in Trent, of a great and long sickenesse, whereof the Physicians thought hee would die, hee sent him, by their counsell, to Verona, to change the Aire; where hauing recouered his health, and returning to Trent, the day of his ar∣riuall, the Legate went out of the Citie for recreation, accompanied with many Prelats, and mette him neere the gate, shewing many signes of ioy. This gaue matter of discourse, whether it were by chance, or whether the Cardinall, going forth vnder another colour, had a secret purpose to meere him. Hee was wont to say, that hee loued and fauoured him, as authour of his owne fortune, because the Astrologers had foretold, hee should haue great dignity and riches, which hee could not haue, if he did not ascend▪ to the Papacie. So soone as he was created Pope, his will was, that Innocen s (for so the yong man was called) should be adopted the sonne of Bold win di Monte, his brother, by which adoption, hee was called Innocenti di Monte. Hauing giuen him many benefices, on the day aforesaid, hee created him Cardinall, giuing subiect of discourse, and Pasquins, to the Courtiers, who did striue to shew the true cause of such an vnusuall action, by coniectures of diuers accidents past. Charles, before he parted out of the Low Countreys, established the Inqui∣sition there: whereat the Dutch and English Merchants, of whom there were many in those parts, beeing much mooued, had recourse to Queene The Emperor establisheth the Inquisiti∣on in the low Countreys. Mary, and the Magistrates, desiring a mitigation of the Edict, or, otherwise, protesting they would depart. Those who were to execute the Edict, and institute the Inquisition, found difficulty euery where; so that the Queene was enforced to goe to Caesar, who was in Ausburg, to celebrate the Diet, to perswade him that the populous Countrey might not be made desolate, and some notable sedition arise. Caesar yeelded very hardly; yet, in the end, hee was content to take away the name of Inquisition, and to reuoke whatsoeuer And reuoketh it as faare as concerneth strangers. in the Edict did concerne strangers, all standing firme which belonged to the Naturals of the place. The Emperour dealt with the Pope by his letters and Ambassadour, to reassume the Councell of Trent, desiring a precise an∣swere, The Emperor requireth frō the Pope a precise answer concerning the Councell. not such as hee gaue to D' Auila, nor with such ambiguity as he vsed to treat with Cardinall Pacceco, but that hee would let him know the Capitula∣tions which hee required, that hee might resolue whether that medicine would cure the maladies of Germanie, or should thinke of other remedies, it being impossible to continue longer in that State. The Pope, considering with his inward friends, that this was the most im∣portant deliberation which could happen in all his Papacie, did ballance And the Pope doth seriously deliberate what answer to make. the reasons which might perswade or disswade it. First he considered, that, remitting the Councell to Trent, hee condemned the Translation to Bolonia, which was principally his deede, and so should plainly confesse hee had done amisse, either willingly, or at the instance of another. And if there had beene nothing but the Translation, it had not beene a matter of so great weight. But hauing made himselfe a party to defend it, and so earnestly, hee could not excuse himselfe of malice, if hee did so easily retract it. And, which imported most, he should put himselfe into all those dangers, from which Paul, a most wise Prince, thought fit to secure himselfe, & perseuered in that opinion vntil his death: and that it was a manifest error to reenter into them. And though many were not ill affected to him, being a new Pope, yet it is certaine that the maior part doe not pretend to bee greued at the Pope, but at the Popedome: and, for this particular, no man can bee sure, that something may not hap∣pen in the progresse, which may raise him greater hatred, though without his fault. Besides, all men are not mooued with hatred, but those that hurt most, desire to aduantage themselues by depressing others, Therefore it may be concluded that the same reasons, which mooued Paul, would con∣straine Iulius also to the same resolution. He considered the great troubles that Paul sustained 26. moneths, for this cause, and the indignities which hee did necessarily suffer, and the diminution of the Papall authority, not onely in Germany, but in Italy also. And if this did derogate from Paul, confirmed so many yeeres in the Papacie, and esteemed by all, it would doe it from him much more, being a new Pope, not hauing as yet made intelligences, and adherences, necessary for the enterprise of contesting, and if a protestation should hee layde on his backe, or a Decree, as the Interim, his authoritie would bee scorned by all. Hee was not to reckon of the paines in translating the Councell, and his constancie in defending it, because with the change of fortune, whatsoeuer dependeth on it is changed, and the actions of Iohn Ma∣ria di Monte, doe not appertaine to Pope Iulius, and those things which gaue reputation vnto that man, doe not giue it vnto this. Then it was fit to doe as he did, to shew himselfe a faithfull seruant of his Lord; but now, beeing Lord himselfe, the respect of constancie in seruing well doeth quite cease, and another doeth succeede, which requireth wisedome, in applying himselfe to the times. Hee considered how popular the Emperours request was, in re∣gard the reducing of Germanie was in question, and how scandalous it would bee not to hearken vnto it. The causes which mooued to make the Councell were plaine and manifest to all; those which disswaded were secret, & know∣en to few. Finally the Oath made, and iterated, ought to be regarded, which though it did binde to prosecute the Councell, without prescribing the place, yet it was certaine, that, without the Emperours consent, being king of Spaine, and Naples, Prince of the low Countries, and hauing other adherences in Italie, it was impossible to make a generall Councell; so that, to refuse to bring it backe to Trent, and not to prosecute it, was all one. He inclined to this part most, as most agreeable to his disposition, desirous rather to flye present incommodities, then auoyd future dangers. For choosing to celebrate the Councell, hee was deliuered from the trouble which the Emperour would giue him; and for the dangers which it brought, hee began to esteeme them lesse. Hee thought the Emperours fortune was not then the same as it was two yeeres before. For at that time the expectation of the victorie, which hee after obtained, gaue him reputation; which now seemeth rather to bee burdensome to him, then any ease. Hee holdeth two Princes prisoners, as wolues by the eares. The Cities of Germanie doe openly inchne to rebellion. The Ecclesiastikes haue a satietie of that domination. There are also domesticall crosses, in regard of his sonne, brother, and nephew, who aspire to the Empire; a businesse, which perhaps may giue him trouble, beyond his forces. In fine, he concluded, according to his disposition, Let vs get out of the present difficultie, with hope that our good fortune will not abandon vs. And concealing his resolution, hee deputed a Congregation of Cardi∣nals, He cōcealeth his resolution vntill it bee confirmed by a congregati∣on of Cardi∣nals and Pre∣lates. and other Prelats, for the most part Imperialists, that they might fall vpon the resolution which hee had taken, mingling some few of his trustie friends amongst them, to gouerne the businesse according to his purpose. To these he proposed the Emperours request; giuing order that without all respect, euery one should speake what he thought conuenient for the seruice of GOD, and the Apostolike Sea. And in case they thought fit to condescend, they should thinke how to doe it with honour, securitie, and fruit. The Con∣gregation, hauing often consulted, related to the Pope, that they were of opi∣nion the Councel should bee prosecuted, because such an Oath was taken in the Conclaue, and by his Holinesse, after his assumption, and to take away scandall from the world, which without doubt would be very great, incase i were not done. And it might be prosecuted two wayes; one by continuing it in Bolonid, another by remitting it to Trent. It could not bee continued in Bolonia, because Paul had called to him the cause of the Translation, and in∣hibited to proceede any further. If his Holinesse did not first giue sentence that the Translation was good, it was not lawfull to goe on in that City: and if hee did, he would giue a lawfull pretence to bee suspected, it being knowen that the Translation was made by him, as being the prime Legate, and Presi∣dent. Therefore onely the other way remayned, to remit it to Trent, and all occasion was so taken away from Germanie to spurne against it, and the Emperour was satisfied, which was a very essentiall poynt. This aduice, being brought to the Pope, was approued by him: and so they passed to that which remained. And first it was concluded, that the consent and assistance of the French The difficul∣ties ∣ting y e coun∣cel to Trent are debated. King was necessary, and the presence of the Prelates of his Kingdome, other∣wise the reputation of the Councell would bee very weake, and they should bee in danger to loose France, onely to indeuour to regaine Germanie, which is lost: which were, according to the fable, to let the body fall, to get the shadow. It seemed hard to perswade that King, and to take from him all suspition, if the Councel were celebrated in a place subiect vnto the Emperour, and neere vnto his armie. But examining what those suspitions might bee, they could finde none, but that the Councel might determine something, in preiudice of the gouernment of that Kingdom, or against the priuiledges of that Crowne, or against the libertie of the French Church: in which, if hee were secure, it could not bee doubted but that, for the hereditarie obligation to protect and fauour the Apostolike Sea, he would assist, and send his Prelates. The second difficultie was, that the Italian Prelates, beeing poore, could not beare the charge of that place, and the Apostolike Chamber, being exhausted, could ill supply as much as was needefull, besides the charge of maintaining the Le∣gats, and Officers of the Councel, and other extraordinaries. Whereof thin∣king often, they could finde no way to hold the Councell without expence, and that it was necessary to drinke of this Cup: but superfluities might well bee cut off, by dispatching the Councell quickely, and not tarying there longer then was necessary. The third difficultie was, that the Protestants would call into question the things determined; wherein all the Congre∣gation resolued readily, that they should make their meaning plaine, that they ought to be esteemed as infallible, and not suffer them to be disputed on: and to declare this before the Councel, not deferring to make them selues vn∣derstood vntill then. The fourth and most important difficultie of all, was the authoritie of the Of which the greatest is the danger of the Popes autho∣ritie. Apostolike Sea, as well in the Councell, as out of it, and ouer it; which not the Protestants onely doe impugne, but many Princes also would restraine, and many Bishops did thinke to moderate. This was the chiefe cause why the former Popes would not bee perswaded to call a Councell; and Paul who was brought to it, did perceiue it in the end, and prouided against it, by the Translation. This danger was seene by all; but none could set downe a way to escape it, but by saying, that God who had founded the Ro∣mane Church, and placed it aboue others, would dissipate all counsell taken against it. This, some beleeuing for simplicitie, some for their interest, some because they knew not what else to say, seemed not suffi∣cient. But Cardinall Crescentius, grounding himselfe much vpon this confi∣dence, sayd, that there was no humane action in which there was not some danger; that the warre did shew as much, which is the chiefest, which is neuer enterprised, though with neuer so much assurance of victorie, but there is danger of losse and totall destruction; neither is there any businesse The feare whereof Car∣dinal Crescen∣tius remoueth vndertaken, with so much certainety of a good issue, which may not sud∣denly fall into great inconueniences, for vnknowen, or lightly esteemed, causes. But hee that is forced, for auoyding other euils, to yeelde to some resolution, must not care for it. Things are in such a state, that, if the Councell bee not held, there is more danger that the world, and the Prin∣ces, beeing scandalized, will aliene themselues from the Pope, and doe more de facto, then, in the Councell, by disputations and Decrees. Danger is to bee incurred either way, and it is best to take the most honoura∣ble, and least dangerous part. But many prouisions may bee made to diuert it; as to keepe the Fathers of the Councell busied, as much as may bee, in other matters, and so to hold them in exercise, that they may not haue time to thinke of this; to keepe many in amitie, especially the Italians, with perswasions and hopes, and by other meanes vsed heretofore, to hold the Princes counterpoysed, nourishing some differences of interests be∣tweene them, that they may not ioyntly vndertake such an enterprise; and, if one doe it alone, the others will oppose it: and a wise man will finde other remedies in the very fact, by which hee will bee able to carrie matters along, and make them vanish. This opinion was ap∣prooued, and a resolution taken, that no demonstration of feare should bee made, but onely that it should bee intimated to the Emperour, that this is foreseene, but that no man careth for it, because there is a remedie prepared. This consultation beeing maturely made, and a resolution taken to re∣store The Pope sendeth Nun∣cij to the Em∣perour, and French King, to giue an ac∣count of his resolution. the Councell in Trent, the Pope gaue an account thereof to the Car∣dinall of Ferrara, and the French Ambassadour, and dispatched an expresse currier to the French King, to signifie his purpose vnto him, saying hee would send a Nuncio vnto him, to relate more particularly the reasons which moued him. And, in the end of Iune, hee dispatched two Nuncij at once, Sebastianus Pighinus, Archbishop of Siponto, to the Emperour, and Triulcius, Bishop of Tolone, to the French King. To the first hee gaue instructions, to speake in conformitie of the resolutions taken in the Congregation. Hee gaue order to Triulcius to goe by poste, that hee might The instru∣ctions of the French Nun∣cio. aduise what the Kings minde was, which hee desired to know before hee proceeded any further. Hee gaue him instruction to giue a particular ac∣count of the causes why hee resolued to bring backe the Councell to Trent, because Germanie did submit to it; because the Emperour did desire it; be∣cause it could not continue in Bolonia, for the cause before related; and that the Protestant affaires might not bee accommodated in some preiudi∣ciall manner, laying the blame on the Pope, But that his first and prin∣cipall ground was the assistance of his most Christian Maiestie, and the presence of the Prelates of his Kingdome: which hee hoped to obtaine, be∣cause his Maiestie was protector of the faith, and an imitator of his ance∣stours, who neuer departed from the opinion and counsels of Popes. That in the Councell they would applie themselues to the declaration and purifying of the poynts of doctrine, and reformation of manners: nei∣ther should any thing concerning the States, Dominions, and particular priuiledges of the Crowne of France bee handled. That to the Emperours request, to vnderstand, whether the Pope would prosecute the Councell in Trent, or not, the Pope had answered he would, with the conditions dis∣cussed in the Congregation, all which hee gaue order to his Nuncio to com∣municate to the King; whose minde hee desired to knowe, as soone as might bee, hoping to finde it conformable to the pietie of his Maiestie, to the loue which hee beareth to him the Pope, and to the confidence which hee hath in him. Hee also charged the Nuncio to communicate all his instructions to the Cardinall of Guise, and, with him, or other∣wise, as hee thought best, to declare it to the King, and to whom else hee thought fit. Hee gaue the like instruction to the other Nuncio, in particular, to tell he instru∣ ns of the who was sent to the Emperor. the Emperour, that the Pope did really shew the obseruation of whatsoe∣uer hee had promised to Don Pedro di Toledo; that is, to proceede with his Maiestie simply, plainely, and without artifice, and to represent vnto him his willing minde to prosecute the Councell, for the glory of God, dis∣charge of his owne conscience, and for the good which thereby might re∣dound to his Maiestie and the Empire. And, to answere the Emperours motion, to make knowen the capitulations which hee required, hee should tell him, that hee neuer dreamed to make any bargaines or capitulations, for prosecuting the Councell, but onely some necessary considerations, which hee charged his Nuncio to expound to his Maiestie. And they were foure. The first, that the assistance of the most Christian King, and the interuention of the Prelates of his Kingdome, was necessary, without which the Councell would haue but small reputation, and it might bee fea∣red that a Nationall Councel would arise, or France be lost. That they ought oure consi∣derations pro∣posed by the Pope to the Emperour. not to deceiue themselues. For as Trent was a secure place for his Impe∣riall Maiestie, so it was too vnsecure for the most Christian King: and therefore that it was fit to finde a way to secure him. That hee should com∣municate to the Emperor the way which he had found out, which if it were not sufficient, it would be necessary that his Maiestie should adde some thing else. The second consideration was, the expences which the Apostolike Cham∣ber, exhausted, and charged with debts, was to make, for the Legats, and other extraordinaries, which the Councell bringeth with it, and like wise for the expences which the poore Italian Prelates cannot beare in that place. There∣fore that it will bee fit to calculate the time well, aswell for the proceeding, as the beginning, that an houre may not bee spent in vaine, otherwise the Apo∣stolike Sea will not bee able to beare the charge, nor to keepe the Italian Pre∣lates from beeing impatient, as former experience hath taught. Besides, it is not honourable for the Apostolike Sea to keepe the Legates idle, and at anchor, without doing any good. That it was necessary, that, before they come to the acte, his Maiestie should bee secure of the intention and obedi∣ence, as well of the Catholiques in Germany, as of the Protestants, establi∣shing things againe in the Diet, causing authenticall mandates of the Coun∣tries and Princes to be dispatched, his Maiestie and the whole Diet together, binding themselues to execute the Decrees of the Councell, that the paines and cost prooue not vaine and ridiculous, and hereby to take all hope from whomsoeuer did thinke to disturbe the Synode. That, in the third place, his Maiestie should consider, that it was necessary to declare, that the Decrees already made in Trent, in matter of faith, and those of other former Coun∣cels, may not, by any meanes, bee questioned, nor that the Protestants may demand to bee heard concerning them. Lastly, that hee should tell the Em∣perour, that the Pope did beleeue, that his Maiesties good will towards him, was reciprocall, and that, as hee did readily condescend to fauour the affaires of his Maiestie, and of the Empire, by holding the Councell in a place so fit for his purpose, so hee desireth that his sincerity and realitie, may not bring a burthen vpon him. That hee hopeth, if any one shall attempt ought against it, by cauillations or calumnies, that his Maiestie will not maruaile, if hee vse the remedies which shall occurre, for defence of the authority giuen immedi∣atly by God to him, and the Apostolique Sea, as well in Councel as out. The Pope thought it profitable for his affaires, that his resolution should bee fully knowen in Italy and Germanie; and bade Iulius Cananus his Secretary, making shew to fauour some Courtiers, his friends, to communicate the foresayd instructions vnto them, with obligation of secrecie: by which meanes they were spread euery where. The Pope had a speedy answere from his new Nuncio in France. For that King, vnderstanding the causes, why the The French King maketh large offers to the Pope. Pope could haue but little confidence in the Emperour, in regard of some things past, thinking hee was much inclined to France, made great demon∣stration to bee well pleased with the Nuncio, and his message, offered to the Pope whatsoeuer he was able to doe for him, promised to assist the Councel, and to send the Prelates of his Kingdome, and all fauour and protection, for maintenance of the Papall authority. The Emperour, hearing the proposition of the Arch-bishop of Siponto, The Empe∣rors answer to the Pope. and consulting maturely of it, did commend the ingenuity and wisedome of the Pope, that, knowing the publiquenecessity, of holding the Councell in Trent, had found a conuenient way to remit it, without further proceeding in the cause of the Translation; a thing distastfull, of much difficulty, and of no profit. Hee added, that the foure considerations were all important, and reasonably proposed by his Holinesse. That, for France, hee did not one∣ly commend what he had consulted, but offered to ioyne with him, to giue all possible security to that King. That it was reasonable to cut off super∣fluous charges, and not to suffer the Councel to bee open, and idle. That a Decree was made in Ausburg, a yeere since, that all Germanie, euen the Pro∣testants also, should submit themselues, a copie whereof hee would giue to the Nuncio, and cause it to be confirmed in the present Diet. That he thought it not a fit time now to treate, that the things already decided in Trent, should not bee questioned, because it would bee done more opportunely in that Ci∣tie, when the Councell was assembled. And for the authoritie of his Holi∣nesse and the Apostolique Sea, as hee hath formerly beene a protectour of it, so hee will bee hereafter, defending it with all his forces, and euen with his owne life, if there were occasion. That hee could not promise his Holinesse that no vnquiet spirit should speake or treate in the Councel, but he gaue his word, that, in case it did happen, hee would so oppose, that he should com∣mend him for his paines. The Emperour, as hath beene sayd, was in Ausburg, to hold the Diet; He proposeth the prosecu∣tion of the Councell in the Diet of Ausburg, and other things. which, though it was not so compassed with armes as the former, yet it was alwayes armed. Hee proposed the prosecution of the Councel of Trent, the obseruation of the Interim, made in the last Diet, and the finding a way for restoring of Ecclesiasticall goods, and the renewing of iurisdiction. It plea∣sed the Catholique Princes, that the Councel should bee prosecuted; but the Conditions required by the Prote∣stants, con∣cerning the Councel. Ambassadours of some Protestant Princes did not consent, but with these conditions. That the things already determined in Trent should bee re∣examined; that the Diuines of the Augustane confession, should not onely bee heard, but haue a deciding voyce; that the Pope should not preside, but should submit himselfe also to the Councel, and release the Bishops of their oath, that they may speake freely. The Emperour complayned of the Pro∣testants, that his Decree of the Interim, was not obeyed by them; and of the Catholikes, that the reformation of the Clergy was not executed. These excu∣sed themselues, some by saying, that they were to proceede slowly auoyding dissensions; others, that the exempt, pretending priuiledges, would not obey. The Protestants layd the cause vpon the people, who, in regard the matter concerned their conscience, did mutin, and could not bee forced. The Em∣perour, gaue an account to the Nuncio of all these particulars, shewing not onely the consent of the Catholiques, and of the greater number of the Protestants, but the limitation also proposed by the others, lest, if hee had heard of it by some other meanes, it might haue produced some bad effect. But hee added, that hee would not haue this limitation put into the acts, be∣cause those Princes had giuen him their word, that they would doe nothing against his will; and therefore hee might affirme to the Pope, that all Germa∣nie was contented with the Councel. Afterwards, he treated more strictly with the principall Ecclesiastiques, proposing that the beginning should be before Easter, and that they would goe thither in person. Which being pro∣mised by the Electors, hee solicited the Pope to make the conuocation for Easter, or immediatly after, because hee was assured of the consent of all The Emperor hastneth the conuocation of the Coun∣cel, and desi∣reth to see the Bull before it be published. Germany. Which the better to confirme, he prayed his Holinesse, that when the Bull was made, hee would send him the draught, before it was published, that (shewing it to all in the Diet) hee might, by that occasion, make a De∣cree, and cause it to bee receiued by all. The Pope thought that nothing was concluded of what was proposed by him, so long as it was not decided, that the Decrees already made should bee receiued. Hee would not, that, in the very beginning of the Councel, this should bee disputed of; because the issue was plaine, that is, that much time would be spent, and nothing done, and in fine, all would bee dissolued without conclusion. It was plaine to be seene, that the generall dispute, whe∣ther they ought to be receiued, did draw after it a particular of euery one, and that himselfe should not be able to interpose, because it would bee alledged that he was to be suspected, as hauing beene president, and the principall au∣thour. To insist more with the Emperour that this point might bee decided would giue him more distast, & cast all into insuperable difficulties. He was counselled, that, without saying any more, he should take the point for deci∣ded, The Popes resolution concerning the Decrees already made, & presuppose in his Bul, that the Decrees already made should be accep∣ted by all. For the Bull going to the Diet with this tenor, either the Dutch-men will be contented with it, and so he shall obtaine his purpose, or will not accept it, and so the dispute will begin in the Diet, and himselfe will bee free from care of it. The Councel seemed vnto him good, in conformitie whereof he made the Bull. And to satisfie the Emperour in part, hee sent it to him, not in a draught, because he thought it was against his honour, but framed, dated, and sealed, yet not published. The date was the fifteenth of The Bull of the Conoca∣tion was da∣ted the 15. 8 Nouember. Nouember. In that Bull he said. That for the taking away of all differences of Religion in Germany, it being expedient and fit (which the Emperour had also signifi∣ed vnto him) to reduce the generall Councel into Trent, called by Paul the third, begun, ordered, and prosecuted by himselfe, then Cardinall, and Pre∣sident and many decrees of faith, and discipline, beeing constituted and published therein, hee vnto whom it belongeth to call and direct gene∣rall Councels, for the encrease of the orthodoxe religion; and to restore peace to Germany, which formerly hath not yeelded to any Prouince in obedience and reuerence of the Popes, the Vicars of CHRIST, hoping also that the Kings and Princes will fauour and assist it, exhorteth and admonisheth the Patriarques, Arch bishops, Bishops, Abbats and others, who, by Law, The Councel is to beg ne the first of Ma custome, or priuiledge, ought to assist in Councels, to bee in Trent, the first of May in which day he hath ordained, by his Apostolique authoritie, and consent of the Cardinals, that the Councell shall be reassumed in the state in which it was, and prosecuted; whether he will send his Legats; by whom he will preside in the Synode, in case he cannot be personally present, notwith∣standing any translation, suspension, or any thing else, especially those things which Paul the third in his Bull of the Conuocation, and others, belonging to the Councell, did ordaine that they should not hinder; which Bulls his will is that they shall remaine in force, with all their clauses, and decrees, confir∣ming and renewing them, as much as is needfull. The Emperours Ministers, and other zealous Catholiques, to whom the Emperour did impart it, thought it would exasperate the Protestants, and giue them occasion not to accept of the Councell, in which the Pope de∣clared that he would not onely preside, but direct also. Besides, to talke of reassuming and prosecuting it, was to put too many suspicions into their heads; and to speake so magnificently of his authoritie was nothing but to prouoke them. They councelled the Emperour to enduour that the Pope should moderate the Bull, and reduce it into such a forme, as might not more alcinate the Protestants. The Emperour treated thereof with the Nuncio, The Emperor desireth an alteration of the Bull. and wrote to his Ambassadour to doe the like with the Pope, praying his Holinesse affectionately, and effectually, and for Christian charitie, to make those words more milde, which might diuers Germany from accepting the Councell. The Ambassadour in Rome treated with a Spanish dexteritie, and said, That as wilde beasts, taken in a snare, must be drawen gently, making shew to yeeld vnto them, nor must bee shewed the fire, or armes, for feare of prouoking them, and putting them in despaire, which will encrease their for∣ces, so the Protestants must bee vsed, who with Gentlenesse, and by instru∣cting and hearing them, must be brought to the Councell, where being ar∣riued, it will bee a fit time to shew them the truth. That to condemne them before they were heard, was to exasperate and prouoke them more. The Pope answered, according to his vsual libertie, that he would not be taught to fight with a Cat shut vp, but would haue it at libertie, that it might fly; that to The Popes answere. bring the Protestants with faire words to the Councel, where the deedes would not be answerable, was to put them in despaire, and make them take some rash resolution; and therefore what was to bee done, was to bee told them plainely, The Ambassadour answered, that it was true in things ne∣cessary, or fit to be spoken: but he saw not how it was then fit to say, that it belongeth to him to direct Councels. That these things are most true; but trueth hath not this priuiledge to be spoken at al times, and in all places; and that it is good to conceale it, when the vttering of it doth produce a bad ef∣fect. That he should remember, that, by the hot speeches of Leo the tenth, and his Legate, Cardinal Caietan, the fire was kindled that now burneth, which, with a gentle word, might haue beene put out. That the Popes fol∣lowing, especially Clement and Paul, wise Princes did often complaine of it. If Germany may now begained with dextrous vsage; why should it be more se∣parated with bitternesse? The Pope, as it were disdaining, sayd, That it was to be preached openly, and inculcated, which CHRIST hath taught, that his diuine Maiestie hath made his Vicar Head of the Church and the principal light of the world: that this is one of the truthes that must be spoken in all times, & places, and (as Saint Paul saith) in season and out of season, that to doe otherwise would bee against the commandement of CHRIST, Hiding the Candle vnder a bushell, which should be set on a Candlesticke. That it was not honourable for the Apo∣stolike Sea to vse artifice, and dissimulation, but that hee ought to speake plainely. The Ambassador, by way of a pleasant discourse, sayd; That to hide the rod, and to make shew of benignitie, and to yeeld vnto all, seemed vnto him the true Apostolike office, that he had heard it read in S. Paul, that being free, hee made himselfe seruant of all, to gaine all; with the Iewes, a Iew, with the Gen∣tiles, a Gentile; with the weake, weake; to winne them also: and that this was the way to plant the Gospel. In fine the Pope, not to enter into dispute, sayde, that the Bull was made according to the stile of the Chancery, which could not be altered; that he was aduerse from nouities, and must follow the steps of his Predecessors; that obseruing the vsuall forme, whatsoeuer should hap∣pen could not be attributed to him, but if he had inuented a new, all the mis∣chiefe would be laid to his Charge. The Ambassadour, to giue him time to bethinke himselfe better, concludeth that he would not take the answere for a Negatiue, but hoping that his Holinesse would take compassion on Ger∣manie, with a fatherly affection, purposing to Christmas be p st; for the it was the midst of December, and then to make a new assault vpon him. But the Pope resolute not to change ; sayd often; I will preuent, and not be preuented; and to take away all trouble of orse Saint Io as day he made a Briefe, in which hauing declared the of his foresayd Bull, pretending that some, publi∣shed, The Pope maketh a Briefe, and cause th th it, and the Bull to be publi∣shed. might alleadge ignorance, he ordained that the Briefe, and the Bull should bee bread, published, and of Saint Peter and Saint Iohn of , with intention to send a Copie thereof printed to the Arch bishops, that by them it might be intimated to the Bishops, and other Prelates. All meanes was taken from the Ambassadour speake any more thereof with the Pope; and therefore hee presently dispatched in ex∣presse Currier, to signifie all to the Emperour. Who seeing the Popes resol∣ution, Which illeth distast both to Papist and Protestant a Germany. and thinking on a remedie, caused the Bull to bee be read in the pub∣like assembly, which produced iust the same effect which hee foresaw, that is, that the Protestants would recall their word to submit themselues, and the Catholikes refuse to goe to the Councell It pleased it the Catholikes by rea∣son of the harsh and intractable stile; the Protestants, for the causes aforesaith which were, that it belongeth to the Pope, not onely to call, but also to direct, and gouerne the Councels; that hee was resolued to continue and prosecute the things begun, which tooke away the reexamination of what was already handled; that vnseasonably, and without occasion, hee had said, that Germany had acknowledged the Popes Vicar of CHRIST; that hee had declared himselfe president of the Councel, and had called but Ecclesiastikes, and with many affected words, had confirmed the Bull of the Conuocation of Paul. They sayd that the Councell, with these grounds, would be in vaine, whereunto to submit ones selfe, was to against GOD and his conscience. The Catholikes sayd, that if there were no hope to reduce the Protestants, the labour, and charge would be The Emperour gaue a temper to both parties, saying, that the Councell was generall of all Christian Nations, all which obeying the Pope but Germany, hee had framed the Conuocation as it did agree vnto them; that for Who are pa∣cified by the Emperour. , they should leaue all to his care, who knew how to handle the businesse; that they should suffer other Nations to meete, and that himselfe would goe in person, if not thither, yet to some neere place, and would take order, not by wordes, but deedes, that all should passe with good termes, that they should not regard what the Pope sayde, but what himselfe did promise vpon the word of an Emperour and a King, So hee pacified their mindes; and the 13. of February a resolution was made, and a Decree published, the tenour whereof, was: That it being proposed in the former Diet, that there is o meanes to compose the discards of Germany, in cause of religion, but by and ge∣nerall Councel, all the States of the Empire haue confirmed the propo and resolued to accept and approue the same Synod, & submit themselues o it; which hauing not bin executed as yet; the same proposition and determi∣nation And therefore a Decree in the Diet is made to this effect. hath been made, in the present Diet. For the Emperour hauing la ∣red, & finally obtained of the Pope, that the Councel should be remitted to Trent, the first of May; the next yeere, and his Holinesse hauing done it 1551 IVLIVS. 3. CHARLES 5. EDVVARD 6. HENRY. 2. and the Corporation hauing beene read, and proposed in the Diet, it is fit they should continue in the same resolution to expect the Councell, with the obedience, and to go to it, in which all Christian Princes will assist, and the Emperour himselfe as aduocate to the holy Church, and defender of the Councels, will doe what belongeth to his charge, as he hath promised Who therefore giueth not be into all, that his will is, that euery one who goeth to the Councel, shal be secured by the Imperial authoritie and power, to goe, remaine returne, and propose freely what he shall thinke in his conscience to be necessary. And therefore that hee will lodge in the Confines of the Em∣pire hee can. And hee admonisheth the Electors Princes, and States of the Empire, especially the Ecclesiastiques, and those who haue made innouation in Religion, that they prepare to bee there, well in∣structed, that they may bee inexcusable, himselfe taking care that all shall passe lawfully, and in order, and that euery thing bee handled piously and Christianly, according to the holy Scripture, and doctrine of the Fathers. And for the transgression of the Decrees of the Inter-religion, and Reforma∣tion, being assured, that it was impossible to ouercome the difficulties, and that as o o things grew worse, to the end that greater confusion may not arise, hee calleth vnto him the cognition of the transgres∣sions post, yet enioyning the Princes, and orders of the Empire, to obseruance hereafter. The world seeing this Decree, thought it, as it was, a iust counterpoise Which seem∣eth to bee a counterpoise to the Popes Bull. of the Popes Bull; in all parts. The one will direct Councels, the other will take care that all bee done in order, and iuridically; the one will pre∣side, and the other will haue the decision according to the Scripture, and the Fathers; the one will continuate, and the other will haue power giuen to e∣uery one to propose, according to his conscience. In summe, the Court could not digest this affront, and complained that it was another Conuo∣cation of the Councell. But the Pope according to his vsuall pleasanthesse, sayd, the Emperour hath been euen with mee, for the publication of the Bull, made without him. The yeere 1551. being begun, the Pope, applying himselfe to the Coun∣cell intimated, had two principall ayes; to send trustie persons to preside, 1551 and to bee at as little charge as was possible. To auoyde charge, hee The Presi∣dents of the Councell are named. thought to send but one Legate, but that was too great a burthen for one, because there would bee none who had the same interests, on whom hee might safely relie, and because hee should bee esteemed the onely au∣thour of whatsoeuer was done. For which respects it was necessary to lay the burden on more mens shoulders. The Pope found a middle way, to send one Legate, and two Nuncij, with equall authoritie, thinking that so hee should bee better serued, because hope maketh men more diligent. Casting his eye on all the Cardinalls, hee found none more trustie, and withall more worthy, then Marcellus Crescentius, Cardi∣nall of S. Marcellus; to whom hee ioyned for Nuncij, Sebastianus Pig∣binus, Archbishop of Siponto, and Aloisius Lipomannus Bishop of Ʋe∣rona of the former hee made choyce, for the great confidence hee had in him before his Papacy; of the other, for the fome of his great pietie, good∣nesse, and loyalty. Hauing had many secret parlies with these three, and o∣pened veto them the sinceritie of his heart, and instructed them fully, hee gaue them an ample Mandate, to be present in the Councell, in his name; the tenor whereof was, It belongeth to the father of a family, to substitute others, to doe that The tenor of their Mandat. which hee cannot commodiously doe himselfe. Therefore, hauing reduced to Trent the Generall Councel, intimated by Paul, hoping that the Kings and Princes, would affoord their fauour and assistance, hee cited the Prelates, who vsually haue voyce therein, to bee there the first of May, to resume the Councel in the state it was. But not beeing able to bee personally present, according to his desire, in respect of his old age, and other impediments, that his absence might not bee an hinderance, he appointeth Marcellus, a zealous, wise, and learned Cardinall, for Legate, and the Bishops of Siponto, and Ve∣rona, famous for knowledge and experience, as Nuncij, with speciall Man∣date, and fit clauses. Sending them as Angels of peace, giuing them autho∣ritie to resume, direct and prosecute the Councell, and to doe all things meete and necessary, according to the tenor of his, and his predecessours let∣ters of the Conuocation. The Emperour, whom the Councel did more The Emperor giueth a safe conduct to the Prote∣stants. concerne, holding it to be the onely meanes, to make himselfe absolute Ma∣ster of Germanie, send a safe conduct in an ample forme, to all the Protestant Orders of that Empire, for themselues, their Ambassadours, and Di∣uines. But while these foundations, were layd in Rome and Ausburg, to build the Councell of Trent vpon them, webs were spunne in other places, which ob∣scured The Pope re∣storeth Par∣ma to Octaui∣us Farnese. the dignitie and authoritie of that Synode, and Engines were framed which did shake and dissolue it. The Pope immediately after his assump∣tion, to preforme what he had promised in the Conclaue, restored Par∣ma to Octauius Farnese, which the Pope had taken into his hands, in the name of the Church, and assigned to him two thousand crownes a mo∣neth, to defend it. Octauius in regard of the enmitie of Ferrante Conzaga, Vice-Duke of Milan, and of many arguments which he had, that the Empe∣rour meant to be Lord of that Citie, the Pope also hauing taken from him the prouision of two thousand crownes, doubting that hee was not able to defend it with his owne forces, treated with the Pope, by his brother the Cardinall, either to assist him, or giue him leaue to prouide for himselfe, by the protection of some other Prince, able to maintaine him against the Em∣perour. The Pope, without thinking more of it, answered, that hee should doe for himselfe the best he could. wherefore Octauius by meanes of Hora∣tius, Who recei∣ueth a French Garison the Citie. his brother, sonne in law to the French King, put himselfe vnder the protection of France, and receiued a French Garison into the Citie. This dis∣pleased the Emperour his vncle, who perswaded the Pope, that it was against his honour, who was supreame Lord of that Citie and Duke. Therefore the Pope published a seuere edict against him, citing him to Rome, and de∣claring him traytor, if he did not appeare, and demanding the Emperours Which occa∣sioneth a war betweene the Emperour & the French . assistance against him; who declared that hee did approoue the Popes cause, and would defend it with his armes. This was a beginning of a manifest warre betweene the Emperour and the French King, and of great distasts of this King against the Pope. And in Saxonie, vpon the Riuer Albi, discour∣ses beganne, betweene the Saxons and those of Brandeburg, to make a league against the Emperour, that he might not wholly subdue Germany, as shall be said in its place. Notwithstanding these seedes of warre, which in Italie, in the beginning of April, began to spring, the Pope would haue the Legate A confedera∣tion is made in Germany against the Emperour. and Nuncij goe to Trent, and gaue them commission to open the Councel, on the first of May, the day appointed, with those who were there, yea though there were none at all; by the example of the Nuncij of Martinus the fifth, who opened the Councell of Pauia alone, without the presence of any Prelate. THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. T He Legat and Nuncij being come to Trent, ac∣companied The Presidēes of the Coun∣cell, and some Prelats striue in Trent. with some Prelats, who followed them from Rome, and some other beeing arri∣ued, who, hauing been llcited by the Pope, came thither a little after; they assembled, the foresayd day, with the wanted Ceremonies, in the vsuall place played, within the Cathedrall Church, which was not pulled downe, where the Archbishop of Torre sang Masse, and the Secretary read the Popes Bull of the Conuoca∣tion, and the of the Presidents; and hee that sayd Masse, read the Decree interrogatorily. Pleaseth the Fathers, that, according to the Popes letters, the Councell of Trent should be resumed, and prosecuted? And all ha∣uing giuen their voyces, hee sayd againe; Please it you, that the next Ses∣sion The next Ses∣sion is appoin∣ted for the first of Sep∣tember. be held the first of September next? Whereunto all agreed. And the Cardinall, Prime President, concluded, by the consent, and in the name of all the Synode, that the Councell is begun, and shall bee prosecuted. No∣thing else was done that day, nor the next, though the Prelats were often assembled in the Legats house, because the Congregations had no forme, there being no Diuines. Onely the thing dispared in were read, to make the deliberation of that winch was to bee handled more ,, espe¦cially in matter of reformation, which was esteemed to bee of the greatest moment. In the ende of the moneth the Pope sent to the The Pope sen∣deth a Nunci to the Suisses. Suisses, who before had beene the Nuncio of Pope Paul to that nation, prin∣cipally to prouide that the French King might not haue Souldiers from them, and to obtaine of them a leule, the affaires of Parma. And, vp∣on that occasion, hee wrote vnto them the seuen and twentieth of May, that as hee had taken the name of Iulius the second, so affectionate to them, so hee would follow his example in louing them, and vsing assistance: which he had begun to doe by taking a guard of their Nation, for the safety of his owne person, and another for Bolonia. Now the Councel being in∣timated; and begun in Trent, the first of May, hee prayed them to send their Prelates against the first of September when the second Session shall bee held. The French King sought to perswade the Pope, by Termes, his Am∣bassadour, that hee had, vpon good reasons, taken vpon him the defence of The French King excuseth to the Pope his protection of Parma. Parma, praying him to bee contented with it; and to shew him, that, doing otherwise, and preferring warre before peace, hee should not onely damnifie Italie , but hinder the prosecution of the Councell, or cause it to dissolue. And that though did not fall out ye , in regard no French Bishop could goe thither, it could not with reason bee called a generall Councell. The Pope offered to doe any thing el e which the King should desire▪ and after many discourses, it beeing represented to him that the King could by no meanes retire, and that, in case his Holinesse would not bee neutrall, but make himselfe the Emperours minister, by whom the King was certaine that hee was guided, his Maiestie would bee forced to vse those remedies of rea∣son and fact, which his ancestors haue vsed against partiall Popes; the Pope grew angry or fained to be so, and answered, that if the King tooke Parma, His Holinesse is angry. from him, hee would take France from the King; and if the King did take from him his obedience, hee would take from the King the commerce of all Christendome; and he spake of force, let him doe the worst he could; if of Edicts, and prohibitions, and such things, hee let him know, that his pen, paper, and inke were not inferiour. But though the Pope spake so high; yet hee was afraid; and therefore, to excite the Emperour, hee signified vnto him, by his Nuncio, the Bishop of Imola, whome hee had sent in place of the Archbishop of Siponto, all these discourses with the French, and afterwards tolde him, that in Rome▪ there was doubt of another sacke, in regard of so many rumours of the Turkes, and French-men, and feare of Nationall Councels. Therefore there was neede of Armes, to preuent these attempts, and to defend themselues, when neede re∣quired. The King seeing it was impossible to perswade the Pope, wrote a publike The French King maketh preparation for a Natio∣nall Councel: from which, and from the protection of Parma, he is disswaded by the Pope. letter to all the Bishops of his Kingdome, as well in France, as elsewhere, commanding them to bee at their Churches within sixe moneths, and to put themselues in order there for a Nationall Councell; and the letter was presented to those also who were in Rome; neither durst the Pope hinder them, for feare of doing them, and his owne reputation more hurt. But he sent Ascanius della C rna, his nephew, into France, to disswade the King from the protection of Parma: to make him vnderstand that Octauius Farnese, be∣ing his Vassall, hee should by no meanes endure to be contemned by him, in regard it would bee an eternall infamy, and an example to others not to acknowledge him for Pope. That his inclination to France and his Maiesty was great, and his minde auerse from those who were emulous of him, and that this is knowen to the whole world. Yet the foresaid respect is so potent that, if his M tie would not giue a remedy, it were enough to make him cast himselfe into the armes of him that he would not. His instruction also was, that if the King would not be perswaded to this, he should pray him to consi∣der well how great inconueniences a Nationall Councell would draw after it, and that it would be a beginning to giue his Subiects licence, whereof hee would repent him, and would presently cause this bad effect to hinder the ge∣nerall Councell, which would be the greatest offence could be done to God, and the greatest damage to faith, and the Church. He prayed him to send an Ambassadour to Trent, assuring him he should receiue all honour and respect from the Presidents, and all the Prelats who were his Holinesse friends. Wher∣unto if hee did not condescend, but perseuere in maintaining the Edict, hee should, for taking away all scandall, propose to him a temper, to declare, that his meaning was not to hinder the generall Councell by that Edict. The King, hearing the Ambassage, shewed also that his honour did con∣straine But he conti∣nueth firme in his resolution. him to continue the protection of the Duke, and to maintaine the Edict, but with such words, as made it plaine hee was displeased with the distastes giuen him, and that hee had a desire to right himselfe. And to an∣swere the Pope, hee sent the Lord of Monluc, the Elect of Bourdeaux, to him, not without some hope to pacifie the Popes minde. But doe hee what hee could, hee continued in the same rigidnesse concerning the affaires of Par∣ma, and sent the same Monluc backe, with commission to complaine of the King, that hee had sent the Edict of the Nationall Councell, and letters, to the Prelates who were subiects to his Holinesse, euen in temporalities (vnderstanding the Bishop of Auignion) as farre as to Rome, which all the world did interpret to be done onely to hinder the generall Councell. And, in conclusion, hee prayed the King, that seeing they were both resolute, himselfe to correct Octauius, and his Maiestie to protect him, at the least their differences might bee contained within Parma, though his Maiestie had already proceeded further, by taking the Cardinals and Prelates from Rome; whose departure hee would not hinder, hoping that his Maiestie, ha∣uing exhaled his anger, should bee illuminated by God, to change his ma∣ner of proceeding. Neither these mutuall offices, nor the respect of the Councell, could make either of these Princes remit any thing of their rigor. The generall consent was fauourable to the King. For the Emperour ha∣uing seized on Piacenza, to leaue Parma to him also, was to giue all Italie into his hands; and it seemed an indignity, that the postetity of Paul, who had so laboured for the liberty of Italy, should bee abandoned by all: and if the Pope did not complaine that Piacenza was vsurped, nor made any in∣stance for the restitution, why should hee complaine that the Duke should secure himselfe of Parma. And this reason preuailed so much with some, that they assured themselues it was well vnderstood by Iulius; but that, to make some thing arise which might hinder the Councell, which not procee∣ding from him, might bee ascribed to another, hee desired a warre betweene the King and the Emperour. It is certaine that hee laboured more with the Emperour to mooue armes against Parma, or Mirandula, then with the King to accommodate the businesse. The King hauing tried all meanes to paci∣fie the Popes minde, passed to the extreame, which was to protest by his And protest∣eth against the Councell, then assem∣bled in Trent▪ Ambassadour Termes, and particularly against the Councell which was as∣sembled, hoping that respect would remooue the Pope: the contents of which protestation, because it was reiterated in Trent, shall be related vpon that occasion. But in Germany there was more speach of the Councell then euer. For Maurice, Duke of Saxony, seeing the Emperours resolution, to giue him a sure argument that he would obey him, in sending to Trent, commanded Phi∣lip Melancthon, and some others of his Diuines, to put together the points of The Prote∣stant Princes resolue to send to Trent. doctrine, to bee proposed in the Councell, and to assemble in Lipsia all the Doctors and Ministers of his State to examine them. And Christopher, Duke of Wittenberg, who, a little before, succeeded his father, caused another com∣position to be made by his people, which was the same thing in substance; and the one part did approoue that of the other; yet did choose not to pro∣ceed ioyntly, that the Emperour might not suspect. Afterwards Duke Maurice wrote to the Emperour, giuing him an account of his being in or∣der with his Diuines, and of the writing which hee had prepared; but ad∣ded that his Safe Conduct seemed not sufficient. For in the Councell of Con∣stance it was determined, that they might proceede against those that came to the Councell, though they had Safe Conduct from the Emperour; and the And require a Safe Conduct from the Councell. Decree was approued by the death of Iohn Husse, who went to the Councell vnder the publike faith of Sigismond. That therefore hee could not send a∣ny to Trent, if those of the Councell did not giue Safe Conduct, as was done in that of Basil, whither the Bohemians, for the example of Constance, would not goe; but vnder the publique faith of the whole Councell. There∣fore hee prayed the Emperour to procure for them a Safe Conduct from the Ecclesiastiques of Trent, in that forme as those of Basil did grant it to the Which the Emperour promiseth to procure. Bohemians, because they were iust in the same condition now, as the Bohe∣mians were then. Caesar promised to doe it, and gaue order to his Ambassa∣dours, whom he then dispatched to the Councell, to procure it. The Ambassage consisted of three persons, to honour the Councell, and to haue many ministers to treate; and this colour was for the number, that one was for the Empire, another for Spaine, and the third for his other States, Who sendeth three Ambas∣sadours to the Councell. and yet all in solidum for all. The Mandate was signed the sixt of Iuly: and conteined that Pope Iulius, to appease the controuersies of Religion in Ger∣manie, hauing recalled to Trent, the first of May past, the Councell called by The contents of their Man∣dat. Paul, began, and intermitted, himselfe, by reason of his indisposition, not beeing able to bee there in person, hee hath sent (not to faile of his duetie) his Proctors thither. Therefore trusting vpon the faith, honestie, experi∣ence, and zeale of Hugh, Count of Mountfort, Don Pedro di Toledo, and William, Archdeacon of Campagnia hee maketh them his Orators, and Mandataries for his Imperiall dignitie, Kingdomes, and hereditarie States, giuing them, and each of them faculty, to appeare in the Councell, to hold his place, consult; treate, giue counsell and voyce, to decree in his name, and doe euerie thing else which himselfe could doe if hee were present: putting them in place of▪ his person, and promising to ratifie whatsoeuer shall bee done by them▪ three, or by any one of them. The Pope, though hee much desired the Councel should bee opened, yet after it began, hee tooke no thought that the Prelates should goe thither; either because he was intent vpon the warre, which was on fire at Mirandula, or because hee cared but little for it. All the paines was taken by the Emperour, who thrust forward, first, the Electours of Mentzs, and Triers, and afterwards of Cullen, together with fiue other prin∣cipall Bishops, and the Proctors of many who were hindered. He caused also some Prelates to come out of Spaine, besides those who had entertained themselues in Trent, and Italy, vntill then, and out of his States in Italy be∣sides which there were but few: so that, for eight moneths that the Councel The Ecclesia∣stical Electors goe to Trent. The number of the Prelats in the Coun∣cell. lasted, the Presidents and Princes beeing reckoned, the number did not ex∣ceed sixty foure. The first of September, the day appointed for the Session, beeing come, they went to the Church with the vsuall ceremonies. The order of prece∣dence was thus. First the Cardinall Legate, then the Cardinall Madruccio, the The second Session is held. two Nuncij, the two Electours, (that of Collen beeing not come) two of the Emperours Ambassadours (the Arch-deacon being not yet arriued) the Am∣bassadour In which the Legats make a long exhor∣tation to the Fathers. of the King of the Romanes, and then the Arch-bishops. The Masse beeing sung, and the Ecclesiasticall ceremonies ended, the Secretary read an exhortation, to the Fathers of the Councel, in the name of the Pre∣sidents: to this purpose. That, by the presence of the two Electours, being entred into hope, that many Bishops, of that and other Nations, will assist in the Councel, they thought fit, in the meane time, in regard of the place they bare, to giue a little admonition to themselues, and them, (though they saw all were ready to doe the office of good Pastours) because the matters to bee handled were of great moment; that is, to extirpate heresies, to reforme Ec∣clesiasticall discipline, from the corruption whereof heresies haue risen, and finally, to pacifie the discords of Princes. That the beginning of the ex∣hortation, ought to be taken from the knowledge of their owne insufficien∣cie, flying to the assistance of GOD, who will not faile them: whereof they see many arguments already, but especially the comming of the two Princes. That the authority of Generall Councels, was alwayes very great, the holy Ghost presiding in them, and their Decrees esteemed not humane, but di∣uine. That an example hereof hath beene left by the Apostles, and the Fa∣thers following, seeing that, by Councels, all heretiques haue beene condem∣ned, the life and manners of Priests and people reformed, and the discords of the Church appeased. Therefore being now assembled to doe as much, they must awaken themselues, that they may regaine the sheepe that lept out of the Lords fold, and keepe those which haue not gone astray as yet. Wherein the saluation of those only is not in question, but their owne too, in regard they must giue an account to GOD, by whom, if they performe their duety, they shall be rewarded, and all posterity will attribute great praise to that Councel; but they should not aime at that, but onely at their owne duety, and charity towards the Church, which beeing afflicted, wounded, and depriued of so many deare children, lifteth vp her hands to GOD, and them, to restore them to her. That therefore they would handle the mat∣ters of the Councel with all gentlenesse, and without contention, as becom∣meth so great an assembly, vsing perfit charity, and consent of minds, know∣ing that GOD doeth behold and iudge them. The exhortation beeing ended, the Decree was read by the Bishop that The Decree of the Session is read. said Masse; the substance whereof was; That the holy Synode, which, in the Session past, did determine to proceed in this, hauing deferred to doe it vntill now, by reason of the absence of the Germane Nation, and the small number of the Fathers, reioycing for the arriuall of the two Prince Electors, hoping that many more of that and other Nations, will, by their example, hasten their comming, doth deferre the Session for fourty dayes, that is, vntill the eleuenth of October, and prosecuting the Councell in the state in which it is, hauing treated alreadie of the seauen Sacraments, of Baptisme, and Con∣firmation, doth ordaine to treat of the Eucharist; and, for reformation, to handle those things which doe facilitate residencie. Then the Emperours Proxie beeing read, the Earle of Mountfort said, that the Emperour, after hee had obtayned the reduction of the Councel to Trent, neuer ceased to labour that the Prelates of his states should goe thither, which the presence of the Electours, and the frequencie of the Fathers, doth demonstrate. And to te∣stifie his mind the more, he hath sent Don Pedro of the Kingdome of Spaine, another of his patrimoniall States, and himselfe of Germanie, though vn∣worthy, Praying to be receiued for such. Iohn Baptista Castello, the Speaker, answered, in the name of the Councell, that they were glad to heare the Em∣perours Mandate, hauing by it, and the quality of the Proctours, conceiued how much they may promise themselues; therefore that it hopeth for assi∣stance from them, and doth, as much as it can, admit the Emperours Man∣date. Likewise the Proxie of the King of the Romanes, in the person of Pau∣lus Gregorianus, Bishop of Zagabria, and of Fredericke Nausea, Bishop of Vi∣enna, was read, and this second did speake, and was answered as those of the Emperour. After this Iacobus Amiotus, Abbat of Bellosana, appeared in the name of the French King, with letters of his Maiesty, which he presented to the Legate, The Abbat of Ballosana pre∣senteth the French Kings letters, the in∣scriptiō wher∣of giueth di∣stast to the Synode. desiring they might be read, and his credency heard. The Legate receiuing them, gaue them to the Secretary, to be read. The superscription was, San∣ctissimis in Christo Patribus Conuentus Tridentini. The Bishop of Orange, and after him, the other Spaniards said aloud, that those letters were not sent vnto them, who were a generall Councel, and not a Conuent; and therefore that they ought neither to bee read, nor opened in publike Session, but, if the Messenger had ought to say, hee should goe home. Much was spoken concerning the signification of the word, Conuentus, the Spaniards persi∣sting that it was iniurious. So that the Bishop of Mentz was forced to say, that if they would not receiue a letter from the King of France, who called them Sanctissimus Conuentus, how would they hearken to the Protestants, who called them Conuentus Malignantium? But the Spanish Prelats continu∣ing still to be more tumultuous then the rest, the Legate, with the Nuncij, and the Emperours Ambassadours, retired into the vestry, and had a long dispu∣tation hereof. At the last, returning to their place, they made it bee told to the Speaker, that the Synode doth resolue to reade the letters without preiu∣dice, thinking that the word Conuentus, is not meant in an ill sence; and, if it be, doth protest of the Nullitie. Then the Kings letter was opened, and read, which was dated the 13. of August, and said in substance; That it seemed a∣greeable to the obseruance which his ancestors haue alwaies vsed towards the Church, to signifie to them the causes why he hath bin forced not to send any B. to the conu nt, called by Iulius by the name of a publike Councel, being as∣sured that they the fathers wil not condemne any mans fact before they know it, and that when they shal vnderstand what he hath done, they wil commend it. That he was compelled, for preseruation of his honour, to continue in his resolution to protect the Duke of Parma; from which hee would not refuse to depart, if Iustice and Equity did permit. That hee writeth to them as to Honourable Iudges, praying them to receiue the letters, not as from an adder∣sary, The contents of them. or a person vnknowen, but as from the Prince and principall sonne of the Church by inheritance of his Ancestors, whom hee promiseth alwayes to imitate, and, while he defendeth himselfe from wrongs, not to lay aside his charity towards the Church, but euer to receiue whatsoeuer shall be con∣stituted by her, so that due order be obserued in making the Decrees. The let∣ters The Abbat readeth a protestation. being recited, the Abbat read a Protestation, containing a narration of a Protestation, made by Termes, in Rome, saying, That the King, after hee had taken vpon him the defence of Parma, seeing that those laudable things which hee had done were reprehended, vsed great care that Paul Termes, his Ambassador, should giue an account of all to the Pope, & Colledge of Cardi∣nals, to take from them all sinister opinion, shewing that the taking of the Duke into his protection, was the effect of a pious, humane, and kingly minde, wherein there was no cunning or priuate gaine, but respect onely of the Church; as appeared by the propositions of accord, which aymed at no∣thing but that the Church might not be robbed, and Italy preserued in peace and libertie. And if the Pope thought this a cause to put all Europe into warre, he was sorry; but it could not be imputed to him, hauing not onely accep∣ted, but offered also all honest and fit conditions. Neither could the dissolu∣tion of the Councell assembled bee prescribed to him, praying the Pope to consider what mischiefes would accompany the war, and to preuent them with peace. Which if his Holinesse will not regard, but desire rather to set Europe on fire, and hinder the Councell, giuing suspicion that it was called not for the good of the Church, but for priuate interests, excluding from it a most Christian King, hee could not choose but to protest to him and the Colledge, that he could not send his Bishops to Trent, where the accesse is not free and secure, and that he could not esteeme that a generall Councell, but priuate from which he was excluded, neither could the people or Prelates of France be obliged to the decrees of it. Afterwards he protested that he would come to the remedies vsed by his ancestors in like occurrences; not to take away his due obseruance from the Apostolique Sea, but to reserue it for bet∣ter times, when armes shall bee laid downe, which are dishonestly taken vp against him, desiring of his Holinesse, that this Protestation might bee regi∣stred, and giuing him a copie of it to peruse. These things hauing beene al∣ready protested in Rome, he desired should be likewise protested in Trent, with the same instance, that they might be registred in the actes of that assembly, and that there being a publike instrument made of it, he might vse it in time and place. When the Protestation was read, the Speaker, hauing talked with the Pre∣sident, answered in substance; That the Kings modesty in his letters was gratefull to the Synode; that it doth not accept the person of the Abbat, but as it is lawfull, that warneth him to bee in the same place the eleuenth of October, to receiue the answere which shall bee made to the Kings letters; and forbiddeth the Nuncij to make an instrument of the present action, but ioyntly with the Secretary of the Councell. And nothing else beeing to bee done, the Session was ended. Then the Abbat demaunded an instrument of the action, but could not obtaine it. When Termes had protested in Rome, though many did not know of the The censure of this Prote∣station. act, yet it was beleeued that the Pope would deferre the Councell, because it must needes bring forth new diuisions, if such a principall Nation did resist. But he deceiued the world, not for any desire hee had to celebrate it, but for that he would not seeme to be cause of the dissolution; being resolued, that if it were separated without him, hee would answere, with an open mouth, to whosoeuer should desire it again, that he had done his part, and would do no more. But the Protestation made in Trent, a place so conspicuous, was pre∣sently published euery where, and gaue matter of discourse. The Imperialists esteemed it a vainity, saying, That the act of the maior part of the vniuersali∣ty, is euer esteemed lawfull, when the lesser, being called, either cannot or wil not be present: that all are called to the Councell, and the Frenchmen also might haue come without passing by the Popes territories; but in case they could not, yet their absence doth not derogate from the Councell, because they are not neglected, but inuited. It was said to the contrary, that to call in words, and to exclude in deeds, was not to inuite, and, for the Popes ter∣ritories, one might goe from France to Trent without passing by them, but not without passing by those of the Emperour, and the maior part hath full authoritie, when the lesser cannot appeare, and is silent, because it is pre∣supposed to consent, and when it will not appeare, because it is accounted contumacious, but when it doth protest, it bath its place, and especially, if the impediment proceed from him that calleth the action, in absence, cannot be of force. And the Counsellors of the Parliament of Paris, said some thing more; The Decrees of Councels do not binde the Churches absent. That it is true, that the authoritie of the whole vniuersalitie is transferred in∣to the maior part, when the cause is common to all, and nothing belongeth to particular men: but when the whole belongeth to all, and euery one hath his part, the assent of euery one is necessary, Et prohibentis conditio potior; and the absent, not giuing their voyces, are not bound. Of this sort are Ecclesi∣asticall assemblies, and bee the Councell as populous as it will, the absent Churches are not bound if they thinke fit not to receiue it. This hath alwayes beene vsed in ancient times, that the Councels beeing ended, the Decrees should be sent, to be confirmed, to the Churches that were absent, in which otherwise they had no force; which euery one that readeth Hilarius, Athana∣sius, Theodoretus, and Victorinus, who handle this particular, may see plaine∣ly. And i happened sometimes, that some part of the Canons were recei∣ued by some Church, and some left out, as euery one thought fit, for their ne∣cessities, manners and vses. And S. Gregorie himselfe doth witnesse, that the Church of Rome did not receiue the Canons of the second Councell of Con∣stantinople, nor of the first of Ephesus. Wisemen, not considering the subtilties, said, that the King had giuen that Councell an vncurable wound. For it hauing no other ground then Chri∣stian charity, and the assistance of the holy Ghost, it would neuer bee belee∣ued that these were present in an assembly, against which a most Christian King, persecutor of all Sects, with the adherence of a kingdome, not blemi∣shed in Religion, did protest in that forme. And they brought an experi∣ence for proofe. For they said, that the Presidents retyring to consult with the Emperours Ambassadours, did shew who guided the Councell. And which was of more importance, when these fiue had consulted, and impar∣ted nothing to any body else, the Speaker sayd, The holy Synod doth receiue the letters. And what was that holy Synode? And likewise the Abbats ex∣position The Presi∣dents take vpon them the authority of the Coun∣cell. beeing read, the answere, resolued on by the Presidents onely, was giuen in the same name. Neither can the difficulty bee remooued, by say∣ing that the matter was of no great importance; first, because it will be hard to maintaine, that it is not a most important matter, where the danger of di∣uision in the Church is in question; then, be it as it will, no man can arro∣gate to himselfe power, to declare what is of importance, and what not: and this is a demonstration that things are carried iust as the Pope sayth in the Bull, and the Presidents in the Sermon read, that they were to direct the Councell; for they did so indeed. The adulse that the King had dismissed the Popes Nuncio, and published a Manifest, did reiterate the same discourses; The French King dismis∣seth the Popes Nuncio, and publis th a Manifest. which Manifest was then printed and diuulged throughout. Where he shew∣eth at large the causes why he tooke vpon him the protection of Parma, bla∣meth the Pope for the warre begun, saying that hee vsed this Artifice, that the Councell might not be held; Concluding in the end, that it is not meete that he should haue money out of his kingdome, to make warre against him, whence a great summe is ordinarily taken for vacancies, Bulls, Graces, Dis∣pensations, and Expeditions: and therefore, by the counsell of his Princes, he did for bid to dispatch Curriers to Rome, and to answere money, or gold or siluer not coyned, by way of banke, for Benefices or other Graces and Dispensations, vpon paine of Confiscation, as well for Ecclesiastiques as se∣culars, and these to bee punished corporally besides, giuing the Promooters a third of the confiscation. This Manifest was inrolled in Parliament, with a proposition of the Attourney generall of the King▪ in which he said, that it was no new thing, but vsed by Charles the sixt, Lewis the eleuenth, and Lewis the twelfth, and was conformable to the common Law, that money should not bee carried to the enemie, and that it would bee a hard case, if with the money of France, warre should bee made against the King, and that it was better for the subiects of the kingdome to keepe their money, and not care for dispensations, which were not able to secure the conscience, and are no∣thing but a shadow cast before the eyes of men, which cannot hide the trueth from GOD. It could not be endured, neither at Rome, nor in Trent; that the King should What the A∣pos olike Sea is. solemnely protest, and make warre against the Pope, and still say, that hee bare the same reuerence toward the Apostolique Sea, which is nothing but the Pope. Whereunto the French-men answered, that antiquity had not this opinion; yea, Victor the third, who was one of the Popes that assumed much, sayd that the Apostolique Sea was his mistresse. The same was sayd before him by Stephen the fourth, and by Ʋitalianus, and Constantinus, who were more ancient, it plainely appeareth, that by the Apostolike Sea is vnder∣stood the Church of Rome; for if the Pope were the same thing, his errours and defects, would be of the Apostolike Sea. The French King, fearing that, by his dissention with the Pope, those that desired change of religion, would make some innouation, which might The French King waxeth more seuere against the Protestants. prooueseditious, or that himselfe might come into the bad opinion of his people as if his minde were auerse from the Catholike faith, and perhaps to open a way for reconciliation with Rome, hee made a most seuere Edict against the Lutherans, confirming all the others which hee had published be∣fore, adding greater punishments, more wayes to discouer the guilty, and greater rewards to the Promooters. The Emperour, considering that the French King, in regard of the num∣ber of the French Cardinals, and other dependants of that Crowne, had no lesse power in the Colledge then himselfe, and being combined with the Far∣nesi, did farre exceede him, though he had the Pope of his side, sent to Rome Don Iohn Manriques, to perswade his Holinesse to create new Cardinalls, to exceed, or equalize the number of the French. The Pope was enclined here∣unto; yet hee saw what difficulty there was, his Papacie being new, and ex∣hausted, and in time of stirres, when it is hard to haue the consent of all the Cardinalls; and to create them without consent was dangerous. Hee was doubtfull whether to make many at once, or by little and little. He thought hee should sooner obtaine consent for this second course, and that his trusty friends would remaine in hope, and that the Cardinalls would more oppose a numerous promotion, and those that were excluded would despaire. He doubted whether it were fitte to create any of the Prelats of the Conucell; because there were many that deserued well, and the three Electors were not to bee passed ouer, especially the Elector of Mentz who thought of it. On the other side, to send red Cappes to the Councell, hee thought would mooue enuie. Hee resolued not to expect Christmas, when all come foorth with their pretensions, and the places of common meetings are full of wa∣gers, but to execute this businesse some day before vpon the sudden; though afterwards he found no fit time to create them, but Christmas. But to returne to Trent, the second of September, the day following the Session, a generall Congregation was made, and, in it, Fathers deputed to frame the Articles of the Eucharist, to bee giuen to the Diuines, and to col∣lect the abuses in that matter. Afterwards they discoursed of the Refor∣mation; which because it was to take away the cause why Bishops doe not reside, many were repeated, some proposed before in Trent and Bolo∣nia, and some then first spoken of. Finally, they insisted vpon iurisdiction; saying that the Bishops were wholly depriued of it, partly by auocation of causes, and partly by appeales, but especially by exemptions: yea, that more often iurisdiction was exercised ouer and against them by their Subiects, ei∣ther by speciall commission from Rome, or by vertue of Conseruatories, then by them ouer their subiects. And Fathers were elected to frame the Ar∣ticles concerning this matter. The Presidents, considering the Popes in∣struction to auoid dangerous contentions among the Diuines, & their vnin∣telligible disputes, in which they grow bitter, and also their confusion in speaking they gaue out the Articles framed, which they were to begin to handle on Tuesday after dinner, and there added the manner and order to bee held in the Congregations, much limited, which did compell them to speake soberly. The Articles were tonne; drawen from the doctrine of the Zuingliani, and . That in the Eucharist the Body, Blood Ten Articles concerning the Eucharist are proposed to be discussed by the Di∣uines. and Diuinitie of CHRIST is not truely, but as in a signe 2. That CHRIST is not giuen to bee eaten Sadramentally, but spiritually and by faith . That in the Eucharist there is the Blood and Body of CHRIST, but together with the substance of the Bread and Wine, so that there is no T tion, but an hypostaticall vnion of the humanitie, and of the substances of the Bread and Wine; so that it may bee truely sayd this Bread is the Body of CHRIST and this wine is the Blood of CHRIST. 4. That the Eucharist is onely for remission of sinnes. 5. That CHRIST ought not to bee worshipped in the Eucharist, nor honoured in feasts, not carried in procession, nor to the sicke, and that the worshippers are truely Idolaters 6. That the Eucharist ought not to bee saued, but spent, and distributed immediatly and that he that doth not so doth abuse this Sacrament and that it is not lawfull for any to giue the Communion to himselfe. 7. That in the particles which remaine after the Communion, the Body of our LORD doth not remaine, but onely while it is receiued, and neither before nor af∣ter. 8. That it is de iure diuino, to giue both kinds to the people and chil∣dren, and that they sinne who force them to vse one onely. 9. That so much is not contained vnder one, as vnder both, neither doth hee receiue so much, who communicateth with one, as hee that doeth communicate with both 10. That onely faith is a sufficient preparation to receiue the Eucha∣rist, neither is confession necessary, but free, especially to the learned, neither are men bound to Communicate at Easter. After these Articles a precept was added, in this forme. That the Di∣uines Who are pre∣scribed an or∣der how they shall proceed. ought to confirme their opinions with the holy Scripture, Traditions of the Apostles sacred and approoued Councels, and by the constitutions and authorities of the holy Fathers; that they ought to vse breuitie, and auoyd superfluolis and vnprofitable questions, and peruerse contentions. That this shall bee the order of speaking amongst them; first, those that are sent by the Pope are to speake then those that are sent by the Emperour and, in the third place, the Secular Diuiries, according to the order of their pro∣motions; and lastly the Regulars, according to the precedencie of their or∣ders. And the Legate and Presidents by the Apostolique authority gran∣ted them, gaue faculty and authority to the Diuines, who are to speake, to haue and reade all prohibited bookes, that they may finde out the trueth, and confute and impugne false opinions. This order did not please the Ita∣lian Which doth displease the Italian Di∣uines. Diuines; who sayd it was a nouitie, and a condemning of Schoole di∣uinitie, which in all difficulties, vseth reason, and because it was not lawfull to treate as Saint Thomas Saint Bonauenture, and other famous men did. The other doctrine which is called positiue, and consisteth in collecting the say∣ings of the Scriptures and Fathers, was onely a faculty of the memory and a painet in writing and was old but knowen to be vnsufficient, and vnprofi∣table by those Doctors who for these three hundred and fifty yeeres, that de d the Church, and that this was to yeeld the victory to the Luthe∣ranes. For when the point shall stand vpon variety of reading, and memo∣rie, they will euer ouercome, in regard they know many congues, and reade Authours, where unto he that will bee a good Diuine can not apply , who must exercise his wit, and make himselfe able to weigh things, and not to number them. They complayned, that this was to shame them∣selues before the Dutch Diuines, who? beeing accustomed to contend with the Lutheranes, are exercised in this kinde of Learning, which is not vsed in Italy who, if they were to speake according to true Theologie, it would ap∣peare they knew nothing: But the Presidents being willing to please them haue done this shame to the Italians. Though many complained hereof, yet it preuailed but little because generally the Fathers desired to heare men speake with intelligible tearmes not abstrustly in the matter of iustifica∣tion, and others already handled. And it is certaine, that this order did the expedition. In diuers Congregations all the voyces, were comfortable. For the first Article that it should becondemned for hereticall, as formerly it had beene Opinions are deliuered con∣cerning the articles. In the second there were three opinions. Some said it was to bee omitted, for that no heretique doeth denie the Sacramentall Communion. Others held it onely for suspected and some would haue deliuered it in clearer tearmes. The common opinion was, that the third was hereticall; but that it was not fit to condemne, or speake of it, because it was an opinion inuented by Ro∣bertus Tutciensis, more then foure hundred years since, and neuer followed by any, therefore to speake of it, would (contrary to the precept of the wise man) mooue the euill, which beeing quiet hurted not. They added, that the Councell was assembled against the moderne heresies, and therefore that they were not to take paines in the old. Concerning the fourth Article, there were diuers opinions. Some said, that the word, onely, beeing taken away, the opinion was Catholique, to say that the Eucharist is for the remis∣sion of sinnes, and that word was not put by any of the heretiques, and therefore they thought this Article might to omitted. Some sayd it was he∣reticall, though the word onely were remooued, because the Sacrament of the Eucharist as not instituted for the remission of sinnes. In the fift, all a∣greed, and many amplifications were vsed to perswade the worship, and ma∣ny new wayes proposed to enlarge it, as the deuotion of euery one had found out. Likewise they allagreed in the sixt, except in the last part, that is, that it is not lawfull to giue the Communion to himselfe. Some said, that it be∣ing vnderstood of the Laiques, it was Catholique; and therefore it must bee expressed, that it is to bee condemned onely in regard of the Priest. O∣thers sayd, that neither in regard of these it was to bee condemned for here∣ticall because in the sixt Councell, the hundred and one chapter, it was not condemned. Others would, that, for the Laiques also, the case of necessity should be excluded. In the seuenth, all powred themselues out into ∣ctiues against the moderne Protestants, as inuentors of a wicked opinion, neuer heard of before in the Church. Vpon the eight all made long discour∣ses, though all to the same purpose. Their principall reasons to condemne it were, because our Sauiour in the foure and twentieth of Saint Luke, did blesse the bread onely to the two Disciples: and because, in the Lords Prayer, wee aske our dayly bread; and because, in the Actes of the Apostles, in the second, and twentieth Chapters, Bread onely is spoken of, and Saint Paul in the ship, in the seuen and twentieth, blessed nothing but the Bread. Au∣thorities of the ancient Doctors, and some examples of the Fathers were brought, but they grounded themselues principally vpon the Councell of Constance, and the custome of the Church, as also vpon diuers figures of the Olde Testament, and drew many prophecies also to this sence. And, concerning the children, all agreed that perhaps it might formerly bee done by some particular man, but was, by all others, knowen to bee an errour. In the ninth Article, the first part, that as much is not contained vnder one Species as vnder both, was thought to bee hereticall, by the Dutch Diuines; but the Italians sayd it must bee distinguished, before it could bee condem∣ned. For if it were vnderstood in respect of the vertue of the consecration, it is cleare that vnder the bread there is the body onely, and vnder the wine, the blood onely; but by consequence, which the Diuines call Concomitancie, vnder the bread there is the blood, soule, and diuinitie, and vnder the wine, there is the body, and the other things; and therefore it is not to be condem∣ned in so generall termes. But for the second, that as much is receiued by one as by both, there was a difference; for many did thinke, that although no more of the Sacrament, yet more grace was receiued; so that they did de∣sire a declaration herein. In the tenth some would haue the first part ex∣pounded of dead faith, because there is no doubt but that a liuely faith is suf∣ficient. For the necessitie of Confession, the Dominicans considered, that many learned and holy Catholiques held that opinion, so that to condemne that would bee to condemne them. Others proposed, for a temper, that it should not bee condemned as hereticall, but as pernicious. Some would haue this condition added, if there were commodity for a Confessor. The last part, for communicating at Easter, it not beeing commanded by the Law of GOD, but by the Church onely, the common opinion was, that it ought not to bee condemned for hereticall, it being a thing not heard of, that one should bee condemned of heresie, for not approouing a particular humane precept. Many Diuines did propose another Article also, taken out of the writings of Luther, which was necessary to condemne. And it was this: that although there was a necessitie to recite the words of CHRIST, yet they are not the cause of the presence of CHRIST in the Sacrament, but the cause is, the faith of him who receiueth it. After all the diuines had spoken, the deputed Fathers did collect seuen Out of which 7. Anathe∣matismes are composed. Anathematismes, out of their opinions, which being proposed in the generall Congregation, it was first of all considered, that it was not fit to passe ouer the matter with Anathematismes onely; that this was not to teach, but onely to confirme; that the ancient Councels had not done so, which alwayes had expounded the Catholike opinion, and then condemned the contrary; that the same succeeded well to this Councell, in the matter of Iustification; and although it was forced, in the Session of the Sacra∣ments, to change this course, for vrgent respects, yet that was rather to bee imitated which was then done by reason, then that which was after chan∣ged by necessitie. This opinion was cherished by the Italian Diuines, who saw there was but one way to regaine their reputation lost. For as the Dutch and Flemish Diuines were of abilitie to prooue the conclusions by authori∣ties, so to expound them, and finde their causes, there was neede of Schoole Diuinitie, in which themselues were well seene. This opinion did preuaile; and order was giuen, that the Heads of doctrine should bee framed, and Fathers deputed to see it done. The Heads were reduced to the number of eight. Of the Reall presence. Of the Institution. Of the excellencie. Eight heads of doctrine are proposed to bee discus∣sed. Of Transubstantiation. Of worship. Of preparation to receiue the Sa∣crament. Of the vse of the Cup, in the Communion of the Laitie. Of the Communion of Children. It was proposed also to make a collection of the abuses which did occurre, and to adde the remedies. Then, in that Congregation, and some of those that followed, the Fathers began to speake their opinion concerning the seuen Anathematismes: wherein nothing re∣markeable was sayde, but that, in condemning those who confessed not the reall presence of the Lords body, many desired that the Canon should bee more fat and pregnant (for so their wordes were) that, in the Eucharist, there is the body of IESVS CHRIST, the same which was borne of the Ʋirgin, did suffer on the Crosse, was buried, raysed, and ascended into hea∣uen, sitteth on the right hand of GOD, and shall come to iudgement. And some of them called to minde, that there wanted one very important point, that is, to declare, that the Minister of this Sacrament is the Priest, lawfully ordained. Which they did, because Luther and his followers doe often say, that euery Christian may doe it, euen a woman. But the Earle of Montfort, perceiuing that they treated of a matter much controuersed, especially of the Communion of the Cup, which was the most palpable, popular, and best vnderstood by all, hee thought that, if The Ambas∣sadors of the Emperor and Ferdinand dissw de the discussion of the Commu∣nion vnder one kinde. that were determined, the Protestants would neuer bee induced to come to the Councell, and all the labour would bee in vaine. And hauing imparted this to his Colleagues, and the Ambassadors of Ferdinand, they went all to∣gether to the Presidents, to whom, when they had shewed what paines Caesar had taken, both in warre, and in the negotiation to make the Prote∣stants submit to the Councell, which they would neuer doe if they went not thither, they shewed that they ought to apply themselues principally to this; and, to that end, the Emperour had giuen them a Safe conduct. But they were not contented with it, alleadging that it was decreed in the Councel of Constance, and really executed, that the Councell is not bound by the Safe conduct of any, whatsoeuer hee bee; and therefore they required one from the Synode, which was promised to them by Caesar, who gaue charge to them his Ambassadours to obtaine it of the Councell. Whereunto the Le∣gate making a very complementall answere, and referring himselfe to the Session which should bee held, to gaine time, that hee might giue an ac∣count thereof to Rome, the earle added, that for the same cause, he thought it not fit, that, before their comming, the controuersed points of the Eu∣charist should bee handled; that there wanted not matters of reformation to be treated on, or others, in which there was no difference. The Legate answered, that it was resolued long agoe to handle the Eucharist, neither could it be altered, because it was concluded before, that the Decrees of faith and reformation should goe hand in hand, and that the matter of the Eucha∣rist did follow that of reformation, which was handled last, before they went to Bolonia. But hee sayd, that this was more controuersed with the Zinglian Suisses, then with the Protestants, who are not Sacramentaries; as those. The Count spake of the Communion of the Cup, and said, that if that point were decided against them, which is vnderstood by all the people, and a thing whereon they stand most, it was impossible to reduce them. That, Caesar also in the Decree of the Inter-religion, was forced to yeeld in this, and therefore desired that they would be pleased to deferre it vntill the comming of the Protestants. The Legate did not refuse, but passed it ouer with ge∣nerall and vnconcluding wordes, that hee might first vnderstand the Popes minde, vnto whom hee gaue an account of whatsoeuer was handled by the Diuines, and of the Anathematismes framed, and of that which was discour∣sed The Legate giueth the Pope an ac∣count of all. in matter of reformation (whereof wee will speake hereafter) and then hee gaue aduise of the two requests of the Emperours Ambassadours, desi∣ring an answere. The Pope put these things in consultation; and, for the lafe conduct, found varietie of opinions. Some would not haue it giuen, alleadging that Who causeth a consultation to be held. it was neuer done but by the Councell of Basill, which was not to bee imita∣ted in any thing; and that it was a great preiudice to binde themselues to rebels, though any thing might bee endured if there were hope to gaine them; but there was none at all; yea rather, in stead of that, there was reason to feare that some would bee peruerted, as Vergerius was, though not whol∣ly, yet in some part; from which contagion the most principall Prelates, and the most obliged to the holy Sea, haue not beene exempted. On the other side it was sayd, that, not out of hope to conuert, but to leaue them with∣out excuse, it was fit to giue them all satisfaction; but the rather, because the Emperour for his owne interests, had made greater instance, whom it was necessary to please now, because, France being aliened, they were wholly to depend on him: and it was better to preuent, and doe that willingly, which of necessitie was to bee done. And, concerning the preiudices, it might bee made in such a forme, that it should not binde at all, or very little. First, by not descending to name the Protestants, but in generall, the Ecclesiastikes and Seculars of the German Nation, of euery condition. For so, vnder the generall wordes, it may bee said they are comprehended, or, that it is vnder∣stood of the Catholikes onely, and not of them, alleadging that for them, a speciall and expresse mention was necessary. Then the Synod may grant a safe Conduct for it selfe, and the Popes authoritie will bee reserued. Then Iudges, concerning faults committed, may bee deputed, and the election And answe∣reth thus. left to them, to auoyd suspicion. So that vigor of discipline, and authoritie of punishing would bee retained, and no shew made of yeelding or remit∣ting any thing. This opinion preuailed with the Pope, who, according to that forme, made a draught of the safe Conduct, and answered the Legate, commending his wisedome in the answers hee had giuen, resoluing that the safe Conduct should bee granted in the forme hee sent him, and that the mat∣ter of the Cup should bee deferred, and the Protestants expected, but not a∣boue three moneths, or little more, not beeing idle in the meane while, but making a Session betweene, to treate of Penance, which hee would not haue deferred aboue fourtie dayes, or little more. Hee aduertised them also, that the Canons, in matter of the Eucharist, were too full, and that it were better to diuide them. While they consulted in Rome, in Trent they went on to handle the points of doctrine; wherein they proceeded as easily, as before, in discussing the Articles. But when they came to expresse the manner of existence, how CHRIST is in the Sacrament, and the Transubstantiation, how the Body of CHRIST is made of the Bread, and the Blood of the Wine, it could not be A contenti∣on a s be∣tweene the Franciscans and Domini∣cans concer∣ the reall p sence treated on without contention betweene the two Schooles, Dominican, and Franciscan; which did much trouble the Fathers, by the subtiltie and small fruit thereof, themselues not knowing how to explicate their owne meaning. In summe, the Dominicans would not haue it said that Christ was in the Eu∣charist, because he went thither from another place where he was before, but, because the substance of the Bread is turned into his Body, the Body being in the place where the bread was, without going thither; and because all the sub∣stance of the bread is turned into all the substance of the Body, that is, the mat∣ter of the Bread into the matter of the Body, and the forme into the forme, it is properly called Transubstantiation. And therefore there are two sorts of the existence of CHRIST our Lord, both of them reall, true, and substantiall, one, as he is in heauen, whither he ascended, when he parted from the earth, where hee first conuersed; the other, as hee is in the Sacrament, in which he is, be∣cause hee is where the substances of the bread and wine, conuerted into him, were first. The first existence is called naturall, because it agreeth to all bo∣dies; the second, as it is singular, so it cannot bee expressed with any name agreeing to others, nor can bee called Sacramentall, which were as much as to say, that it was not there really, but as in a signe, the Sacrament being nothing but an holy signe, except by Sacramentall one would vnderstand a reall manner, proper to this Sacrament onely. The Franciscans would haue it said, that one body may, by Gods omnipotencie, bee truely and substan∣tially in many places, and when it doeth get a new place, it is in it, because it goeth thither, not by a successiue mutation, as when it leaueth the first place to get the second, but in an instant, in which it gaineth the second, without losing the first; and that God hath so ordained, that where the body of CHRIST is, there should remaine no other substance, not by annihilation, because the substance of CHRIST succeedeth in place of it, and therefore it is truely called Transubstantiation, not because the one substance is made of the other, as the Dominicans say, but for that the one doeth succeede the other. The manner of CHRISTS being in heauen and in the Sacrament dif∣fereth not in substance, but in quantitie onely: because in heauen the mag∣nitude of the body possesseth as much space as is proportionable to it, and it is substantially in the Sacrament without possessing any place. There∣fore both sorts are true, reall, and substantiall, and, in regard of the sub∣stance, naturall also: in respect of the quantitie the existence in heauen is naturall, and in the Sacrament miraculous, differing in this onely, that in heauen the quantity is truely a quantity, and in the Sacrament, hath the con∣dition of a substance. Either partie was so wedded to their owne opinion, that they affirmed it to be plaine, cleere, and intelligible to all, and opposed infinite absurdities against the other. The Elector of Cullen, who, with Io∣hannes Groperus, was assiduous at the disputations, to vnderstand this matter, in that which one party opposed against the other, he gaue a reason to them both, in that which either of them affirmed, hee said, he desired some proba∣bility, and that they should speake as vnderstanding the matter, not, as they seemed to doe, by custome and habite of the Schooles. Diuers draughts were made by both sides, to expresse these mysteries, and some were compo∣sed by taking some thing from either partie. But none gaue satisfaction, es∣pecially to the Nuncio Ʋerona, who was the principall Superintendent in this matter. It was determined in the generall Congregation, to vse as few words as was possible, and to make an expression so vniuersall, as might bee accommodated to the meaning of both parties: and the care heereof was committed to some Fathers and Pheologues, with the superintendencie of the foresaid Nuncio. In the end of this Congregation, it was proposed that a collection should The abuses occurring therein rre noted. be made, of the abuses occurring in this matter, with remedies against them, and, in the Congregations following, many were recounted. That in some particular Churches, the Sacrament is not kept, and in others, is kept very vndecently. That, when it is carryed in the stree e, many doe not kneele to it, and some scarce vouchsafe to put off their caps. That, in some Churches, it is kept so long, that it becommeth putrified. That, in administring the holy Communion, great indecencie is vsed, by some parish Priests, who haue not so much as a cloath, for him that communicateth, to hold in his hand. That, (which is of most importance) the communicants doe not know what they receiue, nor are instructed of the dignity, and fruit of this Sacra∣ment. That Concubinaries, Concubines, and other enormous sinners, and many who know not the Pater noster, and A e Maria are admitted to the Communion. That money is demanded at the Communion in the name of almes, and, which is worse, there is an vse in Rome, that he who is to com∣municate, doeth hold a burning candle in his hand, with money sticking in it, which, together with the candle, after the Communion, remayneth to the Priest, and he that beareth not a candle, is not admitted to the Commu∣nion. To remedie part of these, and other abuses, flue Canons were made, And fiue Ca∣nons made to redresse them. which had a faire proheme. In which it was constituted, that the Sacra∣ment beeing lifted vp on the Altar, or carryed by the way, euery one should kneele, and vncouer his head. That the Sacrament should bee kept in euery Parish Church, and renewed euery fifteene dayes, and haue a lampe burning before it night and day. That it bee carryed to the sicke, by the Priest, in an honourable habite, and alwayes with light. That the Curates teach the peo∣ple, what grace is receiued in this Sacrament, and execute against them, the penalties of the Chapt. Omnis Ʋtriusque sexus. That the Ordinaries should haue care of the execution, chastising the transgressours with arbitrary pu∣nishments, besides those which are set downe by Innocentius the third, in the Chapt. Statuimus, and by Honorius the third, in the Chapt. Sane. The reformation was handled, at the same time, when there was dispu∣tation in matter of faith, but by other Congregations, in which the Cano∣nists did assist; which discussions, not to interrupt the matter, I haue brought all together to this place. And because the purpose was to reforme the Epis∣copall iurisdiction, this place requireth (for the vnderstanding of what will be sayd vpon this, and many other occasions hereafter) that the originall should bee declared, and how, beeing mounted to so great power it became suspected to Princes, and terrible to the people. CHRIST hauing com∣manded his Apostles to preach the Gospel, and administer the Sacraments, hee left also to them, in person of all the faithfull, this principall precept, To loue one another, charging them to make peace, betweene those that dissen∣ted, and, for the last remedie, giuing the care thereof to the body of the Church, promising it should bee bound and loosed in heauen, whatsoeuer they did binde and loose on earth, and whatsoeuer two did aske with a com∣mon consent, should bee granted by the Father. In this charitable office to giue satisfaction to the offended, and pardon to the offender, the Primitiue Church was alwayes exercised. And, in conformity of this, Saint Paul or∣dayned, that brothers, hauing ciuill suites one against another, should not goe to the Tribunals of the Infidels, but that wise men should be appoynted to iudge the differences; and this was a kind of ciuill Iudgement, as the o∣ther had a similitude of a criminall; but were both so different from the iudgements of the world, that as these are executed by power of the Iudge, who enforceth submission, so those onely by the will of the guilty, to receiue them, who refusing them, the Ecclesiasticall Iudge remaineth without exe∣cution, and hath no power, but to foreshew the iudgement of GOD, which, according to his omnipotent good pleasure, will follow, in this life, or the next. And indeed, the Ecclesiasticall iudgement did deserue the name of cha∣ritie, The Refor∣mation is handled at the same time with the Do∣ctrine, but in diuers Con∣gregations. in regard that it only did induce the guilty to submit, and the Church to iudge with such sincerity, that neither in the one any bad effect could haue place, nor iust complaint in the other; and the excesse of charitie in corre∣cting, did make the corrector to feele greater paine then the corrected; so that, in the Church, no punishment was imposed, without great lamentati∣on of the multitude, and greater of the better sort. And this was the cause A discourse of the Authour concerning opall Iu∣risdiction. why to correct, was called to lament. So Saint Paul, rebuking the Corin∣thians, for not chastising the incestuous, said, You haue not lamented to separate such a transgressour from you. And in another Epistle, I feare that when I come vnto you, I shall not finde you such as I desire, but in contentions and tu∣mults, and that at my comming, I shall lament many of those who haue sinned before. The iudgement of the Church (as is necessary in euery multitude) was fit that it should be conducted by one, who should preside and guide the action, propose the matters, and collect the points to bee con∣sulted on. This care, due to the most principall, and worthy person, was al∣wayes committed to the Bishop. And where the Churches were many, the propositions and deliberations were made by the Bishop, first in the Col∣ledge of the Priests and Deacons, which they called the Presbyterie, and there were ripened, to receiue afterwards the last resolution in the generall Congregation of the Church. This forme was still on foote in the yeere two hundred and fiftie, and is plainely seene by the Epistles of Cyprian, who in the matter concerning those who did eate of meates offered to Idols, and subscribe to the Religion of the Gentiles, writeth to the Presbytery, that hee doeth not thinke to doe any thing without their counsell, and consent of the people; and writeth to the people, that, at his returne, hee will examine the causes, and merits thereof, in their pre∣sence, and vnder their iudgement; and hee wrote to those Priests, who, of their owne braine, had reconciled some, that they should giue an account to the people. The goodnesse and charitie of the Bishops, made their opinion for the most part to be followed, and by little and little, was cause that the Church, charitie waxing colde, not regarding the charge layd vpon them by CHRIST, did leaue the care to the Bishop; and ambition, a witty passion, which doth insinuate it selfe in the shew of vertue, did cause it to be readily embraced. But the principall cause of the change was the ceasing of perse∣cutions. For then the Bishops did e ect as it were a tribunall, which was much frequented; because as temporall commodities, so suites did encrease. The iudgement, though it were not as the former, in regard of the forme, to determine all by the opinion of the Church, yet it was of the same sincerity. Whereupon Constantine, seeing how profitable it was to determine causes, and that, by the authoritie of Religion, captious actions were discouered, which the Iudges could not penetrate, made a Law that there should lye no appeale from the sentences of Bishops, which should bee executed by the se∣cular Iudges: and if in a cause depending before a secular tribunall, in any state thereof, either of the parties, though the other contradict, shall de∣mand the Episcopall iudgement, the cause shall be immediately remitted vn∣to him. Here the tribunall of the Bishop, began to be a common pleading place, hauing execution by the Ministerie of the Magistrate, and to gaine the name of Episcopall iurisdiction, Episcopall audience, and such like. The Emperor Ʋalence did enlarge it, who, in the yeere 365. gaue the Bishops the care ouer all the prizes of vendible things. This iudiciall negotiation pleased not the good Bishops. Possidonius, doth recount that Austin, being imployed herein, sometimes vntill dinner time, sometimes longer, was wont to say, that it was a trouble, & did diuert him from the things proper vnto him; and him∣selfe writeth, that it was to leaue things profitable, and to attend things tu∣multuous and perplexed. And Saint Paul did not take it to himselfe, as be∣ing not fit for a Preacher, but would haue it giuen to others. Afterwards some Bishops, beginning to abuse the authoritie giuen them by the law of Constantine, that law was seuentie yeeres after, reuoked by Arcadius and Hono∣rius, and an ordination made that they should iudge causes of religion, and not ciuill, except both parties did consent, and declared that they should not be thought to haue a Court. Which law being not much obserued in Rome, in regard of the great power of the Bishop, Valentinian being in the Citie, in that yeare 452. did renew it, and made it to be put in execution. But a little after, some part of the power taken away was restored by the Princes that followed; so that Iustinian did establish vnto them a Court, and audience, and assigned to them the causes of Religion, the Ecclesiasticall faults of the Clergie, & diuers, voluntary iurisdictions also ouer the Laitie. By these degrees the charitable correction, instituted by CHRIST, did degenerate into do∣mination, and made Christians loose their ancient reuerence and obedience. It is denyed in words, that Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction is dominion, as is the secular, yet one knoweth not how to put a difference betweene them. But S. Paul did put it, when he wrote to Timothie, and repeated it to Titus, that a Bishop should not be greedy of gaine, nor a striker. Now on the contrary, they make men pay for processes, and imprison the parties, as is done in the secular Court. But the Westerne Countries being separated, and an Empire made of Ita∣ly, France, and Germany, and a kingdom of Spaine, in these foure Prouinces the Bishops, for the most part, were made Counsellors of the Prince, which, by the mixture of spirituall and temporall charges, caused their iurisdiction to encrease exceedingly. Before 200. yeeres were past, they pretended ab∣solutely all iudicature, criminall and ciuill, ouer the Cleargie, and, in some things, ouer the Laitie also, pretending that the cause was Ecclesiasticall. Be∣sides this kinde of Iudicature, they inuented another, which they called mixt, in which the Magistrate or the Bishop might proceed against the secu∣lar, which of them tooke the cause in hand first; whereby in regard of their exquisite diligence, neuer leauing place to the secular, they appropriated all vnto themselues; and those which remained out of so great a number, were comprehended in the end by a generall rule, established by them, as a ground of faith, that euery cause is deuolued to the Ecclesiasticall Court, if the Ma∣gistrate will not, or neglect to doe iustice. But if the pretensions of the Cleargie were contained within these bounds, the state of Christian Com∣mon wealthes were tolerable. The people and Princes, when they saw it mount to these vnsupportable termes, might with Lawes and statutes haue brought the iudgements to a sufferable forme, as formerly vpon occasion hath beene done. But that which put Christendome vnder the yoke, tooke from it, in the end all meanes to shake it from the necke. For after the yeere 1050. all the causes of the Cleargy being appropriated to the Bishops, and very many of the Laitie, vnder title of spiritualitie, and almost all the rest vn∣der the name of a mixt iudicature, and placing themselues aboue secular Ma∣gistrates, vpon pretence of iustice denied, they came to say, that the Bishop had that power to iudge, not by the grant or conniuency of Princes, or by the will of the People, or by custome, but that it was essentiall to the Episcopall dignitie, and giuen to it by CHRIST. And though the Lawes of the Emperours remaine in the Codes of Theo∣dosius and Iustinian, in the Capitulars of Charles the great, and Lewis the Debo∣neere, and others of later Princes of the East and West, which doe all shew plainely, how, when and by whom this power hath beene graunted, and all Stories, as well Ecclesiasticall as prophane, doe agree in declaring the same grants and customes, adding the reasons and causes, yet so notorious a trueth hath not had such power, but that a contrary affirmation onely, without a∣ny proofe, hath been able to ouercome it; which the Canonists haue so farre maintained, as to publish those for heretikes who doe not suffer themselues to bee hoodwinckt. And not staying heere they adde, that neither the Magistrate, nor the Prince himself, can meddle in any of those causes which the Clergie hath appropriated, because they are spirituall, and of spirituall things the Laiques are vncapeable. Yet the light of trueth was not so put out but that learned and godly men, in those first times, did oppose that do∣ctrin, shewing that both the Premisses of that discourse were false, & that the Maior, that is, that the Laiques are vncapeable of spiritual things, was absurd, and impious. For they are adopted by the heauenly Father, called the sonnes of God, brothers of CHRIST, partakers of the Kingdome of heauen, made worthy of Diuine grace. Of Baptisme, and of the Communion of the flesh of CHRIST. What other spirituall things are there beside these? And if there were, how can hee, who is partaker of these which are the chiefest, be sayde absolutely in generall termes to be vncapeable of spirituall things? But they sayd that the Minor was false also, that causes appropriated to the Episcopall iudicature are spirituall. For all either delicts or contracts: which, considering the qualities, giuen by the holy Scripture to spirituall things, are as farre from being such, as earth is from heauen. But the oppo∣sition of the better part could not ouercome the greater, and so; vpon the spirituall power, giuen by CHRIST to the Church, to binde and loose, and vpon the institution of Saint Paul, to compose contentions betweene Christians, without going to the tribunall of Infidels, in much time, and by many degrees, a temporall tribunal hath beene built, more remarkeable then euer was any in the world, and in the midst of euery Ciuill gouernement another instituted, not depending on the Publike, which is such a kinde of Common-wealth, as not one of as many as haue written of gouernments would haue imagined could subsist. I will omit to speake how the paines of so many, besides the obtaining of the wished end. To make themselues in∣dependent of the publike, haue, before they were aware, raysed an Empire, there being a more difficult opinion sprung vp, taking root with admirable progresse, which giueth to the Pope of Rome, as much at once, as hath, in 1300. yeeres, beene gained by so many Bishops, by such extraordinarie meanes, not making the power to binde and loose the foundation of iuris∣diction, but the power of feeding, and so affirming, that all iurisdiction was giuen the Pope by CHRIST, in the person of Peter, when he sayd to him, Feede my sheepe. For so it will be said in the third reduction of the Councell, when great tumults were raised by this opinion, which shall then be recoun∣ted. But by that which hath been now declared, euery one may of himselfe, conceiue what remedies were necessarie, to giue a tolerable forme to a matter, broken out into so great corruptions, and compare them with these that were proposed. In Trent there were two defects considered; that is, that the charitie of the superiours was turned into domination, and the obedience of the inferi∣ours into complaints, subterfuges, and lamentations; and they first thought of prouiding, in some sort, against them both. But in prosecuting the first, which is the fountaine from whence the second is deriued, they vsed onely an exhortatorie remedie to the Prelates to take away domination, and re∣store charitie. And for the inferiours, many subterfuges, beeing mentio∣ned to delude iustice, three heads onely were taken, Appeales, absolutorie graces, and complaints against the Iudges. Iohannes Groperus, who assi∣sted in that Councell as a Diuine and a Lawyer, spake honourably of Ap∣peales, and sayd, that while the heat of faith remained in the brests of Chri∣stians, Appeales were not heard of. But charitie in the Iudges waxing colde, and place being giuen to passion, they entred into the Church, for A discourse of Iohannes Groperus con∣cern ng Ap∣peales. the same reasons which brought them into the secular Courts, that is, for the ease of the oppressed. And as the first iudicatures belonged not to the Bishop onely, but to him with the councell of his Priests, so the Appeale was not deuolued vnto one man, but vnto another Congregation. But the Bi∣shops, taking away the Synods, did institute Courts and officers, like the seculars. Neither did the mischiefe stoppe there, but passed to greater abu∣ses then in the Secular court. For there the first Appeale is onely to bee im∣mediate superiour, neither is it lawfull to leape to the highest, nor permit∣ted, in the articles of the cause to appeale from the Decrees of the Iudge which they call interlocutories, but it is necessarie to expect the end. But in the Ecclesiasticall Courts one may appeale from euery acte, which ma∣keth the causes infinite, and immediately to the highest Iudge, which carry∣eth them out of the Countreys, with great charges, and other intolerable mischiefes. This hee said hee did declare, to conclude, that if they would reforme this matter, which is wholly corrupted, and doeth not onely hinder residencie, as in the Congregations of so many worthy Doctours and Fa∣thers was considered, but corrupteth the whole discipline, and is a grie∣uance, charge, and scandall to the people, it was fit to reduce it to its be∣ginning, or as neere to it as might bee, setting a perfect Idea before their eyes, and ayming at that, to come as nigh to it, as the corruption of the matter doth comport. That the well instituted monasticall religions haue forbidden all appeale; that this is the true remedie. Hee that hath not beene able to goe so high, hath moderated them, granting them within their or∣der, and forbidding them without; which succeeding well, as appeareth, to keepe those gouernments in order, it would worke the same effect in the publike gouernments of the Church, if the Appeales were confined with∣in the same Prouince. And to effect this, and to bridle the malice of the liti∣gants, it is sufficient to reduce them to the forme of the Common lawes, for∣bidding the Leap, that is, to go to the highest without passing by the interme∣diate superiours, and by forbidding Appeales from the Articles, or the interlo∣cutory Decrees: with which prouisions, the causes will not goe farre, will not be drawne in length, will not cause excessiue charges, and other innume∣rable grieuances, and, that the sentences may passe with sinceritie, to restore the Synodals, which are not subiect to so great corruptions, remouing those officers by whom the world is so much scandalized, because it is not possible that Germany should endure them. This opinion was not willingly heard, except by the Spaniards & Dutch-men. But the Cardinall & the Nuncio of Siponto, were displeased that hee went so farre. For this was to take away, not onely the profit of the Court, but the honour also, no cause would goe to Rome, and by degrees, euery one would forget the superioritie of the Pope, it beeing an ordinary thing with men, not to esteeme that Superiour, whose authoritie is not feared, or cannot be vsed. Therefore they caused Iohn Baptista Castellus, of Bolonia, to speake in the next Congregation, in the same matter, in such sort, as that without con∣tradicting Groperus, the appearance, which the reasons alleadged by him did make should bee darkened. Hee beganne with the prayses of the ancient n opposition whereof, Io∣hannes Bapti∣sta Castellus maketh ano∣ther discou se by direction of the Presi∣dents. Church, yet dexterously touching, that in those same times, there were im∣perfections, in some part greater, then in the present. He thanked GOD that the Church was not oppressed, as when the Arians did scarce suffer it to appeare: and said, that antiquitie ought not so to be commended, as that something in the latter age, may not bee reputed better. Those who praise the Synodall iudicature, haue not seene their defects, the infinite length in the dispatches, the impediments in the diligent examination, the difficulty to informe so many, the seditions made by the factious: it is to bee beleeued that they haue beene intermitted, because they did notsucceed well, and that the Courts and Officers haue beene brought in, to remedy those disorders. It cannot be denied, that these haue some that deserue to be prouided against; which is fit to doe, without restoring that which was abolished, because it was intollerable. In Appeales, the custome was to passe by the intermediate Superiours, and not, at the first, to leap to the highest; which was taken away, because the Gouernours of Prouinces and Countries, were become Tyrants ouer the Church, and for a remedie, all businesses were carried to Rome. This hath its inconueniencies, the great distance of place, and charge; but they are more tollerable then oppression, He that would reduce the first custome, should find that in stead of redressing one euill hee should cause many and euery one greater. But aboue all it must be considered, that the same publike thing must not alwayes bee ordered in one manner, but as time hath mutati∣ons, so it is fit to change the gouernment. The ancient manner of gouer∣ning will not be profitable, except the ancient state of the Church doe re∣turne. Hee that, seeing how children are gouerned, and how the libertie of eating and drinking any thing, at any time, is cause of health and strength, should thinke an old man might doe so, would find himselfe much deceiued. The Churches were little, compassed with Pagans, vnited amongst them∣selues, as beeing neere the enemy; now they are great, without any oppo∣site to keepe them in their duetie; whereupon the common things are neg∣lected, and it is necessarie they should be cared for by one. If the causes did continue in euery Prouince, within a few yeeres there would bee such diuer∣sitie, that one would bee contrary to another, and they would not seeme to be of the same faith and religion. The Popes of Rome tooke not vpon them in ancient times many parts of gouernment, when they saw it was good, but reserued it to themselues when it was abused by others. Many succeed∣ing Popes were of holy life, and good intension, who would haue restored it, but that they saw, that, in a corrupt matter, it could not be well vsed. His con∣clusion was, that to preserue the vnity of the Church, it was necessary to leaue things as they are. Neither did this please the Italian Prelats, who would haue the Popes au∣thoritie preserued, yet withall, some thing restored to themselues, especially being to reside; therefore they came to moderate the businesse. To restore Synodall iudicatures was reiected by almost all, because it did diminish the Episcopall and was too popular. To appeale by degrees, though it was maintained by many; yet it was excluded by pluralitie of voyces. To ap∣peale from the definitiues alone, was accommodated with a limitation, that it should be onely in criminall causes, others beeing left in the same state, though perhaps they had more neede to be reformed. For proceeding a∣gainst the persons of the Bishops, no man desiring to facilitate the iudicature against himselfe, the restoring of it to Parochiall Synods, vnto which it did formerly belong, was not spoken of, but they desired to prouide that, it remaining in the Popes hands, it should passe with greater dignitie of that or∣der, moderating the commissions which came from Rome, by which they were forced to appeare, and submit themselues to persons of an inferior ranke. And this was so earnestly desired by all, that it was necessary for the Legat to yeeld vnto it, though he was not pleased with any exaltati∣on of the Bishops, because all was taken from the Pope which was giuen to them. The Dutch Prelates did propose, that the lawes of the Degradations might be moderated, as being intolerable, and giuing much occasion of complaint in Germany. For it being a pure ceremonie which hindereth Iustice, and The Dutch Prelates com∣plaine of the lawes of De∣gradation. they hauing desired a moderation, euer since the yeere 1522. in the one and thirtieth of the hundred grieuances, to see that the abuse is continued, giueth matter of scandall to some, and of detraction to others, The ancient vse of the Church was, that if any Ecclesiasticall person would returne to the secu∣lar state, to the end it might not appeare that those who were deputed to the A discourse about Degra∣dation. ministerie of the Church, should serue the world, the Bishops did vse to take from him the Ecclesiasticall degree; as in warre, to hold themselues in more reputation, it was not graunted to a Souldier to returne to ciuill functions, and be subiect to the ciuill Iudge, if he were not first bereaued of his milita∣rie degree, which therefore was called Degradation, taking from him his gir∣dle, and armes, as with those he was created a Souldier. Therefore when any Cleargie man, either willingly, or by the lawes was to returne to secular fun∣ctions, or, for some faults, was made subiect to that Court, the Bishops did take from him the degree, with the same ceremonies with the which he was inuested, spoilng him of the habits, and taking out of his hand the instru∣ments, by the assignation of which he was deputed to the ministerie. Being apparelled iust as if hee were to minister in his charge, hee was to be stripped first of that, which was last in the ordination, and with contrary words to those that were vsed in the promotion. And this was very vsuall in those first times after Constantine, for three hundred yeeres. But about the yeere sixe hundred, a custome was brought in, not to permit Cleargie-men of holy Or∣der to returne to the world, and to others it was granted to doe it at their pleasure; whereupon, by little and little, the Degradation of the lesser was who∣ly disused, and that of the greater was restrained onely to this case, when they were to be made subiect to the secular Court. And Iustinian, regulating the iudicature of the Cleargie, after he had ordained that, in Ecclesiasticall de∣licts, they should be chastized by the Bishops, and in secular delicts, which hee called Ciuill, by the publique Iudge, added that the punishment should not bee executed before the partie guiltie, were despoyled of Priesthood by the Bishop. And after that criminall iudicature ouer the Clergie was granted to the Bishops, the Degradation remained onely when the punish∣ment was death, which, in regard of the dignity of their order, the Ecclesi∣astiques would not haue inflicted vpon a Clergie man. But, in cases of exor∣bitant wickednesse, it seemed that it could not be denied, without scandall; therefore they found a way to doe that indirectly, which directly they could not, saying, it was iust that the offences of the Clergie should bee punished with deserued death, but the Degradation was first necessary: which they made so difficult, by circumstances of solemnitie, that very seldome it could bee done. And this procured a greater reuerence of the Clericall Order, with whose blood iustice had nothing to doe, if so much solemnitie did not precede. It was iustly ordered that the Bishops should not doe it but in publique, apparelled with the holy vestments, and, which more imported, with the assistance of twelue Bishops, in the Degradation of a Bishop, of sixe, in the Degradation of a Priest, of three, in the Degradation of a Deacon, who were to bee present in their Pontificall ornaments. And it seeming strange, that a Bishop, who might giue a degree without companie, could not take it away alone, Pope Innocentius the third remooued the marueile, with a maxime, which hath not much probability, saying, that temporall buildings are hardly erected, and easily pulled downe, but spirituall contra∣rily, are easily built, and hardly destroyed. The vulgar held the Degrada∣tion for a necessary thing, and, when it happened, ranne to it, with vnspeake∣able frequencie. But learned men doe know the bottome of it. For hauing determined, that, in the collation of the Order, a signe is imprinted in the soule, called a Character, which is impossible to blot out, or remooue by Degradation, this remaineth a pure Ceremony, performed for reputation onely. In Germanie, there beeing but few Bishops, it could not bee done without immense charge, to bring so many into one place. And those Dutch Prelates, who were in the Councell, for the most part Princes, did know more then others, how necessary it is, for examples sake, to punish, with death, the wickednesse of Priests: wherefore they desired that prouision should be made therein. This particular was much discus∣sed, and, in the end, it was resolued not to change the Ceremony by any meanes, but to finde a temper, that the difficulty and the cost might be mo∣derated. The Legat, though euery weeke he had giuen an account to the Pope of all occurrences, yet he was willing to establish in Congregation the draughts of the Decrees, that he might send a copie of them, and receiue an answere before the Session. Wherefore, the generall Congregation being assembled, not making mention of what was written to him from Rome, hee made a relation of that which the Earle of Mountfort had represented, adding that the request for a Safe Conduct seemed reasonable, and also the deferring of whatsoeuer could bee deferred with honour. For hauing appointed al∣ready to speake of the Eucharist, the first day of September, they could not choose but doe it, but to omit some point more important, and more con∣trouersed, was a thing which might be granted. And the voyces beeing col∣lected, all were of opinion, that the Safe Conduct should bee giuen, but concerning the matter to bee handled, some thought that it was not for their honour to deferre it, if the Protestants did not giue securitie that they would come to handle it, and submit themselues to the determination of the Councell. Others said, that their honour was saued, if it were done at their A dispute what points of doctrine are to be han∣dled, vntill the comming of the Prote∣stants. request; and this was the more common opinion. Then the Legate added that they might reserue the matter of ministring the Cup to the Laitie: and, to shew that they did not come for one Article onely, they might ioyne also with it the Communion of Children. And order was taken to compose the Decree in this particular. Which beeing read, some thought it was too little to reserue two Articles, and therefore that it was better to diuide the first into three, and so reserue foure, and to adde the Sacrifice of the Masse; the controuersies whereof are great. For so it will appeare, that many things are reserued, and the most principall; and in this opinion all did a∣gree. And when it was sayd that the Protestants desire to bee heard con∣cerning these, a Prelate of Germanie stoode vp, and asked, by whom, and to whom this request was made; because it did much import that this should appeare; otherwise when they should say it was not true, the ho∣nour of the Councell would bee much blemished. But there beeing no∣thing but what Count Mountfort had sayd as of himselfe, and that also not restrained to those foure heads, nor to the matter of the Eucharist, but in generall of all the Controuersies, they were much troubled how to re∣solue. To shew that this reseruation was made by their owne motion, be∣sides that it was an indignitie, it did draw an obiection vpon them, that they ought to reserue all. This way was found to bee least ill, not to say that the Protestants make request, but that they desire to bee heard; whereof there can bee no doubt made, because they haue sayd it vpon di∣uers occasions; and though they meant concerning all the controuersies, yet it is no falsitie to speake that of a part, which is spoken of the whole number, not excluding the rest. Some thought that this was to hide them∣selues behinde a thread; but yet it did passe, because they knew not how to doe better. For this cause, the matters reserued beeing to bee taken out of the Heads of doctrine, and the Anathematismes, these which remai∣ned were, for more perspicuitie, diuided, and reduced to eleuen, When they were to make the Decrees against the abuses, they knew not where to put them. Amongst those of faith they were not to bee placed, beeing of Ceremonies and vses. With those of Reformation they did not agree, in regard of the diuersity of the matter. To ranke them by themselues was a nouitie, and did alter the order set downe. After a long dispute it was concluded to omit them now, and after to place them with the De∣crees of the Masse. The points of the Reformation were accepted with∣out difficultie, hauing beene already established by themselues. There re∣mained the forme of the Safe Conduct, which was referred to the Presi∣dents to compose, by the helpe of those who had experience in such things; which assisted the Legate to make that forme passe which was sent him from Rome. The eleuenth of October beeing come, they went to the Church, as they were wont. The Bishop of Maiorica sang Masse, and the Archbishop of Torre made the Sermon, which was all in the praise of the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And other vsuall Ceremonies being performed, the Decree of the doctrine was read by the Bishops that did celebrate the Masse. The sub∣stance whereof was: That the Synod assembled to declare the ancient faith, A Session is held. and to remedy the inconueniences caused by the Sectes, did desire, from the beginning, to roote cut the cockle, sowed in the field of the Eucharist. There∣fore, The Decree of doctrine concerning the Eucharist. teaching the Catholike doctrine, euer beleeued by the Church, it doth prohibite all the faithfull hereafter to beleeue, teach or preach, otherwise then is declared. First, it teacheth that in the Eucharist, after the Consecration, CHRIST is contained, truely, really, and substantially, vnder the appea∣rances of the sensible things, notwithstanding he is in heauen, by a naturall existence, because he is present in his substance in many other places, Sacra∣mentally, in a maner of existence, which is beleeued by faith, and can hardly be expressed by words. For all the ancients haue professed, that CHRIST did institute this Sacrament in the last Supper, when, after the benediction of the Bread and Wine, hee sayd, in cleare and manifest words, that he gaue his Body and Blood, which hauing a most plaine signification, it is great wic∣kednesse to wrest them to imaginary figures, denying the trueth of the Flesh and Blood of CHRIST. Afterwards it teacheth, that CHRIST hath institu∣ted this Sacrament in memory of himselfe, ordayning it should be receiued as a Spirituall foode of the soule, as a medicine for our dayly faults, a preser∣uatiue from mortall sinne, a pledge of eternall glory, and a signe of the Bo∣dy whereof himselfe is the Head. And though it bee common to this Sacra∣ment with others, to bee a signe of a sacred thing, yet it hath this proper to it selfe, that other hauing vertue to sanctifie in the vse, this doth conteine the author of Sanctity before the vse. For the Apostles had not receiued the Eucharist from the hand of our Lord, when he sayd that it was his Body: and the Church hath alwayes beleeued, that the Body of CHRIST is vnder the bread, and the Blood vnder the wine, by vertue of the Consecration; but, by concomitancie, as much is vnder either of the kindes, and euery part of them, as vnder both; declaring that by the Consecration of the Bread and Wine, there is made a conuersion of their whole substance into the substance of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, which conuersion the Catholique Church hath called Transubstantiation, by a fit and proper terme. Therefore the faithfull doe giue the honour of Latria, or diuine worship, due vnto God, to this Sacrament, and it hath been religiously instituted to make a particular feast for it euery yeere, and to carry it in procession, in pubique places. Like∣wise the custome to keepe it in an holy place is auncient and hath been obser∣ued from the time of the Nicen Councell, and to carry it to the sicke is an old custome, beeing reasonable besides, and commanded in many Councels. And if it be not fit that any holy thing should be handled without sanctity, much more none ought to come to this Sacrament without great reuerence, and proofe made of himselfe: which proofe must bee, that none hauing mortally sinned, though hee bee contrite, may receiue it, without sacramen∣tall Confession, which the Priest also, who is to celebrate, ought to obserue, so that hee can finde a Confessour; and if hee cannot, hee must confesse im∣mediately afterward. It doeth teach also that there bee three kindes of recei∣uing the Eucharist. One Sacramentally onely, as sinners doe; another spi∣ritually, as those doe, who receiue it with a liuely faith, and desire; the third conteineth both kindes, as those doe receiue it, who, hauing prooued themselues, as aforesaid, doe goe to the Table. And there is an Apostolicall Tradition, and so it ought to bee obserued, that the Liaitie should receiue the Communion from the Priests, and the Priestes should Communicate Themselues. In the ende the Synode prayeth all Christians to agree in this doctrine. When the Decree was ended, the eleuen Anathematismes were read. 1. Against him that shall denie that, in the Eucharist, is contained truely, The Anathe∣matismes. really, and substantially the Body and Blood, with the Soule and Diuinitie of CHRIST, that is, whole CHRIST, and shall say that he is contained onely as in a signe, or figure, or virtually. 2. That in the Eucharist there doeth remaine the substance of the bread and wine with the Body and Blood of CHRIST, or shall denie that admirable conuersion of all the substance of the bread into the body, and of the wine into the blood, there remaining onely the forme, which conuersion the Church most appositely calleth Transub∣stantiation. 3. That, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, vnder euery kinde, and vnder euery part beeing separated, all CHRIST is not contayned. 4. That, the Conseoration beeing made, he is not there, but in the vse, and neither before nor after, and that hee is not in the particles, which remaine after the Communion. 5. That, the principall fruit of the Eucharist is the remission of sinnes, or that it hath no other effect. 6. That CHRIST in the Eucharist ought not to bee worshipped with the honour of Latria, nor honoured with a particular feast, nor carried in procession, nor put in a publique place, to bee worshipped, or that the worshippers are Idolaters. 7. That it is not lawfull to keepe it in an holy place, but that it should bee distributed to the standers by, or that it is not lawfull to carrie it honou∣rably to the sicke. 8. That CHRIST in the Eucharist is eaten onely spi∣ritually, and not Saoramentally, and really. 9. That the faithfull being of age, are not bound to communicate euery yeere at Easter. 10. That it is not lawfull to the Priest, who celebrateth, to communicate himselfe. 11. That faith onely is a sufficient preparation to receiue it: Declaring in the ende, that the preparation ought to bee by the meanes of Sacramen∣tall Confession, holding him to bee excommunicate who shall teach, preach, affirme pertinaciously, or defend in publique disputation, the con∣trary. The Decree of the Reformation containeth first a long admonition to The Decree of Reforma∣tion. the Bishops, to vse their iurisdiction moderately, and charitably; then de∣termineth, that in causes of visitation, correction, and inability, and in the criminall, none may appeale from the Bishop or his Vicar generall, before the definitiue, or from an irreparable grieuance; and when there shall bee place of Appeale, and a Commission shall bee granted in partibus, by Aposto∣like authority, it shall not bee granted to any but the Metropolitan, or his Vicar; or, in case hee bee suspected, or farre distant, or the Appeale bee from him, it shall not bee granted but to a Bishop dwelling neere, or a Bishops Vicar. That the defendant appealing, shall bee bound to produce in the se∣cond instance the actes of the first, which shall beegiuen him, within thir∣tie dayes, without paying for them. That the Bishop, or his Vicar generall may proceede against any to condemnation, and verball deposition, and may also degrade solemnely, with the assistance of so many Abbats of Miter and postorals, if hee can haue them, or of so many other Ecclesiasticall dig∣nities, as there are Bishops required by the Canons. That the Bishop as de∣legate, may summarily take knowledge of the absolution of euery one of whom inquisition is made, and of the remission of the punishment of euery one that is condemned by him; and if it shall appeare vnto him, that sentence hath been obtained, by telling that which is false, or concealing the trueth, hee may cause it not to be executed. That a Bishop may not bee cited to ap∣peare personally, but for such a cause for which he may be deposed or depri∣ued, by what forme of iudgement soeuer the proceeding bee. That testimo∣nies, in a criminall cause, against a Bishop, may not bee receiued by informa∣tion, but by witnesses, and those of good fame, chastizing them grieuously if they shall depose vpon Passion: and the criminall causes of the Bishops may not be determined but by the Pope. After this another Decree was published; in which the Synode sayd, The Decree concerning matters to be deferred vntill the comming of the Prote∣stants. That, desiring to extirpate all errours, it had handled foure Articles exactly. 1. Whether it were necessary and commanded by GOD, that all the faith∣full should receiue the Sacrament vnder both kindes. 2. Whether hee that receiueth but one, receiueth lesse then he that receiueth both. 3. Whether the holy Church hath erred in communicating the Laiques with the bread onely, and the Priests who doe not celebrate. 4. Whether children ought to bee communicated. But because the Protestants of Germany, doe desire to bee heard concerning these Articles, before the definition, and therefore haue demanded a Safe Conduct to come, remaine, speake freely, propose and depart, the Synode, hoping to reduce them into the concord of one faith, hope, and charity, by yeelding to them, hath giuen them publique faith, that is, Safe Conduct, as farre as it can, according to the tenor vnder-written, and hath deferred to define these Articles, vntill the twenty fiue of Ianuary the next yeere; ordaining withall, that the Sacrifice of the Masse be handled in that Session, as a thing annexed, and that in the next, the Sacraments of Pe∣nance, and extreame Vnction, be discussed. The tenour of the Safe Conduct was; That the holy Synode doeth, as The tenor of the Safe Con∣duct. much as it can, grant publike faith, full security, that is, Safe Conduct, with all necessary and fit clauses, though they require a speciall expression, to all Ecclesiasticall and Secular persons of Germany, of what degree, state, or qua∣lity soeuer, who will come to this generall Councell, that they may with all liberty, conferre, propose, treate, come, remaine, present Articles, by writing or by word, conferre with the Fathers deputed by the Synode, and dispute without iniury and ill words, and depart when they please. And the Sy∣node is further pleased to grant, that if, for their greater liberty and security, they shall desire, that Iudges bee deputed for the offences which they haue committed, or shall commit, though they be enormous, and sauour of here∣sie, The Ambas∣sage of the Elector of Brandeburg. they may name those that they shall esteeme fauourable. After this, the Mandate of I achim, Elector of Brandeburg, was read, in the persons of Chri∣stopher Strassen, a Lawyer, and Iohn Osman, his Ambassadours, sent to the Councell. The former made a long Oration, shewing the good affection and reuerence of his Prince, towarde the Fathers, without declaring what his opinion was in point of Religion. The Synode answered, (that is, the Speaker in its name) that it heard with great content, the Ambassadours dis∣course, especially in that part, where that Prince doth submit himselfe to the Councell, and promiseth to obserue the Decrees, hoping that his deedes will be answerable to his wordes. But the Proposition of those of Brandeburg was noted by many, because the Electour was of the Augustane confession, and it was openly knowen, that his interests did mooue him to make such a faire shew, that his sonne Fredericke, elected Archbishop of Magdeburg by the Canons, a Benefice, vnto which a very great and rich principallitie is annexed, might not be hindered at Rome, and by the Catholiques in Ger∣manie. The answere which the Councel gaue, was much matueiled at, in regard An artifice vsed by the Councel, of∣ten practised by the Church of Rome. of the faire and aduantagious manner of contracting, pretending ten thou∣sand by vertue of the promise, when the bargaine was but of ten. For there is no more proportion betweene these two numbers, then was betweene the reuerence promised by the Electour, and the obedience receiued by the Sy∣node. It was replied for defence, that the Councell did not regard what was, but what should haue been sayd, and that this is an vsuall and pious al∣lurement of the holy Church of Rome, which yeelding to the infirmitie of her children, maketh shew to beleeue, that they haue performed their duetie. So the Fathers of the Councell of Carthage, writing to Innocentius the first, to giue him an account, that they had condemned Celestinus and Pelagius, desi∣ring him to conforme himselfe to their declaration; hee commended them in his answere, that, remembring the old Tradition, and Ecclesiasticall disci∣pline, they had referred all to his iudgement, whence all ought to learne, whom to absolue, and whom to condemne. And indeed, this is a faire gen∣tle meanes, to make men speake that in silence, which they will not in words. Afterwards, according to the intimation, made to the Abbat of Bellosana, to giue him then an answere to the Letters, and Protestation of his Master, they made the Apparitors demaund, by proclamation; at the Church doore, whether any were there for the most Christian King. But no man appea∣ring, because it was so concluded by the Kings Counsel, not to enter into the contestation of the cause, especially for that they could expect no answere, but made at Rome, by the Pope and the Spaniards, the speaker did desire, that the answere decreed, might be read publikely; and so it was, by consent of the Presidents. The substance of it was; That the Fathers conceiuing great hope of the fauours of the King, were exceedingly grieued for the The answere of the Coun∣cell made to the Abbat of Bellosans. words of his Minister, which did much abate it; yet they had not quite lost it, in regard they were not conscious of hauing giuen him any cause of offence: and, for that hee said, the Councell was assembled for the profit of some fewe, and for priuate ends, it had no place in them, who were assem∣bled, not by the present Pope onely, but by Paulus the third, to extirpate he∣resies, and reforme discipline, then which causes none can bee more com∣mon and pious: praying him to let his Bishops goe to assist this holy worke, where they shall haue all liberty. And if his Minister, a priuate person, who brought vnto them things distastfull, was heard, with patience and attenti∣on, how much more welcome shall persons be of so great dignitie. Adding withall, that though they come not, the Councell will not want reputation or authoritie, hauing been lawfully called, and for iust causes, restored. And, for that his Maiestie did protest, to vse the wonted remedies of his An∣cestors, the Synode had good hope, that hee would not restore the things long since abrogated, to the great benefit of that Crowne, but looking backe vpon his Ancestors, on the name of the most Christian King, and on his fa∣ther Francis, who did honour that Synode, following that example, hee will not bee vnthankefull to GOD, and the Church his mother, but will rather pardon priuate offences, for publike causes. The Decrees of the Session were immediatly printed; which, being curi∣ously The Decrees are censured in Germany. read in Germany, and else-where, raised much speech in many things concerning the Eucharist. First, because treating of the manner of the ex∣istence, it said, that it could hardly be expressed in wordes, and yet affirmeth after, that it is properly called Transubstantiation; and, in another place, that it is a most fit terme: which beeing so, one cannot doubt but that it may bee properly expressed. It was further noted, that hauing declared that CHRIST, after the benediction of Bread and Wine, said, that that which hee gaue, was his Body and Blood, it came to determine, against the opinion of all the Di∣uines, and of the whole Church of Rome, that the wordes of consecration were not those; that is, this is my body, because it doth affirme that they were spoken after the consecration. But to prooue that the body of our LORD is in the Eucharist before the vse because CHRIST, in giuing of it, said, before it was receiued by his Disciples, it was his Body, did shew that they did presuppose, that the giuing of it did not belong to the vse; the con∣trary whereof was apparantly true. The manner of speach vsed in the fifth point of doctrine, saying that diuine worship was due to the Sacrament, was noted also for improper, seeing it is certaine, that the thing signified or con∣teined, is not meant by the Sacrament, but the thing signifying and contai∣ning: and therefore it was well corrected in the sixt Canon, which said, that the Sonne of GOD ought to bee worshipped in the Sacrament. That also in the third Anathematisme was noted, that all CHRIST was in euery part, after the separation, because it seemeth one may necessarily inferre from hence, that it was not in euery part before the diuision. The Priest complained of the reformation, and sayd, that the Bishops au∣thority The Priests complaine of the reforma∣tion. was made too great, and the Clergie brought into seruitude. But the Protestants seeing the point where it was said, that they desired to bee heard in foure Articles onely, did much wonder who should make that request in their name, seeing they had said, and repeated so often, in publique Diets, and by publique writings, that they desired a discussion of all the controuersies, nor would receiue any of those things which were already determined in The Prote∣stants dislike the reseruati∣on of y e points of doctrine. And the form of the Safe Conduct. Trent, but would haue all to be reexamined. They thought also that the forme of the Safe Conduct was very captious, because as well in the Decree to grant it, as in the tenour therof, there was this clause of reseruation, as farre as belogneth to the Synode: for no man demaundeth of another, but that which belongeth to him to graunt. But this affected diligence to expresse and repeat it, was a signe that they had inuented a meanes to goe against it, and to excuse themselues vpon others. And they doubted not but that the ayme of the Synode was to leaue a gate open for the Pope, that he might doe with his owne and the Councels honour, what hee thought seruiceable for them both. Besides, the treating to depute Iudges for things hereticall com∣mitted, or to be committed, seemed to them a kinde of net, to catch those that were vnwary; and euen the very Pedants did laugh at it, that the principall verbe was more then an hundred and fifty wordes distant from the begin∣ning. The Protestants did vniformely agree not to bee content with it, or trust vpon it, but to desire another; iust like that which was giuen by the Councell of Basill, to the Bohemians; which if it were granted, they did ob∣taine one great point, that is, that the controuersies should be decided by the holy Scripture, and if it were not granted, they might excuse themselues with the Emperour. The day following the Session, there was a generall Congregation, to set downe how to treate of Penance and extreame Vnction, and to continue the reformation. It was considered, that the manner of discussion prescribed, was exceeded by the Diuines, whence contentions did arise, for which they could not be vnited against the Lutherans: and therefore it was thought ne∣cessary to renew the decree, & not uffer any to vse the reasons of the schools, but to cause them to speake positiuely, and also to obserue the order, which they thought fit to establish againe, as well because the not obseruing of it had bred confusion, as because the Flemings did complaine that none ac∣count was made of them, as did also the Diuines which came with the Pre∣lates of Germanie. To handle Penance, and extreame Vnction, was decided already, and something was said in matter of reformation, and Prelats were deputed, who, with the Nuncio of Verona, were to make the Articles in mat∣ter of faith, and, with the Nuncio of Siponto, in matter of reformation. In matter of faith twelue Articles were framed vpon the Sacrament of Penance, drawen Verbatim out of the booke of Martin, and of his Schoolers, to be dispu∣ted by the Diuines, whether they were to bee held for hereticall, and con∣demned for such; which, in framing the Anathematismes, after the Diuines had giuen their voyces, were so changed, that no iot of them remaining, it is superfluous to recite them. To these Articles were added 4. more of extreame Vnction, answereable, in all points, to the soure Anathematismes established. In Three De∣crees are made concer∣ning the man∣ner of procee∣ding in Coun∣cell. the same page where the Articles were set downe, three Decrees were added. That the Diuines ought to giue their opinions out of the holy Scripture, Tra∣ditions of the Apostles, holy Councels, Constitutions, and authorities of Popes, and holy Fathers, and out of the consent of the Catholique Church. That the order of speaking should be thus: that first they should speake who were sent by the Pope: secondly, those who were sent by the Emperour: thirdly, those of Louaine, sent by the Queene: fourthly, those Diuines who came with the Electors: fiftly, the Secular Clergie men, according to their promotions: sixtly, the Regulars, according to their orders. That there should be two congregations euery day, one in the morning from the foure∣teenth houre, vntill the seuenteenth, another in the afternoone from the twentieth houre vntill the three and twentieth. The Articles of Reformati∣on were in number fifteene, all which answered the points which were after established, except the last; in which a propose was made, to constitute, that Benefices should not be giuen in Commenda, but to persons of the same age, which the law required in those who might haue them in title: which Ar∣ticle when it was spoken of, was easily buried in silence, because it hindered many Prelates to renounce their Benefices to their Nephewes. The Pope, who (as hath been said) wrote letters to the Catholique Suisses, inuiting them to the Councell, did still make the same instance vnto them, by his Nuncio, Ieronymus Francus, wherein also hee was assisted by the Empe∣rour. The French King did oppose, by his Ambassadour, Marleus M as∣sisted by Vergerius, who, knowing the searets and ends of the Romanes, told Vergerius dis∣couereth the secret ends of the Roma∣nists to the Suisses and Grisons. him how hee should perswade that nation, and wrote also a Booke in this subiect; so that in the Diet of Bada, which then was helde, not onely the Euangelicall, but the Catholique Suisses also were perswaded not to send any; and the Crisons entring into suspicion vpon the aduertisements of Ʋergerius, that the Pope did plotte something to their preiudice, did recall Thomas Planta Bishop of Coira, who was already in the Coun∣cell. In Trent the Congregations of the Diuines were diligently hastened: who though they spake according to the order of the twelue Articles, yet all the matter of Penance was handled, not as the Schoole-men only, but also as the Canonists doe handle it, following Gratian, who maketh a question thereof, diuided, for the length of it, into sixe distinctions: and the manner prescribed by the Presidents, to deduce and prooue the conclusions from the The manner of discussing the points of doctrine is censured. fiue places aforesaid, caused not prolixity, superfluity, and vnprofitable and vaine questions to bee auoided, but gaue occasion of greater abuses. For when they spake Scholastically, they kept themselues within the matter at the least, and the discourse was all serious and seuere. But in this new maner, which they call positiue (an Italian word, drawne from plaine apparell, with∣out superfluous ornaments) they ranne into fooleries. For, alleadging the Diuine Scripture, they brought all the places of the Prophets, and Psalmes, especially where the word, Confiteor, and, its verball, Confessia, are found; which doth signifie in the Hebrew, prayse, or rather, religious profession; and haled them to the Sacrament of Confession: and, which was lesse to the purpose, figures were drawen from the Olde Testament, to shew that it was prefigured, without any regard whether it might bee applied to it with si∣militude; and hee was held most learned who brought most of them. All the rites signifying humility, griefe, and repentance, vsed by those who confessed, were boldy called Apostolicall Traditions. Innumerable mi∣racles were related, ancient and moderne, concerning things which sue∣ceeded well to those who were deuoted to Confession, and ill, to those who were negligent, and despisers of it. All the authorities alleadged by Gratian were often recited, but various and diuers sences giuen them, accor∣ding to the matter; and others also were added. And hee that should haue heard those Doctours speake, could not but conclude, that the Apostles, and ancient Bishops did neuer any thing but kneele at Confession, or sit to confesse others. In summe, that, to which all did come, and which was most to the purpose, was the Councell of Florence. Among the memori∣als, there doth nothing appeare worthy of particular mention, except that which is to be spoken of when the substance of the doctrine must be recited. But thus much was necessary to be deliuered. Out of these sheaues of diuers sorts of corne, caried into the barne, it is no maruell if a mingled grist were threshed. The points of doctrine, by reason of the mixture, did absolutly please but few; neither was it obserued in this subiect, as in others, not to condemne any opinion of the Catholikes, but, where the opinions of the diuines were va∣rious, to make the expression with such a temper, that al parties might be satis∣fied. Which causeth me not to obserue my former order, but first to expound the substance of the Decree, as it was established to be read in the Session, and then to adde that which the same persons of the Councell did not approue. The Decree was this. That although, in handling Iustification, much The Decree concerning Penance. was spoken of the Sacrament of Penance, yet, to roote out diuers heresies of this age, it was fitte to illustrate the Catholike trueth, which the holy Sy∣node doth propose to bee perpetually obserued, by all Christians; adding that Penance was alwayes necessary, in euery age of the world, and, after CHRIST, to those also who were to be baptized; which Penance is not a Sacrament. There is another instituted by CHRIST, when, breathing vpon his Disciples, he gaue them the holy Ghost, to remitte and retaine sinnes, that is, to reconcile the faithfull, fallen into sinne after Baptisme. For so the Church hath alwayes vnderstood it; and the holy Synode doeth approoue this sense of the wordes of our Lord, condemning those who vnderstand them of the power to preach the Gospell. And this Sacrament differeth from Baptisme, not onely in the matter and forme, but also because the mi∣nister of Baptisme is not iudge, whereas, after Baptisme, the sinner doth pre∣sent himselfe before the tribunall of the Priest, as guilty, to bee set at libertie, by his Sentence. And, by Baptisme, a full remission of sinnes is receiued, which is not receiued by Penance, without sighes and paines. And this Sacrament is an necessary for sinners after Baptisme, as Baptisme it selfe is to him that hath not receiued it. But the forme thereof consisteth in these words of the mi∣nister; I doe absolue thee: vnto which other prayers are laudably added, though they bee not necessary. And Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, are, as it were, the matter of the Sacrament, which are therefore called parts of Penance. The thing signified, and the effect of the Sacrament, is, re∣conciliation with God, whence peace and clearenesse of conscience do some∣times arise. And therfore the Synod doth condemne those who make horror of conscience and faith to be parts of Penance. Contrition is griefe of minde for sinne committed, with purpose to sinne no more, and was euer necessary in all times; but in sinners, after Baptisme, it is a preparation to remission of sinnes, being ioyned with a purpose to doe whatsoeuer else is required, for the lawfull receiuing of this Sacrament. And it is not onely a ceasing from sinne, or a purposing and a beginning of a new life, but also an hate of the life past. And though Contrition be sometimes ioyned with charity, and re∣concileth a man to GOD, before the receiuing of the Sacrament, yet this ver∣tue cannot bee ascribed to it, without purpose to receiue the said Sacrament of Penance. But the action which ariseth, either by reason of the filthinesse of sinne, or of the feare of punishment, with hope of pardon, is not hy∣pocrisie, but the gift of GOD, by which the penitent beeing assisted, doeth goe on to receiue Iustice; which although it cannot bring vs to iustifi∣cation without the Sacrament, yet it doeth dispose vs to obtaine grace from GOD, in the Sacrament of Penance. By this, the Church hath euer vnderstood that CHRIST hath instituted the entire confession of sinnes as necessary, by the Law of GOD, to those that fall after Baptisme. For hauing instituted the Priests, his Vicars, for Iudges of all mortall sinnes, it is certaine that they cannot exercise this iudgement, without knowledge of the cause, nor obserue equitie in imposing punishment, if the sinnes bee not particularly made knowen vnto them, and not in generall onely. There∣fore the penitent ought in Confession, to declare all his mortall sinnes, euen the most secret, but the veniall, though they may be confessed, yet they may bee concealed also without offence. And hence it commeth, that, in Confes∣sion, it is necessary to explicate the circumstances, which alter the nature of the sinne, because otherwise, one cannot iudge of the weight of the excesses, and impose a condigne punishment. So that it is wickedesse to say, that this kinde of Confession is impossible, or that it is the murdering of the con∣science, because nothing is required but that the sinner, hauing diligently ex∣amined himselfe, should confesse what hee remembreth, and the sinnes for∣gotten are supposed to bee included in the same Confession. And though CHRIST hath not forbid publique Confession, yet he hath not commanded it; neither would it bee good to commaund that sinnes, especially secret, should bee confessed in publique. Wherefore the Fathers, hauing euer pray∣sed the Sacramental secret Confession, the calumny of those is vaine, who call it an humane inuention, excogitated by the Laterane Councell; which did not ordaine Confession, but onely that it should be made at the least once eue∣ry yeere. Concerning the Minister, the Synod doth declare those doctrines to bee false, which extend to all the faithfull, the ministery of the keyes, and the authority giuen by CHRIST to binde and loose, remit and retaine pub∣lique sinnes by correction, and secret by voluntary Confession, and teacheth that the Priests, though sinners, haue authority to remit sinnes; which is not a naked ministery, to declare that sinnes are remitted, but a iudiciall act. Therefore let no man ground himselfe vpon faith, thinking that, without contrition, and a Priest, who is willing to absolue him, hee can haue remissi∣on. But because there is a nullity in the sentence, pronounced against him who is not subiect, there is also a nullity in the absolution of the Priest, who hath not authority, delegate, or ordinary, ouer the penitent: and the grea∣ter Priests doe, with reason, reserue to themselues some faults more grieuous, and so doth the Pope very iustly; and there is no doubt, but that euery Bishop may doe it in his Diocesse. And this reseruation is not onely for externall policie, but is also of force before GOD. Therefore it was alwayes obserued in the Church, that, in the houre of death, any Priest may absolue any peni∣tent, from any sinne. Of satisfaction the Synod doth declare, that the sinne beeing remitted, the punishment is not pardoned, it beeing not conue∣nient, that hee should bee so easily receiued into Grace, who hath sinned be∣fore Baptisme and after, and bee left without a bridle, which may draw him from other sinnes: yea it is conuenient hee should bee like to CHRIST, who suffering punishments did satisfie for vs, from whom our satisfactions also receiue force, as offered by him to the Father, and receiued, by his inter∣cession. Therefore the Priests ought to impose conuenient satisfactions, not onely to keepe the penitent from new sinnes, but also to chastise him for the old: declaring likewise that Satisfaction is made, not onely by punishments, willingly receiued, or imposed by the Priest, but by induring also, with pati∣ence, the scourges sent from God. In conformitie of this doctrine, fifteene Anathematismes were made. 1. 15. Anathe∣tismes. Against him that shall say, that Penance is not truely and properly a Sacra∣ment, instituted by CHRIST, to reconcile sinners after Baptisme. 2. That Baptisme is Penance, or that is not the second table or bord after ship∣wracke. 3. That the words of CHRIST, Quorum remiseritis peccata, are not vnderstood of the Sacrament of Penance, but of the authority to preach the Gospel. 4. That Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, are not required for, as it were, the matter, and as parts of Penance, or shall say that the terrors of conscience and faith are parts. 5. That Contrition is not profitable, but causeth hypocrisie, and is a forced, and not a free sorrow. 6. That Sacramentall Confession is not instituted, and necessary by the law of GOD, or that the manner of confessing to the Priests in secret, is an humane inuen∣tion. 7. That it is not necessary to confesse all mortall sinnes, euen those that are hidden, and the circumstances which doe change the nature of them. 8. That this is impossible, or that all are not bound to confesse once a yeere, according to the precept of the Laterane Councell. 9. That the Sacramentall absolution is not a iudiciall act, but a ministery, to declare the remission of sinnes to the beleeuer, or that an absolution giuen in iest doth helpe, or that the confession of the penitent is not requisite. 10. That Priests in mortall sinne, haue not power to binde and loose, or that all the faithfull haue it. 11. That Bishops haue not authority to reserue cases, but for ex∣ternall policy. 12. That all punishment is remitted together with the fault, and that no other satisfaction is required but faith, that CHRIST hath sa∣tisfied. 13. That Satisfaction is not made by suffering afflictions sent by GOD, by punishments imposed by the Priest, and willingly taken, and that the best Penance is onely a new life. 14. That Satisfactions are not diuine worship, but humane traditions. 15. That the keyes of the Church are onely to loose, and not to binde. The Diuines of Louaine opposed the reseruation of cases, saying it was not Some of which are op∣posed by the Dutines of Louaine and Collen. so cleere, because it cannot bee found that any Father did euer speake of it; and that Durand, who was a Penitentiarie, and Gerson and Caietan doe all af∣firme, that not sinnes, but censures are reserued to the Pope: and therefore that it was too rigid, to esteeme him an heretique who thought otherwise. The Diuines of Collen ioyned with them, and said plainely, that it could not bee found that any Ancient did speake of any reseruations, but of publique sinnes, and that it was not fit to condemne the Chancellour of Paris, so pi∣ous and Catholique an Authour, who wrote against them. That the here∣tiques were wont to say, that these reseruations were inuented for gaine; as also Card. Campeggio said, in his reformation, and that it gaue him occasion to write against it; vnto which the Diuines would not haue answered, nor been able to answere. And therefore as well the doctrine as the Canon, ought to bee moderated, that it may not giue scandall, nor offend any Catholike. The same men of Col∣len said, that the meaning of the words, Quorum ligaueritis, condemned in the tenth Canon, is expresly, and formally so vnderstood by Theophilact, and that to condemne it were to make the enemies reioyce. And that which was said in the last, that the power to bind, is vnderstood to impose Penance, they ob∣serued that the ancient Fathers did not so vnderstand it, but that to binde was to make one abstaine from receiuing the Sacraments, vntill a compleate satisfaction. They demanded also that mention should bee made of publike Penance, so much commended by the Fathers, especially by Cyprian, and Saint Gregorie the Pope; who, in many Epistles, sheweth it to bee necessary by the Law of God; which if it bee not brought againe into vse concerning heretikes and publike sinners, Germaine will neuer bee free: and yet the De∣cree, as well in the doctrine, as the Canons, doeth not onely not speake in fauour of it, but rather doeth weaken it, and detract from it. They de∣sired also that some certaine externall signe should be declared for the matter of the Sacrament, for otherwise the obiection of the aduersaries will neuer bee answered. Two things did exceedingly displease the Franciscan Diuines: the one And others by the Fran∣cascans and by r ar Am∣brosius Pelar∣gus. for hauing declared Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction to bee the mat∣ter of the Sacrament, holding them to be necessary requisites, but not essen∣tiall parts of Penance. They sayd it was plaine, that the matter should bee a thing applied to the receiuer, by the Minister; and not an operation of the receiuer himselfe. That this appeareth in all Sacraments; and therefore that it is a great inconuenience to put the actes of the Penitent for part of the Sacrament. That it is certaine that Contrition is no lesse required to Bap∣tisme, then it is to Penance; and yet it is not put for part of Baptisme. That the ancients did require confession of sinnes before Baptisme, as also Saint Iohn did of those whom he baptized, and they made those that were Cate∣chised to stand in Penance; and yet neuer any said, that these were parts or matters of Baptisme▪ Therefore to condemne this opinion, held by the an∣cient Diuines of the Franciscan religion, and now by the whole Schoole of Paris, was to passe their limits. They complained also that it was made he∣resie to say, that sacramentall Absolution is declaratiue, because Saint Ierom, the Master of the Sentences, S. Bonauenture, and almost all the Schoole Di∣uines haue cleerely sayd, that the Absolution in the Sacrament of Penance, is a declaration that one is absolued. To this last, answere was made, that hee was not absolutely condemned for an heretike, who said that Absolution is a declaration that sinnes are remitted but that sinnes are remitted to him that doeth certainely beleeue that they are remitted to him▪ therefore onely the opinion of Luther was comprehended. But they were not so satisfied, say∣ing, that, in handling of heresie, one should speake plainely and that no man would make such an exposition of it: and they demanded, that, as well in the point of doctrine, as in the Anathematisme, this particular should bee well declared. But Friar Ambrosius Pelargus, a Diuine of the Elector of Triers, considered, that the words of our Lord, Quorum remiseritis, were perhaps not expounded by any Father, for an institution of the Sacrament of Pe∣nance, and that by some they were vnderstood of Baptisme, by others, of any other thing, by which pardon of sinnes is receiued. Therefore to restraine them onely to the Sacrament of Penance, and to declare them heretikes who vnderstand them otherwise, would giue a great aduantage to the aduersa∣ries, and cause them to say, that the ancient doctrine of the Church was condemned in the Councell. Therefore hee exhorted them, before they made such a great stride, to looke vpon the expositions of the Fathers, and, when those were examined, to determine what should be sayd. Many of the Fathers thought the remonstrances to be very considerable, & desired that the Deputies would consultagaine, as they had done before, vpon other oc∣casions, to remooue whatsoeuer gaue offence to any, and so to frame the De∣cree, as that euery one might approoue it. But Cardinall Crescentius opposed with a continuate speach, shewing that But all of th are crossed by Card. Cres∣centius. to take the sinewes and soule from the Decrees, to satisfie the humours of par∣ticular men, was not honourable for the Synode. That they were mature∣ly established, and therefore it was fit to obserue them. Yet, if his opinion did not please all, hee was content, that, before any thing else were done, this generall should bee handled in a Congregation, whether it were good to make a change or not, and then to descend to the particulars. But in this hee did not fully discouer what his aime was, which afterwards hee did manifest to his Colleagues, and trustie friends: that they should not suffer the vse of contending and speaking so freely; which would bee dangerous when the Protestants came, because they would doe as much, in fauour of their owne opinions. That, for the honest and reasonable libertie of the Councell, it sufficeth that one may deliuer his opinion, while the matter is disputed; but after, when all men haue beene heard, the Decrees framed by the Doputies, allowed by the Presidents, seene, examined, and approoued at Rome, to call them into question, and to require an alteration, for particular interests, was too much licence. The Cardinall ouercame, at the last, the maior part of the Fathers, being perswaded that the doctrine established was according to the opinion of the most intelligent Diuines, and most opposite to the Lu∣theran nouities. But because almost all is spoken that concerneth matter of faith, in that Session, it will not bee amisse to adde that little which remaineth, touching the Sacrament of extreame Vnction. Of which the Diuines spake with the ame prolixitie, but without any difference amongst themselues. And out of their opinions three points of doctrine, and foure Anathematismes were framed. The doctrine contained in substance. That the Vnction of the The Doctrine co ng Vnction. sicke, is truely and properly a Sacrament, insinuated, by CHRIST our Lord, in S. Marke, and published by the Apostle S. Iames: from whose words the Church did learne, by an Apostolicall tradition, that the oyle, blessed by the Bishop, is the matter, and the wordes vsed by the Minister, is the forme of the Sacrament; but the thing contained and the effect, is the grace of the holy Ghost, which purifieth the reliques of sinne, and rayseth vp the minde of the sicke, and sometimes, when it is profitable for the soule, giueth health of body. The ministers of the Sacramentare the Priests of the Church, the word being not vnderstood for ancients, but for Priests. And this Ʋnction ought principally to be giuen to those who are at the point of death, who, being recouered, and returned to the state of sickenesse, may receiue it againe. And therefore an Anathema is pronounced. 1. Against him that shall say that extreame Ʋnction is not truely and properly a Sacrament, in∣stituted by CHRIST. 2. That it doeth not giue grace, nor remit sinnes, nor case the sicke, but is ceased, as that which did formerly belong to the grace of health. 3. That the rite vsed by the Church of Rome, is contrary to the saying of Saint Iames, and may bee neglected without sinne. 4. That the Priest onely is not the minister, and that Saint Iames did vnderstand the ancients for age, and not the Priests, ordained by the Bishop. But if any maruaile why it is said in the first head of the doctrine, that 14. Articles of reformation are handled, in which the Presidents of the Synod & the Bishops haue diuers ends. this Sacrament is insinuated by CHRIST our Lord in Saint Marke, and pub∣lished in Saint Iames, whereas the antecedence, and consequence of the words did require, that it should not bee sayd, insinuated, but instituted, hee may know that it was first so written; but a Diuine hauing obserued, that the Apostles, who anoynted the sicke, of whom Saint Marke speaketh, were not Priests, because the Church of Rome holdeth, that Priesthood was conferred vpon them onely in the last Supper, it seemed a contradiction, to affirme, that the Ʋnction which they gaue, was a Sacrament, and that Priests onely are ministers of it. Whereunto some, who held it to bee a Sacrament, and at that time instituted by CHRIST, did answere, that CHRIST command∣ing them to minister the Ʋnction, made them Priests concerning that acte onely. As if the Pope should command a simple Priest to giue the Sacrament of Chrisme, he made him a Bishop for that acte. Yet it was thought too dan∣gerous to affirme it absolutely. Therefore, in stead of the word Institutum, they put Insinuatum. Which word what it may signifie in such a matter, eue∣ry one may iudge who vnderstandeth what Insinuare is, and doeth apply it to that which the Apostles then did, and to that which was commanded by Saint Iames, and to the determination made by this Councell. But in matter of reformation, as hath beene said, fourteene Articles were proposed, all belonging to Episcopall iurisdiction: whereof when they had vnderstood the opinion of the Canonists in the particular Congregations, and read all in the generall, they came to frame the Decree. Herein the ayme of the B B▪ was to increase their authority, & to recouer that which the Pope had vsurped from them, and of the Presidents, to grant as little as they could. But both parties did proceede cunningly, and made shew to regard onely the seruice of God, and the restitution of the ancient Ecclesiasticall discipline. The Bishops thought they were hindered in executing their office. For when they did suspend any from exercise of their orders, or Ecclesiasticall de∣grees, and dignities, for causes knowen to themselues, or did refuse to let them passe to higher degrees, all was retracted, by a Licence or Dispensation gotten at Rome: which caused a disreputation of the Bishops, damnation of soules, and a totall ruine of discipline. Concerning this, the first head was made, that such Licences and Restitutions should not bee offorce. But the President for the honour of the Apostolique Sea, would not haue the Pope named, nor the chiefe Penitentiarie, nor any ministers of the Court, from whom such Licences were wont to bee obtained. The titular Bishops did also hinder them; who beeing depriued, by a Decree published in the sixt Session, of power to exercise the pontificall office in the Diocesses without leaue of the proper Bishop, did retire themselues, into a place exempt from all Bishopriques, admitting those to holy orders who were before reiected, as vnfit, by their owne Bishops; which they did, by vertue of a priuiledge to ordaine any that offered himselfe vnto them. This was prohibited in the se∣cond head, but with this moderation, that, for reuerence of the Apostolike Sea, mention should not bee made, who granted the priuiledge. And conse∣quently in the third head, power was giuen to the Bishops to suspend, for what time they pleased, any one ordained without their examination, or with licence, by facultie giuen by whomsoeuer. These things the wiser sort of Bishops knew to bee of small weight, because the Canonists doe hold that 344 Licences, Priuiledges, and Faculties granted by the Pope, are neuer compre∣hended in generall words, without speciall mention bee made of them. But not beeing able to obtaine more, they were content with this, hoping that time might open them a way to proceede further. It was also decreed in the same sixth Session, that no secular Clerke, by vertue of personall Priuiledge, nor Regular, dwelling out of the Monaste∣rie, by vigor of the Priuiledge of his order, should bee exempt from the cor∣rection of the Bishoppe, as Delegate of the Apostolike Sea. Which some thinking not to containe the Canons of Cathedrall Churches, and other Col∣legiate dignities, who, not by priuiledge, but by ancient custome, or by sen∣tences put in execution, or by Concordates with the Bishops established and sworne, were in possession of not beeing subiect to Bishops, and others al∣so restraining it onely to visitation, it was ordained in the fourth head, that, concerning secular Clerkes, it should bee extended to all times, and all sorts of excesses, and declared that none of the things aforesayd should with∣stand. Another disorder as great did arise, because the Pope did grant a Iudge, at the election of the supplicant, to whosoeuer did seeke it by the ordinary meanes vsed in Court, with authoritie to defend, protect, and maintaine him in possession of his rights, and to remooue the molestation giuen him, extending also this fauour to all his domestiques. And this sort of Iudges were called Conseruators; who did stretch their authoritie, in place of defen∣ding the supplicant from molestations, to withdraw him from iust correcti∣ons, and also, at their instance, to molest and trouble the Bishops, and other ordinary Ecclesiasticall superiours, with censures. The fifth point made prouision against this disorder, ordaining that Conseruatorie graces should not helpe any body, nor free him from inquisition, accusation, and conuenti∣on, before the Ordinary, in criminall and mixt causes, and in ciuill also, in which hee is plaintife: and, in other causes, if the Conseruator bee suspected, or difficultie arise betweene him and the Ordinary, who is competent Iudge, that arbitrators shall bee chosen, according to the forme of the Law, and that Conseruatory letters which comprehend domestiques, shall bee exten∣ded but vnto two, who doe liue at the charge of the Master of the familie, and that these and the like graces shall not continue aboue fiue yeeres, and that the Conseruators shall not haue Tribunals. But the Synod did not meane to containe in this Decree Vniuersities, Colledges of Doctours, and Schol∣lers, places of Regulars, and Hospitals. Concerning which exception, when this point was handled, there was very great contention, it seeming to the Bishops, that, against all right, the exception was larger then the rule, because the number of Doctors, Schollers, Regulars, and Hospitalaries, is greater then of all others, who can haue Conseruatorie letters, and that the prouision against any particular man was easie, but the disorders of Vniuer∣sities and Colledges, were of the greatest importance. The Legate gaue an account heereof to Rome: where it beeing decided, by that which was con∣sulted vnder Paul the third, that it was necessary, for maintenance of the A∣postolique Sea, that the Friars, and Vniuersities, should totally depend on Rome, there was no neede of a new determination: and immediatly an∣swere was made, that the Conseruatories of these, should, by no meanes, bee touched. Whereupon the Fathers of the Synode, who were adherents of Rome, beeing entred into this opinion, the others, who were fewer, were forced to be content with the exception, and there was some hope, and some meanes vsed to pacifie them. The sixth point was concerning the Priests apparell: wherein it was ea∣sily concluded to ordaine, that all the Ecclesiastiques of holy Order, or Be∣neficed men, should bee bound to weare an habite fit for their degree, accor∣ding to the appointment of the Bishop, giuing him power to suspend the transgressours, if, after admonition, they shall not obey, and to depriue them of their Benefices, if, after correction, they shall not amend; renewing here∣in the constitution of the Councel of Vienna; which notwithstanding was not much fitted to those times, prohibiting vpper garments laced, and of di∣uers colours, and frockes shorter then the vestment, and red and greene bree∣ches chequered, things disused, which haue no neede of prohibition. The vse of all Christian Nations was most ancient, that, to imitate the mildenesse of CHRIST our LORD, all the Ministers of the Church should bee neat and cleane from mans blood, neuer receiuing to any Ecclesi∣asticall order, any person defiled with homicide, whether voluntary or ca∣suall: and, if any Clerke committed any such excesse, either willingly or by chance, all Ecclesiasticall function was immediatly taken from him. This hath beene, and is now, inuiolably obserued by other Christian Nations, vnto whom dispensations against the Canons are vnknowen; but in the Latine, where rich men may easily make vse of them, it is obserued onely by the poorer sort. It being proposed in the fourth and fifth Article to mo∣derate the abuse, it was ordained in the seuenth head, that a voluntary ho∣micide should for euer remaine depriued of all Order, Benefice, and Eccle∣siasticall office; and when there shall bee cause to dispence with the casuall homicide, the commission of the dispensation, shall bee directed to the Bi∣shop onely, or, if there bee cause to the contrary, to the Metropolitane, or next Bishop. They saw that this Decree, did not serue to moderate the abuses, but to make the dispensations dearer. For the Popes hands, were not tied concerning voluntary homicide; and for casuall, the decree was obser∣ued, in not committing the cause to any but the Bishop, but to dispence di∣rectly, without committing it to another, was not taken away, first making the proofes in Rome, or dispatching the dispensations vnder the name of Motu proprio, or with other clauses, with which the Chancery doth abound, when it hath cause to vse them. A certaine sort of Prelates seemed to hinder much the authority of Bi∣shops, who, for their reputation, in the place where they dwelt, obteined pow∣er of the Pope, to punish the faults of the Ecclesiastiques of that place; and some Bishops also, pretending that their Priests receiued scandall and bad ex∣ample from those of the next Diocesses, obtained authority to chastise them. Some desiring that this disorder should bee remedied, by reuoking wholly such authorities, and perceiuing that it would distaste many Cardinals, and great Prelates, who abused them, they found a moderation, that they should vse them, yet without preiudice of the Bishop, ordayning in the eighth poynt, that they might not proceede but in presence of the Bishop, or his de∣putie. There was another way to subiect the Churches and people of one Diocesse, to the Bishop of another, by vniting the Churches of one, to the Churches or Benefices of the other: which though it were prohibited in generall termes, in the seuenth Session, yet it beeing not so plainely done as some desired, an expresse declaration was demanded. Whereupon it was re∣solued in the ninth point, that all perpetuall vnions of the Churches of one Dioces e, to the Churches of another, should be prohibited, vnder what pre∣tence soeuer. The Regulars made great instance to keepe their Benefices, and to re∣gaine those which they had already lost, by the inuention of perpetuall Com∣mendaes; and many Bishops, for sundry respects, were willing to assist them. They were desirous to propose, that these perpetuall Commendaes should bee quite taken away; but, fearing to bee contradicted, they were content onely to desire they should bee moderated. The Presidents, on the other side, see∣ing the hazard, that this matter, dangerous for the Court, should bee set on foote, themselues proposed a light remedie, to hinder all treatie of a better. And this was, that Regular Benefices, vsually giuen in title to religious men, when they shall bee vacant hereafter, shall not bee conferred but vpon men professed of that Order, or to some person who is to receiue the habite, and take vpon him the profession. This was the tenth poynt, which did not much import the Court of Rome, in regard as many Commendaes were alrea∣die made as could bee; and the Prelates had no great desire to obtaine more, though it would haue beene an honour for the Churches, if the regular Ab∣bats had resided. But, in regard of the fauour extended to the Monkes, not to take more from them then was taken already, a counterpoize was added in the next point, ordaining that they could not haue secular Benefices, though with cure. Which howsoeuer it speaketh onely of those who are translated from one order to another, ordaining that none should bee recei∣ued, but with condition to remaine in the Cloyster, yet by parity of the rea∣son, or by an argument of greater reason, it hath beene vnderstood generally of all. And because the patronage of Churches, was graunted in Court by grace, and to make the grace the greater, power giuen to depute an Ecclesia∣sticall person, with faculty to institute him that is presented; this disorder was remedied in the twelfth head, ordaining that none should haue right of Patronage, but the founded of the Church, or hee that hath competenly indowed, with his patrimoniall goods, one already founded. And for re∣medie of the second disorder, it was forbid in the 13. head, that the Patrone, though he had a priuiledge to doe it, should not make the presentation to a∣ny but the Bishop. While these things were handled, Iohannes Theodoricus Pleniagorus, and The Ambas∣sadors of the Duke of Wit∣tenberg arriue in Trent, with commission to present the confession of their faith. Iohannes Eclinus, Ambassadours, sent by the Duke of Wittenberg to the Coun∣cell, arriued in Trent, with order to present publiquely the confession of their doctrine, whereof mention hath beene made, and to say withall, that Di∣uines would come to expound it more at large, and defend it, if securitie and safe conduct were giuen them, according to the forme of the Councell of Ba∣sil. They went to the Count Montfort, the Emperours Ambassadour, shew∣ed him their Mandate, and tolde him they had commission to propose some things in the Councell. This being related by the Count to the Legate, hee answered, that as others Ambassadors did first present themselues to the Pre∣sidents in the name of the Pope, and did signifie to them the summe of their Ambassage, so those of Wittenberg ought to doe: hee therefore wished they Whereof the Legat giueth an account to Rome. should come, and promised to receiue them with all humanity. The Count related the answere; wherewith the Ambassadours were not contented, say∣ing, That it was one of the points required in Germany, that the Pope should not preside; which not beeing willing to contradict, without order from their Prince, they would write; and expect an answere. The Count did cun∣ningly assay to learne the whole secret of their instructions, to aduertise the Legate of it. But they stood vpon generall termes, and would not specifie any particular. The Legate sent immediately aduise hereof to Rome, desiring to know what hee should doe, and the rather, because he vnderstood that o∣thers would come also. In the beginning of Nouember, the Emperour, to bee neere the Councel, The Emperor goeth to Is∣pruc, distant from the Councel but three dayes iourney. and the warre of Parma, went to Ispruc, distant but three dayes iourney from Trent, the way being so commodious, that if there were occasion, hee might heare from his Ambassadours in one day. The Pope had newes at once of the arriuall of the Emperour, and of those of Wittenberg. And although hee trusted vpon the Emperours promises made to him before the conuocation of the Councell, and often reiterated, and saw the effects, because his Am∣bassadours curbed the Spaniards, when they were too bold in maintaining the Episcopall authoritie, and was perswaded he would perseuere, in regard of their common interests against the French King, yet hauing heard of Which ma∣keth the Pope somwhat iea∣lous of him, some things handled in Germany, hee was a little iealous, that, either for ne∣cessitie, or for some great opportunitie, which occurrences might bring, hee would change his opinion. Yet he tooke courage; considering, that if there were warre in Germany, no account would be held of the Councell, and du∣ring peace, all the German Ecclesiastiques would bee on his side, as also the Italian Prelates; whose number hee could easily encrease by sending thither all those of the Court: that the Legat being resolute, and hoping to be Pope, would labour as for himselfe, and that the Nuncio of Siponto was most affe∣ctionate to his person: that he might at any time be reconciled with France, because it was desired by that King, by meanes of whom, and with the Pre∣lates of his kingdome, hee might withstand all attempts made against his authoritie. He answered the Legate, that hee could giue him but little instruction more; that he was not onely acquainted with, but principall Author of the The answere of his Holi∣nesse made to the Legate. Treaties made in framing the Bull of the Conuocation, that hee should re∣member that the things decreed vnder Paul, were studiously approoued therein; that it was sayd that it did belong to the Pope, not onely to call, but also to direct Councels, and to preside by his ministers, and that hee should not leaue open so much as a little chinke, in preiudice of any of these. For the rest he should gouerne himselfe according to occasions, putting him in mind to fly, as the Plague, all middle counsels, and moderations, when any of these were handled, but so soone as the difficultie did arise, to breake it off suddenly, that the aduersaries might not haue time to looke farre into it. That he would not lay on his shoulders the Translation, or dissolution of the Councell, but onely that he should speedily aduertise when hee saw cause. Furthermore, that he should set on foot as much matter of doctrine as he could, which would worke many good effects. For it would make the Lu∣therans despaire of concord without their totall submission, would interest the Prelates more against them, would not giue time to these to thinke on the point of reformation, and make a sudden dispatch of the Councel, a matter of the greatest importance, because there is danger of some inconuenience so long as it lasteth. And when he saw himselfe forced to giue them some satisfaction, in amplifying the Episcopall authoritie, hee should condescend, and yet hold backe as much as might bee. For in case some thing should bee granted preiudiciall to the Court, as formerly hath beene done, yet so long as the Popes authoritie remaineth intire, there will bee meanes to reduce them easily to their first state. Things standing thus, the 25. of Nouember, the day appointed for the The Session of the 25 of Nouember. Session, came. The Fathers met, and went to Church in the vsuall order: where the ceremonies being finished, the doctrine of faith, the Anathema∣tismes, & decree of the Reformation were read by the Bishop that said Masse. The tenour whereof being already recited, there remaineth nothing else to be spoken. And finally, the last decree was read, to giue order for the future Session; in which it was sayd, that it being already appointed for the 25. of Ianuary, the Sacrament of Order ought then to bee handled, together with the Sacrifice of the Masse. So the Legate would haue it pronounced, that, ac∣cording to the Popes opinion, they might haue matter of doctrine enough whereon to treat. The Session being ended, the Legate vsed all diligence that the Decrees might not be printed. And his order was obserued at Ripa, The decrees are forbid to be published, but are prin∣ted in Ger∣many. where the Presse was, and where the other Decrees were printed. But no man could hinder the sending of many copies out of Trent, whereupon they were printed in Germany, and the difficultie and delay to let them see light, made the Critiques curious, and diligent to examine them more ex∣actly, to finde the cause of this secrecy. That which was decided in the first point of doctrin, and the sixt Canon, caused much speech: that is, that CHRIST, when hee breathed on his Disci∣ples; and gaue them the holy Ghost, saying, Whose sinnes you remit they are re∣mitted, and whose sinnes you retaine, they are retained, did institute the Sacrament of enan e. It was considered, that Baptisme was first vsed by the Iewes, for legall cleanlinesse, afterwards applyed by Saint Iohn for a preparation to goe to the Mess which was to come, and finally by CHRIST, in expresse and And there censured. plaine words, instituted a Sacrament, for remission of sinnes, and an entrance into the Church: ordaining it should bee ministred in the name of the Fa∣ther, Sonne, and holy Ghost. Likewise in the captiuitie of Babylon a Postce∣nium was instituted by the Iewes, with bread and wine, for a thankes giuing and a memoriall of their going out of Egypt, while being out of the land of promise, they could not eat the Paschal Lambe: in imitation of which rite CHRIST instiruted the Eucharist, to giue thankes to GOD, for the generall deliuerance of mankind, and in memorie of himselfe, who was the Author thereof, by the sprinkling of his blood. And howsoeuer like rites haue beene formerly vsed, though for other ends, as hath beene said, yet the Scripture doth expresse all the singularities of them. Now that CHRIST would in∣troduce a rite to confesse our sinnes in particular so exactly, as that no vse was euer the like, it seemed strange that hee would bee vnderstood by words, from which it must bee drawne by a very vnioynted consequence, yea by many consequences, very farre fetcht, as was done by the Councell. And they wondred, why the institutiō being made by the word remitto, the forme was not, I remit thy sinnes, rather then Iabsolue thee. Others added, that if, by those words, a Sacrament of absolution is instituted, with this forme; Absoluo te: by which one is absolued, one must say, by an vnresistable necessitie, that another, or the same, is instituted, in which, this forme should likewise be, Ligo te: because it cannot be vnderstood how the same authoritie to loose and binde, founded vpon the words of CHRIST absolutely alike, doth require in absolution the pronouncing of the wordes, Absoluo te, and that other of binding doth not require the pronouncing of the words, Ligo te: Nor by what reason, to execute that which CHRIST hath said, Quorum retinueritis, &c. & quaecunqne ligaueritis &c. it is not necessary to say, Ligo te, but to execute Quorum remiseritis, & quaecunque solueritis, it is necessary to say, Ab∣soluo te. Likewise the doctrine, inferred in the fifteeneth point, was censured by critiques: where it is saide, that CHRIST by the same words, did con∣stitute the Priests, iudges of sinnes, and therefore that it is necessarie to con∣fesse them all absolutely, and in particular, together with the circumstances which alter the kinde, seeing that it doeth appeare by the words of our Lord, that he hath not distinguished two sorts of sinnes, one to bee remitted, and the other to be retained, whereby it would bee necessarie to know of which the delinquent is guiltie, but one onely which doeth comprehend all, and therefore the word Peccata in generall is onely vsed. But hee hath distingui∣shed two sortes of sinners, saying, Quorum, & Quorum: one of the Penitent, vnto whom remission is granted, another of the obstinate; vnto whom it is denyed. Therefore they are rather to know the state of the delinquent, then the nature and number of the sinnes. But concerning the circum∣stances which alter the kinde it was said, that euery honest man may sweare, with a good conscience, that the holy Apostles, and their disciples, most skil∣full in things celestiall, not regarding humane subtilties, did neuer knowe what were the circumstances which alter the kinde, and perhaps if Aristotle had not made this speculation, the worlde would not haue knowen it vn∣till now, and yet there is made of it an Article of Faith, necessary to saluation. But as it was approoued, that Absoluo, was a iudiciall word, and reputed a good consequence▪ that if the Priests doe absolue, they are Iudges, so it appea∣red to be an inconstancie, to condemne those who say, it is a naked ministe∣rie to pronounce; it being plaine, that the office of a Iudge is nothing but to pronounce him innocent who is so, and the transgressor guiltie, and that this metaphore of the Iudge doth not beare, that the Priest can make a iust man of a delinquent, as is ascribed to him. The Prince may pard on offenders, and restore them to their good name; to whom, hee that maketh a wicked man iust, is more like, then to a Iudge, who doeth euer transgresse his of∣fice, when hee pronounceth any thing but that which hee first findeth to be true. But they were amazed most of all, when they read the poynt where the specificall and singular confession of sinnes, with the circumstan∣ces, is prooued; because the iudicature cannot bee executed without know∣ledge of the cause, nor equitie obserued in imposing punishment, if the faults be knowen onely in general, and afterwards that CHRIST hath commanded this confession, that they may impose the cōdigne punishment. They said that this was plainely to mock the world, and think all men fooles, & to perswade themselues that all their absurdities should be beleeued, without more to doe. For who knoweth not, and seeth not dayly, that the Confessors enioyne Pe∣nance, not onely without weighing the merit of the faults, but without ha∣uing the least consideration of them. It would seeme considering the words of the Councell, that the Confessors should haue a balance, to make difference of euery graine; and yet oftentimes to recite fiue Pater nosters, shall bee a Penance, for many murders, adulteries, and thefts: and the most learned Con∣fessors and generally all in giuing Penance, doe say to euery man, that they doe impose onely part of the Penance. Therefore it is not necessarie to im∣pose that exact Penance which the faults doe deserue, nor to haue a particu∣lar enumeration made of the sinnes and circumstances. But what neede one goe so farre, when the same Councell, in the ninth point of the doctrine, and the thirteenth Anathematisme, doth ordaine, that satisfaction is made by volun∣tary Penance, and suffering of aduersities. Therefore it is not needefull, yea not iust, to impose in Confession the punishment that is correspondent, and, by consequence, not to make a specificall enumeration, which is sayd to bee ordained for this ende. And they added, that, not considering any thing spo∣ken before the Confessor, though most learned, attentiue, and wise, hauing heard the Confession of an ordinary man, for one yeere, much more of a great sinner, for many yeeres, it is impossible hee should iudge aright, though hee had Canons of the punishment due to any sinne whatsoeuer, without danger to erre more then halfe, to speake the least. For a Confessor seeing all in writing, and considering many dayes of it, could not make a balance to decide iustly, much lesse hearing, and resoluing presently, as the custome is. They said it was not fit they should be so contemned, & held so insensible, as to beleeue such absurdities. Of the reseruation of Cases enough was said by the Diuines of Louine, and Collen, which was attributed to a desire of do∣minion and to auarice. The next day there was a generall Congregation, to giue order for the The Sacrifice of the Masse, the Commu∣nion of the Cup, and of children are handled. discussion of the Sacrifice of the Masse, and the Communion of the Cup, and of Children. And although the Decrees were already made, for the Session of the eleuenth of October, and deferred, yet they discoursed againe, as if no∣thing had beene sayd, and did choose Fathers to collect the Articles to bee disputed on, and others to make the Decree. And because they made hast, seuen Articles were suddenly framed, whereon they disputed, twise euery day in which number was the Ambassadour of Ferdinand, and Iulius Plu∣gius, Bishop of Namburg, and for greater reputation, the Electour of Collen, that all that doctrine might seeme to come from Germany, and not from Rome. They made also thirteene Anathematismes, condemning those for here∣tiques, who doe not hold the Masse, for a true and proper Sacrament, or doe say it doth not helpe the Liuing and the dead, or doe not receiue the Canon of the Masse, or doe condemnd priuate Masses, or the ceremonies which the Church of Rome vseth. And then foure Heads of doctrine were made. That in the Masse, is offered a true and proper Sacrifice, instituted by CHRIST; of the necessitie of the Sacrifice of the Masse, and how it agreeth with that of the Crosse; of the fruits of that Sacrifice, and the application thereof; of the and ceremonies of the Masse. All which were to bee handled against Christmas, and are not related heere perticularly, because they were not published in the next Session. While the Fathers doe entertaine themselues in the businesse of the Coun∣cel, The Ambas∣sadours of Wittenberg receiue letters from their Princes, with order to pro∣ceed in their negotiation. the Ambassadors of Wittenberg, did receiue letters from their Princes, to proceed, and to present their doctrine, in the best maner they could. There, fore in the absence of the Earle of Montfort, they entreated the Cardinall of Trent, to bee a meanes, that the Presidents would receiue their letters, assem∣ble the Fathers, and giue them audience. The Cardinall promised all good office, but sayd it was necessary to tell the Legate what they Would treat on; it being so constituted by the Fathers, mooued thereunto by the propositi∣on made by the Abbat of Bellosana. Therefore they imparted to him their instruction, saying, they were sent to obtaine a safe Conduct for their Theo∣logue, as it was giuen in Basill to the Bohomians, and to propose their do∣ctrine; that, it being examined by the Fathers▪ they might be ready to con∣ferre with their Diuines, when they came. The Legate, receiuing this rele∣tion from the Cardinall, imparted to him what the Pope had written, and The answere of the Legate to their pro∣positions. told him, that it was not to be suffered, that either they or any other Prote∣stants, should present their Doctrine, much lesse be admitted to defend it, in∣regard there would bee no end of contentions that it was the office of the Fathers, which was obserued vntill then, and ought to be continued▪ to exa∣mine their doctrine, taken out of their Bookes, and condemne that which did deserue it. If the Protestants had any difficultie, and did propose it hum∣bly, and shew themselues willing to receiue instruction, it should bee giuen by aduice of the Councel. Therefore hee denied absolutely to assemble the Fathers, to receiue their doctrine, and said, he could not change this opinion, though it should cost him his life. For altering the safe conduct, he said it was an exorbitant indignity to the Councel, that they should mistrust that which was granted, and that to treat thereof was an vnsupportable iniury, and de∣serued that all the faithfull should spend their liues in opposing it. The Cardinall of Trent would not giue the answere so sharpe to the Am∣bassodors, but said: That the Legate was angry, that they would begin with I fauourably related to the Ambsssadors by the Cardi∣nall of Trent. the presentation of their doctrine, in regard they were to receiue from their Superiors, with reuerence and obedience, the rule of Faith, and not prescribe it to others, with such an vnseemelinesse, and absurditie. Therefore he adui∣sed them to let that day passe, that the wrath of the Legat might be remitted, and then to beginne with some other point, that afterwards they might fall vpon those two: that is, to present their doctrine, and desire a safe conduct. They followed this counsell, and a few dayes after, the Cardinall being par∣ted from Trent, they desired the Emperours Ambassadour to perswade the Legate to receiue their mandate, and heare their proposition, that vnderstan∣ding his minde they might resolue, as they should haue instruction from their Prince. The Ambassadour treated with the Legate, and had the same answere which was giuen to the Cardinal of Trent; which did not proceed from disdaine, but from a resolued will. The Ambassadour vnderstanding the Legats mind, was of opinion that the businesse could not then take place, and knowing that to relate the answere was dishonourable for the Empe∣rour, who had so largely promised, that euery one should be heard, propose freely, and conferre, in stead of giuing a direct answere to those of Wittenberg, he found diuers excuses, to gain time, which he did not so artificially, though he were a Spaniard, but that they were discouered to be pretences not to giue a plaine Negatiue. At this time Ambassadours went to Trent, from Argentina, and fiue Cities more, with instruction to present their doctrine. They imployed Gulielmus Pictauius, the Emperours third Ambassador; who not to fall vpon the same difficulties which his colleague did, tooke their Mandat and perswaded them to expect a few dayes, vntill he had sent to Caesar and receiued an an∣swere: because in so doing, they should proceed vpon a good ground. This made quiet those of Wittenberg also. The Ambassadour wrote to Caesar, tel∣ling him of the Ambassadours resolution, sh wing what an indignitie it was to his Maiestie, that no account should bee made of so honest, and so iust a promise made by him. The Emperour, to prouide against this disgrace, and couningly to make vse of the Councell, expecting the Ambassadours of the Elector of Saxonie, wrote that the others should bee entertained vntill their arriuall, assuring them they should then be heard, and with all charitie, con∣ferred with. The thirteenth of December▪ Maximilian, the Sonne of Ferdinand, passed Maximilian pasteth by Trent. by Trent, with his wife and children, and was met by the Legat, and the Itali∣an and Spanish Prelats, and some Germans also. The Prince Electors did not meete him, but visited him in his lodging. The Protestant Ambassadours complained to him, that, notwithstanding so many promises made by Caesar, they could not haue audience, and prayed him to haue pitie on Germanie, because those Priests, being strangers, did not care, for some small respects of their owne, to see it on fire, yea, by precipitating the determinations, and Anathematismes, did make the controuersies euery day more hard. Maximi∣lian perswaded them to bee patient, and promised to treate with his vncle, that the actions of the Councell might passe as he had promised, in the Diet, And promi∣seth the Pro∣testant Am∣bassadours to treat with the Emperour his vncle in their behalfe. they should. At Christmas the Pope created fourteene Italian Cardinals, and imme∣diately published thirteene of them, reseruing one to bee published when hee thought fit. And to honour so great a creation in the beginning of his Papacie, especially there being eight and fourtie Cardinalles in the Colledge, The Pope createth 14. Cardinals; & giueth a rea∣son of it. which was then thought a great number, hee pretended occasion to doe it for the enmitie with the French King. Of whom hee complained as well for the warre hee made against the Apostolike Sea, as for the Edictes publi∣shed, adding a report which then came from Lions, and Genua, that he threat∣ned to make a Patriarke in France, which if it were true, hee said it would be necessarie to proceed iudicially against him. Wherein he should meet with many difficulties, in regard of the great number of the French Cardinals, to whom it was needefull to make a counterpoise, by creating new, men of worth, of whom the Apostolike Sea might make vse, in occasions of impor∣tance. The Colledge was contented, and the new Cardinals were receiued. The Bishop of Monte-Fias∣cone commeth to the Coun∣cel with let∣ters of credit. After this hee dispatched to Trent the Bishop of Monte-Fiascone, with letters of credit to Cardinall Crescentius and the three Electors, whose comming hee did congratulate, and thanked them for their zeale and reuerence towards the Apostolike Sea, exhorting them to perseuere. Hee gaue him order to tell them that hee had created Cardinals, that hee might haue Ministers de∣pending on himselfe, in regard all the olde did depend vpon some other Prince, to excuse him for the warre of Parma, saying that hee did not make it but that it was made against him, and was forced to defend himselfe. To Cardinall Crescentius hee gaue an account of the Cardinals made, promising to make them all vnderstand his mind, how they should demeane them∣selues towards his friend, vnto whom hee was so much obliged: And hee made the Nuncio of Siponto bee tolde that hee had disposed of him as the friendship betweene them did require, and that hee should not care to know wherein, but should continue to performe his dutie, as formerly hee had done. Christmas being ended, a generall Congregation was made, to giue forme A generall congregation is held to set downe a rule for the discus∣sion of the Sacrament of Order. to the handling of the Sacrament of Order. They discoursed of the abuses which, in this, were entred into the Church, and the Nuncio of Ʋerona said, that there was in all some abuse, worthy of amendment, but in this an ocean of them. And, after many tragicall exclamations were made, they re∣solued, accordingly to their custome, first to propose the Articles drawne out of the Lutheran doctrine, and then discusse which should bee condemned for hereticall, and frame the Anathematismes and Heads of doctrine and in the end, speake of the abuses. Twelue Articles were giuen to the Diuines, where∣on they discoursed, morning and euening. Out of the opinions of the Di∣uines, the Deputie Fathers framed first eight Anathematismes, condemning for hereticall to say, that Order is not a true and proper Sacrament; or that it is 1552 IVLIVS 3. CHARLES 5. EDWARD 6. HENRY 2. one onely, which tendeth to Priesthood, by many meanes; to denie the Hierarchie, to say that the consent of the people is necessary; to say that there is not one visible Priesthood; that Vnction is not necessary; that the holy Ghost is not giuen in it; that Bishops are not De iure Diuino, and superiour to Priests. Vpon these, foure points of Doctrine were made; of the neces∣sitie and institution of the Sacrament of Order; of the visible and external Priesthood of the Church; of the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie; of the difference of a Priest from a Bishop. This doctrine and Canons, beeing approoued by the general Congregation, were all put into one Decree, vnder the same con∣text: with that of the Sacrifice, to be published in a Session. Yet it was not Why no men∣tion is made of what was handled in the Congregati∣ons of De∣cember and Ianuary. done for the reasons which shall be declared. Therefore there is no particu∣lar mention made of what did passe in the Congregations of December and Ianuary, because the same things were discussed againe vnder Pius 4: in the third reduction of the Councell: vnto which when we shall come, the diffe∣rences shall bee shewed betweene the Decrees framed now, and those which were after established vnder Pius. But newes comming to Trent that there were leuies made of Souldiers, The Electors craue leaue to depart. throughout all Germany, and that there was feare of warre, the three E∣lectors seeing their States were in danger, craued leaue of the Emperour, by Letters and Messengers, to returne, that they might preserue them. Caesar, de∣siring the Councell should continue, answered them, in the beginning of the yeere 1552. that the troubles were not so great as the fame; that he had sent 1552. to know the trueth, and that a few men onely were in Armes; but that the ci∣ties continued in their obedience, and Maurice, of whom the report was, that he had raised some stirres, would shortly come vnto him, and had sent Ambas∣sadours, who were already in Ispruc, and would shortly be in Trent; that those few Souldiers, lodged in Thuringia, who made some excursions vpon the ter∣ritorie of the Bishop of Mentz, did mutin for want of pay onely; that he had sent one exppresly to pay them, and giue them their pasport; that hee knew whatsoeuer was spoken and feared, and did not neglect any thing; that he had some in euery place to aduertise him, and did spare no cost; therefore hee exhorted them not to abandon the Councell, which would bee in dan∣ger to bee dissolued with their departure, which would giue a great blowe to Religion: and if their States want any prouision, let them commaund their Ministers, and giue him notice, and hee will giue them all assi∣stance. Wolfius Colerus, and Leonardus Badebornus, Ambassadors for Maurice, Ele∣ctor The Ambassa∣dors of Saxo∣ny come to Trent. of Saxony, arriued in Trent the 7 of Ianuary; which gaue great ioy to the Electors and German Prelates, being assured hereby, that Maurice did not at∣tempt any thing. They first treated with the Emperors Ambassadors, say∣ing, that their Prince, desirous of concord, determined to send to the Coun∣cell some godly Diuines, men louing peace, which the other Protestant Princes would doe also; but that a safe Conduct was first necessary, in the Their nego∣tiation. forme of that of Basill, and that, in the meane while, all treatie in the Coun∣cell should cease, and that, after their arriuall, the things already handled should bee reexamined, it not beeing a generall Councell without the pre∣sence of all Nations; that the Pope should haue no power to preside, but should submit himselfe to the Councell, and release the oath to the Bishops, that their voyces may be free. They added, that, in the Congregation, they would expound all more at large, which they desired should bee assembled quickly, because their Diuines were within the distance of fourty miles, and did expect onely to bee called. The Emperours Ambassadours gaue good wordes, because the Emperour to entertaine Maurice, commaunded they should bee well vsed. These Ambassadours treated in the same manner with the Prince Electors, and Cardinall of Trent, but refused to treate with Car∣dinall Crescentius, and his Colleagues, that they might not seeme to acknow∣ledge them for Presidents. They desired to bee admitted in publique, to present their Mandate, and to bee receiued as those of the Elector of Bran∣deburg had been; whereof the Emperours Ambassadours gaue them hope, and promise, that they might entertaine them. But, on the other side, the Legate and Nuncij did plainely refuse to alter the forme of the Safe Conduct, The answere of the Legate and Nuncij. saying, it was too much dishonourable for the Synode, which representeth the Catholike Church, that foure Sectaries should make difficulty to beleeue it; neither would they stoppe the course of the Decrees, already put in order with maturitie. And what hope can there bee of the conuersion of Germa∣nie, when they come with these demaunds. And, for hearing them in publike, it was iust, because it was promised; but beeing sent to the Coun∣cell, of which they see and know that the Legate and Nuncij are Presidents, they must acknowledge them for such, or else they cannot bee admitted; for so they had speciall Commission from the Pope, when those of Wittenberg came; that to release oathes, and such like impieties, they would rather die, then cause to be done: and that they would sooner depart, dissolue the Coun∣cell, and command the Prelates not to assist at any acte. The Emperour, en∣formed Offendeth the Emperour. hereof, who tooke the businesse to the heart, was offended with the obstinacie of the Papalins, who, vpon a nice point of honour, would disturbe a businesse of that consequence, and raise a warre, which, in the end, might be their owne ruine. And he sent backe order to his Ambassadours, and the Cardinall Madruccio, to vse all meanes, and his owne authoritie also, to pacific the Legate, first with intreaties, then with high words, if they could not find a temper, which might satisfie both parties, and to force the Presidents, in a ciuill manner, to yeeld to that which was iust. The Emperours Ambassadours, and Madruccio, aduising together, resol∣ued not to demand of the Presidents all at once, but first, onely to receiue the Ambassadours; wherein they vsed long perswasions, which did all tend to shew, that when they were brought into the assembly, where themselues are Presidents, it might be said, that their Presidencie was acknowledged though before no particular complement had beene vsed with them. To the per∣swasions, they added intreaties in the Emperours name; mixed with some words, signifying that it was not fit to abuse his clemencie, nor to force him to vse other remedies; that necessity was a potent incitation, to him that had power in his hand. In the end Crescentius suffered himselfe to be perswaded to receiue them, not in Session, but in a publique generall Congregation in his house, thinking that thereby he should be acknowledged as Head. His edge beeing thus abated, they came to speake of ceasing to treate of the points of doctrine. Toledo said, that he had heard it often preached, that the sauing of one soule was so deare to CHRIST, that hee would descend againe, and suffer on the Crosse to gaine it; and now that they refused to saue all Germany, where was the imitation of CHRIST? The Legate excused himselfe vp∣on the absolute commands of the Pope, which hee must needes obey. But the Ambassadour replying, that, to a Minister instruction is giuen, in wri∣ting, At y e instance of whose Mi∣nisters they change their opinion. and matters of discretion are referred to iudgement, the Legate said, that hee saw well, that this was a degree to demand a retractation of the things already decided. The Ambassadour gaue his word that hee would neuer speake of that, yea, would deale effectually with the Saxons, to make them desist from that request. In the end, the Legate, perswaded by the Nuncio of Ʋerona, who suffered himselfe to bee ouercome first, not to lay (hee sayd) on the Popes backe, and the Councels, so great a burthen, that so important a businesse should bee precipitated, and so small a delay denied, condescen∣ded to say, that hee was content, so that the Prelates, in the generall Congre∣gation, did approoue it; to whom also he referred himselfe for the Safe Con∣duct, which they required. The Congregation was called, to consult vpon these particulars; and the delay was easily granted, vpon the perswasions of the Imperialists. For the Safe conduct, the consultation was more hard, not onely for the reason al∣leadged by the Legate, but because the name of the Councell of Basill, and the referring themselues to it, was abhorred; and, which did more im∣port, they thought that some things might fit those times, and not these, because the doctrine of the Bohemians was not so contrary to the Church of Rome. Notwithstanding all these oppositions, the authoritie of the three Electors, and of the Cardinall Madruccio, and the negotiation of the Empe∣rours Ambassadours preuailed. But Petrus Tagliauia, Archbishop of Palermo, sayd, that one very princi∣pall point was omitted, whether it should bee allowed, that they should sit A consultati∣on about the maner of re∣ceruing the Protestants in Councell. in the Councell or not, and what termes of honour should bee giuen them, and their Prince. For, to vse them meanly would breake off the businesse, and to honour manifest heretiques, would bee a great preiudice. The same, and greater consideration must bee had, how to behaue themselues towards the Diuines which are to come, who pretend to haue a voyce, and will bee a partie in disputations and Consultations, nor will be esteemed, as the Church must esteeme them, that is, as heretiques, excommunicated, and condemned, with whom it is not lawfull to treat, but onely to instruct them, if they hum∣bly craue it, and pardon them by fauour. Concerning this proposition, much was said of the varietie of times, vnto which all lawes must be accom∣modated; that the same Popes which did constitute those Decretals, would not obserue them in these occasions; that nothing is more easily broken, then that which is most hard. Which reasons, though they perswaded the maior part, yet they knew not what to resolue. It seemed, that to determine what rigor of the law was to bee retained, and what to bee mitigated, was a matter of much and long consultation, not to bee resolued on without the Pope and Colledge of Cardinals, which the straitnesse of time could not suffer. When all were doubtfull, the Bishop of Namberg opportunely sayd, that necessity did excuse euery transgression, and that in the Colloquies and Di∣ets of Germany, these things were naturely considered on, and so decided. But, for more assurance, it was good to make a Protestation before, that all was done for charitie, and piety, which are aboue all law, and to reduce those that wander, and that it is vnderstood to bee done without preiudice; with those clauses which the Lawyers know how to find. This opinion was readily embraced, first by the Dutch, then by the Spanish Prelates, and at last, somewhat coldly by the Italians, the Legate remaining immooueable, and shewing plainely that hee stood quiet, being forced by necessitie. These re∣solutions beeing setled; it was resolued, that, the 24. of the moneth, there should bee a generall Congregation, to receiue and heare the Saxon Ambas∣sadours, that the 25. day the Session should bee held, wherein the dilation, made vntill the comming of the Protestant Diuines, should be published, and Fathers elected, who, together with the Nuncio of Sponto, should make the Decree, the Protestation, and Safe Conduct. The Emperours Ambassa∣dours desired to haue the draught of the Safe Conduct, before it was publi∣shed, to shew it the Protestants, that if it did not giue them satisfaction, it might be so amended, that they might not haue occasion to refuse it as they did the other. The dayes following were spent in the things aforesaid; which beeing An exhorta∣tion of the Emperours Ambassadour Pictauius to the Prote∣stants. finished, the Emperours Ambassadours called the Protestants to them; and the Ambassadour Pictauius, hauing made an eloquent encomiastique orati∣on, of the goodnesse and charitie of the Fathers, and exhorted them to giue some little part of satisfaction to the Councell, as they receiued much from it, told them that it was concluded to receiue their Mandats and persons and to heare their propositions, and to deferre the conclusion of the points of doctrine, though already discussed and digested, to expect the Diuines, and heare them first. That they should haue a very ample Safe Conduct, as they desired, whereof the draught was made. And hee was copious in shewing that these were memorable fauours and graces, saying, it was necessary to yeeld something to the time, and not to desire all at once; that when they shall bee entred into the businesse, occasion will make them obtaine many things, which before seemed hard; that the Fathers doe desire the comming of the Diuines; that themselues, the Emperours Ambassadours, haue mat∣ters to propose of great moment, and doe stand onely expecting that the Protestants should beginne, that afterwards they may come foorth them∣selues also. For this cause he prayed them to proceed slowly, in their demand, that the Pope should submit himselfe to the Councell. For the Fathers doe know, that there is some thing to bee amended in the Papall greatnesse, but withall, that they must goe on cunningly; that themselues haue dayly expe∣rience, what dexterity and Art must bee vsed, in treating with the Popes Mi∣nisters. Likewise the reexamination of the things already concluded, was not to be proposed in the very beginning, because it would bee too great an infamy and dishonour to the Councell. Therefore let their Diuine come, who should haue a conuenient audience in all things, and when they shall see themselues wronged, it shall euer be free for them to depart. The Prote∣stants, retyring themselues, and considering, the draught of the safe Conduct, were not content, because it was not like to that of Basill, in which foure things more were granted to the Bohemians. 1. That they should haue a decisiue voyce. 2. That the holy Scripture, the practise of ancient Church the Councels, and Interpreters conformable to the Scripture, should bee Iudges. 3. That they might exercise their religion in their houses. 4. That nothing should be done in contempt and disdaine of their doctrine. Of Who are not content with the forme of the Safe Con∣duct. these foure, the second was different from that which was graunted in this draught, and the three others were totally left out. They suspected also, be∣cause the Councell did not promise them security in the name of the Pope and Colledge of Cardinals as did that of Basil. Yet they resolued not to make mention of this but to demand the inserting of the other 4. clauses: and told the Emperours Ambassadours plainly, that they could not receiue it in this forme because they had this expresse commission in their instructions. Toledo shewed some disdaine, that they should not content themselues, with that which he, and his Colleagues, had obtained, with so much paines; that the chiefe importance was in the security of comming and departing, and that the residue appertained to the maner of their negotiation, which might more ea∣sily be concluded by the presence of the Diuines; that it was too much ob∣stinacie to yeeld in nothing, and to desire to giue lawes alone to the whole For which cause Toledo the Emperors Ambassadour is offended. Church. But it not being impossible to remoue them with these reasons, from their resolution, they said, in the end, that they would referre it to the Fathers, to whom they restored the draught of the safe Conduct, with the additions which were required. The Legate and presidents, vnderstanding the request and resolution of the Protestants, shewed the Emperours Ambassadours how vniust and vn∣meet their demands were. For in the forme or that of Basil they neuer found that it was granted to haue a decisiue voyce in the Councell; but, that the Scripture, practise of the Church, Councels, and Doctours, who ground themselues on it, should bee Iudges, is sayd, because the practise of the Church is called by the name of Apostolicall Tradition: and when it is said, the holy Fathers, it is vnderstood that they ground themselues on the Scrip∣ture, because they haue no other gounds. The third, to exercise their Re∣ligion in their owne houses, is vnderstood, with condition that it bee not knowen, and done without scandall. The prohibition, that nothing shall bee done in contempt of them, is expresse when it is promised, that, by no meanes, they shall bee offended. Therefore that it did appeare that they complayned without cause, onely to cauill, and in regard there is no hope to content them, there doeth remaine nothing but to giue them the Safe Con∣duct, as it is made, and to leaue them to their liberty, to make vse of it or not, The Earle of Mountfort replied, that nothing could bee more seruiceable to the publique cause, then to take from them all pretences and cauils, and to make them vnexcusable to the world: therefore, in regard there was no re∣all difference betweene the Safe Conduct of Basil and this, to stoppe their mouthes, that might bee copied out Verbatim, changing onely the names of the persons, places, and times. The Presidents mooued with that subtile and strict answere, looked one vpon another, and the Legat, taking the mat∣ter vpon him, answered, that it should be referred to the Fathers, in the Con∣gregation, and resolued according to their determination. The Presidents did recommend the cause of GOD and the Church, euery one to his famili∣ar friends. To the Italians and Spaniards they said, that it was great iniury to bee compelled to follow a company of Schismatiques, who haue spoken vnaduisedly, and contrary to Christian doctrine, and bound themselues to follow the Scripture onely. But vnto all in generall, they sayd, it would be a great indignitie, if the Councell should so speake, as that an inextricable dis∣pute should presently arise. For in setting downe what Doctors doe ground themselues vpon the Scripture, they should neuer agree: that it was honou∣rable for the Councell to speake plainely, and that the expression made was iust the declaration of the Councel of Basil. And such perswasions they vsed, as that almost all were resolued not to change the draught, hoping that though the Protestants desired it should bee better, yet they would bee con∣tent when they saw all was done. All being in order, the foure and twentieth day the generall Congrega∣tion The Prote∣station of the Councel con∣cerning the admission of the Prote∣stants. was made; in which the Electors and all the Fathers met in the Legates house, as also the Ambassadours of the Emperour, and of Ferdinand, who were not wont to be present in such kinds of Congregation. The Legat be∣gan breifly, and said, they were assembled to beginne an action, the most doubtfull that euer happened to the holy Church: therefore they were to pray GOD for good successe, with more then vsuall deuotion; and, hauing, inuocated the name of the holy Ghost, as the custome is in the Congregati∣ons, the Protestation was read by the Secretary; whereunto all the Fathers hauing giuen consent, the Speaker desired it should bee registred in the actes, and a publique instrument made of it. The tenour whereof was thus in sub∣stance. That the holy Synode, not to hinder the progresse of the Councell, by the disputes which would arise, when it should be duely examined, what sort of persons should appeare in the Synode, and what sort of Mandats and Writings bee presented, and in what places men should sit, doth declare, that, if any be admitted for himselfe, or as a deputie, which ought not to bee re∣ceiued by the disposition of the law, or vse of the Councels, or set not in his right place, or if Mandats, Instruments, Protestations, or other writings, which doe, or may, offend the honour, authority, or power of the Councell bee pre∣sented, it shall bee vnderstood, that the present or future generall Councels shall not bee preiudiced, it being the Synods meaning to restore peace and concord vnto the Church, by any meanes, so that it bee lawfull and conue∣nient. Afterwards the Saxon Ambassadours were brought in; where beeing en∣tred, Badehornus one of the Saxon Am∣bassadours maketh an oration in the generall con∣gregation. and hauing made their obeisance to the assembly, Badehornus spake, v∣sing these titles, Most reuerend, and most worthy Fathers and Lords. The substance of his speach was this. That Maurice, Electour of Saxony wishing them the assistance of the holy Spirit, and a happy issue of the action, did let them know, that hee had long since resolued, that if euer a generall, free, and Christian Councel were celebrated, where the controuersies of Religion might be decided according to the holy Scripture, and all might speake se∣curely, and a Reformation bee made in the Head and the members, to send his Diuines thither. That now thinking they are assembled to this end, hee hath called his Theologues together, commanding them to choose some, to carry their Confession to that Synod; which was not yet done, in regard of a certaine constitution of the Councell of Constance, that faith or safe Con∣duct, giuen by the Emperour, Kings, or others, to heretiques, or persons suspected, ought not to bee obserued; and of the example of the Bohemians, who would not goe to Basill, without securitie from the Councell. Therefore that the Elector desired that such a safe Conduct should bee giuen to his Di∣uines, Counsellors, and their families; that not long since a certaine forme of safe Conduct was presented to him, much different from that of Basil, so that the Diuines thought it dangerous to come hither with it, because, by some Decrees made in Trent, and already printed, it did appeare, that they are ac∣counted heretiques and schismatiques, though they neuer haue beene either called or heard. Therefore the Prince demaundeth, (he sayd) that his men may be excused and a safe Conduct granted, in the forme of that of Basil, and that, vnderstanding that they would proceede to the conclusion of the con∣trouersed Articles, it seemed vnto him a thing preiudiciall, and contrary to all law of GOD and Man, in regard his men were lawfully hindered, for want of a safe Conduct. Who therefore prayeth them that all may be defer∣red vntill his Diuines be heard, who be but sixty Dutch miles distant. That afterwards it being related to him, that the Protestants may not be heard con∣cerning the controuersed Articles, defined the yeeres past, the greater part of which containe grieuous errours, the Prince desireth that they may be reex∣amined, and his Diuines suffered to speake, and that determined which shall bee conformable to the word of GOD, and beleeued by all Nations of the Christian world. For the things determined haue beene handled by very few of those who ought to assist in the generall Councell, as doeth appeare by the printed Catalogue; it beeing essentiall to a generall Councel, that all Nations should bee admitted, and freely heard. That the Prince also doeth remember, that many controuersed Articles doe concerne the Pope; and the Councels of Constance and Basil hauing determined, that the Pope, in points of faith, and which concerne himselfe, is subiect to the Councell, it is fit the same should be done in this place, as also, which was constituted in the third Session of the Councell of Basil, that all persons of the Councell should bee absolued from the oathes of Obligation to the Pope, as farre as concer∣neth the causes of the Councell. Yea, that the Prince is of opinion, that, without any further declaration, by vertue of the constitutions of those Councels, all are free from those bonds. Therefore prayeth the assembly, that they would first repeate, approoue, and ratifie the Article of the superi∣ority of the Councell aboue the Pope, especially in regard the Cleargie hath need of reformation, which hath beene hindered by the Popes. For the a∣buses cannot bee amended, if the persons of the Councell depend on the Popes nod, and bee bound, by vertue of oath, to preserue his honour, state, and power: and if it might bee obtained of the Pope to remit the oath wil∣lingly, it would be praise-worthy, and gaine great fauour, credit, and autho∣rity to the Councell, because the Decrees would bee made by free men, who might lawfully treat, and iudge according to the word of CHRIST. That in conclusion the Prince desireth that his propositions may be taken in good part, being moued to tender them, for the zeale of his owne saluation, chari∣tie towards his Countrey, and peace of all Christendome. Hauing this dis∣course in writing, he presented it, and it was receiued by the Secretary, and the Speaker said in the common name, that the Synod would consider of it, and make answere in due time. After these, those of Wittenberg were heard, who presented the Mandate of And so do the Ambassadors of the Duke of Witten∣berg. their Ambassage. Which being read, they briefly said; that they were to ten∣der the Confession of their doctrine, and that Diuines would come to de∣fend it, and handle the same things more at large, so that iudges might be in∣differently chosen by both sides, to take knowledge of the controuersies. For their doctrine being repugnant to that of the Pope and the Bishops his adhe∣rents, it was vniust that either the Plaintife, or the defendant should be iudge: desiring therefore, that what was done in the Councel the yeeres past, might not haue the strength of a law, but that the discussion of euery thing already handled should begin again, it being not iust, that when two contend in law, what is done by one, the other beeing lawfully absent, should bee of forces and the rather, because it may be cleerely demonstrated, that aswell in the last actions, as in those of the yeeres before, Decrees haue been published contra∣ry to the word of GOD. And they presented their doctrine, and discourse in writing: all which was receiued by the Secretary, but the doctrine was not read. The Speaker answered in the name of the Fathers, that answere should be giuen in time conuenient. When this was done, the Electours and Ambassadours departed, the The Fathers resolue not to alter the Safe Conduct. Prelates remaining with the Presidents, to giue order for the Session. First, the Decree was established, and then the Safe Conduct proposed, adding the causes why the Protestants were not content. And consulting, whether that which they desired should bee added to the forme, they did easily agree all in one opinion, that nothing should be added, to auoide inextricable dis∣putes, and ineuitable preiudices. The next day, the 25. of Ianuary, deputed for the Session, they went to the The Session. Church with the vsuall Ceremonies, but with more Souldiers, called by the Presidents, to make ostentation of the greatnes of the Councel, and with ma∣ny strangers, who came thither, thinking the Protestants should be receiued publikely, and with singular ceremonies. The B. of Catanea sang Masse, and Iohn Baptista Campeggio, B. of Maiorica, preached, and, the vsuall Ri es being ob∣serued, the Decree was read by the Masse Bishop; the substance whereof was: That the Synod, to performe the things already decreed hauing exactly han∣dled The Decree. whatsoeuer belongeth to the Sacrifice of the Masse, & Sacrament of Or∣der, to publish in the Session the Decrees concerning them, and the 4. Articles of the Sacrament of the Eucharist deferred, thinking that the Protestants, vnto whom they had giuen safe Conduct, would haue been arriued by this time, in regard they are not come, but haue made supplication that all should be defer∣red vntil another Session, giuing, hope that they wil come long before the cele∣bration thereof, hauing receiued a safe Conduct in a more ample forme, the Sy∣nod desirous of quiet & peace, beleeuing that they will come, not to contra∣dict the Catholike faith, but to vnderstād the truth, & that they wil be satisfied with the Decrees of the holy mother the Church, hath put off the next Sessi∣on, vntill the nineteenth of March, to giue light to, and publish the things a∣foresaid, granting them (to remoue all cause of greater delay) a safe Conduct, of the tenour as shall be recited, determining to handle, in the meane while, the Sacrament of Matrimony, and to prosecute the reformation, that they may publish the definitions of this, together with the definitions of the things aforesayd. The substance of the safe Conduct was; That the Synod, adhering The Safe Conduct. to the safe Conduct already giuen, and amplifying it, doeth make faith to all Priests, Princes, Nobles, and persons, of what condition soeuer, of the German nation, which shall, or are already come to the Councell, Safe Conduct to come, remaine, propose, and speake in the Synode, to handle and examine what they thinke fit, giue articles, and confirme them, answere the obiections of the Councell, and dispute with those whom it doth elect, declaring that the controuersies in this Councell shall bee handled according to the holy Scripture, Traditions of the Apostles, approoued Councels, consent of the Catholike Church, and authoritie of the holy Fathers, adding, that they shall not be punished vpon pretence of Religion, or offences committed, or which will bee committed, so that there neede not bee any cessation from Diuine Seruice, by reason of their presence, either in the iourney, or in the Citie of Trent, or in any place else, and shall returne when it shall seeme good vnto them, without let, with safety of their robe, honour, and persons, but with the knowledge of the deputies of the Synode, that prouision may bee made for their security: granting that, in this safe Conduct, all those clauses bee held to bee included, which are necessary for reall and full assurance: adding, that if any of them, either in comming, or in Trent, or in returning, shall commit any enormity, which shall nullifie the benefit of this publike faith, hee shall be punished by their own Iudges, so that the Synod may be satisfied: and, on the other side, if any other in comming hither, remaining here, or returning shall commit any thing which may violate this Safe Conduct, hee shall bee punished by the Synode, with the approbation of the Germans themselues, who shall be present in Trent, the forme of the assicuration remaining still in force, giuing leaue to their Ambassadours to goe out of Trent, to take the ayre, and returne, to send and receiue aduises, and messengers, as often as they shall thinke fit, yet accompanied with the Deputies, for their scecurity: which Safe Conduct shall remaine in force, so long as they be vnder the care of the Synode, in comming to Trent, in their abiding there, and twenty dayes after they shall aske leaue to depart, or after it shall bee granted to them, that they may bee rendred in a secure place, at their election: which things it promiseth faithfully, in the name of all faithfull Christians, of all the Princes, Ecclesiasticall and Secular, and likewise of all other persons Ecclesiasticall and Secular, of all conditions: faithfully promising withall, that the Synod shall not seeke occasion, publikely or secretly, that any thing bee attempted in preiudice of this Safe Conduct, nor to violate the same, will vse, or suffer a∣ny to vse any authority, power, right, statute, or priuiledge of Lawes, Canons, or Councels, especially that of Constance, and of Siena: which things in this be∣halfe, and for this time, it doth disallow. And if the Synod, or any person in it, or any that belong to them shall violate the forme of this Safe Conduct in any point or clause whatsoeuer, and punishment bee not inflicted to their approbation, let them thinke that the Synode hath incurred all the punish∣ments which the violaters of such Safe Conducts may incurre by the law of GOD, or man, or custome, without admitting excuse, or contradiction. These things being read, the Session was ended. It is certaine that the Pre∣sidents, doubtfull what might ensue, were willing to bee prepared, if the winde were prosperous, to decide the matter of the Sacraments, all in one Session: and therefore hauing in a readinesse all that belonged to the Com∣munion, the Masse, and Sacrament of Order, they were desirous to digest also and put in order all that concerned Matrimonie, that they might put all into one bundle, and to handle succinctly, in another Session, Purgatorie, Indulgences, Images, Reliques, and such small matters, (for so they called them) and then to end the Councell. And if any thing were opposed to this deseigne, they might shew that the fault was not in them. Many, who read these occurrences, will maruell that the Pope, from whom all consultations of farre lesse moment were wont to proceed, is not named. Which they will cease to doe, when they shall know, that hee was aduised from point to point, of all the accidents and deseignes, and that, when those of Wittenberg were arriued, and newes came that more were ex∣pected, hee answered his Legate, and Nuncij, that the Protestants should bee entertained with as much courtesie as was possible, knowing it was ne∣cessary in such cases, to suffer some indignity; willing them to vse discre∣tion, because patience winneth honour in the end. That they should ab∣staine from all publique Colloquie in matter of religion, either by writing, or by word of mouth. That they should endeauour, by perswasions and hopes, to gaine some of the Protestant Doctours, and should spare no cost. The Pope was aduised of euery thing that was done, yet nothing hapned that might make him alter his purpose. But when hee vnderstood that the Emperours Ambassadours had giuen the Protestants hope to moderate the Papall authoritie and said that they expected to see a gate laide open by their negotiation, that afterwards they might second it, and bring in those things which they had deseigned, and that the Fathers did hold it necessary to re∣straine it, Why the Pope is aliened from the Em∣perour. hauing other intelligence that all the Spaniards were of that minde, and that the Emperour did deseigne to aduance himselfe by debasing the Pa∣pacie, and did cherish the Protestants, to shew that it did not proceed from him, his mind was aliened from him, and turned to the French King. Hee therefore hearkened to the treaty of the Cardinall Tornon, in the Kings name, which being executed, the dissolution of the Councell would follow, with∣out his paines, or without shewing that he did desire it. The Session beeing made, the Protestants, though they perceiued that the Safe Conduct was not enlarged, as they desired, dissembling the know∣ledge of it, did demand it, and an authenticall copie was consigned by the Emperours Ambassadours, to the Ambassadours of each Prince. Who, ha∣uing read it, did complaine that promises were not kept, and required the Synods answere to their expositions, and to their requests, made concerning the manner of proceeding in the Councell. The Imperialists perswaded them to goe on with dexterity, saying, as before, that with time they should obtaine all, but seeking things distastfull, and before there was opportunity, euery thing would be more hard. That it was not necessary to expresse in the Safe Conduct, that they might exercise their religion in their houses, in regard it was vnderstood to be granted, because it was not forbid. That no∣thing should bee done to their disgrace was plainely expressed, in that good and reall vsage was promised, and, besides that, publique prohibitions will be made to all, which will be of greater force. For the reasons to be alleadged in Councell, the same was said in substance, that the Scripture shall bee the ground, but when there is controuersie of the meaning of it, it will bee ne∣cessary that the Councell should be iudge. For it is dumbe of it selfe, with∣out soule, and, as ciuill Lawes, hath neede of a Iudge to giue it life; which, in matter of religion is the Councell, as hath been obserued euer since the Apo∣stles time. The Protestants receiued the Safe Conduct, but with Protestation, that they did it onely to send it to their Princes. The Prote∣stants receiue the safe con∣duct with protestation. 33. Articles concerning Matrimony a e giuen to be discussed. The Presidents, to examine the Sacrament of Matrimony, as was decreed, making a generall Congregation, and choosing Deputies, gaue foorth 33. Articles, in that matter, to be discussed by the Diuines. They ordained also, that the Deputies should make the Canons, as the particulars were exami∣ned. Some Congregations were held, and sixe Canons framed. Whereupon the Protestants complained to the Emperours Ambassadours, that the hope that with time they should obtaine a reuiew of the things decided, was quite taken away, because they proceeded to new decisions, while their Diuines were expected. The Emperours Ambassadours could not obtaine of the Whereof the Protestant Ambassadors do complaine Presidents to stop their proceeding, which they hastened with all diligence, that either the Protestants might not come to Trent, or, if they came, might finde all decided. For the reexamination, the Pope, the Court, and all the The Papaline doe desire to proceed the faster. Prelates, were resolued to denie it constantly. And they thought that they might with better ground denie the reuision of many things, then of a few. But the Emperour, whom it did much concerne, to bring the Protestants to Trent, but nothing at all to haue the matters reexamined, aduised by his Am∣bassadours, of what the Protestants complained, and how they were hinde∣red But are stop∣ped by the Emperour. to goe to the Councell, sent a man to Trent, with commission to goe to Rome also to negotiate, that all action might be deferred for some few dayes, shewing that that haste did precipitate the businesse, gaue suspicion to the Protestants, and made them more vnwilling to goe to the Councell. He gaue order also, that his men should bee commanded not to proceede, and should Protest against the Papalins, if perswasions would not serue. This resoluti∣on of the Emperour, signified in Trent, caused a generall Congregation to be called, where it was resolued, to desist from all Conciliary act, during plea∣sure of the Synode. But the Pope was displeased with that which was done, and disdaining Wherewith the Pope is displeased. at the Emperour for other causes also, wrote to Trent, that suspending the actions as few dayes as was possible, they should, for reputation of the As also with the attempt of Ferdinand, a∣gainst the Bi∣shop of Vera∣dine. Councell, resume them without respect. Another cause, which, besides this, had prouoked the Pope and Cardinals, was, that Ferdinand desiring to possesse Transiluania, which was assaulted by the Turkes on the other side; vpon pre∣tence to keepe it for the young sonne of Iohn Ʋaiuode, George Martinaccio, Bishop of Veradino, a man of excellent wisedome, and great reputation in that Countrey, was willing to keepe it in liberty, and, to auoyd greater danger, not being able to contest with the Turkes and the house of Austria at once, made choyce to ioyne himselfe with these, by whom counterpoysing the Turkes, he held all in an euen balance. Those of Austria knowing that by gaining of this Prelat, they should wholly obtaine their purpose, Ferdinand, besides other things which hee did to oblige him more vnto them, promised him a pension of eighty thousand Crownes, and the Emperour obtayned of the Pope with great instance, to create him Cardinall, and (which was seldome vsed) to send the Cap, and to giue him leaue to weare the scarlet habit, which was not lawfull, because hee was a Monke of Saint Basil: all which was done in the middest of October. But this vaine shew of honour beeing not esteemed by the Bishop, was not willing to preferre the inter∣ests of the house of Austria, before his Countrey, he was traiterously, and cruelly slaine, by Ferdinands ministers, the eighteenth of December, vpon pretence that he held intelligence with the Turkes. This accident did excee∣dingly mooue the Cardinals, who thought themselues most sacred and in∣uiolable. They considered of what importance the example was, that a Cardinall should bee slaine vpon fained calumnies, or for suspicion. And they incited the Pope, who was forward of himselfe, shewing him that the Cardinall was possessour of a great treasure, to the value of a million, which belonged to the Chamber, being the goods of a Cardinall, dead without a Will. For all these respects the Pope deputed Cardinals to take knowledge of the crime, and Ferdinand, and all his Ministers of Transiluania, were thought to haue incurred the censures. Commissioners were sent to Vienna to make Ferdinand & his Ministers were thought to haue incur∣red the cen∣sures. inquisition. And, not to returne to speake of this againe, I will say heere, by way of anticipation, that the heat being abated, as the custome is, because that which was done could not be vndone, not to raise any greater stirres, the proceeding was with much conniuencie; and though the processe was made as Ferdinand would, yet nothing was prooued against the dead man, and the purpose to draw the inheritance to the Chamber died, because little was found, in comparison of that which was thought, Martinuccio, a man bountifull, ha∣uing spent all in the publike seruice, and that which was found being diuided amongst the Souldiers. The Pope declared Ferdinand, and all those who Ferdinand is absolued, first, conditionally, and then ab∣solutely. were not present at his death, to be absolued, with this addition, if the things deduced in the Processe were true. Whereof the Emperours ministers com∣playning, as if the integrity of Ferdinand were questioned, the Pope made the sentence absolute, and those onely, who were Authours of the murder, went to Rome to bee absolued; but so, as if they had done a good worke. And in Hungarie and Rome it was held, that it was done by command from him who had interest, according to the vsuall saying, that of euery secret coun∣sell hee is Authour, who receiueth profit by it. Yet this did Ferdinand no good, who shortly after for this and other causes, was chased out of Transilua∣nia. But because to speake thereof, belongeth not to my purpose, I returne to the matter which I left. The seuenth day of Februarie, the next Sunday before Septuagesima, the Gospel of the Cockle being read, Ambrose Cigogna, or Storke, (for so his Dutch name Pelargo is expounded) a Dominican Diuine of the Arch-bishop of Triers, preached; who, applying the name of Cockle to the heretiques, said it was fit to tolerate them, when, without danger of greater mischiefe, they could not be nooted our. This was told to the Protestants, as if hee had sayd, that it was lawfull not to obserue the faith giuen: which raised a great tumult. Hee defended himselfe that hee spake of heretiques in gene∣rall, and sayd no more then what the Gospel it selfe doeth propose: but if he had sayd that it was fit to extirpate them with fire, bonds, and halters, or any other way, hee should haue done that which the Councell in the second Session did command: that he had spoken modestly, nor could a Sermon bee made vpon that Gospel without saying as much. The Cardinall of Trent, and the Emperours Ambassadours did pacifie the commotion, but with diffi∣cultie, though it was manifest that the Friar spake not of keeping faith, not of the Protestants particularly, but of heretiques in generall. The Elector made this his pretence to depart, which hee was resolued to doe before, by reason of some secret intelligence, which he held with the French King, as also to recouer his health; and so he departed in the midst of February, lea∣uing The Elector of Triers de∣parteth from Trent. an opinion, that it was with the good liking of the Emperour, and with promise to returne quickly. Yet he passed not by Ispruc, nor spake with the Emperour. The first day of Lent the Stations were, by affixion, published in Trent, in the same manner as in Rome, by the Popes graunt, to him that visited the Churches; which gaue entertainement to the Fathers and Diuines, who, in regard of the intermission of the Congregations, wanted businesse. And be∣fore, beeing almost idle, they entertained themselues in priuate meetings, dis∣coursing variously, sometimes, of dissoluing, sometimes of continuing the Councell, according to the newes which was brought. In the beginning of March, letters came from the Electour of Saxonie, to his Ambassadours, gi∣uing them commission to prosecute their instances in the Councell, and ad∣uising that hee was ready to goe to the Emperour in person; which put all men out of feare. But not long after, a generall rumor was spread, that the French King was confederate with the Protestant Princes, to make warre against the Emperour. The Electours of Mentz, and Collen departed The Electors of Collen and Mentz depart from Trent. the eleuenth of March, and passing by Ispruc, had very secret conference with Caesar; and the Ambassadours of Maurice, fearing some danger, went secretly out of Trent, and returned home by diuers wayes. Not∣withstanding all this, foure Diuines of Wittenberg, and two of Argenti∣na came to Trent afterwards, who, with the Ambassadours of that Duke The Diuines of Wittenberg & Argentina come to the Synode. did immediately desire the Emperours Ambassadours, that the Synode might answere the proposition alreadie made, and begin the conference. The Legate answered, that the nineteenth of March, a day appointed for the Session, approaching, it was necessary to giue order for it, and to han∣dle many other things, of which one should bee, to finde a forme how to treate. Therefore that day a Congregation was made in the Legats house, and a The Ambassa∣dor of Portu∣gal is receiued in congrega∣tion. resolution taken to prolong the Session vntill the first of May. In this Congregation the Ambassador of Portugal was receiued, who presented his Mandat, and made a speach, and was answered in the vsuall forme, with praise and thankes to the King, and words of Complement to the Ambassadour. But those of Wittenberg, seeing no answere was made to their propositions, and that the Legate concealed the Confession, presented by them, which ma∣ny desired to haue, and could not, hauing brought many printed copies, di∣stributed them vnto diuers; which raised much noise, and some said the de∣serued The Ambas∣sadours of Wittenberg spread copies of their Con∣fession. serued punishment. For he, vnto whome Safe Conduct is granted, is bound to giue none offence vnto him that graunteth it. And this was esteemed a publique offence. Yet in the end all was quieted. The Protestants, together with the Emperours Ambassadours, desired often, that the action should begin, which not withstanding was deferred, sometimes vnder pretence, that the Legate was not well in health, sometimes vnder diuers others. The Emperours Ambassadours vsed all meanes to make them begin, and perswaded the Protestants not to desire an answere to the demaunds presented by them, and afterwards not to desire that the doctrine exhibited by them should bee examined. But as one difficulty was remooued by the Protestants, so another was still raised by the Presidents, sometimes about the manner of treating, sometimes about the matter with which to begin. But in the end, the Protestants, perswaded by Pictauius, were content to begin where the others would. Yet, for all this, nothing was done. For the Legate, though very sicke of great passions of minde, was thought to faine, that hee might finde a pretence not to begin. The Nuncij were irresolute, and the Bishops did not agree among themselues. For the adherents of Caesar, Spaniards and others, mooued by the Emperours Ambas∣sadours, desired to proceede: but the Papalins, suspecting that the end of the Imperialists was to come to the reformation of the Court of Rome, embraced all occasions of delay. And because the Dutch Bishops were already depar∣ted, by reason of the rumours of warre, they expected the like occasion also, especially because the aduices of the Armes of the French King, and confede∣rates of Germanie against the Emperour, did continue, Protests, and Manifests beeing published, which alleadged, for a cause, the defence of Religion, and libertie of Germany. The first of April, the Elector of Saxonie besieged Aus∣burg, which did render it selfe the third day, and the sixt newes there of came The Fathers of the Coun∣cell, and the Protestants depart from Trent, by rea∣son of the rumors of warre. to Trent, and that all Tirol did arme, and meant to goe to Ispruc, there beeing an opinion, that the armie of the confederates did purpose to possesse them∣selues of the passages of the Alpes, to hinder strangers from comming into Germany. Therefore in many of the Italian Bishops embarqued, and went downe the Riuer Adice, to goe to Ʋerona, and the Protestants determined to depart. There remaining but few Prelates, and the Legate often doting, by rea∣son The Legate doteth, and the Nuncij send to Rome to knowe what to doe. of his great infirmitie, nor being able constantly to resolue, the Nuncij fearing they should be alone in Trent if they expected the first of May, accor∣ding to the order, wrote to Rome, desiring to knowe what they should do in these great straits. The Pope, who already had concluded with France, nor esteemed any more what the Emperour could doe, hauing ouer come the dif∣ficulties by which he was compassed, assembled the Cardinals, and propo∣sed to them the aduice of the Nuncy, the maior part of whom did concurre, without difficulty, that the Councell should bee suspended. The Bull was made, and sent to Trent, and letters addressed to the Nuncij, giuing them au∣thority for the suspension. Therefore, when they saw vrgent necessitie, they were commanded to yeeld vnto it, not putting the dignity of the Councell in danger, which should be restored, at another, more peaceable time, nor dissoluing it absolutely, that they might keepe it in their power, and vse it vpon occasions, but suspending it, for some yeeres. The Nuncij concealed From whence they receiue order to sus∣pend the Councel. this answere, and consulted with the Emperours Ambassadors, and the prin∣cipal prelates, who desired that order should be expected from Caesar, and ex∣tenuated the feare as much as they could. Notwithstanding the Prelates, though the maior part were Spaniards, fearing their owne persons, and ha∣ting the Protestants, and not hoping, that in so great straits, the Emperour could haue time to thinke of the Councell, gaue consent to a suspension. Therefore the Nuncij did intimate the publique Session for the 28. of April, so great was their feare that they could not expect two dayes, the time appoin∣ted for it. Those few that remained did assemble; and, after the Ecclesiasticall cere∣monies were ended, (for the pompes were omitted for that time) the Nun∣cio of Siponto caused the Decree so bee read; by the Secretary. The substance Which is exe∣cuted in Sessi∣on the 2. of April. whereof was: That the Synode (the two Nuncij presiding in their owne name, and in the name of Cardinall Crescentius the Legate, grieuously sicke) is assured, that all Christians doe knowe, that the Councell of Trent was first The Bull of the suspension for two yeres. assembled by Paulus, and after restored by Iulius, at the request of Charles the Emperour, to restore Religion, especially in Germanie, and to correct manners, and that many Fathers of diuers Countreys did meete without spa∣ring any paines, or fearing any dangers, and that the proceeding was pro∣sperous, with hope that the innouators of Germanie would come to the Councell, and yeeld to the reasons of the Church: but that, by the subtilty of the enemie, tumults are suddenly raised, which haue interrupted the course, taken away all hope of proceeding, and giuen cause of feare, that the Synode would rather irritate the mindes of many, then pacifie them. Therefore per∣ceiuing that euery place, Germanie especially, is on fire with discords, and that the Dutch Bishops, especially the Electors, were departed to make prouision for their Churches, it hath determined not to contend with necessitie, but to be silent vntill better times. And therefore they doe suspend the Progresse for two yeeres, with condition, that if all be quiet before that time bee ended, the Councell shall bee vnderstood to bee restored; but if the impediments shall not cease at the end of two yeeres, it shall bee vnderstood that the sus∣pension is taken away so soone as the impediments are remooued, without a new Conuocation of the Councell, his Holinesse, and the holy Apostolique Sea, hauing giuen consent and authoritie to this Decree. And, in the meane time, the Synode doth exhort all Christian Princes and Prelates, as farre as concerneth euery one, to cause all the Decrees of the Councell, made vntill then, to be obserued in their Dominions, and Churches. This Decree bee∣ing read, was approued by the Italians. The Spaniards, who were twelue, sayd, that the dangers were not so great as they were made. That fiue yeeres Is opposed by the Spanish Prelates. since Chiusa was taken by the Protestants, when no commander, but Castel∣alto, was in Tiral to defend it, and yet the Councell did not disso . Now the Emperour was in , by whose vertue those stirres would quickly ceast; that the should haue leaue to depart, as then they had, and those remaine that would; vntill the Emperour were aduised; beeing but three dayes might returness speedy answere. But the o∣thers opposing popularly▪ the Spaniards protested against so absolute sus∣pension▪ Who protest against the suspension. notwithstanding▪ the Nuncio of Siponto, giuing his benediction to the Fathers gaue them leaue to begin their iourney. The Nuncij and Ita∣lian Prelates beeing departed, in the end, the Spaniard departed also, and so did the Emperours Ambassadours, and the Cardinall Crescentius was carried The Legate dieth in Ve∣rona. to Verona, where hee died. For the last part of the Decree, the Nuncij were much blamed in Rome, The Nuncij are blamed for the last part of the Decree. that the Synode had determined the obseruation of the Constitutio with∣out asking first the confirmation of the Apostolique Sea, alledging that this, hauing been exquisitely obserued by all former Councels, was a great vsur∣pation and offence against the Papall authoritie. Some also made a scruple that all that assisted in that Session, had incurred the censure of the Canon, Omnes, dist. 22. hauing done a preiudice to a priuiledge of the Popes authori∣ty pretending that the Decrees of the Councell, were of force before the confirmation. They sayd for themselues, that they had not commanded, but perswaded the obseruation. But the answere did not satisfie, because to And their de∣fence is not esteemed good. obserue as a law, doth presuppose an obligation, and in the Decree, the ex∣hortation is referred onely to Princes and Prelates, who are exhorted to cause the Decrees to bee obserued. And for the obseruers, a former obligation is presupposed, and for matter of faith, they said the answere could haue no place. They might haue excused themselues, and sayd, that euerything was approoued by the Pope, before it was published in the Sessions. Neither would this haue satisfied, because, thought it was true, yet it did not appeare. This gaue occasion to wonder, that there should bee such a contention, be∣tweene the Synode and the Protestants, concerning the things decreed, which the Protestants would haue reexamined, and the Synode would haue to bee held as concluded. For if they were not perfectly established, they might bee reexamined. And they discoursed, that the Pope, who was to con∣firme them; was to doe it, either with taking knowledge of the cause, or without; if without, the confirmation was a vanitie, and according to the prouerbe, that none should take a potion, and another bee purged; if with it, then the Pope ought to examine them, and so might euery one, and referre himselfe to his Holinesse. In summe, if the force of the Decrees of the Coun∣cell dependeth on the Popes Confirmation, before that, they are in suspence, and may be questioned, and discussed better, which was alwayes denied to the Protestants. Some did conclude, that the Decree was a declaration that the confirmation was not needfull. The Protestants thought not of these reasons, which the stronger they are in the Doctrine of the Sea of Rome, so much the more the vse of them would endammage their pretensions. But because there was more speech of the validitie of this Decree in the yeere 156 when the Councel ended, that which remaineth shall be deferred vntill then. Though the Protestants had the better in mannaging the warre, yet Man∣rice treated friendly with Ferdinand, yea, went to him into his owne Territe∣ries, desiring nothing of him but the freedome of the Landgraue, his father in law, the liberty of Germanie, and peace of Religion. The Protestants Annos did still proceede; and the Emperour, though hee were not ready to make resistance, yet thinking he had Germany vnder his yoke; hee would not leaue any part of the domination which hee had assumed: and Ferdinand, af∣ter hee had treated with Maurice, went to Ispruc, to perswade him. But the The Emperor flieth from Isprut. enemies Armie approaching that Citie, the simperour was forced to flie by night, with all his Court, and after he had wandered in the Mountaines of Trent, he came to Ʋdlaco a City of Carinthia, at the confines of the Venetians; where he was much afraid, because the Senate, to secure the frontiers, sent Souldiers to that place, though the Venetian Ambassadour did assure him that they were at his seruice, if there were occasion to employ them. Before he departed from Ispruc, he set Iohn Fredericke, Duke of Saxony, at libertie, to And setteth Fredericke, Duke of Sax∣ony at liberty. take the glory of his deliuery from Maurice: which pleased that Prince ve∣ry much, whom it concerned more to bee fauoured by an enemie his Supe∣riour, then by an enemie his equall, and emulous. A few houres after the departure from Ispruc, Maurice arriued there the same night; where not touching any thing that belonged to Ferdinand, or the Maurice ta∣keth Isprue. Citizens, he made himselfe Lord of the Emperours baggage, and of the bag∣gage of his Court. The Protestants seeing their aduantage by this flight, published another Manifest, signifying in substance; that hauing taken armes The Prote∣stants set forth a Ma∣nifest. for Religion, and the liberty of Germany, as the enemies of the trueth had no other ayme, but that the holy Doctors being first oppressed, the Popish er∣rours, might be restored, and the youth brought vp in them, hauing impriso∣ned some, and made others sweare to depart, and not returne againe, which oath doth not binde, because it is wicked, they did recall them all, and com∣maund them to resume their office of teaching, according to the Augustan Confession, and, to remooue all calumnies, did absolue them from the oath taken. The treatie of peace still continuing, it was at last concluded in A Peace is concluded. Passau, in the beginning of August, concerning all differences; and, for Religion, it was thus ordered: that, within sixe moneths, a Diet should bee called, to consult how the discords in Religion might most easily, and com∣modiously be composed, either by a generall or Nationall Councell, or by a Colloquie, or vniuersall Diet of the Empire. That in that Diet, an equall number of godly, humble and wise men of either Religion should bee taken, charging them to consider of and propose the most conuenient meanes: and, that in the meane space, neither the Emperour, nor any other may force any in matter of Religion, against his conscience, or will, neither De facto, nor by forme of reason, nor doe any thing in contempt, or to grieue any for that cause, but to let euery man liue in quiet, and in peace: and likewise that the Princes of the Augustan Confession may not molest the Ecclesiastiques or seculars of the old Religion, but let them enioy their goods, Lordships, Su∣periorities, iurisdictions, and ceremonies; that in the Chamber iustice bee ad∣ministred to euery one, without regard of what Religion he is, not excluding the Confessionists from the places they are to haue amongst the assessors, and that it be free for the assessors, and for the litigants to sweare by God and the Saints, or by God and the Gospel. And though there be no meanes of com∣position in Religion, yet this peace shall remaine in force for euer. And so the Interim was abrogated, which had been really executed but in few places. The Landgraue of Hassia was deliuered by vertue of this agreement, so that all difficulties with the Emperour did cease; yet the warre continued a whole The Interim is abrogated, The Land∣graue is set at liberty, and the Protestant Preachers are recalled. The Diet is deserted. yeare, in many parts, betweene diuers Princes and Cities of the Empire. But the Cities recalled their Preachers, and Doctors of the Augustan Confession, and restored the Churches, Schooles, and exercise of Religion, and though, in regard of the banishments and persecutions against the Doctours and Preachers, there remained but few of them, and those concealed vnder the protection of the Princes, yet, as if they had risen againe, there wanted not to furnish all places. The warre hindred the assem∣bling of the Diet disseigned, and deferred it from one yeere to another, vntill February 1555. whereof wee will speake in the fit place. THE FIFT BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. T He Pope, now freed from many cares, by the dissolution of the Councell, thought fit to preuent all occasions of relapse, and propo∣sed in Consistory the necessity to reforme the The Pope ma∣keth a great shew that hee will reforme the Church. Church. He said he had reduced the Councel to Trent for this end, which hauing not succee∣ded according to his desire, in regard of diuers accidents of warre, first in Italy, then in Ger∣many, it was meete to doe that in Rome, which in Trent could not be done. Hee appointed therefore a great congregation of Cardinals and Prelates, to consider of the businesse. Hee sayd, hee elected many, that resolutions might bee more mature, and haue greater reputation; though his ende was thought to bee, that, by reason of the multitude, more impediments might arise, and so all might come to nothing. And the euent was iudge. For the Reformation was handled in the beginning with great heate; after∣wards it went on, for the space of many moneths, very coldly; and, at the last, was buried in silence. And the suspension of the Councell, in The suspensi∣on of y e coun∣cel, made for two yeeres la∣steth ten. stead of two yeeres, did continue tenne; verifying the maxime of the Phi∣losophers, that the causes ceasing, the effects doe cease also. The causes of the Councell were first the great instances of Germanie, and the hope, conceiued by the world, that it would cure all the diseases of Christen∣dome. But the effects that were seene vnder Paul the third did extinguish The causes of the two Con∣uocations of the Councel. the hope, and shew to Germanie that it was impossible to haue such a Councell as they desired. Of the second reduction of the Synode there was another cause; which was the great desire of Charles the Emperour to put Germanie vnder his yoke, by meanes of Religion, and to make the Empire hereditarie, by causing his sonne to succeede him, and so to e∣rect a Monarchie, greater then any since the Roman, euen then that of Charles the great. For this, the victories hee had obtained was not sufficient, 1553▪ I 3. CHARLES▪ EDWARD▪ HENRY neither did hee thinke hee could supply what was wanting by new forces onely: but supecting the people vnto him by Religion, and the Princes by treaties, hee had conceiued a vast hope to immortallize his name. This was the cause why hee was so earnest with Iul for the second Conuoca∣tion of the Councell, and of his effectuall pers asions (not to call them vi∣olent) Charles vseth meanes to make the Em∣pire heredi∣tary▪ to the three Electors to goe thither, and to the Protestents, with whom hee had power, to send their Druines. But while the Councell was celebra∣ted, Charles, hauing put all Christian Princes in iealousie, found the first en∣counters in his owne house. For Ferdinand, though hee seemed formerly to haue consented to make the Empire common to them both (as it was to Marcus and Lucius, with equall authority, an example followed by Dioclesian, and many others afterwards) and then to labour that Philip should bee cho∣sen King of the Romanes to succeed them, (wherein Charles had employed But cannot effect it. his sister, the Queene of Hungary, to perswade him to it, for the aduancement of their house) yet, better aduised by his sonne Maximilian, hee began to change his opinion. To effect this businesse, already set on foote, Philip was called by his father, that hee might bee knowen to the Electors, in the Diet of Ausburg in the yere 1551. which made Ferdinand retire himselfe, & the foresaid Queene to goe thither, to make peace betweene the brothers. But Maximi∣lian, fearing that his father out of his good nature, would yeeld, leauing the gouernment of the Kingdomes of Spaine, which the Emperour had giuen him, in the hands of his wife, the Emperours daughter, returned suddenly into Germanie by whose perswasions Ferdinand remained constant in his pur∣pose, and Charles had nothing from the Electors but good words. By this opposition the Emperours edge was abated, who sent his sonne backe into Spaine, without hope euer to obtaine the consent of Maximilian. And after∣wards being compelled, by the foresaid warre, to make an agreement, despai∣ring of his sonnes succession, he layd aside all thought of restoring the anci∣ent Religion in Germany, and, by consequence, all care of the Councel, though he continued many yeeres after in the Empire. And the Court did care for it as little, because none did desire it. But diuers accidents then happened, Which cau∣seth him to lay aside all care of Religi∣on and of the Councel. which though they seemed to make the suspension perpetuall, yet, in the se∣cret prouidence of God, did minister causes for the third Conuocation, which the continuation of the story requireth should not bee passed ouer in silence, in regard the knowledge of the causes doeth helpe much to penetrate the ef∣fects, which happened after that the Councell was resumed. The Pope, seeing that the people of his obedience did not so much esteem him, by reason of the alienation of Germany, did imitate Eugenius the fourth, 1553. who maintained the reputation which the Councell of Basill tooke from How y e Pope maintained his reputation him, by a shew of Grecians, and a shadow of Armenians; and the late exam∣ple of his predecessour Paulus 3. who, when the contentions were ho e, be∣tweene him and the Emperour, for the translation of the Councell to Bolo∣nia, for which the people also did distaste him, receiued, with many ceremo∣nies, on Steuen, by the name of Patriarke of Armenia the greater, with one Archbishop, and 2. Bishops, who came to knowledge him for the Vicar of CHRIST, and generall commander of the Church, and to render him obe∣dience. According to these examples, Iulius did receiue with much pub∣like solemnitie one Simon Sul akam, elect Patriarke of all the people which are betweene Euphrates and India sent from those Churches to be confirmed by the Pope, successour of Peter, and Vicar of CHRIST. Hee ordained him Bishop, and gaue him the Patriarchall Robe with his owne hands, in the Consistory; and sent him backe to his home, that the Churches might not suffer in his absence, accompanied with some religious men, who vnder∣stood the Syriaque tongue. All the discourse was, not onely in Rome, but throughout all Italie, of the immense number of the Christians in those parts; and how much the lists of the Apostolique Sea were enlarged. And particularly they spake of the great number of Churches in the Citie Muzal, which, they sayd, was the old Assur, vpon the riuer Tigris, from which Ni∣niue, renowmed for the preaching of Ionas, was not farre distant, situated be∣yond the riuer. Vnder this iurisdiction they put Babylon, Tauris, and Arbela, famous for the battaile betweene Darius and Alexander, with many Coun∣treys of Assyria and Persia. They found also the ancient Cities named in the Scripture, and Ecbatan, which the stories doe call Seleucia and Nisibi. They sayd that this man, elected by all the Bishops, was sent to the Pope for con∣firmation, accompanied with seuenty persons, as farre as Ierusalem, and from thence by three, of whom one died, and another remained sicke in the iour∣ney, and the third, called Calefi, came with him to Rome. All these things were printed, and very curiously read. The Pope receiued another also, na∣med Marderius, a Iacobite of Assyria, sent by the Patriarch of Antioch, to ac∣knowledge the Apostolique Sea, and giue it obedience, and make profession of the Romane faith. But the world beeing satiated with the former, did not care for this second. After these shadowes of obedience, which the Sea of Rome gained, there succeeded one reall, and of great importance, which did abundantly recom∣pence The King of, England dieth whatsoeuer was lost in Germanie. The sixt of Iuly 1553, Edward King of England died, of the age of sixteene yeeres. Fifteene dayes before, he made a Will, with approbation of his Councell, wherein hauing declared that it did belong to him to name the Successour, according to the lawes of the King∣dome, he excluded his sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, because their legitimation was doubted of, and all the posterity of Margaret, his fathers elder sister, as strangers, not borne in the kingdome, and named her Queene who followed in order, that is, Iane of Suffolke, grand-childe to Mary, formerly Q. of France, and younger sister to his father Henry 8. by her daughter, notwithstanding that the sayd Henry had, in his last Will, substituted Mary and Elizabeth, which substitution hee sayd was pupillary, and did not binde him now hee was of age. Iane was proclaimed Queene in London, and Mary, retiring her selfe in∣to Iane is pro∣claimed Queene. Norfolke, that shee might commodiously passe into France, if there were occasion, named her selfe Queene also, and was finally accepted by all the kingdome, alleadging in her fauour the Testament of Henry, and that of a Matrimony contracted bona fide, though there bee a nullity in it, the issue is legitimate. Iane and her adherents were imprisoned, and Mary entred into But Mary ob∣taineth the Crowne. London, and was receiued with a generall applause, and proclaimed Queene of England and France, and had the title of Head of the Church. Shee pre∣sently set the prisoners at liberty, which her father had put into the Tower, 1553 IVLIVS 3. CHARLES 5. Q. MARY. HENRY 2. A sedition in London about Religion. partly for Religion, and partly for other causes. A little after her entry there arose a sedition in London, by occasion of one who tooke the boldnesse to preach Popery, and of another who did celebrate the Masse. To appease this trouble, which was very considerable, the Queene caused an Edict to be pu∣blished, that she would liue in the Religion of her Ancestors, and therefore would not permit that any thing should bee preached to the people, but that which formerly had been. Afterwards, the eleuenth of October shee was crowned with the vsuall ceremonies. The Pope aduertized hereof, consi∣dering that shee was brought vp in the Catholique Religion, interrested in the respects of her mother, and cousin by blood vnto the Emperour, ho∣ped he might make some entrie into the Kingdome, and therefore did make Cardinall Poole his Legate, thinking, because hee was of the blood royall, and The Pope maketh Car∣dinall Poole his Legat for England. of an exemplary life, he was the onely instrument to reduce that Kingdome to the Church of Rome. The Cardinall, who had been banished by pub∣lique Decree, and depriued of his honour, thought it not fit to begin the enterprise, before he fully vnderstood the state of things, beeing assured that the maior part was still deuoted to the memory of Henry. Hee therefore sent into England secretly, Giouanni Francesco Comendone, to enforme him, and wrote a Letter to the Queene: in which, commending her perseuerance in Religion in the times of her troubles, hee exhorted her to continue in the times of her happinesse, recommended vnto her the saluation of the soules of those people, and the restitution of the true worship of GOD. Comendone hauing obserued euery particular, and found meanes to speake with the Queene though compassed and garded on euery side, perceiued shee had ne∣uer beene auerse from the Romane faith, and had promise from her that shee would labour to restore it into the whole Kingdome, which the Cardinall vnderstanding, put himselfe into the voyage. In England, after the Coronation, a Parliament was held, in which the A Parliament is held, & the diuorce of Henry the 8. declared to be vnlawfull. diuorce of the Queenes mother, Katherine of Aragon, was declared to be vn∣lawfull, the marriage good, and the issue legitimate; which was obliquely to restore the Popes supremacie, in regard it could not be good, without the validitie of the dispensation of Iulius the second, and by consequence, not without the supremacie of the Sea of Rome. It was ordained also, that all the constitutions in matter of religion made by Edward should be abrogated, and Pope y is esta∣blished. that religion obserued which was in vse at the death of Henry. In this Parlia∣ment, they treated of marrying the Queene, though shee were aboue fourty yeeres of age: and three were named: Poole, who had not taken holy Orders, And the mar∣riage of the Queene is treated on. though he was a Cardinall; and Courtney, both of the blood Royall, and first Cousins of Henry the eight, in an equall degree, this of the white Rose, grand child of Edward the fourth, by his daughter, and that of the red Rose, Nephew to Henry the seuenth by his sister; both acceptable to the Nobilitie of England; Poole for wisedome, and sanctifie of life, and Courtney for his lo∣uing behauiour, and carriage. But the Queene preferred Philip Prince of Spaine before these, aswell for the treaties made by her cousin Charles the Em∣perour, (her affection also inclining much more to the mothers side then to the fathers) as because shee thought shee might better secure her owne and the Kingdomes peace with that marriage. The Emperour, who did much 1554 IVLIVS 3. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. Vntil the cō∣clusion wher∣of the Empe∣rour hindreth Poole in going into England. desire to effect it, fearing that Poole might disturbe it, by his presence in England, knowing hee was departed Legate, made meanes by Cardinall Dandinus, the Popes Minister with himselfe, that hee should not part out of Italie so soone, saying, that as yet an Apostolique Legate could not goe into England with honour. But the Letter of Dandinus not ta∣king effect, and Poole beeing in his iourney as farre as the Palatinate, hee sent Diego Mendoza to stop him by authoritie. It seemed strange to the Cardinall, and hee complayned that the Popes Legation was hindered with the damage of Christianitie, and of the Kingdome of England, and ioy of Germanie. Therefore the Emperour, not to giue so much matter of talke, made him goe to Bruxels, and entertayned him in Brabant, vntill the marriage was ended, and all things accommodated as hee would; and, for colour, imployed him to treate a peace betweene himselfe and the French King. In the beginning of the yeere 1554. the Emperour sent Ambassadours 1554. into England to make the conclusion: and the Queene proceeding to fauour the olde Religion, did the fourth of March publish other Lawes, restoring the Latine tongue into the Churches, forbidding married men to exercise holy Functions, and giuing order to the Bishops not to make them sweare, who were to bee receiued into the Clergie, as Henrie had ap∣pointed, that the King was supreme Head of the Church of England, and that the Pope had no superioritie there, but was Bishop onely of the Citie of Rome. Shee ordayned also that the forme of Prayer, instituted by Hen∣rie, where, amongst other things, God is prayed to deliuer that Kingdome from sedition, conspiracie, and tyrannie of the Pope, should be razed out of all the Bookes of Rites, and forbid to bee printed. In April another Par∣liament was held, in which consent was giuen to the contract of marriage: where the Queene proposed the restitution of the Popes supremacie; which shee could not obtaine, because the Nobilitie did resist, who con∣sidered not that they did vainely denie this demaund, which was vertually contayned in their assent to the marriage. Philip, Prince of Spaine, ar∣riued The celebra∣tion of the marriage. in England the eighteenth of Iuly, and on Saint Iames day the Nuptials were celebrated, and hee receiued the title of the King of Naples, and did consummate the Matrimonie. In Nouember there was a new Parliament, in which Cardinall Poole was restored to his Honour and Coun∣trey, and two were sent to inuite and accompany him; with whom hee passed into the Island, and arriued at London the three and twentieth of Cardinall Poole com∣meth to Lon∣don, with the crosse carried before him. And maketh an Oration in the Parli∣ment. Nouember, with a siluer Crosse carryed before him. At his first entrie into the Parliament, hee made a discourse in English before the King, Queene, and Orders of the Kingdome. Hee thanked them very much that hee was restored to his Countrey, saying, that in exchange, he was come to restore them to the Countrey and Court of Heauen▪ of which they were depriued, by departing from the Church. Hee exh them to acknowledge the errour, and receiue the benefit which God, by his Ʋicar, had sent them. The discourse was very long and artificiall▪ and the conclusion was, that hee had the Keyes to bring them into the Church, which they had shutte, by making Lawes against the Apostolique Sea: which when they did reuoke, hee would open the doores vnto them. The Cardinals person was well accepted, and an apparant assent was giuen to his Proposition, though the Maior part did secretly abhorre the qualitie of a Popes Minister, and were grieued to come vnder, the yoke againe. But they had suffered themselues to bee carried so farre, that they knew not how to returne. The next day the re-vnion with the Church of Rome was decreed in The manner of the re-vni∣on with the Church of Rome. Parliament; and the manner was thus set downe. That a Supplication should bee made in the Parliaments name, wherein it should bee declared that they were very sorrie for hauing denyed obedience to the Apostolique Sea, and for hauing consented to the Decrees made against it, promising to endeuour heereafter that all those Lawes and Decrees should bee abo∣lished, and beseeching the King and Queene to intercede for them, that they may bee absolued from the crimes and censures, and receiued, as peni∣tent children, into the bosome of the Church, to serue God, in obedience of the Pope and Sea of Rome. The last of Nouember, Saint Andrewes day, their Maiestics, the Cardinall, and whole Parliament beeing assembled, the Chancellour asked the generalitie whether they were pleased that par∣don should bee demanded of the Legate, and whether they would returne to the vnitie of the Church, and obedience of the Pope, supreme Head there∣of; and some saying yea, and the others holding their peace, a Supplica∣tion was presented to their Maiesties in the name of the Parliament; which beeing publiquely read, they rose to desire the Legate, who mette them, and shewed himselfe willing to giue them satisfaction; and causing the authoritie giuen him by the Pope to bee read, hee discoursed how accepta∣ble to God the repentance of a sinner was, and how the Angels did then reioyce for the conuersion of that Kingdome: and all being on their knees, imploring the mercie of God, hee absolued them; which beeing done, hee went to the Church with all the multitude, to giue thankes to God. The next day an Ambassage was destinated to the Pope, to render him obe∣dience; Ambassadors are appointed to goe to the Pope. for which were named Anthony Browne, Vicount Mountacute, Thomas Thirlby, Bishoppe of Ely, and Edward Cerne, who had formerly beene Ambassadour in Rome for Henrie the eight, and was now to bee resident there againe in that charge. Aduice heereof came to Rome For which Processions are made in Rome. quickly, for which many Processions were made; not onely in that Citie, but thorow out all Italic, to giue thankes to God. The Pope approoued what his Legate had done, and sent a the foure and twentieth of December, alleadging in the ll for a cause, that, like the Father of the familie, hauing recouered his prodigall sonne, it was mee e that hee should not onely-shew othesticall ioy, but generally inuite all to the same Iubi∣lie; and hee praysed and extolled the action of the King, Queene, and peo∣ple of England. The Parliament continued vntill the midst of Ianuarie . and to the ancient Edicts of the Kings to punish heretickes, and of the Iurisdiction of Bishops were renewed, the Primacie, and all prehe∣rtinences of the Pop restored, all contrary Decrees made within twen∣tie yeeres last past, would Henrie as by Edward, abolished, the penall: Lawes against heretickes reuiued, and many were burned, especially Bi∣shops, who would perseuere in the reformation abolished. It is certaine that one hundred seuentie and sixe persons of qualitie were burned that yeere, for Religion, besides many of the common sort, which gaue but little content to that people, who also were displeased that Martin Bucer, and Paulus Fagius, dead foure yeeres before, were cited and condemned, as if Many are bur∣ned in Eng∣land for Re∣ligion. they had beene liuing, and their bodies digged vp, and burned; an action, commended by some as a reuenge of what Henrie the eight had done a∣gainst S. Thomas, by others compared to that which the Popes, Stephanus the sixth, and Sergius the third, did against the Corps of Pope Formosus. Many also were at the same time burned in France for Religion: not And in France also. without the indignation of honest men, who knew that the diligence vsed against those poore people, was not for pietie, or Religion, but to satiate Which was done to sati∣ate the coue∣tousnesse of Diana Valen∣tina. the couetousnesse of Diana Ʋalentina, the Kings Mistris, to whom he had giuen all the confiscations of goods made in the Kingdome for cause of Heresie. It was wondred also that those of the new reformation, should meddle with blood, for cause of Religion. For Michael Seruetus of Tarra∣gona, made a Diuine of a Physician, renewing the old opinion of Paulus Samosatenus, and Marcellus Anciranus, that the word of God was not a thing subsisting, and therefore that Christ was a pure man, was put to death for Michael Ser∣uetus is bur∣ned in Ge∣neua. it in Geneua, by Counsell of the Ministers of Zuric, Berne, and Schiaffusa: and Iohn Caluin, who was blamed for it by many, wrote a Booke, defen∣ding that the Magistrate may punish Heretickes with losse of life: which Doctrine being drawen to diuers sences, as it is vnderstood more strictly or more largely, or as the name of Hereticke is taken diuersly, may some∣time doe hurt to him, whom another time it hath helped. At that time Ferdinand, King of the Romanes, published an Edict to all The King of the Romanes publisheth an Edict against all innouati∣on in Religion the people subiect vnto him, that in points of Religion, and Rites, they should not innouate, but follow the ancient customes; and particularly that, in the holy Communion, they should bee content to receiue the Sa∣crament of bread onely. Wherein though many persons of note, the Nobilitie, and many of the Cities made Supplication vnto him, that, at the least the Cup might bee granted them, saying that the institution was of Christ, which might not bee altered by men, and that it was the vse of the old Church, as was confessed by the Councell of Constance, promising all submission and obedience in all other things, praying him not to burthen their consciences, but to accommodate his commandement to the orders set downe by the Apostles, and of the Primitiue Church, yet Fer∣dinand perseuered in his resolution, and answered them, that his comman∣dement was not new, but an ancient institution, vsed by his Ancestors, Emperours, Kings, and Dukes of Austria: and that the vse of the Cup was a nouitie, brought in by curiositie, or pride, against the Law of the Church, and consent of the Prince. Yet hee moderated the rigour of the answere, saying, that the question being of a point that concerneth salua∣tion, hee would thinke of it more diligently, and answere them in fit time, but that, in the meane while, hee expected from them obedience, and ob∣seruation of the Edict. Hee published also a Catechisme the fourteenth of And a Cate∣chisme. August, made, by his authoritie, by some learned and pious Diuines, 1555 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. Which gaue distaste to the Court of Rome. commaunding all the Magistrates of those Countries, not to suffer any Schoolemasters to reade any but that, either in publique or in priuate, be∣cause, by diuers Pamphlets which went about, Religion was much corrup∣ted in those Countryes. This constitution distasted the Court of Rome, because it was not sent to the Pope, to bee approoued by his authoritie, nor came foorth in the name of the Bishop of the Countrey, the secular Prince assuming the office; to cause to bee composed, and to Authorize Bookes in matter of Religion, especially by name of Catechisme, to shew that it belon∣ged to the secular power, to determine what Religion the people should fol∣low, and what refuse. The two yeeres of the suspension of the Councell being expired, they treated in the Consistorie what was fit to bee done. For although the con∣dition in the Decree was, that the Councell should be of force againe when the impediments were remooued, which did still continue, by reason of the warres of Siena, Piemont, and others, betweene the Emperour and the French King, yet it seemed that any man of an vnquiet Spirit might say that those impediments were not sufficient, and that it was vnderstood that the Councell was on foote againe; so that, to free themselues from those dangers, it might be good to make a new declaration. But wiser men It is resolued in Rome not to speak of the Councell though the two yeeres of suspension were ended. gaue counsell not to mooue the euill while it was quiet, while the world was silent, while neither Prince nor People demaunded the Councell, lest by shewing they were afraid, they might excite others to require it. This aduice preuayled, and made the Pope resolue neuer to speake more of it. In the yeere 1555. there was a Diet in Ausburg, which the Empe∣rour 1555. A Diet. had in Ausburg to compose the differences in Religion. had intimated, principally to compose the controuersies of religion, in regard this was the fountaine of all the troubles, and calamities of Germanie, with the losse not onely of the liues of many thousands of men, but of their soules also. Ferdinand began the Diet, in the Emperours name, the fifth of Februarie; where hee shewed at large, the lamentable spectacle of Germanie, in which men of the same Baptisme, Language, In which Fer∣dinand ma∣keth an Ora∣tion. and Empire, were distracted by so various a profession of Faith, there ari∣sing new Sects euery day: which did shew not onely small reuerence to∣wards God, and great perturbations of mens mindes, but was cause also that the multitude knew not what to beleeue, and that many of the prin∣cipall Nobilitie and others were without all faith, and honestie, making no conscience of their actions, which tooke away all commerce: so that now it could not bee sayd that the Germanes were better then the Turkes, and other barbarous people; for which causes God hath afflicted it with so great calamities. Therefore it was necessarie to take in hand the bu∣sinesse of religion. Hee sayd a generall, free, and pious Councell was for∣merly thought the onely remedie. For the cause of Faith beeing common to all Christians, it ought to bee handled by all: and the Emperour im∣ploying all his forces heerein, did cause it to bee assembled, more then once. But there was no neede to say why no fruit came by it, it beeing well knowen to all that were present. Now if they desired to prooue the same remedie againe, it was necessary to remooue the impediments, which did 1555 MARCDILVS . CHARLES 5. MARY HENRY 2. hinder them from attaining the wished end. But if, by reason of the acci∣dents that occurre, they thought fit to deferre this vntill another time, they might treate of vsing other meanes. They knew not how to make vse of a Nationall Councell, because the maner, forme, and name of them were disused. The Colloquies, whereof they had often made proofe, did no And propo∣seth a Col∣loquie. good, because both parties aymed more at priuate gaine, then publique pietie and vtilitie. Yet hee sayd they were not to be despised now, if they would lay aside the obstinacie of their priuate affections; and counsel∣led them to trye them once more, if the Diet did not propose a better way. This proposition was made by Ferdinand, with others, concerning the peace and warre with the Turkes, that it might passe through Germanie, and serue to inuite men to the Diet, to which very few were come. But it was ill expounded, in regard of his former Edict, published in his States, much contrarie to this proposition, and more, in regard of the execution of it, hauing chased more then two hundred Preachers out of Bohemia. And it went to Rome also; where the Pope, cursing, as hee vsually did, the Which dis∣pleaseth the Pope. Colloquies, and inuentors of them, complayned that there was no end of these difficulties, and that hee was to haue a Councell, a Colloquie, or a Diet alwayes on his backe. Hee blamed those times for beeing so full of trou∣bles, praysing former ages when the Popes might liue quietly, not beeing in feare of their authoritie. Yet hee was comforted by the perfect subiecti∣on of England to his obedience, by the decrees made in his fauour, by the Who is conso∣lated with the obedience of England. Letters of thankes which hee receiued, and with the promise that a solemne Ambassage would come ere long, to thanke him personally for his father∣ly clemencie and benignitie, and to promise him obedience. Wherewith beeing well pleased, hee could not choose but iest, and sayd, that hee did en∣ioy some part of happinesse, in that hee was thanked by those vnto whom he owed thankes. But though the Pope had little hope of Germanie, yet, not to neglect it, nor any ouerture that might bee made, in proposing meanes to reduce to the Church those that wandred, hee sent Cardinall Morone. for his Legate, Hee sendeth Cardinall Morone to the Diet. to the Imperiall Diet, with instructions euer to lay before them the example of England, and, by that, to exhort Germanie to know their disease, and re∣ceiue the same cure; and, aboue all, to diuert all Colloquies, and treaties of religion. The Cardinall was no sooner arriued in Ausburg, but Pope Iu∣lius died, whereof hee receiued aduise eight dayes after. He therefore depar∣ted And dieth presently af∣ter. the last of March, together with the Cardinall of Ausburg, to assist at the election of the new Pope. Before they came, Marcellus Ceruinus, Cardinall de Santa Croce, was Marcellus Ceruinus is created Pope, and reteineth his name. elected Pope in Rome, the ninth of April; a man graue, and seuere by nature, and of a constant minde, which he was willing to demonstrate in the first action of his Papacie, by retaining the same name, shewing the world that his dignitie had not changed him; contrarie to that which so many of his predecessors had done. For after the changing of the names began, because Dutch men were made Popes, to whose names Romane eares were not accustomed, all that followed obserued the same vse, sig∣nifying thereby that they had changed their priuate affections into pub∣lique and diuine cares. But this Pope, to shew that in his priuate estate hee had thoughts worthy of the Popedome, would, by retaining the same name, shew his immutabilitie. Another action of his also was like to this. For the capitulations made in the Conclaue beeing presented to him, that hee might sweare to them, hee answered it was the same thing which hee had sworne a few dayes before, and that he would obserue it by deedes and not by promises. The holy weeke which then was celebrated, and Easter holy dayes approching, put the Pope, by the assiduitie of Eccle∣siasticall ceremonies into an indisposition. Yet his thoughts were still fixed on the things hee had disseigned with many Cardinals, before his Pope∣dome, to which hee did euer thinke hee should ascend; and particularly hee imparted his purpose to the Cardinall of Mantua, to compose the dif∣ferences of Religion by a Councell, which hee sayd did not formerly suc∣ceede well, because a good course was not taken. That it was necessary He purposeth to make a re∣formation. first to make an intire reformation, by which the reall differences would bee accorded; which beeing done, the verball would partly cease of them∣selues, and partly would be composed with some small paines of the Coun∣cell. That his Predecessors for fiue successions, abhorred the name of re∣formation, not for any bad end, but because they were perswaded that it was set on foote, to pull downe the Papall authoritie. But his opinion was contrary, and that nothing could more preserue it then that; yea, that it would bee a meanes to enlarge it. For obseruing things past, euery one might see, that onely those Popes who haue made reformations, haue aduanced and inlarged their authoritie. That the reformation did not al∣ter any thing but that which was for shew and vanitie, not onely of no moment, but of charge and burthen; as ryots, pomps, great traines of Pre∣lates, excessiue, superfluous, and vnprofitable charges, which doe not make the Papacie venerable, but rather contemned; which vanities being cut off, the true power, reputation, and credit with the world will increase, together with the reuenue and other sinewes of gouernement, and aboue all, the pro∣tection of God, which euery one may assure himselfe doth worke in confor∣mitie of ones proper duetie. These dissignes, published in Court, were, by his wel-willers, adorned And is censu∣red by the Court. with the titles of Pietie, loue of Peace, and Religion; but some, that were emulous, sayd the end was not good; that the Pope did ground him∣selfe vpon Astrologicall predictions (following his fathers steps, who became great by that profession) which, as some times, either by chance or otherwise, they succeede, so, for the most part, they are occasions of the fall of many. Amongst the Popes particular dissignes, one was, to He purposed to institute a religion of an hundred per∣sons. institute a Religion of an hundred persons, like vnto a Caualarie: of which himselfe would be Head, and make the election, taking them out of any other Religion, or state of persons; euery one of which should haue yeerely fiue hundred crownes out of the Chamber, should take a very solemne and strict Oath of fidelitie to the Pope, should not bee assumed to any other degree, nor haue any more reuenue, except, for their deserts, they were created Cardinals, in which case they were not to forsake the compunie. These onely hee would imploy for Nuncij, and ministers of businesses, Gouernours of Cities, Legates, and in all other occasi∣ons of the Apostolique Sea. And many learned men, Inhabitants of Rome, whom himselfe did know, were named, and others put themselues forward to receiue this honour. The Court was full of the expectation But dieth be fore anything was effected, hauing sat but 22. dayes. of many nouities; which were all buried in silence, because Marcelius, first weakened by the paines he tooke in the long great ceremonies, as hath bin said, afterwards taken with an apoplexie, dyed the last day of the month, the other astrologicall predictions of his father and his owhe, which were extended a yeere after that time, being not verefied. The Cardinals being assembled againe in the Conclaue, hee of Ausburg, assisted by Morene, made great instance, that among the capitulations which the Cardinals were to sweare vnto, one should bee, that the future Pope should, by counsell of the Colledge, call an other Synod, within Two cap ∣lations, one to cal another S councel with∣in two years, another not to make a∣boue 4. Car∣dinals within two years. Iohn Peter Caraffa, cal∣led Paul the 4 41 created Pope. two yeeres, to finish the reformation begun, to determine the controuer∣sies of Religion that remained, and to finde a meanes to cause the Coun∣cell of Trent to bee receiued in Germany. And the Colledge of the Car∣dinals beeing full, it was capitulated that the Pope should not create more then foure within two yeeres. The three and twentieth day of the next Moneth, Iohn Peter Caraffa, who called himselfe Paulus Quar∣tus, was created, the Imperialists resistng as much as they could. For he was thought not to be the Emperours friend, in regard of the old distastes which he receiued in the King of Spaine his Court, where he serued eight yeares, in the life time of the Catholique King Ferdinand, and because the possession of the Archbishoprique of Naples was denyed him, a few yeares before, by the common inclination of the Barons of that King∣dome. Whereunto was added the seueritio of his manners, which made Of whose se∣ueritie the Court is afraid. the Court fad, and put it in geater feare of reformation, then it formerly had in the treaties of the Councell. The strictnesse of his life, concerning his person and familie, he laid aside immediately after his creation. For be∣ing demaunded by his Steward what diet hee would haue prouided for him, hee answered such as befitteth a Prince: and would be crowned with greater pompe then was vsuall, affecting, in all his actions, to keepe his de∣gree with magnificence, and to appeare stately and sumptuous. To his Nephewes and kinsmen hee was as indulgent as any of his Predecessors. He affected to hide his seueritie towards others, by shewing the greatest humanitie, but within a short time hee returned to his owne naturall dis∣position. Hee tooke it for a great glory that the three English. Ambassadours, The English. Ambassadors are receiued in the first cō∣sistory after the corona∣tion. dispatched in the time of Iulius, entred Rome the firstday of his Papa∣cie: and the first consistorie after the Coronation, was publique. The Ambassadours, were brought into it, who prostrating themselues at the Popes feete, did, in the name of the Kingdome, acknowledge the faults committed, relating them all in particular (for so the Pope would haue it) confessing they had beene vngratefull for so many benefits receiued from the Church, and humbly crauing pardon for it. The Pope did par∣don them, tooke them vp from the ground, and imbraced them: and, to honour their Maiesties who sent them, gaue the title of a Kingdome to Ireland, graunting them this dignitie by the authoritie which the Pope hath from God, being placed ouer all Kingdomes, to supplant those that are contumacious, and to build new. Men of iudgement, who then knew not the true cause of that action, thought it a vanitie, not seeing The Pope gi∣ueth to Ire∣land the title of a kingdom what profit, either of authoritie or honour, it might bring to a King, to haue many titles in the Countrey which hee possesseth, considering that the most Christian King is more honoured by the onely title of King of France, then if his State were diuided into as many Kingly titles as hee hath Prouinces. Neither did it then seeme a fitte time to say, hee had power from God to build vp, and ouerthrow Kingdomes. But those that knew the true cause, did not thinke it vaine, but a secret, vsually pra∣ctised a long time. Henrie the Eight, after his separation from the Pope, made Ireland a kingdome, and called himselfe, King of England, France, and Ireland; which title, continued by Edward, was assumed by Marie, and her Husband. The Pope so soone as hee was created, en∣tred into a resolution that the title of Ireland should not bee vsed by those Princes, affirming constantly that it belonged onely to him, to Which was taken before without the consent of any Pope. giue the name of a King. But it seemed hard to enduce England to quit that which two Kings had vsed, and the Queene, not thinking much of it, had continued. Therefore hee found a temper; that is, to dissemble the knowledge of what Henry had done, and himselfe to crect the Island into a Kingdome, that so the world might beleeue that the Queene Popes haue often giuen that which they could not take frō the possessors. had vsed the Title as giuen by the Pope, not as decreed by her Father. And the Popes haue often giuen that which they could not take from the possessors, and to auoyd contentions, some haue receiued their owne goods as gifts, and some haue dissembled the knowledge of the gift, or of the pretence of the giuer. In the priuate discourses betweene the Pope and the Ambassadours, hee found fault that the Church goods were not wholly restored, saying that by no meanes it was to bee tolerated, and that it was necessarie to render all, euen to afarthing; because the things that belong to God can neuer bee applyed to humane vses, and hee that withholdeth the least part of them, is in continuall state of damnati∣on. That if hee had power to grant them, hee would doe it most readily, The Pope commandeth the restitutiō of Church goods in England. for his Fatherly affection which hee beareth to them, and for the experi∣ence hee hath of their filiall obedience, but his authoritie was not so large, as that hee might prophane the things dedicated to GOD, and let England bee assured that this would bee an Anathema, and an contagion, which, by the iust reuenge of God, would alwayes hold the Kingdome of England in perpetuall infelicitie. He charged the Ambassadours to write thereof immediatly, and was not content to speake of it once, but repea∣ted it as often as there was occasion. Hee said also plainely, that the Peter∣perce ought to be payd, as soone as might bee, and that, according to the And the pay¦ment of Pe∣ter pence. custome hee would send a Collector for that purpose; that himselfe had exercised that charge three yeeres, hauing beene sent into England for that end, wherein hee was much edified, by seeing the forwardnesse of the people to contribute, especially of those of the meaner sort; and told them often that they could not hope that Saint Peter would open heauen vnto them, so long as they vsurped his goods vpon earth. This relation made vn∣to the Queene, with many other treaties, continued succeesliuely from Rome, caused her to imploy all her spirits herein; but nothing could be done, be∣cause many of the Nobilitie, and of the Grandies had incorporated many of The Queene maketh ∣tution, which her people ∣suse to doe. these reuenewes into their houses. For herselfe shee restored the tenths, and all other Ecclesiasticalligoods annexed to the Crowne, by her brother, and her Father. The Ambassadours parted from Rome, with much praise, and fauour from the Pope, for their submission, a meanes by which his good will is easily gained. Immediately after the Creation of the new Pope, tho Imperialists and French men, did vie who should gaine him. But the Cardinall of Loraine, who well knew his humour, confirmed his affection towards the French, telling him in Consistorie, and in many priuate Treaties besides, that the King did know that the Church of France had neede of reformation, and was ready to assist his Holinesse, either by sending Prelates to the Councell, if hee thought fit, or by any other meanes that should seeme good vnto him. In the meane space the Diet of Germany was prosecuted, not without Contentions doe arise in the Diet of Ausburg. contentions, which would haue beene greater if Cardinall Morone had remayned there, as well for the negotiations hee would haue made, as for the suspicions conceiued by the Protestants, that hee was sent onely to oppose their commodities. And it was alreadie published euery where that Rome was full of hope, that Germany would quickely come vnder the yoke, as England had done. After the Cardinals departure, the first dif∣ficultie was; whether the points of Religion should bee discussed first of all; which though the Ecclesiastiques did contradict in the beginning, yet it was finally resolued, by common consent to beginne there. Wherein there were two contrary Propositions; One to treat of the meanes to re∣forme it; the other to leaue euery one to his libertie: about which point there was very great controuersie. But in the ende, all inclined to the se∣cond proposition, not knowing how to roote out the euill which did still moue, onely hoping that when the humours were quiet, and the diffe∣rences and suspitions remooued, many easie and commodious wayes might bee found out. For this, it was necessary to establish a peace, that for cause of Religion there might bee no more warre, and that it might bee lawfull for all the Princes and States of the Empire to follow and cause to bee obserued in their Dominions what Religion pleased them best. Which resolution, when it came to bee established raised greater contro∣uersies. For those of the Augustan Confession did pretend, that it was law∣full for all to accept their Doctrine, retaining the honours, States, and De∣grees which they possessed. On the contrary, the Catholiques would not haue it permitted to the Ecclesiastiques to change their Religion, and keepe their degree, but that if a Bishop or an Abbot did embrace the other Religion, he should loose his dignitie. Neither would they haue it permit∣ted to the Cities, which seuen yeares since had receiued the decree of the Interim made in Ausburg, to returne to the Augustan Confession. Writings passed on both sides concerning this, and, at the last, the ri∣gour 1555 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY. 2. But at the last a peace of Re∣ligion is esta∣blished. of either partie was abated. The Catholiques were content that the Cities should doe as they pleased, and the Protestants gaue ouer their pretence concerning the Ecclesiastiques. And the fiue and twentieth of September the Recesse was made, that a Generall or Nationall Councell (nei∣ther of which could bee assembled in regard of many difficulties) beeing necessarie to determine lawfully the causes of Religion, vntill a way might bee opened vnto a friendly agreement thoughout all Germanie, the Em∣perour Ferdinand, the Catholique Princes and States, should not force the Princes, Orders and States of the Augustan Confession to forsake their Re∣ligion and Ceremonies alreadie instituted, orto bee instituted in their Do∣minions, nor should doe any thing in contempt thereof, nor hinder them in the free vse of that Religion: and those of the Augustan Confession ought to behaue themselues in the same sort towards Caesar, Ferdinand, and the other Princes and States of the old Religion, as well Ecclesiasticall as Se∣cular, euery one hauing power to establish in his owne State what Reli∣gion hee will, and to forbid the other. And if any Ecclesiastique shall abandon the old Religion, it shall bee no infamie vnto him but hee shall pre∣sently loose his Benefices, which shall bee conferred vpon others by the Pa∣tron; and the Benefices, which the Protestants haue already annexed to Schooles and Ministeries of the Church shall remayne in the same state. That Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction shall bee exercised no more against those of the Augustan Confession; but, otherwise, shall bee exercised according to the ancient custome. The Recesse being made, another difficultie arose, for the remoouing of which, Ferdinand, vsing the absolute Imperiall au∣thoritie of his brother, did declare with consent ofthe Ecclesiasticall Order, that the Titulars, Cities, and Communities, subiect to Ecclesiasticall Prin∣ces, who haue adhered many yeeres to the Augustan Confession, and recei∣ued long since the Rites and Ceremonies thereof, and doe obserue them still, may not bee compelled by their Princes to change them, but may continue in them vntill a generall concord in Religion, which shall be con∣cluded. Pope Paul vnderstanding of this Recesse of Ausburg, was exceeding Of which the hope com∣plaineth to the Emperors Embassador, and Cardinall of Ausburg. angry; Hee complained thereof to the Emperours Ambassadour, and to the Cardinall of Ausburg, reprehending Ferdinand for suffering a treaty in matters of Religion, without the knowledge of the Apostolique Sea, and threatning that in due time hee would make the Emperour and that King know to their griefe, how they had offended him: hee exhorted them to preuent it, by reuoking and dissallowing the things graunted, that hee might haue no occasion to proceed, as hee meant to doe, not onely, a∣gainst the Lutherans, but euen against them also, as Abettors: offering to assist them, in case they should doe it by authoritie and armes, and to command all Christian Princes, vpon paynes and censures, to aide them with all their forces. He was not satisfied with the Ambassadours answere, who alleaged the strength of the Protestants, the warre against Caesar, in which hee was like to bee prisoner in Ispruc, and the Oathes taken. For the Oathes, hee answered that hee freed and absolued them, yea, comman∣ded not to obserue them. To the rest hee sayd, that in Gods cause, one must not proceed according to humane respects. That the Emperour was in danger by Gods permission, because he did not what hee could and ought to doe, to reduce Germanie to the obedience of the Apostolicall Sea: that this is but a token of Gods anger, and that hee must expect greater pu∣nishment if hee take not warning by it: but carrying himselfe as a Soul∣dier of Christ vndauntedly, and without worldly respects, he shall obtaine all manner of victorie, as the examples of the times past doe demon∣strate. The fame was that the Pope was mooued to say so, not onely by his owne inclination, but by the perswasion of the Cardinall of Ausburg, who was displeased with the libertie granted to the Confessionists. It is certaine that Paul, being of an high spirit and vast thoughts, did assure himselfe that he could redresse all the disorders, by his Papall authoritie onely, nor had need of any Prince herein. Therefore hee neuer spake with Ambassadours but Paul had vast thoughts, and was excee∣ding proud. hee thundred in their eares, that hee was aboue all Princes, that he would not that any of them should bee too domesticall with him, that hee could change Kingdomes, that hee was successor of him who hath deposed Kings and Emperours, and did often repeate, for a beginning of authoritie ex∣ercised by him, that hee had made Ireland a Kingdome, and went on so farre, that, in Consistorie, and at his Table publiquely, in the presence of many, hee said, he would not haue any Prince for his Companion, but all subiects vnder his foote (so hee sayd, striking it against the ground) as it is fit, and as it is his will who hath built the Church, and hath placed them in this degree. And sometimes he would say, that, rather then we would doe any thing basely, we would die, ouerthrow all, and set the whole world on fire. Paul the fourth was naturally of a loftie mind and courage, and trusted much in his knowledge and good fortune, which did accompany him in all his actions: whereunto the power and fortune of the Papacie being added, hee thought euery thing was easie. But two humours did flore in him by turnes; one, which by custome to make vse of Religion in all his attempts, did induce him to imploy his Spirituall Authoritie: the other was put into him by Charles Caraffa, his Nephew, who being valiant, and exercised in warre, made Cardinall of a Souldier, did retaine his marrial spirits, and perswaded him to vse his temporall power, saying, that the one without the other is despised, but, beeing ioyned, are instruments of great matters. The circumspect old man, knew well that the Spirituall is made weaker, when it is manifested that there is neede of the Temporall. But be∣ing euer intent to make his name great, sometimes hee gaue eare to his Nephew, and sometimes hee beleeued himselfe more. In the one lice con∣cluded to vse the Temporall secretly, and the Spirituall openly, that pro∣ceeding with this, hee might adde, or omit the other, as hee should lice adui∣sed by the euents. Therefore hee treated most secretly, by his Nephew, He trea ced a League with the French King. with the Cardinall of Loraine, a league with the French King, ∣ing almost made, Loraine parted from Rome, to take away u ption and the Cardinall Torrnon went thither, with whom it was concluded, with the same secrecy. The principall captiulation whereof was, the gayning of the Kingdome of Naples for a yonger sonne of the King, with great enlargement of the bounds of the Ecclesiasticall state; whose confines were to be S. Germano, Gerigliano, and, on the further side of the Apennine, the Riuer Pescara, beyong Beneuentum: and some things besides were yeel∣ded vnto for the Popes benefit. The Pope also that he might haue a prop to leane on in both courses, thought it necessary to make a promotion of Cardinals, dependants on himselfe, men of courage, who would not bee afrayd to prosecute hisdis∣seignes, and imploy themselues in any hard enterprise. Hee began to speake of this promotion but a few dayes before hee made it; which grie∣ued And createth Cardinals, contrary to his Oath. the Cardinals, for that hee would contradict the Capitulation which he had sworne: and the Imperialists, aboue all, considering the qualitie of the persons to be promoted, purposed to oppose. The twentieth of De∣cember, the Pope being entred into the Consistorie, sayde, so soone as hee sate downe, that he would not giue audience to any that day, because hee had greater matters to propose. Euery one vnderstanding by this that his meaning was to create new Cardinals, the Cardinall of Saint Iames went to his seate, to speake with him; and the Pope refusing, and the Cardinall not desisting, hee set his hand on his brest, and thrust him from him. All being set, the Pope began to complaine of those who reported hee could make but foure Cardinals, in regard of that which hee had sworne in the Conclaue, and said, that this was to binde the Popes authoritie, which is ab∣solute; that it is an Article of Faith that the Pope cannot bee bound, and much lesse can bind himselfe; that to say otherwise was a manifest heresie; from the guilt whereof he did absolue those that were faultie, because hee thought they did not speake obstinately: but hereafter if any shall say the same, or the like, against the authoritie giuen him by God, hee will giue order that the Inquisition shall proceed. Hee added, that hee would make Cardinals, and would not haue any contradiction, because hee wanted per∣sons for imployment, which hee could not put vpon them, because euery one had his proper faction: that it was fit to promote men of learning, and of exemplarie life, to imploy them for reformation of the Church, espe∣cially in the Councell, whereof it was high time to treate seriously, which he would propose with the first occasion. But now hee would name vnto them the persons to bee promoted to the Cardinalitie (a thing not to bee deferred any longer) that they hauing a consultiue voyce; might put to his consideration what was for the good of the Church; wherein they should bee heard; and that they should not beleeue they had a de∣cisiue voyce, because that belonged onely to him. Hee proposed seuen persons: in which number onely one was his kinsman, and another of the Theatine Congregration: the others were men of much fame, either for lear∣ning, or for the negotiations of the Court Amongst these was Iohannes Groperus, of Collen, of whom often mention hath beene made; who knowing hee would not liue long, thinking to honour his memorie much more by refusing a dignity, desired euen by great Princes, then by keeping it a few dayes, which would giue matter of discourse to those that were emu∣lous of him, hee sent the Pope many thankes, together with his excuse, and refusing the ornaments, would neither haue the name, nor the title. The Cardinals were created the next Sunday before the league was concluded with France, which was the 15. of that moneth. At this time Cardinall Poole, who for many respects of succession, and Card Poole, ordained Priest and made Arch-bishop of Canterbury to shew hee was not so much obliged to the Papacie, would not receiue Ec∣clesiasticall Orders, these causes being ceased, went out of the number of the Deacon Cardinals, and was ordained Priest: and, foure moneths after, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury being burnt, hauing beene first degraded with many ceremonies, he was put into his place. The people of Austria, in regard of the Recesse made in the Diet, and of Ferdinands declaration in fauour of the Cities, and Nobles subiect to Ecclesi∣asticall Princes, entred into hope that themselues also might retaine libertie The people of Austria disire liberty of ∣ligion. of religion. Therefore hauing called a Diet of his Subiects, to haue a con∣tribution against the Turkes who made warre against him, they demaunded permission and freedome to liue in purity of religion, and to inioy the bene∣fit which was granted vnto the Confessionists; telling the King that the scour∣ges of the Turkes, are Gods visitations, to inuite them to amendment of life; that Armes are in vaine taken against the enemie, if the wrath of God be not first appeased, who will be honoured according to his owne prescript, and not according to the fansies of men. They beseeched him that they might not be in worse estate then other Germans, and that Ministers of the Church might teach and distribute the Sacraments, according to the Euangelicall and Apostolicall doctrine; and that the Schoole-masters should not bee ba∣nished vntill their cause were heard, according to iustice; offering, vpon these conditions, to aduenture their liues and goods, to giue him content∣ment. Ferdinand answered, that hee could not grant their demand, not for want To whom Ferdinand an∣swereth thus. of will to gratifie them, but because hee was bound to obey the Church, and that himselfe and Caesar had euer detested the discords in religion; for remedy whereof they had institured many Colloquies, and finally procured the Councell of Trent; which if it had not a happy successe, it was not to bee imputed vnto them, in regard it is knowen with what counsels and artifices it hath been hindered by others; that afterwards an Edict was made in fauour of the Augustan Confession, in which themselues were partakers, because it was said therein, that euery Prince, not Ecclesiasticall, might choose which of the two religions he would, and the people follow the religion of the Prince, with which if any bee not content, hee hath liberty to sell his goods, and to goe whither hee will; that therefore their duety was to continue in the old Catholique Religion, which himselfe professeth: but to yeeld to their desires as much as he could, hee was content to suspend that part of the Edict which concerneth the Communion of the Cup, yet with condition that they should change nothing in the rites and ceremonies of the Church, vntill the Decree of the future diet. And they, desiring nothing else, were content to contri∣bute readily against the Enemie. The Bauarians also desired of their Duke, libertie of religion, demaunding a free preaching of the Gospel, mariage of Priests, the Communion Sub v∣traque, 1556 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. The Bauari∣ans also desire liberty of re∣ligion. Which their Duke doeth grant vnto them in some few points. and to eate flesh euery day, protesting that, otherwise, they would not pay the heauie Subsidies, and contributions against the Turkes. The Duke, seeing that Ferdinand (his wiues father) had graunted his peo∣ple the Communion of the Cuppe, to obtaine contributions of them, did likewise grant them that Communion, and leaue to eate flesh, if there were necessity, on fasting dayes, vntill the causes of Religion were composed by publique authority, the Edicts made by him in matter of Religion stil remai∣ning in force; protesting, in many and copious termes, that hee would not depart from the Church, and religion of his ancestors, nor change ought in the ceremonies, without consent of the Pope, and the Emperour, promi∣sing to procure that his Metropolitan and Bishops should approoue this grant, and not molest any for these things. The whole Palatinate did imbrace The whole Palatinate doth imbrace the Augustan Confession the Augustan Confession, because, the Elector beeing dead, his Nephew succee∣ded, who had declared himselfe to be of that Confession many yeeres before; for which he had suffered many persecutions. And, now being made Prince, hee presently forbade the Masses, and Roman ceremonies throughout all his Principality. But the Pope hauing layd the foundations before rehearsed, applying himselfe to spirituall matters, thought it necessary to gaine credit with the world; which could not bee done, if it did not appeare by deedes, not by words onely, that the Court of Rome was reformed. Therefore, beeing wholly bent to this, in the end of Ianuary 1556. he erected a Congregation, 1556. The Pope e∣recteth a con∣gregation to discusse all doubts con∣cerning Si∣monie. in which were foure and twenty Cardinals, and fiue and fourty Prelates and other persons, the most learned of the Court, to the number of 150. and di∣uide them into three rankes, in each of which were eight Cardinals, fifteene Prelates; and others to the number of fifty. To these hee committed the discussion of all the doubts in matter of Simonie: which hee printed, and sent copies of them to all Princes, and said hee had published them, that they might come to the knowledge of the Ʋniuersities, of generall Studies, and of euery learned man, that all might haue occasion to make knowen their opi∣nions, which he would not openly desire, because it was not honourable for that Sea, which is mistris of all, to goe about and beg them. Hee sayd, that, for himselfe he had no neede of the instruction of any, because he knew what CHRIST did command; but that he had erected the Congregation, that, in a matter wherein all are interested, it might not bee sayd that hee had pro∣ceeded of his owne head. Hee added that, hauing purged himselfe and his Court, it could not bee sayd to him, Physician cure thy selfe, and that he would make Princes know, that there is greater Simonie in their Courts, which hee would take away, beeing superiour aswell to Princes, as Pre∣lates. In the first Congregation of the first ranke, held the 26. of March, be∣fore In the first meeting of which 3. opi∣nions are broached. Cardinall Bellai, Deane of the Colledge, twelue persons did speake, and there were three opinions. One of the Bishop of Feltre, who defended that for the vse of the Spiritual power it is not inconuenient to take money, when it is not for a price, but for other respects: another of the Bishop of Sessa, that this was by no meanes lawfull, and vpon no condition, and that it was absolutely detestable Simonie, as well to giue as to receiue, nor could bee excused with any pretence: the third of the Bishop of Sinigaglia, in the middle betweene these two, that it might bee lawfull; but in some certaine time one∣ly, and with certaine conditions. The voyces of that ranke being all giuen, and brought to the Pope after Easter holy dayes, hee, seeing the diuersitie of the opinions, did almost resolue to publish a Bul according to his owne sence, The Pope in∣tendeth to publish a Bull according to his owne opi∣nion. The Bull is hindered. that it was not lawfull to take a reward, present, or almes, not onely deman∣ded, but voluntarily offered, for any spirituall grace whatsoeuer, that hee would grant no more matrimoniall dispensations, and was in a minde to re∣dresse those that were already granted, as much as he could without scandall. But there were so many delayes and impediments interposed by diuers, that hee could not come to a resolution. Some told him that it was necessary to handle such a thing in a generall Councell, which he heard with great indignation, and said hee had no neede of a Councell, himselfe beeing aboue all. And Cardinall Bellai saying, that a Councell was necessary, not to adde authority to the Pope, but to finde a meanes for execution, which cannot bee vniforme in all places, hee conclu∣ded, that, if a Councell were necessary, it should bee held in Rome, and that it was not needfull to goe elsewhere; that he neuer consented that the Coun∣cell His opinion concerning the Councell of Trent. should be held in Trent; as was knowen to them all, because it was in the middest of the Lutheranes, that the Councell is to consist of Bishops onely; that other persons might bee admitted for counsell, yet onely Ca∣tholikes, otherwise the Turke also ought to bee admitted; that it was a great vanitie to send into the mountaines threescore Bishops, of the least able, and fourtie Doctours of the most vnsufficient, as was twice done already, and to beleeue that, by those, the world could be better regulated, then by the Vicar of CHRIST, with the Colledge of all the Cardinals, who are the pil∣lars of all Christendome, elected for the most excellent of all Christian Nati∣ons, and by the counsell of the Prelates and Doctors which are in Rome, who are the most learned persons in the world, and more in number then, by any diligence, can bee brought to Trent. But when newes came to Rome of the grant of the Cuppe, made by the Hee is much distasted with y e grant made by the Duke of Bauaria. Duke of Bauaria to his subiects, hee entred into a great rage against him: and hee put this amongst other things, for which hee desseigned to make prouision at once, beeing full of hope that euery thing would bee easie vn∣to him, if the Court were reformed, and was not troubled though hee saw the number of abuses to increase. For a few dayes after the Ambassadour of Polonia, comming expresly to congratulate his Holinesse for his assump∣tion to the Popedome, made fiue demands in the name of the King and the Kingdome. To celebrate the Masse in the Polonian tongue. To vse the As also with the fiue de∣mands made by the Polo∣man Ambas∣sadours. Communion Sub vtraque specie. The mariage of Priests. That the paiment of Annates might bee taken away. And that they might call a Nationall Councell to reforme the proper abuses of the Kingdome, and to reconcile the variety of opinions. Hee heard these demands with vnspeakable impa∣tience, and set himselfe to detest them most bitterly, speaking against them, one after another, with infinite vehemencie. And, for conclusion hee sayd, that a generall Councell in Rome would cause the heresies and bad opinions of many to bee knowen, alluding to what was done in Germany, Austria, and Bauaria. And beeing for these reasons almost resolute in himselfe, (or at the least, willing to seeme so) that it was necessary to call a Councell, hee told all the Ambassadours that they should signifie to their Princes his purpose to make a Lateran Councell, like vnto that which is so famous. And hee sent Nuncij to the Emperour and the French King, to exhort them to peace, Which ma∣keth him speake of hol∣ding a Late∣ran Councel. though in France hee had a more secret negotiation. Hee gaue commission also to treate with them of the Councell; and sayd in the Consistory, in a long discourse, (as he was very copious) that it was necessary to celebrate it quickly, seeing that besides Bohemia, Prussia, and Germanie, which were much infected (for those were his words) Polonia also was in danger. That in France and Spaine they were well affected in Religion, but the Clergie was Hee is angry with y e French King. badly vsed. That which hee principally reprehended in France, was the ex∣action of the Tenths, which the King made the Clergie ordinarily pay. But hee was more incited against Spaine. For Paul the third, and Iulius, hauing And with the Emperour much mo . granted the Emperour Charles the halfe and quarter fruits, for a Subsidie of the warre of Germany, and hee hauing reuoked the grant, because he was not satisfied with the Recesse of Ausburg, yet they perseuered in Spaine, and forced the Clergie to pay, by seques rations and imprisonments. Hee did not forbeare to say, that the Emperour was an heretike; that in the beginning hee fauoured the innouators of Germanie, to depresse that holy Sea, and to make himselfe Lord of Rome, and of all Italie; that hee held Paul the third in perpetuall trouble, and that he should not doe the like to him. Hee added, that although hee might remedie all these inconueni∣ences by his owne authority, yet, not to lay so great a burden vpon him∣selfe alone, hee would not doe it without a Councell; that hee had called it in Rome, and named it the Lateran; that hee had giuen Commission to sig∣nifie it to the Emperour and French King in courtesie, but not to haue their consent or counsell, because his will was they should obey; that he was assured it would please neither of them, because it is not for their purpose, li∣uing as they doe, and that they will say many things against it, to disturbe it. But hee will call it whether they will or no, and make knowen what that Sea can doe, when it hath a Pope of courage. The 26. of May, the anniuersa∣rie of his Coronation, all the Cardinals and Ambassadours dining with him, according to custome, hee began, after dinner, to discourse of the Councel, and that his resolution was to celebrate it by all meanes in Rome, and that in courtesie, hee gaue notice thereof to the Princes, and that the high wayes may be made secure for the Prelates. But if no Prelates would come thither, yet hee would hold it with those onely who are in Court, because hee well knew what authority he had. While the Pope was busie about the reformation, newes came to Rome, that a truce was concluded the fifth of February betweene the Emperour But most of all for the truce conclu∣ded betweene those two Princes. and French King, by the mediation of Cardinall Poole, who did interpose in the name of the Queene of England: which made the Pope amazed, and the Cardinall Caraffa much more, hauing beene treated, and concluded without them. The Pope was displeased, principally for the losse of repu∣tation, and for the danger which it brought, if those two Princes were ioyned▪ at cretion hee must needes stand. To the Cardinall, im∣patient of , it seemed that fiue yeeres, in the decrepit age of his Vncle, did quite take from him all occasions to chase the Spaniard out of the King∣dome of Naples, whom he so much hated. Yet the Pope, not loosing cou¦rage, made shew of ioy for the truce, but said hee was not fully satisfied with it, because a peace was necessary, in regard of the Councel, which hee pur∣posed to celebrate, which he was resolued to treat, and, for that end, to send Legates to those Princes, beeing assured to conclude it, because hee would imploy his authority. For hee would not bee hindered in the gouernment of the Church, committed to him by CHRIST. To the Emperour hee sent Notwithstan∣ding he dis∣sembleth his passion and sendeth Le∣gates to them both, to treat a peace, but intendeth no∣thing but vvar. Scipio Rebiba, Cardinall of Pisa, and to the French King, Cardinall Caraffa, his nephew. This went with all speede, and to the other order was giuen to goe slowly. Rebiba had instruction to exhort the Emperour to amend Germany, which was not doen vntill then, because none had proceeded a▪ right in that enterprise. Hee knew the detects of his predecessors, who, to stop the reformation of the Court, did hinder the good progresse of the Councel. But contrarily he was resolued to promote the reformation, and to celebrate a Councel in his owne presence, and to begin with this poynt; assuring himselfe that when they should see the abuses taken away, for which they haue separated themselues from the Church, and remaine con∣tumacious still, they will desire, and runne to receiue the decrees and con∣stitutions which the Councell will make; where shall be reformed, not ver∣bally, but really, the Head, members, Clergie, Laitie, Princes, and people. To doe so good a worke, a truce of fiue yeeres is not sufficient, because there are no lesse suspicions in truces then in warre; and one must euer bee ready to prouide against the time when they end; that a perpetuall peace is necessary▪ to remooue all malice and suspicions, that all may bend themselues ioyntly, without worldly respects, to that which concerneth the vnion, and reformation of the Church. He gaue the like instruction to Caraffa, and was content it should be published, by giuing out some copies of it. The Court did generally thinke that the Pope spake so often and so ear∣nestly of the Councel, that no man else might propose it vnto him, and did threaten the Princes, and all the world with it, to make them abhorre it. But afterwards it was knowen that he deseigned to free himselfe by another way, from the trouble giuen to his predecessours. For when the reformation onely of the Pope, of the Court, of the exempted and priuiledged persons, dependants of the Popedome, was proposed, euery Prince, people and pri∣uate man, in regard nothing was to bee handled that concerned them, was forward to sollicite the Councell; but hee proposing the reformation of the Clergie, Laitie, and especially of the Princes, with a most seuere Inquisition, which he deseigned to institute, he made them all equall so that himselfe was not in question onely, but other likewise▪ And this was a secret by which hee meant to hold all men in feare, and himselfe in reputation of integrity, and worth. And, concerning the Councel, hee meant to gouerne himselfe according to the coniunctures, yet euer holding this point constantly, to ce∣lebrate it in Rome. But, to returne to the Legates, hee gaue his nephew a large instruction, to trie the Kings minde, and, if hee saw him resolute to obserue the truce, to thunder into his eares the same lesson of the Councel: and to Rebiba he gaue order to gouerne himselfe as hee should receiue aduice from his nephew. Caraffa caried to the King, the Sword and Hat, which the Pope had blessed on Christmas day at night, according to the custome. Of the Peace hee made no mention, but represented to the King, that howsoeuer the league was not violated by the truce of fiue yeeres, yet it was made of no force, to the great danger of his Vncle and of his family, and that they had already some taste thereof, by that which the Spaniards had done. Hee recommen∣ded to him, in most effectuall termes Religion, and the Papacie, to which his predecessours gaue singular protection, and the Pope himselfe and his family, much deuoted to his Maiestie. The King was not auerse, but re∣mayned doubtfull, considering the Popes age, who might die when hee should haue most neede of him. Caraffa perceiued this, and found a reme∣die, The French King breaketh the truce at the Popes in∣stance. promising that the Pope should create so many Cardinals, partiall for France, and enemies to Spaine, that hee should euer haue a Pope on his side. The Cardinals perswasions, and the promise of the promotion, and the ab∣solution from the oath of the truce, which he gaue in the Popes name, toge∣ther with the negotiation of the Cardinall of Loraine and his brother, made the King resolue to mooue warre, though the Princes of the Blood, and all the Grandies of the Court abhorred the infamie of breaking the truce, and re∣ceiuing absolution from the oath. The conclusion beeing made, Caraffa recalled the Legate sent to the Emperour, who was arriued at Mastric, and caused him to come into France, though he was but two dayes iourney distant from Caesar: which made the Emperour, and the King his sonne beleeue, that in France, some thing was concluded against them. The Popes distasts, against the Emperor, and his sonne, did dayly increase. The Pope proceedeth seuerely a∣gainst the Colonnesi. He made a most seuere processe against Ascanius Colonna, and Marcus Antonius his sonne, for many offences, which hee pretended to bee done against the Apostolique Sea, so long since, as when Clement was besieged, and after∣wards against Paul the third, and Iulius, and by Marcus Antonius against him∣selfe, and the State of the Church: and, relating in Consistorie all the in∣iuries done of old, by the Colonnesi, against the Apostolique Sea, did ex∣communicate Ascanius and Marcus Antonius, depriue them of all dignitie and fee, with censures against those that gaue them assistance, or fauour, and did confiscate all their possessions within the State of the Church, and gaue them to the Count Montorius, his Nephew, with the title of Duke of Pagliano. Marcus Antonius, retiring into the Kingdome, was receiued, and sometimes Who retire into the king∣dome of Na∣ples, and make excursions vpon their lands. made excursions vpon his owne lands, with some few Souldiers, which much prouoked the Pope; who thinking his nods were commandements vnto all, able to terrifie euery one, hee could not endure to bee so little estee∣med at Naples, his Countrey, where hee would haue beene thought to bee omnipotent. Hee thought in the beginning, by talking lauishly of the Em∣peror, and of the King, to make them desist from fauouring the Colonnesi, and therefore spake very often disgracefully of them, in the presence of all sorts of persons, but most willingly when any Spanish Cardinall was pre∣sent, and, at last, commanded it should be written vnto them. None of these proofes taking effect, hee proceeded further, and the three and twentieth day of Iuly made the Fiscal, and Siluester Aldobrandinus, the Consistoriall Aduocate, appeare in the Consistory, who declared that his Holinesse hauing excommunicated, and depriued Marcus Antonius Colonna, and prohibited vnder the same censures, all sorts of persons to assist or fa∣uour him, and it being notorious that the Emperour, and King Philip, his The Pope maketh shew that he will proceed a∣gainst the Emperor, and his sonne. sonne, had furnished him with horse, foote, and money, they were fallen into the punishments of the same sentence, and had lost their Territories, which they held in Fee. Therefore they desired that his Holinesse would proceed to a declaratory sentence, and giue order for execution. The Pope answered that he would aduise of it, by the counsell of the Cardinals, and giuing them leaue to depart, he proposed in Consistory what was fit to bee done, in a case of so great importance. The French Cardinals spake with much honour of the Emperour, and King Philip, but so that the Pope was more prouoked. The Imperialists vsed words of an ambiguous sence, fit to gaine time. The Theatini, the Popes owne Cardinals, spake magnificently of the Papall authoritie, and of the worth and wisedome of his Holinesse, who onely knew how to finde a remedy for that maladie, praising all that he had done, and referring themselues vnto him for all the rest. The Consi∣story being dismissed without a resolution, the Pope knew that either hee must yeeld, or come to a warre; from which beeing not auerse, in regard of his naturall disposition, full of courage and hopes, aduice came fitly to him from his Nephew, of what was concluded in France. So that the discourses of reformation and Councels were turned into parleys of money, Souldiers, and intelligences; of which things, as not pertaining to my purpose, I will onely say as much as may shew what the Popes minde was, and how much he was addicted to a true, or, at least to a colourable reformation of the Prouideth for warre. Church. The Pope armed the Citizens, and inhabitants of Rome, for the most part, artisans, and strangers, to the number of 5000, distributing them vnder the Heads of the Rioni, for so they were called: hee caused many of his Cities to bee fortified, and put garisons in them; and the French King sent Wards or precincts. him, at his instance, 3000. Gascons, by sea, that hee might subsist while the royall Army was prepared. In these negotiations, and preparations for warre, the Pope imprisoned And impriso∣neth many Cardinals & Barons vpon suspicion, and King Philip his Ambassa∣dour. many Cardinals, Barons, and others, vpon suspicion: as also Carsillasso di Ve∣ga, Ambassadour of Philip King of England, and Ioannes Antonius Tassis, the Emperours Post-master. And to the Duke of Alua, who sent to protest a∣gainst him, for maintaining in Rome the fugitiues of the kingdome of Na∣ples, for laying hands on, and keeping in prison publique persons, without reason, for hauing opened the Kings letters (all which things hee had done) adding that the King, for preseruation of his honour, and of the right of his people, could not choose, in case his Holinesse did perseuere in such offen∣siue actions, but seeke reuenge for the iniurie, he sent backe an answere, that The Duke of Alua prote∣steth of the wrong done to his Master by the Pope, and receueth a proud an∣swere. hee was a free Prince, and superiour to all others, not bound to giue any ac∣count, but to demaund it of any whosoeuer; that hee might entertaine any persons, and open any letters, which hee thought to bee written against the Church: that if Carcillasso had done the office of an Ambassadour, nothing should haue been done against him; but hauing made treaties, mooued se∣ditions, 1557 PAVL 4. CHARLES 5. MARY. HENRY 2. plotted against the Prince, to whom he was sent, he had offended as a priuate man, and as such should bee punished; that no danger should make him bee wanting to the dignity of the Church, and defence of that Sea, re∣ferring all to GOD, by whom hee was made shepheard of the flocke of CHRIST. And the Pope still continuing to make prouision, the Duke of Alua being resolued that it was better to assault then to bee assaulted, sent an∣other protestation against him, that, the King hauing endured so many in∣iuries, knowing that the intention of his Holinesse was to dispossesse him of the kingdome of Naples, and beeing assured, that, to this end, hee had, made a league with his enemies, could not continue in those termes: and therefore in regard his Holinesse did desire warre, hee did denounce it against him, and would begin it quickly, protesting that the calamities thereof could not be imputed to him, and laying the blame vpon the Pope. But if he desired peace, he did offer it likewise vnto him, with all readinesse. The Pope ma∣king a shew to desire peace, but answering onely in generall termes, to gaine time, the Duke began to make warre the fourth of September, and in the yeere 1556. possessed himselfe of almost all Campania, holding it in the For which cause he mo∣ueth warre a∣gainst him. name of the next Pope, and came so neere to Rome, that he put all the Citie in feare, and made them strengthen and fortifie it. And the Pope, to teach the Gouernours of strong places what they ought to doe in such cases, com∣pelled all the religious persons, of what state or qualitie soeuer, to carry earth with a dosser on their shoulders, to raise the bulwarkes. Amongst other places which had need of Rampards, one was neere the gate of the people, at the end of the way called Flaminia, where there is a Church of our Ladie, The Pope ar∣meth the Re∣gulars, and purposeth to pull downe a Church of great deuo∣tion. of much deuotion; which the Pope purposing to pull downe, the Duke sent to pray him to let it stand, giuing his word and oath that he would make no vse of the opportunitie of that place. But the greatnesse of the Citie, and o∣ther respects and dangers, counselled him, not assayling Rome, to vndertake smaller enterprises. It gaue much matter of discourse, that, this yeere, Charles the Emperor The Emperor quitteth the world. parted from Flanders, and passed into Spaine, to betake himselfe to a priuate life in a solitary place; so that they made a comparison betweene a Prince, trained vp, from his infancie, in the negotiations and affaires of the world, who at the age of little more then fifty yeeres, had resolued to quit the world and onely to serue God, changed from a mighty Prince, to a meane religious person, and one, who had formerly abandoned the Eiscopal charge, to retire into a Monastery, and now, being at the age of 80. yeeres, and made Pope, did wholly addict himselfe to pomp and pride, and endeauoured to set all Europe on fire with warre. In the beginning of the yeere 1557. the Duke of Guise passed into Italy, 1557. The Duke of Guise passeth into Italy with an army. with his armie, in fauour of the Pope, who, to obserue the promise of his nephew made to the French King, made a promotion of 10. Cardinals; which not beeing according to the meaning, and the end agreed on, neither for the number, nor qualitie of the persons, his excuse was, that hee was so The Pope createth ten Cardinals. neerely conioyned with his Maiestie, that his dependants would bee as ser∣uiceable to the King, as the Frenchmen themselues, and that he might assure himselfe that they were all for him; and that he could not then make a grea∣ter promotion, seeing the number was so great already, arriuing to 70. which would quickely bee diminished, by remoouing some rebels, and putting ho∣nest men in their roomes; which hee meant of those who were already in the Castle, and others against whom he had a desseigne, as well for matter of State, as of Religion. For hee was not so intent to the warre, as that he did The Inquisi∣tion is the principal my∣sterie of the Papacle. Card. Morone and the B of Morlena are imprisoned. And Card. Poole depri∣ued of his Le∣gation. abandon the businesse of the Inquisition, which he said was the principall se∣cret and mysterie of the Papacie. He had some information against Cardi∣nall Morone, that he held intelligence in Germanie, and did imprison him in the Castle, deputing foure Cardinals to examine him seuerely, and Egidius Foscararus, Bishop of Modena, as confederate with him. Hee depriued also Cardinall Poole of his Legation of England, and cited him to appeare in the Inquisition at Rome, hauing alreadie imprisoned his in∣ward friend, as one of his complices, Thomas S. Felice Bishop of Caua. And that hee might not pretend to stay in England, vnder colour of his Legation, and the affaires of those Churches, hee created Cardinall at Whitsuntide William Peto, Bishop of Salisbury, and made him Legate in the place of Poole. And although the Queene and King, testifying what seruice hee had done to the Catholique Faith, made earnest intercession for him, yet the Pope would neuer remit one iote of his rigour. Cardinall Poole obeyed, laying a∣side the administration and ornaments of a Legat, sending Ormaneto to Rome, to giue an account of his Legation; but himselfe parted not out of England, alledging the Queenes commandement, because neither shee, nor the King, thinking the Pope was passionate, would consent that hee should goe. In England many were scandalized for it, and aliened from the Pope, and ma∣ny Wherewith many were offended. in Rome thought it a calumnie, inuented to reuenge himselfe for the truce betweene the two Kings, treated by him being Cardinall and Legate, without imparting it to him. And the opposition which hee made against him in the Conclaue, to hinder him from being Pope, was thought to haue no better ground. The new Legat, a man of great integritie, had the same conceits, who, though hee tooke vpon him the name of Legat, not to anger the Pope, yet in nine moneths that he liued, after he had the crosse of the Le∣gation, hee did neuer exercise the Charge, but bare the same respect towards Poole, as before. The Duke of Guise being come into Italy, made warre in Piemont, with purpose to continue it in Lumbardie, and so to diuert the armes taken vp a∣gainst the Pope: But the Popes ardent desire to assaile the Kingdome of Na∣ples, did not permit him. The Frenchmen knew the difficulties, and the Duke of Guise, with some principall Commanders, went to Rome by post, to make the Pope vnderstand, what the reasons of warre did perswade. In whose presence all being consulted on, and the Popes resolution not giuing place to any other deliberation, it was necessary to yeeld vnto him. Yet they did nothing, but assault Ciuitella, a place situated at the entry into the Pro∣uince The Duke of Guise recei∣ueth a repulse, by default of the Caraffi. of Abruzzo, where the armie had the repulse; and Guise complained much that the Caraffi had not made the prouisions which they had promi∣sed, and were necessary. In summe, the Popes armes, as well his owne, as auxiliarie, were not much fauoured by God. But in the midst of August the army of the Duke of Alua approaching Rome, not afraid of the French, which 1557 PAVL 4. FERDINAND. MARY. HENRY 2. The Pope is terrified by the approa∣ching of the Duke of Alua The battell of S. Quintin. was entertained in Abruzzo, and the Pope vnderstanding the surprize and sacke of Signea, the slaughter of many, and the danger in which Pagliano was, he related all in Consistorie, with many teares; adding, that he did vn∣dauntedly expect martyrdom, the Cardinals marueiling that he should paint out the cause to them, who vnderstood the trueth, as if it had bin of CHRIST, whereas it was profane, and proceeded from ambition, and say it was the principall sinew, and mystery of the Papacie. When the Popes affaires were in the greatest straits, the French Kings Army had such a great ouerthrow neere to S. Quintin, that hee was forced to recall the Duke of Guise, and his forces, for the safety of the Kingdome; let∣ting the Pope know his ineuitable necessitie, giuing him leaue to take what counsell seemed best for him, and sending him backe the hostages. The Pope refused to let Guise returne, whereupon there beeing a great contesta∣tion Maketh the French King recall the D of Guise, and his forces. Whom the Pope disims∣seth with bad tearmes. betweene them, the Pope not able to keepe him, bid him goe, seeing hee had done little seruice to the King, lesse to the Church, and none at all to his owne honour. In the end of that moneth, the Duke of Alua approached Rome, which he had taken but for want of courage. His retreat was ascri∣bed to the basenesse of his minde, who publikely sayd, that hee feared, that if Rome had been sacked, the Armie would haue been scattered, and the King∣dome The Duke of Alua might haue taken Rome, and did not. exposed to danger, without forces or defence. But secretly hee said, that beeing in the seruice of a King, who bare great reuerence to that place, hee refrained to doe it, because he knew not whether the action would haue been approoued. Finally, a composition was made the fourteenth of Sep∣tember betweene Alua and the Caraffi, the warre hauing continued a whole But made a base compo∣sition with the Pope. yeere. In the capitulations the Pope would not haue Colonna, nor any of his subiects comprehended, nor any word inserted, to shew, that hee had of∣fended in imprisoning the Emperours Ministers, but maintained most con∣stantly, that the Duke of Alua ought to come to Rome to aske pardon, and receiue absolution; saying plainely, that before hee would loose one iore of this due (for so hee called it) he would see the whole world ruined: that the question was not of his owne, but of Christs honour, which he could not preiudice, nor renounce. With this condition, and with the restitution of the cities taken, the controuersie was ended. It was esteemed a prodigie, that the very day that the Peace was concluded, there was such a great in∣undation of the riuer Tiber, that all the plaine of Rome was drowned, and a great part of the fortifications of the Castle S. Angelo was ouerthrowen. The Duke of Alua went personally to Rome to submit himselfe to the Pope, and receiue absolution in the Kings name, and his owne. So it happened, And goeth to Rome to de∣mand abso∣lution. that the conquerour bare the indignitie, and hee that was ouercome trium∣phed more, then if hee had been victorious. And it was no small fauour that the Pope receiued him with humanity, though hee forbare not his vsuall haughtie state. The warre was no sooner ended, but new troubles came vpon the Pope. For aduice was sent out of France, that, the fifth of September at night, in Paris, about two hundred persons were assembled in an house to celebrate the Communion; which beeing discouered by the common people, the house was assaulted, and some fled, but the women and weaker sort were ta∣ken, 1557 PAVL 4. FERDINAND PHILIP 2 K. of Spainè. MARY. HENRY 2. of whom seuen were burned, and the greater part of the others reser∣ued for the same punishment, to be inflicted when the complices were found out. The Suisses made intercession for these; and the King, in regard of his warre with the King of Spaine (for so Philip was called after the resignation of his father) hauing need of their assistance, gaue order that the proceeding against them should bee moderate. The Pope was infinitely angry, and complained in Consistory, and said it was no maruell if the affaires of the The Pope is angry with y e French King for vsing mo∣deration to∣wards the Protestants. King, did not succeed well, because he more esteemed the assistance of here∣tiques, then the fauour of God. The Pope had forgotten that, in the time of his warre, the Cardinals of the Inquisition complaining that the Protestant Grisons, brought to his pay, for the defence of Rome, vsed many scornes a∣gainst the Churches and Images, his Holinesse did reprehend them, saying they were Angels, sent by God, for the custodie of the Citie, and of his per∣son, and that hee had a strong hope that God would conuert them. So men iudge diuersly of their owne interests, and of the facts of others. The Pope tooke occasion hence, to call in minde two constitutions, which the King And for ma∣king two cō∣stitutions in matter of re∣ligion. had made the same yeere, which hee said were against the liberty of the Cler∣gie, and therefore was resolute they should be abrogated. The one was pu∣blished the first of March, that Mariages made by sonnes before the age of thirty yeeres compleat, and of daughters before twenty fiue, without con∣sent of the father, or of him in whose power they were, should bee voyde. The other the first of May, that all Bishops and Curates should reside, vp∣on paine of losse of the reuenues, with an imposition of an extraordinary Subsidie, besides the ordinarie Tenths, to pay fiue thousand foote Souldiers. The Pope thought not of these things when the newes came, because hee was then in warre, and had neede of the King. But this reason ceasing, hee complained that he had medled euen with the Sacraments, and vnsupport∣ably burdened the Clergie. Hee sayd it was necessary to prouide against these disorders, by a Councell, which were greater then could bee obiected against the Clergie; that it was fit to begin the Reformation from hence; that the French Prelates durst not speake so long as they were in France, but beeing in a Councel in Italy, free from feare of the King, their complaints would soone be heard. Amongst these distastes the Pope receiued some ioy, But is well pleased with the dissoluti∣on of the Colloquie in Germany. that the Colloquie, begunne in Germany, to compose the differences in reli∣gion (which troubled his Holinesse and the Court, as all Colloquies had done) was resolued into nothing. The beginning, progresse, and ende whereof, I thinke necessary to recount, for the vnderstanding of the things that follow. Ferdinand hauing, in the Diet of Ratisbon, confirmed peace in Religion A relation of the Colloquy. vntill a concord were concluded, to finde a way to make it, it was resolued in the Diet the thirteenth of March, that a Colloquie should bee held in Wormes, of twelue Doctours of the old religion, and twelue Protestants, in which the differences should bee discussed, to bring the parties to an agree∣ment. Ferdinand appointed for President of the Colloquie, the Bishop of Namburg, who was so famous. The parties being met in the place the four∣teenth of August, the twelue Protestants were not absolutely of one opinion. For some of them, desiring a perfect vnion of the Church, laboured to recon∣cile 1558 PAVL 4. FERDINAND. PHILIP 2. MARY. HENRY 2. the doctrine of the Heluetians, which was different concerning the Eu∣charist; and, for this end, the Ministers of Geneua had made a Confession in this point, which did not displease Philip Melancthon, and sixe more of the Confession of Ausburg, but did not satisfie the other fiue. This beeing percei∣ued by the Bishop, a man wise, and factious, whose end was that the Colloquie should be dissolued without fruit, hee made the Catholiques propose, that the Colloquie being instituted onely betweene them, and the Confessionists, it was necessary to condemne all the sects of the Swinglians, and of others; be∣cause the errors being vniformely condemned, the trueth would easily ap∣peare. The fiue aforesaid, did consent it should be so. Melancthon, who per∣ceiued the cunning, which was to sow diuision betweene them, and to make them at variance with the Suisses the Prussians, and others, said that it was fit to agree vpon the truth first, and then by that rule, to condemne errors. The Bishop shewing to the fiue that they were contemned by the other seuen, perswaded them to depart from the Colloquie, and wrote the successe to Fer∣dinand, concluding that they could not proceede, in regard of the departure of these, and that those which remained would not first condemne the sects. Ferdinand answered, that his desire was they should proceede, and that the Confessionists should recall those fiue that were departed, and the Catholiques bee in the meane space content to begin and discusse the controuersed Arti∣cles. The Bishop seeing that he had lost this point, perswaded the Catholike Collocutors to write to the King, that it was not iust to begin the treatie, if all the Protestants were not vnited, because it would be necessary to treat againe with the absent, that which was concluded with the present, and so to take double paines. They all retired, without expecting any answere, and each partie blamed the other, excusing it selfe vpon the reasons aforesaid. The Pope perceiuing that, by the warre past, hee was depriued of the cre∣dit 1558. The Pope proceedeth seuerely a∣gainst his owne family. with which hee thought to daunt the whole world, thought to regaine it by an heroicall action, and did, the sixe and twentieth of Ianuary, in Con∣sistory depriue Cardinall Caraffa of the Legation of Bolonia, and of all go∣uernement, and confined him to Ciuita Lauinia, and tooke from Iohn Caraffa, the Cardinals brother, the command and charge of the Armie, exiling him likewise to Galessi. Hee depriued the other Nephew of the gouernement of Borgo, and banished him to Monte-bello, commanding that their wiues, fami∣lie, and children should depart from Rome, and themselues not depart from the places to which they were banished, vpon paine of rebellion. Hee de∣priued likewise all those of their offices; to whom he had giuen them in con∣templation of these. Hee spent more then sixe houres, in complaining, and enueighing against their offences, with such furie, that hee disdained at the Cardinals who spake any good word to pacific him. To Cardinall S. Angelo, who first commending iustice, put him in minde of a saying of Paul the 3. which he often vsed, that the Pope should neuer take hope of fauour from any, hee answered, that his grand father Paul the 3. should haue done better to haue proceeded against his father, and punished his villanies. Hee insti∣tuted Instituteth a new gouern∣ment in Rome a new gouernment in Rome, and in the State of the Church, giuing the charge of all businesses to Camillus Orsinus, vnto whom hee ioyned the Car∣dinals of Trani and Spoleto, affecting a fame of iustice in these actions, and laying the blame of all the grieuances, which the people suffered, vpon the Nephewes. Being thus disburthened of the gouernement, he applyed him∣selfe wholly to the office of the Inquisition, saying it was the true Ramme to beate downe heresie, and defend the Apostolike Sea. And, not regarding what did befit the time, hee published a new Constitution, dated the fif∣teenth of Februarie, which hee made all the Cardinals subscribe. In this he And applieth himselfe who∣ly to the of∣fice of the In∣quisition. Making a new Constitution. renewed euery censure and punishment, pronounced by his predecessors, and euery Statute of Canons, Councels, and Fathers, in what time soeuer, published against heretikes; ordaining that those that were disused, should bee brought in vse againe. Hee declared that all Prelates, and Princes, euen Kings and Emperours, fallen into heresie, should be, and should bee vnder∣stood to be depriued of all their Benefices, States, Kingdomes, and Empires, without further declaration, and vncapeable to be restored to them, euen by the Apostolike Sea: and their goods, States, Kingdomes, and Empire, shall bee vnderstood to be common, and to belong to those Catholikes who can get them. This did minister much talke, and if it had not presently been Which was disesteemed by the world. disesteemed by the world, it would haue kindled a fire in all Christen∣dome. Another accident made the world know that he had not moderated the haughtinesse of his minde The Emperour Charles in the yeere 1556. by his letters written to the Electors and Princes, did absolutely giue to Ferdinand all the administration of the Empire, without reseruing any thing to him∣selfe, commanding that he should be obeyed by all. Afterwards he sent Wil∣liam, Prince of Orange, with two colleagues, to the Diet in Germanie, to trans∣fer the name, title, crowne, and dignitie vpon Ferdinand, as if himselfe had beene dead; which, not seeming fit to the Electors, was deferred vntill the yeere 1558. in which the fourth of February, the day of the Natiuitie, Coro∣nation, and other felicities of Charles, the Ceremonies of the resignation be∣ing made by his Ambassadors, in presence of the Electors, Ferdinand was in∣stalled with the vsual rites. The Pope hearing this, fell into an excessiue rage. Ferdinand is installed in the Empire. He pretended that as the Popes confirmation doth make the Emperour, so the resignation cannot be put into the hands of any but himselfe; in which case it belonged to him to make what Emperour he pleased; alleadging that the Electors haue power granted them by the Popes fauour, to elect the Em∣perour in place of him that is dead, but not in case of resignation, in which it remaineth still in the power of the Apostolike Sea; as also to the disposi∣tion The Pope re∣fuseth to ac∣knowledge him. thereof are annexed all dignities resigned vnto it. Therefore the resig∣nation of Charles is voyd, and the whole authoritie to choose an Emperour is deuolued to him, and was resolued not to acknowledge the King of the Romanes for Emperour. Ferdinand, though he knew this, sent Martin Gusman, his Ambassador, to giue him an account of his brothers resignation, and his owne assumption, to testifie vnto him the reuerence hee bare him, to promise him obedience, and to signifie vnto him that he would send a solemne Ambassage, to treate of his Coronation. The Pope refused to heare him, and referred the discus∣sion And to heare his Ambas∣sadour. of the matter to the Cardinals: who related (for the Popes wil was they should doe so) that the Ambassador could not be admitted, before it did ap∣peare whether the resignation of Charles were lawfull, and the succession of Ferdinand iust. For he being elected King of the Romans, and the election confirmed by Clement, to succeed after the death of the Emperour, it was ne∣cessary the Empire should bee voide by death. Besides there was a nullitie in all the actes of Francfort, as made by heretikes, who haue lost all authoritie and power. Wherefore it was necessary that Ferdinand should send a Proctor, and renounce whatsoeuer was done in that Diet, and beseech the Pope, that hee would graciously bee pleased to make good the resignation of Charles, and his assumption to the Empire, by vertue of his plenarie power, from whom he might expect all paternall grace and fauour. The Pope resolued according to this Counsell, and so declared himselfe to Gusman, giuing him three moneths to put it in execution, beyond which time hee would heare no more speech of it, but himselfe would create a new Emperor. Neither was it possible to remoue him, though King Philip, to fauour his vncle, sent Francis Vargas expresly, and after him Iohn Figaroa, to intreate him. Ferdinand, vnderstanding this, gaue order to Gusman, that, if within three dayes after the receipt thereof, he were not admitted by the Pope, he should depart, and protest vnto him, that Ferdinand, together with the Electors, would resolue of that which should be for the honour of the Empire: Gusman desired au∣dience againe, which the Pope granted in priuate, not as vnto an Ambassa∣dour of the Emperour; and, hearing him relate what he had in his instructi∣ons, and that which was wrote vnto him from the Emperor, he answered, that the things considered by the Cardinals were very important, and that hee could not resolue on them so soone; that he would send a Nuncio to the Imperiall Maiestie of Charles the fifth, and, in the meane while, if hee had commission from his Master to depart he might doe it, and protest what he thought fit. Therefore the Ambassador, hauing made his protestation, de∣parted. Who, hauing made a prote∣station, depar∣teth from Rome. And although Charles died the same yeere the 21. of September, yet it was impossible to remooue the Pope from this resolution. The number of those who call themselues Reformed being now increa∣sed in France, their courage did increase also; and there being a custome a∣mongst the people of Paris, in the Summers euenings, to goe out of the Sub∣urbes of S. German in great multitudes, to take the fresco, and to folace them∣selues with diuers kindes of sportes, those of the new Religion, in stead of doing so, began to sing the Psalmes of Dauid, in French verses. The multi∣tude first laughed at the nouitie, then, leauing the sports, ioyned themselues vnto the singers. And the number of those who came to that place began to increase more then vsually. The Popes Nuncio told the King of this noui∣tie, as of a thing pernicious and dangerous, because the ministeries of religi∣on, vsually celebrated in the Church, in the Latin tongue, by religious men onely, were put into the mouth of the common people, in the vulgar lan∣guage, which was an inuention of the Lutherans; telling him that, if he did not resist the beginnings, in a short time all Paris would be Lutheran. The King gaue order that the principall authors should bee proceeded against; wherein they went not very far, hauing found Antony, king of Nauar, and his wife, in that number: But for hereafter it was forbid vpon paine of death. The Religion in England was also much changed this yeere. The Queene 1558 PAVL 4. FERDINAND PHILIP 2. ELIZABETH. HENRY 2. Mary Queene of England dieth And Eliza∣beth is crow∣ned. died the seuenteenth day of Nouember, and Cardinall Poole the same day; which stirred vp many, who were not satisfied with the former gouerne∣ment, to restore the reformation of Edward, and to separate themselues whol∣ly from the Spaniards: which they did the rather, because King Philip, to hold a foote in England, had treated to marrie Elizabeth, sister and successor of Mary, to Charles his sonne: and when there was little hope of the life of Mary, hee had also cast foorth diuers words, that hee would take her for his owne wife. But the new Queene being wise, as shee shewed her selfe to bee in all her gouernement, did first secure the Kingdome by oath, that she would not marrie a stranger, and was crowned by the Bishop of Carlile, an adhe∣rent to the Church of Rome, not making any open declaration what do∣ctrine shee would follow, disseigning, so soone as shee was setled in her go∣uernement, to establish it, by the counsell of the Parliament, and of learned and godly men, and to make a constant reformation of the state of Religi∣on. Therefore shee exhorted the chiefe of the Nobilitie, who desired a change, to proceede without tumult, assuring them that shee would not en∣force any. Shee caused presently an account to bee giuen to the Pope of her assumption, with letters of credence written to Edward Cerne, who was Ambassadour to her sister, and was not departed from Rome. But the Pope, proceeding according to his vsuall rigour, answered, that that Kingdome was held in Fee of the Apostolike Sea; that shee could not succeede beeing With whom the Pope doth presently con∣test. illegitimate; that hee could not contradict the declarations of Clement the seuenth, and Paul the third, that it was a great boldnesse to assume the name and gouernement without him; that, for this, shee deserued not to bee heard in any thing; yet beeing desirous to shew a fatherly affection, if shee will re∣nounce her pretensions, and referre her selfe wholly to his free disposition, hee will doe whatsoeuer may bee done with the honour of the Apostolike Sea. Many did beleeue that as he spake thus by his own inclination, so he was incited by the French King, who fearing a marriage betweene her and the King of Spaine might be made by the Popes dispensation, thought fit to as∣sure himselfe by cutting off the practises in the very beginning. But the new Queene vnderstanding the Popes answere, and wondring at the mans hastie disposition, thought it not profitable, either for her, or the Kingdome, to treate any more with him. So that the cause ceasing, shee gaue the Nobilitie leaue to consult what was fit to bee done for the seruice of God, and quiet of the Kingdome. A disputation was held in Westminster, in presence of all A disputation is held in Westminster in matter of religion. the States, betweene learned men, chosen on both sides, which began the last of March, and lasted vntill the thirtieth of April: and, a Parliament being assembled to this end, all the Edicts of Religion made by Mary were abolished, those of her brother Edward restored, obedience taken away from the Pope, the title of the Head of the Church of England giuen to the Queene, the reuenues of the Monasteries confiscated; and assigned some to the Nobilitie, and some to the Crowne, the Images taken out of the Chur∣ches by the people, and the Romane Religion banished. Another accident happened also. For in the Diet of Ausburg it appearing, by the actes of the Colloquie the yeere before, dissolued without fruit, that there was no hope to doe any good by that meanes, Ferdinand tolde them hee would procure the generall Councell to be restored, exhorting all to submit themselues to the Decrees thereof, as beeing the way to remooue differences. The pro∣testants answered, that they would consent to a Councell, called, not by the Pope, but by the Emperour, to bee held in Germanie, in which the Pope should not preside, but should submit himselfe to the iudgement thereof, and release the Bishops and Diuines of their oath; in which also the Protestants Ferdinand promiseth to procure a ge∣nerall Coun∣cell. should haue a deciding voyce, and all should bee determined according to the holy Scripture, and whatsoeuer was concluded in Trent, should be reexa∣mined: which, if it cannot be obtained of the Pope, yet the peace of Religion should be confirmed, according to the agreement of Passau, hauing knowen, by too manifest experience, that no good can bee drawen from any Popish Councell. The Emperour knowing the difficultie to obtaine of the Pope a grant of the things proposed, and that now hee had no meanes to negotiate with him, in regard of the controuersie about the resignation of Charles, and his succession, he confirmed the accord of Passau, and the Recesses of the Di∣ets And confir∣meth the ac∣cord of Pas∣sau. following. The Pope hauing cut off all meanes to treate with the Emperour and Germanie, knew not what to say to this. Yet hee was more displeased with Wherewith the Pope is much displea∣sed. their discourse concerning the Councell, then with the libertie granted by the Recesse, beeing resolute not to call any Councell but in Rome, whatsoeuer should happen. In this respect another accident was as grieuous as the for∣mer; But more with the capi∣tulations of the peace of Cambray. that is, the peace made at Cambray the third of Aprill, betweene the Kings of France and Spaine, which was well confirmed by the marriages of the daughter of Henry to the King of Spaine, and of his sister to the Duke of Sauoy. In which peace, amongst other capitulations, it was agreed, that both the Kings should make a faithfull promise to labour ioyntly that the Councell should bee celebrated, the Church reformed, and the differences of religion composed. The Pope considered how goodly a shew the title of reformation, and the name of a Councell did make; that England was lost, and all Germany also, partly by the Protestants, and partly by his difference with Ferdinand; that these two vnited Kings were much offended by him, the Spaniards by deedes and words, the French by words at the least, there re∣mayning none to whom he might haue refuge, that the Cardinals were wea∣rie of his gouernement, and his people not well affected, in regard of the incommodities of the warre, and the taxes layd vpon them. These cogitati∣ons did so afflict the old Pope, that hee was vnfit to rule. Hee could not holde the Consistories so often as hee was woont, and when hee did holde So that hee became vnfit to rule. them hee spent the most part of the time in speaking of the Inquisition, and exhorting the Cardinals to fauour it, as beeing the onely way to extinguish heresies. But the two Kings did not agree to procure the Councell for any ill will, or interests, which either of them had against the Pope, or Papacie, but to pro∣uide against the new doctrines, which did exceedingly increase, being wil∣lingly heard and receiued by all men of conscience: and, which was of more The progresse of the refor∣med religion; and y e meanes vsed to sup∣presse it. importance, the male-contented, and those who were desirous of innouati∣ons, put themselues on that side, and did dayly, vnder pretence of religion, make some enterprises, as well in the Low Countries, as in France, in regard those people did loue their libertie, and had commerce with Germanie, as bor∣dering vpon it. In the beginning of the troubles some seedes were sowed, which that they might not take roote, the Emperour Charles the fifth, in the Low Countries, and the French King, in his Kingdome, made many Edicts, and commanded diuers executions, whereof wee haue spoken in their due places. But after that the number of the Protestants did increase in Germa∣nie, and the Euangeliques did multiply amongst the Suisses, and the separa∣tion was made in England, by reason of the often warres betweene the Empe∣rour and French King, either partie was forced to call Auxiliaries out of these three Nations, who publikely professing and preaching the Reformed reli∣gion in their quarters, by their example, and by other meanes, diuers of the people became of their opinion. It is certaine, that this compelled Charles the Emperour, to attempt the bringing in of the Spanish Inquisition, seeing that other remedies did not preuaile, though hee was partly forced to desist, for the causes before related. And Henry the French King, gaue the Bishops authoritie to punish heretiques; a thing neuer vsed before in that Kingdome. And although in the Low Countries, from the first Edict of Charles, vntill this time of the peace, there were hanged, beheaded, buried aliue, and bur∣ned, to the number of fifty thousand, and very many put to death in France, In the Low Countries 50000 were executed for religion in a short time, and very ma∣ny in France. yet both places were then in worse case then euer. This made the Kings to thinke ioyntly of finding a remedie, by the great perswasion of the Car∣dinall of Loraine for the French, and of Granuel Bishop of Arras for the Spa∣niards, who being in Cambray, from October vntill Aprill, with other De∣puties of the two Kings, to treate a peace, did conferre particularly amongst themselues, how that doctrine might be rooted out; and were afterwards the chiefe instruments of whatsoeuer did happen in both States. The cause they Whereof the Cardinall of Loraine and Granuel, Bi∣shop of Arras were causes. alledged to be the zeale of religion, and the seruice of their Princes: but it was vniuersally beleeued, that it was rather ambition, and a deseigne to enrich themselues by the spoyles of those who were to be condemned. The peace beeing made, the King of Spaine, to begin to giue some order, not being able to bring in the Inquisition openly, thought to doe it obliquely, The King of Spaine ere∣cteth Bishop∣rickes in the Low Coun∣tries, that hee might more easily bring in the Inquisi∣tion. by the Bishops. But there beeing but two Bishopricks in the Low Coun∣tries, Cambray, and Ʋtrect, and the residue of the Clergie subiect to the Bi∣shops of Germanie, and France, and those two Bishoprickes also subiect to for∣raigne Arch-bishops, to whom appeales could not be denied, so that he could not worke his will by meanes of them, hee thought fit to free all that Clergie from the subiection of Bishops, who were not his subiects, and to institute three Arch-bishoprickes in those Countries, Meclin, Cambray, and Ʋtrect, and to erect into Bishoprickes, Anwerp, Balduck, Gant, Bridges, Ipre, S. Omar, Na∣mur, Harlem, Middleburgh, Lewarden, Groninghe, Ruremond, and Dauenter; an∣nexing vnto them, for reuenewes, some rich Abbies. Hee caused the Pope to approoue all this by his Bull, dated the ninth of May the same yeere. The pretence for doing of this was, that formerly those Countries, beeing not much inhabited, did not neede a greater number of Bishops, but now the multitude of people, and dignitie of the Cities did require they should bee honoured with Ecclesiasticall titles. Yet the Nobilitie and Comminalty did imagine it was an art to bring in the Inquisition; in which opinion they were confirmed when they saw the Popes Bull. For, according to the vse of Rome, to enlarge their power or profit in euery bargaine, he alledged, for a cause of that new institution, that that Countrey was compassed, and, as it were, besieged by Schismatiques, who did not obey him, the Head of the Church, so that the true faith was in great danger by the fraudes and insidiations of the Heretiques, if new and good Gardians were not placed ouer them. This occurrence made the Nobilitie to adhere together, and to thinke how to make resistance before there was meanes to compell them by force of armes. Which ma∣keth the No∣bility to com∣bine and re∣fuse to pay tribute. They resolued therefore not to pay tribute, vntill the Spanish Souldiers were remooued out of the Countrey, and began to incline more to the new opinion, and to fauour it: which caused the other troubles which shall bee spoken of. But the French King, desirous to make prouision that the Lutheran sect The French King entreth into the Mer∣curiall. should not more encrease in the Kingdome, vnderstanding that some of the Counsellors of the Parliament were infected with it, in a Mercuriall (so they call the iudicature, instituted to examine and correct the actions of the Counsellors of Parliament, and Iudges of the King) held in Paris the 15. of Iune, where they were to treate of Religion, after the Congregation was assembled, entred in person. Hee said hee had established peace in the whole world, by the marriages of his sister and daughter, that hee might prouide a∣gainst the inconueniences bred in his Kingdome about Religion, which ought to bee the principall care of Princes. Therefore vnderstanding they were to treat of this subiect, hee exhorted them to handle Gods cause with sinceritie. And hauing commaunded them to prosecute the things begun, Claude Ʋiole one of them, spake much against the manners of the Court of Rome, and the bad customes, growen to bee pernicious errours, which haue caused the new sects. Therefore it was necessary to mitigate the seuere pu∣nishments, vntill the differences of religion were remooued, and the Ecclesi∣asticall discipline amended by authority of a Generall Councell, the onely remedie for these euils, as the Councels of Constance and Basil haue iudged, commanding that one should bee celebrated euery ten yeeres. His opinion was followed by Ludouicus Faber, and some others. Anne du Bourg did adde, that many villanies were comitted, condemned by the Lawes, for punish∣ment whereof, the rope and fire were not sufficient; as frequent blasphemies against God, periuries, adulteries, not onely secret, but euen cherished with impudent licence; making himselfe to be plainely vnderstood, that hee spake not onely of the Grandies of the Court, but of the King himselfe also; ad∣ding that, while men liued thus dissolutely, diuers torments were prepared against those who were guilty of nothing, but of publishing to the world the vices of the Church of Rome, and desiring an amendment of them. In opposition of all this, Egidius Magister, the prime President spake against the new sects, concluding that there was no other remedie, but that which was formerly vsed against the Albigenses, of whom Philippus Augustus put to death sixe hundred in one day, and against the Waldenses, who were choked in the caues, whither they retired to hide themselues. When all the voyces were giuen, the King said, he had now heard with his owne eares, that which before was told him, that the contagion of the Kingdome doth hence arise, 1559 PIVS 4. FERDINAND. PHILIP 2. ELIZABETH. HENRY 2. And cōman∣deth some of the Counsel∣lors of Parlia∣ment to bee imprisoned. that there are in the Parliament who doe despise the Popes authoritie, and his, that he well knoweth they are but few, but the cause of many euils. There∣fore hee exhorted those who are good subiects to continue in doing their duety, and immediatly gaue order that Faber and du Bourg should be impriso∣ned, and afterward caused foure more to bee apprehended in their houses: which did much daunt those who embraced the new religion. For the Counsellors of Parliament in France, beeing reputed most sacred, and inuio∣lable, who notwithstanding were put into prison for deliuering their opini∣on in publike Assembly, they concluded that the King would pardon none. But examples of great feares are alwayes ioyned with others of equall bold∣nesse. 15 9 The Refor∣matists hold a Synod in Paris. For at the same time, as if there had beene no danger at all, the mini∣sters of the Reformed (for so the Protestants are called in France) assem∣bled in Paris in the suburbes of Saint German, made a Synode, in which Franciscus Morellus, the chiefe man amongst them, was President, ordayning diuers constitutions, of the manner of holding Councels, of remoouing the domination in the Church, of the election and office of Ministers, of cen∣sures, of marriages, of diuorces, of degrees of consanguinitie, and affinitie, that throughout all France they might not onely haue an vniforme faith, but discipline also. And their courage did increase, because the fame of the seuerity vsed in France comming into Germanie, the three Electors, and And are en∣couraged by the intercessi∣on of the Pro∣testant Prin∣ces of Ger∣manie. other Protestant Princes sent Ambassadours to the King, praying him to proceede with pietie and Christian charitie against the professors of their Religion, guiltie of nothing but of accusing the corrupted manners, and the discipline peruerted by the Church of Rome, which had bene done more then an hundred yeeres since by other godly Doctors of France. For that Kingdome beeing now in quiet, the differences of Religion may easily bee composed, by the disputation of able men, desirous of peace, who may ex∣amine their confession by the rule of holy Scripture, and of the ancient Fa∣thers, suspending in the meane time the seueritie of the sentences; which they will receiue as a thing most gratefull, and remaine much obliged to him for it. The King gaue a courteous answere in generall wordes, promi∣sing Which did them no good. to giue them satisfaction, and to send one expresly to signifie so much vnto them. Yet he remitted nothing of the seueritie, but, after the Ambas∣sadours were parted, hee deputed foure Iudges, of the body of the Parlia∣ment, in the causes of the prisoners, with the Bishop of Paris, and the In∣quisitor, Antonie de Mocares, commaunding them to proceede with all ex∣pedition. The Pope, vnto whom all these things were knowen, as hee was much discontented with the progresse of the new doctrine in the States of both the Kings, so hee was pleased that those Princes did thinke of it, and mooued them, by his Nuncij, and by their Ambassadours residing with him, to doe so still. But hee would not haue any other meanes then that of the Inquisition, which he thought the onely remedie, as he said vpon all occasions, iudging that the Councell would doe as formerly it had done, that is, reduce all into a worse state. While he was possessed with these cogitations, and weake of body, the King of France died the second of Iuly, by a wound in the eye, running at Tilt; for which hee seemed very sorrowfull, and was so indeede. For although hee suspected, and with reason, the intelligence betweene the 1559. PAVL. 4. FERDINAND ELIZABETH. FRANCIS. 2. Henry the se∣cond dyeth, the second of Iuly. two Kings, yet hee had still hope to separate them. But the one being dead, he saw he was at the discretion of the other alone, whom he more feared, be∣cause he was more offended by him, and was of a more close nature, hard to be sounded. Hee feared also that in France a gate would be set wide open to let in sectes, which might bee confirmed before the new King could get so much wisedome and reputation, as was necessary to oppose so great difficul∣ties. Hee liued some few dayes, afflicted with these cogitations; but now laying aside all hopes, which had vntill then kept him aliue, hee died the eigh∣teenth The Pope Iy∣eth the 18. of August, re∣commending to the Cardi∣nals nothing but the office of the Inqui∣sition. of August, recommending to the Cardinals nothing but the office of the Inquisition, the onely meanes, as he said, to preserue the Church, exhorting all to employ all their endeauours, to establish it in Italy, and wheresoeuer else they could. The Pope being newly dead, or rather still breathing, there did arise, by reason of the great hatred conceiued by the people against him, and his whole house, such tumults in Rome, that the Cardinals were more troubled with these, as being neere and vrgent, then with those that were common to all Christendome. The Citie was all in sedition; the head of the Popes statua The people shew their de∣testation of him. was beaten off, and drawen through the streetes; the prisons broken open, and more then foure hundred prisoners set at libertie: and going to Ripeta, where the Inquisition was, they did not onely take out the imprisoned, but burnt the place, and all the processes and writings kept there; and they had almost burned the Conuent of Minerua, where the Fryars, imployed in that office, doe dwell. The Colledge of Cardinals had recalled Caraffa in the life time of the Pope, and, in the first congregation which they held after his death, they deliuered the Cardinall Morone out of the Castle, who was rea∣die Card, Morone was set at li∣bertie, who was ready to be sentenced for an here∣tique. to bee censured for an Heretique. A great question was made, whether he could haue a voyce in the election, being opposed by those who thought him their aduersary. But at the last it was resolued on his side. The Cardi∣nals were forced to consent, that all the moueable armes and monuments of the house of Caraffa should be torne in pieces, and the immoueable de∣molished. Being assembled in the Conclaue the fift of September, eight dayes after the iust time, because they were hindred by those inconueniences, they made capitulations, which, according to custome, were sworne to by all, that they might giue some order for the gouernement, which was wholly confu∣sed by the too great seueritie of Paul 4. Two of them did belong to the Capitulatiōs sworne vnto by the Cardi∣nals in the Conclaue. matter whereof we treat; one, that the difference with the Emperour, which might hazard the losse of all the residue of Germanie, should bee composed, and hee acknowledged for Emperour; the other, that for the necessitie of France and Flanders, the Councell; as the onely remedie against heresies, should be restored. The Papacie was vacant longer then the necessitie of the time did comport, not so much for the discords of the Cardinals, as for the interests of Princes, who did interpose more then they were wont. While they were locked vp in the Conclaue, King Philip going from the Low Coun∣tries into Spaine by sea, with resolution neuer to remooue thence, fell into a storme, in which almost all the fleet was wracked, his houshold stuffe, of ve∣ry 1559 PIVS. 4. FERDINAND. ELIZABETH. FRANCIS 2. King Philip is in great pe∣rill at sea, Who, at his arriuall in Spaine, vseth great seueritie against the Lutherans. great valew, lost, and himselfe hardly escaped. Hee said he was deliuered, by the singular prouidence of GOD, to root out Lutheranisme, which hee presently began to doe. For the 24. of September, so soone as he was arri∣ued in Seuil, to giue an example in the beginning of his gouernment, and to leaue no hope to any, he caused Iohannes Pontius Count of Bayleno, together with a preacher, and many others of the Colledge of S. Isidore, where the new religion was entred to be burned for Lutherans; as also some Noble women, to the number of thirteene, and last of all the statue of Constantinus Pontius, Confessor to Charles the fifth, who serued him in his retyred life, and held him in his armes when he dyed. This man dyed in prison a few dayes before, where he was put immediatly after the Emperours death, for imputation of Heresie: which execution, though against an vnsensible sta∣tue, increased the feare, because euery one concluded that no conniuencie nor mercie could be hoped for from the King, who bare no respect to him, whose infamie did dishonour the memorie of the Emperour deceased. Af∣terwards he went to Ʋalidolid, where he caused twentie eight of the prime Nobilitie of the Countrey to be burned in his presence and kept Fryar Bar∣tholomew Caranza in prison, mentioned often in the first reduction of the Councell of Trent, who was Arch-bishop of Toledo, chiefe Prelate of Spaine, taking from him all the reuenewes. And it cannot be denied that these exe∣cutions, with others which daily succeeded, though not so exemplarie, kept those Countreys in quiet, while all other places were full of sedition. For al∣though the new opiniōs were sowed in the minds of many, especially of the Nobilitie, yet they were concealed within their hearts, in regard of the close nature of the Spaniards, who abhorre dangers, neuer aduenturing vpon hard enterprises, but ayming to prooceed securely. The Kings death in France, which they reformed did ascribe to miracle in∣creased their courage; though they durst not shew themselues openly in Pa∣ris. For his sonne Francis, the new king, after he was consecrated at Rhemes, The young French King, imirateth the seueritie of his father. the twentieth of September, gaue order to prosecute the processe of the Counsellors, who were in prison, and deputed the President of S. Andreas, and the Inquisitor Antonius de Mocares, to discouer the Lutherans. The Iud∣ges, hauing gained some of the common sort, formerly professors of that religion, had notice of the places where they did secretly assemble. Therfore many, both men and women, were imprisoned, and many fled, whose goods were confiscated, after a citation by three Edicts. And by the example of Paris, the same was done in Poytou, Tholouse, and Aix of Prouence, by the insti∣gation of George Cardinall of Armignac, who, not to abandon that enter∣prise, would not goe to Rome to the election of the pope, vsing all diligence that those who were discouered might be apprehended. The professors of that religion being stirred vp hereby, and imboldened, because they knew they were many, sent about many writings, against the King and Queene, and those of Loraine (by whom the King was gouerned) authours of the persecution, intermixing some points of doctrine, which being willingly read by all, as things composed by publique libertie, did imprint the new religion in the minds of many. In the end of the processe against the Counsellers, after along contestati∣on, all were absolued, except Anne du Burg, who was burnt the eighteenth of December, not so much by the inclination of the Iudges, as by the resolu∣tion of the Queen, prouoked against him, because the Lutherans did diuulge in many writings, & libels spread abroad, that the King had been wounded in the eye by the prouidence of God, for a punishment of his words, vsed a∣gainst Anna Borges is burned. du Bourg, that he would see him, burnt. But the death and constancie of a man so conspicuous, did make many curious to know what religion that was, for which he had so couragiously indured punishment, & made the number increase: which augmenting also euery day for other causes, those whose con∣stancie giueth an encrease to the reformed Religion. who were interessed in their ouerthrow, either for loue of the old Religion, or as Ecclesiastiques, and authours of the former persecutions, thought it necessarie to discouer them, before they were so many as that they could not be suppressed. To this end they caused the pictures of the blessed Vir∣gin, and of Saints, to be placed in euery corner throughout all France, and Meanes vsed in France to discouer the Reformatists. especially in Paris, burning candles before them, making the porters, and o∣ther vulgar persons sing the vsuall prayers of the Church, and appointing men to stand there with little boxes, to aske almes for the buying of candles: and he that did not honour the images in passing by, or did not stand with reuerence at those corners, or did not giue the almes that were asked, wree held suspected, & the least euil that did befall them, was to be abused by the people, with boxes and spurnings: But many of them were imprisoned, and put in suit. This prouoked the Reformatists, and caused the great con∣spiracie of Geffery Renaut, of whom wee will speake hereafter. In Rome, after diuers contentions and practises to create Pope, the Car∣dinals of Mantua, Ferrara, Carpi, and Putea, finally the 24. of December at Iohn Angelo, Car Me¦dici, is created Pope. night, Iohn Angelo Cardinall of Medicis was created, and named himselfe Pius 4 who hauing appeased the tumults of the city, and secured the minds of all by a generall pardon of whatsoeuer was committed in time of their sedition, applyed himselfe suddenly to the execution of two capitulations, which he had sworne, concerning the most common affaires: and the thir∣tieth of the same moneth calling together 13. Cardinals, and consulting with them about the reiection of the Ambassage of Ferdinand, and the de∣termination of Paul not to acknowledge him for Emperour, the common opinion was, that he had receiued wrong. But after a long consultation how to remedie this inconuenience, many things being proposed and discussed, but no meanes found how to treat without danger of greater incounters, in case the Electors should interpose (as it was impossible to forbid them) the common opinion was, that they were to auoide all negotiation, because it would conclude with the dishonour of the Pope, and that it was better not to expect any request to be made from the Emperour. This was approued by the Pope, who thought it wisedom to giue that, which he could neither He approo∣ueth the re∣signation of Charles, & the succession of Ferdinand. keepe nor sell. He therefore presently called for Franciscus della Torre, the Emperours Minister in Rome, and tolde him that he approued the resigna∣tion of Charles, A succession of Ferdinand to the Empire, promising to write vnto him with the vsual titles, and bad him send aduise hereof. After this, he thought seriously of the Councell, being assured hee should be importuned for it from diuers parts. Conferring with the Cardinall Mo∣rone, whom he trusted for his wisedome and friendship, he much doubted, as himselfe said, whether the Councell were good for the Apostolique Sea, or not; and if not, whether it were better to denie it absolutely, and freely oppose whosoeuer should desire it, or to make shew he was willing, and to crosse it with some impediments, besides those which the businesse it selfe And consul∣teth about the Councel. would bring: and if it were fit to celebrate it, whether it were better to ex∣pect vntill he were requested, or to preuent and require it himselfe He cal∣led to minde the causes why Paul the 3, did dissolue it vnder colour of trans∣lation, and the hazards which Iulius did runne, if good fortune had not as∣sisted; that now there was no Emperour Charles to be feared, and that the weaker the Princes are, the BB. are the more bolde, who were the more to be looked vnto, because they cannot aduance themselues but vpon the ru∣ines of the Papacie. To oppose openly the demand of the Councell was scandalous, in regard of the glorious name thereof, and of the vaine opini∣on which the world hath, that it must needs be profitable; as also because e∣uery one is perswaded, that the Councel is refused for feare of reformation; which maketh the refusall a greater scandall. And if necessitie shal enforce to grant that which had bene absolutely denied, it will be a totall losse of reputation, and incite the world to debase him who hath opposed. In these ambiguities the Pope was assured that the Councel could not be profitable for the Church, nor for the Kingdomes diuided, and must necessarily en∣danger the Papal authoritie; yet he could not openly oppose it, because the world was vncapable of this trueth. But he was vncertaine, whether, in case the Kings or Kingdomes did require it the coiunctures of the future affaires might be such, as that the secret impediments might take effect. When hee had thought of all, he concluded to shew himselfe ready, yea, desirous, and to preuent the desires of others, that he might conceale himselfe the better in crossing them, and haue more credit in representing the contrary difficul∣ties, referring to the superiour causes that deliberation, to which humane iudgement could not reach. So much he resolued of, and no more. The coronation was made at the Epiphany; and the eleauenth of the same moneth he held a frequent congregation of Cardinals, in which he decla∣red his minde at large, that hee would reforme the Court, and call a generall Councell, charging them all to consider what things deserued reformation, and of the place, time & other preparations of the Synod, that it might not bring foorth the same fruit that it had done twice before. And afterwards he spake of this in his priuate discourses with the Cardinals and Ambassa∣dours, vpon all occasions; yet did nothing which might manifest his inten∣tion more plainely. Newes came to the Emperour at Ʋienna of what the Pope had intima∣ted to his Minister; who immediatly deputed an Ambassadour, and, before The Empe∣rour sendeth an Ambassa∣dor to Rome. his departure, wrote to the Pope to giue him ioy of his assumption, and thankes that he had wisely, and like a father, ended the difficultie, which Paulus 4 had, against reason and equitie, set on foot, giuing him an account of the Ambassadour which he had appointed to come vnto him. This was Scipio, Count of Arco, who came to Rome the tenth of February, and fell into a great difficulty in the very beginning. For the Emperour gaue him commission to render to the Pope reuerence onely, and the Pope was reso∣lute hee should render him obedience, shewing that the. Ambassadours of other Emperors had done so to his predecessors, and said plainly, that other∣wise, he would not admit him. The Ambassadour of Spaine, and the Car∣dinal Pacceco aduised him not to transgresse his commission, but the Car∣dinals Who, after some conte∣station, ren∣dereth obedi∣ence to the Pope, not reuerence onely. Morone & Trent perswaded the contrary; whose opinion he followed, because the Emperour had giuen him charge to consult with those two Cardinals in all matters. After the ceremonie was ended in the Consistery, with satisfaction of the Pope, the Ambassadour, begin to pray him in the first priuate audience, in Caesars name, to call the Councel to compose the dissensions of Germany, was preuented by him, with the Ambassadors great contentment; who beleeuing that hee was to treat with the Pope, about an And is well pleased that his Holinesse beginneth to speake of the Councell. vnpleasing businesse, was prepared to deliuer in sugered termes, that it might be heard more willingly. The Pope told him, that the Cardinals, being in the Conclaue, consulted how they might set the Councell on foote againe, in which consultation himselfe was a very principal partie; and now being Pope, was more confirmed in the same determination. Yet he would not proceede blindely, but so as that he might auoyd the difficulties, which happened before, and would bee sure of the necessarie preparatories, that the desired fruit might succeed. Hee sayd the like to the Ambassadours of France and Spaine, and wrote to his Nuncij to impart it to their Kings: hee spake of it also with the Ambassadours of the King of Portugal, and of the Princes of Italie, which were in Rome. The Duke of Sauoy deman∣deth the Popes haue to hold a Colloquie. After this the Duke of Sauoy sent one expresly to desire the Pope, that by his fauour, he might make a colloquie of religion, to instruct his people of the Vallies, who were generally alienated from the old religion. These were a part of the Waldenses, who, 400, yeeres since, forsooke the Church of Rome, and in regard of the persecutions, fled into Polonia, Germany, Puglia, Prouence, and some of them into the Valleys of Mountsenis, Luserna, Angronia, Perosa, and S. Martin. These hauing alwayes continued in their separation, with certaine ministers of their owne, whom they called Pastors, when the doctrine of Zuinglius was planted in Geneua, did presently vnite themselues with those, as agreeing with them in points of doctrine, & principall rites: and when Piemont was vnder the French-men, though they were forbid vpon paine of death to exercise their religion, yet by little and little, they made it publique, so that when Countrey was restored to the Duke of Sauoy, the exercise of it was almost free. The Duke resolued to make them receiue the Catholike religion, so that many were burned, and put to death by other meanes, and more condemned to the Galleys, at the instigation of the Inquifitor, Thomaso Iacomello, a Dominican Friar. This made them consult whether it were lawfull to defend themselues with Armes; wherein their ministers did not agree. Some sayd they might not oppose their Prince, though it were to defend their own liues, but might carry away their goods and reure into the mountaines. Others said they might vse force, in so de∣sperate a case as this, especially it being not so much against the Prince, as against the Pope, who abused the autoritie of the Prince. Many of them did follow the first opinion, and the others stood vpon their guard; so that the Duke perceiuing they had not rebellious thoughts, and that they might ea∣sily be gained by instruction, receiued the counsell which was giuen him, to institute a Colloquie to this end. But because hee would not displease the Pope, by proceeding without his knowledge, he gaue him an account here∣of, and asked his consent. The Pope beeing angry that, in Italy also, euen vn∣der To instruct the people of his Valleys, whom before he had perse∣ceted. his nose, his authority should be questioned, answered that hee would consent by no meanes; but, if those people had neede of instruction, hee would send a Legate, with authority to absolute them who would bee con∣uerted, accompanied with Diuines who might giue them instruction. But But his Holi∣nesse refuseth to grant it. hee sayd hee had little hope to conuert them, because the heretikes are obsti∣nate, and whatsoeuer is done to exhort them to acknowledge their fault, they expound to bee a want of force to compell them. That it cannot bee remembred that any good was euer done by this moderation, but that ex∣perience is taught, that the sooner iustice is vsed, and force of Armes, when that other is not sufficient, so much the better the successe is. If hee would proceed thus, hee would send him assistance; but if he thought it not fit, all might bee deferred vntill a generall Councell, which he would suddenly call. And therefore the Duke ta∣keth Armes against them. The Duke did not like the sending of a Legat, because it would haue prouo∣ked them more, and forced him to proceed according to the interests of o∣thers, thinking it better to take Armes, which the Pope commended more, and promised assistance. Therefore there was warre in these Ʋalleys all this yeere, and part of the next, whereof we will speake in the time when it ended. There was a great conspiracie in many parts of France, into which many A great con∣spiracie in France, & the causes of it. were entred, and the maior part for cause of Religion, disdaining to see poore people drawen euery day to the stake to bee burned, guilty of nothing but of zeale to worship GOD, and to saue their owne soules. To these were ioy∣ned others, who, thinking the Guisards to be the cause of all the disorders of the Kingdome, iudged it an heroike acte to deliuer it from oppression, by taking the publike administration out of their hands. There were also am∣bitious persons, desirous of change, who could not worke their will, but in the middest of troubles. Both these couered themselues with the cloake of Religion, to gaine more followers: and the better to confirme their mindes, caused the Principall Lawyers of Germany and France, and the most famous Protestant Diuines to publish in writing, that, without violating the Maiestie of the King and dignity of the lawfull Magistrate, they might oppose with Armes, the violent domination of the house of Guise, who offended true Re∣ligion, and lawfull iustice, and kept the King as it were in prison. The Con∣spirators prepared a great multitude, who should appeare before the King, without Armes, to demand that the seuerity of the iudgements might be mi∣tigated, and liberty of conscience granted, designing they should bee fol∣lowed by Gentlemen, who should make supplication against the gouerne∣ment of the Guisards. The conspiracie was discouered, and the Court reti∣red from Blois, an open place fit for the execution of such a purpose, vnto The Conspi∣rations are dis∣couered, and many of them executed and the rest par∣doned. Amboise, a strong fortresse. This troubled the Conspiratours; who, while they were thinking of a new course, some of them, who tooke Armes, were beaten and slaine, and others taken and sentenced to die; and to appease the tumult, pardon was granted by the Kings Edict, dated the eighteenth of March, to all, who simply moued with zeale of Religion, had entred into the conspiracie, so that they disarmed within 24. houres. Afterwards the King, by his Edict, pardoned all the reformatists, vntill they returned to the Church. Hee forbade all assemblies for Religion, and committed to the Bishops the hearing of the causes of heresie. This displeased the Chancellor; though hee consented, for feare the Spanish Inquisition would bee brought in, as the Gui∣sards desired. The humors mooued were not quieted by the punishment of the Con∣spirators, and the pardons published, nor the hopes laid aside, which they had conceiued, to haue libertie of religion, yea, greater tumults of the people were raised in Prouence, Languedoc, and Poitou, whether the Preachers of Geneua The Prote∣stants doe increase by meanes of the Preachers of Geneua. were called, and came willingly: by whose Sermons the number of the Pro∣testants did increase. This generall and sudden combination made the go∣uernours of the Kingdome resolute, that there was neede of an Ecclesiasticall remedie, and that very quickly; and a Nationall Synode was proposed by the whole Councell. The Cardinall of Armignac said, that nothing was to be done without the Pope; that he alone was able to make prouision; that they should write to Rome, and expect an answere. To which opinion some few Prelats did adhere. But the Bishop of Valence said, that a sudden remedy could not be expected from the Pope, because he was farre distant, nor a fit one, be∣cause hee was not informed of the particular necessity of the Kingdome, nor a charitable one, because he was busied in making his Nephewes great; that GOD had giuen to all kingdomes, all things necessary to gouerne them; that France had Prelats of its owne to regulate the causes of religion, who better know the wants of the kingdome; that it would bee a great absurditie to see Paris burne, hauing the riuers of Some and Marne full of water, and to beleeue that water must be brought from Tiber, to quench the fire. The resolution A Nationall Synod is in∣timated in France. of the Councell was, that, there beeing neede of a strong and sudden remedy, the Prelates of the Kingdome should assemble, to finde a way to hinder the course of these great mischiefes: and the eleuenth of Aprill the Synod was in∣timated, for the tenth of September. But that the Pope might not take it in ill part, a Curriet was dispatched to Rome, to giue him an account of the resolution, and to enforme him of the necessity of that remedy, and to pray him not to take it amisse. The Am∣bassador represented to his Holinesse the infection of the kingdome, and the dangers, and the hope which the King had of some good remedy by a ge∣nerall Conuocation of the Prelats, without which he saw no meanes to make an effectuall pouision. Therefore hee was forced not to deferre longer, nor to expect remedies from places romote, which were vncertaine, and long in comming, and to vse that which was in his owne power: and he added that no constitution of that Synod should bee of force before it were confirmed by his Holinesse. The Pope, on the contrary, did grieuously complaine, that the King had pardoned the errours committed against religion, euen of The Pope blameth the French King for pardoning here kes. those who did not aske it; wherein none had power but himselfe. And what King is there (hee sayd) who thinketh hee is able to pardon offences against GOD? That it is no maruell if, by the iust wrath of GOD, there be so many tumults in that kingdome, where the Sacred Canons are dise∣steemed and the Popes authority vsurped. He said that the assembling of the Prelats would doe no good, yea, would cause a greater diuision▪ that he had proposed a generall Councel which was the onely remedy that the cause why it was not essembled already proceeded from them who would not haue it, that hee was resolued to celebrate it, though it were desired by none, but And will not approue the Nationall Synod. would not by any meanes consent to the assembly of the Prelates, either in France or elsewhere, that this was neuer tolerated by the Apostolique Sea▪ that if euery Prince should celebrate Councels of himselfe, a confusion and separation of the Church must needes follow. Hee complained much that the assembly was first intimated, and then his consent demanded which hee must needes thinke was done with small respect of the head of the Church▪ to whom all Ecclesiasticall affaires are to bee referred, not to giue him an ac∣count when they are done, but to receiue from him authority to doe them; that the Edicts published did inferre an Apostasie in that kingdome from the Sea of Rome; for remedie whereof hee would send an expresse Nuncio, to make his will knowen to the King. Hee sent the Bishop of Viterbo, with instruction, to shew him that a Na∣tionall But sendeth a Nuncio into Spaine to dis∣swade it. Councell of that Kingdome, would bee a kinde of Schisme from the vniuersall Church, giue a bad example to other nations, and make his Pre∣lates proud, assuming greater authoritie, which diminution of his owne; that it is generally knowen how earnestly they desire the restitution of the Prag∣matique, which they would first of all bring in, by which meanes the King would lose his whole collation of the regalities, and the presentation of the Bishoprickes and Abbies: whence it would follow that the Prelats, not ac∣knowledging the power of the King, would refuse to obey him. And yet, with all these inconueniences, the euils which do now presse him, would not be prouided against. For the heretikes doe professe already that they esteeme not the Prelates, so that whatsoeuer they should doe would bee opposed by the Protestant Ministers, if for no other cause, because it was done by them▪ that the true remedie was to make the Prelates, and other Curates reside and keepe their flockes, opposing the furie of the woolues, and to proceed in iu∣stice against those who are iudged to bee heretiques, by the iudges of faith, and where it cannot bee done in regard of the multitude, to vse force of armes to compell all to the performance of their duetie; before the conta∣gion doth increase, that all these things beeing done now, all differences might bee compleatly endded, by the celebration of the generall Councell, which hee would immediatly intimate, that, if the King would resolue to reduce the contumacious to obedience, before they did more increase in number and strength, hee promised to assist him with all his power, and to labour that the King of Spaine, and Princes of Italie should doe the like. But if hee would not bee perswaded to compell his Subiects by force, the Nuncio had instruction to propose vnto him, that all the mischiefe which troubleth France, and the poyson, which infecteth that Kingdome, and the neighbour places, commeth from Geneua; that the extirpation of that roote And to per∣swade y e King to make ware against Ge∣neua. would take away a great nourishment of the euill; that making warre out of the Kingdome, hee should euacuate those bad humors, which did trouble it▪ Therefore he was to exhor the King to ioyne with him in this good worke promising that hee would d ee the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Sauoy, to doe the like. The Pope gaue the bishop Commission also to negotiate the same thing with the Duke of Sauoy, as he passed. He wrote to the King of Spaine, and ealt with him by his Nuncio, that he would labour to diuert his cofin from the Nationall Councell, which would be hurtfull to France, and a bad exam∣ple for Spaine, and worse for the Low Countreys. The Duke of Sauoy hear∣kened to the proposition of the warre of Geneua, promising to employ him∣selfe wholly in it, so that those two Kings would bee content to assist him, and that the warre were to bee made by him and for him. For that Citie belonging to his Dominion, it was not iust, in case it were wonne, that a∣ny should possesse it but himselfe. Therefore if his Holinesse would come to the effect, it was necessary to make a league with plaine capitulations, lest some great inconuenience might arise, if either the Kings should not agree, or himselfe should bee abandoned, after he had prouoked the Suisses against him, who would vndoubtedly defend the Citie. For Geneua, the King of Spaine considered, that France would not permit it should bee in the hands of any but French-men, which was not good for his seruice, in regard of the vieinity of the Franche Countie. Therefore hee answered that hee thought it not a fit time to make attempt. But for the Nationall Councell of France, he was perswaded it would bee a dange∣rous example to his States. Therefore hee dispatched away Antonio di To∣ledo, Prior of Lions, to signifie to the French King, that the celebration of that Councell would bee very hurtfull, in regard of the diuision which might a∣rise, the kingdome being infected. Hee prayed him not to goe on heere∣in, The King of Spaine disswa∣deth y e French King from the Nationall Synode. and sayd, that nothing mooued him to make this request, but onely his loue to him, and his zeale to the glory of God. Hee left to his considera∣tion, besides the contentions which it might cause within his kingdome, the pernicious example which other Prouinces would take, and the preiudice it would bring to the Generall Councell, which was to bee held, and was the onely remedy for all the euils and diuisions of Christendome; that it would shew there was not so good intelligence betweene the Emperour and them as should bee, and would make the Protestants waxe proud, in preiudice of the publique cause. Hee added, that hee wanted not force to represse the insolencies of his Subiects, and, if hee would make vse of the forces of him the King of Spaine, hee would very willingly employ them in this case, and his owne person also, if there were neede, that his Subiects might not boast they had brought him to any indignitie: whereof he was to consider much now, in this beginning of his reigne. Hee gaue commission also to his Am∣bassadour, that, if hee could not obtaine this, hee should, for the same and o∣ther reasons, negotiate a suspension of it, for as long a time as he could, and should treate with the Cardinall of Lorayne, who, as hee vnderstood, had a great hand in this Councell, that, as a Prince of the Church, and as hauing a great part in the gouernement of that Kingdome, hee was bound to consi∣der the dammage which might redound to it, and all Christendome. He cau∣sed also the same request to be made to the Duke of Guise, the Constable, the Queene mother, and to the Marshall Saint Andrew. Hee gaue him com∣mission also to aduise the Duchesse of Parma, and Ʋargas his Ambassadour at Rome, of whatsoeuer hee did. Likewise hee gaue the Pope aduice of the earnest request he had made by one expresly sent, and of the need that King had of assistance. To this he added the necessitie in which himselfe was, the Turkes hauing taken from him the yeere before, twenty Gallies, twenty fiue And deman∣deth of the Pope a Subsi∣die from the Ecclesiastikes. round Ships, and the fortresse of Gerbe; which forced him to increase his Ar∣mie▪ He therefore requested his Holinesse, to grant him a large Subsidy of the Churches, and Benefices of his Kingdomes. The proposition of assaulting Geneua, was not well taken in France, be∣cause The French men are dista∣sted with the proposition of assaulting Geneua. it would make the Hugonots (so the Reformatists are called) suspicious, and vnite themselues. Besides, none going to that warre but the Catho∣liques, the Kingdome would bee left open to the opposites. And to pro∣uoke the Suisses, protectors of that Citie, seemed not good, in regard of the seruice they might doe that Crowne. Therefore they answered the Nuncio onely thus, that, while so great confusion did afflict the Kingdome within, it was impossible to apply themselues to matters abroad. But, for the Na∣tionall The French Kings answer concerning the Nationall Synode. Councell, the same answere was giuen to Toledo and the Nuncio, that the King was resolued to keepe himselfe and the kingdome in the Catho∣lique vnion; that hee would make a Nationall Councell to separate him∣selfe, but to vnite to the Church those that went astray; that a Generall Coun∣cell would more please, and, in likelyhood, be more profitable, if his vrgent occasions would suffer him to expect the time, which must needes be very long; that the Nationall Councell, which hee desireth, shall depend on the Apostolique Sea, and the Pope, which shall cease when the Generall shall be assembled, and shall incorporate with it. And that his deedes may answere to his words, hee desired the Pope to send a Legate into France, with power to assemble the Bishops of the Kingdome, and to settle the affaires of Re∣ligion. The Pope cast foorth the Proposition to make warre against Geneua, not so much for the hatred hee bare to that Citie, as the Seminary of the Zuin∣glian Preachers in France, or for feare of some innouation in Italy, as to pro∣long the treatie of the Generall Councell. For if the warre had beene kin∣dled, it would haue lasted a yeere at the least, and in the meane while, the Councell would haue beene forgotten, or a good forme would haue beene found for it. But now, seeing that his proposition did not take effect, and that the French did still perseuere in their resolution for a nationall Synode, hee thought it necessary not to deferre his determination for the generall, and to stop the French-men with this, and with some grant of what they de∣sired. Hee conferred hereof with the Cardinals which were most intimate Maketh the Pope hasten the General Councell. with him, and particularly about the place, which seemed of most impor∣tance, because, in conclusion, the Councell doth produce effect according to the minde of him that is strongest in the place where it is celebrated. Hee would faine haue proposed Bolonia, or some other of his owne Cities, pro∣mising to goe thither in person, but saw it would bee ill construed by the world. He was resolued not to accept of any Citie beyond the Mountains, no not to heare any proposition of it. The Cardinall Pacceco proposed Mi∣lan, and he condescended, so that he might haue the Castle in his hands, du∣ring the time of the Councell; which was to referre himselfe to an impossi∣ble condition. He thought also vpon some of the Venetian Cities, but the Republique excused it selfe, lest they should make the Turkes suspicious, of whose forces they were then afraid. When hee had considered all, he found no fitter place then Trent. For the Councell hauing been held there twice be∣fore, euery one had experience of what was good, and what bad in that place, Who, after consultation, thinketh Trent the fit∣test place for the assembly. and therefore would more easily consent to goe thither then elsewhere. And there was also some appearance of reason for it, because the Councell, celebra∣ted by Iulius, was not finished, but suspended. Hee thought to satisfie the French men, by sending Cardinall Tornon into France, not in qualitie of a Le∣gate, but with power, when he was there and saw there neede, to assemble And sendeth Card. Tornon into France to hinder a Nationall Sy∣nod there. some of the Prelats of the Kingdome, such as the King and himselfe thought fit, but not all, that there might be no appearance of a Councell, and to treate with these, but to resolue of nothing. There were also two other accidents of no lesse consideration, which thrust the Pope forward to speake more plainely of a Councell; one farre off, but imported the losse of a Kingdome; the other concerned one person onely, but was of great consequence. The Nobilitie of Scotland, who had a Scotland re∣uolteth from the Pope. long time made warre to chase the French men out of the Kingdome, and to take the gouernment out the handes of the Queene Regent, and had euer encountred many difficulties, in regard of the great succours, sent her by her sonne in law the French King, to maintaine the kingdome for his wife; finally that they might quite free themselues, they resolued to ioyne with the English, and incite the people against the Regent. To this end they gaue way to libertie of religion, to which the people was inclined. By this meanes they brought the Frenchmen into great straits, and the old religion was lit∣tle esteemed; for which the Pope was blamed, because the world thought, that, if the Councell had beene begunne, all popular commotions would haue beene stopped. The other accident was, that the King of Bohemia had, a long time, held intelligence with the Protestant Electors, and Princes of Maximilian is, not with∣out cause, thought to be a Protestant. Germanie, and was formerly suspected for it by Paul the fourth, so that hee could not refraine to obiect to the Emperour, in priuate discourse which hee had with Martin Gusman his Ambassadour, that his sonne was a fauourer of heresie. The same suspicion continuing in the Court after the death of Paul, the Pope caused the Count of Arco to tell him, that if he would not liue as a Catholique, hee would not confirme him King of the Romanes, yea, would depriue him of all Dominion. Notwithstanding this, aduice came afterwards to Rome, that hee entertained a Preacher, and heard him often, who had brought in the vse of the Cup in diuers places, but not in the Citie; and the King himselfe sayd, hee could not receiue it otherwise: which al∣though he put not in practise, yet those words gaue the Pope great suspicion, especially because, almost in all places of Germanie, the Communion of Which two accidents in∣cite the Pope to call the Councell quickly. the Chalice was vsed by all that would, and none hindered the Priests to mi∣nister it. For all these former respects the Pope was resolute to make this great iumpe. The third of Iune he called the Ambassadours of the Emperour, of Spaine, Portugal Polonia, Venice and Florence; who appearing all before his Holinesse, except the Ambassadour of Polonia, that was sicke, hee complained first, that hee could not call the French Ambassadour for feare of some question of precedencie, which was a cause to hinder the publique benefit of con∣sulting on the common affaires of Christendome: but those two Kings be∣ing cousins, it was necessary they should resolue to accommodate the diffe∣rence, Wherein hee declareth his purpose to all the Ambassa∣dors residing with him. for the good of the Christian Common-wealth, and especially of their owne Kingdomes. Then hee said, that, the cause why hee had called them, was the celebration of the Councell, which hee was resolued to bring to ef∣fect, remoouing all difficulties, which Princes, for their owne ends, might set on foote: that the place should be Trent, which hauing pleased twice, could now be denied by none, in regard it was not a new place, and the Councell celebrated there onely suspended. Therefore taking away the suspension, the Councell is open, as before; and many good Constitutions hauing been made there, it would not be fit to call them in question, by making shew of calling a new Councell. He added that it was necessary to doe it quickly, be∣cause things grew worse euery day as appeared in France, where they treated of a Nationall Councell; which hee neither would nor could endure, because Germanie, and euery Prouince would doe the like; that hee would giue or∣der to his Nuncij with the Emperour, Kings of France and Spaine, to treate hereof with their Maiesties, and did now intimate the same to all them, that they might send their Princes word of it. For although he could both re∣solue and execute of him selfe, yet hee thought fit to doe it with their know∣ledge, that they might put him in minde of some things for the common be∣nefit, and reformation of the Church, and send Ambassadours to the Coun∣cell, and fauour it by treating with the Protestants. Hee added, that hee did beleeue that some of the Princes of Germanie would goe thither in person, and that he was sure the Marquisse of Brandeburg would. Vargas made a long answere, relating what had been done in former Councels. He discoursed of the manner of celebrating Councels, and then descended to the place, and spake of what was done in Trent, where himselfe was present. He distinguished Generall Councels from Nationall, much condemning that which was intimated in France. The Ambassadour of Portugall commended the Popes purpose, and promised the obedience of his Master. The Venetian sayd, that, in times past, neuer any better remedie was found then Councels, and thanked GOD for inspiring his Holinesse to doe so pious a worke, which was for the preseruation of Religion, and bene∣fit of Princes, who could not hold their States in peace in change of Religi∣on. The Florentine Ambassadour spake in the same manner, offering all assi∣stance from the Duke. The Pope wrote to his Nuncio in Germany, France, But alwyes vt∣tereth some∣thing that may crosse it. and Spaine, in conformity of that which hee spake to the Ambassadours, Yet hee neuer talked of the Councell, but hee cast foorth some seed of a contrary herbe, which might hinder the birth of it, or choke it afterwards, being as∣sured, that, when the affaires of the world did stand so, that the life of it might doe him seruice, hee could roote out that which hee had sowed vpon it. Hee told the same Ambassadours apart, some more plainely, some in iest, that, to call the Councel with profit, it was necessary to thinke more of the end, then of the beginning, and of the execution, then of the Conuocation, prose∣cution: that the Conuocation belonged to him alone, the prosecution to him and the Prelats, the execution to the Princes: and therefore that it was meet, that, first of all, they should binde themselues to it, and make a league, and elect a generall Captaine, to goe against the disobedient, to execute the deter∣minations of the Councell, considering that, without this, it would be fruit∣lesse, and dishonourable to the Apostolike Sea, and to those Princes who had sent Ambassadours, and afforded fauour and assistance. The Pope did not receiue a conformable answere from his Nuncij. The The French King doth not thinke Trent a fit place for the Councell. King of Spaine commended the Councell, approoued the place of Trent, pro∣mised to send his Prelates to it, and to fauour it by all other meanes; but ad∣ded, that it was not fit to doe any thing without the good will of the Empe∣rour, and French King. The answere of this King was, that hee approoued the celebration of the Councell, but not the place of Trent, alleadging that his Prelates could not goe thither, and proposing for places more fit, Con∣stance, Triers, Spire, Wormes, or Aganoa. Hee intimated also, that they ought not to make a continuation of the things begun in Trent, but to abandon Nor that the doctrines, al∣ready discussed there, should be maintained without reex∣amination them quite, and make a whole new Councell. This answere troubled the Pope, who thought it did not proceede from the Kings owne motion, but from the Hugonots. But the Emperour sent a long writing, in which hee sayd, hee could pro∣mise nothing for the Princes of Germany, before hee knew their opinion; which he could not doe without a Diet: which if hee would call, it was ne∣cessary not to name the Councell, because the Princes would not goe thi∣ther, but pretending another cause to call it, hee might afterwards speake Of whose o∣pinion the Emperour is. of it by occasion. Hee added, that, for his patrimoniall States, hee had no hope to bring them to the Synode, without graunting them the Com∣munion of the Cuppe, and marriage of Priests, and without a good refor∣mation were made; but aboue all, that no mention ought to bee made of a continuation of the things begun in Trent. For the Lutheranes would neuer consent otherwise, yea, the very name of Trent would make them refuse. And he proposed Constance or Ratisbon. The Pope saw that the proposition of a Diet did require the time of a yeere, and perhaps of two, and was glad of it, but was sory that the occurrences of France required haste. He told euery one, to shew his forwardnesse, that he cared not for one place more then an∣other, and would take Spire, Collen, or any other Citie which pleased the Emperour, so that the Bishops might come and goe in safetie, it not being conuenient to secure those who haue no voyce in the Councell, and leaue o∣thers without securitie who certainely haue. But it was not fit to speake of reuoking what was done in Trent, saying he would spend his blood in main∣taining it, it beeing a matter of faith. Concerning that which is of humane constitution, as the Communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priestes, these prohibitions beeing made for a good end, as hee would not take them away of himselfe, which he had power to doe, so he would referre all to the Coun∣cell, howsoeuer hee saw they would neuer forsake their opinion what∣soeuer was granted them. Hee complained of the Emperours weakenesse, who feared his owne sonne no lesse then others, and then desired the Prelates should be sent into Germanie; where hee declared he had not power to secure them, that he would goe to Constantinople, so that hee might haue securitie, which could not be expected from the Emperour, that the Germans were al∣most in Heretiques, and the King of the Romanes more potent then his father; in the egarded not one place more then another, so that it were in Italy, which onely is secure for the Catholiques. Therefore he answered the French King, and the Emperour, in generall The Popes answere to them both. terme, that hee was content with any secure place, saying that the securitie of the Councel hath alwayes beene esteemed necessary, and was now as much as euer, without making particular opposition against the places na∣med by them. But, in his answere to the Catholique King, hee commended his good mind, and confirmed him in his purpose; and, for the subsidie he desired hee interposed diuers difficulties, as well to maintaine the profits of the Church, as not to offend him, and make him his opposite, in the time of the Councell. The affaires of the Catholiques waxed euery day more difficult. For the The Low-countrey men wax peremp∣tory against their King. Hugonots in France grew stronger, and in Scotland liberty of Religion was granted to all by publique decree, and in Flanders the humors were prepared to stirre, vpon the first occasion; which the King did appease by proceeding slowly graunting them what they would, though to his owne losse and in∣dignitie. First, they refused to contribute to the King before the Spanish soul∣diers were remooued out of the Countrey; when these were dismissed, they would pay to none but to the people of their owne Countrey, and onely for the guard of strong places, and those not to depend of the Kings Ministers. The King endured all, knowing that euery little distaste would make them set on foote the pretence of Religion, and expected vntill the heat were extin∣guished; which he did the rather, because it was discouered that the seedes of the new opinions in Spaine were not dead, but onely couered for feare, and that in Sauoy there were more heretiques besides the old Waldenses. But the Court of Rome was grieued most of all, that the Pope hauing, by his nephew Marcus Altemps, who afterwards was Cardinall, perswaded the King of Bohemia to be a good Catholique, with many promises of honours and profits, intimating the succession of the Empire, which he would hardly obtaine in case he should doe otherwise, was answered by the King, that hee The answere of Maximili∣an to y e Popes nephew, con∣cerning his Religion. thanked his Holinesse, but that his soules health was more deare to him, then all the things of the world, which answere they sayd in Rome, was a Lutheran forme of speach, and signified an alienation from the obedience of that Sea, and they began to discourse what would happen after the Empe∣rours death. While these accidents troubled the Popes minde, newes was The Popes Subiects of A∣uignion rebel against him. brought him, that the Hugonots his Subiects in the territory of Auignion were assembled, and disputed whether they might take Armes against the Pope their temporall Lord, and resolued they might, because his succession was not lawful, as well because that Countrey was not iustly taken from Rai∣mondus, Count of Tholouse, as also for that the Ecclesiastiques cannot, by the commandement of Christ, possesse any temporal Dominion: and resoluing to rebel, by the means of Alexander Guilotimus, a lawyer, put themselues vnder the protection of Charles de Montbrun, who was in Armes for Religion, and was much followed in Dolphinie. Charles, entring the territory with three thou∣sand foote, made himselfe Lord of the whole Countrey, with much ioy of the inhabitants. Iames Maria, Bishop of Ʋiuiers, Vice-Legat of Auignion, made opposition, and very hardly kept the Citie. The Pope was much afflicted herewith, not so much for the losse of the Countrey, as for the cause, which, being taken for an example, would touch the very root of the Papacie. Ther∣fore hee sent Cardinall Farne e, who was Legat, to defend the Citie. But the danger was moderated, because Cardinall Tornon (whose Neede Charles had But all danger was taken a∣way by means of Cardinall Tornon. married) who was then not farre from that place, as hee was going to the Court, made him desist, and goe to Geneua, by promising restitution of his goods, confiscated for rebellion, and to bee recalled shortly, with liberty of conscience, if he would goe out of France. So the Popes territory, depriued of that protection, did remaine in subiection, but full of suspicions, and rea∣dy to embrace euery nouitie. The Protestants still increasing in France, and which was of more impor∣tance, the dissentions and suspicions betweene the Grandies, the 21. of Au∣gust 1560. the King called a very great assembly at Fountainbleau, in which ha∣uing 1560. The French King calleth an assembly at Fountain∣bleau. briefly exhorted, to set downe what was fit for his seruice, the necessities of the Kingdome were declared by the Chancellour, which hee compared to a man sicke of an vnknowen disease. Afterwards Iasper Colignie gaue the King some petitions, which he said were deliuered to him, by a multitude of peo∣ple, when he was in Normandy, vnto whom hee could not denie this fauour, to present them to his Maiestie. The summe of them was; that the faithfull Christians, dispersed throughout the whole Kingdome, did pray his Maiesty to looke on them with a fauourable eye; that they desired nothing but a moderation of the cruell punishments, vntill their cause were heard; and that they might make publique profession of their Religion, to auoid suspicion by priuate assemblies. Then Iohn Monluc, Bishop of Valence, hauing declared the In which the opinions were diuers. infirmities of the Kingdome, and commended the chastising of the fediti∣ous, sayd that the cause of the euill remained, yea still grew worse, so long as religion might bee taken for a pretence; against which, prouision had not beene formerly made, because the Popes had no other ayme, but to holde the Princes in warre; and the Princes, thinking to suppresse the euill with punishments, haue not attained the wished end, nor the Magistrates and Bi∣shops iustly performed their duetie. The principall remedie was to flie vnto GOD, to assemble godly men out of the whole Kingdome, to finde a way to roote out the vices of the Clergie, to forbid infamous and immodest songs, and in stead of them to command the singing of Psalmes, and holy hymnes, in the vulgar tongue; and if the common interpretation which goeth about be not good, to take away the errours, suffering that which is good to be v∣sed by all. Another remedie was, the Generall Councell, alwayes vsed to compose such differences; that hee could not see how the Popes conscience could be quiet one moment, in regard so many soules did perish euery day; saying, that if a Generall Councell could not bee obtained, they were to as∣semble a Nationall, by the example of Charles the Great, and Lewis the De∣boneere; that they did grieuously erre who troubled the publique quiet with armes, vpon pretence of Religion, a thing alwayes abhorred by antiquitie; that their errour was as great, who condemned to death those that adhered 1560 PIVS 4. FERDINAND. ELTZABETH. FRANCIS. 2. to the new doctrine, onely for the opinion of piety; who, dying constant∣ly, and contemning the losse of their goods, stirre vp the mindes or the mul∣titude, and make them desirous to know what faith that is, for which they endure so great punishments. Charles Marillac Bishop of Vienna, spake in the same manner; commending the Generall Councell, but adding, that it might sooner bee desired then ho∣ped for, considering the difficulties which doe vsually arise in such a busi∣nesse, wherein Charles the 5. hauing taken great paines, hath euer been de∣luded by the Popes. Besides, the disease of France is so sharpe, that there is no time to call a Physician from farre. Therefore they were to call a Natio∣nall Councell, as had been vsed from the time of Clodoue vntill Charles the Great, and afterwards vntill Charles the seuenth, sometimes of the whole kingdome, and sometimes of part: that now, the disease being vrgent, they were to expect no longer, nor to holde any esteeme of the impediments which the Pope did interpose; in the meane while that the Prelates ought to reside, and that the Italians, who haue a third part of the Benefices, were not to be suffered to enioy the fruits in their absence; to take away all Simonie, and ordaine, as was done in the Anciran Councell, that almes should not bee giuen in times of administring the Sacraments; that the Cardinals and Pre∣lates, deputed by Paul the third, gaue the same counsell, that Paul the fourth thought it necessary, though afterwards hee gaue himselfe to luxury and war, that if this were not done, there was danger to see the prophecie of Bernard verified, That CHRIST would descend from heauen to whippe the Priests out of the Temple, as hee had the Merchants. Then hee spake of the remedies for the other maladies of the Kingdome. Colignl, when it was his turne to speake, said, that requiring those who gaue him the petitions to subscribe them, hee was answered, that 5000. men would subscribe, if there were occasion. Francis of Guise, concerning the point of Religion, said, hee referred him∣selfe to the iudgement of learned men, but protested that no Councell should haue so great authority with him, as to make him decline one iote from the old beliefe. The Cardinall of Loraine, hauing spoken of other particulars, descending to that of Religion, sayd, that the petitions presented were most proud, and that to grant the Orators publique exercise, were to approoue their doctrine; that it was a cleere case, that the greater part vsed Religion for a pretence; and therefore his opinion was, they should bee proceeded a∣gainst with more seueritie, mitigating the punishment of those who assem∣ble without Armes, onely for Religion, instructing and admonishing them; and to this purpose to cause the Prelates to reside, hoping that by these reme∣dies, all will bee prouided for, without either Generall or Nationall Coun∣cell. The voyces beeing not vniforme, a Decree was made, the 27. of that moneth, that there should bee an assembly of the States at Meaux, the tenth of December, and, if the Generall Councell shall not be called suddenly, as the Pope hath made shew, the Bishops shall assemble the 13. of Ianuary to treat The Decree of this Assem∣bly. of celebrating a Nationall: in the meane while the punishments for cause of Religion were suspended, except against those who tooke Armes. The Pope, enformed of the resolution of the assembly of Fountainbleau, wrote to Cardinall Tornon to hinder the meeting of the Bishops, and, if hee could not returne to Rome. And the three and twentieth of September hee called the Ambassadours, and told them the neceseitie of the sudden ce∣lebration of a generall Councell, in regard of the determination of the Frenchmen, to call a Nationall; which though he had giuen order to Car∣dinall Tornon to hinder, yet hee did not hope it could be done. But hee saw Causeth the Pope to make shew that hee is resolued to call the Coun∣cel suddenly. a necessitie to celebrate the generall Councell, that it might not bee sayd that the Nationals were called, for want of it. Therefore that hee must needes open the Councell of Trent, taking away the suspension; that the place was most fit, beeing betweene Germanie and Italie, though others propose Spire, Triers, and other places, which hee would accept if they were secure; beeing readie to goe to Constantinople, if hee might with safetie; that one could not trust those who want faith; that no Catholike could bee secure in those places, no not the Emperour himselfe; that, if they refuse Trent, they may finde places in the Dukedome of Milan, the Kingdome of Naples, in the State of Venice, of the Duke of Sauoy, or Flo∣rence. Concerning the reuocation of the things already decided, it was not to bee mentioned, that hee would neither reuoke nor confirme them, but referre all to the Councell, which, with the assistance of the holy Spi∣rit, will determine whatsoeuer it shall please God. Hee did much rumi∣nate vpon the Nationall Councell of France, saving that Germanie would follow the example, and that some stirres would bee raised in Italie, if order were not taken; that they would submit the Papacie to the Councell, and whatsoeuer belongeth to it. But his resolution was this: Pro fide & religione volumus mori: Desiring the Ambassadours to speake their opinion, the Em∣perours Ambassadour sayd, it was better to take time, in regard the Empe∣rours affaires would not permit him to consent. The Pope seeming to bee angry, the Ambassadour added, that it was good first to winne the mindes of the Princes of Germany. The Pope answered more angerly, that there Wherein he is contradicted by the Empe¦rours Ambas∣sadour onely. was now no time to doe it; and the Ambassadour replying, that he feared that by this meanes the heretiques would bee incited against Italy, the Pope said aloud, that GOD would not abandon his owne cause, and that he should bee assisted by the Catholique Princes, with men and money, for his de∣fence. The Spanish Ambassadour commended the Popes purpose, and said that his King would not faile to fauour him, and that to this end hee had al∣ready sent Antonio di Toledo into France. The Ambassadours of Portugall, Ve∣nice, and others offered the fauour and assistance of their Princes, and in the ende, the Pope gaue them order to signifie his intention, and so dismissed them. Afterwards hee receiued answere from Cardinall Tornon, that, hauing tried all meanes, hee was not able to remooue the King, nor any of his Coun∣cell, nor could hope for any better successe hereafter, yea, that hee saw all things to waxe worse. The King of Spaine, hauing sent to the Pope the fi∣nall answere giuen to Toledo, wrote withall, that the French King excused himselfe, that, without a Nationall Councell, hee could not remedie the dis∣orders of his kingdome, and that it was no maruell, if, to withstand inconue∣niences, Princes doe that alone, which they should doe together with the Pope. This letter troubled his Holinesse thinking hee did inferre that hee might doe the same also himselfe in Flanders. It was afterwards discouered that the Popes purpose was, if hee could not absolutely auoyd the Councell, to deferre it at the least, vntill he had set in order his domesticall affaires. For, being to hold a Synod, it was necessary to giue a good example in the meane space, and spend excessiuely in maintaining poore Prelats, and officers, and The Popes secret purpose was to auoid, or deserre the Councell. other things, necessary for the Synode, which would consume all the reue∣newes; and the businesse it selfe also would take vp all his time, so that hee could not take care of his house. But hee resolued, though against his will, not to deferre the Conuocation any longer. Whereupon the twentieth of But maketh a contrary reso∣lution against his will. October hee held a Congregation of Cardinals, in which hee gaue them an account of the answere of the French King to Toledo, of the King of Spaine his letter to him, and of the negotiation of the Cardinall Tornon; adding a new aduertisement sent him out of France, that although the generall Coun∣cell were opened, they would not goe thither, if the Protestants did not consent to receiue it. These things put them in a great confusion, and all feared, that though the generall Councell should proceede, yet France would And is much troubled with. the occurren∣ces of Trance. make the Nationall, whence, by consequence, an alienation from the obedi∣ence of the Apostolique Sea would arise, and an example to the residue of Christendome to doe the like, either with, or without the consent of their Princes. Some thought much of the Protestation made to the Cardinall of Trent, that hee should not bee too liberall in offering that Citie, but remember that the Emperour is Lord of it, without whose consent hee neither can, nor ought to dispose of it in such a businesse; who had declared himselfe alrea∣die, that, by all meanes hee would first make a Diet. They were also much troubled with that which D. Antenio di Toledo wrote, that all the Grandies, yea, the Bishops themselues did fauour the new opinions, to settle and augment their owne estates. Notwithstanding all this, all the Cardinals, except the Cardinall of Ferrara, were of opinion to open the Councell, remoouing the suspension. The Pope said the Councell should begin at Saint Martins tide; and considering the imminent dangers, and the hopes to ouercome them, he His comfort is, that the losse will be greater to the French King then to the Apostolike Sea. resolued himselfe, and did comfort also the Cardinals and his other depen∣dants with it, that the losse would be great to France, and little to him. For the Apostolike Sea receiueth yeerly out of that Kingdome but fiue and twen∣tie thousand crownes, but on the other side, the Kings authority being great, granted by the Popes, to dispose of Benefices, hee would loose it all, in regard the Popes authoritie being taken away, the Pragmatike wold take place, and the Bishops would be elected by the Canons, the Abbats by the Monasteries, and the King bereaued of all this. Therefore hee was sorry for nothing but for the losse of so many soules. But if GOD would correct them for their faults and infidelity, he could not helpe it. In the beginning of Nouember Letters came to Rome from the Emperor; The Emperor writeth to the Pope against the commua∣tion of the old Councell, and so the conuo∣cation of a new. in which he said, though in generall termes, that, concerning the Councell, hee would doe, for his owne person, whatsoeuer the Pope pleased; but ad∣ded, that, to hold a Councell out of Germanie, or to continue that of Trent, by taking away the suspension, would doe no good, but raise a greater hatred in the Protestants, with danger that they would endeuour to hinder it with Armes; in which kinde hee had heard of diuers treaties: but, making a new Councell, there was hope to perswade them to goe thither. This caused va∣riety of opinions amongst the Cardinals, it being plaine, that, if there were not a continuation of the Councell of Trent, all the things already determi∣ned would be vaine and voide, hauing neuer beene confirmed by any Pope. This was proposed in Congregation by his Holinesse, whereof they consul∣ted Wherein the Cardinals are diuided in o∣pinion. and spake much, without giuing of voyces; which being demanded in another Congregation, Carpi shewed at large, that it was necessary to conti∣nue the Councell, remoouing the suspension onely, and was followed by Ce∣sis and Pisano. But the Cardinall of Trent, who was next, said, that in a matter where they were to treat de summa rerum, full of so many difficulties, it was better to thinke a little more on it. And this opinion was followed by all the other Cardinals. And, fitly, the next euening a Currier came in haste, to Rome out of France, with protestations from the King, that, if the generall The protesta∣tion of the French King sent to Rome. Councell were not called, he could no longer deferre the Nationall: and that they were not to thinke of Trent, or any place in Italie, in regard the Councell hauing been desired so many yeeres for the necessities of Germany, and now the danger of France beeing added, it was meete to holde it in a conuenient place for both the nations: otherwise it would bee in vaine, if the Germanes and French-men went not thither, adding, that if any place in France were chosen, it should be most secure. In the end the Pope thought not fit to delay it any more, but the fifteenth of Nouember resolued in the Consi∣story to make, the next Sunday, a Procession, in sackecloth and ashes, gi∣uing A Procession and Iubelie for the deter∣mination to celebrate the Councell. a Iubelie, and singing the Masse of the holy Ghost, for the determinati∣on made to celebrate the Councell in Trent; concluding that if, after it was assembled, it seemed commodious to translate it to another place, hee would doe it, and goe himselfe also in person, so that it were secure. He added, that he could finde Armes to vse, if any went about to infringe the things determi∣ned, and began to consider of the tenour of the Bull. Euery day a Congrega∣tion A great que∣stion in Rome whether the continuation should plainly be declared. was held, to resolue whether they should plainely declare the continua∣tion, taking away the suspension (as he desired) that the things determined might not be disputed on againe, or examined. The Imperialists, and French men laboured much with the Pope and the Deputies, that it might be called a new Councel, that the Dutch and French-men might go thither, saying, they might resolue in it, that the things already handled might not be handled a∣gaine, otherwise it were in vaine to speake of a Councell to reduce the Prote∣stants, giuing them occasion at the first to refuse it, and to say they could not submit themselues to those who haue condemned them before they were heard. On the contrary, the Spaniards and Duke of Florence, who was then in Rome, laboured that the suspension only might be remoued, and a continua∣tion declared. The Pope and deputies tooke a middle way hoping both par∣ties would be satisfied. A Iubelie was published and sent into all places, and the 24. day the Pope, with the Colledge of Cardinals, & all the Court, went on foote, with a solemne Procession, from S. Peters Church to Minerua, in which there was great cōfusion. For the Ambassadors who were wont to go before the Crosse, perceiuing that the BB. did follow, and after them the Duke of Flo∣rence between 2. minor Cardinals, they would haue that place also. Wherupon there arose a disorder; for cōposing wherof, after some contestation, the Pope gaue them place betweene himselfe and the Cardinals who went before him. The 29. day the Conuocation of the Councell was published in the Con∣sistory, the Bul wherof was intitled, of the Intimation of the Councel of Trent, the Latine word was Indictionis. And it was so printed in many places, though afterwards when the whole body of the Councell was printed, the word, Ce∣lebrationis, was vsed. The tenor of the Bull was; That the Pope, from the beginning of his assumption, did apply his mind The Bull of the intimati∣on of the Councell. to the rooting out of heresies, extinction of diuisions, and amendment of manners; for remedie whereof he resolued to celebrate a generall Councell, that Paul the third, and Iulius had assembled it before, but could not finish it; and relating all the occurrences vnder those Popes, ascribeth the successe to diuers impediments, promoted by the enemy of mankinde, at the least, to deferre so great a benefit of the Church, which hee could not absolutely hinder; saying, that in the meane while the heresies and diuisions were mul∣tiplied. But it hauing pleased GOD to giue peace to Christian Kings and Princes, he conceiued hope to put an end to the euils of the Church, by means of the Councell, which hee would not deferre any longer, that hee-might take away schisme, and heresies, reforme manners, and preserue peace a∣mongst Christians. Therefore, by the counsell of the Cardinals, and ad∣uice of Ferdinand, Emperour elected, and other Kings and Princes, whom hee hath found ready to helpe forward the celebration, by the authoritie of GOD, and of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, hee doth intimate a generall Councell, in the Citie of Trent, to begin at Easter, remoouing all suspension whatsoeuer, exhorting, and commanding, vnder the canonicall punish∣ments, all Patriarkes, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and others, who haue a deciding voyce by law, priuiledge, or ancient custome, not beeing lawful∣ly hindered, to bee there before that day; admonishing those also in the same manner, who haue, or may haue any interest there; praying the Emperour, Kings, and Princes; to send their Proctors, if they cannot be personally pre∣sent; and to cause their Prelates to performe their duetie without excuse or delay, and to make the passage free and secure, for them and their company, as himselfe will doe within his Territories, hauing no other end in celebra∣ting the Councell, but the honour of GOD, the reducing of the dispersed sheepe; and the perpetuall peace of Christendome; ordaining that the Bull should be published in Rome: and that by vertue thereof after the end of two moneths, it shall binde all that are comprehended, as if it had been personally intimated vnto them. The Pope thought hee had satisfied himselfe, those who would haue a Did not please either party. new Councell intimated, and those who desired a continuation of the old. But as middle counsels doe vsually displease both parties, so the Pope gaue satisfaction to none, as shall be declared. Presently after the publication of the Bull the Pope sent Nicheto into France with it, with commission, if the forme did not please, to say, that they should not except against the word Continuare, because it did not hinder them to speake againe of the things al∣ready proposed. Hee sent it also to the Emperour, and King of Spaine. He sent likewise Zacharias Delphinus, Bishop of Liesina, to the Princes of high Germany, and Ioannes Franciscus Comendone, Bishop of Zante, to those of Lowe Germany, with letters to them all, and with order, first to receiue instruction from the Emperour how to treate with them, and then to execute their am∣bassage. He sent also the Abbat Martinengo to the Queene of England, to inuite her and her Bishops to the Councell, beeing perswaded so to doe by the fore∣named Edward Cerne, who promised him that his Nuncio should be receiued The Queene of England is inuited to the Councell. by one halfe of the Kingdome, by the Queenes consent. And although the Pope was put in minde to send Nuncij into England, and to Princes elsewhere, who doe professe open separation from the Sea of Rome, would be a disrepu∣tation to him, yet hee answered hee would humble himselfe to heresie, in re∣gard whatsoeuer was done to gaine soules to CHRIST, did beseeme that Sea. For the same reason also he sent Canobius into Polonia, with desseigne to make him to goe into Moscouia, to inuite that Prince and Nation to the Councell, though they haue neuer acknowledged the Pope of Rome. Afterwards he returned to speake of the Councell in Consistory, desiring to be informed of the learned men, of good life and opinion, of diuers. Pro∣uinces, fit to dispute and perswade the trueth, saying he purposed to call ma∣ny of them; promising that, after hee had vsed all possible diligence to make all Christians come thither, and to vnite them in Religion, though some, or many, refused to come, he would not forbeare to proceede. Yet he was trou∣bled, because the Protestants of Germanie, vnto whom a great part of France was vnited, would denie to come, or would demand exorbitant things, which hee could not grant them, and doubted they might bee able to disturbe the Councell with Armes. Neither did hee hope to be assisted by the Emperour against them, in regard of his small forces. Hee confessed that the dangers were great, and the remedies small, and was perplexed and troubled in mind. The Bull of the Councel going through Germany, fell into Protestants hands, assembled at the mariage of the Duke of Salzemburg, who did intimate a Diet in Namburg, to begin the twentieth of Ianuary. Vergerius wrote a booke against this Bull, in which, after a great inuectiue Vergerius writeth a booke against the Bull. against the pompe, luxury, and ambition of the Court, hee said, that the Coun∣cell was called by the Pope, not to establish the doctrine of CHRIST, but the seruitude and oppression of poore soules; that none were called, but those who were bound by oath to the Pope, so that not onely all were excluded who are separated from the Church of Rome, but also men of the greatest vnderstanding amongst themselues, taking away all liberty, in which onely there was hope of agreement. At this time newes came to Rome, that the French King had imprisoned The Prince of Conde is im∣prisoned, and a guard is set vpon y e King of Nauarre. the Prince of Conde, and set a guard vpon the King of Nauare; which plea∣sed the Pope much, as a thing which might wholly disturbe the Nationall Councell. And his hope was the stronger that he should receiue no distaste, because aduice came that the King was very sicke, & in danger to die, which hindred the assembly of the States in Meaux. And, in the end, there was great alteration. For Francis, the French King, dying the fift of December, and Charles the ninth, of the age of ten yeeres, succeeding, in regard of his mino∣ritie, The French King dieth, & Charles the 9. succeedeth. the gouernment fel principally vpon the King of Nauarre, as first Prince of the Blood. The Queene in other adhered to him; to maintain calld continue 1560 PIVS 4. FERDINAND. ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. The King of Nauar & Q. mother go∣uerne France Which ma∣keth the Pro∣testants more confident. the authority which shee had taken in the life time of her other ; and Nauar was content to participate with , the better to maintaine his owne. He did almost openly fauour the new religion, and was wholly gouerned by the counsell of Iasper Coligni, the Admirall, who did make profession of it; so that the Protestants were more confident to obtaine liberty of religion, as they desired. They assembled almost publikely, with much discontent and indignation of the people, and danger of section. Hereupon the Kings mo∣ther, and the chiefe of the Counsell resolued to hold the States in Orliens, and began to doe it the 13. of December. Amongst other things, there proposed for the benefit of the Kingdome, The States are held in Orliens Where the Chancellor beginneth to speake. the Chancellor said, that religion is the most potent weapon, ouercommeth all affections, and charitie, and is the forest bond of humane society; that Kingdomes are more bounded and more diuided by Religion, then by the confines themselues; that he that is moued with Religion, contemneth wife, children, and kinred. If there be difference of religion in the same familie, the father agreeth not with his sonnes, nor the brothers among themselues, nor the husband with the wife. To remedie these disorders, there is neede of a Councell, which the Pope hath promised: but in the meane while, it is not to be tolerated, that euery one should shape out his owne religion, and bring in new Rites at his pleasure, and so trouble the publique pence. If the Councell faile by the Popes default, the King will make prouision another way: but it was necessary that euery one should amend himselfe, because a good life is a vehement orator to perswade; that the names of Lutheranes, Hugonots, and Papists, no lesse factious then those of the Guelphes and Ghibi∣lines, were to be taken away, and Armes to be taken against those who couer their auarice, ambition, and desire of innouation, with the of religi∣on. Iohn Angelo, aduocate in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, spake for the third Iohn Angelo speaketh for the third Or∣der. Order: he spake much against the bad manners, and discipline of the Clergy, noting their ignorance, auarice, and luxury, as causes of all the euils; and did much discourse vpon them: in the end, hee demanded that all might bee re∣dressed by a sudden celebration of the Councell. Iames, Earle of Rochfort, Iames, Earle of Rochfort, speaketh for the Nobility. spake for the Nobilitie; who, amongst other things, said that all the euill did arise from the large donations, made by the King and other Grandies, to the Churches, especially of iurisdictions; a thing much inconuenient, that he that ought to giue himselfe wholly to prayer and preaching, should exercise power ouer the liues and goods of the Kings subiects; and that it was neces∣sary to remedie these inconueniences. And, in the end, hee gaue a petition, demaunding in the name of the Nobility, to haue publique Churches for their religion. Iacobus Quintinus a Burgundian, spake for the Clergie. He said, Iacobus Quin∣tinus speaketh for the Cler∣gie. the States were assembled to prouide for the necessities of the Kingdome, not to amend the Church, which cannot erre, which is without blemish or wrinkle, and will alwayes remaine without corruption, though the disci∣pline, in some small part, may neede reformation. Therefore those are not to bee hearkened vnto, who, renewing the Sects, long since buried, demand Churches apart from the Catholiques, but are to bee punished as heretiques, and doe not deserue that the King should heare them, who ought to force all his Subiects, to beleeue and liue according to the forme prescribed by the 1561 PIVS 4. FERDINAND ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. Church, that those who haue forsaken the Kingdome for Religion, ought not to be suffered to returne, that those that are infected with here i , ought to be proceeded against capitally; that the Ecclesiasticall discipline will easi∣ly be reformed, if the Clergie be fried from paimene of T lls, and elections restored to the Chapters, it being obserued, that, in the yeere 1517 wh by the Concordate, the nomination of Ecclesiasticall dignities was giuen to the The opinions of Luther be∣gan, when the Concordate was made. King, the heresies of Luther began, who was followed by Zainglius and others In the end, hee demanded that all immunities and priuiledges of the Clergie should be confirmed, and all grieuances remooued. The King ordained that the Prelates should put themselues in order to goe to the Councell, which was intimated at Trent; commanded that all that The Ordina∣tions of the King. were in prison for Religion, should be set at liberty, their Processes the void, their offences, committed vntill that time, pardoned, and their goods restored He constituted a capitall punishment, for those who gaue offence for matter of Religion either in words or deeds. He admonished all to follow the rites vsed in the Church, without making any innouation. The residue was de∣ferred vntill May next, when the petition presented by Rotchfort, was to bee considered of. The Pope, vnderstanding of the death of King Francis, together with the aduice of the Cardinall Tornon, that the Queene was ioyned with Nauar, was troubled in minde, fearing the raines would be more giuen to the Prote∣stants. Therefore hee sent Lorenzo Leutio, Bishop of Eermo, and caused the King of Spaine to send Io Manriques, to condele with the Queene; for the death of her sonne, and to pray her to bee carefull of the Religion in which The Pope sendeth a Nū∣cto to the Q. mother, and the King of Spaine an am∣bassadour. shee was borne and bred, to remember the great benefits receiued from the Apostolique Sea, by the meanes of Clement, and not to suffer schisme to arise, by too much licence, nor to seeke remedies elswhere for the euils present and imminent, but from the Church of Rome; for which end the Councell was intimated; that in the meane space, she would take care that the Kingdome should not swarue from true piety, and that no preiudice should bee done to the Councell intimated. The yeere 1560 ended thus, leauing some seedes, from whence greater troubles did spring. The next yeere Manriques came into France, and deli∣uered 1561 his Ambassage: Who hauing receiued from the Queene a piou and fauourable answere concerning Religion and the Councell, and speaking a∣gaine of the same subiect, as occasion was offered, did continually exhort her to proceed with punishments against the Hugonots, adding threats also to his exhortations. Nauarre, contrary to all the Spanish desseignes, did op∣pose, The negotia∣tion of the Spanish Am∣bassadour. in regard of his pre ensions to the Kingdome of Nauarre. Manriques did combine with the house of Guise, and others who had the same desseigne, to make him fauour the Catholiques, the Pope, and the Councell, to propose vnto him the patronage of the Catholique Religion in France, and that he would bee diuorced from his wife, Ioan of Alibert, Queene of Nauarre, by inheritance, and would retaine right to the Kingdome by the Popes au∣thoritie, of which shee should bee depriued for heresie by his Holinesse, and would take to wife Mary Queene of Scots, by whom hee should haue the Kingdome of England, Elizabeth being depriued by the Pope For effecting all this, the Guisards promised him the Popes authority, and the forces of the King of Spaine, who for Nauarre, would giue him the Kingdome of nia. These things they continually represented vnto him in ormes; euen vntill his death. In Germanie, the Princes of the Augustan Confession, assembled The to concerning the Councel. especially in regard of the Councell, being ashamed that their religion should bee esteemed a confusion for the variety of doctrines amongst the propose that they might first agree in one, and then resolue whether they ought refuse refuse or accept the Synode. Concerning the first , said, that the difference was not essentiall, and that the Papists substan∣tially differ, dissenting euen in the very foundations of Religion. They laid the Augustan Confession was to bee the ground of their doctrine; and if they differed in any point not contained therein, it would bee of small But there beeing diuers Copies of that Confession, which differed in regard of diuers additions made in diuers of them, some approouing one, and some another, many thought they ought to take that onely which was presented to Charles in the yeere 1530. Where vnto of the Pulatinate did not con∣sent, except it were declared, in a Proheme made vnto it, that the other edi∣tion did agree with it. The Duke of Saxonie answered; they could not stop the eyes and eares of the world, that they should not see and heare their dif∣ferences, and that, if they would make shew of vnion, where they were at variance they should bee conuinced of vanitie and lying; and, after many contentions, they remained without agreement in that point. For the Coun∣cell, some thought fit to refuse it absolutely, and others were of opinion, to send Ambassadours to make offer that they would goe to a free and Chri∣stian Councell and to propose the exceptions, of the suspicion of the Indges, of the inconueniencie of that place, and others, often times proposed, to shew they did not refuse the authoritie of a lawfull Councell, and that the vnion of the Church was not hindered by them, but by the ambition of the Coure of Rome: which would make the Germane Catholiques more fauourable them. And they concluded to make petition to the Emperour in this forme. The two Nuncij, arriuing in Austria at the same time, found the Empe∣rour To which place y e Popes two Nuncij are sent by the Emperor with three Ambas∣dors of his owne. at Vienna, who gaue them counsell to go both immediately to N umburg, in Saxenie, where the Protestants were assembled in a Diet, and to treate as modestly with them as was possible, taking care not to exasperate or offend them. For, if they went to each of them into their owne States, they would bee posted from one to another, and would neuer haue any certaine answere, and when they had both performed this office ioyntly, they might diuide themselues, and god apart to whom they were sent. He put them in mind of the Conditions with which the Protestants did formerly condescend to the Councell, that, if mention were made thereof againe, they might bee prepa∣red to replie, in the Popes name, what they thought fit. The Emperour sent three Ambassadours of his owne to goe with them to the Assembly, and the King of Bohemia did recommend them to the Duke of Saxonie, that they might goe securely. The Emperours Ambassadours, hauing had audience at the Diet, exhorted the Princes to assist in the Councell, and to put an end to the of Germanie. The Princes, after they had consulted together; thanked Caser, and concerning the Councell, said they would not refuse it, if the word of GOD were to beiudge, if the BB. were released of their oaths, made to the Pope and the Sea of Rome, and if the Protestant Theologi es might have But seeing that the Pope admitteth no Bishops to be in the Councell but such as are sworne vnto him, against which they The Prote∣stants answer to the Am∣bassdor. haue alwayes protested, they could hardly agree vnto it; that they were wil∣ling presently to represent so much to the Emperour with all respect, defer∣ring their absolute answere vntill the Princes, then absent, were informed. Afterwards the Popes Nuncij were brought in; who, hauing commended the Popes and Religion, in reuiuing the Councel, to exti pate , in regard there are as many Religions and Gospels, as there are Doctors, said he had sent inuite them, to helpe forward so laudable an enterprise, promising that all should be handled with Christian Charitie, and that their voyces shall be free . They presented also the Popes Briefes, written to each of them. The next day all the Briefes, sealed as before, were sent backe, and the Nuntij cal∣led And to the Popes Nuntij to receiue an answere; which was to this effect: That they did not ac∣knowledge any iurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome; that there was no cause to reueale their pleasure concerning the Councell to him, who had no power either to call or hold it; that they had deliuered their minde and determinati∣on to the Emperour, their Lord; that to the Nuncij, who were nobly descen∣ded, in a Common-wealth which they loued, they offered all good office, The Prote∣stants doe in∣timate ano∣ther assembly, to begin in April. and would doe more if they had not come from the Pope. Thus they did end the assembly; and did intimate another, to begin in April to finish the of v iting themselues together. The Nuncio Delphinus, deliuered his Ambassage in diuers Cities as he re∣turned. The negoti∣ation of Del∣phinus. The Senate of Noremberg answered, that they would not forsake the Augustan Confession, not accept of the Councell, as not hauing the con∣ditions required by the Protestants. The Senates of Argentine, Francfort, Aus∣burg, and Ʋlma, answered in the same manner. Comendone parting from the Of Comen∣done. Diet, went to Lubec, from whence he sent to Frederic, King of Denmarke, to demand his Safe conduct to come to him, to deliuer to him the Popes Am∣bassage, and, inuite him to fauour the Councell. Hee answered, that neither Christian, his father, nor himselfe had euer any thing to doe with the Pope, and therefore hee cared not to receiue any Ambassage from him. Both the Nuncij had a fauourable answere from the Prelates; Princes, and Cities Ca∣tholique, with promise of deuotion to the Pope, but, concerning the Coun∣cell, they sayd they were to treate with the Emperour, it being necessary to consult together, for feare of the Lutherans. Ierolamus Martinengo, sent to Of Marti∣nengo. the Queene of England for the same cause, beeing in Flanders, receiued com∣mandement from her not to passe the Sea; and although the King of Spaine and Duke of Alua did make earnest entreaty that hee might bee admitted, and heard, commending the cause of that Legation, that is, the vnion of all the Christian Church in a generall Councell, yet the Queene did perseuere in her first resolution, answering that she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose authority was excluded out of England, by consent of Parliament. Canobius, when hee had deliuered his Ambassage to the King of Polonia, by whom he was well receiued, could not goe into Moscouia, by reason of the warre betweene that Prince and the King. But going into Prussia, hee was answered by that Duke, that he was of the Augustan Confession, and could not consent to a Popish Councell. The Suisses, assembled in a Diet at Bada, heard the Popes Nuncio, and, receiuing the Briefe, one of the Burgomasters of Zu∣ric And of Cano∣bius. did kisse it. The Pope, aduertised hereof, could not choose but tell it to all the Ambassadours residing with him, with much ioy. But, hauing con∣sulted The Pope re∣ioyceth that his Bull was kissed by a Burgomaster of Zuric. of the businesse concerning the Councell, the Catholiques answered, that they would send thither, and the Euangeliques that they would not ac∣cept of it. The negotiation of the Nuncij in Neumburg beeing published in Rome, there was a whispering against the Pope, for sending Ministers to the Diet of the Protestants: wherein hee excused himselfe, that it was not by his or∣der, but by the Emperours, to whose direction he did deferre the Nuncij; for which hee did not blame him, in regard hee did not care for nice points of honour, but onely for doing of good. The Emperour, hauing consulted The Emperor excepteth a∣gainst the Bul of the Coun∣cell. with his Diuines concerning the Bull of the Councell, wrote to the Pope, that as Ferdinand, hee could totally adhere to the will of his Holinesse, and bee content with any forme of the Bull, and endeauour that all Germanie should submit themselues to him; but as Emperour hee could say nothing, vntill he was enformed what was done by the Nuncij, and his Ambassadours, who went to the Diet of the Protestants in Neumburg. Hee was almost se∣cure, that if the Pope had not declared, that the conuocation of the Councel was not a continuation, but a new Indiction, or that the points already deci∣ded might bee reuiewed, and handled againe, the Bull would haue been ac∣cepted. The French King wrote to his Ambassadour in Rome the last of Ia∣nuary, And so doth the French King. that there were some things to bee reformed in the Bull before hee could receiue it. For although the word Indictio, was vsed in the title, yet in the body of it there were words which did signifie the remoouing of the suspensions of the Councell already begun, which Germanie suspecting, would vndoubtedly require an interpretation of them: which would draw the Councell in length, and not giuing the Emperour satisfaction, and them, would cause so many diuisions in Christendome, and so many difficulties, that it would be a Councell in shew onely, without fruit or profit. That, for his part he was pleased that Trent should bee the place, nor made any diffe∣rence whether it were a new Indiction, or a continuation, in regard his Ho∣linesse was willing, as hee was told by Nicheto, that the determinations al∣ready made may be disputed, and examined againe: wherein, as the reall per∣formance would giue satisfaction to all, so to take away feare, and secure eue∣ry one, it was necessary to declare so much before hand, taking care to satisfie the Emperour by all meanes, without whom no good successe of the Coun∣cell could bee hoped for. Hee sayd, that if all this were not performed, hee would, as the purpose of his brother was, call a Nationall Councell, which was the onely remedy for the necessities of his Kingdome. Hee gaue order to his Ambassadour also to complaine to his Holinesse, that his brother ha∣uing procured with such earnest entreaty, the opening of the Councell, yet no honourable mention was particularly made of him in the Bull; the rea∣son whereof euery one knew to bee, because hee would not name the French King immediately after the Emperour. Notwithstanding all these respects, the King, to promote the businesse of Religion wrote at the same time to the Prelates of his Kingdome, to prepare themselues to goe to the Councell, and to bee there at the time of the Conuocation: of which letter he sent a copie to Rome. The Rope was aduertised by his Nuncio, that the King spake against the To whom the Pope answe∣reth. Bull, by instigation of the Cardinall of Loraine, and, after hee heard the Ambassadours proposition, he answered, That hee maruelled that the King, who doeth not acknowledge any superiour, would subiect himselfe to the discretion of another Prince, & not referr himselfe to the Vicar of CHRIST, to whom it belongeth to moderate whatsoeuer doeth concerne Religion; saying, that his Bull was approoued by all others, and had no neede of refor∣mation, and that he was resolued it should stand as it did. That, for naming the French King, he had not thought of it, and that the Cardinals, to whome the composition of it was committed, thought it sufficient to name the Em∣perour and all Kings in generall; otherwise, naming one in particular, it would haue beene necessary to haue done the like in all the rest; that him∣selfe tooke care onely of the substance of the Bull, leauing all the rest to the Cardinals. This answere did not satisfie the Frenchmen, who thought their preeminence was not to be passed ouer in generall termes, in regard as well of their greatnesse, as of their merits towards the Apostolique Sea. In the end, the Pope gaue them contentment, saying hee could not haue his eye vp∣on all things, but would be carefull not to commit any errour hereafter. Yet he made no great account of that kingdome, seeing that, without any respect of his authoritie, they intermedled in things properly belonging to him: as in pardoning heretiques, and ordering things Ecclesiasticall, though reser∣ued The Pope doeth not e∣steem France. to himselfe. For the States assembled in Orleance in Ianuary, did ordaine that the Bishops should be elected by the Clergie, with the assistance of the Iudges of the King, twelue of the Nobilitie, and as many of the people; that no money should be sent to Rome for Annats; that all Bishops and Curates should reside personally, vpon paine of loosing the fruits of their Benefices; that in euery Cathedrall Church a Prebend should bee reserued for a Reader in Diuinity, and another for a Schoolmaster, that all Abbats, Abbesses, Priors, and Prioresses should be subiect to the Bishops, notwithstanding any exemption; that nothing should bee exacted for administring the Sacra∣ments, for Burials, or other publique functions; that Prelates should not vse censures, but for publique faults and scandals; that women should not make profession to be of any religious order, before the age of twenty yeeres, nor men before the age of fiue and twenty, vntill which time they might dispose of their goods to whom they pleased, except to the Monastery; that the Ecclesiastiques should not receiue Legacies, or any thing left vnto them or giuen them by last will. And other things also were ordained, for better reformation of the Church, and of the Clergie, which though they were not then published, yet the Nuncio sent them to the Pope, and those that gouerned France, thought it sufficient to giue satisfaction in shew onely, to those that required a reformation, not caring that any thing should be exe∣cuted. But, on the contrary, the Kings Diuines in Spaine did not approoue the Bull, because it did not plainely say, it was a continuation of the Councell already begun, yea, they thought, though the affectation of ambiguity were manifest, that it was plainely a new intimation, and some of them held, that The King of Spaine excep∣teth against the Bull. it might be drawen from the words of a cleare consequence, that the Deter∣minations made already in Trent, might be reexamined; which they said was dangerous, would embolden the Protestants, and might cause a new diuision amongst the Catholiques. The King would not publish or receiue the Bull, vpon pretence that the words were ambiguous, and that it ought to be expressed plainely, that it was a continuation of the Councell, and that the things already determined might not bee called into question: but the And is angry with the ope for receiuing the Ambassa∣dor of the K. of Nauar in the Kings hal. true cause was, for that the King of Nauarre, hauing sent the Bishop of Cominges to tender his obedience to the Pope, according to the custome, hee receiued him in the Kings Hall, and as Ambassadour of the King of Nauarre, thinking it preiudiciall to his possession of that Kingdome, to which hee had no title but by the excommunication of Iulius the second, and because hee gaue audience to Monsieur de Cars, who came to intreat him in the same Kings name, to be a meanes that the Kingdome might be restored to him, or satis∣faction giuen him, and had promised his paines herein. The Pope sent the Bishop of Terracina, expressely, into Spaine, to iustifie and excuse what hee For which two causes the Pope sen∣deth a Nunci into Spaine. had done in fauour of the King of Nauarre, and to expound, as it were by occasion, the meaning of the Bull. To those that were afraid, in regard of the contrary opinions of so great Princes, hee answered, that as a louing father, hee had inuited all, but that hee esteemed the Protestants as lost, and that the Catholiques of Germanie could not adhere to the Councell without making a separation from the others, and raising a warre: and if any Ca∣tholique Prince would forsake him, hee would proceede by his owne au∣thority, as did Iulius the third, without the French King. But hee told his inward friends, that he accounted all these troubles to be indifferent, in re∣gard, not knowing the issue of them, hee might as well hope for a good suc∣cesse, as feare a bad. In the meane space hee saw that hee receiued some be∣nefit by this vncertaine Councell, because it serued him as a bridle for Prince and Prelate, in attempting any nouitie, and for a colour to denie vn∣pleasing The vnccrtain∣ty of y e Coun∣cel did stand the Pope in some stead. suits, saying that the Councell beeing opened, hee ought to proceed warily, and with respect, and not to be prodigall in bestowing graces and fauours: and when any great difficulty did arise, hee did referre it to the Councell. Onely he was afraid that the bad affection of the Protestants to∣wards the Church of Rome, might cause some excursion into Italie, which A difference about prece∣dence be∣tweene the Dukes of Flo∣rence and of Ferrara. would bee deriued wholly vpon himselfe; and hee saw an ouerture thereof by a difference of precedence betweene the Dukes of Florence and Ferrara, who descended to vnciuill termes. Cosmo Duke of Florence, said hee held the place of the Florentine republique, which was euer preferred before the Dukes of Ferrara. Alfonso, Duke of Ferrara, pretended that the Dukedome had continued in the house of his progenitors for many successions, where∣as Cosmo was the first Duke of Florence, whose precedencie could not be main∣tained by the right of the Republique, because it was no more in being. This Duke was fauoured by Francis, as cousin to Henry the second: and brother in law to those of the house of Guise. The other grounded himselfe vpon a sen∣tence of Charles the fifth, in his fauour. Alfonso made instance in Germanie, that the Emperour, with the Electors, would bee iudge of it in a Diet. The Pope thought it dangerous that the Diet of Germany should giue sentence concerning Italy, which did by consequence import an execution, and dan∣ger of Armes. For remedie whereof, he wrote to both the Dukes, that it be∣longed onely to the Apostolique Sea, and Vicar of CHRIST to giue sentence in such causes, commanding them both to shew him their proofes, and to ex∣pect his determination. And to be prepared for all euents, hee resolued to fortifie the Castle of Rome, and the Citie Leonina, commonly called Borgo, and other places in his State, as hee thought conuenient, and imposed a taxe, of three Iulij, vpon euery measure of corne called a Rubie, throughout his whole Territory. And not to giue cause of iealousie to Princes, he called the Ambassadours of the Emperour, Spaine, Portugal, and Ʋenice, to whom hee imparted his determination, and his reasons, commanding them to aduer∣tise their Princes of it: and sayd, that the Subsidie layd vpon his Subiects would be but small, lesse then that which was imposed by Paul 4. when hee commanded the celebration of the Chaire of Saint Peter; because by his im∣position, the poore man paid but three Iulij a yeere, but by the Feast of Paul 4. did lose fiue, and that dayes worke. The time prefixed to begin the Councell approaching, the Pope, not to The Pope ap∣pointeth Pre∣sidents for the Councell. faile in any thing that was to bee performed by him, deputed Legate to pre∣side, Hercules Gonzaga, Cardinall of Mantua, a man eminent, in regard of the greatnesse of his house, of his brother Ferandus, and of his owne vertue. Hee vsed the Emperour to perswade him to accept, and was confident of his worth and dexteritie. To him hee ioyned Iacobus Puteus, of Nizza, an ex∣cellent Lawyer, who was exercised a long time, first in the Rota, and then in the Signature; saying that hee purposed to make three more, and that; if hee could not finde able men in the Colledge, hee would create new Cardinals, Diuines, and Lawyers, men of honesty, for this imployment. And hee cal∣led a Congregation of Cardinals and Prelates, to giue order for all things necessary for the beginning of the Councell in Trent, at the time appointed: and letters came very fitly from the French King; and, in conformity of The French King accep∣teth the Bull. them, his Ambassadour, Mounsiear of Angolesme, did declare vnto him, that he was content with the Councel vpon any tearmes, being desirous to see the effect of it, and that fruit which all Christendome did require. And he sent Mounsieur de Ramboullet expressely vnto him, to make the same request, and to represent vnto him the necessities of France, and to tell him of the in∣stance made vnto him herein, by the States assembled in Orliens; signifying vnto him, that, if this remedie were not quickly applyed, hee should bee con∣strained to receiue a medicine in his owne Kingdome, by an Assembly of his Prelates, in regard there was no meanes to compose the differences of Religion, but by a free Generall Councell, or, in defect thereof, by a Natio∣nall. The Pope answered that none did desire the Councel more then him∣selfe, the delay whereof proceeded not from him, but from the diuers opi∣nions of Princes, for whose satisfaction he had giuen such a forme to the Bull, as seemed most fit to content them all. They changed their opinion in France, because, beeing in as bad a state as might bee, thought that euery mutation made elsewhere would better their condition. Viterbo wrote out of Spaine that the King did approoue his propositions, and that, after some consultation with his Prelates, was finally resolued to accept the Bull, without making any difficultie, and to send his Prelates as And so doth the King of Spaine. soone as the season was fit for trauell, and an honourable Ambassage, to assist in the Councell. Hee sent aduice also that the Prelates of Portugall were al∣ready parted from their houses, and that the King would send an Ambassa∣dour; but that he had perceiued that some of those Prelates had a purpose, The Pope is troubled with the designe of the Portugal Diuines. that the superioritie of the Councell aboue the Pope should be defined in the Synode, which point they had studied, and caused many Diuines to doe the like. The Pope was troubled with this aduice, and considered what hee might looke for when the Prelates were assembled in the Councell, and did treate altogether, who had such high thoughts before they parted from home, and feared that the King and his Counsell had a finger in it. Yet, as a wise Prince, hee considered, that when the Councell was held, not that nouitie onely would be proposed, but many more to the disaduantage of o∣thers as well as of himselfe: saying that euery weight had his counterpoyse, and that of the things that are attempted, not one in a thousand doeth take effect. Hee was more attentiue to the enterprises of the French-men, as beeing more imminent, and of persons who are not flegmaticall in resoluing, as the Spaniards are. Therefore hee imparted to the Ambassadour euery aduice that came vnto him, and told him in diuers conferences, that they were not to thinke of Nationall Councels, assemblies, or Colloquies, in matter of Religi∣on, because hee could not but esteeme them all for schismaticall; that hee prayed the King not to vse those remedies, which would certainely reduce France, not onely into a worse condition, but into the worst of all; that the difficulties of Spaine being remooued, the Councell should certainly be ce∣lebrated, because those which doe continue in Germanie are not consider∣able; that the Catholique Princes and Bishops will consent and perhaps the Duke of Saxonie also, as hee hath made shew, by separating himselfe from the others assembled in Neumburg; that hee hoped the Emperour would assist personally, if there were neede, as himselfe did promise to doe, if hee thought it fit, wherein hee would not subiect himselfe to the iudgement of any but himselfe. Easter drawing neere, which time was appointed to begin the Councell, One of the Presidents falleth sicke, and another is put in his place. and Cardinall Puteus being very sicke, hee put in his roome Friar Ierolamus, Cardinal Seripando a Diuine of much fame, and caused him to depart present∣ly, and to passe by Mantua, taking with him the other Legate, and to bee at Trent at the time appointed. Notwithstanding which commandement they came not thither vntil the third feast of the resurrection, and found there nine Bishops who were arriued before them. The Pope was diligent to make the Italian Bishops put themselues in order; and therefore wrote effect all errors to the Vice-roy of Naples, and to his Nuncio there, and caused his Ministers to perswade the Bishops of the State of Milan, to bee ready for their iourney to the Councell, as soone as might be. Hee desired also the State of Venice to send the Bishops of their Territories in Italy, of Candia, Dalmatia, and Cyprus, with all possible expedition, and to create Ambassadors, to assist in the Coun∣cell in the name of that Republike. The Italian Prelats were not easily mo∣ued, because they knew the beginning could not be before the consent of the The Italian Prelates are not so hasty to goe to the Councel as y e Pope would haue had them Emperour did come: which was still prolonged, because the Spaniards and French-men were expected, before whose arriuall in Italy they thought it su∣perfluous to goe to Trent. And many of them, especially the Courtiers, could not beleeue but that the Pope did counterfeit. But the trueth was that, being assured he could not auoide the Councell, hee did desire to see it quick∣ly. Hee said he knew what incouenience the prolongation did cause, but knew not what the celebration might doe: and thought that the enemies of his owne person, and of the Apostolique Sea might doe him more hurt in the time of the expectation, then they could doe in the Councell it selfe. And be∣ing of a resolute nature, hee vsed the Prouerbe; It is better to prooue the euill once, then alwayes to feare it. While these delayes were vsed, the Duke of Sauoy made a composition The Duke of Sauoy maketh composition with the Wal∣denses of Montsenis. with the Waldenses of the Valleys of Montsenis. For, hauing made more then a yeeres tryall to reduce them by punishments, and, after they stood vpon their guard, as hath been sayd, maintained Souldiers against them, for which the Pope did assist him with money, howsoeuer they proceeded rather with skirmishes, then any set warre, because of the craggednesse of the Countrey, yet, at the last, they came to a formall battaile, in which the Duke had a great ouerthrow, lost seuen thousand men, and slew but fourteene of the enemies: and although hee did often repaire his Army, yet he had alwayes the worse. By reason of a great ouer∣throw. Therefore considering hee did nothing but make his Rebels more warlike, consume his owne Countrey, and spend his money, hee resolued to receiue them into fauour, and made an agreement with them, the fifth of Iune; in which hee pardoned all faults past, gaue them libertie of conscience, as∣signed them certaine places, where they might make their Congregations, in other places gaue them leaue to comfort the sicke, and doe other dueties of re∣ligion, but not to preach; gaue leaue to those that were fled to returne againe, and restitution of goods to those that were banished. It was agreed also that the Duke might send away which of their Pastors he pleased, and that they might prouide themselues of others; that the Roman Religion might be ex∣ercised in all places, but no man inforced to professe it. The Pope was much distasted that an Italian Prince, assisted by him, and not so potent but that Which giueth distaste to the Pope. hee might still haue neede of him, should permit heretikes to liue freely in his state: and the example did trouble him aboue all, because it would be al∣leadged to him by greater Princes, when they would permit another religi∣on. Hee made a bitter complaint hereof in the Consistorie, comparing the ministers of the Catholique King with that Duke, who hauing, at the same time, discouered three thousand Lutherans, who went out of Cosenza, and retired themselues to the mountaines, to liue according to their doctrine, did hang some, burne others, and put the rest into the Galleys; and hee exhorted all the Cardinals to thinke of a remedie. But there was great difference be∣tweene oppressing a few disarmed persons, farre from helpe, and ouer com∣ming a great number of armed men in a place aduantagious for them, with potent succours at their shoulders. The Duke sent to iustific his cause, and the Pope, not able to answere his reasons was pacified. In France, though the Queene and Prelates did desire to satisfie the Pope, in referring the causes of religion to the Councell, yet a congregation of the Who was pa∣cified by the . The Pope is offended with the Congre∣gation of the Prelates in France. Prelates was put in order: in which, howsoeuer the Ambassadour assured the Pope, that nothing should bee spoken of doctrine, nor any thing preludici∣all to his authority, but onely a course set downe how to pay the Kings debts, to prouide against some abuses, and to consult what was to bee handled in the generall Councell, yet his Holinesse was not satisfied, yea was of opinion that they thought, that to prouide against abuses, was to hinder the profits of the Court, and that to consult of the Councel, was to ioyne with the Spa∣niards (whereof hee had some intelligence) in the point of the supreame power of the Councell, euen ouer the Pope. And, by reason of the dissenti∣ons betweene the Grandies of the Court, spread also ouer all the Prouinces be∣cause euery one sought to increase his faction, there being a great liberty of speaking; the professours of the new religion were plainely discouered, and protected by the greatest about the King, with much indignation of the Ca∣tholiques. Whereupon there were contentions and discords throughout the whole Kingdome, calling one another, in scorne, Papists, and Hugonots, the Preachers making the people tumultuous, and euery one hauing diuers ends. He plainly saw, that if the Catholike partie had not all the same ayme, some great inconuenience would arise; for preuenting whereof, and to crosse those desseignes, he thought it necessary to haue a Minister there, a man of authoritie, and not a French man, who would haue more interest in the king∣dome, then in the seruice of the Apostolique Sea; and resolued to send a Legatethither. And casting his eye vpon all the Cardinals, hee made choice Into which Kingdome he sendeth for Legate the Cardinall of Ferrara. of Ferrara in whom all necessary qualities did concurre; singular wisedome, dexteritie in negotiations, nobility of birth, being allied to the Royall house of France, brother in law to the Kings great Aunt, daughter of Lewis the 12, and so neere a cousin to those of Guise, (the Dukes wife being the Cardinals neece) that they could not chuse but fauour him, in regard of their neerenesse in blood. He gaue him foure particular Commissions; to fauour the Catho∣liques, and oppose the Protestants; to diuert the Nationall Synode, and And giueth him foure commissions. assembly of the Prelates; to sollicite the going of the Prelates to the Coun∣cell; and to cause an abrogation of the constitutions, made in matters Ec∣clesiasticall. While the Legate was preparing to goe, there fell our an accident which made the Kings neerest friends feare the Catholiques, as much as the Prote∣stants. For the fourteenth of Iuly, Arthurus Defiderius was apprehended A supplication sent out of France into Spaine. neere to Orleans, who was sent into Spaine with a Supplication, written in the name of the Clergie of France, in which they demaunded the assi¦stance of that King against the Protestants, because they could not bee suppressed by a boy and a woman, with other more secret instructions in cipher, to be imparted to his Maiestie. This man being imprisoned, and in∣terrogated of the confederates, discouered some, whom it was dangerous to make knowen: for which cause they resolued to proceede no further, but condemned him to make honourable satisfaction, to teare the supplication, and to bee perpetuall prisoner in the Monasterie of the Carthusians. But many of his confessions being divulged, the Kings Counsel thought fit to giue the other partie some satisfaction. Whereupon the King did prohibite the names of Hugonotes and Papists, ordaining that no man, vnder pretence of disco∣uering the Congregations for religion, which were forbid, should enter with The King maketh an oc∣dination in fauour of the Protestants. many or few, into another mans house; that those who were in prison for re∣ligion should be set at libertie, and that those which fled, since the time of Francis the first; might returne and repossesse their goods, in case they would liue like Catholiques, or, if they would not, might sell them, and goe to ano∣ther place. The Parliament of Paris did oppose, and said, it was a kinde of grant of libertie of religion, which was neuer knowen in France; that the returne of the fugitiues would cause great troubles, and that the libertie to sell their goods, and goe to another place was against the lawes of the Kingdome, which doe not giue leaue to carry foorthany great quantitie of money. But notwithstanding all these oppositions, the Edict was executed; so that the Protestants being increased in number, and making more and grea∣ter assemblies then they were wont, the King, with the Queene and Princes, went into the Parliament to prouide a remedy, by the mature counsel of men skilfull in matters of State and Iustice. The Chancellour said, they were not to speake of Religion, but of making prouision against dayly tumults, which did arise by the meanes of it; lest being made licontious, by raising of stirres, they might lay aside all obedience to the King. There were three opinions. 1. To suspend all punishments against the Protestants, vntill the decision of the Councell. 2. That they should bee capitally proceeded against. 3. That they should bee punished by the Eclesiasticall Court, for∣bidding their Congregations, either publike or priuate, and liberty to preach, or administer the Sacraments, but after the Romane fashion. In conclusi∣on, they tooke a middle course, and made an Edict, which is called the Edict of Iuly. That all should abstaine from doing iniuries, and liue in peace; The Edict of Iuly. that the preachers should not rayse tumults, vpon paine of death; that none should preach or administer the Sacraments, but according to the Romane Rite; that the Ecclesiastiques should bee iudges of heresie; that if the person guilty were deliuered to the Secular power, no greater punishment should bee inflicted then banishment, and this to continue till a Generall or National Councell did determine otherwise; that all those who haue mooued any tu∣mult, for the cause of Religion, should be pardoned, liuing hereafter in peace, and like Catholiques. Afterwards treating how to accommodate the con∣trouersies, it was ordained that the Bishops should meete in Poisi, the tenth A Colloquie is ordained at Poisi. of August, and that the Protestant Ministers should haue a Safe Conduct to come thither. This was contradicted by many of the Catholiques, who thought it strange, dishonourable, and dangerous to put the Religion of their predecessours, receiued vntill that time, to compromise, and in ha∣zard. In which the Card of Lo∣raine vnder∣taketh to con∣fute the here∣siques. But they yeelded at the last, because the Cardinall of Loraine promi∣sed largely that hee would confute the heretiques, and take the burden vpon himselfe; wherein hee was assisted by the Queene, who, knowing his desire to make ostentation of his witte, was willing to giue him satisfa∣ction. The Pope had newes at once of these two Edicts; in which hee found some thing to commend, and something to blame. Hee commended the Parliament, for maintaining the cause of religion; and blamed it, because they had ordered it contrary to the Decretals, not to proceed to any greater con∣sure then banishment. His conclusion was, that when the maladie is grea∣ter then the remedie, it ought to be made lighter by patience. But the immi∣nent danger of the assembly of the Prelates, especially together with the Pro∣testants, he thought was intolerable, and said, he would doe the best he could to hinder it; wherein if he should not bee able to preuaile, yet hee was with∣out fault. Therefore he treated effectually with the Ambassadour, and with the King, by his Nuncio, that, seeing the Assembly could not bee omitted, yet at the least the arriuall of the Cardinall of Ferrara might bee expected, that beeing made in presence of an Apostolicall Legate, with absolute authori∣tie, it might bee lawfull. Hee wrote also to the Prelats, that their power did not extend so farre as to make Decrees in matter of Religion, or Ecclesiasti∣call discipline, and that if they went beyond their bounds, hee would not onely make all voyd, but proceed against them with all seuerity. Neither the Nuncio nor the Ambassadour could preuaile, in regard that not onely the Popes aduersaries did oppose, but euen the Cardinall of Loraine himselfe, with his adherents; and it was told the Nuncio in the Kings name, that the Pope might rest secure, because nothing should bee resolued on, but by the opini∣on of the Cardinals. But for all this, the affaires of the Church did precipitate: and in Rome The Councel of the French King determi∣neth that the Princes of the Blood ought to precede the Cardinals. it was thought to bee a great fall, that there being a controuersie for prece∣dencie betweene the Cardinals and Princes of the Blood, in the Assembly of the States continued in outoise, the Kings Counsell did determine it against the Cardinals, and the Cardinals Chastillon and of Armignac did yeelde though Tornon, Loraine, and Guise departed, disdaining and murmu∣ring at their Colleagues. And the Deputie of the third Order, who spake against the Clergie, was heard with applause, obiecting to them ignorance, and luxury, demanding that all iurisdiction should be taken from them, and the reuenewes, and a Nationall Councell held, wherein the King or Princes of the Blood should preside; and that in the meane time those, who doe not receiue the Romish ceremonies, might assemble, and preach, in the presence of a publike Minister of the King, that it might plainly appeare that nothing is done against him. They treated also of applying to the publique a part of the Ecclesiasticall reuenewes, and many other things against that order; and the number of those who did fauour the Protestants, did still increase. The Clergie, to free themselues, were forced to promise to pay the King foure tenths yeerely, for sixe yeeres, and so the humours, stirred against them, were quieted. And, The pope is discontented with a letter sent vnto him by the Queen mother. which was the greatest precipice, the Queene wrote a long letter to the Pope, dated the fourth of August, shewing the imminent dangers for the diffe∣rences of Religion, and exhorting him to vse some remedie; shee sayd there were so many separated from the Church of Rome, that it was impossible to reduce them, either by law or force; that many of the Grandies of the Kingdome did draw others by their example; that there beeing none of them who denie the Articles of Faith, nor the sixe Councels, many did aduise to receiue them into the Communion of the Church; but if this did not please, and that it seemed better to expect a Generall Councell, in the meane space, in regard of the vrgent necessitie and danger of delay, it was necessary to vsesome particular remedy, by making Colloquies of both parties, by admonishing them to abstaine from iniuries, contentions, and offensiue words, by cleering the mindes of those who were not aliened as yet, taking from the place of adoration the Images, prohibited by GOD, and condem∣ned by S. Gregory; by remoouing from Baptisme, spittle, and exorcismes, and other things, not instituted by the word of GOD; to restore the vse of the Cup in the Communion, and prayers in the vulgar tongue; that the first Sun∣day in euery moneth, or more often, the Curates should call those who will communicate, and, singing Psalmes in the vulgar, should, in the same also, pray for the Prince, and Magistrates, for the salubrity of the ayre, and fruits of the earth; then, expounding the places of the Euangelists, and of S. Paul, concerning the Eucharist, they should come to the Communion; that the Feast of Corpus Christi should be taken away, because it is instituted onely for pompe; that if the Latine tongue must bee vsed in prayers, yet the vulgar should be added, for the benefit of all; that the Popes authority should not be diminished, nor the doctrine changed, in regard it is not iust to take away the ministery, because the Ministers haue erred. It was thought that shee wrote these things at the perswasion of Iohn Monluc, Bishop of Valence, with too much French liberty, and they troubled the Pope very much, con∣sidering the time, full of suspitions, when a Nationall Councell was spoken of, and a Colloquie intimated in Poisi. Hauing well considered all, he resol∣ued to dissemble, and not to answere, but onely that, the Councell drawing neere, whatsoeuer was thought necessary might bee there proposed, with as∣sured hope that no resolution should bee made but for the seruice of GOD, and peace of the Church. These occurrences did confirme the Pope in his opinion, that the Coun∣cell was profitable both for himselfe and the Court, and that it was necessa∣ry to celebrate it for his defence, against the preparations which were and might be made. And hee shewed tokens of ioy, for the letters which came vnto him, the 24 of August, from the Emperour, in which hee sayd that hee But is com∣forted by ano∣ther, receiued from the Em∣perour. did absolutely consent vnto the Councell, and that hee did not declare him∣selfe vntill then, that hee might more easily winne the Princes of Germanie; but now, not being able to doe any more, hee prayed him to continue his en∣deauours, in hastening the celebration. Hauing called together all the Am∣bassadours of Princes, and most of the Cardinals, so that it was almost a Consistorie, he shewed the letters to them all, saying, it was worthy to bee written in letters of gold; that the Councell would bee most profitable; that it was not to be deferred; that it would be sovniuersall that the Citie of Trent would not bee able to receiue it, and that it would bee necessary to thinke of translating it to a place more large and fertile. His discourse was approoued by all that stood by, though some thought it dangerous to name the transla∣tion in the beginning, in regard that euery little suspition might either hinder or delay the Councell. Others beleeued that this would not displease the Pope, and that he cast foorth that word to open a gate where the difficulty might enter. It being not onely resolued, but generally knowen that none of the Dutch Prelates would come to Trent, and a doubt made also, in regard of the Collo∣quie instituted, that the French-men would treat onely amongst themselues, and that the Councell would consist of noen but Italians, except some few Spaniards, the Italians were of opinion, that a few of them would serue the turne, so that many of them vsed meanes to the Pope to bee excepted; who told them plainly, that he was assured that all the Vltramontans would come, The Italians desire to be excused from going to the Councell, but cannot ob∣taine leaue of the Pope. full of hopes to subiect the Popedome to the Councell, which being the common interest of Italie, whereby it is preferred before other Nations, they ought to goe all thither for the publike defence; that hee would not ex∣empt any, but rather take all hope from them, saying, that they might bee as∣sured thereof, seeing how diligent he was in sending the Legats thither. For, besides the Cardinall of Mantua and Scripando, hee had sent Stanislaus Osius, Cardinall of Ʋarmia. The next day, hauing published the Emperours letters, hee called a generall congregation of all the Cardinals, though it were Sun∣day. Hee treated of many particulars concerning the beginning and pro∣gresse of the Councell; and promised to assist the poore Prelats with money, but vpon condition they should goe thither; and allowed them but eight daies to begin their iourney. He shewed how necessary the Councell was, in regard Religion was banished, or endangered in some place euery day. And he spake the truth. For in Scotland, in an assembly of all the Nobilitie of The Roman Catholike re∣ligion is bani∣shed out of Scotland. the kingdome, it was constituted that there should be no more exercise of the Romane Catholique Religion. In August the Prelats did assemble in Poist, where they treated of the re∣formation of the Cleargie, without making any conclusion. Afterwards, the Protestant Ministers being come, in number foureteene, who were cal∣led, and secured by a safe conduct, amongst whom Peter Martyr, a Florentine, who came from Zuric, and Theodore Beza, who came from Geneua, were the chiefe, they gaue a petition to the King which had foure parts. 1. That The Colloquie of Poisi in France. the Bishops might not be Iudges in that businesse. 2. That the King with his Counsellours would preside. 3. That the controuersies might be de∣cided by the word of God. 4. That that which was agreed on, and de∣creed might be written by Notaries elected by both parties. The Queene would haue one of the foure Secretaries of the King to write, and graunted that the King should preside; but so, that this should not bee committed to writing, alledging that it was not fit for them, nor profitable for the King, considering the present times. The Cardinall of Loraine desired the Kings presence in the publique assembly, that it might be more frequent, and ador∣ned, to make ostentation of his worth, promising himselfe a certaine victo∣rie. Many of the Diuines perswaded the Queene not to suffer the King to bee present, that those tender cares might not be enuenomed by pestiferous doctrine. Before the parties were called to the combat, the Prelats made a procession, and did all communicate, except the Cardinall Chastillon, and fiue Bishops. The other protested one to another, that they meant not to handle points of doctrine, nor matters of faith. The second of September they began, in presence of the King, Queene, Princes of the blood, and the Kings Counsellors, together with sixe Cardi∣nals, and fortie Bishops. The King, as he was instructed, made an exhorta∣tion, that, being assembled to remedie the tumults of the kingdome, and to In which the King speaketh biterely. correct the things that were amisse he desired they should not depart before all differences were composed. The Chancellor spake more at large to the same purpose, in the Kings name, and said particularly that the disease be∣ing And the Chancellor at large. vrgent, did require a present cure; that the remedie which could bee ex∣pected from the Councell, besides that it would bee slow, would proceede from men, who, being strangers, know not the necessities of France, and are bound to follow the Popes will; that the Prelates present, knowing the needs of the kingdome, and neere in blood are more fit to execute this good worke; that although the Councell intimated by the Pope were held, yet the like of this hath beene done at other times, and is not without example; that in the time of Charles the great many Councels were held at once and that, many times, the error of a generall Councel hath bin corrected by a Na∣tional, as Arianisme established by the generall Councel of Arimini, was con∣demned in France, by a Councel called by S. Hilarie. He exhorted all to ayme at the same end, and the more learned not to contemne their inferiors, nor these to enuie those; to auoid curlous questions; not to bee auerse from the Protestants, who were their brethren, regenerate in the same Baptisme, wor∣shippers of the same CHRIST. Hee exhorteth the Bishops to treat with them courteously, seeking to reduce them, but without seueritie, conside∣ring that much was attributed to them, in that they were suffered to be Iud∣ges in their owne cause: saying, that this did constraine them to proceede with sinceritie, and that, in so doing, they should stop the mouth of their aduersaries, but, transgressing the office of iust Iudges, all would be invaine, and to no purpose. The Cardinall Tornon rose vp, and, hauing thanked the King, Queene, and Princes, for the assistance they affoorded to that assem∣bly said that the Chancellors propositions were of great importance, and not to bee handled, or answered vpon the sudden, and therefore desired they might bee committed to writing, the better to deliberate vpon them. The Chancellor did refuse and the Cardinall of Loraine did vrge it. The Queene, perceiuing that this was required by the two Cardinals, to The Queene mother com∣mandeth Be∣za to begin. draw the businesse in length, gaue order to Beza to speake: Who, hauing prayed on his knee, and recited the profession of his faith, complained that they were accounted turbulent, and seditious, perturber of the publique peace, though they had no other end then the glory of GOD, nor desired to assemble themselues but to serue him, and obey the Magistrates, appointed by him. Then he declared in what they do agree with the Church of Rome, and in what they dissent, he spake of faith, good workes, of the authoritie of Councels, sinnes of Ecclesiasticall discipline obedience to Magistrates, and of the Sacraments and entring into the matter of the Eucharist, hee spake Who sheweth too much heate. with such heate, that he gaue but ill satisfaction to those of his owne partie; so that he was commanded to conclude. And hauing presented the Confession of his Churches, and desired it might bee examined, he made an end. The Cardinall Tornon, full of disdaine, rose vp, and said, that the Bishops, euen for∣cing their consciences, had consented to heare these new Euangelists, fore seeing they would speake many iniurious things against God, and that but for the respect they bare to the King, they would haue risen, and disturbed the Whereat Car∣dinall Tornon disdaineth. assembly. Therefore hee prayed his Maiestie, not to beleeue what they had said, because the Prelates would disprooue it, so that hee should see the diffe∣rence betweene the trueth and a lye, and demanded a dayes time to answere, requiring that all should bee remooued from thence, that they might not heare those blasphemies. Wherewith the Queene, thinking her selfe to bee touched, answered, that nothing was done but by the aduice of the Princes, of the Kings Counsell, and Parliament of Paris, not to change or innouate any thing in Religion, but to compose the differences, and to reduce those that wandered into the right way; which the Bishops were bound in wise∣dome to procure, by all good meanes. The assembly being dissolued, the Bishops and Diuines consulted amongst themselues what to doe. Some of them would haue had a Confession of Faith written, vnto which if the Protestants would not subscribe, they should bee condemned for heretiques, without any further disputation. Which opi∣nion seeming too hard, after much discourse, they resolued to answere two of the points proposed by Beza; that is, of the Church, and of the Eucharist. The Congregation being assembled againe the sixteenth of the moneth, the The Card. of Loraine spea∣keth for the Catholiques. Cardinall of Loraine, in the presence of the King, Queene, and Princes, made a long Oration, and sayd; That the King was a member, not head of the Church; that it belonged to his care to defend it, and that, for matter of do∣ctrine, hee was subiect to the Ecclesiasticall Ministers; that the Church did not containe the elect onely, any yet could not erre; that when any particu∣lar Church is in an errour, recourse must be had to the Church of Rome, De∣crees of the generall Councels, consent of the ancient Fathers, and, aboue all, to the Scripture expounded in the sense of the Church; that the heretiques, failing in this, haue runne into inextricable errours; as the modernes, for ex∣ample, in the point of the Eucharist, in which, by an incurable itch of curious questions, they haue vsed that which was instituted by Christ for a bond of vnion, to make an irreconciliable rent in the Church. And then he handled this matter, and concluded, that, if the Protestants will not change their o∣pinion herein, there is no meanes of composition. When he had made an end, all the Bishops stood vp, and said they would liue and die in that Faith; they prayed the King to perseuere in it; adding, that if the Protestants will subscribe to this article, they will not refuse to dis∣pute the rest; but if not, they ought not to haue any more audience, but to be chased out of the whole kingome. Beza asked leaue to answere present∣ly; To whom Beza was willing to an∣swer and was not suffered. but it seeming not fit to equalize a priuate Minister, to so great a Prince Cardinall, the assembly was dissolued. The Prelats were willing the Colloquie should haue beene thus ended; but the Bishop of Ʋalence told them it was dishonourable. Therefore the foure and twentieth day it was assembled a∣gaine in presence of the Queene, and the Princes. Beza spake of the Church, But speaketh another day. and of the conditions and authority thereof; of Councels, shewing they may erre, and the dignity of the Scripture. Claudeus Espenseus answered, that hee had alwayes desired a Colloquie in matter of Religion, and abhorred the punishments which the poore vnfortunate people endured: but he much marueiled by what authority, and by whom the Protestants were called in∣to the Ecclesiasticall ministery, who had layd hands on them to make them And is an∣swered by Claudius E∣spenseus. ordinary Ministers, and, if they pretended an extraordinary vocation where were the miracles to demonstrate it. Then hee treated of Traditions. Hee shewed, that there beeing a controuersie of the sense of the Scriptures, re∣course must be had to the Fathers; and that many things are beleeued by Tra∣dition onely, as the Consubstantialitie of the Sonne, the baptizing of infants, and the virginity of the mother of Christ after his birth. Hee added, that no generall Councell was euer corrected by another in point of doctrine. Di∣uers replies and disputations passed on both sides, betweene the Diuines, who were present. And, there being a great contention, the Card of Loraine making a silence, proposed the matter of the Eucharist, and sayd, that the Bi∣shops were resolute not to proceede any further, if that Article were not a∣greed on; and then demaunded of the Ministers, if they were prepared to subscribe the Augustan Confession in that Article. Beza asked whether hee proposed that in the name of all, and whether himselfe, and the other Pre∣lates would subscribe to the other points of that Confession: and receiuing no answere either of the one or the other, hee demanded, that that which was proposed to bee subscribed vnto, should bee put in writing, that they might consult of it; and so the Colloquie was put off till the next day. In which Beza, who began to speake, did much prouoke the Bishops. For hauing iustified his vocation to the Ministerie, he discoursed of the vocation Beza spea∣keth, againe, and prouo∣keth the Bi∣shops. and ordination of Bishops, shewing what Simonie was committed, and de∣manding how it could be accounted lawfull. The passing to the Article of the Eucharist, and the point of the Augustan Confession proposed vnto him, hee said it ought to bee first subscribed by those who did propose it. The parties not being able to agree, a Spanish Iesuite, one of the traine of the Cardinall The saw ines of a Spanish Iesuite. of Ferrara, who was at the Colloquie, hauing reproched the Protestants, did reprehend the Queene for meddling in matters which belonged not to her, but to the Pope, Cardinals, and Bishops. This arrogancie troubled the Queenes Patience; but, for the Popes sake, and the Legates, shee dissembled. Finally, not being able to conclude any thing by this manner of parlie, it was A new course is taken. ordered, that two Bishops and three Diuines, of the most moderate, should conferre with fiue of the Protestants Ministers, to see if they could finde out a way to make an agreement. They assayed to frame an Article of the Eu∣charist Which doth as little good as the former in generall termes, taken out of the Fathers, which might giue satis∣faction to both parties, which because they could not doe, they concluded the Colloquie. This did minister much matter of discourse. Some sayd it was a bad example to treate of errours once condemned, and that they ought no so much as to heare those who denie the foundations of Religion, which hath continued so long, and beene so much confirmed, especially in the pre∣sence of ignorant people; and that, although nothing was resolued against the true Religion, it hath made the heretiques bolde, and grieued the Ca∣tholiques. Others sayd, it would bee generally good to handle these con∣trouersies often, because the parties would by this meanes become familiar; malice and other bad affections would cease, and many wayes of composi∣tion might be found, and that there was no other course to extirpate the e∣uill that had taken such deepe roote. For the Court being diuided vnder pre∣tence of religion, it was impossible they should be reconciled, except all ob∣stinacie layd aside, they did tolerate one another, and take that cloake out of the hands of vnquiet and turbulent people, with which they couer their bad actions. The Pope, vnderstanding that the Colloquie was dissolued without doing Wherwith the Pope is well pleased. any thing, was very glad, and much commended the Cardinall of Loraine, and Tornon more. The zeale of the Iesuite pleased him, and sayd, hee might be compared to the ancient Saints, hauing, without respect of the King and Princes maintained Gods cause, and vpbrayded the Queene to her face. On the contrary, hee reprehended the oration of the Chancellour, saying, The Chan∣cellour of France is bla∣med in Rome, together with the whole go∣uernment of that kingdom. it was hereticall in many parts, and threatned to call him into the Inquisi∣tion. The Court also, when it was diuulged to them, was distasted with it, and coniectured that all the gouernours of the Kingdome had the same dis∣position toward Rome; and the French Ambassadour had much adoe to de∣fend himselfe. That which hapned to the Cardinall of Ferrara is not to bee omitted, as The enter∣tainment of the Cardinall of Ferrara in France. being of affinitie to the matter whereof I write. That Prelate was receiued at the first by the King and Queene, with much honour, and hauing presented the Popes letters of credence, was acknowledged for Legate of the Aposto∣like Sea, by their Maiesties, by the Princes, and Clergie. But the Parliament, hauing discouered that, amongst his Commissions, one was, to desire a reuo∣cation, or moderation, at the least, of the things accorded in the States of Orle∣ance, the last of Ianuary, concerning the distribution of Benefices, and, parti∣cularly, the prohibition of paying Annates to Rome, and sending money out of the Kingdome to obtaine Benefices there, or other fauours, did immediatly publish the Decrees, which had not been punished vntill that time, vnder the date of the thirteenth of September, that the Cardinall might not ob∣taine his purpose; and did resolue not to giue the Legate leaue to vse the Fa∣culties giuen him by the Pope. For the custome of that kingdome is, that a Legate cannot exercise his office, if his Faculties be not first presented, and ex∣amined in Parliament, and regulated and moderated by a decree thereof, and confirmed in that forme by the Kings Briefe; so that when the Bull of the Faculties of the Legation was presented, to bee, as they say, approoued, it was refused by the Chancellour and Parliament, alleadging that it was already de∣termined not to vse any more dispensations against the rules of the Fathers, nor collation of Benefices against the Canons. But the Cardinall had a grea∣ter affront, in that Pasquins were made, and spread, both in the Court and Citie of Paris, concerning the loues of Lucretia Borgia, his mother, and Pope Alexander the sixt, his Grand-father by the mothers side, with repeti∣tion of the obscenities, diuulged throughout all Italy in the time of that Pope∣dome, which made the Cardinall ridiculous to the people. The first thing hee vndertooke was to hinder the preaching of the Re∣formatists, who after the Colloquie, did practise it more freely then before, and vsed perswasions, and made secret promises to the Ministers. And because hee had no credit with them, in regard of his kinred with the house of Guise, for which reason also he was held suspected by all the opposites of that fami∣lie, to gaine reputation, he made acquaintance with the Nobles of the Hugo∣not faction, and went to their feasts, and sometimes was present at their Ser∣mons His familiari∣ty with the Hugonots. in the habit of a Gentleman. By all which he gained nothing, because many thought he did it as Legate, by consent of the Pope, and the Court of Displeaseth the Court of Rome. Rome was displeased with his actions. The Queene of France, vnderstanding that the King of Spaine tooke the Colloquie in ill part, sent Iaques de Montbrun expresly to him; who made a large The Q. mo∣ther sendeth an Ambassa∣dour into Spaine to ex∣cuse the Col∣loquie. excuse, that all was done for necessitie, and not in fauour of the Protestants, and that the King and Queene, without speaking any more of a Nationall Councell, were resolued to send their Bishops to Trent, as soone as might bee. The King answered him in generall words, and referred him to the Duke of Alua; who, hauing heard his Ambaslage, said, that the King was sory that, in a kingdome so neere, and so neerely allied to him in kinred, religion should be so ill handled; that there was neede of that seuerity which Henry vsed, in a Mercuriall Congregation, and Francis in Amboise, not long since; hee prayed the Queene to make prouision, in regard, the danger of France belonging to him also, hee was resolued by the aduice of his Councell, to imploy all his for∣ces, and his life also to extinguish the common pestilence; whereunto he was sollicited by the Grandies and people of France. The wise Spaniards thought The Spani∣ards would haue cured y e maladies of Flanders, with the me∣dicine of France. to cure the maladies of Flanders, by the medicine of France; which were not lesse, but onely were lesse apparant, and tumultuous. The King of Spaine could neuer make the States assemble, to obtaine a contribution or donatiue; but priuate assemblies in Cambray, Valentia, and Tornay were discouered. The Magistrate hauing forbid them, and imprisoned some of them, they put themselues into Armes, with great danger of rebellion; and it seemed that the Prince of Orange, and Count Egmont were open fauourers of them, especially after that the Prince had married Anne, daughter of Maurice, Duke of Saxonie The Prince of Orange mari∣eth the daugh∣ter of y e Duke of Saxony. deceased: which did much displease the King, foreseeing what issue such a marriage might haue, contracted by one of his Subiects, with a Protestant of so great adherence. Yet the Spaniards spake as if Flanders had beene sound, and that they feared infection in France onely, which they would haue pur∣ged with warre. And the Ambassadour was answered concerning the King of Nauarre, of whose businesse he had Commission to treate, that hee deser∣ued nothing, for the small care hee had of religion, and that if hee would haue fauour, he should first mooue warre against the Hugonots in France. The Queene also excused the same Colloquie to his Holinesse by the Kings Ambassadour in Rome, telling him, that, to put the Hugonots to silence, who said they were persecuted before they were heard, and to appease their com∣motions, the King was forced to graunt them publique audience, in the presence of the Princes, and officers of the Kingdome, resoluing that, if they would not be ouercome with reason, he would, after he had time to put him∣selfe in order, ouercome them by force. She caused him also to treat with the Cardinall Farnese, Legate of Auignion, to resigne that legation to the Cardinall of Burbon, whereunto Fernese hauing giuen consent, the Ambassador spake of it to the Pope in the name of him, and of the King of Nauarre, saying; that his Holinesse would be freed from charge, and the Citie secured from the Hu∣gonots, who would not attempt ought against it, being in the protection of a Prince of the blood. Not onely those who were skilfull in the affaires of the world, but euery one of any meane iudgement, knew that this was done to take with ease the dominion of that Citie from Rome, and vnite it to France. Therefore the Pope denied it absolutely, and related the proposition in Con∣sistorie, as if some great preiudice had beene concealed vnder it, which did not appeare at the first sight. And he much complained of the Queene and King of Nauarre, who hauing often promised him that nothing should bee done in France against his authoritie, yet they did fauour heresies, and were authors of the Congregations of the Prelates, Colloquies, and of other preiu∣diciall things. He said his gentlenesse was ill required, and therefore, that hee would begin the Councell suddenly, & by meanes thereof, make known the reuerence which secular Princes owe to the Church. He vsed the same com∣plaint and threats to the Ambassadour; who hauing replyed that the demand of the Legation was to a good ende, and that all the actions of the Queene were done with maturitie and iustice, added, that the Councell was more desired by the King then by his Holinesse, hoping it would proceede with the same equitie and respect towards all Princes, not making difference of them. He vsed these words, to mocke the Pope, who had granted a little be∣fore a great Subsidie to the King of Spaine, to be paid by the Clergie, after he had obtained of him the simple Annates. But the Pope, suspecting the peti∣tion of Auignion, and considering that the Vassals of that Citie were all Pro∣testants fearing it might be vsurped by the King of Nauarre, did presently di∣spatch thither Fabri ius Sorbellone, with two thousand foote, to lye there in garrison, and gaue the gouernement thereof to Lorenzo Lenci, Bishop of Fer∣mo, as Vice-legate. After the Colloquie was ended, and the Protestants departed, the Prelats re∣mained, to treat of the Subsidies to be giuen to the King; which the Queene thinking would giue suspition to the Pope, in regard of his often complaints assured him that they remained onely to consult of the Kings debts, and that, the congregation being ended, shee would immediatly giue order to the Bi∣shops to put themselues in a readinesse to goe to the Councell. Notwithstan∣ding they treated of the Communion of the Cup, the Bishop of Valence, A treatie in France about the Commu∣nion of the Cup. with consent of the Cardinall of Lorayne, proposing, that if it were allowed, the prosperous course of the increase of the Protestants would be interrupted, in regard that many, who doe adhere vnto them, doe begin to beleeue them from this point, who would not hearken vnto them, if this were granted freely by the Church. And those who vnderstood the affaires of the world did consider, that, by this meanes, a faction would arise betweene the Re∣formatists themselues. Some few of the Bishops thought fit it should be con∣stituted by the Edict, and immediately executed, saying that the whole Com∣munion was not taken away by decree of the Church, but by custome only, and that there is no Ecclesiasticall decree which forbiddeth the Bishops to returne to the former vse. But the maior part would not consent it should bee done, but by grant, or, at the least, by the fauour of the Pope. Some few would not agree to any innouation, but were forced to yeeld to the greater number. This was much vrged by Loraine, who, to obtaine the Popes con∣sent, thought it necessary to gaine the fauour of the Cardinall of Ferrara; and to win him the better, he perswaded the Queeneto hearken to his propositi∣ons, and to grant him something. The Cardinall had proceeded so sweetly and courteously with euery one, euen of the contrary religion, that hee had gained the good will of many who did oppose him at the first. And his nego∣tiation being examined, it was granted, by a Briefe of the King, aduised Leaue is gi∣uen to the Legat by the Kings Briefe to exercise his Faculties. thereunto by the most intimate of his Counsell, that the capitulations of Or∣leance concerning matter of Benefices should be suspended, and that the Le∣gat might exercise his Faculties; but so, as that he should first promise vn∣der his hand writing, that he would not vse them, and that he would bee a meanes that the Pope should prouide against all the abuses and disorders which are committed in the collation of Benefices, and dispatches of the Bulls in Rome. Notwithstanding the Coancelor refuseth to subscribe and Which the Chancelor re∣fuseth to sub∣scribe. seale the Briefe, according to the stile of the kingdome; and, it being impossi∣ble to remooue him from his resolution, it was subscribed by the Queene, the King of Nauarre, and by the Principall officers of the Kingdome: wherewith the Legate was content, more regarding the preseruation of his own honour, then the seruice of him that sent him. For this fauour, he was content to th nke well of the Communion of the Cup, and to write thereof to Rome; which he did with such a temper, that neither the Pope nor Court were di∣stasted. The Assembly of Po si giueth the K. power to sell Church lands to the valew of 100000. Crownes. In the conclusion of the assemblie of Poisie, the Prelates granted power to the King to sell 100000. crownes of the yeerely rents of the lands of the Chuch, so that the Pope would allow it. The King gaue order to his Ambassadour in Rome to make request for it, shewing the necessity and vtility of the grant; which the Ambassador did, iust the day before letters came to the Pope from the Card of Ferrara, which gaue him an account of the difficulties ouercome, and how he had obtained a suspension of the capitulations of Orleance against the ecclesiasticall libertie, and leaue to vse the Faculties of a Legate; which things, he said, were more hardly compassed, because the Cardinall of Loraine, from whom he expected fauour, had opposed him from the beginning. And he made a full narration The Legat informeth the Pope that there are but two wayes to preserue reli∣gion in France. of the state of Religion in France, shewing the danger that it would bee quite extinguished, and the remedies to preserue it; which were onely two. One, to giue satisfaction to the King of Nauarre, and to interest him in the defence of it. The other to grant the people generally the Com∣munion Sub vtraque specie; affirming that certainely, by this meanes, at the least two hundred thousand soules would be gayned. The Ambassadour, in The French Ambassador desireth the Pope to grant the Commu∣nion of the Cup to the French-men. conformitie hereof, beseeched the Pope in the name of the King, of the Church of France, and of the Prelates, that they might be dispensed with to administer to the people the Sacrament of the Euchar st vnder both kindes, as a profitable and necessarie preparation, to dispose them to receiue the de∣terminations of the Councell with readinesse, without which it is much to bee doubted that this remedie will find raw humours, which may causea greater disease. The Pope, according to his naturall disposition, suddenly answered, without any premeditation, that he had euer thought that the Communion of both kinds, and mariage of Priests were de iure poisi in , in the disposition of which things hee had as much authority as the whole vniuersall Church: and therefore was thought to bee a Luth in the last Conclaue. That the Emperor had made the same request for his son, the king of Boh ia, whose Who glueth a fauourable answere. conscience did induce him to be of this opinion; and had demanded the like for the people of his patrimoniall Territories, but that the Cardinals would neuer yeelde vnto it. Notwithstanding hee sayd hee would not resolue of any thing without proposing it first in the Consistory, and promised to speake hereof in the next; which beeing intimated for the tenth of Decem∣ber, the Ambassadour, according to the custome of those at whose instance any businesse is handled, went in the morning while the Cardinals were as∣sembled expecting the Pope, to mediate with them. The most discreete amongst them answered, that the demand did deserue great deliberation, and that they durst not resolue vntill they had well considered of it; others were passionate, as at newes neuer heard of before. The Cardinall of Cueua sayd, that he would neuer giue his voyce in fauour of such a demand, and that if it were so resolued by authority of his Holinesse, and the consent of the Cardinals, hee would goe to the top of the staires of Saint Peter, and crie (misericordia) with a loud voyce; not forbearing to say that the Prelates of France were infected with heresie. The Cardinall Saint Angelo answered, that hee would neuer giue a Cup full of such deadly poyson to the people of France, in stead of a medicine, and that it was better to let them die; then cure them with such remedies. To whom the Ambassadour replied; that the Prelates of France were induced to bee of this opinion with good grounds, and Theologicall reasons, which deserued not such a contemptu∣ous censure; and, on the other side, that it was not fit to giue the name of poyson to the Blood of CHRIST, and to call the holy Apostles poysoners, and the Fathers of the Primitiue Church, and of that which followed for many hundreds of yeeres, who, with much spirituall profit, haue ministred the Cup of that Blood to all the people. The Pope, beeing entred into the Consistory, hauing discoursed with For which af∣terwards hee was sory. some Cardinals, and better thought of the businesse, wished hee had been a∣ble to recall his word. Notwithstanding hee proposed the matter, related the Ambassadours instance, caused the Legats letter to bee read, and demaun∣ded their opinions. The Cardinals who were dependants on France, com∣mended with diuers formes of words the Kings intention, but, concerning the request, referred themselues to his Holinesse. The Spaniards did all oppose; and vsed great boldnesse of speach, some calling the Prelates of France heretiques, some schismatiques, and some vnlearned, alleadging no reason but that all CHRIST is in both the kinds. The Cardinall Pacceco consi∣dered that all diuersities of rites, especially in the most principall ceremonies doe end with schisme and hatred. For now the Spaniards in France goe to the French Churches, and the French men in Spaine to the Spanish, but when they shal communicate so diuersly, one not receiuing the Communion of the other, they will be forced to make Churches apart; and so behold a diuision. Friar Michael, Cardinall of Alexandria, sayd, that it could not by any meanes be granted by the Pope de plenitudine potestatis; not for want of autho∣ritie in him ouer all which is de iurepositiuo, in which number this is but in re∣gard of the incapaci of him that demaundeth the fauour. For the Pope cannot giue power to doe enill; but it is an hereticall euill to receiue the cha∣lice, thinking it to bee necesary; therefore the Pope cannot grant it to such persons▪ And it cannot bee doubted but that those who demand it doe iudge it necessary, because no man maketh any great matter of indifferent ce∣remonies. Hee said that these men doe hold the Chalice either to bee neces∣sary, or not: if not, why doe they giue scandall, by making themselues dif∣fer from others? if otherwise, then they are heretiques and vncapable of the grace. The Cardinall Rodolpbo Pio di Carpi, who was one of the last that spake, because the inferiours doe begin, concluded in conformitie with the others, that not onely the sauing of two hundred thousand soules, but one onely was a sufficient cause to dispence with any positiue law, with wise∣dome and maturity; but in that proposition one ought to take heede, lest, thinking to game two hundred thousand, hee lose two hundred millions. That it was manifest, that this would not bee the last demand of the French men in matter of religion, but a step to propose another, that afterward they will demand the marriage of Priests, the vulgar tongue in the ministery of the Sacraments: which will haue the same ground, because they are de iure positiuo, and must be granted for the preseruation of many. Of the marriage The incon∣uenience of the mariage of Priests. of Priests this inconuenience will follow, that hauing house, wife, and chil∣dren, they will not depend on the Pope, but of their Prince, and their loue to their children will make them yeeld to any preiudice of the Church. They will seeke also to make the Benefices hereditary; and so in a short space, the authoritie of the Apostolike Sea will be confined within Rome. Before single life was instituted, the Sea of Rome receiued no profit from other nations and Cities, and, by it, is made Patron of many Benefices, of which mariage would quickly depriue her. Of the vulgar tongue this incouenience would fol∣low, The inconue∣nience of the vulgar tongue that all would thinke themselues Diuines, the authoritie of Prelates would be disesteemed, and all would become heretiques. If the communi∣on of the Chalice were granted, so that faith were preserued, it would bee of small importance; but it would open a gate to demaund an abrogation of all posi ue constitutions, by which onely the prerogatiue giuen by CHRIST to The inconue∣nience of the communion of the Cup. the Church of Rome, is preserued, for by those which are de iure diuino no pro∣fit doth arise, but that which is spirituall. For these reasons it is wisedome to oppose the first demand, not to be bound to grant the second and all the rest. The Pope, principally for these causes, did resolue negatiuely; and, to The Popere∣solueth not to grant the Cup to the French men. make his resolution the lesse grieuous, he caused the Ambassadour to be per∣swaded to desist of his owne accord, who not consenting, hee caused him to be intreated, that, at the least, hee would prosecute it gently, in regard it was impossible to yeeld vnto him, for feare of aliening all the Catholiques. The Ambassadour still proceeding, the Pope first put him off with delay, and, in conclusion, answered, that howsoeuer he could▪ yet he ought not to yeeld to his request, because the Councell was at hand, vnto which hee had re∣ferred the Emperours petition, so hee would doe that of France, and, to gra∣tifie the King, would handle that article first of all, and so dispatch it in as little time as would be requisite to grant the grace with maturi i . The Am∣bassadour repeating this instance in euery audience, the Pope added, that hee was sure all the Prelates did not make that request, because the maior part in the Congregation did resolue not to speake of it, saying that the name of the Prelates of France was vsed, whereas the motion proceeded but from a few, and those incited by others, meaning the Queene; against whom hee bare a secret grudge, for the letter she wrote vnto him the 4. of August. At the same time when the Petition of the French Prelates was publi∣shed The French Prelates are suspected in Trent, and Rome. in Rome, newes came out of Germanie, that the same men had sent to the Protestants there, to perswade them to perseuere in their doctrine, promi∣sing to fauour them in the Councell, and to draw other Prelates to doe the like. This was diuulged in Trent also; and caused the French-men to haue but small reputation, both there amongst the Italians, and in the Court of Rome, where they were esteemed to be men of an vnquiet spirit, and desirous of innouation. And it was said (as suspicions doe alwayes adde something) in regard of the disputes which that Nation hath euer had with the Court of Rome, in very important Articles, and of the present accidents, that cer∣tainely they would goe to the Councell, with no other aime, but onely to The Popes expences in the Councel. cause troubles and innouations. The Ambassador, that the popular rumor against his Nation might not make an impression in the Popes minde, was willing to secure him; who perswaded him ironically not to trouble him∣selfe, because it was not likely, nor could hee beleeue, that so small a num∣ber as are the French-men, could thinke of so great enterprises; and▪ if they did, that they should finde many Italians who would oppose them. But he said, he was displeased that they had hindered the Councell, which was assembled for their sakes onely; which shewed but small care in them to cure that sick∣nesse, whereof they complaine; adding that hee was resolued to open the Councell; either with them, or without them, and to prosecute and dispatch it; and that his Legates and a great number of Bishops had been many mo∣neths in Trent already, to their great trouble and charge, not able to doe any thing, while the Prelats of France doe so deliciously prouide for their case at home. In conformity hereof, hee did recapitulate in Consistory the instances, and causes, for which hee had, iust a yeere since, intimated the Councell, by aduice of them the Cardinals▪ the difficulties which hee encountred, and o∣uercame, in perswading the Princes, who were of contrary opinions to ac∣cept the Bull; his diligence in sending presently the Legates, and those Pre∣lates with whom hee was able to preuaile, either with perswasions; or com∣maunds, that all is already prepared by him onely, seuen moneths since, and is so chargeable to him, that, amongst officers and poore Prelates, the Apostolique Sea doeth spend aboue three thousand crownes a moneth, and that experience sheweth that delay doeth bring on more expence, that the Dutch-men doe inuent some thing euery day, to oppose against this holy and necessary worke; that heresies doe increase in France; and some Bishops are almost become re ellious, by making absurd petition for the Cup, which they doe with such violence, that the greater number▪ who are good Cat o∣liques, are forced to yeelde; that all Princes haue appointed Abassadours; that there are so many Prelates in Trent already, that they are not onely suf∣ficient to beginne the Synod, but are more then were in any of the two for∣mer conuocations thereof; and that nothing remained but to beginne, with∣out expecting any longer. The Gardinals hauing consented hereunto, and commended his resolution, hee ioyned two Legates more to the three for∣mer, Two presi∣dents more are appointed for the Coun∣cell. Ludouicus Simoneta, a great Canonist, who had passed through all the offices of the Court, and Marcus di Altemps, his sisters sonne. Hee comman∣ded the former to depart presently, and not to tary any where in the iourney, and, so soone as hee came to Trent, to cause the vsuall ceremonies to be made, and the Masse of the holy Ghost to bee said for a beginning of the Councell. Hee said afterwards that the Synode was to continue still, not to terminate in suspensions, or translations, as formerly it did, with notorious preiudice and danger, but to haue an absolute end. For effecting whereof, there was no neede to spend many moneths, in regard the most important points were already determined and the residue was so set in order, by disputations and examinations vnder Iulius, that scarce any thing remained but publication; so that all would be dispatched in a shorttime. Simoneta arriued in Trent the niuth of December, and at his entrie, sawa great fire rise out of the earth, which passed ouer the Citie, like vnto a fal∣ling starre, but onely in bignesse; whereof idle persons, of which number there were many, made diuers pronognostiques, some presaging good, and some hurt, which would be a vanlty to recount. The Cardinall found let∣ters written after his departure, that hee should expect a new commission to open the Councell. The Pope compelled some Bishops who were at Court The number of the Prelats in ent. at the time of his departure, to goe with him, so that the number of all, be∣side the Cardinals, was 92. The Nuncio, resident in France, returned to Rome in the beginning of December; who hauing related the state of that Kingdome, the Pope wrote The Pope writeth to his Legate in France. to the Legate that he should represent to the Kings Counsell, that the Coun∣cell was to be celebrated for France onely, because neither Italy, nor Spaine had neede of it, and Germanie did refuse it; and tell them, that therefore it did concerne them to promote it; a thing neglected by them, but performed by him in regard of his fatherly affection; and that the Legates beeing in Trent already, and many of the Italian and Spanish Prelates, and the rest in their iourney, they should immediatly send an Ambassadour, and their Bishops. Besides, he commanded the Legat to vse all diligence to hinder the preach∣ing and assembling of the Protestants, and to encourage the Diuines, giuing them Indulgences and spirituall graces, and promising them temporall assi∣stance also, but that himselfe should, by no meanes, be present at the sermons of the Protestants, and auoid all banquets where any of them were in com∣panie. At the same time the Polonian Prelats came to Trent, who, hauing visited Two Poloni∣an Prelates cometo Trent. the Legates, and shewed the deuotion of their Church to the Sea of Rome, related how the Lutherans attempted to bring their doctrine into that king∣dome, and the foundations which were already layd in some parts; to op∣pose whose plots the Bishops were alwayes to be vigilant: that they were all desirous to assist in the Councell, and to promote the common cause, which not being able to doe, for the cause aforesaid, so important and necessarie, they had sent their Proctors to giue voyce, as if the▪ Prelats were present. And they demanded to haue as many voyces as they had commissions from the Bishops, who, for lawfull causes, could not part out of the kingdome. The Legats answered in generall termes, meaning to resolue with mature de∣liberation: Who desire to haue as many voices as they haue commis∣sions from the Bishops. Their r quest is sent to Rome; where it was resected for feare of dangerous confequences and the Pope, whom they had aduised hereof, proposed it in Consistorie; where the Cardinals, without difficultie, concurred in the nega∣tiue, because it was determined before that the resolutions should bee made as formerly they had beene, by pluralitie of voyces, and not by Nations. Which was therather thought to be necessary, because there was a fame that the French-men, though Catholiques, came with Sorbonicall and Parliamenta∣rie mindes, fully bent to acknowledge the Pope no further then they pleased. And it was knowen before, that the Spaniards had some humour to subiect the Pope to the Councell; and the Legates had often sent aduice from Trent, The deseignes of the French, and Spanish Prelates are suspected. that some bad ambitious humours, to enlarge the Episcopall authority, were discouered; and, in particular, the Spaniards did propose that it was necessary to restraine the authority of the Pope, at the least so farre as that hee might not derogate from the decrees of this Councell, saying, that, otherwise, the labour and cost would be all in vaine, if, for small causes, and sometimes with∣out any, he might dispence with them, as he dayly doth with all the Canons. The Cardinals saw no other meanes to oppose these attempts, but by sen∣ding a great number of Italian Prelates, who, being vnited together, will o∣uercome For which cause the Pope resolueth to send many Italian Pre∣lats to Trent, to make a maior part. all the Vltramontans. And this remedie would bee to no purpose, if the voices of the absent were admitted. For the Spaniards and French-men would cause all their Bishops to send proxies, and it would be as much as to giue voyces, not by heads, but by Nations. Therefore it was written to Trent, that they should make large promises to the Polonians, but conclude, that the Councell was a continuation, and the same which was begun vnder Paulus the third, so that the orders then practi∣sed, and continuately kept, with good fruit, as did appeare, must be still ob∣serued; amongst which one was that the absent should haue no voyce, with which if they did dispence, all other National would pretend the like, with much confusion; that whatsoeuer request Polonia did make, for any thing The Polonian Prelats seeme to be satisfied with a courte∣ous negatiue, but depart, & returne no more. that was proper to it selfe, and would not raise any stirres in other Countries, should be granted in regard of the merits of that most noble Nation. The Polonians seemed to bee satisfied with the answere, yet pretending businesse at Ʋenice, they departed; and returned no more. A letter which the King of Spaine wrote with his owne hand, caused much ioy in Rome; in which hee aduertized the Pope of the negotiation of Montbrun, sent vnto him by the Queene of France, and of the answere which hee gaue him, promising to assist his Holinesse to purge Christendome of he∣resie, Iohn Tanche∣rel is con∣demn d by the Parlia∣ment of Paris for defending in y e schooles, that the Pope may depose Kings. with all the forces of his Kingdomes and States, and to send potent and speedy aydes to any Prince that would cleanse his Countrey of that conta∣gion. But the bad conceit which the Court had of the French-men was in∣creased, by an aduice sent from Paris, that the Parliament had, with much solemoitie, condemned to recant one Iohn Tancherel, a Bachelor of Diuini∣ty, because, with intelligence of some Diuines, he had proposed and defen∣ded publique questions, that the Pope, Ʋicar of CHRIST, is Monarch of the Church, and may depriue Kings and Princes, who disobey his comman∣dements, of their Kingdomes, States, and Digmties; who beeing accused, cited, and hauing confessed the fact, did flie, and the iudges, as in a Comedie, caused the Beadell of the Vniuersitie to represent his person, and to make a publike satisfaction, and recantation, forbidding the Diuines to dispute such questions hereafter, making them goe to the King to aske pardon for hauing suffered so important a matter to bee disputed on, and to promise to oppose themselues alwayes against that doctrine. They spake of the Frenchmen as of lost sheepe, who denied the authoritie giuen by CHRIST to S. Peter, For which the French-men are much cen∣sured in Rome to feede the whole flocke, and to loose and binde, which doth consist principally in punishing the delicts which giue scandall, or offence against the Church in common, without difference of Prince or subiect. The examples of the Emperours, Henry the fourth and fifth, Frederic the first and second, and Lewis of Bauaria, of the Kings of France, Philippus Augustus, and Pulcher, were alleadged; as also the famous sayings of the Canonists in this poynt: they sayd the Pope ought to cite the whole Parliament to Rome; and that the conclusion of that Diuine ought to be sent to Rome also, to be examined be∣fore any thing else were done, and approoued, and the contrary condem∣ned. The Pope did moderately complaine hereof, and thought it better But the Pope dissembleth his distaste. to dissemble, because, as hee sayd, the great sore of France did make this in∣sensible. The Court was perswaded, that neither Ambassadour nor Bishop would be sent out of France to Trent, and discoursed what was fit for the Pope to doe, to force them to accept the determinations of the Councell, which the Pope was, by all meanes, resolued to open, at the beginning of the new yeere. Hee imparted this determination to the Cardinals, exhorting them to consi∣der, that it did not stand with the honour of the Apostolike Sea, nor of that Colledge, to receiue rules and reformations from others, and that the condi∣tion of the times, when all crie out for reformation, not vnderstanding what The Pope promiseth to make a refor∣mation in the Court. it is, did require, that in regard of the glorious name thereof, it should not bee refused; that, in this contrariety of reasons, the best temper was, to make, by way of preuention, a reformation of his owne accord; which would not serue to that purpose onely, but win commendations also, by making himselfe an example to others; that for this cause, hee would reforme the Penitentiary, and Datary, principall members of the Court, and afterwards consider of smaller matters: and he deputed cardinals for one and the other charge. He discoursed of the causes why the opening of the Councell could And hastneth the opening of the Coun∣cell. no longer be deferred. For it being discouered that the Vltramontans haue bad ends and disseignes, to abate the absolute power which GOD hath giuen to the Pope of Rome, the more time they haue to thinke on it, the more their plots will encrease; and that there is danger, that, by time, some of the Ita∣lians may bee gained also; that therefore it is the safest way to vse expedition, and that, if the great expences, which are made in maintaining the Prelats, be not quickly ended, the Apostolike Sea, will not bee able to beare them. After∣wards he gaue the crosse of the Legation to the Card. Altemps, with order to put himselfe in readinesse, and to bee in Trent at the opening of the Coun∣cell, if it were possible. The cause why hee reuoked the order, giuen at the departure of Cardinall Simoneta, to open the Councell at his arriuall, was the instance of the Emperours Ambassador in Rome, that the Ambassadours of his Master might bee present at it. But afterward hauing aduertized his Holinesse, that they would be in Trent before the midst of Ianuary, hee ear∣nestly entreated the Marquis of Pescara, whom the King of Spaine had sent Ambassadour to the Councell, to bee in Trent, and assist at the opening of it. Hee solicited the Venetians also to send their Ambassage, beeing care∣full that that ceremony should passe with reputation. Notwithstanding, he wrote to the Legats to open the Councell so soone as the Ambassadors of the Emperour, and of the forenamed Princes were arriued, and that if they came not by the middest of the moneth, they should deferre it no longer. And in this coniun∣cture the yeere 1561 did end. THE SIXT BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. T He Legats, 1562 PIVS 4. FARDINAND. ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. in conformitie of that which the A generall congregation is hel the 15. of April; in which two great contro∣uersies did arise. Pope had last commanded, the fifteenth of Ianuary made a generall Congregation, in which the Cardinall of Mantua, as prime Legate, made a discourse, to shew how ne∣cessary and fit it was to open the Councell, and exhorted the Prelates to promote so sa∣cred and pious a worke, with fastings, almes, and frequent Masses. Afterwards the Bull of the Legation was read, dated the tenth of March; which was in generall termes, with the vsuall clauses▪ that he sent them, as Angels of peace, to preside in the Councell, which was to begin at Easten. After this, three other Briefes were read. The first dated the fifth of March, and was a facultie to the Legates to giue leaue to the Prelates and Diuines to reade, during the time of the Councell, bookes prohibited. The second dated the three and twentieth of May, that the Le∣gates should haue facultie to absolue those who would secretly abiure for cause of heresies. The third was dated the last of december, in which the Pope to take away all controuersie which might happen betweene the Pre∣lates about precedencie, doth command that the Patriarkes should haue the first place, the Archbishop the second, and the Bishops the third, regarding onely the time of the promotion, not the dignitie of the Sea, or of the Prima∣cie, whether true or pretended. This being read, Friar Bartholomew de Mar iri, Archbishop of Braga in One about precedence of the Prelates. Portugall, exclaimed that the Councell should begin with doing iniurie to the principall Churches of Christendome, saying that his Sea, which had the Primacie of Spaine, should, by this sentence, be made inferiour, not onely to three Archbishopricks, subiect vnto him, but also to the Archbishop of Ro∣sano who hath no Suffragan, and to the Archbishops of Nissia and Antiuari who haue not any residencie, and scarce any Christians to gouerne; that it is not equitable to make one law for ones selfe, and another for others, and to pretend the preseruation of ones owne right, and to depriue others of theirs. He spake so earnestly, that the Legats were troubled, and did hardly pacifie him, though they caused a declaration to bee written, that the Popes meaning, and theirs was, that no man should gaine or lose any right by that Decree, neither in possission, but that euery Primate, whether true or pretended, should, after the Councell, remaine in the same state in which hee was before. The Archbishop beeing with much adoe ap∣peased, the other Spaniards made request, that the opening of the Councell Another whe∣ther this Con∣uocation of the Councell should be a continuation of the old, or a new Coun∣cell. might be declared to be a continuation of that which was begun vnder Paul, and prosecuted by Iulius le any one might cauill, that it was a new Coun∣cell. The Bishop of Zante, who had been in Germany, and knew how that action would be calumniated and how distastfull to the Emperour, replied, that as the things already determined ought not to bee questioned, but held as decided, so to declare so much now without necessitie, would cut off all hope from the Emperour and French King to finde such a coniuncture, as that the Protestants would submit themselues to the Councell, and assist in it. The Legats especially Mantua and Varmiense, did second the opinion of the Bishop with many discourses, and much was spoken on both sides very bitterly, and the Spaniards sayd they would protest and returne: yet, after many consultations, they finally agreed to desist from their instance, not to oppose the Emperour, the French King, the Dutchmen, and Frenchmen, nor to giue matter of complaint to the Protestants, so that no words were v∣sed to signifie it was a new Councell, or to preiudice the continuation. The Cardinals promised in the Popes name, that his Holinesse would confirme whatsoeuer was done in Trent, in the two precedent Councels, though this were dissolued without conclusion. The Spaniards were content: and af∣ter long discoursing, it was concluded, that a forme of words should be vsed A decree for opening the Councell. to signifie, that the Councell did begin to be celebrated, all suspension being remoued; which though they were ambiguous, and might bee drawen to contrary sences, yet being sufficient to compose the present difference, they were receiued, and they concluded to open the Councell the next Sunday, being the eighteenth of the moneth. In the ende the Cardinall proposed, that the Councell being begun, the Prelates should frequent the publique Chappels in the time of Masse, and that there should bee many Latine Ser∣mons, which being to bee made sometimes by men that know not what doth befit the time, place, and auditorie, that it were good to depute a Prelate, who, as Master of the holy Palace in Rome, should reuiew that which was to bee The Bishop of Modena is ap∣pointed to peruse what∣soeuer is to be deliuered in publique. spoken, and so the Sermon to bee repeated, according to his censure. The proposition pleased them all; and Egidius Foscararus, Bishop of Modena, was appointed to peruse euery Sermon, and whatsoeuer else was to bee deliuered in publique. The Congregation beeing dissolued, the Legates, by the helpe of their inward friends, beganne to frame the Decree, and did conceiue it in the forme agreed on; and obseruing diuers treaties amongst the Prelates, while they were idle in Trent to propose some one prouision, some another, all tending to enlarge the authority of the Bishops, and diminish that of Rome, they thought to remedie all in the beginning, before the humour began to stirre, by decreeing that none, but the Legats, might propose any matter to bee discussed. They saw the proposition was hard, and foresaw contradicti∣on; therefore they thought it necessary to vse much Art, that it might bee re∣ceiued sweetely, and at vnawards. The negatiue, that none should propound, Why the Le∣gats desire to make a decree that none should pro∣pose any thing in Councell, but them∣selues. seemed hard and sharpe; and the affirmatiue, that the Legats should propound, which did virtually onely, and not plainely containe an exclusion of others, did please better, couering all with a pretence of keeping order, and giuing time of deliberation to the Synode. The Decree was so artificially made, that, euen at this present, one must be very attentiue, if hee will discouer the sense, and it is impossible to vnderstand it at the first; which I will rehearse in vulgar, in plaine tearmes; but hee that will see the Artifice, let him reade it in Latine. Therefore in conformitie of the resolution, when the eighteenth day was The solemni∣ties of the first Session, in which the Councell was opened. come, a procession was made of the whole Clergie of the Citie, of the Diuines and Prelates, who, besides the Cardinals, were one hundred and twelue, that did weare Miter, accompanied by their families, and by many Countrey people armed going from Saint Peters Church, to the Cathedrall; where the Cardinall of Mantua sang the Masse of the holy Ghost, and Gaspar del Fosso, Arch bishop of Rheggio, made the Sermon. His subiect was the authori∣tie of the Church, Primacie of the Pope, and the power of Councels. He said that the Church had as much authoritie as the word of God; that the Church hath changed the Sabbath, ordained by God, into Sunday, and ta∣ken away Circumcision, formerly commanded by his Diuine Maiestie, and that these Precepts are changed, not by the preaching of CHRIST; but by the authoritie of the Church. Turning himselfe to the Fathers, hee exhor∣ted them to labour constantly against the Protestants, being assured that, as the holy Ghost cannot erre, so they cannot bee deceiued. And the Veni crea∣tor spiritus beeing sung, the Secretary, who was Bishop of Tile i, read the Bull of the Conuocation, before alleadged; and the foresaid Arch-bishop interrogated the Decree for the opening the Councell; saying, Fathers, doth it please you that the generall Councell of Trent should be celebrated from this day, all suspension whatsoeuer beeing remooued, to handle, with due order, that which shall seeme fit to the Synod, the Legats and Presidents proposing, to remooue the controuersies of Religion, correct manners, and reconcile the peace of the Church? They answered, Placet. Onely foure prelats contra∣dicted that part, Proponentibus Legatis: which wordes I repeate in Latine, The words, Proponenti∣bus Legatis, were much questioned. because they must bee often mentioned, in regard of the great controuer∣sies and disputes which followed. The contradictors were Peter Guerrero, Arch-bishop of Granata, Francesco Bianco, Bishop of Orense, Andreas della Questa, Bishop of Leon, Antonio Colermero, Bishop of Almeria. They said they could not consent, because they were new wordes, neuer vsed in any Councell, and demanded that their voyces might bee registred in the actes of the Councell. No answere was giuen them, and the next Ses∣sion was intimated for the sixe and twentieth of February. The Spea∣ker of the Councell required all the Notaries and Protonotaries to make one or more Instruments of the things aforesayd; and so the Session ended. The Legates aduised the Pope of what happened in the Congregation, and Session, who imparted it to the Consistory. In which many were of o∣pinion, in regard of these first difficulties, that the Councell would not pro∣ceed well, especially considering the obstinate contradiction of the Spanish Bishops not fit to compose the differences of Religion, although the Le∣gates and Bishops of Italie should vse Arte, and vnitie in temporizing and ouercomming them. The Pope commended the wisedome of the Le∣gates, that they had preuented, as hee sayd, there meritie of the innouators; and was not displeased with the opposition of foure, because hee feared a greater number; hee exhorted the Cardinals to reforme themselues, seeing they had to doe with vnrespectfull persons, giuing order that the other Italian Bishops should bee solicited to depart. And hee wrote to Trent that they Which the Pope wil haue to be maintai∣ned by all meanes. should maintaine the Decree firmely, and put it in execution, without relen∣ting one iote. In France the Queene of Nauarre, Prince of Conde, Admirall, and Du∣chesse Tumults in France about Religion. of Ferrara, hauing many moneths made request that places should be allowed to those of the new Religion, for the Sermons and Ceremonies, and all these, and many Grandies more, euen in the Court it selfe, making profes∣sion thereof, the inferiour Reformatists, imboldened hereby, did assem∣ble themselues apart, which the Catholiques not being able to support, very dangerous popular tumults were raised in many parts of the Kingdome, with slaughter on both sides; which were cherished by the Nobilitie of the Ca∣tholiques, enuying that the Hugonot Princes, gayning a popular trayne, should exceede them. Two diuers tumults were raysed by Sermons; one in Dijon, and the other in Paris; notorious not onely for the death of many, but also for the rebellion against the Magistrates; which made the Kings Counsell resolue to seeke a remedy; and, that it might bee fitted to the whole Kingdome, the Presidents of all the Parliaments were called, and a number of Counsellors elected to deliberate with maturity what was best to be done. The seuenteenth of Ianuary, all these being assembled in Saint German, the Chancellor declared in the Kings name, that they were called to consult how to remedie the stirres raised in the Kingdome. Hee made a recapitulation of all the things that hapned, adding that the differences of Religion should be referred to the Prelates, but when the peace of the Kingdome, and keeping of the Subiects in obedience to the King is in question, that this could not belong to the Ecclesiastiques, but to those whom the King would appoint to consult of it. That he had euer commended Tulli, who was wont to blame Cato, that, liuing in a most corrupt age, was so seuere and rigid in his deter∣minations, as if hee had been a Senator in Plato his Common-wealth. That lawes were to bee fitted to the time and persons, as the shooe to the foote. That this particular was then to bee consulted of, whether it were good seruice for the King to permit or prohibite the Congregations of the Pro∣testants; wherein they were not to dispute which Religion was the better, because they tooke not in hand to frame a Religion, but to put in order a Republique; and that it was not absurd to say, that many might bee good Citizens, and not good Christians, and that those who were of diuers religi∣ons might liue in peace. In consulting hereof the opinions were diuers: but they preuailed who thought that the Edict of Iuly was to bee remitted in part, and the Prote∣stants to haue leaue to preach. At the making of the Edict, which contained many points, the Cardinals of Borbon, Tornon, Chastillon were present, as also the Bishops of Orleans, and Valence. That the Protestants should restore the Churches possessions, and other Ecclesiasticall goods vsurped. That they should forbeare to beate downe Crosses, Images, and Churches, vpon paine of death. That they should not assemble themselues to preach, pray, or administer the Sacraments, in publique or in priuate, by day or by night, within the Citie. That the prohibitions, and punishments of the Edict of Iuly, and all others made before should bee suspended. That they shall not be molested in their Sermons made out of the Citie, or hindred by the Ma∣gistrates, who ought to protect them from iniurie, chastising the Seditions on both sides. That none shall scandalize another for Religion, or vse con∣tumelious words of faction. That the Magistrates and officers may bee pre∣sent at the Sermons and Congregations. That they shall not make Synods, Colloquies, or Consistories, but with leaue, and in presence of the Magistrate. That they shall obserue the lawes for feasts, and degrees prohibited for mar∣riage. That the Ministers shall bee bound to sweare to the publique Offi∣cers, not to offend against this Edict, nor to preach any doctrine contrary to the Nicen Councell, and the bookes of the New and Old Testament. The Parliament could hardly be brought to accept of this Edict. Therefore the King did commaund againe, that it should bee published, adding that it was to be vnderstood to bee made by way of prouision, vntill the determinations of the Generall Councell were diuulged, or the King ordaine otherwise, not meaning to allow two Religions in his Kingdome, but that onely of the ho∣ly mother the Church, in which himselfe and his predecessours haue liued. The Parliament beeing not agreed for all this, the King commaunded, that, laying aside all delayes and difficulties, the ordination should bee published. And so it was the sixth of March, with this clause, that the Parliament did ve∣rifie For appeasing of which an Edict is made, March 6. the Kings letters to obey him, considering the state of the times, not to approoue the new Religion, but onely by way of prouision, vntill it be other∣wise ordained by the King. But to returne to Trent in the Congregation held the seuen and twentieth Three propo∣sitions in the Congregati∣on of the 27. of Ianuary. of Ianuary the Legates made three propositions. The first, to examine the bookes written by diuers authors, since the heresies began, together with the censures of the Catholiques against them, to determine what the Synode should decree concerning them. The second, that all that are interested in that matter, should bee cited by Decree of the Synode, lest they com∣plaine that they haue not beene heard. The third, that a Safe Conduct should be giuen to those who are fallen into heresie, with a large promise of great and singular clemencie, so that they will repent, and acknowledge the power of the Catholique Church. And order was giuen that the Fathers, hauing considered on the propositions, should deliuer their opinions in the next Congregation, as well how to examine with case the bookes and cen∣sures, as concerning all the rest. And Prelates were deputed to examine the Mandates and excuses of those who pretended they could not come to the Councell. This place doth require a relation of the beginning of prohibiting bookes, and with what progresse it was come to that state in which it then was, and what new order was then taken. In the Church of Martyrs there was no Ecclesiasticall prohibition, though some godly men made conscience of A discourse of the Author concerning the prohibiti∣on of bookes. reading bad bookes, for feare of offending against one of the three poynts of the Law of God, to auoyd the contagion of euill; not to expose ones selfe to temptation, without necessitie or profite; and not to spend time vainely. These Lawes, beeing naturall, doe remaine alwayes, and should oblige vs to beware of reading bad bookes, though there were no Ecclesiasticall law for it. But these respects ceasing, the example of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, a famous Doctor, did happen, who about the yeere of our Lord 240. being reprehended by his Priests for these causes, and troubled with these respects, had a vision that hee should reade all bookes, because hee was able to iudge of them. Yet they thought there was greater danger in the bookes of the Gentiles, then of the heretiques, the reading whereof was more abhorred and reprehended, because it was more vsed by Christian Doctors for a va∣nitie of learning eloquence. For this cause S. Hierom, either in a vision, or in a sleepe, was beaten by the Deuill; so that about the yeere 400. a Councel in Carthage did forbid to reade the bookes of the Gentiles, but allowed them to reade the bookes of the heretiques; the Decree whereof is amongst the Ca∣nons collected by Gratian. And this was the first prohibition by way of Canon: but there are others, by counsell of the Fathers, to bee regulated ac∣cording to the Law of God, before recited. The bookes of heretiques, con∣taining doctrine condemned by Councels, were often forbid by the Empe∣rours for good gouernment. So Constantine forbad the bookes of Arrius; Arcadius those of the Eunomians, and Maniches; Theodosius those of Nestorius; Martianus those of the Euticheans; and in Spaine the King Ricaredus, those of the Arrians. It sufficed the Councels and Bishops to shew what bookes did containe damned or apocryphall doctrine. So did Gelasius in the yeere 494. and went no further, leauing it to the conscience of euery one to auoyde them, or reade them to a good end. After the yeere 800. the Popes of Rome, as they assumed a great part of the politique gouernment, so they caused the bookes, whose authors they did condemne, to bee burned, and forbad the reading of them. Notwithstanding, one shall finde but few bookes forbid in that sort, vntill this age. A generall prohibition of reading bookes con∣taining doctrine of heretiques, or suspected of heresies, vpon paine of ex∣communication, without any further sentence, was not vsed. Martinus 5. doth in a Bull excommunicate all the Sects of heretiques, especially Wiglesists, and Hussites, not mentioning those who read their bookes, though many of them went about. Leo the tenth condemning Luther, did withall forbid all his bookes, vpon paine of excommunication. The Popes following, in the Bull called In oena, hauing condemned and excommunicated all heretiques, did excommunicate those also who reade their bookes: and, in other Buls against heretiques in generall, did thunder the same censures, against the rea∣ders of their bookes. This did rather breed a confusion. For the heretiques not beeing condemned by name, one was to iudge of the bookes more by the quality of the doctrine, then by the name of the authors, wherein diuers men beeing of diuers opinions, many scruples of conscience did arise. The Inquisitors being more diligent, made Catalogues of those whom they knew, which, not being conferred, were not sufficient to remooue the difficultie. Philip, King of Spaine, was the first that gaue a more conuenient forme, in the yeere 1558, making a Law that the Catalogue of bookes prohibited by Inqui∣sition should be printed. According to this example Paul 4. also ordained, that an Index should be composed by that office, and printed; and so it was in the yeere 1559. in which they did proceede many steps further then formerly they had done, and layd foundations to maintaine and make great the authority of the Court of Rome, by depriuing men of that knowledge, which is necessary to defend them from vsurpations. Vntill that time they contained themselues with∣in the tearmes of the bookes of the heretiques, neither was there any booke forbidden, if the author were not condemned. This Index was diuided into three parts. The first conteineth the names of those, all whose workes, of what argument soeuer, though prophane, are forbidden: and in this number are placed not onely those who haue professed doctrine, contrary to that of Rome, but many also which liued and dyed in the profession therof. The se∣cond conteineth the names of the bookes which are particularly condem∣ned, others of the same authours not beeing condemned. In the third, some bookes are condemned without a name, but onely by a generall rule, that all those are forbidden which beare not the names of the authors, writ∣ten after the yeere 1519, and many Authours and bookes are condemned which for 300. 200. and 100. yeeres haue beene commonly read by the learned in the Church of Rome, with the knowledge, and without the contradiction of the Popes of those times; and, amongst the modernes, some of those which were printed in Italy, euen in Rome, with approba∣tion of the Inquisition, and allowed also by the Briefes of the Pope himselfe, are forbidden; as the Annotations of Erasmus vpon the New Testament which Leo the tenth hauing read, approued by his Briefe, dated in Rome, Sep∣tember The annota∣tions of Eras∣mus vpon the New Testa∣ment, read & approued by Leo 10. are, forbidden to be read. 10. 1518. But it is a thing considerable aboue all, that vnder colour of faith and religion, bookes are prohibited and condemned, with the same seuerity, in which the authority of Princes and Temporall Magistrates is de∣fended from they surpations of the Clergie; and of Councels and Bishops, from the vsurpations of the Court of Rome; in which hypocrisies or tyran∣nies are manifested, by which the people, vnder pretence of Religion, are deceiued. In summe, a better mystery was neuer found, then to vse religi∣on to make men insensible. That Inquisition went so sarre, that it made a Catalogue of 62. Printers, and prohibited all bookes printed by them, of what authour, art, or idiome soeuer; with an addition of more weight; that is, and bookes printed by such Printers who haue printed bookes of here∣tiques; so that there scarce remained a booke to bee read. And for the height of rigour, the prohibition of what booke soeuer contained in that Catalogue, was vpon paine of excommunication sententiae, reserued to the Pope, depriuation and incapacitie of offices and benefices, perpetuall infamie, and other arbitrary punishments. Concerning this seueritie, remon∣strance was made to this Pope Pius, who referred the Index and all the mat∣ter to the Councell, as hath been said. Touching the Articles proposed there were diuers opinions. Ludouicus Becatelli, Archbishop of Ragusi, and Friar Augustin Seluago, Archbishop of The opinion of the Arch-bishop of Ra∣gusi, and of Genua, con∣cerning the Index. Genua, thought that no good effect could proceed from handling the matter of bookes in Counsell, yea, that it would rather hinder the conclusion of that for which the Councel is principally assembled. For Paul 4. by the counsell of all the Inquisitors, and of many famous men, who sent him aduice from all parts, made a most compleat catalogue, to which nothing can bee added, except some booke come foorth within these two yeeres, which deserueth not the labour of a Synod. But hee that would allow any that are prohibi∣ted in that collection, would shew that they haue vnaduisedly proceeded in Rome, and so would take away all reputation from the Index already publi∣shed, and from the Decree it selfe which they would make; it beeing a com∣mon maxime, that new lawes doe remooue estimation more from them∣selues, then from the old. Besides (said Becatelli) there is no need of bookes, the world hath too many already, especially since printing was inuented: and it is better to forbid a thousand bookes without cause, then permit one that deserueth prohibition. Neither were it fit the Synod should be troubled with rendring the causes of the prohibitions, making censures, or approo∣uing those which are already made in diuers places by the Catholiques. For it would bee to call for contradiction. It belongeth to a Doctor to giue a rea∣son of his saying, a law-maker if he doe it, doth diminish his authority, be∣cause the subject doth wrestle with the reason alleadged, and when hee thin∣keth he hath resolued it, hee thinketh also that hee hath taken all vertue from the precept. Neither is it good to correct or purge any booke for the same causes, for feare of making men say that something is omitted that deserued, and something changed that did not deserue correction. Moreouer the Sy∣nod would incurre the displeasure of all that are affectionate to the bookes prohibited, and would induce them not to receiue the other necessary De∣crees, which shall bee made. Hee concluded, that, the Index of Paul being sufficient, he thought it not fit to take paines in vaine in doing of that anew, which is done already, or vndoing that which is done well. Many other reasons were alleadged in confirmation of this opionion, by many Bishops creatures of Paul 4, admirers of his wisedome in managing the Ecclesiasticall discipline, who maintained that it was necessary to preserue, yea, to augment the rigour instituted by him, if they would preserue the purity of religion. Iohn Thomaso S. Felicio, was of a contrary opinion; that the Councell should treate againe of bookes; as if there had been no precedent prohibi∣tion; The opinion of Iohn Tho∣maso S. Felicio because that, beeing made by the Inquisition of Rome, is odious, for the name, to the Ʋltramontans, and besides is so rigid that it cannot bee obserued; and nothing doth more easily bring a law into disuse, then the impossibilitie or great difficulty in keeping it, and the great rigour in punishing the trans∣gressours; he sayd that, indeed, it was necessary to preserue the reputation of that office, but that might bee done conueniently enough, by making no∣mention thereof, and by ordayning onely things necessary, and moderate punishments. And therefore his opinion was, that all consisted in setting downe the manner, and spake what himselfe thought to be the best; that is, that the bookes not already censured should be diuided amongst the Fathers and Diuines of the Counsel, and those that were absent also, to bee examined and censured, and that a great Congregation should be deputed, to iudge be∣tweene the censure and the booke; and that this also should bee obserued in those which are censured already, and then all should be proposed in the ge∣nerall Congregation, to decree that which was best for the publike good. For citing the Authors, hee said there were two sorts of them; some separated from the Church, and some incorporated in it, of the former no account is to be made, seeing that, by their separation, they haue, as Saint Paul saith, con∣demned themselues, and their owne workes, so that there is no cause to heare them; of the others some are dead, and some aliue; of which the latter are to be cited and heard, because their good name and honour being in question one cannot proceed against they workes, before the hearing of their rea∣sons. Concerning the dead, whatsoeuer the publike good doth require may be done, without danger of offending any. Another Bishop added to this opinion, that the same forme of iustice, vsed towards the Catholiques aliue, should be vsed also towards those that are dead, because they haue kinred and schollars, who doe participate of the fame of infamie of the dead, and are therefore interested, and in case there were none such, yet the onely memory of the dead cannot be iudged, before it be defended. Some also did thinke it was not iust to condemne the workes of Prote∣stants, without hearing them. For howsoeuer the persons be condemned by themselues, yet the lawes doe not permit the declaratory, without citation, though in a notorious fact; and therefore it cannot be pronounced against a booke, though it doth notoriously containe heresie. Fryar Gregory, Gene∣rall of the Heremites, sayd, he did not thinke it necessary to obserue so many subtilties. For the prohibition of a booke, is as the prohibition of a meate, which is not a sentence against it, nor against him that hath prepared it, but a precept to him that is to vse it, made by him who hath the charge of his health; therefore the credit of the Victualer is not in question, but the bene∣fit of the sicke, who is forbid to eate of a meat that is hurtfull to him, though in it selfe, it may be good. So the Synod, as a Physician, ought to forbid that which is hurtfull, or dangerous to the faithfull; wherein none will re∣ceiue wrong. For howsoeuer the booke may bee good in it selfe, yet per∣aduenture it may not agree to the infirmity of the mindes of this age. Ma∣ny other considerations did passe, which were finally resolued into one of these. Concerning the third Article, to inuite the heretickes to repentance with The Legats and Prelats are diuided concerning the generall safe conduct. promise of clemencie, and grant of a safe conduct, there were diuers opini∣ons, euen amongst the Legates themselues. Mantua was for a generall par∣don, saying, that many would bee gained thereby, and that it was a remedie vsed by all Princes, in seditions, or rebellions, to pardon those whom they cannot ouercome, because, by that meanes, those that are least faultie, doe re∣tire, and the others remaine more weake; and although but few were gained, or but one onely, yet it was to bee done; that though none at all could bee gained, yet it would be great gaine to vse and shew clemencie. Simoneta said, that this would be dangerous for the ruine of others, because many are indu∣ced to transgresse, when they see it is easie to get a pardon, and that rigour, though it be hard to him that feeleth it, doth keepe many in their duety; that it is sufficient to shew clemencie to him that desireth it, but to carrie it after him that doeth not demaund; or doeth refuse it, doth make men more care∣lesse of themselues; and heresie will be thought to bee but a small fault, when men see it is so easily pardoned. In these two opinions the Prelates were di∣uided; and those who did not approoue the Safe Conduct, said, it was not gi∣uen to any in the first Conuocation of this Councell, which would haue been done if it had beene necessary or conuenient, because the Pope that sate then was most wise, and the Legats the chiefest of the Colledge; that it was giuen in the second Conuocation, because Maurice Duke of Saxonie, and other Protestants did desire it, and the Emperour also in their behalfe: but now it beeing demaunded by none, Germanie saying aloud, and protesting that it doth not hold this Councell to be lawfull, a Safe Conduct would but giue them matter, to make some bad exposition of the Synods meaning. The Spanish Prelats would by no meanes consent to a generall Safe Conduct, be∣cause it would preiudice the Inquisition of Spaine, in regard, so long as that la∣sted, euery one might professe himselfe to bee a Protestant, and make him∣selfe ready for the voyage, and could not be arrested by that office. The Le∣gates thought the like might happen to the Inquisition of Rome and Italy. All The resoluti∣on of the ge∣nerall Con∣gregation concerning the Index, and Safe Conduct being considered, concerning the Index, it seemed sufficient for that present, to make Deputies, and to let those that were interested vnderstand, by some little part of the Decree, that they should be heard, and inuite all to the Coun∣cell; and, for the Safe Conduct, to referre themselues, in regard of the difficul∣ties, to a further consideration. While these things were handled, the Popes Nephew, Cardinall Altemps, the fift Legate, came to Trent, and withall the newes of the Edict of France before rehearsed: which put them all into a confusion, that Princes should permit, by publique Decree, those nouities which the Councell was then as∣sembled to condemne. The next day Antonius Miglicius, Archbishop of The Empe∣rors Ambas∣sador is recei∣ued in Con∣gregation. Prague, Ambassadour for the Emperour, was receiued in a generall Congre∣gation, and his Mandate read. The Archbishop made a long Oration, reser∣uing the residue to Master Sigismond Tonn, his Maiesties second Ambassador, who was to come. The Synode answered, that they were very glad to see the Emperours Ambassadours, and that they did admit his Mandate. The Ambassadour would haue preceded the Cardinall Madruccio, alleadging the reasons and pretensions of Don Diego, in the first Councell; but by the Legats answere, who told him how that businesse was ended, he was satisfied, and sate belowe. The ninth of this moneth Ferdinandus Martinez Mascarenius, Ambassa∣dour of Portugall, was receiued, and the Kings letter of credence and Man∣dat The Portugal Ambassador is receiued, & a doctor, who came with him, maketh an Oration. read. A Doctor that came with him made a long oration; in which he shewed the benefit which the Church reapeth by Councels, and the necessi∣ty of this present, the crosses which it formerly endured, and how the wise∣dome of Pope Pius hath now ouercome them. Hee said the authoritie of Councels was so great, that their Decrees were to bee receiued, as diuine Ora∣cles; that the King hoped that the differences of Religion should bee deci∣ded in that Councel, and the manners of the Clergie directed to Euangeli∣call sinceritie; that therefore he promised all obedience, whereof the Bishops arriued alreadie, and those who were to come, could giue testimonie; hee shewed the pietie and religion of those Kings, and the paines they haue taken to subiect so many Prouinces to the gouernment of the Apostolique Sea; of which heroically pious workes they might expect an imitation in King Se∣bastian. Hee set forth, in few words, the Nobilitie, and vertue of the Ambas∣sadour, and finally prayed the Fathers to heare him, when hee should speake in the behalfe of the Churches of that kingdome. The Speaker briefely an∣swered, that the Synod was well pleased with the Kings Mandate, and his Oration, and that the piety and Religion of his Maiesty and of his Ancestors was generally knowen, and their glorie conspicuous, for maintaining the Catholike Religion in that kingdome in these turbulent times, and sprea∣ding of it in places farre remote: for which the Synod did giue thankes to GOD, and receiue the Kings Mandate with due respect. In the congregation of the eleuenth, the other Ambassador of the Empe∣ror The Empe∣rours second Ambassador is receiued in Congrega∣tion. presented himselfe: who was receiued without much ceremonie, because the Mandate had bin read before, so that there was time to treat of Conciliarie matters; whereof some thing being spoken, libertie was giuen to the Le∣gats to elect Fathers to consider of the Index, and others to frame the De∣cree, against the next Session. For the businesse of the Books, Censures, and Index, the Legats named the Ambassadour of Hungarie, the Patriarke of Ve∣nice, foure Arch-bishops, nine Bishops, one Abbat, and two Generals. The thirteenth the Emperours Embassadours came to the Legats, and The Empe∣rors Ambas∣sadours make fiue requests to the Legats. made fiue requests; which they left in writing, that they might consider on them. That the word Continuation should not bee vsed, because it would make the Protestants refuse the Councell. That the next Session should be deferred, or at the least, matters of small weight handled. That the Confes∣sionists should not bee exasperated in the beginning, by condemning their bookes. That a large safe conduct should be giuen to the Protestants. That whatsoeuer was handled in the congregations, should bee concealed, which hitherto had beene diuulged, euen to the common people. And hauing of∣fered all fauour and assistance in the Emperours name, they added, that they had order from his Maiestie, that if they were called by their most Reuerend Lordships, they should giue their aduice in matters of the Councell, and em∣ploy his authoritie to fauour them. The Legats answered the seuenteenth day, that it being necessary to giue To whom the Legats answere. satisfaction to all, as they would not name the Continuation at their request, so, not to prouoke the Spaniards, it was necessarie to abstaine from the contra∣ry; that they would spend the next Session in generall and light matters, and allow a long time for others; that they would not then condemne the Au∣gustan Confession; that they would not then speake of the bookes of the Con∣fessionists, but would make the Index in the end of the Councell; that a large safe-conduct should be giuen to the Germans, when it was decided whether it should be giuen to them apart, or together with other Nations; that they would take a good course for secrecie, and impart vnto them whatsoeuer they shall handle, being assured of the Emperors good affection and that the Ambassadours are correspondent to the pietie and Religion of their Master. George Droscouitius, Bishop of the fiue Churches, the Emperours third Am∣bassadour, who came to Trent the moneth before, presented his Mandate in The Bishop of fiue Chur∣ches, the Em∣perours third Ambassadour is receiued in congregation. the generall Congregation, the foure and twentieth of February, and made an Oration, in which hee enlarged himselfe in the praises of the Emperour, saying, that God had giuen him to these times, to prouide against so many miseries; hee compared him to Constantine in fauouring the Church; shewed what paines he had taken for the conuocation of the Councell, and that ha∣uing obtained it, he had before all other Princes sent Ambassadours, two for the Empire, kingdome of Bohemia and Austria, and himselfe for the King∣dome of Hungarie. Hee presented his Mandate, and thanked the Synode for giuing him place, fitting the qualitie of an Ambassadour, before they saw the purpose of his ambassage. The Decree was made in generall tearmes, and read, as well to satisfie the Imperialists, as because the matter was not well digested. Which being done, Mantua gaue a modest and graue admonition to the Fathers, to keepe secret what was handled in the Congregations, as well to auoyd opposition, as because things are held in greater reputation and re∣uerence when they are not knowen to all. Besides, that it would be dishono∣rable for that assembly, if any thing were published, (as might happen often) without conuenient circumspection, and fit seemelinesse. Hee added that there was no Colledge or Councell, Secular or Ecclesiasticall, small or great, which had not its secrets, to bee obserued by oath, or vpon penalties: but that Synode, consisting of wise men, ought not to bee tyed but by the bonds of their owne iudgement; that, in saying thus, hee spake no more to the Fa∣thers, then to his colleagues, and to himselfe, euery one being obliged to ad∣monish himselfe in euery thing that is seemely. Then hee spake of the diffi∣cultie of the Safe conduct, and exhorted euery one to thinke exactly of it, say∣ing, that if it could not bee determined before the Session, an addition should bee made to the Decree, that it might be granted in Congregation. This was agreed on amongst the Legats, because hauing discouered the difficulty, especially in regard of the Inquisition of Rome and Spaine, they had written whatsoeuer had been spoken as well concerning this point, as the Index, and expected an answere from Rome. Where the Pope was in a rage for the Edict of France, and impatient be∣cause they did nothing in the Councell. Hee said it was not good that the Bishops should bee long out of their residencie, especially to handle superfi∣cially points already decided in other Councels; hee had formerly suspected the Spanish Prelats, and did it then much more, because he thought their ill affection was increased, for giuing the King leaue to sell foure hundred thou∣sand crownes of yeerely rent of the Ecclesiasticall reuenues for tenne yeeres, and thirty thousand crownes of the reuenues of lands held in vassalage of the Church: which seemed to be a great diminution of the greatnesse of the Church of Spaine. Lewis S. Gelais, Lord of Lansac, sent out of France expressely to giue the Pope an account of the State of the Kingdome, came to Rome, and sayd, that the King seeing the great care of his Holinesse concerning the Councell, had elected for his Ambassadour to that place Monsieur di Candall , and cau∣sed foure and twenty Bishops to goe thither, of whom hee gaue him a list. Hee related what had happened in France since the death of Francis, and the An Ambassa∣dour is sent out of France to giue the Pope an ac∣count of the state of the kingdome. necessitie to proceede with moderation, as well because their forces were not sufficient to vse rigour, as also because (if they had beene) they should haue embrewed themselues in the blood of the greatest of the Nobility; which would haue aliened the whole Kingdome, and brought all matters to a worse estate; and that the King had no hope but in the Councell, in which all Na∣tions, euen the Germans themselues, would assist. For Religion being esta∣blished in Germany, he did not doubt to doe the like in France, but thought it impossible to make those who will not be present in the Councell, to accept the Decrees therof; and that the French Protestants cannot be separated from the Dutch. Therefore hee entreated his Holinesse, that, to giue them satis∣faction, only for the security of the place and forme of proceeding, he would be pleased to yeeld vnto them, in regard of the great benefite which would ensue. The Pope answered, first concerning the Councell, that, from the To whom the Pope answe∣reth. beginning of his Papacie, he was resolued to call it, that hee hath beene hin∣dered by the Emperour and King of Spaine, both which notwithstanding haue at this present Ambassadours and Prelates there; that none remaine but the Frenchmen, who haue most neede of the Councell; that he hath omitted nothing to inuite the Dutch Protestants, euen with the indignitie of that Sea; that hee will continue, and will giue them what security they can re∣quire; that hee thought it not honest to subiect the Councell to their discre∣tion, and that, if they refused to come, especially hauing beene inuited, they ought to proceed without them. But, for the things done in France, he brief∣ly sayd hee could not commend them, and prayed God to pardon the Au∣thours of so great inconueniences. And the Pope would haue passed those bounds, if hee had knowne what was in doing in France at that same time, when Lansac made relation vnto him of what had beene done. For, the fourteenth of February, the Queene gaue order in S. German, that the Bishops of Valence and of Seez, and the Di∣uines, Butiglier, Espensous, and Picorellius, should consent what might be done A treaty in France about a concord in Religion. for a beginning of concord; who proposed the points following. That it should bee absolutely forbidden to make an image of the holy Trinity, or of any person not named in the Martyrologies, accepted by the Church. That the images should not haue any crownes or garments put vpon them, or vowes or oblations made vnto them, nor should be carried in procession, ex∣cept the signe of the holy Crosse; wherewith the Protestants seemed to rest content, howsoeuer concerning the signe of the crosse they made some re∣sistance, saying that Constantine was the first which did propose it to be wor∣shipped, contrary to the vse of the ancient Church. But Nicholaus Magliar∣dus, Deane of the Sorbon, together with other diuines, did oppose, and de∣fend the adoration of images, though hee confessed there were many abuses in it. In the same moneth the King of Nauarre wrote to the Elector Palatine, the Duke of Wittenberg, and Philip of Hassia, that howsoeuer they could not agree in the Colloquie of Poisi, nor in this last about images, yet hee would still labour to reforme religion, not so, as to trouble the publike quiet of the Kingdome, but bringing it in by little and little. At the same time the Duke of Guise and Cardinall of Loraine went to Ta∣uerne, a Castle belonging to the Bishop of Strasburg, and there met Christopher The King of Nauarre wri∣teth to the Protestant Princes of Germany. A Parly be∣tweene the Guisards and the Duke of Wittenberg. Duke of Wittemberg, with some Ministers of the Augustane Confession. They were together three dayes; and those of Guise expounded to the Duke what fauour was done to the Augustan Confession in the Colloquie of Poisi, and the difficulty which the Reformatists of France did make in accepting it, desiring that Germany would ioyne with them to hinder the doctrine of Zuinglius: not that the amendment of religion (which they much desired) might bee delayed, but that a pestiferous poison might not take roote, not onely in France, but in Germany also. This they did, that, the warre now approching, they might more easily haue assistance, or, at the least, that it might be denied to their enemies. This Parlie be got great suspitions in Rome, Trent, and France. The Cardinall and his adherents iustified themselues, that it was for the good of Christendome, to haue the fauour of the Protestants of Germany a∣gainst the Hugonots of France. And there was a fame, that the Cardinall did truely desire an vnion in religion with Germany, and that, as hee detested the Confession of Geneua, so hee inclined to that of Ausburg, and desired to see it planted in France. It is certaine that, after the Councel of Trent was ended, he said hee had formerly beleeued that Confession, but that afterwards he was sa∣tisfied with the determination of the Councel, and thought that all good Christians ought to doe the like. Concerning the Sermons publikely made in France, though there were seditions in many places, which did hinder the increase of the Reformatists, yet there were then 2150. assemblies, which 2150 refor∣med Chur∣ches in France were called Churches. The sixe and twentieth of February being come, the Session was held in Trent. Antonius Helius, Patriarke of Ierusalem, said Masse, and Antonius The Session February 26. Coccus, Archbishop of Corfu, made the Oration. When the Masse was en∣ded, A question be∣tweene the Ambassadors of Portugal and Hungary, about the pre∣cedency of their Masters the Mandats of Princes being to be read, there grew a question between the Ambassadors of Hungary and Portugal, each pretending that his should first be read, as of the more eminent King: There was no difficultie in the Precedence of the Ambassadors themselues, because that of Portugal, as a se∣cular, sate at the right side of the Temple, and the other, as an Ecclesiastike, at the left. The Legates, hauing consulted hereof, said, that the Mandats should be read in the order as they were presented, not according to the dignitie of the Princes. The Popes briefe, referring the matter of the Index to the Councell, was read also. This Index had beene made in Rome by Paul the fourth, as hath been said, with which if the Councel had medled, it might haue seemed to chalenge superiority aboue the Pope. Therfore they thought fit that the Pope should voluntarily giue leaue, to preuent that preiudice. The Masse Patriarke read the Decree, the substance whereof was. That the Sy∣nod, The Decree concerning the Index. meaning to restore the Catholike doctrine to its purity, and correct ma∣ners, in regard the number of pernicious and suspected bookes was increa∣sed, because the censures made in diuers Prouinces, and Rome, haue done no good, hath determined to depute some father to consider hereof, and to re∣late to the Synod, in time conuenient, what they thinke fit to haue done more, to separate the cockle from the good corne, to remooue all scruples out of mens mindes, and to take away all cause of complaints; ordaining that this should bee published with that Decree, that if any haue interest in the bu∣sinesse of the bookes, and censures, or any other to bee handled in Councell, hee may know and be assured that hee shall bee courteously heard. And be∣cause the Synod doth heartily desire the peace of the Church, that all may ac∣knowledge their common mother, it doth inuite all who doe not commu∣nicate with her, to reconciliation and concord, and to come to Trent, where they shall be imbraced with all offices of charitie; and further, hath decreed that a safe conduct may be granted in a generall Congregation, and shall bee of the same force and strength, as if it had beene granted in publike Session. The Decree being read, the title whereof was: Of the holy Ecumenicall, generall The title of the Councell is questioned. Synod, lawfully assembled in CHRIST, the Arch-bishop of Granata requi∣red that these words (representing the vniuersall Church) should bee added, as hath beene obserued in all the later Councels. Antonius Peragues, Arch-bishop of Caglieri, made the same request; and these two were followed by almost all the Spanish Prelates, desiring that this request might bee noted in the acts. No answere was made, but, for conclusion, the next Session was appointed to be the 14 of May. The Decree was printed, not onely because it was the custome, but because The Decree is censured. it was made of purpose to bee published to all; and it was censured by all sorts of persons. It was demanded how the Synod did call those, who were interested in the things which were to bee handled in the Councell, if they were not knowne; and said that formerly all things were handled besides expectation, and who could prophesie what the Legates would pro∣pose, because they knew not themselues, still expecting Commissions from Rome. Those who were interested in any booke, how could they know that any thing would be spoken against it? The generalitie of the citation, and in∣certaintie of the cause might induce euery one to goe to Trent, because euery one hath interest in some particular, which might perhaps bee treated on. It was concluded generally that they were called in shew, and excluded indeed. Notwithstanding, these things which they could not praise, they commen∣ded the ingenuous confession of the Synod, that the former prohibitions had begot scruples in mens minds, and giuen cause of complaints. In Germanie that part was suspected, where the Synod giueth authoritie to itselfe, to giue a safe conduct in a generall Congregation. For they vnderstood not any dif∣ference, in regard the same persons met in both assemblies, but only that they did weare Miters in the Sessions, and Caps in the Congregations; nor why, if the safe-conduct could not then be granted, they could not make a Session expresly for it. In summe, they thought that there was some great mysterie couered in it, howsoeuer the most vnderstanding men did beleeue that the Synod was assured that no Protestant would come to Trent, with any safe-conduct whatsoeuer, except it were by force, as it happened in the yeere 1552. because of the resolution of Charles, a thing which could no more bee put in practise. The Pope wrote backe to the Legats, that the heretikes should not be in∣uited to repentance with promise of pardon; because, it hauing been done by Iulius, and, another time, by Paul the fourth, no good issue came of it. A∣mongst the heretiques, those who are in a place of liberty will not accept it. and those who remaine where the Inquisition hath power, if they feare to bee discouered, will receiue the pardon fainedly to secure themselues of that The Popes answer to the Legats. which is past, with purpose to doe worse more warily. For the Safe Con∣duct, hee was content it should bee giuen to all who are not vnder the Inqui∣sition; but so, as that the exception should not bee expressed; in regard that when Iulius granted his pardon, except onely to those who were subiect to the Inquisitions of Spaine and Portugall, much was spoken against it, and it passed with small reputation, as if the Pope had not the same power ouer that Inquisition, as ouer others. But for the manner of expressing it, hee did referre it to the Synode. For the forme, hee commended that which the Councell gaue to Germanie in the yeere 1552, in regard that was seene al∣ready, and that so many Protestants came that yeere to Trent, vpon that secu∣ritie. Concerning the Index, he ordained that the deputies should proceede, vntill an occasion were offered to make a publique Decree without the op∣position of any Prince. The answere being come, the second of March and the day following Congregations were held, to resolue whether the generall pardon ought to bee published, and a Safe Conduct granted, and what forme was to be giuen to the one and the other; and the fourth day, after long disputations, all was concluded, the Legates hauing made the determination fall where they ay∣med, without interesting the Popes authority. To inuite the heretikes to re∣pentance was omitted, for the reasons alleadged in Rome. It was much disputed, whether a Safe Conduct was to be giuen by the name of the French, English, and Scottish men; and some spake of the Greekes, and other Nati∣ons of the East. It was presently seene that these poore men, afflicted in ser∣uitude, could not, without danger and assistance of money, thinke of Coun∣cels; and some sayd that, there beeing a diuision of the Protestants, it was good to let them alone, and not to name them, alleadging that it was dange∣rous to mooue in a body ill humours which were at quiet. To giue a Safe Conduct to English men which neither they, nor any of them doe require, would bee a great indignitie. They were content it should bee giuen to the Scots, because the Queene would demand it, but so, as that the demaund should first bee made. For France, there was a doubt made whether the Kings Counsell would take it well or not, because it would bee thought to bee a declaration that the King had rebels. Of Germanie none could doubt, because it had beene formerly graunted to them; and if it were graunted to that Nation alone, it would seeme that the others were aban∣doned. Many thought fitte to grant it absolutely to all Nations; but the Spaniards did oppose, and were fauoured by the Legates, and others who knew the Popes minde, to the great indignation of those, who thought that an inference might bee made that the Councell was not aboue the Inqui∣sition of Spaine. In the ende all difficulties were resolued, and the Decree framed with three parts. In the first a Safe Conduct was giuen to the Ger∣mans, iust word by word, as it was made in the yeere 1552. In the second, it was sayd that the Synod doeth giue Safe Conduct in the same forme and words as it was giuen to the Dutchmen, to euery one who hath not com∣munion of faith with her, of euery Nation, Prouince, Citie and place where any thing is preached; taught, or beleeued, contrary to that which is belee∣ued in the Church of Rome. In the third it was sayd, that although all nati∣ons The Decree of the Safe Conduct. doe not seeme to be comprehended in that extention, which hath been done for certaine respects, yet those who repent, and returne to the bosome of the Church, are not excluded, of what nation soeuer they be, which the Sy∣nod desireth should be published to all. But because it must be maturely con∣sulted on, in what forme the Safe Conduct must bee giuen them, they haue thought fit to deferre that point vntill another time, thinking it sufficient, for the present to prouide for the securitie of those who haue publiquely aban∣doned the doctrine of the Church. The Decree was presently printed, as was fit, it being made onely to bee published. Yet the Synode did not keepe promise, to consult of the forme of the Safe Conduct, to be giuen to those of the third kinde, and in printing of the body of the Councell, this third part was left out, leauing it to the speculation of the world, why they did promise to prouide for those also, and publish it in print, with a desire to haue all men know it, and afterwards not to do it, and labour to conceale that, which then they did desire to manifest. The Emperours Ambassadours sollicited the Legates to make the refor∣mation, and to write to the Protestants, exhorting them to come to the Councell, as was done to the Bohemians, in the time of the Councell of Basil. The Legats answered that, for these fourty yeeres, all, both Prince and peo∣ple, haue desired reformation, yet neuer any part thereof was handled, but themselues did crosse and hinder it, so that they haue been constrayned to a∣bandon the worke; that now they will endeauour to make a generall refor∣mation of all Christendome, but for one particularly for the Clergie of Ger∣manie, which doth most neede it, and which the Emperour doeth principally expect, they saw not how they could make it, seeing that the Dutch Prelats were not come to the Councell; and for writing to the Protestants, in regard they haue answered the Popes Nuncij with such exorbitant vnseemelinesse, they could not but expect that they would make a worse answere to the Let∣ters of the Synod. The eleuenth of March the Legates proposed twelue Articles in the ge∣nerall Twelue Arti∣cles to be dis∣cussed. Congregation, to bee studied and discussed in the next Congrega∣tions. 1. What prouision might bee made, that Bishops and other Curates may reside in their Churches, without beeing absent, but for causes iust, honest, necessary and profitable for the Catholique Church. 2. Whether it bee expedient, that none be ordained but vnto a title of some Benefice, in regard many deceits are discouered which arise from ordination to a title of the Patrimony. 3. That nothing be receiued for Ordination, either by the Ordainers, or their Ministers, or Notaries. 4. Whether it ought to bee granted to the Prelates, that in the Churches where there are no dayly distributions, or so small as that they are not estee∣med, they may conuert one of the Prebends to that vse. 5. Whether great Parishes which haue need of many Priests, ought to haue many titles also. 6. Whether small Benefices with Cure, which haue not a competent reue∣nue for the Priest, ought to be reformed, making one of many. 7. What prouision is to be made concerning Curates ignorant, and of a bad life, whether it be fit to giue them coadiutors, or able Vicars, assigning them part of the reuenues of the Benefice. 8. Whether power ought to bee giuen to the Ordinarie to incorporate into the mother Churches, ruinated Chappels, which, for pouertie cannot be rebuilt. 9. Whether it ought to be granted to the Ordinary that hee may visite Be∣nefices held in Commenda, though they be regular. 10. Whether secret marriages, which shall bee contracted hereafter, ought to be made voyd. 11. What conditions ought to bee assigned, that a marriage may not bee esteemed secret, but contracted in the face of the Church. 12. What prouision ought to be made concerning the great abuses, caused by the Pardoners. After these the point following was giuen to the Diuines to bee studied, One Article more concer∣ning clande∣stine maria∣ges. and discussed in a Congregation appointed for that onely. Whether, as Euaristus, and the Lateran Councell haue declared, that clan∣destine, or secret marriages are reputed not good, both before the Iudge, and in estimation of the Church, so the Councell may declare that they are abso∣lutely voyd, and that secrecie ought to bee put amongst the impediments, which doe make a Nullitie in the marriage. In the meane space, it beeing The Prote∣stants of Ger∣many treate a lea ue, and raise Souldi∣ers. discouered that the Protestants of Germanie did treate a league, and make some leuies of Souldiers, the Emperour wrote to Trent, and to the Pope al∣so, that the Councell might surcease, vntill it did appeare whither the moti∣on did tend. For this cause, and because of holy dayes the residue of this moneth was spent in ceremonies onely. The sixteenth day Franciscus Ferdinandus d'Aualos, Marquis of Pescara, The Spanish Ambassadour is receiued, & an oration is made in his name. Ambassadour of the Catholique King, was receiued in a generall Congrega∣tion; and, his Mandate being read, an Oration was made on his name; the substance whereof was; That the Councell beeing the onely remedie for the euils of the Church, Pius the fourth hath, vpon good reason, thought it necessary in these times; in which Philip, King of Spaine, desired to haue beene personally present, to giue example to other Princes: but, be∣cause hee cannot, hee hath sent the Marquis, to assist and fauour it as much as possibly he can, knowing that howsoeuer the Church is defended by God, yet sometimes it hath neede of the assistance of man. That the Ambassa∣dour doeth not thinke it needfull to exhort the Synode, knowing their in∣credible and almost diuine wisedome; that hee seeth good foundations laid already, and the things now treated on, managed with arte, which doeth mitigate, and exasperate; so that hoping that their future actions will bee correspondent, hee will onely promise all good offices, endeauours and fa∣uours from the King. The Speaker answered, in the Councels name, that the comming of an Ambassadour from so great a King, had giuen courage and hope of the Synod that the remedies, which it shall vse for the euils of Chri∣stendome, will be profitable, therefore it doeth imbrace his Maiestie with all good affection thanketh him offereth to requite his merits, and to doe what∣soeuer it can for his honour; and doth, as it ought, receiue the Mandate. In The answere of the Spea∣ker. the Congregation of the 18. the Ambassadour of Cosmo, Duke of Florence and Siena, was receiued; who, after his Mandate was read, made an Oration; The Ambas∣sador of Flo∣rence is recei∣ued, and ma∣keth an Ora∣tion. in which hee shewed at large the affinitie of his Duke with the Pope, exhor∣ted the Fathers to purge the Church, and declare the light of the truth, taught by the Apostles, offering all possible assistance from his Duke, as hee had done before to the Pope, for preseruation of the Maiestie of the Sea of Rome. The Speaker thanked him in the Synodes name, and, hauing made a reue∣rent commemoration of Leo the tenth, and Clement the seuenth, added that they were assembled onely for this end, and thought of nothing but of com∣posing all dissention, chasing away the darkenesse of ignorance, and manife∣sting the trueth. Melchior Lusi, Ambassadour of the Catholique Suisses, and Ioachimus Pro∣postus, The Ambas∣sadours of the Catholique Suisses are re∣ceiued. an Abbat, in the name of the Abbats, and other Ecclesiastiques of that Nation, were receiued in the Congregation of the 20. In whose name an O∣ration was made to this purpose. That the Consuls of the 7. Cantons, in re∣gard of their filiall duety towards the Church, haue sent Ambassadours to as∣sist in the Councell, and to promise obedience, and to make knowen to all, that they doe not yeeld to any in their desire to assist the Sea of Rome, as for∣merly they haue, in the times of Iulius 2, and Leo 10, as also when they fought with the neighbour Cantons, for the defence of Religion, slaying Zuinglius, the most wicked enemie the Church had, whose bodie they sought amongst the dead, and burnt it to testifie that they ought to haue irreconciliable warre with the other Cantons, so long as they continue to bee out of the Church, in regard they are situated at the confines of Italy, as a Castle to resist the Nor∣therne euill, that it cannot penetrate within the bowels of that Countrey. The Synode answered by the Speaker, that the piety and good deedes of the Heluetians towards the Apostolique Sea, were many and great; but no obe∣dience or office more opportune then the Ambassage sent; and the offer made to the Synode; that they were glad of the comming of the Ambassadours, and had, beside the protection of the Emperour, Kings, and Princes, much con∣fidence in that famous Nation. In the Congregation of the sixth of Aprill, Andreas Dudicius, Bishop of The Orators of the Clergy of Hungary are receiued. Tinia, and Iohannes Collosarinus, of Canadia, Oratours of the Clergie of Hunga∣rie, were receiued. The first made an Oration, and sayd; that the Archbi∣shop of Strigonium, the Bishops and Clergie, had receiued great ioy for three things; for the assumption of Pius 4. to the Papacie, for the conuocation of the Councell of Trent, and for the deputation of the Apostolicall Legats to preside in it. Hee shewed the obseruance of the Prelates towards the Ca∣tholique Church, and called the Cardinall of Varmia for a witnesse there∣of, who did knowe them, and conuersed with them; hee expounded the de∣uotion of the Hungarians, and the seruice they doe to all Christendome, in maintaining warre against the Turkes, and the particular diligence of the Bishops, in opposing the plots of the heretiques. Hee related the common desire of them all to bee present in the Councell, if their presence had not beene necessary at home, to defend their castles against the Turkes, who are at their confines, and to keepe watch against the heretiques; so that be∣ing forced to performe this dutie by them their Orators, they recommended themselues to the protection of the Councell, offering to receiue and obserue whatsoeuer should be decreed by it. The Secretary answered in the Coun∣cels name, that the Synod was assured of the ioy which the Hungarians con∣ceiued for the celebration of the Generall Councell; that they ought to pray God for the happy issue of it, that they desired to haue seene the Prelates in person, but seeing they are hindered by the causes prooued by the Cardi∣nall of Ʋarmia, it doth accept their excuse, hoping that Christian Religion will receiue profit by their presence in their owne Churches; and the rather because they haue recommended their actions to them the Oratours, beeing honest and religious Fathers, and therefore that they doe embrace both them and their Mandates. In the Congregations dayly held from the seuenth day vntil the 18, the Fa∣thers The Article of residence is set on foot againe, and causeth a con∣tention. spake of the 4. first Articles, but very confusedly of the first, concer∣ning Residence. Of those who assisted in the first Councell, when this point was handled, which was done with some difference, or rather contro∣uersie, there were but fiue Bishops in this, and yet, at the first proposing hereof, they presently diuided themselues into parts, as remembring the an∣cient contention; which happened in no other question, neither at that time, nor in the time of Iulius, nor at this present. Some say the cause was, for that the other discussions, beeing theologicall, were not well vnderstood, and were handled speculatiuely by the learned, without any passion but of ha∣tred against the Protestants, who did trouble them, by setting on foot those questions. But this touched the Prelates in their owne persons. The cour∣tiers were mooued with ambition, or obliged to follow that opinion, which was most commodious for their Patrons. Others were caried away with enuie, who not hoping to raise themselues to that height in which the cour∣tiers were, desired to pull them lower, and so to become equall. In this Arti∣cle euery one laboured according to his passion, and kept a strict account of his owne voyce deliuered in the Congregations, and of all the voyces of o∣thers, which were any way remarkeable. Of this number 34. came into my hands, in that forme as they were deliuered, and of the others I haue vnder∣stood the conclusion onely: but here nothing is to be related but that which is of note. The Patriarke of Ierusalem said, That this Article had been handled, and The Suffrage of the Patri∣arke of Ieru∣salem concer∣ning Resi∣dence. discussed in the first Councell, and concluded, that, to cause residence, there are two prouisions: One, to constitute punishments for those who doe not reside; another, to remooue the impediments which doe hinder residencie. The first was fully ordered in the sixt Session, neither can any thing bee ad∣ded, in regard the losse of halfe the reuenues is a very great pecuniary punish∣ment, then which a greater cannot be imposed, without making the Bishops beggars. If the contumacie bee excessiue, there can bee no greater punish∣ment, except depriuation; which requiring one to execute it, which must needs be the Pope, in regard the ancient vse of the Church was, to reserue to that Sea the hearing and determining of the causes of Bishops, that sixt Session referred it to his Holinesse to finde a remedie, either by meanes of a new prouision, or otherwise, and bound the Metropolitane to aduise him of the absence. For the second they beganne to make prouision, and, in that, and other Sessions, many Decrees were made, to take away many ex∣emptions, which hindered the Bishops to exercise their charge. There∣fore it now remaineth onely to continue, and to remooue the residue of the impediments, electing a certaine number of Fathers, as then was done, to make collection of them, that they may bee proposed, and pro∣uided for. The Archbishop of Granata added, that a more potent and effectuall re∣medie The suffrage of the Arch-bishop of Granada. was proposed in that Councell; that is, that the obligation of Resi∣dence was by the Law of God, which was handled and examined tenne mo∣neths together; and that if that Councell had not been interrupted, it would haue beene decided as a necessary, yea, as a principall article of the doctrine of the Church, and was then not onely discussed, but the reasons vsed by diuers were put in print also, so that the matter is prepared and digested, and nothing now remaineth, but to giue it perfection. When it shall be determi∣ned that residencie is de iure Diuino, all hinderances will cease of themselues; the Bishops vnderstanding their duety, wil thinke on their owne conscience; they will not be reputed hirelings, but Pastors, who knowing that the flocke is giuen to them by God, to whom they must make an account, without lay∣ing the fault on others, and being assured that dispensations wil neither saue, nor helpe them, they will apply themselues to performe their duety. And he proceeded to proue, with many authorities of the New and Old Testament, Is approved by the maior part. and exposition of the Fathers, that this was the Catholike truth. This opini∣on was approoued by the maior part of the Congregation, the maintainers whereof laboured to bring authorities and reasons. Others did reiect it, and said it was new, neuer defended, neither by anti∣quity, And reiected by others. nor by this age before Cardinall Caietan, who set the question on foote, and maintained that part, which notwithstanding hee did abandon in his old age, because hee tooke a Bishopricke, and did neuer reside; that the Church hath euer held, that the Pope might dispense, that Non-residents haue alwayes beene punished, and reprehended as transgressors of the Ca∣nons onely, and not of the Law of God; that, indeede, it was disputed in the first Councell, but the disputation was held to be so dangerous by the Legats, men of great wisedome, that they did cunningly cause it to bee buried in si∣lence; that this example ought to be followed, and that the bookes which haue beene written since, haue giuen great scandall to the world, and made knowen, that the disputation proceeded from partiality. For the authorities of the Scripture and Fathers, they are onely exhortations to perfection, nei∣ther is there any substantiall proofe but out of the Canons, which are Eccle∣siasticall lawes. Some held opinion that there was neither place, nor time, nor opportu∣nity to handle that question, & that no good could come by the determinati∣on of it, but danger of many inconueniences; that the Councell was assem∣bled to extirpate heresies, not to make Schisme among the Catholiques, which would happen by condemning an opinion, followed, if not by the greater part, yet by one halfe at the least; that the authours of that opinion haue not inuented it for trueths sake, but the more to vrge men to reside, with small ground of reason, in regard that the Lawes of GOD are not more diligently obserued then the Lawes of the Church; that the precept for keeping of Lent is more strictly obserued, then those of the Decalogue; that if to confesse and communicate at Easter were commanded by GOD, The lawes of the Pope are more strictly obserued then the lawes of God. more would not doe it then now doe; that to say Masse with Copes is an Ec∣clesiasticall law, and yet no man doth transgresse it, hee that doth not obey the penall commands of the Canons, will transgresse much more when hee fea∣reth onely the iustice of GOD: neither will any Bishop be mooued with that determination, but it will giue occasion to plot rebellions against the Apo∣stolique Sea, to restraine the Popes authority, and (as some haue been heard to whisper) to depresse the Court of Rome; that that was the ornament of the Clergie, which is respected in other places, onely in regard of it, that if it should be depressed, the Church would euery where be lesse esteemed; and therefore that it was not fit to handle such a businesse, without imparting it to his Holinesse and Colledge of Cardinals, to whom it doeth principally belong. The opinion of Paulus Iouius, Bishop of Nocera is not to be omitted; who The Suffrage of Paulus Io∣uius, Bishop of Nocera. said in substance. That certainly the Councel was assembled to cure a great wound, which is the deformation of the Church, the cause whereof, as all are perswaded, is the absence of the Prelats from their Churches; which beeing affirmed by all, is perhaps not sufficiently considered by any. But it is not the part of a wise Physician to take away the cause before hee be well assured that the remoouing of it will not cause greater diseases. If the absence of Prelats hath beene the cause of the corruptions, there will bee lesse deforma∣tion in those Churches where they haue resided. The Popes, for these hun∣dred yeeres, haue continually sate in Rome, and vsed all diligence to instruct the people: yet we doe not see that that citie is better gouerned then others. The great capitall Cities of Kingdomes are most out of order, where the Prelats haue alwayes resided; on the contrary, some poore cities, which haue not seene a Bishop in an hundred yeeres, are lesse corrupted; that amongst the ancient Prelats here present, who haue continually resided in their Churches, of which number there are some, not one can shew that his Dioces is better then the next, which haue continued without a Bishop. If any say they are a flocke without a shepherd, let him consider that not Bishops only, but Parish Priests also haue cure of soules, and that there are mountaines which ha∣uing neuer seene Bishops, may be a paterne to Episcopall Cities. That the zeale and care of the Fathers of the first Councell is to bee commended, and imitated, who, by penalties, haue incited the Prelats to remaine in their owne Churches, and begun to remooue the impediments which did hinder them; but they were deceiued if they did hope that this residencie would be a suffi∣cient reformation▪ yea, they ought to feare, that as residencie is now requi∣red, so posteritie, seeing the inconueniences that arise from thence, wil desire their absence. That they ought not to make such strong bonds as cannot in time of neede bee loosed, such as Ius Diuinum would bee, which they now begin to alleadge, 1400 yeeres after CHRIST Where there is a pernicious Bishop, as was that of Collen, he will defend himselfe by this doctrine, in not obeying the Pope, when he shall cite him to giue an account of his actions, or keepe him farre off, that he may not cherish the euill. He added, that hee saw that the Prelates who were of the contrary opinion had a good zeale, but did beleeue also that some of them would bee content to make vse of it, to withdraw themselues from the Popes obedience, which the stricter it is, the more it doth hold the Church vnited. He put them in minde also, that what soeuer they doe heerein, will turne to the fauour of Parish Priests also, to withdraw themselues from obedience to their Bishops. For the Articles being thus expounded, they will make vse of it, and say, that the Bishop cannot re∣mooue them from their Churches, nor restraine their authoritie by reserua∣tions, and, being Pastors immediatly sent by God, they will pretend that the flocke doth more belong to them then to the Bishop, and no answere can be made against it. And as hitherto the gouernment of the Church hath been preserued by meanes of the Hierarchie, so this will cause a Popularity, and an Anarchie, which will destroy it. Iohn Baptista Bernard, Bishop of Aiace, who though hee beleeued that resi∣dencie The suffrage of Iohn Bap∣tista Bernard Bishop of Aiace. was de iure diuino, yet thought it not fit to speake of that question, de∣liuered a singular speech, saying; That, not ayming to establish one opinion more then another, but onely so to enforce residencie, as that it may bee re∣ally executed, hee thought it vaine to declare from whence the obligation came, or whatsoeuer else, and that it was sufficient onely to remooue the cause of absence; which is, that Bishops doe busie themselues in the Courts of Princes, and in the affaires of the world, being Iudges, Chancellours, Se∣cretaries, Counsellours, Treasurers; and there are but few offices of State into which some Bishop hath not insinuated himselfe. This is forbidden by S. Paul, who thought it necessary that a souldier of the Church should ab∣staine from secular employments. Let Gods command bee executed, and them for bidden to take any charge, office, or degree, ordinary or extraordi∣narie, in the affaires of the world; and then there being no cause for them to remaine at Court, they will goe to their residencie, of their owne accord, without commaund or penaltie, and will not haue any occasion to depart from thence. In conclusion, he desired that the Councell would constitute, that it should not bee lawfull for Bishops or others, who haue cure of soules, to exercise any secular office or charge. The Bishop of fiue Churches, the Emperours Ambassadour, opposed and Is opposed by the Bishop of fiue Chur∣ches, the Em∣perours Am∣bassadour. sayd, that if the words of S. Paul were to bee vnderstood according to the sence which was giuen them, the whole Church was to be condemned, and all Princes, since the yeere 800, vntill now, for that for which they princi∣pally deserue to be commended, these in giuing, and those in accepting tem∣porall Iurisdictions; which also haue beene exercised by the Popes, and by Bishops placed in the Catalogue of Saints. The best Emperours, Kings of France, Spaine, England, and Hungary haue euer had their Counsels full of Prelates, all which must bee condemned, if Gods precept doe forbid them to exercise those charges. Hee that thinketh Paul his command doth compre∣hend Ecclesiasticall persons onely, is deceiued: For it is directed to all faith∣full Christians, who are the Souldiers of Christ, and inferreth, that as the worldly souldier doeth not busiehimselfe in the Artes by which life is main∣tained, because they are repugnant to his profession, so the Souldier of Christ, that is, euery Christian, ought to abstaine from those things which are re∣pugnant to Christian profession, which are sinnes onely; but whatsoeuer may be done without sinne, is lawfull for euery one. The Prelates that serue in those affaires, cannot be reprehended, except it be said that they are sinnes. The greatnesse of the Church, and the esteeme the world maketh thereof, proceedeth most from Ecclesiasticall dignities, placed in persons of Nobili∣tie and of great blood, and from Prelates exercised in charges of importance; which if they should bee incompatible to the Clergie, no person nobly des∣cended would enter into that order, no Prelate would bee esteemed, and the Church would consist onely of people basely borne, and liuing basely. But, on the contrary, the good doctors haue euer maintained, that those Statutes are against Ecclesiasticall libertie, which exclude from publique administra∣tions Ecclesiasticall persons, to whom they belong by right of birth; as also the prohibitions that publique charges cannot be giuen to Priests. This was heard with applause of all the Prelates, euen of those who thought that re∣sidence was deiure Diuino; so potent are the affections of men, that some∣times Who gaineth an applause. they suffer them not to discerne contradictions. Of the other Articles a light discussion onely was made; yet something A briefe dis∣course of the Authoar con∣cerning ordi∣nation to the title of the Pa∣triimonie. was said worth the noting. For the second, for prohibiting ordinations to the title of the Patrimony, it is certaine, that since the Church was constitu∣ted and established, and necessarie ministeries deputed in it, no man was or∣dayned, in the good times of it, but vnto some proper ministery. But this good vse was quickly turned into an abuse. For in regard of the exempti∣ons of diuers, and of other worldly respects, and because the Bishops desired to haue a great Clergie, they ordained whosoeuer came vnto them for it. Therefore this sort of ordination was forbidden in the Councell of Chalce∣don, which was then called absolute, or loose, (for so the Greeke word doeth properly signifie) commanding that none should be ordained but vnto a par∣ticular charge, and that the loose ordinations should beenullified, and made voyd. This was afterwards confirmed by the Canons, so that this rule re∣mained as a Maxime, established in the Church, that no man could bee or∣dained without a title; and in the ancient and good times, by a title was vn∣derstood a charge, or ministery to be exercised. But after that corruptions were entred, a title was taken for a reuenue to liue vpon, and that which was constituted to this end, that amongst the Clergie no person might bee idle, was thus transformed, that no person might want, and bee forced to worke for his liuing. And the true sense of the Canons beeing couered by this in∣terpretation, Alexander the third did establish it in his Lateran Councell, say∣ing, that none should be ordained without a title, by which hee may receiue prouision, necessary for his life, with this exception, if he had no inheri∣tance of his owne, or from his father; which would bevery reasonable if a title were required onely to maintaine life. For this cause many, shewing they had a Patrimonie, by false proofes, were ordained; others, after they were ordained to a true patrimony, did aliene it; and others, borrowing a suffici∣ent patrimony vntill they were ordeined, did afterwards restore it to him that had lent it; so that there were many poore Priests, and many inconue∣niences caused, which required that prouision should be made for them. This Article being proposed to the Synode, there were diuers opinions. In which point diuers opinions are deliuered in Councel. Some sayd, that it being established that residencie is de Iure diuino, and euery one exercising his charge, the Churches will bee perfectly serued, and there will be no neede of Clergie men not beneficed, or of ordinations to the title of patrimonie or any other, and all inconueniences will bee remedied. For there will bee no idle person in the Clergie, from whom innumerable mis∣chiefes and bad examples doe come, there will bee no beggar, nor any forced to vse base trades. They sayd, that no reformation was good, but that which did reduce things to their beginning; that the primitiue Church did continue many yeeres in perfection, and that the integrity thereof could by this meanes only be restored. There was another opinion, that none should be denied to take holy orders, who, for honestie or sufficiencie, did deserue them, although they were poore, alleadging that the poore were not exclu∣ded in the Primitiue Church, which did not dislike that Clerkes and Priests should liue by their labour, by the example of S. Paul the Apostle, and of Apollo the Euangelist, who liued by making Pauilions. And after that Princes be∣came Christians, Constantius the sonne of Constantine, gaue, in his sixt Consul∣ship, a priuiledge to the Clergie, that they should not pay any Subsidie for that which they did traffique in shops and worke-houses, because they gaue some of their gaines to the poore. The instruction of S. Paul to the faith∣full was obserued, that they should labour in honest workes, that they might haue whereof to giue to the poore. They said that an idle and wicked life was vnseemely in the Clergie, because it gaue scandall; but to liue of ones la∣bour was honest, and tended to edification; and if any were forced to beg because of sicknesse, it was no shame, no more then to the Friars who holde it for a glory to bee accounted beggars; that it was not a Christian proposi∣tion, that to labour to liue by ones hands, to begge in case of impotencie, was vndecent to the Ministers of CHRIST, and that nothing was vnseeme∣ly but vice. And if any thought that want was cause of theft, or other sinnes, hee shall finde, when he thinketh better on it, that these bee sinnes of the rich rather then of the poore, and that auarice is more impotent, and vnta∣med, then pouerty, which, beeing alwayes busie, doth take away occasi∣ons of doing ill. An honest man and a poore man are compatible, but not an honest man and an idle man. The great benefit which the Church militant in this worlde, and that which is Purgatorie doeth receiue by Masses, celebrated by poore Priests, and not by rich, is both written and preached; of which number if none were, the faithfull liuing, and the soules of the dead would bee depriued of great suffrages; that it were better that a strict order should bee made, that persons of honesty and sufficiencie should be ordained without a title, seeing that now the cause doeth cease for which Antiquitie forbade it, which was, for that those who had titles, labouring in their Ecclesiasticall functions, did edifie, and the others, beeing idle, did giue scandall, whereas now those that haue titles doe, for the most part, disdaine the Ecclesiasticall ministerie, and liue in pleasure, and the poore performe the functions, and doe edifie. This opinion was not followed by many. But a middle opinion had great applause; which was, that the vse should bee still obserued, not to or∣daine without a title to an Ecclesiasticall benefice, or a sufficient patrimonie, that Priests might not dishonour their order by begging, and that it should bee constituted, to remooue all fraud, that the Bishop should prouide that the patrimonie, to which the Clerke is ordained, might not bee alienated. Ga∣briel de Veneur, Bishop of Viuiers, contradicted this, and said, that the patri∣monie of Clerkes is a secular thing, concerning which the Clergie cannot: possibly make any law: besides many occasions may arise, for which the Law, or the Magistrate may lawfully command it to bee alienated. And it is gene∣rally true that the patrimoniall goods of Clerkes, for prescriptions, and all sorts of contracts, are subiect to the ciuill lawes, and therefore that they ought to consider well of the businesse, before they assume authoritie to breake a ci∣uill contract. The occasion of proposing the third Article was, because the precept of Concerning Simonie. CHRIST, that all spirituall graces should bee freely conferred, as they are freely receiued from him, was many wayes transgressed in the collation of Or∣ders: which abuse was not new, but greater in former times. For, in the beginning of Christianitie, charitie abounding, the people who receiued spirituall things, from the Ministers of CHRIST, did not onely, according to the diuine precept expounded by S. Paul, contribute to them as much as serued for their necessities, but enough also to maintaine the poore, neuer thinking that the temporall was a price of the Spirituall. But after that the temporall, which was held and inioyed in common, was diuided, and a re∣uenue applyed to the titles, called a Benefice, the ordination being not then distinct from the collation of the title, and by consequence of the Benefice annexed to it, but both being giuen and receiued together, it seemed to the ordainers, that, beside the spirituall thing, they gaue also a temporall, for which they might receiue another temporall thing in recompence, which hee that would obtaine, was forced to accommodate himselfe to the will of him that could giue it, so that open buying and selling was easily brought in, which, in the orientall Church, could neuer be corrected, though many Ca∣nons and censures were made against it. Yet it was much diminished, be∣cause God tooke from them, by the rod of the Saracens, a great part of their goods. And, in the West, though it was much reprehended by good men, yet it continued, in some places more, in some lesse, vntill, about the yeere 1000. the ordination was diuided from the collation of the Benefice, for which cause that did beginne to passe for nothing, and Simony did still con∣tinue in this, and that more openly then before. And this abuse did alwayes increase, though vnder diuers names of Annates, small seruices, writing, seale, and other pretences, which the Church still vseth, with small hope that they can euer be taken away, vntill CHRIST come againe, with his whip, ouerthrow the tables of the money changers, and chase them out of the Temple. But the ordination, which, being separated from the Benefice, had the fortune to bee conferred freely, did inioy it but a small time. For the Bishops esteeming it vnprofitable and base, and regarding more the o∣ther which yeelded fruit, left off, by little and little, to administer the ordi∣nations; so that titular Bishops were instituted, who performed the Ponti∣ficall Ecclesiasticall ministeries, and the true Bishops busied themselues in the temporall onely. Those, hauing no reuenues, were forced to maintaine themselues by the administration of those functions. Whereupon hee that receiued Order was compelled to contribute, first by the name of almes or of∣fering, afterwards, to make it more honourable, by the title of donatiue or present, and, proceeding further, that it might not bee omitted as being a due∣tie, it was couered with the name of reward, not of the Ordayner, but of his seruants, or of the Notarie, or of some other who serued him in the ordinati∣on. Therefore in this Article it was proposed, that the abuse occurring in the collation of Benefices should not bee spoken of; as beeing an infirmitie; not curable with any remedie but death. Concerning which the Prelates were diuided, not by opinions, or af∣fections, but by qualitie of persons. The rich Bishops condemned the recei∣uing of any thing; either for themselues or their officers, or Notaries, as Si∣monicall, and sacrilegious, bringing the example of Iehesie seruant of the Prophet Elizeus, and of Simon Magus, and of the seuere commaundement of CHRIST, Giue freely as you haue receiued. They alleadged also many exaggerations out of the Fathers against this sinne, saying, that the names of a voluntary donatiue, or almes, are vaine colours repugnant to trueth, be∣cause the gift is bestowed for the Order, without which it would not haue beene giuen. And if it bee an almes, why is it giuen vpon that occasion onely? let it be made at another time, and Orders conferred without the inter∣uention of any thing. But the mischiefe is, that if one should tell the Ordainer that hee gaue him an almes, hee would hold it for an iniurie, nor would re∣ceiue it at another time. Therefore they ought not to beleeue, that they could deceiue God and the world. They concluded that an absolute De∣cree ought to bee made, that nothing should bee giuen, though willingly, or vnder the name of almes, nor receiued, not onely by the Ordainer, but also by any of his, or by the Notarie, vnder the name of writing, seale, paines, or any other Pretence whatsoeuer. But the poore Bishops and the Titular sayd to the contrary, that as to giue order for a price was a wicked sacriledge, so to take away almes, so much commended by CHRIST, did destroy charitie, and wholly deforme the Church. That there was the same reason absolutely for Ordinations, which is for Confessions, Communions, Masses, Burials and other Ecclesiasticall functi∣ons; and therefore no cause why that should be forbidd in Ordination, which is allowed in all these; and the allegation, that if it bee an Almes, let it bee gi∣uen at another time, is of as much force in all the other functions. The Church hath vsed, from the beginning, to receiue oblations and almes, vpon these occasions, which if they shall bee taken away, the poore religious per∣sons, who liue of them, will bee forced to take some other course, the rich will not performe the offices, as doeth, and, for the space of fiue hundred yeeres, hath plainely appeared, so that the exercise of Religion will bee lost, and the people, remaining without it, will fall into impietie, and diuers per∣nicious superstitions. And if thousands of crownes are giuen without repre∣hension for the vestments which the Apostolike Sea giueth to the Metropo∣litans, how can a small acknowledgement be reprehended, which the Bishop receiueth from the inferiour Orders? What reason is there that things of the same kinde should be ordered by contrary lawes? That cannot be called an abuse which was instituted in the beginning. And it remaineth still in the Pontificall, that waxe candles are presented, by those that are ordayned, to the Bishop ordaining, at the offering place, in time of the Ordinations, which be temporall things, and, if they bee great, and well adorned, may cost much. It is not therefore so bad as it is painted out, neither can the opposites game, by the infamie of poore Bishops, the name of reformers, imitating the Phari∣sees, in obseruing moathes, and straining at gnats. Some sayd also that it could not bee constituted, as being contrary to the decree of Innocentius the third, in the generall Councell, where the vse of gi∣uing and receiuing a temporall thing, in the ministery of the Sacraments, is not onely approoued, but the Bishops are commanded to compell the peo∣ple, by censures and Ecclesiasticall punishments, to obserue the custome, gi∣uing the title of laudable to those things, which now some goe about to con∣demne as sacrilegious. But Dinisius, Bishop of Milopotamus, made a long digression, to shew how the faithfull would bee edified, if the Sacraments were administred by the Clergie for pure charitie, expecting no reward but from God onely. Hee affirmed that necessaries were to bee allowed them, and greater prouision also; but that this was sufficiently and superaboundantly done, by the assig∣nation of Tithes, because they, not being the tenth part of the people, doe re∣ceiue so great a portion, besides other possessions which are double as much. Therefore it is not iust to demand that which is already receiued an hun∣dred folde; and if the Bishops bee poore, it is not because the Church is poore, but because the riches are ill diuided. With an euen distribution e∣uery one might be fitted; and that might be giuen without counter change, for which more then the iust price hath beene already receiued. Hee added, that, if this multitude of abuses could not bee taken away altogether, it would bee good to beginne with that of Ordinations, not restraining it to the onely action of conferring the Sacraments, but extending it also to the precedent. For it would be a great absurditie that one should pay too deere, in the Chanceries of Bishoprickes, for dimisorie letters, by which the Clerke hath leaue to finde out one that will ordaine him, and in Rome to be ordained out of the times appointed, and lay the reformation onely vpon the Bishops that doe ordaine. This opinion was approoued by many, in respect of the dimisories of Bishops; but concerning the Facultie giuen at Rome, the Cardi∣nall Simoneta sayd, that the Pope would prouide for it, and that it was not a thing to be handled in Councell. Concerning the reward of Notaries some thing was said. For some estee∣ming it an office purely secular, thought that their pay ought not to bee stop∣ped. Others held it for an Ecclesiastical office. Antonius Augustinus, Bishop of Lerida, an antiquarie, said, that in the ancient Church the Ministers were ordained in presence of all the people, so that there was no neede of letters Patents or testimoniall, and after they had gained a title they did not change Diocesse; and if, for any cause, they did make a iourney, they had a letter from the Bishop, then called Formata. The vse of letters testimoniall began after that the people left to bee present at the Ordinations, and the Clerkes be∣gan to bee vagabonds, and, being introduced in supplement of the presence of the people, is to bee esteemed a temporall office; but, because it is applied to a spirituall matter, it is to bee vsed with moderation. Therefore his opi∣nion was, that some reward should bee allowed for them, but moderated, and limited. That which was proposed in the fourth poynt belongeth onely to the Concerning distributions. Collegiate Churches; which hauing by their institution, this function, a∣mongst others, to assemble themselues in the Church to prayse God, at the houres appointed by the Canons, which therefore are called Canonicall, rents were annexed to them for the maintenance of the Canons, distributed amongst them in one of these foure manners. For either they liued at a com∣mon table and charge, as the Regulars, or euery one had his portion of rents assigned to him; (which therefore was called a Prebend) or, the seruice be∣ing ended, all was distributed amongst them, either in meate, or money. Those that liued in common continued in that discipline but a small time, but came to diuision, either into Prebends, or distributions to the Preben∣daries, excusing those from performing those diuine offices, who, by reason of infirmitie, or some spirituall businesse, could not bee present. It was an ea∣fie thing to find a pretence, and begin an vse of being seldome in the Church, and to enioy the Prebend notwithstanding. But hee, vnto whom the mea∣sure was distributed, after the worke was done, could not bee excused; so that discipline, and frequencie in the Offices remained longer in this second kinde, then in the first. For this cause the faithfull, when they gaue or bequeathed any thing to the Churches, ordained it should bee put in distributions: and experience shewed, that the greater the distributions were, the better the Of∣fices were performed, and that the negligence of those who did not assist in the offices might bee redressed, by taking part of the Prebends, and making distributions thereof. This was much commended by many of the Pre∣lates, thinking the worship of God would bee much inlarged heereby; whereof there could no doubt bee made, because it did appeare already by experience. And this was all which was spoken for a ground of this opinion. But Lucas Bisantius, Bishop of Cataro, a godly man, but poore, spake to the contrary, that rather the Prebendaries should bee forced, by censures, and depriuations of part, or of all the fruites, and of the Prebends them∣selues, but that the first forme should not bee altered. For almost all these institutions being made by the last will of the faithfull, they ought to bee ob∣serued inuiolably, and without alteration, not onely vpon pretence of better, but not for that which is truely and certainely better, in regard it is not iust to meddle with that which belongeth to another, because hee doeth not vse it well. But, which is of more importance, to exercise a spirituall fun∣ction for reward is vndoubted Simonie, so that by driuing out one euil, ano∣ther would enter farre worse, making negligent men to become Simoniacall. The other part answered, that the Councell had power to change last willes; and, for assisting at diuine Offices for gaine, one must distinguish, that the gaine is not the principall, but the secondary cause, and therefore there is no sinne in it; for the Canons will goe to Church principally to serue God, and se∣condarily for the distributions. The others replyed, that they saw not how the Councell had greater power ouer the goods of the dead, then of the li∣uing, which no man is so impertinent as to pretend; and besides the do∣ctrine is not so secure as it is affirmed, that it is lawfull to serue God for gaine secondarily. And if it were, it is not a secondary, but a principall cause, which first mooueth, and without which the worke would not bee done. This opinion was not pleasing, and raysed much murmuring in the Congre∣gation. For euery one beeing conscious to himselfe that hee receiued the title and charge onely in regard of the rents, did thinke hee was condem∣ned. Therefore the Article had great applause that the Prebends should bee turned into distributions, to incite men to serue God, in the best manner they could. These Articles hauing beene thus discussed, Fathers were deputed to make Fathers are deputed to frame the De∣crees. the Decrees; and it was proposed that, in the next Congregations, they should speake of sixe more, leauing that of secret mariage for another Sessi∣on. The next day the Legates and Deputies met, to collect the substance of the opinions of the Fathers; and, concerning the first Article of Resi∣dencie, they dissented amongst themselues. Simoneta fauoured the opini∣on The Legates dissent in opi∣nion concer∣ning Resi∣dence. that it was de iure positiuo, and sayd, that the greater part, euen those who held it was de iure diuino, thought fitte that the question should bee omitted. Mantua, without manifesting his owne opinion, sayd that the greater num∣ber did demand a declaration of it. Of the other Legates, Altemps follow∣ed Simoneta, and the other two, though with some caution, adhered to Man∣tua. And this difference did not pasle without some bitternesse, though mo∣destly expressed. For this cause the Legates held a generall Congregation, the 20. day; in which the demand following was read out of a paper: that is; Because many Fathers haue sayd that residence is de iure diuino, some haue sayd nothing, and others spoken against the making of the declaration, to the end, that those who are deputed to make the Decrees, may make them quickely, easily, and securely, your Lordships may bee pleased to deliuer your opinions, onely with the word placet, whether you approoue or dis∣prooue the declaration, that residencie is de iure diuino: because, according to the custome of this holy Synod, the Decree shall bee made as the greater number shall giue their voyces; which because they had beene formerly deli∣uered in great variety, they desired that they would all speake distinctly, one after one, that their suffrages might be noted. All hauing giuen their voyces, 8. sayd, Placet absolutely: 33. Nonplacet Andso doe the Prelates. absolutely. 13. sayd Placet, consulto prius Sanctissimo Domino nostro: and 17. answered, Nonplacet, nisi prius consulto Sanctissimo Domino nostro. The 13. did differ from the 17. because they did absolutely approoue the declaration, yet were ready to change their opinion, if the Pope thought otherwise: the 17. did absolutely not approoue, yet were content to be of the Popes opinion, if hee did like it. This was a very subtile difference, and vsed onely where eue∣ry one doeth thinke to doe his Master the best seruice. The Cardinall Ma∣druccio would not precisely answere to the interrogation, but said, he referred himselfe to his voyce, deliuered in Congregation, which was in fauour of Ius diuinum. And the Bishop of Budua said, that hee held the affirmatiue as already concluded, and that he thought fit it should be published. The voy∣ces beeing collected and diuided, and it appearing that the greater part, by one halfe, did approoue the declaration, that a fourth part onely did dislike it, and that others, though conditionally, were with the first, they came to words of some bitternesse, and the residue of the Congregation was spent in discoursing heereof, not without much confusion. Which the Cardinall of Mantua perceiuing, made a silence, and, exhorting the Fathers to modesty, gaue them leaue to depart. The Legates consulted what was fit to bee done; and agreed to giue the Whereof the Legates giue the Pope an account. Pope an exact account of all, and expect his answere, and in the meane while to prosecute in the Congregations the Articles remayning. Mantua would haue sent his Secretarie, Camillus Oliuo, by post, with letters of credence, and Simoneta would haue all expressed in the letters. They concluded to temper these two opinions: that is, to write a very large letter, and referre that which remained to the Secretary: who the same day parted from Trent, in the eue∣ning. This, though secretly caried, came to the knowledge of the Spaniards; To the great discontent∣ment of the Spanish Pre∣lates. who much complayned that they saw a beginning made of an vnsupportable grieuance, that euery treatie should not onely bee sent, but consulted of and resolued also at Rome; that the Councel assembled twise before in that City, was dissolued without fruit, yea with scandall also, because nothing was re∣solued by the Fathers, but all in Rome; so that a blasphemous Prouerbe was generally vsed, that, the Synod of Trent was guided by the holy Ghost, sent thither, A blasphe∣mous prouerb was vsed a∣gainst the p o∣ceeding of the Councel. from time to time, in a cloake-bagge from Rome. And that those Popes, who ab∣solutely refused the Councel gaue lesse scandall, then those who haue assem∣bled it, and hold it in seruitude. The world was in hope that, if once a Councel might be obtayned, all inconueniences would be redressed; but ha∣uing obserued how things were caried, vnder two Popes before, and how they are gouerned now, all hope of any good is extinguished, nor any more to be hoped for from the Councel, if it must serue to bee a minister of the in∣terests of the Court of Rome, and mooue or stand still at their pleasure. This gaue occasion, beginning in the next Congregation to discusse the Articles proposed, briefly to speake of the point of Residencie. The Cardi∣nall of Ʋarmia sayd, that that matter was sufficiently treated on, that the Decree should bee framed to resolue it; which beeing proposed euery one might say what hee thought fit: but hee could not quiet the humors that were mooued. Therefore the Arch-bishop of Prague, the Emperours Am∣bassador, made a continuate speach, to exhort the Fathers to proceede peace∣ably and with lesse passion, admonishing them to consider what did become their persons, and that place: But Iulius Superchius, Bishop of Caurle, answe∣red cholerikely, that nothing doth lesse beseeme the Councel, then to lay a law vpon the Prelates, especially when it is done by one who representeth a Secular authority; and vsed some biting termes: so that the Congregation was like to be diuided into parts. Ʋarmiense, who was President in it, seeking to moderate them, diuerted the speech vpon other Articles, appointed for that day, and proposed that some meanes should bee vsed to set at liberty the English Bishops, who were in prison in England, that, comming to the Councel, it might be said, that that noble Nation was present also, and not wholly aliened from the Church. This pleased all: but the common opinion was, that it might sooner bee desired then hoped for. They concluded that A consulta∣tion in the Councel to set at liberty the English Bishops who were in prisō. the Queene hauing refused to receiue a Nuncio, expressely sent from the Pope, it could not be hoped that she would hearken to the Councel. There∣fore all they could doe was to perswade Catholique Princes to mediate for them. The 25. beeing S. Markes day, the Venetian Ambassadors were recei∣ued, The Venetian Ambassadors are receiued in Congre∣gation. in the generall Congregation, whose Mandat being read dated the 11. of the same Moneth, and an Oration made by Nicolas di Tonte, one of them, an answere was giuen in the vsuall forme. In those few dayes, the wisest amongst the Prelates, considering what a dis∣reputation it would be to the Councel, and themselues, if those stirs were not pacified, endeuoured to pacifie mens minds by shewing that if the Conciliary actiōs were not prosecuted without tumult, besides the scandall & the shame, the dissolution of the Councell, without doing any good, would necessarily follow. This remonstrance tooke effect; and caused them to treat peaceably of the sixe Articles remaining; of which there was not much to bee spoken. For the fifth, the prouision was thought necessary; but there was a difficul∣tie concerning the manner, because the diuision of Parishes was first made by the people, when a certaine number of inhabitants, hauing receiued the true faith, built a temple for exercise of their religion, hired a Priest, and did The diuision of Parishes. constitute a Church, which, by the neighbours, was called a Parish; and when the number was encreased, if one Church and Priest were not suffici∣ent, those who were most remote did build another, and fit themselues bet∣ter. In progresse of time, for good order and concord, a custome began to haue the Bishops consent also. But after that the Court of Rome assumed by reseruations the collation of Benefices, those who were prouided of them from Rome, when the diuision of great Parishes, and, by consequence, a di∣minution of their gaine was in question, opposed themselues by the fauour of the Pope, so that nothing could bee done herein, without going to Rome: which when it hapned, especially beyond the Mountaines, in regard of the impediments of Appeales, and other suites, it was a thing of great charge. To prouide against these inconueniences in Councell, the Prelates thought, that where one Church was sufficient for a people, but not one Rector, the titles should not bee multiplied, because where many Curates are, there must needes be diuersitie of opinions; but that the Bishop should compell the Pa∣rish Priest to take other Priests to assist him, as many as were needefull: but where the largenesse of the habitations did require, hee should haue power to erect a new parish Church, diuiding the people and reuenewes, and com∣pelling them to make a sufficient reuenew by contribution. Only Eustathius Bellai, Bishop of Paris, who came not long before, told them, that in re∣gard of the la t part, the Decree would not be receiued in France, where they doe not consent that the Laitie may be commanded, in a temporall matter, by Ecclesiasticall authoritie, and that it was not for the reputation of a ge∣nerall Councell to make decrees, which would be reiected in any Prouince. Fryar Thomas Casellus, Bishop of Caua, replyed, that the French men doe not know that this power is giuen to the Councell by CHRIST and S. Paul, who haue commanded that maintenance should bee allowed by the people, to those that serue them in spirituall things, and that the French-men, if they will be Christians, must obey. Bellay replyed, that vntill hee had vnderstood that which CHRIST and Saint Paul doe grant to the Ministers of the Go∣spel, to bee a power to receiue maintenance from him that doth voluntarily giue it, and not to constraine any to giue; and that France would euer bee Christian. And he passed no further. The sixth and eighth Articles would not haue needed a decree, if the Bi∣shops had kept their authoritie, or if it had continued in the Parish Priests, or in the people, to whom such prouisions did formerly belong, as hath been said, and should doe still by all reason. But the necessitie of handling these matters proceeded from the reseruations made to Rome. The Prelats were all of the same opinion, that prouisions were requisite, yet some would not consent they should bee made, because they would not m ddle with the Popes authoritie; by treating of things reserued to that Sea, especially in so great a number. Leonard, Bishop of Lanciano, spake of it as of a poin of iu∣stice, that all the offices of the Apostolike Chancerie being sold, it was not fit to diminish the dispatches made there, because it would take away part of the profit, without the consent of the buyer; and therefore that these prouisions ought to bee made in Rome, where the interest of all would bee considered. And this Bishop would haue proceeded further, in regard of the interests himselfe and his friends had in those offices, if the Arch-bishop of Messina, a Spaniard, who sate next, had not told him that nothing should be resolued before it were consulted of, and consented to in Rome. They called to minde that which was done in the first Councell, when authoritie was giuen to Bi∣shops, concerning things reserued to the Pope; that is, to adde, that they should doe it as delegates of the Apostolike Sea; which counsell was follo∣wed in all decrees, made concerning such matters. In the 7. though euery one thought fit that the people should bee serued by persons sufficient for the ministery, and of good behauiour, yet they said it was enough, and very much, to prouide for the future, because those lawes which looke backe and dispose of things past, are euer accounted odious, and transcendent. Therefore they thought it sufficient to prouide fit persons for hereafter, tolerating those who are in possession already. The Arch-bishop of Granata said, that the deputation of any vnfit person to the ministery of CHRIST, was not ratified by his diuine Maiestie: and therefore was void the possessor hauing no right: and that they were bound to remoue him that was vnfit, and to put another sufficient person in his place. But this opini∣on was not followed, as being too rigid, and impossible to be executed, be∣cause there was not a iust measure of necessarie sufficiencie. Therefore the middle way was taken, not to exceed the proposition of the Article, but ma∣king a difference betweene the ignorant and scandalous, to proceede against the former with lesse rigour, as being lesse culpable. And as it belongeth to the Bishop by all reason, to make prouision when the collations came not from the Pope, so, in this case also it should bee graunted vnto him, as Dele∣gate of the Apostolike Sea. To treat of the visitation of Benefices commended, in the ninth article, occasion was giuen by a good vse, degenerated into a great abuse. In the in∣cursions which the Barbarians make vpon the Westerne Empire, it often hap∣ned, that the Churches were depriued of their pastours, when those vnto How Com∣mendaes be∣gan. whom it did canonically belong to make prouision of successors, could not doe it, as being hindred by inuasiont, sieges, or imprisonments: whereup∣on, that the people might not continue long without spirituall gouernment, the principall Prelats of the Prouince, or some of the neighbours, did re∣commend the Church to some Cleargie man, conspicuous for pietie, and ho∣nestie, and fit for gouernment, vntill, the impediments being remooued, a Pastor might be canonically elected. The Bishops and next parish Priests did the like, when the like vacancies hapned in the Countries; and alwayes he that did commend another, did seeke to imploy a man of note, and he that was commended, did labour to answere the expectation; so that great fruit did ensue, to the satisfaction of al: But as alwaies some corruption wil in time creep into good things, some of the Cōmendataries began to think not only of doing the Church good, but to draw some profit to themselues also, & the Prelats likewise to commend Churches without necessitie. The abuse increa∣sing, a Law was made, that the Commenda should not last aboue sixe moneths, nor the Commendatarie participate of the fruits of the Benefice cōmended. Howsoeuer, the Popes, pretended to be aboue this law, did not only cōmend for a longer time, and grant an honest portion to the Commendatarie, but did commend also for terme of life, granting all the fruits vnto the person com∣mended, as vnto the titular. Yea, they made the forme also quite contrary. For whereas it was formerly said in the Buls, We doe recommend vnto thee this Church, that it may be well gouerned in the interim: they began to say, We recommend vnto thee such a Church, that thou mayest maintaine thy state, with a greater dignitie. And moreouer they ordained, that if the Com∣mendatarie died, the Benefice should remaine at their disposition, so that they could not be hindred by the Patron. And the Commendataries being placed by the Pope, the Bishops could not meddle in those churches, and euery one in Court was more willing to get Benefices in Commenda, then in the Title to exempt themselues from the subiection of the superiour Prelates; so that the Bishop was depriued of authoritie ouer the greater part of the Churches of his Diocesse, and the Commendataries, not subiect to any Superintenden∣cie, suffering the buildings to fall, and diminishing, or wholly taking away o∣ther necessarie expenses, hauing no other end, then according to the proëme of the Bull, to maintaine their owne state, let all goe to desolation. It seemed an indecencie, that the Bishop should meddle with that which was recom∣mended by the Pope to another and therefore they thought fit to make a manerly prouision against this disorder, granting the Bishops authoritie to visit and superintend, but as Delegates of his Holinesse. The twelfth proposition was made to remedie the abuses of the Colle∣ctours, The abuses and impieties of Collectors. because the ancient institution was degenerated also. For Hospitals, Spittles, places for education of Orphans, and such like, beeing instituted in diuers places for necessitie, without any maintenance but the armes of the faithfull, some godly persons vndertooke the charge to goe about and aske them at mens houses, and for their credit, had letters testimoniall from the Bishop. Others, that they might not be hindred by the Bishop, obtained fa∣cultie from the Pope, with letters of recommendation; which were easily granted, in regard of the profit which came to the Court, for the dispatch of the buls. This institution was immediatly turned into excessiue abuses, and the least part of the armes collected was bestowed in the right course. Those also who had obtained power to collect, did substitute also base and infamous persons, diuiding the almes with them. The Collectours likewise, to gaine as much as they could, vsed a thousand sacrilegious and wicked artifices, wea∣ring a certaine forme of habite, carrying fire, water, belles, and other instru∣ments to make a noise, that they might amaze the vulgar and breed supersti∣tion in them, telling false miracles, preaching false indulgences, asking almes with imprecations and threats of euill and misfortunes, against those that would not giue, and vsing many other impieties like to these, so that the world was much scandalized; but no prouision could be made, in regard of the Apostolicall grants. The Prelats enlarged themselues in this matter, re∣lating the abuses and impieties aforesaid, and many more, shewing that re∣medies had beene formerly vsed, but without effect; and so would all others prooue that should be attempted: onely one remained, which was to abo∣lish wholly the name and vse of Collectors; in which opinion all concur∣red. At this time the Ambassadours of the Duke of Banaria came, who re∣fused The Ambas∣sadours of the Duke of Ba∣naria contest for preceed ce with the Am∣bassadours of Venice. to present themselues in Congregation, except they might haue prece∣dence of the Ambassadours of Venice. Whereunto they denying to yeeld, the Legates interposed a delay, that they might receiue answere from Rome. The Pope vnderstanding how the voyces were giuen in the Congregati∣ons concerning residencie, and that the Spaniards did all hold together, made a bad Prognostique, and thought that vnion could not be without the Kings knowledge. He said he had a long time knowen, by great experience, The Pope and his Court are much perple∣zed with ad∣uices, sent vn∣to them from Trent and Spaine. that the Ʋltramontan Prelats doe enuie the greatnesse of Italie, & of the Apo∣stolique Sea, and, for the suspition which he had of the King, was ill satisfied with him, as if he had failed of the promise which he made vnto him to pre∣serue his authoritie. The Conclusion of all his discourses was, that if the Princes will abandon him, he will haue recourse to heauen; that hee had a million of golde, and knew where to get another; and besides, that God wil prouide for his Church. The Court also did perceiue, with great passion, in what danger they were, and thought that these nouities did aime to make many Popes, or none at all, and to hinder all the profits of the offices of the Chancerie. Aduice came to him also, from his Nuncio in Spaine, that the King was ill pleased with the (Proponentibus Legatis) constituted in the first Sessi∣on: and the Pope was so much the more pleased with it, because by the di∣staste of others, he perceiued they had desseignes to propose something to his preiudice. Yet he caused it to be excused to the King, that it was done with∣out his priuitie, howsoeuer he thought it necessary to represse the petulancie of vnquiet spirits, saying, that the Councel would be like the tower of Babel, if euery turbulent person might mooue humours as he listed; that the Legats were discreet, and did reuerence his Maiestie, and would propose whatsoe∣uer should please him, and giue satisfaction to all wise and godly persons. But with the Kings Ambassadour residing with him, who spake thereof, hee proceeded somewhat roughly. First, he complained, that he had done bad offices herein; then, relating how the Spanish Prelats, as it were seditiously, proceeded in the Councell, he shewed that the Decree was holy and neces∣sarie, and that no preiudice was done to any, insaying that the Legats shall propose. Vargas answered, that if it had beene sayd onely, the Legats shall propose, no man would haue complained, but that ablatiue (Proponentibus Legatis) did depriue the Bishops of power to propose; and therefore that it was fit to change it into another kinde of speech. Whereunto the Pope an∣swered, with some disdaine, that he had something else to doe, then to thinke Cuius generis, & cuius casus. The Popes suspition did not want ground, ha∣uing discouered that the Ambassadour had sent many posts into Spaine, and vnto Trent, exhorting the Spanish Prelats to maintaine their libertie, and de∣firing the King that the Councel might not be helde in subiection. But, in the Court, many Prelates hauing written to their friends from Trent diuersly, according to their affections, there was a great tumult, or ra∣ther an astonishment, euery one thinking hee did already see Rome emptie of Prelates, and depriued of all prerogatiue and emine cie. It did appeare plainely, that the Cardinals residing in Rome, should bee excluded from ha∣uing Bishoprickes; that pluralitie of benefices was forbid, that no Bishop or Curate might haue any office in Rome, and that the Pope might not bee able to dispence in any of the things aforesaid, which are the most principall of all that are in his power, so that his authoritie would bee much dimini∣shed. And they remembred the saying of Liuie, that the Maiestie of a Prince is hardly brought from the height to the middle, but is easily cast headlong from the middle to the bottome. They discoursed how much the authoritie of Bishops would bee inlarged, who would draw vnto them the collation of Benefices, denying the Popes authoritie for reseruations, that the Bishops beyond the Mountaines, and some Italians also, haue euer shewed a bad minde towards the Court, for enuie, and because they can not so easily haue place in it; and that they were to take heede of those who remanie in places the most remote from Rome, for conscience sake, because they would doe worse then all the rest, in case they were able; that these hypoctiticall Purstans haue a greater ambition then the rest, though couered, and would faine aduance themselues by the ruines of others, as Paul the fourth did very well shew by effects. And because the Spaniards were vnited in this, and exhorted by Vargas to perse∣uere, many did whisper that the King was the first moouer, who, to gaine Subsidies from the Clergie, hauing two difficulties to ouercome, one in ha∣uing the Popes consent, the other in taking away the resistance made by Chapters and Colledges, who being the prime of the Nobilitie, exempted from Bishops, & most of them hauing receiued Benefices by the Popes colla∣tion, doe oppose themselues without respect, did purpose to aduance the Bishops who doe wholly depend on him, and receiue their Bishoprickes by his presentation, by freeing of them from subiection to the Pope, and sub∣iecting the Chapters and Colledges vnto them, and so, by their meanes; to gaine an easie and absolute dominion ouer the Clergie. The Court did generally complaine of all the Legats for proposing the article, or suffering it to be proposed, saying, that it was formerly ordained with great arte, that they onely should propose, onely to resist the attemps of those who were ill affected to Rome, and that they could not bee excused, because they had an example of a disorder, which this dispute caused in the first Councel. Aboue all, they complained of Mantua and Seripando, and especially of Mantua, because with his reputation and credit, he might easily haue withstood all inconueniences. They sayd it was necessarie to other Legats, more inclined to the common good, not Princes, nor Fryars, but such as had passed through the degrees of the Court. And the generall voyce did desseigne Iohn Baptista Cigala, Card. of S. Clement, in the first place, because he had shewed himselfe a stout champion for the Popes authoritie, in the of∣fices of Referendarie and Auditor of the Chamber, with much commendation and encrease of the affaires of Rome; who, being superiour to Mantua, ought to holde the first place, which would make him retire. The Pope caused many congregations to bee held by the Cardinals, de∣puted to consult of the affaires of the Councell: who hauing thought of di∣uers remedies to stop the current of this euill, he began to speake of the busi∣nesses much more quietly and correctly then before. Hee did not condemne the opinion of those who said, that residencie was de iure diuino, yea hee com∣mended them for speaking according to their conscience; and sometimes he added, that perhaps that opinion was the better. But hee complained of those who referred themselues vnto him, because the Councell was assem∣bled, that euery one may deliuer his owne opinion, and not lay the things of difficultie vpon the backe of another, that themselues might auoid ha∣tred and enuie. The differences betweene his Legates did displease him, which they ought not to haue published, with scandall, but, concealing them, to haue composed them betweene themselues, or referred them to him. And as hee was pleased that euery one should deliuer his opinion freely, so hee blamed the practises which many vsed, to subuert others, with deceipts, and almost with violences. And hee could not choose but bee trou∣bled with that which was spoken concerning the libertie of the Councel and that to consult of the matters thereof at Rome was to violate it; saying it was a strange thing, that hee, who was Head of the Church, and the Cardinals, who were principall members, and other Prelates in Rome, who haue voyce in the Councell, should bee accounted strangers, and may not bee infor∣med of what is handled, and speake their opinion, whereas those who haue no lawfull part in it, hold it lawfull to entermeddle, and that in an ill sort; that it is plaine, that the Prelates went to Trent, with commission from their Princes, according to which they proceede; that the Ambassadours, by letters and perswasions, doe compell them to follow the interests of their Masters, and yet, for all this, no man saith, which (should be sayd) that the Councell is not free. This he amplified, in all his discourses, with much vehemencie; adding, that to say the Councell was not free, was a coulour v∣sed by him who was not willing to see a good end thereof, hoping to dissolue it, or to take from it all reputation; all which he held to be secret fauourers of heresie. Finally after he had conferred and often consulted with all the Ambassa∣dours residing with him, of this particular, the ninth of May assembling all the Cardinals, hee caused the aduices sent from Trent to bee read, and decla∣red the summe of the former consultations, and the necessitie to walke cun∣ningly and constantly in this businesse, intimating that many had conspired against the Apostolike Sea. Afterwards hee caused the answere to bee read which he purposed should be sent to Trent; which in substance did containe two points. That the Counsell was free on his part, and euer should. The Popes answere sent to Trent. That it was fit he should bee acknowledged for head, and receiue that re∣spect which is due to the Apostolike Sea. He asked the opinion of all the Cardinals: who did vniformely commend the Answere. Some told him that, in regard of the differences betweene the Legats, it were good to send others, some of the most extraordinary persons; and others sayd that the importance of the busines did require that his Holinesse and the whole Colledge should goe to Bolonia, that they may be neere to Trent, and to giue better assistance, as occasion should be offered. Whereunto the Pope answered, that hee was readie to goe, not onely to Bolonia, but to Trent also, if there were neede, and all the Cardinals offered to follow him. They consulted of sen∣ding A Consulta∣tion in Rome about sending other Legats. other Legates, and resolued not to speake any more of it, as yet, because Mantua would depart, which would bee a great preiudice to the reputation of the Councell, in regard of the opinion which the Emperour, King of Spaine, and almost all Princes haue of his hone∣stie, and of the credite hee hath with the greater part of the Prelates of Trent. The letters being dispatched, he dealt with the Ambassadours of Ʋenice The Pope maketh plots to maintaine the greatnesse of the Apo∣stolique Sea. and Florence, that their Princes would recommend the cause of the Papacie to their Ambassadours in Trent, and command them to cause the Prelates of their States, not to be present in the Parlies against the Apostolique Sea, and not to bee so earnest in the point of Residencie. Afterwards hee called all the Bishops remaining at Court, and shewed them what seruice their pre∣sence might doe in Trent, and the necessitie thereof. Hee loaded them with promises, gaue money to those who were poore, and dispatched them to the Councel. This hee did to encrease the number, against they should speake of Residencie, and because 40. French-men were expected, from whom he could not Prognosticate any good. And not to haue France his opposite, whose Ambassadours would be in Trent very shortly, he resolued to giue the King 100000. crownes, and to lend him as much in the Name of Marchants, vpon sufficient assurance for the principall and the interest, so that he would in earnest, and without dissimulation, reuoke the Edicts, and make warre for religion, that with that money Suisses and Germanes might be leuied to bee vnder the conduct of his Legate, and the collours of the Church, that no Hugonot should bee pardoned without his consent, that the Chancellor, the Bishop of Valence, and others, to bee named by him, should be imprisoned, that in the Councel nothing should be handled against his authority, and that his Ambassadours should not make mention of the An∣nats. Yet he promised to accord with the King in that matter, and to reforme it, to the satisfaction of his Maiestie. Afterwards the Pope consulted on the point of Residence, that, when there was occasion, hee might speake thereof correctly, without preiudice to himselfe, or scandall to others. And hauing well discussed the reasons, hee setled his opinion to approoue it, and cause it to be executed vpon what He consulteth on the point of Residence. law soeuer it were grounded, whether Canonicall, or Euangelicall. And so he answered the French Ambassadour, who spake to him of it; adding, that he alone is deputed to see the execution of all the Euangelicall precepts. For CHRIST hauing sayd to S. Peter, Feede my Lambes, hath ordained that all the orders made by his diuine Maiestie, shall be executed by meanes of him one∣ly, and that hee would make a Bull thereof, with a penalty of depriuation of the Bishoprickes; which should be more feared then a declaration which the Councell might make, de iure Diuine. And, the Ambassadour insisting vpon the liberty of the Councell, hee said, that, if all liberty were graunted vnto it, they would extend it to reforme not onely the Pope, but Secular Princes also. And this forme of speech much pleased his Holinesse, who was wont to say, that nothing was worse then to stand vpon the defence onely, and that, if o∣thers did threaten him with the Councell, hee would play with them at the same weapons. At this time, to begin to execute that which hee had requested, and pro∣mised, And reform∣eth the Court in petty mat∣ters onely. that is, to reforme the Court, that the Councell might not meddle with it, he first published a reformation of the Penitentiary, a very principall mem∣ber, giuing out a report, that hee would shortly also reforme the Chancerie, and the Chamber. Euery one did expect that the things belonging to the sal∣uation of soules should haue beene regulated, which are managed in that of∣fice, but in the Bull there was not any the least mention made of repentance, conscience, or any other spirituall thing: onely it tooke away the Faculties which the Penitentiary doth exercise, in diuers causes beneficiall, belonging to the exterior discipline of regular Friars; not expressing whether that pro∣uision was made to giue those Faculties to some other officers, or whether hee esteemed them abuses vndecent, and would banish them from Rome. But the euent did immediatly take away the doubt. For the same things were obtained from the Datary, and by other wayes, onely with greater charge. And this was the fruit of the reformation. But to returne to Trent, the Fathers hauing deliuered their opinions, and the deputies framed nine Decrees (for the Articles of Matrimonie, as al∣ready decided, and of residencie by consent of the Legats, and of some of the Fathers, perswaded thereunto, were omitted) they proposed them to bee e∣stablished in Congregation, and to bee read in the Session at the time ap∣pointed. By reason of this omission, the demands of those that fauoured resi∣dency Another con∣tendon about Residence. were stirred vp. Wherunto the Legats answering, that that Article was not wel discussed, nor was fit to be proposed in that Session, but that it should bee done in time conuenient, they were more earnest then before, alleadging that there would neuer bee a greater opportunitie, murmuring that it was a tricke neuer to conclude it. But they were forced to relent, seeing the Le∣gates resolute not to handle it then, and because those of the contrary opi∣nion, encouraged from Rome, did labour more effectually to the contrarie. Therefore speaking of the other Articles onely, with some few alterations, the nine heads were framed. The Maquis of Pescara made earnest suite, in the Kings name, that that Councel might be declared to be a Continuation of the Councell begun vn∣der Paul 3. and prosecuted vnder Iulius. He was assisted by the Spanish Pre∣lates, The Spanish Ambassadour maketh siut to haue the Continuation declared. and others, who followed them, alleadging that it was to be done, for ne∣cessity of faith; and that otherwise the determinations, already made, would be questioned, which would be a notable impiety. The Emperours Ambassa∣dors vsed strong perswasions to the contrary, saying they would presently de∣part And is oppo∣sed by the Emperours Ambassadors. & protest. For the Emperor hauing giuen his word to Germany, that that Conuocation should be a new Councel, he could not indure so great an affront. They said they would not by this meanes, reexamine the things decided, but that while there was hope to reduce Germany, they would not cut it off, especi∣ally with so much disgrace of the Emperor. Card. Seripando had no other aime but that it should be determined to be a continuation, & formerly, in making the Bul of the Conuocation, did labour therein, & did now effectually further the Spaniards request. But Mantua did constantly resist, that such an iniurie might not be done to the Emperor, without necessitie; and he found a temper to pacifie the Spaniards; saying, that hauing already held 2. Sessions without making mention of this proposition, it will be no preiudice to deferre it also to another. The resolution of the Emperors Ambassadors to depart, and the perswasion of the Card. caused Pescara to proceed more rimisly. And letters came very fitly from Lewis de Lansac, chiefe of the Ambassadours sent to the Councel from the French King, who, beeing in his voyage not farre distant, wrote to the Legats and Fathers, to pray them that the Session might be pro∣rogued, vntil he & his Colleagues were come. Mantua, making vse of this occa∣sion, proposed the prorogation of the Session, for which though they would not consent, in regard of maintaining the dignity of the Synod, yet they resol∣ued (some for one respect, some for another, and some because the humors of residence were not wel quieted) to celebrate it, without proposing any thing. The 14. day being come, they met in the publike Session, with the vsuall A Session is held. Ceremonies: where the Masse and the prayers accustomed being ended, the Secretary read the Mandats of Princes, according to the order in which the Ambassadors presented themselues in Congregation: Of the Catholike king, of the Duke of Florence, of the Suisses, of the Clergie of Hungary, and of the Ve∣netians. And the Speaker did in a few words thanke all those Princes, for ha∣uing offered their assistance for the security and liberty of the Councel. Af∣terwards the Masse-Bishop pronounced the Decree, in this substance: That the Synode, for some iust and honest causes, hath determined to deferre the I which no∣thing is done promulgation of the decrees appointed for that time, vntil the fourth of Iune, for which day it doth intimate the next Session. And nothing else was done in this meeting. So soone as the Session was celebrated, the Marquis of Pescara parted The Spanish Ambassadour parteth from Trent 2. dayes before the ar∣riuall of the French Am∣bassador. from Trent, saying hee must returne to his gouernment of Milan, because of some new stirres, raysed by the Hugonots, in the Delphinate. But it being knowen that those forces were not able to issue out of the Countrey, and that the Duke of Sauoy was between Milan and them, many beleeued, that he had commission from his King so to doe, who, desirous that the Councell should proceed, would not haue it interrupted by the controuersie of precedence, which could not haue been auoided, if his, and the French Ambassadors had been in Trent together. Lewis S Gelais, Lord of Lansac, chiefe of the French Ambassage, arriued two dayes after the departure of the other, and was met The French Ambassadors come to Trent. vpon the way by many of the Prelats, and partieularly by the Spaniards. The next day Arnold de Ferrieres, President of Paris, and Guido Faber, Lord of Pibrac, gowned men, Colleagues of the Ambassage, did ariue also. At this time aduice came to the Councell how the Pope, Cardinals, and Court of Rome, had censured the Fathers for the point of Residence, and many receiued letters from the Cardinals their Patrons, full of complaints, The Popes indignation against the Cardinall of Mantua is renewed. reprehensions, and exhortations, which letters they shewed to many. On the other side, newes came to Rome of what hapened in Trent afterwards. The Pope did renew and augment his disdaine against the Cardinall of Mantua, for hauing omitted the occasion to declare the Continuation, be∣ing requestd to doe it by the Ambassadour and Prelates of Spaine. Hee was sory to see that Cardinall ioyned with the Spaniads in the point of resi∣dence, and opposite to them in the Continuation; which was to crosse him in all things. For no man, though of a dull wit, would haue forborne to haue made that declaration, because if it had succeeded well, it had beene much in the fauour of the Catholique Church, if not, the Councell had been dis∣solued; a thing of no lesse benefite. They began in Rome to consult againe of sending other Legats, and particularly the Cardinall of Saint Clement; des∣signing to lay the principall charge, and the instruction vpon him: and not to take the first place from Mantua, and so to giue him occasion to depart, they thought to ordaine him Bishop, newes being come a little before of the death of Francis Tornon, Deane, by which one of the sixe Bishoprickes was voyde. The Emperour, aduertised of the proposition to declare the Continuation, was mooued, and sent the Pope word, that whensoeuer it was done, hee would recall his Ambassadours from Trent, whom he commanded, that, if the resolution were made, they should presently depart, not expecting the publication. Therefore his Holinesse was in hope that, by this meanes the Councel might be ended, and was so much the more angry with the Car∣dinall of Mantua for suffering such an occasion to passe, and beganne to thinke how it might bee reuiued. The Court, as well to imitate their Prince, as for their owne interests, continued their complaints, and murmures against the Prelates of the Councell, and most of all against that Cardinall, and against Seripando and Ʋarmiense; and, on the contrary, the Prelates in Trent, and especially the Spaniards, complayned of the Pope and the Court. Of him, for holding the Councell in seruitude, to which he ought to leaue free power, to handle and determine all things, and not to meddle himselfe; and yet, besides that, nothing is proposed but what The Prelates of the Coun∣cel compl of the Pope. pleaseth the Legates, who doe nothing but that which is commanded from Rome, when a proposition is made in which 70. Bishops do vniformely agree, they are hindred, euen to speake therof, that the Councel ought to be free, and exempt from all preuention, concurrence, and intercession of any other power; and yet lawes are giuen them what to handle, and limitations, and corrections made of the things handled and decreed; which continuing, they cannot truely bee called a Councell. That there were amongst them more then fourtie stipendaries of the pope, some receiuing thirtie, some sixtie crownes a moneth; and that others were terrified by the letters of Cardinals, and other Courtiers. They complained of the Court, that, not induring a reformation, they held it lawfull to calumniate, reprehend, and censure that which was done for the seruice of God. That, hauing seene how they proceeded against a necessarie and small reformation, they must needes expect a great commotion, and contradiction, when they shall be more touched at the quicke; that the Pope ought to bridle the tongues of the pas∣sionate, and make shew at the least, seeing that hee would not beetied really, that the councell may proceed with sinceritie and libertie. Paulus Emilius Verallus, Bishop of Capoccio, came to bad termes with the Bishop of Paris, in a meeting of many Bishops. For Paris hauing disliked A passage cō∣cerning the equality of Bishops. the course of determining by pluralitie of voyce, and the other answering that all Bishops were equall, Paris asked him how many soules were vnder his charge; who answered that he had fiue hundred: then Paris replied, that, in regard of his person, he yeelded vnto him, but in respect of those who were represented by the one and the other, hee that spake of fiue hun∣dred, ought not to bee made equall to him that spake of fiue hundred thou∣sand. Things standing in these termes, there was no Congregation made vntill the 20. day: in which the French Ambassadours (who had imparted their instructions to the Imperialists, and held correspondence, according to the The French Ambassadors are receiued in congregation, and one of them maketh an Oration. command of their Master) presented themselues. The Mandat of their Ambassage beeing exhibited and read, Guide Faber made a long Oration, in which, hauing expounded the continuall desire of the King, that the Coun∣cell should be assembled in a fit place, not suspected, and the request hee had made to the Pope and all Christian Princes for it, hee told them what fruite might bee expected from the opening of it. Hee added, that as those doe much erre who would innouate all therites of the Church so to maintaine all of them obstinately, not considering the state of the present times, and the publike good, deserueth no lesse reprehension. Hee declared very parti∣cularly the temptations which the Deuill would vse, to diuert the Fathers from the right way, saying, that if they gaue eare to him, they would make Councels lose all authoritie; adding, that many Councels haue been held in Germany and Italy, with no fruit, or very little, of which it was sayd that they were neither free nor lawfull, because they were gouerned by the will of an∣other; that they ought to bee carefull to vse well the power and liberty gi∣uen them by God. For if, in priuate causes, they deserue seuere punishment, who doe gratifie any man against iustice, they deserue it much more, who, being iudges in causes diuine, doe follow a popular applause, or suffer them∣selues to be made gowned slaues to the Princes, to whō they are obliged; and said that euery one should examine himselfe what passion doth possesse him. And because the defects of some former Synodes haue made a preiudice to this, it is fit to shew that those things are past, that euery one may dispute without being burned, that publike faith is not broken, that the holy Ghost is to be called for from heauen onely, and that this is not that Councel which was begunne by Paul 3. and prosecuted by Iulius 3. in turbulent times, and in the midst of armes which was dissolued without doing any thing that was good, but a new free, peaceable, and lawfull Councell, called according to the ancient custome, to which all Kings, Princes, and Republiques, doe giue consent, to which Germany will runne and bring with the authors of the new disputes, the most graue and eloquent men which it hath. He con∣cluded, that they the Ambassadours did promise, to this end, the assistance of the King. It seemed that some of the Fathers, and of the Legates them∣selues, did not take those words well, to which the Speaker not knowing To which the Speaker know∣eth not what answer to make. what to answere, nor what complement to make, the Congregation ended with the Oration. The next day, the same Ambassadours went to the Legats, assembled for that purpose, where they excused the French Prelates for not comming, in regard of the tumults, promising that when they were ended▪ as they hoped The French Ambassadors demand of the Legates a de∣claration that the Councel is new. they would be shortly, they should come with speed. Afterwards they de∣clared that the Hugonots doe suspect the continuation of the Councel, and doe require a new, that the King had treated heereof with the Emperour, who desired the same, at the instance of the Confessionists; that hee had demanded the same also of the Pope: who answered that the difference was onely be∣tweene them and the King of Spaine, and that it concerned not him, but re∣ferred it to the Councel. Therefore they demanded a declaration, in plaine termes, that the Indication is new, and not in these words, Indicendo continua∣mus, & continuando indicimus, which is an ambiguity not befitting Christians, and implieth a contradiction; and said, that the Decrees already made by the Councell, are not receiued by the French Church, nor by the Pope himselfe, and that Henry 2. did protest against it: that concerning this point, they were addressed to them the Legates, because the Pope hath often said that the que∣stion of Indiction or continuation was not his, and that hee referred it to the Councel. And hauing deliuered this petition by word, they left it also in writing. The Legats, after they had consulted together, answered in writing also, that they admitted the excuse of the Bishops absent, but that they could To whom the Legats an∣swere. not deferre the discussion of that which was to bee handled in the Councel vntill their comming, because the Fathers who were present, would bee in∣commodated too much, that they haue not power to declare that the Indi∣ction of the Councel is new but to preside onely, according to the tenour of the Popes Bul, and the will of the Synode. The French-men were conten∣ted with the answere for the present, hauing determined, together with the Imperialists, not to proceed further, so long as in the acts mention was not made of continuation, considering that the Spaniards hauing made requests in the first Session that the continuation should be declared, and receiued much contradiction, there was danger that the Councel would haue been dissol∣ued. But the answere of the Legats published by the French men, that their authority was to preside according to the will of the Synode made the Spa∣niards say, that those words did subiect the Legates to the Councel, whereas indeed they made themselues Lords ouer it. And Granata said, that it was an absolute dominion to make vse of the quality of a seruant, and of a Lord also. The Legats proposing nothing for the next Session, the Prelats, who fa∣uoured residencie, beganne to discourse againe of it, and perswaded the Am∣bassadours of the Emperour, Kings of France, Portugal, and all the others, to mooue the Legats, that it might be decided in the next Session; alleadging, The Spani∣ards require a determination in the point of Residence. that it hauing beene proposed and disputed, it would bee a great scandall to leaue it vndecided, and would shew that it was for some particular interest, seeing that the principall. Prelats of the Councel, and the greater number did desire the determination of it. The French men, together with the Im∣perialists, made instance that the points of doctrine might not bee handled The Ministers of the French King & Em∣peror demand of the Legats that y e points of doctrine may be defer∣red vntill the comming of the prote∣stants. in absence of the Protestants who doe impugne them, vntill their contuma∣cie be manifest, in regard the disputation is superfluous, where there is none to contradict, especially there being matter enough besides, in which the world doth agree, that is, a good reformation of manners; that the English Ambassadour in France had declared, that his Queene would send to the Councell; whence it would follow that the other Protestants would do the like; so that a generall reunion of the Church would succeed: and that one might assure himselfe to see this effected, if a good reformation were made. Cardinall Simoneta answered this second proposition, that the businesse seemed easie, but was not so, because all consisted in the disposition of Be∣nefices, in which the abuses proceed from Kings and Princes. This trou∣bled all the Ambassadours, because of the nominations, and dispositions which Princes do exercise, and especially the French King. But the propo∣sition of the Residence did molest the Legats more; nor were the Fathers pacified with the excuses formerly vsed, that the matter was not sufficiently digested, that there was not time enough before the Session to make it cleere, and for other considerations. And the heate grew so great, that some of the Ʋltramontans were agreed to protest, and depart. And this was the cause of stopping the motion. For the Ambassadors, fearing that the Coun∣cell would be interrupted, and knowing that the Pope would cherish euery occasion, ceased to make any further instance, and perswaded the Bi∣shops to he contented to expect; and, for the same cause, they laboured with But they doe all surcease, because the Pope would take occasion hereby to dis∣solue the Councel. the Ministers of Spaine, that they should not insist any more to haue the continuation declared: who not onely were pacified, but protested also to the Legats, that they did not then demaund it; saying, that, if others seeke to put the Councell into the stocke, there is no reason their purpose should be couered with the cloake of the King of Spaine. The protestation pleased the Legats, who were ingaged by their word to the Marquis, and knew not how to acquite themselues. Neither was it lesse gratefull to them to deferre the point of Residence; and, that none might change opinion, they drew a writing, which they read in Congregation, that it might there be approued, that in the next Session they should doe nothing but deferre these matters vntill another, and that for good respects: and they thought they were dis∣burthened of two great weights. The Session approching, many who thought themselues much pricked with the oration of the French Ambas∣sadour, desired the Legats to make a sound answere, when the Mandate was read in the Session; and Cardinall Altemps did perswade, that by all meanes it should bee so, saying that the insolencie of that Palace man was to bee re∣pressed, who was accustomed to speake to meane people. The charge here∣of was giuen to 10. Baptista Castello, the Speaker, with order onely to defend the dignity of the Synode, without touching any mans person. The Pope, after long consultation, resolued that the Continuation should The Pope re∣solueth that the continua∣tion shall be declared; but soone after waueth his opinion. be declared; let the Emperour doe what he could; thinking that it must needs succeede well: and dispatched a Currier to Trent with this Commission. This, being arriued the second of Iune, troubled the Legates very much, in regard of the confusions which they saw would arise, and of the disorder in which the Councell was; and all resoluing vniformely to informe the Pope better signifying vnto him the things that haue been handled, and the Decree already published, and shewing him the impossibilitie to performe his order, the Cardinall Altemps, who before had leaue to goe to Rome for other causes, went away by post the next day, to deliuer the message in person. But at night another Currier came with letters, that his Holinesse did refer all to the wise∣dome and iudgement of the Legats. The fourth of Iune being come, the Session was celebrated, with the v∣suall The Session is celebrated; in which the Speaker ma∣keth an an∣swere to the ocation of Pibrac. ceremonies; and the Mandates of the Arch-bishop of Salzburg, and of France, were read. Which being done the Speaker made an answere; and said, that there was hope prouision would be made against all the disorders of Christendome, by the remedie, which the Pope thought necessary, that is, this Councell, begun by the assistance of the holy Ghost, and consent of Princes; amongst whom the French King hath sent men of conscience and religion, to offer not onely assistance, but obedience also to this Synod, which doth not lesse deserue it then other Councels, against which ill affe∣cted persons haue falsely opposed, that they haue not been lawfull, not true, though men of pietie haue euer held them to be Councels, hauing beene called by him that hath authoritie, howsoeuer calumnies haue beene spread by others, that they were not free; against which, as also against the present Synode, the treacheries of Sathan copiously and acutely repeated by them, the Ambassadours, did not preuaile; that the Councell will not make a bad interpretation of their diligent and free admonition not to regard popular applause, or follow the will of Princes, but as it doth esteeme it not to bee necessary, or rather to bee superfluous, so it is willing to beleeue that it doth proceed from a good mind, that it may not be forced to say any thing a∣gainst its mild and pious purpose, and vsuall custome. But to free them the Ambassadours from that vaine feare, which they would seeme to haue, and assure them of their true purpose, he doth foretell them that the effects will shew that the Councell will postpose the desires, will, and power of who∣soeuer to her owne dignitie and authoritie; and promiseth to King Charles what it is able to doe, sauing faith and religion, for preseruation of his dig∣nitie, kingdome, and state. The French-men were ill satisfied with this an∣swere, but knew they had deserued it. Afterwards the Decree was read by Which doth not please the Frenchmen. the Masse-Bishop. That the Synod, in regard of diuers difficulties risen, and to define the points of doctrine, and reformation both together, doth ap∣point The Decree. the next Session to be held the tenth of Iuly, to handle what shall bee thought fit both of the one and the other matter: reseruing power to a∣bridge or prolong the time in a general Congregation. And there were 35. Prelats who desired that the point of Residence should then be handle. Some proposed also that the continuation should be declared, which was thought to be done, to raise some tumults, to make the Councell dissolue. For they were of those who were most obliged to Rome, and therefore did repent that they had spoken their opinion so freely in the point of Residence, so much abhorred by the Court. But all the rest beeing silent, the Session ended. The sixt day a generall Congregation was held; to giue order for that Order giuen for the matter of the next Session. which should be handled in the next Session; and the Articles concerning the communion were proposed. Whether all the faithfull are necessarily, and by Gods Commaundement, bound to receiue both kinds in that Sacra∣ment? Whether the Church doth vpon good ground communicate the Laiques with the bread onely, or hath erred heerein? Whether all CHRIST and all his graces are receiued as well vnder one kind as vnder both? Whe∣ther the reasons which haue mooued the Church to giue to the Laitie the Communion of the bread onely, ought to induce it also, not to graunt the Cup to any? If it shall appeare that it may bee graunted to some for honest causes, vpon what conditions it may bee done? Whether the Communion be necessary for infants, before the vse of reason? The Fathers were deman∣ded if they were pleased that that matter should be handled, and whether they would adde any thing vnto it. And although the French Ambassadors, and many of the Prelates did thinke fit that the points of doctrine should not be handled, vntill it did appeare whether the Protestants would come or not, it being euident, that, in case they, should be contumacious, the dis∣cussion would be in vaine, as not necessary for the Catholiques, and not ac∣cepted by the others, yet none opposed, at the earnest perswasions of the Imperialists, who hoped to obtaine the Communion of the Cup; which would be a beginning to giue Germanie satisfaction. It being resolued that the sixe Articles should bee handled, and the Diuines speake first, and then the Prelats, it did appeare that all the time vntill the Session would be spent in this onely, eighty eight Diuines being to speake, and many Prelats to giue their voyces. Therefore some said, that there was no need of any great con∣sideration to be had of these points, because they were fully discussed in the former assembly vnder Iulius, but that a briefe and sound examination might serue, so that they may bee determined in a few dayes, and all the other time may be spent in the reformation. They sayd that Article of residencie had beene already proposed, and examined in part, and that it was meete that it should once be ended. This opinion was openly followed by thirtie Fathers, and it appeared that it was secretly approoued by many more, who would haue shewed themselues in the conclusion. But Cardinall Simoneta, desiring to interpose a delay, by saying that it was not meete to handle that matter vntill mens mindes were pacified, which had beene mooued by the former difference, which will not suffer them to discerne the trueth, opened a gate to Iohn Baptista Castagna, Archbishop of Rosano, and to Pompeius Zambecca∣rus Bishop of Sulmona; both which speaking hotly and sharpely, raised such a tumult that they feared some inconuenience. For remedy whereof the Cardinall of Mantua prayed those of the residence to be quiet, promising, that in another Session, or when they handled the Sacrament of order, this should bee discussed. The tumult being thus appeased, and it appearing, that the resuming of the points handled vnder Iulius, would spend more time, and The Card. of Mantua pro∣miseth that the point of Residence shal be discussed. bee more difficult then to examine them againe, as hapneth to a iudge who is to frame his sentence vpon a processe made before another, a resolution was taken, that the Diuines should speake of them, and a congregation bee held twice a day, in which two of the Legats should assist (so diuiding their char∣ges, that they might make an end the sooner) and of the Prelats as many as would; and that they should haue two dayes to study, and begin the third. With this conclusion the Congregation ended. But Simoneta was offended Wherewith Card Simone∣ta is much offended. with the promise which Mantua made, without consent or participation of his colleagues, and made an open quarrell. Mantua was blamed by the Pre∣lates who fauoured the Court, and calumniated to be ill affected; but, by the sincere, was commended for his wisedome, who, in a dangerous necessi∣tie, tooke a course to withstand the diuisions and protestations which were prepared, and blamed Simoneta for being offended, because Mantua, much more eminent then he, trusting vpon the consent of Seripando and Varmien∣se, whose opinion he knew, might thinke that a resolution taken by necessity, ought to haue beene ratified by him also. The next day the Emp. Ambassadors hauing obtained, as they desired, the proposition of the Chalice, for which vntill then they had proceeded with re∣spect, came to the Legats, and presented to them, according to the instructi∣on of their Prince, twenty points of reformation. 1. That the Pope would The Empe∣rors Ambassa∣dors propose to the Legats twenty points of Reforma∣tion. bee content to make a iust reformation of himselfe and the Court of Rome. 2. That if the number of Cardinals cannot be reduced to twelue, yet that it bee brought at the least to the double of it, with two supernumerary, so that they may not exceede sixe and twenty. 3. That no scandalous dispensa∣tions may bee granted hereafter. 4. That the executions against the com∣mon Lawes may be reuoked, and all the monasteries subiected to the Bishops. 5. That pluralitie of Benefices bee taken away, and Schooles erected in Ca∣thedrall and Collegiate Churches, and that Ecclesiasticall offices may not bee bought and sold. 6 That Bishops may bee compelled to reside, and not exercise their office by Ʋicars, and if they bee not sufficient, that the charge may not bee committed to one Vicar, but to many persons, and that the Visi∣tations, and Dioecesan Synods, may bee made euery yeere. 7 That euery Ecclesiasticall Ministerie bee exercised freely, and that rich Benefices, with∣out cure, may bee incorporated to those that haue cure, and small reuenues. 8. That the Canons against Simonie may bee reuiued. 9. That the Ec∣clesiasticall constitutions bee abridged, the superfluitie cut off, and not made equall to the obligations of the Law of GOD. 10 That excommunicati∣on bee not vsed but for mortall sinne, or notorious irregularitie. 11. That Diuine Seruice be so said, as that it may bee vnderstood by him that faith it, and by him that heareth. 12. That the Breuiaries and Missals bee corre∣cted, and those things taken away which bee not found in the Scripture, as also the prolixitie. 13. That in celebrating the diuine offices in Latine, prayers bee intermingled in the vulgar. 14 That the Clergie and Mona∣sticall order bee reformed, according to the ancient institution, and that so great riches may not bee administered so ill. 15 That it be considered whe∣ther it be expedient to remit so great obligations of the positiue Law, abating some of the rigour, in the difference of meats and fasts, and granting marri∣age of Priests to some nations. 16. That, to take away the diuersitie of o∣pinions, the diuers Postils be forbidden to be read, and one made by publique authoritie, and likewise a new Ritual, which may bee followed by all. 17. That a way bee found, not to chase away bad Parish Priests, because that is easie, but to substitute better. 18 That in great prouinces many Bi∣shoprickes bee erected, conuerting rich Monasteries to this vse. 19. That, for Ecclesiasticall goods vsurped, perhaps it was better at that time to passe them ouer with dissimulation. In the end to say something to please the Pope, and to pacifie him if hee were angry for these propositions, he added: 20 That the Legats should endeauour, that no vnprofitable questions, which breed scandall, as whether Residence bee de iure diuino, and the like, should bee proposed; and that the Fathers should speake without choler, and not make themselues a fable to the aduersaries. Concerning the 17. they gaue some particular notes, to reduce those who were lest obstinate amongst the Sectaries, by sending them to some Vniuersitie where they may bee instru∣cted, in a short time, and giuing order to the Bishops, who haue no Vniuersi∣tie, to make a Colledge in the next, for the youth of their Diocesses, to make a Catalogue of the Doctours which are to be read in the Schooles, prohibi∣ting that any others be read. The propositions being vnderstood, the Legats, retiring first, and con∣sulting Who answere that they can∣not be propo∣sed in the next Session. together, returned and made answere; that it was not possible to pro∣pose them the next Session, hauing, at their instance, that matter of the Cha∣lice vpon their hands, of great importance and difficultie; that the things proposed are diuers, and concerne diuers subiects, which cannot be all dige∣sted together; that therefore they would communicate to the Prelates, as oc∣casions were offered, those which had affinitie with the other reformations. The Ambassadours knew that they spake this that they might not publish their writing in congregation, that, by gaining time, they might delude the Emperours expectation. But yet, at that time, they said no more. After∣wards, consulting together, they held it expedient to informe the Empe∣rour well, as well of this particular, as generally of the manner how they pro∣ceeded in the Councell. And to doe this, the Bishop of Prague rode post, that The Bishop of Prague go∣eth by post to informe the Emperor of the State of the Councell hee might returne before the Session. The Legats, perceiuing that the Coun∣cell stood vpon bad termes, in many respects, but especially for the distaste and suspition of the Pope, thought it necessary to informe him fully of all that was past, and imminent. For this, Friar Leonardus Marinus, Archbishop of Lanciano, was chosen, because hee was a man of spirit and acceptable to And the Arch-bishop of Lan∣ciano to in∣forme the Pope. the Pope, promoted and much fauoured by him, and a friend also to Seri∣pando, whose instruction was to enforme the Popefully, to excuse the Legats and to pacifie his Holinesse. Hee carried the common Letters of the Legats for his credence, to which Simoneta made much and long difficultie to sub∣scribe, nor would haue done it, but that they agreed that euery one should write particular letters of his owne. Simoneta wrote; that hee did thinke to send the Archbishop of Rosano, for his particular, to giue a more exact infor∣mation, but that, being better aduised, hee afterwards resolued to expect the euent of Lanciano his iourney. The mutual distasts; and detractions of the Romans against the Trentines, and of these against those, did increase at the arriuall of euery Currier. In Trent, the fauourers of residence did bewayle the miseries of the Church, the seruitude of the Councel, and the manifest desperation to see the Church re∣formed in Rome. The opposites lamented, that a Schisme was plotted in the Councell, yea, an Apostacie from the Apostolique Sea. They sayd that the Vltramontans, for malice and enuie against the Italians, did aime not so much at the depression, as at the abolition of the Papacie; which beeing the foun∣dation of the Church, because CHRIST hath made it so, the totall de∣struction of the whole building must needes ensue. The Pope, receiuing new aduices dayly, and alwayes worse, as euery day some nouity did happen in Trent, besides the accidents occurring in Germanie and France, contrary to his affayres, was still more displeased. The opinion of the maior part for re∣sidencie, did not so much trouble him, as the practises which were made, es∣pecially by the Ambassadours, perceiuing that the Princes were interested in it against his authority. He saw the Emperor was wholly bent to make his sonne King of the Romans, and ready to giue all satisfaction to Germany; and therefore had caused these Articles of reformation to be presented to the Le∣gats, and called to him the Amb. Prague, to find a way how to propose them in Councell, and establish them. Hee knew the French King was exhausted, compassed with infinite difficulties, and in danger to be forced to compound with the Hugonots, which if it happen, the French Prelates may runne to the Councell, ioyne with the Spaniards, and make themselues authors of other propositions against the Papall authoritie. Hee thought to calme the tem∣pest, which he saw prepared against him, both with deeds and words, by le∣uying foure thousand Suisses, and three thousand Dutch horse-men, hee sent to Auignion Nicolas Gamba a with fiue hundred foote, and an hundred The Pope treateth a common league of all Catholique Princes a∣gainst the Protestants. light-horsemen; gaue money to the Duke of Sauoy, to put himselfe in armes, and oppose, if the Hugonots would descend into Italy. And to engage al Prin∣ces, he resolued to treate a league defensiue of all Catholiques, against the plots of the Protestants in euery place, holding it to be an easie thing to make them condescend, if for no other cause, yet for this, at the least, to free themselues from suspicion. In Italie hee thought it not hard to induce all. For the Duke of Florence was wholly his; In Sauoy hee had interest, for the succours he sent him, and for the danger hee was in; the Venetians desired to keepe the Vltramontans out of Italie; the King of Spaine had neede of him for Naples, and Milan, and France for the actuall necessitie in which it was. Therefore he made the proposition in Rome to the Emperours Ambassador, and the Venetians, and sent the Abbat of Saint Saluto for this end into France, and the Lord Odescalco into Spaine; to whom also hee gaue instruction; to complaine to the King that the Spanish Bishops were vnited against his au∣thority, and to shew him that the propositions of the Emperour were fit to make a Schisme. It was easie to foresee the issue of that proiect, to any that did know, though but superficially, the ends of the Princes: The Emperor would by no meanes condescend to any thing that might giue suspicion to the Protestants; the French King was so farre from hindering the passage to the Hugonots in Italy, that hee would haue beene content to haue seene his whole kingdome rid of them; Spaine hauing great possessions in those parts, But cannot effect it. did more feare and abhorre an vnion of Italian Princes, then desire the ru∣ine of the heretiques; the Venetians and Duke of Florence could not consent to any thing, which might trouble the peace of Italy. And so it happened that the proposition of the league was not imbraced by any of the Princes, euery one alleadging a particular cause, and all one common, that it would hinder the progresse of the Councell; which many beleeued would not haue displea∣sed his Holinesse: and the rather because hee againe proposed in Consistory the declaration of the Continuation, and that himselfe would make a decla∣ration concerning Residencie. Which things he did not performe, in regard of the opinion of Cardinall Carpi, followed by the greater part of the other Cardinals, that it would not bee good seruice for his Holinesse, nor the A∣postolique Sea to make himselfe authour of odious things, which might a∣liene the mindes of one party, and that it was better to leaue them in the li∣berty of the Councell for that time. Notwithstanding he did not forbeare to complaine in Consistory of all the Ambassadours. Of the French hee sayd, that Lansac seemed to bee an The Pope complaineth of the Am∣bassadors. Ambassador of the Hugonots, by his propositions, desiring that the Queene of England, the Protestants of Suisserland, Saxonie, and Wittemberg, should bee expected at the Councell, who are declared enemies and rebels, and haue no other end then to corrupt the Councel, and make it Hugonor; which he sayd himselfe would preserue, and haue forces to doe it. That hee also and his Colleagues defended some, who disputed the authority of the Councell to be aboue the Pope, which opinion is hereticall, and the fauourers of it are here∣tiques, threatning to persecute and chastise them. Hee sayd they liued like Hugonots; that they did no reuerence to the Sacrament; that Lansac, at his table, in the presence of many Prelates inuited, had sayd, that there would come so many Bishops out of France and Germanie, that they would chase the Idol out of Rome. He complained of one of the Venetian Ambassadors, and sent his Masters word of him. He sayd of the Cardinals, Mantua, Sere∣pando, And of three of the Legats. and Varmiense, that they were vnworthy of the Cap. Of the Prelates he spake as occasion was offered, and perswaded the friends of each of them to write vnto them. All this was done and sayd by him, not because he belee∣ued it, or for intemperance of his tongue, but by Arte, to force euery one, some for feare, some for shame, some for ciuilitie, to make his Apologie to him, which he did most easily receiue, and readily beleeue. And its incre∣dible That hee might force them to make their Apolo∣gies. how his affaires were aduanced by this meanes. For hee gained some, and caused the others to proceede more warily, and remisly. Whereupon his naturall courage reuiuing in him, which still was full of hope, hee sayd, that all were vnited against him, but that, in the end, he would make them all be reunited in his fauour, because they haue all neede of him, some deman∣ding assistance, and some graces. Amongst the Prelates which the Pope sent last to the Councel, from Rome, as hath beene said, there was one Charles Ʋisconte, Bishop of Ʋintimiglia, who had beene Senator of Milan, and imployed in many Ambassages, a man fit for negotiation, and of an exact iudgement. Hauing loaded this man with promises (which hee performed also, creating him Cardinall in the first promotion after the Councel) hee desired to haue him in Trent besides The Bishop of Vintimiglia is the Popes secret minister in the Coun∣cell. the Legates, as a secret Minister. Hee gaue him commission to speake that to diuers which was not fit to bee committed to writing, to marke well the differences betweene the Legats, and the particular causes thereof, to obserue exactly the humors, opinions, and practises of the Bishops, and to write to him particularly all matters of substance. Hee charged him to obserue the Cardinall of Mantua aboue all the Legates, but to holde intelligence with Simoneta, who knew his minde, and to labour that there should bee no more any demand made for the declaration concerning residencie; or, if it could not bee hindered, that it should be deferred vntill the end of the Coun∣cell; and that, if that also could not bee obtained, hee should delay it as long as it was possible, vsing all meanes which hee thought expedient for this ende. Hee gaue him also a list of the names of those who fauoured the Ro∣man part in that matter, with commission to thanke them, and incourage them to continue, and to promise them recompense: referring to his discre∣tion, intreating with the opposites, to vse some kind of threats, without sharpenesse of words, but strong in substance, and to promise to those that would relent, obliuion of all that is past, and to giue particular aduice to Cardinall Boromeo of whatsoeuer did happen: which he did. And the regi∣ster of the letters written by him, with much acutenesse and iudgemens, hath been shewed me, out of which a great part of those things which follow hath beene drawen. But hauing receiued aduise of the promise made by Mantua, hee saw it was hard to diuert the handling of that Article, and thought that the dissen∣tion betweene the Legates would produce greater euils, and esteemed this to bee the most principall point, as well in deede, as for reputation. For how could he hope to represse the attempts of the ministers of other Princes, when he could not gouerne his owne? Therefore hee thought it necessary to vse the strongest medicines, for a disease that had seized on the vitall parts; and resolued to shew openly how ill hee was satisfied with Mantua, which hee thought would either make him alter his course, or aske leaue to depart, or by some meanes, to retire from Trent: and if the dissolution of the Councell did insue, it was so much the better. He gaue order that the dispatches to Trent, The dispatch∣es from Rome are no more addressed to the Cardinall of Mantua. formerly addressed to him, as prime Legate, should heereafter bee directed to Simoneta; he remooued, from the congregation of Cardinals, who were to consult of the affaires of Trent, the Cardinall Gonzaga, and caused Frederico Boromeo to tell him that the Cardinall, his Vncle, did thinke to ruine the Apostolike Sea, but should effect nothing but the ruine of himselfe, and of his house. He related to the Cardinall S. Angelo, who was a great friend to Mantua, whatsoeuer had happened, and shewed himselfe most cholerique a∣gainst him; and as much against Camillus Oliuus, the Cardinals secretary, as not hauing performed the promise hee made vnto him, when hee was sent to Rome. Which cost the poore man very deare. For howsoeuer the Pope and the Cardinall were reconciled, yet after his death, returning to Mantua, with the corps of his Master, he was imprisoned by the Inquisition, vpon diuers pre∣tences, and troubled a long time whom, after his persecutions were nded, I knew my self to be a person very vertuous, and that he had not deserued such misfortunes. When the Pope was thus affected, Lanciano came to Rome; and amongst Whose Secre∣tarie also, Ca∣millus Olluus is in disgrace with the Pope. other things, presented to his Holinesse a letter subscribed by more then thirtie Bishops, in fauour of residencie. In which they complayned of his distaste against them, protesting they did not thinke their opinion was con∣trary The negoti∣ation of the Arch bishop of Lanciano with y e Pope. to his authority, which they would defend against all, and main∣taine it inuiolable in all partes. This made a miraculous disposition in the Popes minde to receiue kindely the letters of the Legates, Mantua, Seripando; and Ʋarmiense, and to giue care to the relation of the Arch-bishop, who gaue him a particular account of all occurrences, and made him a great deale lesse suspicious. Then hee began to excuse the Cardi∣nals, that, in the beginning, not beeing able to foresee that any inconue∣nience could happen, they did discouer the opinion which in their consci∣ence they did holde, and after that contentions did arise, without their fault or defect, their adherence to that part was honourable for his Holinesse and the Court. For now it could not bee sayd, that the Pope and all the Court were opposite to an opinion, which the world held to bee pious and necessary. And this hath succeeded well. For hereby they haue gained credit and authority with the Prelates, and haue beene able to moderate the rashnesse of some, who, otherwise, would haue made a great diuision, to the great dammage of the Church. Hee related the frequent and effectuall perswasions, which they made to quiet the Prelates, and the affronts also which they receiued from some, who told them they could not bee silent a∣gainst their conscience. Hee shewed the dangers and necessitie which for∣ced Mantua to make the promise. Hee added, that the greater part of the Prelates, to take all suspition out of the minde of his Holinesse, did offer to de∣clare in the next Session, that he was Head of the Church, and had giuen him commission to deliuer the Ambassage to him, which, for many respects, they thought not fit to commit to writing; and named so many of them, that hee made the Pope marueile, and say; that bad tongues, and worse pens had pain∣ted those Fathers in other colours. Then hee shewed him the vnion, and resolution of the ministers of Princes to maintaine the Councell, and the dis∣position of the Prelates to support any thing, that it might continue, and no occasion arise to dissolue it; that the point of residence was so aduanced, and the Fathers so interested, in regard of their conscience and honour, and the Ambassadors for their reputation, that it was impossible to denie the hand∣ling and defining of it. He gaue him an account, and a copie of the propositi∣ons of the Emperours Ambassadors, shewing they did all aime to subiect the Pope to the Councell, and that the Cardinall of Mantua did dexterously de∣cline the proposing of them in congregation. Hee concluded, that, it being impossible to recall that which was past, his Holinesse might attribute much vnto chance, pardoning, according to his vsuall benignitie, that which for∣merly had happened, not by malice, but by negligence of some, and might make better prouision for hereafter, because all were resolued not to propose or handle any thing, before it was consulted and determined by his Holinesse. The Pope, weighing the remonstrance well, sent presently backe the Arch-bishop, with letters to the Legats, and to some of those who had sub∣scribed The Archbi∣shop is sent back to Trent with letters and instructi∣ons. the letters to him, in answere of the letters which hee brought, and gaue him commission to tell them all in his name, that his will was the Councell should bee free; that euery one should speake, according to his con∣science; that they should make Decrees according to trueth; that hee was not displeased because the voyces were giuen more after one manner then another, but in regard of the attempts and practises to perswade and vio∣lence others, and of the contentions and bitternesse betweene them, which things doe not become a generall Councell. Therefore that hee doeth not oppose the determination of residence, but aduiseth them to lay aside their heate, and that when their minds are quieted, and doe aime only at the seruice of God, and benefit of the Church, they may handle it with profit. Hee was content it should bee told Mantua that hee was glad to vnderstand of his in∣nocencie, and affection, and that hee will giue a demonstration thereof; praying him to labour that the Councell may bee quickly ended, because, by the discourse he hath had with Lanciano, hee hath vnderstood that it may bee concluded in September. And, in conformitie hereof, hee wrote a let∣ter to the Legates, that, following the steps of the Councel vnder Iulius, and taking the points already digested by it, they should immediatly determine them, and make an end. At that time they were busied in Trent, in hearing the Diuines speake in the Congregations, concerning the sixteene Articles, who began the ninth, and ended the three and twentieth of the moneth; and howsoeuer they were in number 60. yet nothing worthy obseruation was deliuered by any, in re∣gard the matter beeing new, neuer handled by the Schoolemen; defined in the Councell of Constance at the first onset; and maintained by the Bohemi∣ans by force of armes, rather then by reason and disputation, they had no∣thing to studie but what was written in the last fourtie yeeres, by some few, excited by the disputations of Luther. Therefore they all agreed, that there The commu∣nion of the Cup is dis∣cussed. was no necessitie or precept of the Cup; and, for proofe, they alleadged pla∣ces of the new Testament, where bread onely is named; as in Saint Iohn, Hee that eateth this bread shall liue for euer. They sayd that, vntill the time of the Apostles, bread onely was in vse; as it is read in Saint Luke, that the dis∣ciples in Emmaus knew CHRIST in breaking of bread, where there is no mention of wine. And Saint Paul, ready to suffer ship wracke at the Sea, doth blesse the bread, and speaketh not of wine. In many of the olde Canons mention is made of the communion of the Laitie, as differing from that of the Clergie, which difference could not consist in any thing but in the Cup. To these were added the figures of the old Testament. Manna, which sig∣nifieth the Eucharist, hath no drinke in it. Ionathan, who tasted the honie, did not drinke; and such other congruities. And it was a matter of great pa∣tience to heare them all repeate the same things. I ought not to omit one particular, seriously deliuered by Iames Payua, a Portugall, that CHRIST, both by precept and example, hath declared that the bread is due to all, and the Cup to the Priests onely. For hauing consecrated the bread, he gaue it to his disciples, who then were Laiques, & represented the whole people, comman∣ding they should all eate of it; afterwards hee ordained them Priests, in these words, Doe this in remembrance of mee; and, in the end, hee consecrated the The opinion of Iames Pay∣ua a Portu∣gall. Cup, and gaue it to them now consecrated Priests. But the wiser sort did lightly passe ouer this kinde of arguments, and confined themselues to two. One, that the Church hath power from CHRIST to change the things Two princi∣pall argumēts against the communion of the Cup. that are accidentall in the Sacraments, and that to the Eucharist both kindes are necessary, as it is a sacrifice, but as it is a Sacrament, one onely, so that the Church hath power to ordaine the vse of one alone. Which they con∣firmed, because it did once, in the beginning, change in Baptisme the inuo∣cation of the Trinitie into the inuocation of CHRIST onely, and returned afterwards to the diuine institution. The other reason was, that the Church cannot erre; but shee hath suffered the vse of bread onely to be brought in; and finally hath approued it, in the Councell of Constance, and therefore it must bee sayd that there is no diuine precept or necessitie to the contrary. But Friar Antonius Mandolphus, a Diuine, belonging to the Bishop of Prague, hauing first affirmed that hee was of the opinion of others in this, that there was no diuine precept, obserued, that it was as contrary to the Catholique doctrine to giue the Cup to the Laiques by diuine precept, as it was to denie it to them by diuine precept. Therefore all those reasons, which did so con∣clude, were to be layd aside, and those of the disciples in Emmaus, and of Saint Paul in the ship, because by them it would bee concluded that it was not sa∣criledge to consecrate one kinde without the other, which is contrary to all the Doctors, and meaning of the Church, and ouerthroweth the distincti∣on of the Eucharist as it is a Sacrifice, and as it is a Sacrament. That it was plaine also, that the distinction of the Laicall and Clericall Communion in the Romane Ordinary was a diuersitie of places in the Church, not of the Sa∣crament receiued, because otherwise this reason would conclude, that, not onely those who say Masse, but all the Clergie should haue the Cup. Of the authority of the Church in changing the accidentall things of the Sacra∣ments, no man can doubt; but hee sayd it was not a time to dispute whether the Cup were accidentall, or substantiall. Hee concluded that this Article might bee omitted, as already decided in the Councel of Constance, and that the fourth and fifth Articles might bee exactly handled, because, granting the Cup to all Nations that desire it, all other disputations are superfluous, yea hurtfull. Iohn Paul, a Diuine of the Bishop of fiue Churches, spake also to the same purpose, and both of them did displease, because it was thought they spake against their conscience, at the instance of their masters. Concerning the second Article, the Diuines were also vniforme in the affirmatiue, and all their reasons were reduced to three Heads. The congrui∣ties of the old Testament, when the people did participate of the meate offe∣rings in the sacrifices, but neuer of the drinke offerings. To take away from the vulgar, occasion to beleeue that one thing is contained vnder the bread, another vnder the wine. The third the danger of irreuerence. And heere the reasons recited by Gerson were brought; that the blood might be shed, either in the Church, or in bringing of it, especially ouer the Mountaines in win∣ter, that it would hang in the beards of the Laikes, that it would bee sower if it were kept, that there would want vessels to hold enough for ten thou∣sand or twenty thousand persons; that, in some places, it would bee too great a charge, in respect of the price of wine; that the vessels would not bee kept cleane; that a Laie man would bee of equall dignitie with a Priest. Which reasons it was necessary to say that they were iust and good; otherwise the Prelates and Doctors, for so many ages, would haue taught an vntrueth, and the Church of Rome, and Councell of Constance erred. All these reasons (ex∣cept the last) were thought ridiculous, because those dangers might bee more easily withstood in these times, then they could in those 12. first ages, when the Church was in greater pouerty. And the last seemed to bee of no force to shew that the change was reasonably made, but was good to maintaine it after it was made. The two Diuines afore named did aduise that this Article also might bee omitted. In the third Article, that all CHRIST is receiued vnder one kinde, the do∣ctrine of concomitancie, deliuered by the Diuines, was taken for an argument. For the body of CHRIST being vnder the bread, by vertue of the consecration, CHRIST hauing sayd, by words omnipotent and effectiue, This is my body, and the body being aliue, it must needes haue blood, soule, and diuinitie: so that all CHRIST was vndoubtedly receiued vnder the bread. But some in∣ferred hereby, that therefore all graces are receiued in it, seeing that he who hath all CHRIST wanteth nothing, because hee is abundantly sufficient. Others sayd to the contrary, that the illation was neither necessary, nor pro∣bable. For those who are baptized, are filled with CHRIST, as St. Paul saith, and yet other Sacraments are giuen vnto them. And because some auoyded the force of the reason by saying, that the other Sacraments are necessary in respect of sinnes committed after baptisme,, it was replyed that the anci∣ent Church did immediately communicate the baptized, so that, as from be∣ing filled with all CHRIST in baptisme, it cannot bee inferred that the Eu∣charist doth not conferre other graces, so from hauing receiued all CHRIST vnder the bread, it cannot be inferred that no other grace is to be conferred by the blood; neither can it be sayd, without great absurdity, that the Priest in the Masse, hauing receiued the body of our LORD, and, by consequence, all CHRIST, doeth not receiue any grace in drinking of the Cup: for other∣wise to drinke of it, would be a worke indifferent and vaine. Moreouer it is decided, by the common doctrine of the Schooles, and of the Church, that by euery sacramentall action, by vertue of the worke it selfe, which they call, Ex opere operato, a degree of grace is conferred. But it cannot be denied that to drinke the blood of CHRIST is a sacramentall action, therefore it can not bee denied, that it hath a speciall grace annexed. In this controuersie the greater part of the Diuines held, that, not speaking of the quantity of grace, answerable to the disposition of the receiuer, but of that which the Schoole-men call sacramentall, it was equall in him that receiued one kinde onely, and in him that receiued both. The other opinion was defended, though with the smaller number, yet more earnestly. Friar Amante Seruita, a Brescian, a Diuine of the Bishop of Sebenico, a fauourer of this second opinion, passed very farre, I know not with what aime or end; who, alledging the doctrine of Thomas Caietane, that blood is not part of humane nature, but the first aliment, and adding that it could not bee sayd, that the body doth necessarily draw in concomitance its aliment, did inferre that the thing contained vnder both kindes is not absolutely the same: and hee added, that the blood of the Eucharist, according to the words of CHRIST, was blood spilt, and, by con∣sequence, Friar Amante concurreth in opinion with the Lutherans out of the vaines, in which if it remained, it could not bee drinke, so that it could not bee drawen in concomitancie with the vaine, and that the Eucharist was instituted in memory of the death of CHRIST, which was by separation, and effusion of blood. Whereat there was a noyse raysed amongst the Diuines, and a cracking of the benches. Therefore, recalling himselfe, But presently recanteth, and asketh pardon hee retracted, and said that the heat of dispuaion had caryed him to alledge the reasons of the aduersaries, as if they had beene his owne, which notwith∣standing hee purposed to resolue in the end; and hee spent the residue of his discourse in resoluing them; and, in conclusion, asked pardon of the scandall giuen, because hee had not spoken with such caution, as to shew plainely that those reasons were captious, and contrary to his owne opinion. And he made an end without speaking of the other 3. Articles. But, concerning the fourth Article, the Spanish Diuines, and dependants The 4. Article that the Cup is not to bee allowed to the people, is st ōgly main∣tained by the Spanish Pre∣lates. on Spaine, were maruellously vnited, in giuing counsell that, by no meanes, the vse of the Cup should bee permitted to Germany, or others. The sub∣stance of that which they said was; That none of the causes which former∣ly mooued the Church to take it from the people beeing ceased, yea beeing now more vrgent, and others more strong and essentiall annexed, it was fit to perseuere in the determination of the Councell of Constance, and of the Church before and after. And discoursing of the dangers of irreuerence, which was the first kinde of the causes, they said they were now more to bee feared, then in former times. For then there was none who did not con∣stantly beleeue the reall and naturall presence of CHRIST in the Sacra∣ment, after the consecration, so long as the kindes did last, and yet the Cup was taken away, because men had not such regard to the blood of CHRIST, as was necessary; and therefore what reuerence can bee hoped for now, when some doe denie the reall presence, and some will haue it onely in the vse? Besides there is not so much deuotion amongst good Catholiques, di∣ligence in humane affaires, and negligence in diuine beeing much increased; so that it may bee feared, that a greater neglect may produce a greater irre∣uerence. To make a difference betweene Priests and others, is now more necessary then euer, because the Protestants haue exposed them to the ha∣tred of the people, and spread a doctrine which taketh from them their ex∣emptions, subiecteth them to lay Magistrates, detracteth from their power of absoluing from sinnes, and saith also that they should bee called to the ministery by the people, and bee obnoxious to bee deposed by them; which should force the Church to preserue exactly all those rites, which may giue them reputation. The danger that the vulgar may receiue an impression of false beleefe, and bee perswaded that some thing is in the Cup which is not vnder the bread, is now more vrgent, in regard of the new opinions spread abroad. Many said, that the Church did prohibite the Chalice, to oppose the errour of Nestorius, who did beleeue that all CHRIST was not vnder one kinde; which being the opinion of some of the heretiques now, the pro∣hibition is to bee maintained still. What they would inferre by this I cannot expresse better, hauing neuer read that Nestorius did speake in this subiect, nor that the Modernes doe handle it with those termes. But the third dan∣ger that the authoritie of the Church would bee debased, and a conclusion made that it hath erred in taking a way the Cup, may bee called not a danger, but a thing that would certainely happen; neither was the request made by the Protestants, but to conclude, that the Synod hauing confessed the errour past, hath corrected it, by this graunt; so they will publish the victory, and demaund a change also in other constitutions of the Church. They said they were deceiued, who thought the Dutch-men would bee satisfied with this, and submit themselues to the decrees of the Councell; yea, they will take away fasts, difference of meates, demaund marriage of Priests, and an abolition of Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction in the exterior Court, which is the marke at which they all doe ayme; that it is not credible they are Catholikes who desire the Cup, because the Catholikes doe all beleeue that the Church cannot erre, and that no deuotion is acceptable to God if it be not approued by it, and that obedience to the Church is the height of Christian perfecti∣on; that it is certainly to bee beleeued, that hee that doth demaund the Cup thinkes it necessarie, and hee that thinketh so, cannot bee a Catholique; that none doth demaund it beleeuing that hee may not lawfully vse it without the graunt of the Councell, but that they may not bee hindred by their Prin∣ces, who, if they were alone; would vsurpe it, without any allowance; that of this euery one may bee assured, obseruing, that, not the people, but the Princes doe entreat, who will not suffer a nouitie without a lawfull Decree, not because the people would not bring it in of themselues, more willingly, then seeke it of the Councell. And this argument was so pressed, that Fryar Francis Forier, a Portugall, A petulant saying of a Fryar against the Princes, who deman∣ded the Cup. vsed a conceipt, which the auditors thought to bee not onely bold, but petu∣lant also; that the Princes would make themselues Lutherans, by permission of the Councell. The Spaniards exhorted them to consider, that, if this were graunted to Germanie, Italy, and Spaine would demaund the like, to whom it could not bee denied; from whence also these Nations would learne not to obey, and to desire a change of other Ecclesiasticall Lawes; and that to make a most Catholike countrey Lutheran, there was no better meane, then to giue it the Cup. Franciscus Della Torre, a Iesuite, repeated a saying of the Cardinall Saint Angelo, the chiefe Penitentiarie, that Sathan, who was woont to trans∣forme himselfe into an Amgell of heauen, and his Ministers into Ministers of light, doth now vnder the couer of the Chalice, with the blood of CHRIST, exhort to giue the people a cup of poyson. Some added, that the prouidence of God, guiding the Church, inspired the Councell of Constance, in the former age, to establish the taking away of the Cup, by a decree, not onely for the reasons which were then of force, but because if it were now in vse, there would bee no externall signe, to di∣stinguish the Catholiques from the Heretiques, and this distinction being taken away, the Protestants would bee mingled in the Church with the faithfull, and that would follow which Saint Paul saith, that A little leauen doth quickly make sower a great lumpe; so that to graunt the Cuppe would bee nothing else but to giue the heretiques greater opportunitie to hurt the Church. Some also, who knew not the petition had beene presented to the Pope, and by him, (to vnburthen himselfe, and draw the matter in length) referred to the Councell, did expound it ill, that the request was then made to the Sy∣nod, and not to the Pope, suspecting it was to this end, that they might en∣large euery grant with vnsit interpretations, and so cause a necessitie of ano∣ther Councell. But those who thought they might condescend to the requests of the Em∣perour, and of so many other Princes and people, gaue counsell to proceed with lesse rigour, and not to make such bad interpretations of the godly prayers of the weake brethren, but to follow the precept of Saint Paul, to transforme themselues into the defects of the imperfect, to winne them, and not to haue worldly aymes of reputation, but to gouerne themselues by the rules of charitie which treading vnder foot all others, euen those of humane prudence, and wisedome, hath compassion, and yeeldeth to euery one. They said they saw no considerable reason adduced by the others, but onely that the Lutherans would say that they had prooued that the Church hath erred, and would make other demands. But hee is deceiued who beleeueth that a Negatiue will make them hold their peace. They haue sayd already that an error hath beene committed, they will say hereafter, that obstinacie is added to it; and where humane ordinations onely are in question, and altera∣tion will not seeme strange, nor misbeseeme the Church. Who knoweth not that the same thing cannot agree to all times, that there are innumerable Ecclesiasticall rites established and abolished; and that it is not against the honor of the Councell to haue beleeued that a rite hath beenegood, which experience hath shewed to be vnprofitable. To perswade ones selfe that this demand will beget others, argueth too much suspicion, and desire of aduan∣tage; but S. Paul saith, that simplicitie and christian charitie doth not thinke euill, beleeueth euery thing; supporteth all, hopeth well. It belonged to these onely to speake of the first Article, because those of the absolute negatiue had nothing to say of it. But these were diuided into two opinions. One which was the more common, that it should be graun∣ted, vpon such conditions as Paul the third did grant it, of which wee haue spoken in their place. The other of some few, that if they would graunt the Cup, to make them stand fast in the Church, who now doe stumble, it is meet so to temper it, as that it may produce the effect desired; which those conditions cannot doe, yea would vndoubtedly make them fall headlong into Lutheranisme. It is certaine, that the penitent man ought rather to choose any temporall euill then to sinne; yet Caietan gaue counsell, not to come to any specificall comparison, and say, that it is better to bee put to death with pincers, or vpon the wheele, &c. because by this meanes one should tempt himselfe without necessitie, and fall from a good disposition, presenting horrours to himselfe to no purpose. So, in the present occasion, these am∣biguous men, when the Councels fauor shall bee brought vnto them, will rest satified, and thanke GOD, and the Church, and will thinke no more of it, strengthening themselues by little and little. It is the precise commande∣ment of S. Paul, to receiue the weake in faith, not with disputations, or pre∣scribing them opinions & rules, but simply, expecting opportunitie to giue a more ample instruction. Hee that should now propose a condition in Germanie, to beleeue this, or that, would trouble them much, while their mindes doe wauer, so that, thinking whether they ought to beleeue it or not, they will fall into some errour, on which they world not otherwise haue thought. To this reason they added, that howsoeuer it is maintained, that the Church hath, for iust causes, taken away the Cup, if afterwards it doeth grant it vpon other conditions, without prouiding against those inconueni∣ences, for which it was first remooued, it is confessed, that it was taken a∣way without cause. Therefore they concluded, that it was fit to constitute for conditions, all the remedies to the inconueniences, which first caused the prohibition, that is, that the Cup should neuer be carried out of the Church, and that the bread onely should be sufficient for the sicke, that it should not bee kept, to take away the danger of sowernesse, that they should vselittle pipes, to auoid effusion, as formerly was done in the Romane Church. This being done, it will appeare that the prouision was first made vpon good rea∣son, reuerence will be stirred vp, people and Princes will be satisfied, and the weake will be tempted no more. A Spaniard said, that it was not so easily to be beleeued, that the Catholiques did, with such heat of deuotion, desire the Cup, and therefore that it were good to send into Germanie, to be infor∣med who they be that demand it, what their faith is, and what be their mo∣tiues, that the Synod, receiuing the relation, may haue a foundation to pro∣ceed on, and not ground an selfe vpon the words of other. In the sixt Article they al expressed themselues in few words, because there was not much to be said. For the Eucharist not being a Sacrament necessa∣rily, and Saint Paul commanding that he who is to receiue it, should exa∣mine himselfe whether he bee worthy, it doeth plainely appeare, that it can∣not be administred to any that hath not the vse of reason; and if the contrary hath beene practised in ancient times, it hath beene where and when the trueth was not so well declared as now it is. Therefore the Synod ought to determine that the present vse should bee maintained. Some well obser∣ued that they ought to speake of Antiquitie with more reuerence, and not say that they wanted the knowledge of the Trueth. Desiderius a Carmelite Friar of Palermo, had an opinion by himselfe, that the Article ought to be o∣mitted; saying, that the difficultie being not mooued by the Protestants of these times, it was not good, by handling of it, to set a nouitie on foot, that the matter was probable on both sides, and that when it should be knowen that it was handled in the Councel, it would excite the curiositie of many to thinke on it, & giue them occasion to stumble. For some might be persuaded to beleeue that the Eucharist is a Sacrament of necessitie, as well as Baptisme, because the ground of that are the words of CHRIST, He that shall not be borne againe of water and the Spirit, shall not enter into the Kingdom of heauen and of this, If ye eate not my flesh and drinke my blood, yee shall not haue life. And the exception of children cannot plainely be grounded vpon the precept of S. Paul, to examine our selues, which children cannot doe, because the Scrip∣ture doth likewise command, that an instruction in the doctrine of Faith ought to precede Baptisme: which if it be applyed to men of age, without ex∣cluding children of baptisme, who cannot learne, the examination prece∣ding the Eucharist may also be applyed to men of discretion, without exclu∣ding children from it. His conclusion was that hee did approoue the vse not to giue them the communion, but would not haue the Councell to han∣dle that which no man opposeth. The congregations of the Diuines being ended, the Legats did incline to The Legats doe incline to graunt the Cup to Ger∣many. grant the Cup to Germanie, with the conditions of Paul the third, and some more; and, consulting with their inward friends, framed decrees concerning the first, fourth, and fifth points, deferring the others vntill they had better considered how to auoid the difficulties concerning them, related by the Diuines. And calling a congregation of the Prelates, they demaunded whe∣ther the three decrees should be proposed, that they might speake their opi∣nions of them in the first congregation. Granata, who had found the Le∣gats intention, and was most opposite to the grant of the Cup, contradicted, And are op∣posed by the Spaniards. and said, that the order of the Articles was to be followed; which was essen∣tiall, it being impossible to decide the fourth and fifth, vntill the second and third were decided. Thomas Stella, Bishop of Capo di Istria, opposed, and sayd, that in the councell they ought not to vse Logicke, and artifices, to hinder good determinations. Granata replyed, that himselfe desired the same; that is, that propositions might be made to the Synod in order, that they might not stumble, by walking in confusion. Granata was assisted by Matthias Cal∣linus, Archbishop of Zara, and the other by Iohn Thomas of S. Felix, Bishop of Caua, but vsing ridiculous iests, rather then any serious discourse; which gaue some distast to the Spaniards, and made a great whispering amongst the Prelats. This caused the congregation to be dismissed; and the Cardinall of Mantua exhorted the Archbishops to read and consider of the draughts made, that the order of proceeding might bee resolued on in the next Con∣gregation. This place requireth, that, because the Congregations were often ended by reason of some distasts giuen to some great Prelate, the ordinary cause thereof should be related. It hath been shewed before that there were ma∣ny Bishops in the Councel, Pensioners of the Pope, who did all depend on Simoneta, because he was most interested for his Holinesse, and had the most secret instructions. Hee beeing a man of an acute iudgement, made vse of them, according to the capacitie of euery one. Amongst these, he had some that were bold and wittie, whom he employed in the Congregations, to crosse those who entred into matters contrary to his endes. These were ex∣ercised in the Art of iesting soberly, to prouoke others, and make them ridi∣culous, themselues retaining their grauitie, and not being moued at all. The seruice they did to the Pope, and the Cardinal, doth deserue particular men∣tion. These were the forenamed Bishops, Caua, and Capo di Istria, Pompeius Zambeccarus of Bolonia, Bishop of Sulmona, and Bartholomeus Sirigus, of Candia, Card. Simone∣ta the Legat, maketh vse of 4. iesting Bi∣shops in the Councell. Bishop of Castellanetta; each of which, to the common qualities of their Countrey, had ioyned the perfections which are gained in the court of Rome These did exasperate also the distasts betweene Mantua and Simoneta; before mentinoed, by speaking ill, and detracting from Mantua, aswell in Trent by words, as by letters to Rome; which was attributed to Simoneta, because eue∣ry one saw hee made much esteeme of them. Whereof purging himselfe to the Secretarie of Mantua, and to the Bishop of Nola, he said, that for the small respect they bare to such a Cardinal, he would not haue had any more friend∣ship with them, but that he had need of them in the Congregation, to op∣pose the impertinences of the Prelates. Augustinus Pauugarner, Ambassadour of Bauaria, hauing beene in Trent The Ambas∣dour of Ba∣uaria is recei∣ued in Con∣gregation, and maketh a pro∣testation a∣bout prece∣dence. two moneths, as a priuate man, by reason of his pretention to precede the Venetians, had finally commission from his Prince, to appeare in Publique, and was receiued in the Congregation of the 27 of Iune, sate after the Ve∣netian Ambassadours, and first made a protestation, saying, that as the right of his Prince was most strong, so hee was ready to defend it in any other place, but that in the Councell, where Religion is handled, hee would not stand vpon those points of honour: and therefore was contented to yeelde, but so as that it might be no preiudice to his Master, or other German Prin∣ces of the Electorall blood of the Empire. The Venetian Ambassadors an∣swered To which the Venetian Am∣bassadours make answer. the Protestation, that their Republique had right of Precedence, and that as the Duke of Bauaria did then yeeld, so hee ought to doe in all places. The Ambassadour made a very free and long oration; in which hee shewed the state of religion in Bauaria, saying it was compassed with heretiques, who were also entred into it; that there were whole Parishes of Lutherans, Zuin∣glians, The Bauariā maketh a long and free orā∣tion. Flacians, Anabaptists, and of other Sects which cockle the Prelats haue not been able to weede out, because the contagion is not onely in the vulgar, but in the Nobilitie also. The cause hereof hath beene the bad life of the Clergie, whose great wickednesse hee could not relate, without offending the chaste eares of the auditorie. But it sufficeth that his Prince doth tell them, that the amendment of Doctrine would bee in vaine and vnprofita∣ble, if first an amendment were not made of manners. Hee added, that the Clergie is infamous for lust; that the politique Magistrate doth not suffer a Concubinary Citizen: which fault is so common in the Clergie, that there are not aboue three or foure in an hundred, who are not concubinaries, or secretly married, or openly; that the Catholikes also in Germany, doe preferre a chaste mariage before an vnchaste single life, that many haue abādoned the Church for the prohibition of the Cup, saying, that the word of God & pra∣ctise of the Primitiue Church doth force them to vse it; which vntil this pre∣sent is obserued in the Oriental Churches, and formerly hath beene vsed in the Church of Rome. That Paul 3. did grant it to Germany, and the Bauari∣ans doe complaine of their Prince, that he doeth enuie it to his subiects, pro∣testing that if the Synod doe not make prouision, his Highnesse will not be able to gouerne his people, and will be forced to giue them that which hee cannot withhold. For a remedie of the scandals of the Clergie, hee proposed a good reformation, and that in euery Bishopricke Schooles and Academies should be erected, to bring vp good Ministers; he demanded the mariage of Priests, without which it was impossible, in that age to reforme the Clergie; alledging that single life was not commanded by GOD. Hee demanded also the Communion vnder both kindes, saying, that if it had beene permitted, many prouinces of Germanie had remained in the obedience of the Aposto∣like Sea, whereas those who haue continued in it vntill now, doe runne away from it, like a torrent, together with other nations; that the Duke doth not desire the three remedies mentioned, hoping to reduce to the Church the sectaries, and those that are strayed, but onely to retaine those who are not diuided as yet. Hee said it was necessary to begin with reformation, or else all the paines taken in the Councell would be in vaine; that, the Clergie being reformed, his Prince, if his opinion be asked in point of doctrine, will bee able to say something worthy of consideration; which is not fit to be spo∣ken now, because it is not conuenient to treat of making warre against the enemie, before one hath mustered his owne forces at home. In the course of his Oration hee often interposed, that his Prince spake this, not to giue a Law to the Councell, but to intimate it with reuerence, and with this con∣ceipt also he made an end. The Synod answered, by the Speaker, that hauing The answere to it. long expected some Prince or ambassage of Germanie, but aboue all the Duke of Bauaria, a Baracadoe of the Apostolike Sea in that Countrey, they were glad to see his Ambassadour, whom they doe receiue, and will labour as they haue done, to constitute whatsoeuer shall bee for the seruice of God, and soules health of the faithfull. The French-men, hearing this oration, were well pleased, because they were not the only men that did freely admo∣nish the Prelats of that which was fit to be told them; but hearing the an∣swere, they grew iealous, because this was courteous, and theirs sharpe. The difference was, because, howsoeuer the Bauarian did acutely bite the Clergie in generall, yet he spake of the Fathers with much reuerence, whereas the French oration was especially directed to reprehend those that heard them; besides the answere made to them was premeditated, and that to the Bauarian extempore. But they were both vsed alike, being heard with the eares onely. The Emperours Ambassadours, considering, that, in the last Congrega∣tions The Empe∣rors Ambas∣sadors do pre∣sent a writing in Congre∣gation, con∣cerning the grant of the Cup. of the Diuines, the Spaniards, and most of the Italians had spoken a∣gainst the graunt of the Cup, and that many of them had called them here∣tiques who doe demaund it, to answere to this and other obiections, to pro∣mote the proposition of the Bauarian, and to preuent the Prelats that they fall not into the impertinencies vsed by the Diuines, composed a wri∣ting, which they presented in the same congregation, after the Ambassador had ended his Oration. The substance whereof was. That, in regard of the place they hold, they haue thought fit to admonish the Fathers of some things before they deliuer their suffrages. That the Diuines haue these last dayes spoken well, as farre as concerneth their owne Countries, but not for other Prouinces and Kingdomes. They prayed the Fathers so to frame their opinions, that they might giue a medicine not to the sound parts, which haue no neede of it, but to the members ill affected; which they will fitly doe, when they shall know which bee the weake parts, and what helpe they desire. And beginning with the Kingdome of Bohemia, they said there was no neede to goe farre, nor to mention the things handled in Constance, but onely to adde, that, after that Councell, no practise, force, or warre, hath beene able to take the Cup out of that Kingdome. That the Church did louingly grant it vnto them, vpon certaine conditions, which Pius, did reuoke, because they were not obserued. But Paul and Iulius the third, to regaine that kingdom, sent Nuncij, to permit it vnto them, though the busi∣nesse, by reason of some impediments, was not brought to perfection. Now the Emperor, hauing at his charge, instituted the Arch-bishopricke of Prague and obtained in the Parliament of Bohemia, that the Calistine Priests should not bee ordained but by the Arch-bishop, and should acknowledge him for a lawfull Prelate, did beseech the Pope that such an occasion, to regaine , might not be lost, which his Holinesse hauing referred to the iudgement of the Councell, it will remaine in the power thereof to, preserue that King∣dome by granting the Cup vnto them. That those people differ but little from the Church of Rome; that they neuer would admit of maried Priests, nor ordained by any Bishop out of the communion of the Apostolique Sea; that, in their prayers they make mention of the Pope, Cardinals, and Bi∣shops; that, if they haue any small difference in doctrine, it may easily be re∣ctified, so that the Cup bee granted to them, that it is no maruaile if an igno∣rant multitude haue conceiued that opinion; seeing that men learned, godly; and Catholike doe defend that more grace is conferred in the Communion of both kindes, then of one onely. They exhorted the Fathers to take heede, that their too great seueritie doe not make them desperate, and cast them∣selues into the armes of the Protestants. They added, that there were Ca∣tholikes in Hungarie, Austria, Morauia, Silesia, Carintbia, Carniola, Stiria, Bauaria, Sueuia, and other parts of Germanie, who desire the Cup with great zeale; which being made knowen to Paul the third, hee gaue the Bishops leaue to communicate them with it, which, for many impediments, was not effected. Of those there is danger that, if the Cup be taken from them, they will turne to the Lutherans. The Diuines haue, in their publike disputations, made a doubt; that those who desire the Cup are heretikes; but his Maiestie doeth demand it for Catholikes onely. That there is hope to reduce, by this grant, many Protestants also, as some of them haue already protested they would returne and bee conuerted, being satiated with nouities; otherwise the con∣trary is to bee feared. And to answere to him that asked a few dayes sinee, who hee is that doeth demaund it, hee may know that the Emperour doeth desire, that the Arch-bishop of Prague may ordaine Calistine Priests, and the Ambassadours for the Clergie of Bohemia desire the same, for that kingdome; and if there were no hope to obtaine it, there would not be left so much as any little remainder of Catholikes. In Hungarie they force the Priests to giue them the Cup, by taking away their goods, and threatning to kill them; and the Arch-bishop of Strigonium hauing punished some Priests for doing it, the people remayneth without Catholike Curates, hath no Baptisme, and is absolutely ignorant of Christian doctrine, ready to fall in∣to Paga sme. In conclusion, they prayed the Fathers to haue compassion, and to finde a meanes to preserue those people in the faith, and call backe those that are strayed. In the end of the congregation the Legates gaue the draughts composed, concerning the three first Articles, for feare of the opposition made in the for∣mer congregation. The dayes following the Fathers handled them, and on the 3 they diseoursed very amply, speaking of the sacramental grace, whether more bee receiued in both kindes then in one: and some defended one part and some another. Cardinall Seripando said, that the same difficultie hauing beene discussed in the Councell vnder Iulius, it was resolued that it should not bee discussed againe. Yet some Prelates desired a declaration of it; but were not hearkened vnto, in regard of the contrarietie of opinions, and because the greater part did hold that both opinions were probable. But to auoyde all difficultie, it was concluded, that all CHRIST the fountaine of all gra∣ces, is receiued. Some of the Bishops prepared for their departure from Trent, Some of the Prelates are a∣bout to depart from Trent, fearing they had spoken too freely cō∣cerning resi∣dence. who, hauing spoken with much passion and heate concerning residence, saw they were hated, and feared some grieuous incounter, in case they should perseuere. Amongst these was the Bishop of Modena before mentio∣ned, a man very learned, and of a sincere conscience, Iulius Pauesi Arch-bishop of Surrento, the Bishop of Viuiers, Peter Paul Costazzarus, Bishop of Aqui, and others, who had obtained leaue from the Legates: which Mantua gaue them, that (in regard they were his friends) he might set them at libertie, and the others, to take away occasion of distastes. But the Am∣bassadour of Portugall did remonstrate to the Legates that this would bee a disreputation to the Councell, the cause being knowen why they suffered and that it would bee sayd there was no libertie, which would also be disho∣nourable to the Pope. Thereupon they resolued to stop them, and the ra∣ther, But are stop∣ped. because they vnderstood, that so soone as they were departed, others would aske leaue also. The Legates deferring to propose the other Articles, in regard of the difficulties, which they foresaw, the third of Iuly the Emperours Ambas∣sadours and the Bauarian desired that they would deliuer their opinions con∣cerning them; and a Congregation beeing called the next day to this ef∣fect, the French Ambassadours presented a writing, exhorting the Fathers The Ambas∣sadours of France and Bauaria pre∣sent a writing to perswade the grant of the Cup. to graunt the Communion of the Cup, making this their ground, that in matters of Positiue Law, as this was, they ought to yeelde, and not to bee so obstinate, but to consider the necessitie of the time, and not giue scandall to the world, by shewing themselues so constant in obseruing mens preceptes, and neglecting GODS; by reiecting reformations. And in the ende they required, that what determination soeuer they would make, it might not preiudice the vse of the Kings of France, who receiue the Cup in their Consecration, nor the custome of some Monasteries of the Kingdome which doe, at certaine times, administer it. Yet nothing else was done in that Congregation, but onely sixteene poynts of doctrine giuen foorth, to bee discussed in the Congregations following. The Legates were astonished at the proposition of the Frenchmen, vn∣derstanding they were ioyned with the Imperialists, for which cause them∣selues The Legates are troubled with the con∣iunction of the French-men and Im∣perialists, in this point of the Chalice. were to walke more warily. And weighing well the motiues of the Frenchmen to derogate frō the positiue precepts, they obserued that the grant of the Cup, besides the difficulties proposed, did draw with it many more, in diuers matters. They remembred the request for marriage of Priests, made by the Bauarian, and that Lansac, in a feast two dayes before, in the presence of many Prelates inuited, exherting them to gratifie the Emperour in the petition for the Cup, sayd, that France did desire Prayers, diuine Offices and Masses in the vulgar tongue, that the images of the Saints should bee taken a∣way, & mariage granted to Priests; and knowing that the beginning is more easily resisted then the Progresse, and that one may, with lesse paines, be hindered from entring into an house, then driuen forth, they resolued that it was not a fit time to treate of the Cup. They perswaded Pagnauo, Agent of the Marquis of Pescara, to desire that the determination might not bee made before his King was aduised thereof. The Congregations of the sixe and seuen dayes were intermitted, to treate with the Imperialists, that they would bee contended to deferre the matter, alleadging diuers reasons: the most concluding whereof was, because the time was too short, to make the And the doe cause treaty there of to be ¦ferred. Fathers vnderstand, that the graunt was necessary. Finally, after long par∣ley, they were content, that all that part which concerneth doctrine should be deferred, wher with the Legats not being satisfied, at the last the Ambassadors consented, that that point onely should be deferred, so that the dilation were mentioned in the Decree, and a promise made to determine it another time. The French-men remained to be treated with; where they found more faci∣litie, then they expected; who said, they had neither proposed nor required it, but onely assisted the Emperours Ambassadours. This difficulty being o∣uercome, they began to compose the Decrees; which to dispatch quickly, they let the Fathers knowe, that if any of them would aduise any thing, they should commit it to writing, that the composition might not bee fore∣slowed. In the Congregation of the eighth day, Daniel Barbaro, Patriarke of Aqui∣leia, said, in deliuering his suffrage, that newes beeing come of the accord in France, and therefore it beeing probable that many Prelates would come, it were fit to deferre the points of doctrine vntill their arriuall: but the instance beeing seconded by none, not so much as by the French Ambassadors them∣selues, it did fall of it selfe. In the next Congregation Antonius Augustinus, Bishop of Lerida, put them in minde, that it would bee good to make men∣tion of the customes of France, according to the instance of the Ambassadors, by putting in words which might preserue the priuiledges of that kingdome, adding that, after the determination of the Councell of Constance, the Greci∣ans were not forbid to communicate with the Cup, because they had a pri∣uiledge, which hee had seene, but beeing seconded by none but Bernar do dal Bene, a Florentine, Bishop of Nimes, his proposition was layd aside also. After the Congregation, the Ambassadour Ferrier did curiously demaund of Augustinus the tenour, Authour, and time of that priuiledge: who hauing re∣ferred it to Pope Damasus, the Ambassadour laughed, because it was certaine, that, an hundred yeeres after that Pope, to abstaine from the Cup was ac∣counted sacriledge in the Church of Rome, and that the Romane Ordinarie doth describe the communion of the Laitie alwayes with the Cup, and that in the yeere 1200. Innocentius the third maketh mention that the women did receiue the blood of CHRIST in the Communion. The tenth day Leonard Aller, a Dutchman, titular Bishop of Philodelphia, who came the weeke before, deliuering his opinion concerning the Decrees, made a digression in manner of a set speach, desiring the Legates and the Sy∣node, that the German Prelates might bee expected, vsing diuers reasons, but principally three; which were ill taken by the Congregation: that is, That it could not bee called a generall Councell in which a whole principall Nation of Christendome was wanting. That to proceede without expect∣ing them, would bee accounted a praecipitation. That the Pope ought to write to them, and call them particularly. The good Father knew not that the Pope had dealt with them two yeeres before by Delphinus and Commen∣done, his Nuncij in Germany, nor what answers were made by the Protestants and Catholiques, the former of which sayd they would not, and the later that they could not come to the Councell. Some thought he was mooued by the Emperours Ambassadours, who, seeing that the proposition of the Cup was deferred, were willing to prolong theresidue also. In the next Congregation, nine points of reformation, formerly establi∣shed, were read, and, to the first, that nothing should bee payd for Ordinati∣ons, Nine points of reformati∣on are read. Albertus Duimius, Bishop of Veglia, who came the weeke before, and was not present at the discussion of the matter, sayd; that hee held that poynt to be very imperfect, if they did not constitute withall, that likewise nothing The Bishop of Veglia ma∣keth a resolute speach concerning some corrup∣tions in Rome. should bee exacted at Rome for dispensations to receiue Orders out of due times, before the iust age, without licence and examination of the Ordina∣rie, and for irregularities, and other Canonicall impediments. For in those things great expences were made, whereas to the poore Bishops, who haue not whereon to liue, a small almes is giuen; which hee would by all meanes haue taken away, yet so, as that they giue not a scandall to the world to tithe rue, and steale gold and siluer. Vpon this occasion hee enlarged himselfe, and taxed the payments made in Rome for all sorts of dispensations, and added that, whensoeuer any dispensations haue beene presented to him, either for Ordinations or ought else, hee hath vsed to aske whether they haue payd for them, and, vnderstanding that they haue, hee hath neuer executed nor admit∣ted them; which hee spake publiquely, because it was the duety of euery Bi∣shop so to doe. And being answered, that they had formerly treated of this in Congregation, and resolued to referre the resolution thereof to the Pope, who might with more honour, reforme the Offices of Rome, he replied, that, the last Lent, hee had spoken of it in Rome, but particularly in the house of the Cardinall di Perugia, in presence of many Cardinals, and Prelates of the Court, and said the same things, who answered they were matters to be pro∣posed in the Councell; but now, vnderstanding the contrary, hee will speake of it no more, but leaue it to God. To the second of the Ordinations to title, the Bishop of Fiue Churches said it was more necessary to prouide, according to the ancient constitutions, that none should be ordained without a title and Office, then without a reuenue, because it is an excessiue scandall, that many are seene to bee made Priests, not to serue God and the Church, but to enioy their ease, ioyned with much lux∣urie, and with a good reuenue, that the Synod ought to thinke seriously here∣of, and to finde a meanes that there may not be an Ecclesiasticall person, who shall not be dedicated to some ministery, because hee hath obserued, that, in Rome, in these later times, Bishopriques haue been giuen to some, onely to promore them, who, within a short time, haue resigned them, remaining ti∣tular Bishops, onely for ambition of dignitie; which inuention antiquitie would haue detested, as pestiferous. To the fourth point, for diuision of great and frequent Parishes, after he had commended the Decree, hee added, that it was more necessary to diuide great Bishopriques, that they might bee better gouerned; alleadging that, in Hungary, there are some which containe 200 miles in length, which cannot be visited and directed by one man. These things were not well expounded by the adherents of Rome, who thought that all were bent to reuiue the treaty of residence. The Bishop of Sidonia, a man of the same Countrey, gaue worse satisfa∣ction; The Bishop of Sidonia proposeth metaphorical∣ly a reforma∣tion of the Pope. proposing, vnder metaphors, the reformation of the Pope himselfe; saying, that darkenesse could not bee taken from the starres, except it were remooued from the Sunne, nor the sicke body healed, so long as bad dispo∣sitions did remaine in the head, which doeth dispearse them to all the mem∣bers. And for the last point, concerning Receiuers, he sayd, that it was not honourable for the Councell, nor profitable for the Church to begin with the reformation of the smallest matters; that the matters of importance are first to be handled, the superiour orders to bee reformed first, and the infe∣riour afterwards. Which sayings seemed to please many of the Spanish Pre∣lates, and some of the Italians also. But partly by saying that those Decrees were already composed, and that there were but three dayes to the Session, which short time did not comport the digestion of new matters, partly by making such oppositions against the things spoken as they were able, and by giuing assurance, that the Pope would make a most strict reformation in the Court, the remedies of the abuses wherof could be better discerned and applied at Rome, where the infirmity is better knowen, then in the Councell, and by such like reasons, the prouisions thought on these and other Pre∣lates, were deluded, and all were made content for that present with the nine Articles. But, the Congregation being ended, the Legates and other Papalins, re∣maining The Lgats & other Papa∣lins, doe con∣sult how they may represse the licence of the Prelates. in the place together, to consider of what they heard, discoursed that the boldnesse of the Prelates, in broaching new seditious matters, with∣out respect, did increase dayly, which could not be called, liberty, but too much licence; and that the Diuines, with tedious discourses, tooke vp too much time, contending amongst themselues about nothing, and often pas∣sing to impertinences, which course if it did continue, the Councell would neuer be concluded. Besides there is danger that the disorder will increase, In which con∣sultatiō, Cre∣scentius is re∣prehended by the Cardinall of Varmia. and produce some sinister effect. Iohn Baptista Castedo, the Speaker, who had exercised the same office in the former reduction vnder Iulius; tolde them, that Cardinall Crescentius, when they digressed from the matters pro∣posed, without respect was wont to interrupt them, and to cut off also the file of their discourse, to abreuiate those who were too profixe, and some∣times to impose them silence; which beeing now done once or twice, the affaires of the Councell would bee shortned, and occasions of impertinent discourses would bee taken away. Varmiense was not pleased with this; who said, that, if Crescentius did gouerne so, it was no maruell that the Ma∣iestie of God had not giuen a good progresse to that Councel; that nothing is more necessary to a Christian Synode then liberty, and that, reading the Councels of the better times, one shall finde contentions and discords in the beginnings of them, euen in the presence of the Emperours, most potent in those times, which notwithstanding did, in the end, turne, by the assistance of the holy Ghost, into a maruellous concord: and that was the miracle which did pacifie the world. Hee said there were infinite contentions in the Ni∣cene Councel, and most exorbitant in the Ephesine, and therefore no wonder if now there were some diuersitie of opinions ciuilly carried, which hee that would resist by humane and violent meanes, will let the world know that the Councell is not free, and take from it all reputation; that it is good to re∣ferre the cause vnto God, who will gouerne Councels, and moderate those who are assembled in his name. The Cardinall of Mantua approoued the opinion of Varmiense, and disliked the proceeding of Crescentius; but said it was not contrary to the libertie of the Councell to moderate abuses with Decrees, prescribing the order and time of speaking; and distributing to euery one his owne part. This was commended by Varmiense, and they agreed to giue order for it, when the Sessions should bee held. The Imperialists were now out of hope to obtaine the Chalice, and their interests were ceased. But the French men, with some Prelates, laboured much that nothing might be done in the Session of the sixteenth day, but all deferred vntill the next, as had beene done twice before. The Legates, to auoid the shame, did labour with all their force to establish the points, that those foure that concerne communion, and the nine of reformation, might be published. These therefore did seeke to remooue, and those to interpose difficulties. There remaining but two dayes to the Session, a Congregation was held in the morning of the 14. day; in the beginning where of Granata desired the Legates, that, in regard of the importance of the matter to bee handled, they would protogue the Session; and made, as it were, an Oration, to shew how many difficulties were still on foot; necessary to bee decided. The Legates, resolute to the contrary, admitted no reason, and caused the examination of the doctrine to begin: In reading of the first point, when they came to the place, where it is said; that it cannot bee inferred by the words of our Lord in S. Iohn. If you shall not eat the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke my blood, &c. Granata began; and said, that that passage did not speake of the Sacrament; but of Faith, vnder the Metaphore of nutrimont; alleadg∣ing the Text, and many Expositions of the Fathers, and of S. Austin in par∣ticular. Cardinall Seripando expounded that place, as if hee had read in the Chaire; and it seemed that euery one was satisfied. But Granata replied more earnestly, and in the end, desired that an addition might be ioyned to it; say∣ing, that, by those words, howsoeuer they were vnderstood according to diuers Expositions of the Fathers, the Communion of the Cup could not be inferred. This addition did not please some of the Fathers, and others did not regard it; but it seemed strange, that after things were concluded, one should come with vnnecessary additions, to disturbe the points establi∣shed; and there were 57. who said Non Placet. But, to come to an end, the Legates were content, that the clause should be added; and indeede it seem∣eth to bee inserted by force, and doeth begin in the Latine, Ʋtcunque inxta Varias. In the second point of the authoritie of the Church ouer the Sacraments, when they came to this place, that they might change the vse of the Cup, by the example of the forme of Baptisme, Iacobus Gibertus, Bishop of Alife, stood vp, and said it was a blasphemie; that the forme of Baptisme was im∣mutable; that it was neuer changed; that ouer the essence of the Sacra∣ments, which consisteth in the forme and matter, there is no authoritie; and much beeing sayd Pro & contra, in the end they resolued to take away that particle. It would be tedious to relate all that was spoken by some to hinder the proceeding, and by some not to be silent, when others spake. It is naturall, when a multitude is in motion, for euery one to striue to mooue most, neither was there euer any Colledge of Noblemen so absolute, but that it might bee diuided into persons of honour, and of the common sort. The patience and resolution of the Legates ouercame the difficulties; so that, in the Congregation of the afternoone, the points of doctrine, and the Ana∣thematimes were established, howsoeuer the Cardinall Varmiense did very zealously interpose a doubt, at the instance of some Diuines, who tolde him, that where as it is sayd in the third point of doctrine, The faithfull are not defrauded of any grace necessary to saluation, by receiuing one kinde onely; much cause of disputation was giuen, because the Eucharist being not a necessary Sacrament, it might bee inferred, by the same reason, that the Church might take it away wholly. Many of the Prelats adhered hereunto, demanding that it might be reformed, in regard the reason alleadged against it was euident, and vnanswerable. Cardinall Simoneta did pacifie them with very much adoe; saying, that a draught should bee made in writing how it should be reformed, and shewed in the next Congregation. In that the Bishop of the Fiue Churches gaue new occasion of distastes. Who hauing beene tolde our of Congregation, that, in Rome Bishop∣riques were giuen onely to promote men, returned to that matter, and spake of it at large. He seemed to declare his minde by way of excuse, but indeed hee confirmed the things spoken, and the end of his discourse was an exhortation to the Fathers, to deliuer their opinions freely, without respect. Simoneta was much angry at the occurrences of that Congregation, and, when it was ended, did remonstrate to Varmiense, how contrary it was to the seruice of the Apostolique Sea, to giue care to the impertinencies of the Diuines, men accustomed to bookes of speculation onely, and, for the most part, vaine subtilties, of which themselues make great esteeme, though in∣deed they are but Chimerae, where of one proofe is, because they agree not a∣mong themselues: that, before many of them did approue that point, with∣out contradiction, and now some broach new matters, which, in conclu∣sion, will be opposed by others; that it is a plaine case that what word soe uer is spoken, will bee defended by those that fauour the Speaker, and op∣pugned by his aduersaries. Neither will they much care though it be some∣what dangerous to doe it. But, hauing intimated two Sessions, and done nothing, if the like should happen in this, the reputation of the Councell would irrecouerably be lost, and therefore that they must be carefull to doe some thing. Varmiense was ouercome; and answered that hee had done no∣thing but to a good end, and that those Diuines were addressed to him by the Emperours Ambassadours. Simoneta perceiued that the honesty of that Prelate was abused, by the subtiltie of others, and told the other Legates, that he doubted that the Imperialists might draw some secret from him, and agreed with them to admonish him of it vpon some good occasion. The last day had some encounters also. For the Bishop of Nimes, at the perswasion of the French Ambassadours, desired, that, in the first point of reformation, where some fee is allowed to the Notary, for the Letters patents of Orders, the custome of France might not be preiudiced, where nothing is The Legates. about to part out of the Cōgregation, are stopped by the Bishop of Girone. giuen. He was followed by some Spaniards; and they were satisfied; by an addition in the Decree, that the custome should bee saued. Other mutati∣ons were desired and granted, and all was in order for the Session, the next morning. The Legats rising vp to depart, Arias Gallego, Bishop of Girone, came and stopped them, and desired they would set downe againe, and heare him. They looked one vpon another; but their desire to hold the Session taught them patience. They sate downe againe, with the distaste of many Prelates, especially the Courtiers. The Bishop causing the point of the di∣stributions to bee read, sayd, that it seemed to him a hard thing that power should be giuen to the Bishop to take the third part of the Prebends and con∣uert them into distributions; that formerly all was distributions, and that Prebends crept in by abuse; that Bishops had authoritie to infringe bad cu∣stomes; that it was not iust that the Councell, by giuing the Bishop a third part of the authority which hee hath, should take two thirds from him. Therefore hee desired it should bee declared that the Bishops haue ample power to conuert into distributions as much as they thinke conuement. The Archbishop of Prague confirmed this opinion with other reasons, and the Spaniards seemed by their countenance to giue consent. The Cardinall of Who maketh a speech vnto them concer∣ning distribu∣tions. Mantua hauing much commended the pietie of those Bishops, affirmed, that it was a point worthy to bee consulted on by the Synod, and promised, in the name of the Legates, whose consent he first had, that it should bee spoken of in the next Session. The sixteenth day beeing come, the Legats, Ambassadours, and Prelates went to the Church with the vsuall ceremonies. The Sermon was made by A Session is held. The Bish. of Tiniana prea∣cheth, the matter of whose sermon was the Cō∣munion of the Cup, and Residence. the Bishop of Tiniana: who, howsoeuer hee was resolued not to speake then of granting the Chalice, did not forbeare to take that matter onely for his subiect, and to discourse that the vse of the Chalice was common so long as the heare of charitie did endure; but, that decreasing, and inconueniences succeeding, by the negligence of some, the vse thereof was not interdicted, but onely it was taught, that those who could hardly auoyd irreuerence, should lesse offend, if they did abstaine from it: whose example in progresse of time, others did follow, that they might not tie themselues to diligence. In the first he commended the memorable example of pietie, and blamed the impietie of the moderne innouators, who to haue it, haue kindled so great a fire. He exhorted the Pathers to charitie, and to extinguish the flame, and not to suffer all the world to burne by their default, to condescend to the im∣becillitie of their children, who demand nothing but the blood of CHRIST. He admonished them, not to cast away so many Prouinces and Kingdomes, to spare so small a matter; that seeing that blessed blood is sought with so ear∣nest a desire, they would not feare the former negligence, for which it was o∣mitted, but grant it; that CHRIST would not haue them so obstinate in their owne opinion, as to maintaine so pernicious a discord amongst Christi∣ans, for that blood which himselfe shed to vnite them in a most strict bond of charity. Hee passed dexterously from that matter to an exhortation to resi∣dence; and concluded with the distaste of the others, who desired to haue those matters buried in silence. When the ceremonies were ended, the Masse-Bishop read the doctrine, The doctrine is read, con∣tained in four heads. expressed in foure heads; containing in substance. That the Synod, in regard of many errors which goe about, concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist, hath determined to expound that which belongeth to the Communion Sub∣Ʋtraque, and of children, prohibiting all the faithfull to beleeue, teach, or preach otherwise. Therefore, according to the iudgement and custome of the Church, it doth declare, that the Laickes and Clerkes, who doe not say Masse, are not bound by any diuine precept to communicate Sub Ʋtraque, and that it cannot be doubted, without preiudice of faith, that the Communi∣on vnder one kinde is sufficient; that howsoeuer CHRIST hath instituted, and giuen the Sacrament vnder two kindes, it cannot be inferred from hence, that all are obliged to receiue it so; nor from the speech of our LORD, rela∣ted in the sixt Chapter of Saint Iohn, where although there be words which name both kinds, yet there be also which name that onely of bread. Besides, it doth declare, that the Church hath euer had power to make a mutation in the dispensation of the Sacraments, so long as the substance remaineth: Which may bee drawen in generall from the wordes of Saint Paul, that the Ministers of Christ are dispensers of the Mysteries of God; and particularly in the Eucharist, concerning which power is reserued to it, to giue order by word of mouth. That the Church knowing this her authority, howsoeuer the vse of both kindes was frequent from the beginning, yet the custome beeing changed for iust causes, hath approued that other, to communicate with one onely, which no man can change without the authoritie of the same Church; it doeth declare besides, that All CHRIST is receiued vnder either of the kindes, and the true Sacrament, and that hee who receiueth one onely is not defrauded of any Grace, necessary to saluation, as concerning the fruit thereof. Finally it doeth teach, that children, before the vse of reason, are not bound to Sacramentall Communion, because Grace cannot bee lost in that age, not condemning antiquity for the contrary custome, obserued in some places, because it is to be vndoubtedly beleeued that they haue done it, not for necessitie of saluation, but for other probable causes. In conformitie of this doctrine foure Anathematismes were read. 1. Against him that shall say, Foure Ana∣thematismes are read. that all the faithfull are bound, by diuine precept, or necessitie of saluation, to receiue both the kindes in the Eucharist. 2: That the Church hath not had iust causes to communicate the Laickes and the Clerkes, who doe not ce∣lebrate the Masse, with the kinde of Bread onely, or that it hath erred herein. 3. Against him that shall denie that All CHRIST, the Fountaine and Author of all graces, is receiued vnder the bread onely. 4. Against him that shall say that the Communion of the Eucharist is necessary for children before the vse of reason. After this another Decree was read also, saying, that the Sy∣node will examine, with the first occasion, and define two other Articles, not discussed as yet: that is, Whether the reasons for which the Church hath communicated vnder one kinde, are good still, so that the Cup ought not to A Decree is read concer∣ning two points, to be handled here∣after. be granted to any; and in case it doeth appeare that it may be granted for ho∣nest causes, with what conditions the grant is to be made. During the time of the Masse, Alfonsus Salmeron, and Franciscus della Torre, Iesuites, discoursed, the one with Varmiense, and the other with Madruccio, as they stood behinde their seats; that in the first point of doctrine, the matter of the institution of the Sacrament vnder both kindes is obscurely expressed, and that it is necessary to speake plainly, and say, that CHRIST did institute it for his Apostles, and those that say Masse onely, and not for all the faithfull; that it was necessary to insert this clause, to remooue all doubt from the Ca∣tholiques, and all occasion of opposing and calumniating from the heretikes; that they, as Diuines sent from the Pope, could not forbeare to giue their ad∣uice in a matter of so great importance; and were both so earnest, especially Salmeron, who talked with Varmiense, that the reading of the Decree being en∣ded, Varmiense first, and then Madruccio made the proposition; which pleased many, but was reiected by the greater part, not for its owne sake, but for the manner of proposing it on the sudden, without allowing time to consider on it. It did not please the other Legats, for the same cause also; yet in regard of the honour of the place, they said, without any adoe, that it should be reserued to the next Session, in the handling of the two next Articles. Afterwards the nine points of reformation were read. That for collation of Orders, Dimisories, Testimonials, Seale, or any thing else, neither the Bishop Nine points of Reforma∣tion are read. nor any of his Ministers shall receiue any thing, though voluntarily offered. That the Notaries, where there is custome not to receiue, and where they haue no salarie, may receiue the tenth part of a crowne. That no secular Clerke though sufficient, may be promoted to holy Orders, if hee haue not a Benefice, patrimony, or pension, able to maintaine him; and that the Bene∣fice may not be renounced, nor the pension extinct, nor the patrimony alie∣ned without licence of the Bishop. That in the Cathedrall or collegiate Chur∣ches, in which there are no distributions, or very small, the Bishop may con∣uert, to that vse, the third part of the profits of the Prebends. That in Parish Churches, where much people is, the Bishops may compell the Rectors to take the assistance of other Priests, and those that are large in compasse may bee diuided, and furnished with new Rectors, if there shall be neede, and the people may be compelled to contribute. That the Bishops may make a per∣petuall Ʋnion of Benefices, with cure, or without, because of pouertie, or other iuridical causes. That the Bishops may giue Coadiutors to Parish Priests that are vnlearned, and punish those that are scandalous. That the Bishops may ioyne the Benefices of old ruinous Churches to others, and cause the Churches to bee built, compelling the people to contribute to the fabrique. That they may visite all Benefices held in Commenda. That the name, office, and vse of Receiuer be taken away in all places. In the end, the Session was ordained for the seuenteenth of September, and a declaration made, that the Synod might abbreuiate or prorogue, at pleasure, as well that Terme, as any other, which shall be limited for the future Sessions. The actions of this Councell were not in so great expectation in former times, as at this present; in regard all Princes had agreed in demanding it, and sent Ambassadors, and that a great number of Prelats were assembled, foure times so many as before: and had beene begunne now sixe moneths, and The actions of the Coun∣cell are cen∣sured. those spent in daily and continuall treaties and discussions, with dispatches of many Curriers and Prelats from Rome to Trent, and from Trent to Rome. But when the Session came out in print, the vsuall Latine prouerbe, of The birth of the Mountaines, was generally vsed by all. And particularly the delay∣ing of two Articles was noted; it seeming strange, that, hauing made foure Articles of faith, with foure Anathematismes, they were not able to declare that of granting the Cup, which is de iure Ecclesiastico. Some were of opinion, that it ought to haue beene handled first, because if it had beene granted all the disputations had ceased. The third point of doctrine was much con∣sidered on in the conclusion. For it being said that the faithfull, who recei∣ueth the body of CHRIST onely, is not defrauded of any necessary Grace, it First in matter of doctrine. seemed a confession that some grace, not necessarie, is lost. And here a doubt was made whether there bee any authoritie of man which can hinder the su∣perabundant, and not necessarie grace of God; and if it can, whether these impediments bee charitably vsed. Two things were much spoken of a∣mongst the rest; one, the obligation imposed to beleeue that antiquitie did not hold the Communion of children to bee necessarie; because where the trueth of a story is in question, it is a matter of fact, and past, in which there is no authoritie that can alter the things done. Yet hee that readeth Austin will know that, in nine places, not in a word, but with a dis∣course, hee doeth affirme the necessitie of the Eucharist for children, and two of them doe make it equall to the necessitie of Baptisme; yea hee saith, more then once, that the Church of Rome hath held and defined it to bee necessa∣rie for the saluation of children; and doeth alleadge for it Pope Innocentius, whose Epistle doeth yet remaine, in which hee saith it plainely. And they marueiled why the Councell would, without necessitie, trouble it selfe here in, to no end, when it might bee said that either it, or Innocention had erred. The other was the second Anathematisme, with the declaration, that he is an heretike, who saith the Church was not induced vpon iust causes to commu∣nicate without the Cup: which was to ground an Article of faith, vpon a fact of man. And they held it a miraculous thing that they would say, that one is bound to obserue the Decree onely iure humano, but is bound iure Di∣uino to beleeue it is iust, and to make Articles of faith in things which may bee changed daily. Others added also, that if the causes were so iust, they should say what they were, and not force men to beleeue by terrour, but in∣duce them by perswasion, because that was to domineere ouer the faith, which Saint Paul doth so much detest. Concerning the points of reforma∣tion, Secondly in point of Re∣formation. it was generally said, that more light points could not be handled, nor more lightly, and that they did imitate the Physician, who, in an Hecticall bodie, laboured to kill the itch. And to put their hands into mens purses, to maintaine Curats, or repaire Churches, seemed a strange thing, both for the matter, and for the manner. For the matter, because the Cleargie was luper∣fluously rich, and rather indebted to the Layne for diuers euident respects; for the manner, because neither CHRIST, nor his Apostles, did euer com∣pell men to make contributions, but onely gaue power to receiue those that were voluntarie. And he that readeth Saint Paul to the Corinthians, and to the Galathians, shall see the masters treatment of the Oxe that treadeth the Corne, and the dutie of the catechised, towards him that doth teach; yet so, as that those labourers haue no action or right by rigour of Law, nor any Chancerie to relieue them. The Session being ended, the Legats began to put in order those things A reconcilia∣tion is made betweene the Cardinall of Mantua, and Simoneta. which were to bee handled in the next, purposing to anticipate the time, if it were possible. Letters came to Trent from Alexander Simoneta, to the Car∣dinall his brother, and from Cardinall Gonzaga, to his Vncle with most ef∣fectuall exhortations, in the Popes name, to accommodate the differences, and to hold good intelligence together; for which cause the Sunday after the Session, Simoneta dined with the Cardinall of Mantua, and made a perfect reconciliation with him. Mantua began to discourse of some Prelates, who came much to his house, whom hee suspected to haue done ill offices against him. But Simoneta did stop him modestly, and said, that hereafter they should not speake so. They consulted earnestly how they might giue full satisfaction to the Pope, and the Court, in matter of Residence, and what Prelats were fit to bee employed to perswade others. Those who had decla∣red themselues to fauour the interests of the Pope and Court, howsoeuer they were otherwise able, they thought not fit, because they wanted credit. They made choice of two men of sinceritie, and dextrous in negotiations, the Bishops of Modena and of Bressia. The same day the Arch-bishop of The Arch-bi∣shop of Lanci∣ano presenteth the Popes Briefe to the Bishops, who had written vnto him. Lanciano, hauing called together the Prelats who had written to the Pope in their owne behalfe, presented to them the Popes Briefe, full of kindnesse, hu∣manitie, and offers which pleased them all, and did much mitigate their heate for Residence. Another accident also hapned the same day, much in the Popes fauour. For the Marquis of Pescara sent vnto his Secretarie a copie of a letter, written to him from the King; in which hee told him, that, hauing vnderstood that the declaration of the Continuation would displease the Em∣perour, and France, and might perhaps cause a dissolution of the Councell, hee gaue him commission to make no further instance for it, so that no decla∣ration The King of Spaine wil not haue the conti∣nuation of the Councell, or the point of Residence spo∣ken of. were made for a new Indiction, and that the Councell did proceede as it hath begun. Afterwards hee gaue him order to let his Prelats know, that hee had vnderstood the controuersie and dispute concerning Residence, and the instance they had made, that it might bee declared to bee de iure diuino, saying that hee commended their zeale and good intention, yet thought that the declaration did not befit the present time, and therefore wished them to desist. The Secretarie shewed the letter to the Spanish Pralats; and Granata, hauing exactly considered of it, said, that it was well, seeing that the Pope did dislike it; that the King did not know the impor∣tance of it; that hee was counselled by the Arch-bishop of Seuil, who neuer had resided, and by the Bishop of Conca, who remained in Court; that hee knew very well to what end hee did commaund it, that he would obey him 1562 PIVS 4. FERDINAND. ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. PHILIP 2. in not protesting, but would neuer forbeare to demaund it, as often as there was occasion, knowing well that hee should not offend the King heerein. That point concerning the continuation was shewed also to the Imperia∣lists, and French-mem: who answered, there was no neede of that declara∣tion to be made expresly in words, seeing that it was executed in deedes. In the next Congregation, held the twentieth day, the Sacrament of the Masse, and the abuses consequent, were proposed to bee handled. The Cardinall of Mantua did admonish the Prelates to deliuer their opinions, quietly and briefly, in the Congregations, and without noyse, and related the rules which they had made for the Congregations of the Diuines, to take away contentions, confusion, and prolixitie; which, being read, were approoued by the congregation. Afterwards Cardinall Seripando discour∣sed of the manner of examining the points of doctrine, and the Anathema∣tismes, in the congregations, and put them in minde that they had beene ex∣amined and discussed before in the same Councell, and established also, al∣though not published; so that the Fathers might very much abreuiate their meditations, in regard there was neede of nothing more then of expediti∣on. Granata added, that, the Masse hauing beene handled before, and there remayning much time vntill the Session, the matter of Order might be han∣dled also. And the same was confirmed by the Bishop of Fiue Churches; which some vnderstood to bee spoken ironically, and others, to this ende, that they might handle residence, according to the promise of Mantua. In the ende, the Articles, to bee handled in the congregations of the Diuines, were giuen forth. The substance of the orders before mentioned was com∣prehended Seuen rules are set down, concerning the order of examining the points of doctrine. in seuen rules. That, in euery matter proposed, onely foure of the Diuines sent by the Pope, chosen by the Legates, should speake, two se∣culars, and two regulars. That by the Ambassadours of Princes three of the secular Diuines, sent by them, should bee chosen. That euery Legate should choose a secular Diuine of his owne familie. That of all the other Secular Diuines of the families of the Prelates, onely foure should bee cho∣sen to speake, beginning with those who were created Doctours first. That amongst the Regulars euery Generall should choose three of his owne order. That none of the Diuines shall speake aboue halfe an houre, or, if they doe, shall bee interrupted by the Master of the Ceremonies, and hee that will bee more briefe, shall bee more commended. That those Diuines who are not to speake, may deliuer their opinions in writing to the Deputies, concerning the things proposed. By these rules they made account that foure and thir∣tie Diuines were to speake, and that they might all bee heard in tenne Con∣gregations at the most. In establishing and publishing this order, the dif∣ficultie was what inscription to giue it. Some thought that to call it a meane to bee obserued by the Diuines, was to runne into the inconueni∣ence obiected by that Spartane to the Athenians, that wise men did consult, and the ignorant giue sentence. For auoyding whereof the inscription was con∣ceiued thus; A meane to be obserued heereafter in the poynts which shall bee examined by the inferiour Diuines, inferring that the Prelates were superiour Diuines. The Articles were thirteene. 1. Whether the Masse bee onely a com∣memoration of the sacrifice of the Crosse, and a true sacrifice. 2. Whe∣ther the sacrifice of the Masse derogateth from that of the Crosse. 3. Whe∣ther CHRIST did ordaine that the Apostles should offer his body and blood in the Masse, in those words; Doe this in remembrance of mee. 4. Whe∣ther the sacrifice of the Masse doeth onely helpe him who doeth receiue it, and may not be offered for others, as well liuing as dead, nor for their sinnes, 13. Articles concerning the Masse are propose to be examined. satisfactions and other necessities. 5. Whether the priuate Masses, in which the Priest alone doeth receiue the Communion without other Commu∣nicants, bee vnlawfull, and ought to bee taken away. 6. Whether the mingling of water with wine in the Masse bee contrary to the institution of our Lord. 7. Whether the Canon of the Masse doeth containe errours, and ought to bee abrogated. 8. Whether the custome of the Church of Rome, to pronounce softly, and in secret, the wordes of the consecration, bee damnable. 9. Whether the Masse ought to bee celebrated onely in the vulgar tongue, vnderstood by all. 10. Whether to attribute certaine Masses to certaine Saints be an abuse. 11. Whether the Ceremonies, vest∣ments and other externall signes which the Church vseth, ought to bee taken away. 12. Whether to say that our LORD is mystically sacrificed by vs, bee the same as to say, that hee is giuen vs to eate 13. Whether the Masse bee a sacrifice of prayse and thankes-giuing onely or propitiatorie for the liuing and the dead. It was added, that the Diuines should speake whether these Articles were erroneous, or false, or hereticall, and whether they deserued to bee condemned by the Synode; and that they should diuide them, so that the seuenteene first, should speake of the seuen first Articles, and the others, concerning the sixe fol∣lowing. The French Ambassadours thought still they had small reputation in the Councell, in respect of others; and after that the Decree aforesayd came foorth were more ielous then before, because mention was to bee made of the Diuines to what King each did belong (which was not done concerning the Prelates) and none would bee present for France. They doubted also that, by this meanes, some preiudice might arise to the prerogatiues of the Kingdome. Therefore they did presently, and afterwards, vpon other oc∣casions, The French Ambassadors write to their King for Pre∣lates o Do∣ctors to bee sent out of France. send aduice into France, that the disputation would passe onely be∣tweene the Italians, Spaniards, and Portugals; that France would haue no part, if his Maiestie did not presently dispatch away some Prelate, or Do∣ctour, especially because matters of great importance, contained in the Ar∣ticles proposed, were to bee handled; which also would bee a meanes to obtaine or hinder other things, according to his Maiesties desire, and the contents of their instructions; that vntill then they had proposed none of the Articles of reformation, because, not hauing suffrages to maintaine them, no account would haue been made of their remonstrances; that the Coun∣cell will not hearken to any thing that as preiudiciall to the profit or autho∣ritie of the Court; because the Pope is Lord of the propositions, it hauing beene determined in the beginning, and euer since obserued, that nothing And cōplaine of the procee∣ding in Coun∣cell. may bee proposed but by the Legates; as also of the resolutions, because so many Prelats are his pensioners, and stand at his deuotion; that it is resolued, that the Councel shall not meddle with reforming the Court, but reserue that whole businesse to his Holinesse; that the Spaniards who were very zealous for the reformation, are cooled and put in feare, by the reprehension of their King; that there is no hope, so long as the case standeth thus, to obtaine a∣ny thing but what pleaseth the Pope, because no instance made by all the Ambassadours and Princes which are in Trent, hath been able to perswade a good reformation of the Ecclesiasticall discipline, howsoeuer Articles, conformable not onely to the vse of the primitiue Church, but euen to the Decrees of the Popes themselues haue been presented to the Legates; that, in stead of those, they propose points of the present controuersies of doctrine, though they haue been told it is superfluous, in absence of the Protestants, and that, if they propose any thing concerning manners, it is of small impor∣tance, and of no fruit. The Pope, dayly aduised of the diuers occurrences in Trent, did feare that no Decree would bee published in the Session at the day appointed: but vnderstanding how happlily it passed, was exceeding glad; and the more, in regard of the reconciliation of the Legates, and of the letter of the King of Spaine. Hee could not conceale his ioy, but imparted it in Consistorie, and spake of it to the Ambassadours, and thanked the Cardinall of Arragon, brother of Pescara, to whom he did attribute this seruice. And being whol∣ly bent to conclude the Councell quickly, and finding that nothing could prolong it, but the points of residence, and of the communion of the Cup, he wrote to the Legates, that he was wholly intent to the reformation of the Court; that they should assure thereof the Ambassadours and Prelates who spake of it; and that themselues should dispatch the other matters: which they might doe in three Sessions more. Hee commended them for hauing reserued power to abbreuiate the time prefixed, exhorting them to make vse thereof. Hee added, that, knowing it was hard to make a good resolution in the Councell, in matter of residence, because many Prelates, hauing deli∣uered their opinion to a good end, were interested in their honour, they should procure that it might bee referred vnto him, and likewise should free themselues from instances made by Princes for the communion of the Cup, by making the same reference. And if any difficultie, hard to bee resolued, shall happen, in any of the points, which remaine to bee handled, they should propose the remitting of it to him also; because hee can more easily decide any thing in Consistorie, calling some Doctors, if there be occasion, then in Trent, where mens diuers interests make the resolutions impossible, or very long. The first Congregation of the Diuines was held the next day in the after∣noone, The Iesuites will not ob∣serue y e rules. in which the order of speaking but halfe an houre was so well obser∣ued, that Salmeron the Iesuite spent the whole time himselfe, with much sau∣cinesse; saying he was sent by the Pope, and that being to speake of impor∣tant and necessary matters, no time was to bee prescribed vnto him; and dis∣coursing on the seuen Articles, spake onely common things, which deserue not particular mention. The next morning hee was imitated by his fellow Torre, who spent that whole Congregation also, and rather repeated the things spoken before, then added any thing of his owne. But, which was worst of all, comming, in the end, to the place of S. Iohn, If you eate not, &c. hee sayd, it must needes bee vnderstood of the Sacramentall Communion, and added, that, in the first point of doctrine, published in the last Session, it see∣med that doubt was made of it, and therefore that it was necessary to declare in the next, that nothing is spoken of in that passage but the Sacrament; and that if any were of another opinion, hee appealed to the Synod. The Le∣gates were much offended at his speach, as well because it crossed the deter∣mination With whom the Legates are displeased. of the Councell, as because it shewed a necessitie of the Communion of the Cup; but much more, because those Iesuites, howsoeuer they were the first, would bee excepted both from the generall orders: with so much pe∣tulancie. They called to minde the stirres raysed by them in the Session, and Torre was particularly noted by Simoneta, for hauing written against Ca∣tharinus in fauour of residence, that it is de iure diuino, with insolent termes, as the Cardinall sayd. Therefore, the Congregation beeing ended, hee told his Colleagues, that it was fit to represse this boldnesse, and giue example to others; and they agreed so to doe vpon the first occasion. In the discussions of the Diuines all were vniforme in condemning the The discussi∣on of the Ar∣ticles. Protestant opinions of heresie, in the Articles proposed, and did quickly dis∣patch the others. The discourse of euery one was long, in prouing the Masse to be a sacrifice, in which Christ is offered vnder the sacramentall elements. Their principall reasons were; That CHRIST is a Priest according to the order of Melchisedec: but Melchisedec offered bread & wine; therefore the Priesthood of CHRIST doeth require the sacrifice of bread and wine. Moreouer, the Paschall Lambe was a true sacrifice; and that is a figure of the Eucharist; there∣fore the Eucharist also must bee a sacrifice. Afterwards the prophecie of Malachie was alleadged, by whose mouth God reiected the sacrifice of the Iewes, saying his Name was holy, great amongst the Gentiles, and that in euery place, a pure oblation is offered to him; which cannot bee vnderstood of any thing else which is offered in euery place, and by all Nations. Di∣uers other congruities, and figures of the old Testament were produced, some grounding themselues vpon one, and some vpon another. In the new Testament the place of Saint Iohn was brought, where CHRIST sayth to the woman of Samaria, that the houre is come in which the Father shall bee worshipped in Spirit and in trueth: and to worship in the holy Scripture doeth signifie to sacrifice, as appeareth by many places. And the woman of Samaria asked him of the sacrifice, which could not be offered by the Iewes but in Ierusalem, and by the Samaritans was offered in Garizim, where CHRIST then was. Therefore they sayd the place was necessarily to bee vnderstood of an exter∣nall, publike, and solemne adoration, which could be no other but the Eucha∣rist. It was proued also by the words of CHRIST, This is my body which is giuen for you, which is broken for you. This is my blood which is shed for you. Therefore there is a breaking of the body, and an effusion of blood in the Eucharist, which are actions of a sacrifice. Aboue all, they grounded themselues vpon the words of Saint Paul, who putteth the Eucharist in the same kind with the sacrifices of the Iewes, and of the Gentiles, saying, that, by it, the body and blood of CHRIST are participated; as in the Hebraisme, he that eateth of the hoast, is partaker of the altar; and one cannot drinke the Cup of the LORD, and eate of his Table, and drinke of the cup of Deuils, and bee partaker of their table. But that the Apostles were ordayned Priests by CHRIST, they prooued plainely, by the words spoken to them by CHRIST our LORD; Doe this in remembrance of me. For better proofe, many authorities of the Fa∣thers were adduced, who doe all name the Eucharist a sacrifice, or, in more generall termes, doe testifie that a sacrifice is offered in the Church, Some added afterwards, that the Masse was a sacrifice, because CHRIST offered himselfe in the supper. And they brought this reason for the most princi∣pall, and prooued the ground thereof, because the Scripture saying plainely that Melchisedec offered bread and wine; CHRIST could not haue beene a Priest after that order, if hee had not done the like, and because CHRIST sayd, that his blood was a confirmation of the new Testament; but the blood which doeth confirme the old, was offered in this institution: there∣fore it followeth, by a necessary consequence, that CHRIST himselfe also did offer it. They argued also, that CHRIST hauing sayd, Doe this in remem∣brance of me, if hee had not offered, we could not doe it. And they sayd the Lutherans haue no other argument to prooue the Masse to be no sacrifice, but because Christ hath not offered; and therefore that opinion was dange∣rous, as fauouring the hereticall doctrine. It was also more effectually proo∣ued, because the Church singeth, in the office of the body of our LORD, CHRIST, a Priest for euer after the order of Melchisedec, hath offered bread and wine. And in the Canon of the Ambrosian Missal it is sayd, that instituting a forme of perpetuall sacrifice, hee hath first offered himselfe as an hoast, and hath first taught how to offer it. Afterwards many authorities of the Fa∣thers were produced, to prooue the same. On the other part, it was said with no lesse asseueration, that CHRIST, In which the Diuines are much diuided. in the supper, hath commanded the oblation to bee made for euer, in the Church, after his death; but that hee hath not offered himselfe, because the nature of that sacrifice did not comport it. And, for proofe heereof, they sayd that the oblation of the Crosse would haue beene superfluous, because mankinde would haue beene redeemed by that of the supper, which went before. That the sacrifice of the Altar was instituted by CHRIST, for a memoriall of that which hee offered on the Crosse; but there cannot bee any memoriall, but of a thing past; therefore the Eucharist could not be a sacrifice before the oblation of CHRIST on the Crosse. They alleadged also that nei∣ther the Scripture, nor the Canon of the Masse, nor any Councell euer sayd that CHRIST offered himselfe in the supper, and added, that the places of the Fathers before alledged, ought to be vnderstood of his oblation on the Crosse. They concluded, that, hauing to define the Masse to bee a sacrifice, as indeed it was, it might most effectually bee done by proofes out of the Scriptures and Fathers, without adding such weake reasons. This difference was not betweene many and few, but diuided aswell the Diuines as the Fathers, into almost equall parts, and occasioned some contention. The former went so farre as to say that the other opinion was an errour, and required that it should bee silenced by an Anathematisme, condemning of heresie, those that say, that CHRIST hath not offered himselfe in the supper, vnder the sacra∣mentall elements. The others said it was not a time to ground ones selfe vp∣on things vncertaine, and vpon new opinions, neither heard not thought of by antiquity, but that one ought to insist vpon that which is plaine, and cer∣taine, both by the Scripture and by the Fathers, that is, that CHRIST hath commanded the oblation. All the moneth of Iuly was spent by the seuenteene who spake vpon the first Articles; the latter they dispatched in a few dayes, rather with iniurious tearmes against the Protestantes, then with reasons. It is not fitte to relate the particulars, but onely some fewe that are most no∣table. In the Congregation of the 4 of Iuly, in the afternoone, Georgius di Ataide, a Diuine of the K. of Portugall, sought to ouerthrow all the grounds The discourse of Georgius di Ataide. of the other Diuines; layd to prooue the sacrifice of the Masse by the holy Scripture; and said first, that it could not be doubted that the Masse was a sa∣crifice, because all the Fathers haue said it in plaine words, and replyed it vp∣on euery occasion and hee began with the Latins and Greekes of the ancient Church, and with the Martyrs, and came, from time to time, vntill the present age, affirming that there is no Christian writer who hath not called it a sa∣crifice. Therefore it must certainely bee concluded that it hath beene so taught by an Apostolicall tradition, the force whereof is more then suffici∣ent to make Articles of faith, as this Councell hath maintained from the be∣ginning. But this true and solide foundation is weakened, by those who would build in the ayre, seeking to finde in the Scriptures that which is not there, giuing occasion to the aduersaries to calumniate the trueth, while they see it grounded vpon such an vnstablesand. And hauing thus spoken, hee proceeded to examine, one after another, the places of the old and new Te∣stament, alledged by the Diuines, shewing that no expresse signification of the sacrifice could be drawen from them. To the fact of Melchisedec, he an∣swered, that CHRIST was a Priest of that order, as hee was the onely begot∣ten, eternall, without predecessor, father, mother, or genealogie. And this is prooued too plainely by the Epistle to the Hebrewes, where Saint Paul discour∣sing at large of this place, doeth handle the eternitie and singularity of the Priesthood, and maketh no mention of the bread and wine. He repeated the doctrine of Saint Austine, that when there is a fit place for any thing to bee spoken and it is not spoken, an argument may bee drawen from the autho∣ritie negatiuely. Of the Paschall Lambe he said, that it could not be presup∣posed for a thing so euident that it was a sacrifice, and perhaps to him that would take vpon him to prooue the contrary, the victory would necessarily bee yeelded; and also that it was too hard a metaphor, to make it a Type of the Eucharist, and not rather of the Crosse. Hee commended those Theologues, who, hauing brought the place of Malachie, added that of Saint Iohn, To worship in Spirit and trueth, because indeed, the one and the other did formally speake of the samething, and were to bee expounded alike, that no difficultie might be made concerning the word, Adorare: which certainely doth signi∣fie also a sacrifice, and the woman of Samaria tooke it in the generall sig∣nification. But when CHRIST added, That God is a Spirit, and will bee worshipped in Spirit, no man that is not willing to expound all things in an vnproper sence, will say that a Sacrament, which consisteth of a thing visible and inuisible, is purely spirituall, but composed of this, and the Ele∣mentary signe. Therefore he that will expound both those places of inter∣nall adoration, cannot be conuinced, and shall haue probability on his side; the application being plaine, that this is offered in all places, and by all Nati∣ons and is purely spirituall, as God is a pure Spirit. And he proceeded, and said that the words, This is my body which is giuen for you, and the blood which is shed for you, haue a more plaine meaning, if they be referred to the body and blood in their naturall eslence, then in their Sacramentall; as when it is said, CHRIST is the true Vine, which bringeth foorth the wine, it is not meant that the significatiue vine doth bring foorth Wine, but the reall. So, this is my blood which is shedde, doth not signifie that the Sacramentall and significatiue blood was shed, but the blood naturall and signified. And that which Saint Paul saith of taking part of the Sacrifice of the Iewes, and of the table of De∣uils, is vnderstood of the Rites which GOD did institute by Moyses, and of those which the Gentiles did vse in sacrificing; so that it cannot hence bee prooued that the Eucharist is a sacrifice; that it is plaine in Moyses, that, in the votiue sacrifices, the oblation was all presented to GOD, and a part burnt, which was called the Sacrifice; and that which remained belonged partly to the Priest, and partly to him that offered, which they did eate with whom they pleased; neither was this called, to sacrifice, but to participate of the thing sacrificed. The Gentiles did imitate the same; yea, that part which was not consumed vpon the Altar, was sent by some to bee sold; and this is the table which is not the Altar. The plaine meaning of Saint Paul is, that as the Iewes, eating the part belonging to him that offereth, which is a re∣mainder of the sacrifice, doe partake of the Altar, and the Gentiles likewise, so we, eating the Eucharist, are partakers of the sacrifice of the Crosse. And this is it which CHRIST said; Doe this in remembrance of mee; and which Saint Paul said; As often as ye shall eate of this bread and drinke of this Cup, you shall professe that the Lord dyed for you. But whereas it is said that the Apostles were, by the words of the Lord, ordained Priests, to offer sacrifice, when hee saith, Doe this, without doubt it is vnderstood of that which they had seene him to doe. Therefore it must be manifest first that he hath offered; which cannot be, because the opinions of the Diuines are various, and euery one confes∣seth, that both the one and the other is Catholique; and those who denie that CHRIST hath offered, cannot conclude by those words, that hee hath commanded the oblation. Then hee brought the arguments of the Prote∣stants, by which they prooue, that the Eucharist is not instituted for a sacrifice but for a Sacrament; and concluded that it could not bee said that the Masse was a sacrifice, but by the ground of Tradition, exhorting them to rest vpon this, and not to make the trueth vncertaine, by desiring to prooue too much. Then hee came to resolue the Protestant arguments, and gaue his Auditors ill satisfaction therein; for hee recited them with force, and good appearance, and answered weakely, so that hee did rather confirme them. This was ascribed by some to the shortnesse of time which remained vntill night, and others thought he was not able to expresse himselfe better, and Giueth bad satisfaction to the Prelates. the most intelligent were of opinion, that those answeres did not satisfie himselfe. The Fathers murmuring hereat, Iacobus Paiua, another Portugall Diuine, repeated, in the next Congregation, all his arguments, and resolued them, with satisfaction of his hearers; saying, in excuse of his Colleague, that he was of the same minde; and the testimonies of the Ambassadours and Prelates of Portugall of his honestie, and soundnesse of doctrine, caused the Legates not to be offended with him. Notwithstanding, hee departed a few dayes after; neither is his name in the Catalogues of the Diuines, but onely in those which were printed at Brescia, and Riua, before that time. The 28. of Iuly, Iohn Cauillone, a Iesuite, and a Diuine of the Duke of Baud∣ria, spake very cleerely concerning the Articles; representing all, as it were without difficultie, not by way of examination, or discussion, but stirring vp their affections to pietie. He shewed many miracles, which hapned in diuers times; affirmed, that from the time of the Apostles vntill Luther, no man doubted of it; alleadged the Liturgies of Saint Iames, Saint Marke, Saint Basil, and Saint Chrysostome. Concerning the oppositions of the Protestants, hee said, they were sufficiently resolued, without which they ought to beleeue they were but fallacies, because they come from persons alienated from the Church. And, in the end, he exhorted the Legats not to permit, that in any matter whatsoeuer, the arguments of the heretiques should bee proposed, without adding a most euident resolution; which he that cannot doe, must forbeare to relate them; because true pietie requireth, that the reasons con∣trarie to the doctrine of the Church should not be repeated, before the minds of the hearers be prepared, by shewing the peruersenesse and ignorance of the inuentors, and that their arguments are not hearkened vnto but by people of a weake braine; which being done, they may succinctly be rehearsed, with the intermediate proofes, adding the plaine answere well amplified; and when it doth seeme that some thing wanteth, the disputations is to bee diuer∣ted to another matter, for feare of breeding scruple in the minds of the audi∣tors, especially being Prelats, and Pastors of the Church. His discourse did please very much the greater part of the Prelats, and was commended for pi∣ous and Catholike, and that it did deserue that the Synod should make a De∣cree, and command that all Preachers, Readers, and Writers should obserue the rules set downe therein. But it gaue small satisfaction to the Ambassa∣dour of his Prince, who, after the Congregation, in presence of the Imperia∣lists, which came in complement to thanke him for his speech, said, that true∣ly it did deserue to be commended, for hauing taught how to vse Sophistry, in the simplicitie of Christian doctrine. Antonius of Valtelina, a Dominican Friar, one of the last which were to speake The Rites of the Church of Rome are va∣rious. of the sixe last articles of the Rites, said, that it was plaine by all histories, that anciently euery Church had her particular Ritual of the Masse, brought in by vse, and vpon occasion, rather then by deliberation and decree; and that the small Churches did follow the Metropolitan, and the greater, which were neere. The Romane rite hath beene, to gratifie the Pope, receiued in many Prouinces, though the Rites of many Churches are still most different from it. He spake of Mozarabo, where there are horses and fencings after the ma∣ner of the Moores, which haue a great mystery and signification; and this is so different from the Romane, that, if it were seene in Italy, one would not thinke it to be a Masse. But that of Rome also hath had great alterations (as will appeare to him that readeth the ancient booke, which remaineth as yet, and is called Ordo Romanus) which haue beene made, not onely in ancient times, but euen in the latter ages also, and the true Romane rite, obserued within three hundred yeeres, is not that which is now obserued by the Priests in that Citie, but that which is retained by the Order of S. Dominicke. For the vestments, vessels, and other ornaments of the Ministers and Altars, it appeareth, not by bookes onely, but by statues, and pictures, that they are so changed, that if the ancients should returne into the world, they would not know them. Therefore he concluded, that to binde all to approue the Rites which the Church of Rome vseth, might be reprehended, as a condemnati∣on of antiquitie, and of the vses of other Churches, and might receiue worse interpretations. He aduised to discusse the essence of the Masse, and not make mention of these other things. He returned to shew the difference betweene the present Rite of Rome, & that which is described in the Ordo Romanus; and amongst other particulars, insisted much vpon this, that, according to that, the Laickes did communicate with both kindes; and so began to perswade the grant of the Cup at this present. His discourse displeased the Auditorie; but the Bishop of Fiue Churches protected him, and said, that he had deliuered nothing vntruely, nor giuen any scandall, because he spake not to the com∣mon people, nor to fooles, but in an Assembly of learned men; to whom no trueth can giue bad edification, and that he that would condemne the Friar, as scandalous or rash, did first condemne himselfe, as vncapable of the trueth. The same difference which was betweene the Diuines, was also betweene The Prelates are diuided in opiniō, about publication of the doctrine. the Prelates, deputed to compose the Doctrine and the Anathematismes, to be proposed in Congregation. For, in the doctrine, being to alledge the proofes and explications, some approoued or disprooued one, and some another, ac∣cording to their affections. Martinus Peresius, Bishop of Segouia, who had beene present in the Councell at the handling of this matter, in the end of the yeere 1551 was of opinion, that the same doctrine and Canons should bee taken, which were composed to bee published in Ianuarie 1552. and that they should be reuiewed. But Cardinall Seripando did not approoue it, say∣ing, that there appeared in that an incomparable pietie and Christian zeale, but subiect to the calumnies of the aduersaries; and that the end ought not to bee the instruction of the Catholikes, as the aime of those Fathers see∣meth to haue beene, but the confusion of the heretickes. Therefore that they ought to be more reserued in all parts, and not to meddle with corre∣cting the things ordained then; that it was better to begin againe, and not to giue occasion that it may bee sayd, that they haue reaped that which was sowen by others. Granata dissented from all, and would not haue it said, that CHRIST made an oblation in the Supper, or did institute the sacrifice, by those words, Doe this in remembrance of me. For the first, Seripando said, hee did not thinke it necessarie, and that it might be omitted, it being sufficient that CHRIST hath instituted the oblation; but yet it was necessarie to say by what words it was instituted, and there bee not any other but those before montioned. But Iohannes Antonius Pantusa, Bishop of Lettere, was very pas∣sionate to haue the reasons of Malchizedec, Malachie, of the adoration of the woman of Samaria, the tables of Saint Paul, the oblation of CHRIST in the Supper, and euery other reason alleadged to be put into the Decree. In the end, after the disputation of many dayes, they agreed to put all in, that the Prelats might speake their opinions in the Congregations, and that might be taken away which did not please the maior part. They made also a colle∣ction of the abuses, which dayly happen, in the celebration of Masses, which were but few in respect of those which were noted in the yeere 1551. The thirteenth of August a generall Congregation was helde to receiue The Archbi∣shop of Lan∣ciano, and of Palerme, are contrar, in opinion. the Proctors of the Bishops of Ratisbone and Basil, that they might honour this second, to the shame of the Citie of Basil, which did contend with him for the title, saying, hee should not be called Bishop of Basil but of Bontruto. The draught being giuing forth, the Archbishop of Lanciano was of opinion, that the Anathematismes onely should be published, and the points of doctrine wholly omitted. He alledged the example of other Counsels, in very few of which it hath bin otherwise obserued, and that this same Councel of Trent, in the matter of Original sin, of the Sacraments, & of Baptisme, did leaue it out. He said it was for Doctors to shew reasons for their opinions, but the Iudges (such as Bishops in Councel are) were to make their sentences absolute; that, if a reason be added, not onely the Decree, but that also may bee impugned; without which euery one will thinke that the Synod hath been mooued by most potent arguments, and euery one will beleeue that it hath beene indu∣ced by those which himselfe doth most esteeme; that it is not secure to vse reasons, though most euident, because the heretickes will oppose them, and esteeme them but little; and the more is sayd, the more matter of contradi∣ction is ministred. He added also, that the coniunctures did require a sudden dispatch of the Councell, and did intimate, by words vnderstood by the Le∣gats and fauourers of the Pope, that by this meanes they should giue satis∣faction to his Holinesse. Octauianus Preconius, Archbishop of Palermo, who followed him in order, spake to the contrary; that the vse of Counsels hath beene to make a Symboll of their owne, vnto which the doctrine doeth an∣swere, and then to adde the Anathematismes. That this hauing beene obser∣ued in this Councell vnder Iulius, and now againe in the last Session, if it were not continued, it would be sayd, it was for want of reasons. Hee sayd it was base, to shun the disputation of Heretiques, yea that their contradiction would make the doctrine of the Councel shine more brightly, and that they were not to take care to finish the Councell quickely, but to finish it well. These two Prelats were so tedious, that the night concluded the Congrega∣tion, and they said it was no wonder if a Daminican of Genua (for so Landiano was) should be contrary to a Franciscan of Sicilie. The dayes following diuers practises were vsed, by some to finish, by others to prolong the Councell, and those who were interested vsed these and the like reasons. But the matter being proposed once againe in Congregation, the maior part thought fit to continue the order begun. This set on foote a∣gaine the disputation about residence, and the same men were desirous of the The Legats v practises to uert the scussion of Residence. conclusion of the Councel, and of the omission of that matter. Which gaue occasion to Mantua and Seripando to vse their endeauours, and to shewe the Pope, by effects, that they did accommodate themselues to his pleasure, ac∣cording to the instruction which Lanciano had brought them by word of mouth. They employed herein, to vse good perswasions, the Arch-bishop of Ocranto, the Bishops of Modena, Nola, and Brescia, who were not open Pa∣palins, but newly gained. They did ouercome the Italians, inducing them not to change their opinions, nor to contradict themselues, but not to vrge that matter any more. Many did promise that if the Spaniards would sur∣cease, themselues would doe the like. These foure Prelates made a note of all they had perswaded, and found they had gained much; but with the Spa∣niards it was not possible to preuaile a iot, yea this made them combine the more. They wrote a common letter to the King, in answere of that which his Maiestie had written to the Marquis of Pescara; first complaining of the The Sanish Prelats write a common letter to their kin , and tell him that there is no libertie in the Coun∣cell. Pope, for not suffering the point of Residence to bee decided, in which all the reformation of the Church is to be grounded, and with a very faire and reuerend manner of speech; they concluded there was no libertie in the Councell; that the Italians did ouercome with pluralitie of voyces, of which some for pensions, some for promises, and those who were least corrupted for feare, did obey the will of his Holinesse. They complained of the Le∣gats, who if they had suffered, as they ought, the point to bee concluded, when the fit time was, it might haue beene resolued for the seruice of GOD, with great concord, before they could haue written from Rome. That two thirds of the Prelats did desire the definition; that all the Ambassadours did fauour the truth herein: yet proceeding with modestie and charitie, they neuer had the courage to protest; They beseeched his Maiestie to consult with godly men about this Article, assuring themselues, that, after mature deliberation, he would fauour the opinion, as being catholike, pious, and ne∣cessary for making a good reformation. This accident assured the Legats, and their adherents, that it was impos∣sible to burie this matter in silence, seeing that the Spaniards were not paci∣fied, either by the Kings letter, or by the perswasions vsed to them: yea, had declared themselues againe, by writing into Spaine, which made them seeme to be insuperable. The Papalins therefore consulted together, and resolued to send to the Cardinall of Ferrara into France, a Copie of the Catholique Kings letter to Pescara, that he might procure such another from that King to the French Ambassadours, as well to hinder their practises to the contra∣ry, which they dayly made, as that the French Bishops, when they came, might not vnite with the Spaniards, as these did hope, and expect. And, to discredit the Spaniards with their King, they resolued to write into Spaine, that Granata and Segouia, their Leaders, who make shew of conscience, had promised their voyces to the Bishop of Fiue Churches, for the Communion of the Cup, not respecting his Maiestie, who doth so much abhorre it. At this time, the Pope, considering in what imminent danger his authori∣tie was, in regard of the difficulties and confusions of Trent, stirres of The Pope maketh le∣uies of Soul∣diers. France, and of the Diet which was prepared in Garmanie, in which the Em∣perour would be forced for his owne interests to yeeld to the Protestants, thought fit to secure himselfe by all meanes, and had giuen money a month before to ten Captaines, to raise souldiers, which were lodged in Romania and Marca and grew very familiar with the Ministers of the Princes of Italy, and with the Cardinals who were their neere friends. This bred a suspicion in the Spaniards and French-men; and the French, Ambassadour exhorted him to desist from making prouisions of warre, for feare of disturbing the Coun∣cell. The Pope answered, that the English men and Protestants of Germanie, hauing declared themselues that they will assist the Hugonots of France, it was not fit for him to be vnprouided; that the world was full of heretiques, and therefore it was necessarie to protect the Councell, as well by force, as by authoritie. The Spanish Ambassadour went not the same way, but con∣firming that the proceedings of the protestants were to bee suspected, pro∣mised him all ayde and assistance in his Kings name; which hee did to hinder the making of a league in Italie, which would neuer haue beene pleasing in Spaine. The Pope accepted the offer; and, vnderstanding at the And is plea∣sed with his Legates. same time the vnion of his Legats, and how zealous they were to doe him seruice, was much consolated. And hee sent them word that they should hinder all speach concerning residence, if it were possible, or, if they could not, should make vse of pluralitie of voyces; but aboue all, that they should dis∣patch ckely, that they might conclude it before the comming of the French men, and the assembling of the Dietin Germany, that the Emperour for the great desire hee hath to make his sonne King of the Romanes, may not suffer himselfe to be perswaded by the Protestants, to propose in Coun∣cell something more preiudiciall, then those things which haue been pro∣posed already. The French Ambassadours, after they had often made a modest request, The request of the French Ambassadors. that their Prelates might be expected, did, the tenth of August, present it in writing. The tenor whereof was, That the most Christian King, resol∣uing to obserue and reuerence the Decrees of Councels, which represent the vniuersall Church, doth desire that the Canons of this may be receiued by the aduersaries of the Church of Rome, of which those who are not se∣parated haue no neede; and hee thinketh that those which are to bee made, will be more acceptable, if the Session bee prorogued, that, vnto so great a multitude of Italian and Spanish Prelates, the French Bishops may be added, of whom, in the ancient Councels of the Church, great account hath beene made. The cause of their absence, which they the Legates haue heard be∣fore, and iudged necessarie, will cease quickely, as it is hoped, and, in case it should not, yet they will arriue before the ende of September, because they are so commanded by the King. And hereby it will come to passe also, that the Protestants, for whose sake the Councell was intimated, who say e∣uery day that they will bee present in it, will haue lesse cause to complaine, because they cannot require more maturitie in this weightie businesse, nor accuse them for too much precipitation. They demaunded that, while their Bishops were expected (that none might thinke that the King did de∣signe that by this meanes the Councell should be idle or dissolue) they would treat onely concerning manners, and discipline, and the two points remai∣ning, in matter of the Communion of the Cup. They added this last clause not to displease the Imperialists, who had hope to obtaine it in that Session. The Legats, hauing consulted, answered in writing; that the prelats of France were, before the Councel was opened, expected almost sixe moneths, and af∣ter it was begun, which was principally done in regard of France, they de∣ferred to handle any matter of weight sixe moneths more, into which be∣cause they are now entred, it is not conuenient to desist, because they could not so doe, without dishonouring the Councell, and much incommodating so many Fathers; but to prolong the day of the Session was not in their power to grant, without consent of the Fathers; and therefore that they could not expect from them a more determinate answere. The French-men then desired, that it might be granted to them to make their proposition in the Congregation. But the Legates answered, that, be∣fore it had been tolde them, and all the other Ambassadours, that they . might negotiate with none but the Legates, and that it was formerly decreed in that same Councell that Ambassadours might not publiquely speake in Congregation, but onely the day in which they are receiued, and their Mandate is read. This made the French-men complaine much to the Bishops, and especially to the Spaniards, and to say it was a great absurdity that the Ambassages should be addressed to the Synod, and the Mandats pre∣sented to it, and yet they might not treate with it, but with the Legats onely, as if they were Ambassadours to them, who are but Ambassadors themselues, as the Pope who sendeth them is a Prince; and as hee is a Bishop, and the first Bishop, they are but Proctors of one who is absent, and haue beene al∣wayes so esteemed in ancient Councels. They alleadged the example of the Councels of Nice; Ephesus, Chalcedon, Trullus, of the second of Nice also, and that the breach betweene the Pope and the Councell of Basil was, be∣cause they pretended to change this ancient and laudable institution. That this was a kinde of grieuous seruitude in the Councell that they could not be heard, and an iniurie to Princes, who could not treate with those with whom they were to manage the affaires of their states; that the Decree al∣leadged by them, was not shewed, and that it was fit to see it, and to know from whom it proceeded. For if the Legates for the time being did make it, they did extend their authoritie with great exorbitancie; if the Synode, it was necessary to examine how and when. For it was an intolerable incon∣uenience, which was done in the beginning of this last Conuocation of the Councell, that the Legates, with a few Italian Prelats, who came from Rome onely, should make a Decree, and practise it with rigour, that nothing may bee proposed, but by the Legates; so that the way is barred, to all Princes, and Prelates, to bee able to propose a good reformation, which would bee for the seruice of God; but in stead of that, the doctrine contro∣uersed with the Protestants is handled in their absence, without any be∣nefit of the Catholiques, who doe not doubt of it, and aliening the Pro∣testants, by condemning them before they are heard. And their com∣playnts were renewed when they were enformed from Monsieur de l'Isle, Ambassadour of their King in Rome, that, by the Kings order, hee had made the same request to the Pope, that the French Bishops might bee expected all September, and that his Holinesse had referred it to the Legates. Lansac sayd, it was a thing worthy of eternall memorie; The Pope referred it to the Legates, the Legates cannot doe it without the Synode, and that cannot heare them; and so the King and the world are deluded. The eleuenth of August the Bishops began to giue their voyces, concer∣ning the Decrees in matter of the Sacrifice; and almost all did lightly and v∣niformely passe ouer all, but onely that some did not approoue the put∣ting in of the oblation of our Lord, in the Supper, and others did main∣taine it, andg for many dayes, the number on both sides was almost equall. I must not omit, as a thing worthy of memorie, that the fourteenth of Au∣gust Why the Ge∣nerall of the Iesuite is not in the Cata∣logue of those who assisted in Councell. Iames Lainez, Generall of the Iesuites did arriue; about whose place, because that societie had neuer been in Councell, there was much adoe. For hee would not content himselfe with the last place of the Generals of the Regulars, and three of the same societie laboured to put him forward; for which cause hee is not named in the Catalogues of those who assisted in the Councell. The Spanish Prelats presented to the Legats a request subscribed by them all; in which, hauing rehearsed many inconueniences, caused by the exorbi∣tant graces, and priuiledges, granted to those of the Conclaue, they demanded a The Priui∣ledges of the Conclauists. reuocation, or, at the least, a moderation of them. The Cardinals, entring into the Conclaue, where they are locked vp for the election of the future Pope, vse to haue two seruants apiece, one for a Chaplaine, another to serue in the Cham∣ber; which are elected by them rather for negotiations, then to serue their persons, and are ordinarily the best Courtiers of Rome. These oftentimes haue no lesse part in those affaires then their Masters; so that it hath beene an old vse, that, when they come out of the Conclaue, the new Pope receiueth them all into his family, and giueth them Priuiledges, fitting the degree of eue∣ry one, of one kinde to Priests, of another to Seculars. Amongst those which then were vsually giuen to Priests, were these; that they might resigne, to any Ecclesiasticall person, the Benefices they held, and cause them to bee conferred vpon whomsoeuer they would name; that they might change their Benefices with any beneficed man, themselues making choyce of the persons to conferre both the one and the other. By this exorbitant Facultie, an o∣pen merchandizing was caused, and the Bishops perceiued that where any Conclauist was, Canonries, Parish Churches, and other Benefices were scan∣dalously changed, at pleasure. The Spaniards complained much because great inconueniences had lately happened in Catalonia, by meanes hereof. But the Legates sayd, that the moderation of such abuses belonged onely to the Pope, because it concerned persons of his familie, and that it had beene often concluded, to leaue the reformation of the Court to him, much more of his familie; but they promised to write to his Holinesse, and to desire a prouision: as they did. The Pope considering that the Conclauists of account remayne at Rome, and with the Cardinals, and that the proui∣sion would touch onely some few, and those of small esteeme, men retired to their houses, and that it was fit for his affaires, to giue some satisfaction to the Prelates of the Councell, especially to the Spaniards, resolued to yeelde vnto them, and, in the next moneth, made a reuocation of many priuiledges granted vnto those, which notwithstanding was not obserued by his Successor. Faber, the third French Ambassadour, parted from Trent, to returne to France, which made the Papalins suspect that he went to giue an account of the Councell, and to sollicite the comming of the French Prelates: and they thought hee would doe bad offices, because they saw his inclination by some of his letters written to the Chancellor, which they had intercepted, for the ill satisfaction he and his Colleagues had, because they could not obtaine the prorogation. Which being related to Lansac, by some creatures of Simoneta, to discouer the trueth, hee answered that hee was gone for his owne parti∣cular occasions, and that it was no maruell, if, the defects of the Councell be∣ing so manifest, one did thinke they might be related. But concerning the Sacrifice of the Masse, in the Congregation held vn∣till A sharpe con∣tention about the oblation of Christ in the Supper. the eighteenth, all contended resolutely about the oblation of CHRIST in the Supper: and Father Salmeron was the principall man to perswade the affir∣matiue. Hee went to the houses of those who were of the other opinion, especially of those who had not giuen their voyces, perswading them to bee silent, or, at the least to speake remisly, and vsed the name of Cardinall Var∣miense principally, and sometime of Seripando, intimating the other Legates, without naming them. And this he did with such importunity, that the BB. of Chiozza and of Veglia, complained of it in the Congregation of the 18 of August. And this second spake for the negatiue with very forcible reasons. Hee told them they should consider well of it, because one propitiatory sacri∣fice being offered, if it bee sufficient to expiate, no other is offered but onely for thankesgiuing; and he that maintaineth a propitiatorie (acrifice in the Supper, must needes confesse that, by it, wee are redeemed, and not by his death; which is contrary to the Scripture and Christian doctrine, which ascribe our redemption to this. And if any say it is all one, begunne in the Supper, and ended in the Crosse, hee falleth into another inconuenience as great, be∣cause it is a contradiction to say that the beginning of a Sacrifice is a Sacrifice, and if one should cease after the beginning, and goe no further, no man would say hee had sacrificed: and it will neuer bee beleeued that, if CHRIST had not been obedient vnto his Father, euen vnto the death of the Crosse, but had onely made an oblation in the Supper, wee had been redeemed; so that it cannot bee sayd that such an oblation may bee called a Sacrifice, because it is a beginning of it. Hee sayd hee would not absolutely defend that those arguments were insoluble, but that the Councell ought not to tie the vnder∣standing of any, who had conceiued an opinion, vpon so good reasons. He said, that, as hee made no difficultie to call the Masse a propitiatorie sacrifice, so he could not by any meanes be satisfied, that it should be said that CHRIST did offer, because it is enough to say that hee commanded the oblation. For (said hee) if the Synod doth affirme that CHRIST did offer, the sacrifice was either propitiatory, and so it will fall into the difficulties before mentioned, or not propitiatory, and so, by that, it cannot bee concluded that the Masse is pro∣pitiatorie: yea, on the contrary, it will be said that the oblation of CHRIST in the Supper was not propitiatorie, and therefore that of the Priest in the Masse ought not to bee. Hee concluded, that it was more secure to say onely that Salmeron the Iesuit is taxed for proceed∣ing by faction in matter of faith. CHRIST commanded the Apostles to offer a propitiatory sacrifice in the Masse. Then hee obliquely touched Salmeron, saying, that, if in points of reformati∣on, practises were vsed, it were tolerable, because they are humane, but to proceede by faction, in matter of faith, is not a good example. The Bishop perswaded so many, that it was almost the common opinion, not to make mention of the propitiatory sacrifice offered by CHRIST in the Supper. The same day the Archbishop of Prague, who came not long before from the Emperour, presented his letters to the Legates, and letters came also from the Nuncio Delphinus, resident with his Maiestie: both which signified, that his desire was that the sacrifice of the Masse should not be handled before the Diet, and that the Article of the communion of the Cup might be dispatched in the first Session. The Archbishop presented also, in the Emperours name, a forme of reformation. The Popes command, to finish the Councell quickly, was so peremptory, that the Emperours first demand could not bee granted: but hee was partly satisfied in the expedition of the matter of the communion of the Cup. For the Pope, vnto whom the Emperour had made the same requests, wrote to Trent that they should doe so. Therefore, in the next Congregation, Mantua proposed that, the doctrine of the Sa∣crifice being concluded, the communion of the Cup should be handled. As the Prelats were giuing their voyces, it was remembred, that the difficultie, whether CHRIST did offer himselfe in the Supper, was not proposed to be disputed by the Diuines, howsoeuer they haue accidentally spoken of it, and therefore that it would bee good to propose it, that it might bee disputed on expresly, or omitted. The generall of the Iesuites was the last that spake in this matter; who was wholly for the oblation of CHRIST, and spent a Congregation him∣selfe alone, whereas, in the other, betweene seuen or tenne Prelates did speake. Euery one hauing giuen his voyce, howsoeuer the opinions were almost equally balanced, yet the Legates at the earnest intreaty of Ʋarmiense, resol∣ued to put the oblation into the Decree, but not vsing the word Propitiatorie. In the end of the Congregation, the Bishop of Fiue Churches seconding the proposition of the Cardinall of Mantua, made an oration; in which hauing The Bishop of. Fiue Chur∣ches maketh an oration concerning th Commu∣nion of the Cup.: first repeated the negotiations and paines, taken by the Emperour for the seruice of the Christian Common-wealth, and to restore the Catholique pu∣ritie, not onely after hee was assumed to the Empire, but in the life time of Charles, hee added, that his Maiestie had found by experience, that the most grieuous contentions and complaints of the people did arise from the pro∣hibition of the Chalice, and had therefore desired it should bee treated on in Councell. Whereupon himselfe, and the other Ambassadours, by commis∣sion from him did, at the first, put the Fathers in mind to consider that Chri∣stian charitie did require, that they should not suffer so many sacriledges, and slaughters in most noble Prouinces, & hinder the reducing of so many soules into the bosome of the Catholique Church, by enioying the obseruation of a Rite with too much seuerity; that there is an infinite number of those, who hauing not abandoned the Orthodox faith, are notwithstanding weake of conscience, who cannot bee cured but by this permission; that his Imperi∣all Maiestie is forced to make continuall warre with the Turkes, which hee cannot doe but by the common contribution of Germanie; whereof so soone as hee maketh mention, they begin to speake of Religion, and principally demand the vse of the Cup, which if it be not granted, and so the controuer∣sies taken away, it is to bee suspected that not Hungary onely, but Germany will bee possessed by the Barbarians, with danger of other bordering Pro∣uinces; that the Church hath vsed alwayes to embrace those rites which are contrary to the new heresies: and therefore it is good to take this resolution which doth shew the faith of the veritie of the most blessed Eucharist against the Sacramentaries; that there is no neede, as some require, to send a Proctor expresly in the name of those who doe desire it, as was done in the Coun∣cell of Basill; for then all the Kingdome alone demaunding that fauour, it might easily bee done: but now not one people, or Nation alone, but an in∣finite number dispersed in many Regions, doeth make the demand; that it is no marueile if the Petition were first presented to the Pope, and not obtained, because his Holinesse did wisely referre all to the Synode, to stoppe the mouthes of the Heretiques, who will not receiue fauours from that Sea, and because hee would not seeme to derogate from the Councell of Constance, it beeing conuenient, that the vse of the Cup taken away by a generall Councell should bee permitted by the definition of another, as also to giue reputation to the Synode, to which it is fit to remit this de∣termination which may compose the discords of the Church; that hee had letters from Rome, that the Pope did thinke the demand honest, and necessary, and tooke it in good part that it was desired of the Councell. Then he presented the Article concerning the Cup, as hee desired it should bee handled. And it contained, in substance; that it might bee granted to the States of the Emperour, as they comprehend all Germany and Hungary This beeing read, the Prelates made a great busselling, and gaue manifest signes that they would contradict. But they were quieted for that present, because it was told them, that they might deliuer their opinion, when the voyces were collected. The third of September, the French Ambassadours made a new request to the Legates, that, to giue more credit to the Councell, and to make the Decrees thereof to bee more easily receiued in their Kingdome, they would prorogue the Session a moneth, or fiue weekes, handling other matters in the meane while, to publish afterwards in the next Session aswell that which hath beene discussed and determined already, as that which shall be handled and determined in the meane space; for so no time would be lost, the Coun∣cel would not be prolongued, and the King and the whole Kingdome would receiue great satisfaction. Besides, the Prelates of Polonia being expected to come shortly, it would bee a thing of much edification to the vniuersality of Coristendome, to shew that esteeme is held of two such considerable King∣domes. This instance was made the day before the Legates receiued letters from the Cardinall of Ferrara, that the Cardinall of Loraine and the French Prelates would come by all meanes, and twenty Parisian Doctors with them. Ne es of the comming of the Cardinall of Loraine to Trent, with many Prelates and Diuines. And other letters were shewed also, written to diuers Prelats by their friends, giuing the same aduice; adding, that their intention was to handle the point of the superiority of the Pope and Councell. Therefore they thought it so much the more necessary to dispatch the things already discussed, that they might not be crossed with new troubles, fearing also that, to the bad humors in Trent worse beeing added, and more violent, so many difficulties would bee raised, that either the Councell would bee infinite, or some preiudiciall thing resolued. But the Legates concealing these reasons, answered the Am∣bassadors with honourable termes, in the maner formerly vsed by them. That the Councell was called principally for France; that their Prelates had beene long since called; that to entertaine so many Fathers a longer time, in the same expectation, would bee an indignity to the Councell, and that, if the things discussed were not published, the world would thinke that it was ei∣the by reason of some dissention amongst themselues, or because the reasons of the Protestants had some validity. But Lansac being satisfied with no an∣swere, and still pressing the dilation more, complained that the Councell was The com∣plaint of Lansac. opened for the French-men, and yet they were not expected; that hee could neuer obtaine any request of the Legates; that his remonstrances were con∣temned; that stead of gratifying his King, they vsed greater precipitation that hee did not attribute this to the Legates, knowing they did nothing but what was commanded from Rome; that they were in an error for suspecting the comming of the French-men; that hauing assayed so often to obtaine that which was iust, and ought to bee granted without demand, it was now fit to thinke of other remedies; and spake so, as that he made them doubt he would doe some extraordinary matter. This raised a rumour in the Councell, that it would bee dissolued. Which pleased the greater part; some, to free themselues from the incommodities they suffered; some because they thought that remaining there they should doe God little or no seruice; and the Papalins, for feare of some attempt. It was publiquely said, that Loraine, vpon all occasions, had shewed an inclination to diminish the Popes autho∣rity, that hee would open some way for France to ascend to the Papacie, which he thought not fit should be wholly in the disposition of the Colledge of Cardinals, consisting of Italians; that France hath euer pretended to limit the Popes power, to subiect it to the Canons and Counsels; that this opinion would bee fauoured by the Spaniards, who already, howsoeuer they were much reserued in their speaches, had declared their desire for the same and would be followed by many Italians, who, because they cannot, or know not how to make vse of the preferments of the Court, doe enuie those that doe, besides those who are desirous of nouity not knowing why; of whom there seemed to be a considerable number. In Trent a discourse was published, which passed through the hands of A discourse published in Trent. all, and was sent by the Legates to Rome; in which it was shewed that it was impossible to finish the Councell in a short time, because all Princes were in∣clined to prolong it. Of the French men and Imperialists it could not bee doubted, in regard of their demand made for the dilation. The King of Spaine shewed the same minde, hauing destinated the Count di Luna for Ambassadour to the Synode, so soone as the Diet of Francfort should bee en∣ded, to which hee was first sent. The Prelates, by their redious discourses, would draw the matters in length also. Then was shewed the impossibility to continue long in this sort, there being no prouision of corne but for Sep∣tember onely: and it beeing not knowen where any may bee gotten, in re∣gard of the generall dearth, and the delay, made by the Emperour and Duke of Bauaria, to answere the demand made vnto them concerning victuals, it did seeme they could not bee relieued. It was added that the Protestants would alwayes be laying some snares to make the Fathers fall into some dis∣honourable resolution; and raising nouities to cause Princes to propose things preiudiciall; that the Bishops seemed to aspire to liberty, and would not in time be contained within such narrow bounds, and that the Synode would not onely be made free, but licentious also: and, by a fine metaphor, the pro∣gresse of the Councell was compared to a mans body, which doth get, with delight, a small, and in the beginning not regarded French infection, which afterwards doth encrease, and possesseth all the blood, and all the powers of it. It exhorted the Pope to consider well on it, and not to come to a transla∣tion, or suspension, for feare of being contradicted by all Princes, but to learne how to vse those remedies which God doth send him. Amidst these troubles the Legates hastened to conclude the Decrees for Three opini∣ons about the grant of the Chalice. the Session. That of the sacrifice stood in good termes; but they talked still of the grant of the Chalice: and there were three opinions. One extreame, and negatiue, that, by no meanes, it should be granted; another affirmatiue, that it should bee granted, with the conditions, and cautions, which seemed good to the Synode, which was maintained by fifty of the most intelligent persons; and, amongst these, some would haue Ambassadours sent into the Countreys which did desire it, to take information wheth the grant were fit, and with what conditions. The third, that it should be remitted to the Pope; which was diuided into many branches. Some would haue had an absolute remission, without declaring whether he should grant, or deny it; and others, with a declaration, that he should grant it, according to his wis∣dome. Some would haue restrained him to particular Countreys, and others left him to his liberty. The Spainyards did absolutely deny it, because the Am∣bassadour Vargas had written to them from Rome, that it would bee for the good of religion and seruice of the King, in regard of the Low Countreys and the State of Milan, who, when they should see their neighbours enioy that liberty, would require it themselues also, and whether it were graunted or denied, a great gate would be opened to heresie. The Venetian Prelates, perswaded by their Ambassadours; were of the same minde also for the same reason. I will recite the principall Authors onely of these opinions, and the things remarkable spoken by them. The Cardinall Madruccio, who spake first, ap∣proued Of which the principall au∣thors were. the grant, without exception. The three Patriarches did absolutely deny it. Fiue Arch-bishops who followed, referred themselues to the Pope. Granata, who had promised the Emperours Ambassadours to fauour them, that they might adhere to him in the matter of Residence, on which he insi∣sted aboue all, said hee did neither affirme not deny, but that it could not bee concluded in that Session, and was necessarily to be deferred vntill another, but would not referre, himselfe, saying it was a matter of great deliberati∣on, because it could not be regulated by the Scripture, or Traditions, but by wisedome onely; wherein it is necessary to proceed with circumspection, for feare of being deceiued in the circumstances of the fact, which cannot be knowne by speculation, or discourse; that hee made no difficulty, as o∣thers did, for the danger of effusion, shewing that the Wine is not spilt in the ablution which is now made; that, if it would make an vnion in the Church, it should not be abhorred, it being but a Rite, which may be changed for the good of the faithfull: but yet hee reserued himselfe, because other extraua∣gant things might afterwards be demanded; that, to auoid errour, it would be good first to haue recourse vnto God, by Prayers, Processions, Masses, almes, and fastings: afterwards, not to omit humane diligence, in regard there are no Prelates of Germanie in the Councell, to write to the Metropoli∣tans to assemble them, and examine the matter well, and to informe the Sy∣nod according to their conscience. He concluded, that, it being impossible to doe so many things in a short space, he thought fit to desist now, and de∣ferre the determination vntill another time. Iohn Baptista Castagna, Arch-Bishop of Rosano, disswading the grant absolutely, spake against those that made, and those that fauoured the request, taxing them not to be good Ca∣tholiques, because, if they were, they would not desire a thing vnfit, with scandall of others. And he said plainely, that the request did ayme to bring in heresie, and vsed such words, that euery one vnderstood, that hee meant Maximilian King of the Bobemians. The Arch-Bishop of Braga, or Braganza, said, hee was informed that in Germanie there were foure sorts of men. True, Catholikes: Obstinate here∣tickes: Concea d heretickes; and men weake in faith. That the first doe not demaund the grant, yea oppose it; the second care not for it; the third desire it, that they may couer their heresie, because they may counterfeit in all other things, but in this; which therefore was not to bee granted them, for that it would foster their errours; but the weake in faith were not such, but onely for the bad opinion they haue of the Ecclesiasticall power, and of the Pope, and doe not demaund the Cup for deuotion, which is found one∣ly in persons of a goodlife, whereas they are drowned in vanities and plea∣sures of the world, and doe vnwillingly confesse and communicate once a yeere, which doth not demonstrate such heate of zeale that they should de∣sire to communicate with both kindes. He concluded, that the diligence of the Fathers of Basil ought to be imitated, that foure or six Prelates of the body of the Councel should be elected, who, as their Legats accompanied with Di∣uines fit to preach, should visite the Prouinces named by his Imperiall Maie∣stie, or where they found penitent men, who desired the Cup for deuoti∣on, or because they were accustomed to that Rite, and for all other matters would obey the Church, should reconcile them, and grant it vnto them. The Titular of Philadelphia, though a Dutch man, said, that to deny it, be∣ing demaunded by the Emperour, was dangerous, and pernitious to grant it; but that he was resolued rather to displease men then speake against his conscience, that it was impossible to practise the vse of the Chalice, without danger of effusion, carrying it about, to places remote, and of bad passage, many times by night, intime of snow, raine, and ice; that the Protestants would boast, and inclucate to the people, that the Papists doe begin to know the trueth; and that, without doubt, those who make the request doe maintaine that the precept of CHRIST cannot be fulfilled, but by taking the Eucharist vnder both kindes. And he tooke in his hand a Chatechisme writ∣ten in Dutch, which hee read and expounded in Latine, and declared what their opinion was. He added, that the Catholikes would haue the worse, and to gaine a few, would loose very many; that they would doubt on which side the true faith was seeing the Catholikes yeeld to the customes of the Pro∣testants; that the grant made vnto Germanie would mooue other Prouinces, and especially France; that the Heretiques will make proofe by this, to ouer∣sway the constancie which they haue found in the doctrine of the Catholike Church. He concluded, that it ought to bee deferred, at the least, vntill the end of the Diet, that the Dutch Prelates might send to the Councell, ap∣proouing the opinion of Granata to defer, and the other of Braga, that those who desire the Cup haue all a roote of heresie; and added, that the Empe∣rours Ambassadours had made such passionate instances, and such effectu∣all perswasions, that, being interested so much, it was not fit they should bee present in Congregation, that euery one might speake freely. Fryar Thomas Casellus Bishop of Caua, hauing recounted that the Bishop of Fiue Churches had perswaded many, saying, that if it were not granted, so many mischiefes would follow, that it had beene better neuer to haue called a Councell, shew∣ed at large, that it ought not to bee granted though the losse of many soules should ensue, because a greater number would perish, if it were granted. The Bishop of Captemberg, in Stiria, desired also that the Emperours Am∣bassadours should retire, and inueighed much against the words of fiue Chur∣ches, related by Caua. Many of the Spanish Prelates made the same instance to the Legats, that the Imperialists might not bee present in the treaties of the Fathers during this consultation, it being sufficient for them to know, in the end, the resolution of the Synod. But others contradicted; saying, that ra∣ther they then others should bee present, and that to exclude those who haue interest, hath neuer beene the custome of Synods. The Legats, considering that they had beene present from the beginning, and that they could not bee excluded without danger of tumult, resolued to make no innouation. The Bishop of Conimbria was of opinion, that it should bee referred to the Pope, to grant the Grace, with fiue conditions. That those that were to make vse of it should abiure all heresies, and, in particular, should sweare that they beleeue, that as much is contained vnder one kind, as vnder both, and as much grace receiued; that they should banish the heretique Preachers; that in their places they should not keepe the Chalice, nor carry it to the sicke; and that his Holinesse should not commit this to the Ordinaries, but send Le∣gats, and that the resolution should not bee made in Councell. For when it should be published it would make the heretikes proud, and scandalize ve∣ry many Catholiques; and therefore, in case this dispensation were to bee granted, it ought not to be put in the eyes of all nations. The Bishop of Mo∣dena maintained that it could not bee denied, because, after the Councell of Constance, the Church hauing reserued to it selfe power to dispence, hath al∣wayes shewed, that sometimes it would be expedient to doe it; that Paul the third had formerly sent Nuncij, to release it, because hee perceiued that the prohibition had done no good in so many yeeres; that the Bohemians would neuer be reduced without it; that the vse of the Cup was conformable to the institution of CHRIST, and anciently obserued by the Church. Friar Iasper of Cassall, Bishop of Liria, a man of an exemplary life, and learned, defended the same opinion. He sayd in summe, that he did not won∣der at the diuersitie of opinions, because those who denie haue the moderns to follow, and those who grant doe follow antiquitie, the Councell of Basil, and Paul the third; that in this variety, hee adhered to the affirmatiue, be∣cause the thing was good in its owne nature, and profitable, and expedient with the conditions proposed, and beeing addressed as a thing necessary to reduce soules, hee that did desire the end, must needes vse the meanes; that the necessitie of the meanes ought not to be doubted of, because the Empe∣ror did affirme it, whom he did beleeue that GOD would not suffer to be de∣ceiued in so important a businesse, and the rather, because Charles was of the same opinion; and the demand of the Duke of Bauaria and of the French-men did prooue the same. And if any did doubt that the Secular Princes were not well informed in this cause, being Ecclesiasticall, he must needes be∣leeue the Bishop of Fiue Churches, and the two other Bishops of Hungarie, who were in the Councell. And because it had been sayd, that the Father was to bee imitated, who receiued his prodigall sonne, but not before he re∣pented, he said they ought rather to imitate the shepheard in the Gospel, who fought, with great diligence, in desart and mountainous places, the lost sheepe, and laying it on his necke, brought it to the sheepefold. The dis∣course of this Prelate, for the fame of his honestie and excellent learning, and because hee was a Portugall, whom euery one thought would haue been most rigorous in maintaining the Rites vsed, did not onely confirme those who were of his opinion, but made also very many of the opposites to wauer. The Bishop of Osemo who spake after him, sayd; I doubt we must drinke this Cup, by all meanes, and GOD grant it may be with good successe. Iohan∣nes Baptista Osius defended, that this vse ought not to be granted, because the Church hath neuer wont to grant the least thing according to the positions of the heretiques, yea alwayes to constitute the contrary. He shewed by that which happened amongst the Bohemians, who had alwayes been the most rebellious, that one ought not to promise himselfe any thing of the conuer∣sion of heretiques, but to make account hee shall bee deceiued by them, and that it was necessary to make the Emperour vnderstand, that this demaund was not profitable for his State. He desired the Legats also, that they should not ground themselues vpon those who had from the beginning spoken of referring it to the Pope, because they spake confusedly, and that the suffrages ought to be collected, as vpon other occasions, by making euery one answer Yea, or No, and to omit those artificiall wayes which some had beene for∣ced to vse to giue satisfaction. Hee was followed by Friar Iohannes di Munna∣tones, Bishop of Sogorne, who said, that first hee was of opinion that the Grace ought not to be denied, but hauing heard the Bishop of Riete, was, by his con∣science, forced to change, and defend the negatiue; that the Councell, which was iudge in this cause, ought to haue regard that, yeelding vnaduisedly to the Emperour, they doe not preiudice other Princes. Friar Marcus Laureus, Bishop of Campania, sayd, that the Emperour did heartily desire this grant, but that it would bee sufficient for his Maiestie for the gaining of his people, to make a shew onely, and therefore that it would be fit to giue him an ac∣count of the difficulties, that he might iustifie himselfe with them. Petrus Danesius, Bishop of Lauaur, did not define whether it were fit to grant the Cup or not, but spake onely against the opinion of referring it to the Pope. He sayd in summe, that perhaps the Pope would be offended, be∣cause hauing beene first requested himselfe, and hauing, either for that hee knew not how, or would not resolue, referred it to the Councell, it is a ma∣nifest argument that hee would not bee pleased, if it were remitted to him a∣gaine with the same ambiguities; and the Councell which consisteth of ma∣ny, may more easily beare the burthen of the importunities of those who complaine for want of satisfaction, and require a remedie, then the Pope a∣lone, who, to maintaine his dignitie, must hold an esteeme of many respects. Besides, it will giue occasion of calumnies, that the Pope remitteth to the Councell, and the Councell to the Pope, to delude the world. Afterwards he came to Logicall termes, saying, that either it is referred to the Pope as supe∣riour, or as inferiour; that either the Councell, not daring to resolue, in re∣gard of the difficulties, doeth remit it to a greater power, or, to free it selfe, doth referre it to an inferiour: but neither the one nor the other is fit to bee done, before it be decided which power is superiour; because euery one will hence draw an argument for his opinion, and much occasion will be giuen for disputations and diuision. Hee sayd, with asseueration, that no wise Pre∣late ought to consent to the reference, if he were not first assured in which of the two kindes it ought to bee done; yea, that it was impossible it should bee done, but that the words would shew either the one or the other. The Papa∣lins were impatient to heare this Prelate. The Bishop of Fiue Churches spake in those Congregations, in his place, as a Prelate; and following immediatly after, with other new discourses, he made them forget the former, and making a long digression, perswaded the grant of the Cup. Then he answered poynt by poynt, to all the oppositions. Hee sayd there was no need to answere those who would exclude him from the Congregations, because their reasons were as strong against the Empe∣rour himselfe, if he had beene present; that hee would not answere the dan∣gers of effusion, because if they had beene remedilesse, the Councell of Con∣stance, would not haue reserued power to dispence; that the discourses of those who perswade the negatiue seeme vnto him weighty, and effectual, and able to draw him to that side, if hee had not practise and experience in that businesse, which hath more neede of such knowledge, then of Science and speculatiue reasons. To those that said, that the like grant did neuer any good in times past, he answered, that it was quite contrary, because, after the treatie of Basil, many Catholiques were preserued in Bohemia, who still liue in peace with the Calistini, and haue lately receiued the new Arch-B▪ of Prague, by whom they cause their Priests to bee ordained. To those that feared to put new cogitations into other Nations, hee answered, that those would not bee moued by such an example, because hauing in them no mixture of here∣sie, and being desirous to preserue the purity of Religion, they would refuse the Cup, though it were offered vnto them; that the Germans the more it is denied them, the more they desire it, but if it were granted them, they might bee diuerted from that vse; the feare that when they had obtayned this, they would passe to other demands was too suspicious, and if they should, they might alwayes be denied; that it could not be called a nouitie, because it had been granted by the Councell of Basill, and by Paul the third; whose mini∣sters, had they been more couragious, and not retired from that dispensation for small terrors, because some impertinent Friars preached against them, would haue done more good; that hee was much offended with the reason alleadged by some, that as no man could be receiued with condition that for∣nication should bee permitted vnto him, no more can these people, who would be reconciled, so that they may haue the vse of the Cup. For the first condition is absolutely bad, and this onely as it is prohibited. Hee answered the Bishop of Sogorne, that the Emperour did not contend with any Prince, nor sought preiudices against others, and desired the Cup for his people by Grace, and not by way of Iustice. But vpon those who sayd the care hereof ought not to bee committed to the Ordinaries, but that Delegates were to bee sent from the Apostolique Sea, hee iested somewhat sharpely; as∣king whether hee that had the charge of their soules, and all the Spirituall gouernement might not bee trusted with a thing indifferent, or whether they thought that this thing did exceed the Episcopall gouernement. He said that to referre it to the Pope was to giue him new and continuall molestations. To Philadelphia hee answered, that the Catholiques would not onely not be troubled, but consolated, because they might liue vnited with those, with whom they are now much troubled. To them who would haue Proctors sent expresly, he said, it was no maruell that none came to demand this Grace, because the Emperour had vndertaken to demand it for them, who could make an infinite number of them to come if the Fathers would. But as the Councell was carefull not to make the Safe conduct too large, that so many Protestants might not come as to put them in fear, so they ought to haue the same respect herein, because more would come to obtaine this grant. His conclusion was, that they would haue compassion on their Churches, and hold an esteeme of the demand of so great a Prince, who, out of his desire of the vnion of the Church, doeth neuer speake of this businesse without teares. In the ende, he shewed griefe for the passion of many Prelats, who, for a vaine feare of seeing a change in their owne Countreys, were content with the losse of others. In particular he complained of the Bishop of Rieti, who held the Emperour for a Prince ignorant in gouernement, not know∣ing what was good for his States, which hee sayd his most Reuerend Lord∣ship, accustomed to serue at the Cardinals tables in Rome, could not teach him. Finally, hee sayd, that many other things did remaine to bee answered, which were spoken as to challenge him to a Duell; but hee thought it better to beare them, and passe them ouer with patience. Hee repeated that which hee had sayd before; that is, that if the Cup were not graunted, it had beene better that the Councell had neuer beene called: which hee expounded thus, that much people remained in obedience to the Pope, hoping that this Grace would in the Councell bee graunted vnto them, who would wholly aliene themselues when they saw they were de∣frauded. Andreas di Cuesta, Bishop of Lion in Spaine, sayd, that the good intention of the Emperour and Duke of Bauaria could not be doubted of, nor disputed whether the Councell might giue such a permission, but that it was onely to bee considered what was expedient. His opinion was that the ancient Fa∣thers, and continuall vse of the Church, neuer to yeeld to the petitions of the heretikes, was to bee imitated. It appeared by the practise of the Nicen Coun∣cell, that, howsoeuer the world went topsie turuie, they would neuer graunt any thing vnto them, and the Doctours abstained from words vsed by the he∣retikes, though they had a good sence; that they would neuer haue been plea∣sed with this grant; that the Catholikes would take it ill; that for an vncertaine hope of reducing a few heretikes, many Catholikes would be lost, that because the Bishops of Germanie did not make the demand, it was a great argument that it proceeded not from deuotion, comming from a people who giue no signe of any spiritualitie; that he could not vnderstand how they were peni∣tent, and would returne to the Church, beleeuing it was gouerned by the holy Ghost, and yet be obstinate not to doe it without this fauour; that this obsti∣nacie sheweth, that they haue not the formall reason of faith; that if the Councell of Basil did formerly grant this to the Bohemians, it was because they did absolutely referre themselues to the Church, which, afterwards, in kindnesse, did graunt it; that it ought not to be called a true remedie which is not necessarie, by the nature of the thing, but by the malice of men, that the Synode ought not to nourish nor cherish them, that the example of CHRIST, in seeking the wandring sheepe, is sufficiently imitated, when they are called, inuited, and prayed; that if this fauour must bee graunted, it were better to bee done by the Pope, who may reuoke it if the conditi∣ons bee not performed; that the Councell granting it, if the Pope would afterwards recall it, they will pretend he cannot doe it, and that his authority is not aboue the Councel; that the heretikes doe euer proceede with falshoods and deceits. Antonius Coronicius, Bishop of Almeria, said, that hee was confirmed in the negatiue by the reason vsed by the defenders of the affirmatine; that how∣soeuer God giueth many helpes to the impenitent, as preaching, miracles; and good inspirations, yet hee giueth the Sacraments to the penitent onely; that if they would bee mooued with charitie, they should bee more carefull to preserue the Catholikes then reduce the heretikes; that the Councell of Con∣stance ought to bee imitated, which to maintaine the good children of the Church, prohibited the Communion of the Chalice, taught by Iohn Husse; that now they ought so to deale with the Lutherans; that this grant would open a gate to infinite mischiefes; that they would demaund marriage of Priests, abrogation of images, of fasts, and of other godly constitutions, al∣wayes proposing their demands as the onely and necessary remedies to vnite them to the Church; that euery little change of the Law doeth breede great dammage, especially if it bee made in fauour of heretikes; that hee would not giue counsell that the Pope should doe it, though hee might doe it better; that the people would bee lesse offended then if the graunt were made by the Councell, howsoeuer it ought to bee confessed that the supreame autho∣ritie is in the Pope; that in case he should graunt it, it ought not to bee com∣mitted to the Bishops though knowen to bee worthy for some time, because they may become bad, & of a peruerse faith, moued by their priuate interests. Franciscus di Gado, Bishop of Lugo in Spaine, made a long exhortation to the Fathers, that, to auoyde difficulties, or to giue satisfaction to Prince or people, they would not derogate from the reputation and dignitie of gene∣rall Councels, whose authoritie hauing euer been esteemed in the Church, as euery one knoweth, and that hauing maintained the faith, was not to be con∣temned now, for respects and interests. He alleadged many places of Saint Austin, for authoritie of generall Councels, and much extolled the authoritie of them; and howsoeuer hee neuer descended to compare it with the Popes, yet euery one vnderstood that hee made it the superiour. And Ierolamus Guerini, Bishop of Imola, vsing the like conceits and words, extolled also the authoritie of Prouinciall Councels, to confirme his opinion of not graun∣ting the Cup, and sayd, that their authoritie ought to be esteemed obligatory, vntill the contrary was determined by a generall Councell; alleadging Saint Austin for it. In heate of speaking, hee came out with these words, that the generall Councell had no superiour; but perceiuing afterwards that the Papalins (of which number himselfe was) were offended, sought to mode∣rate it, by repeating the same things, and adding an exception of the Popes authoritie. By which meanes hee satisfied neither partie; but the greater number did excuse him, and attribute it to inconsideration, because, in the former congregations, he had, vpon diuers occasions, confuted those who al∣leadged the Councell of Basil. Notwithstanding Cardinall Simoneta, how∣soeuer he imployed him to make such oppositions, did not forbeare to ex∣pound it in a bad sence, and to charge him that hee was transported by af∣fection, because the Buls of his Bishoprike were not dispatched vpon free cost, as he would haue had them. The last congregation concerning this point was held the fift of Septem∣ber: and, amongst others, Richard of Ʋerselli, a Preualentian Abbat, and a Re∣gular Canon in Geneua, maintaining the negatiue, sayd, that this matter was disputed many dayes in the Councell of Basil, which disputation remaineth still, collected by Friar Iohn, of Ragusi, Proctor of the Dominicans, and, in conclusion, the Cup was absolutely denied to the Bohemians: so that no o∣ther determination can now bee made, without declaring to the world that the Church did then erre, in a generall Councell. Hee was reprehended by the Bishop of Imola (to salue his owne sore) for giuing authoritie to that schismaticall Councell, and noted of great boldnesse, that those who sim∣ply alleadged the Councell of Basil hauing beene often reprooued, he should not onely cite it, but giue it the authoritie of a generall Councell. The Fa∣ther The authority of the Coun∣cell of Basil. replied that he alwayes marueiled, and then more then euer, how any one could speake so of that Councell, considering that the foureteene Articles decreed in the matter of the Chalice the last Session were wholly taken out of it, and that hee knew not how a Decree could more be approued, then by renewing of it not onely in sence, but in words also. And waxing warme herewith, hee sayd, that, in regard of the Decree of that Councell, the de∣mand of the Cup sauoured of heresie, and mortall sinne. Whereupon a buz∣zing was raised among the Prelates; and he desiring to proceed was silenced by the Cardinall of Mantua, so that stopping himselfe hee asked pardon, and speaking a few words, concluded. Not to speake any more of this Father, I will adde heere, that hee was noted to haue been at the French Ambassadours house, the sixteenth of Au∣gust, early in the morning, to demand whether their Bishops would come, and to exhort that they might bee sollicited to come quickly. And in the Congregations, in which the sacrifice was handled, hee proposed the doubt whether the authority of the Pope bee aboue the Councell; adding, that when it should bee discussed, hee would speake freely. These things bee∣ing put together, and duely weighed, the Legates did not thinke fit that the French-men should finde at their comming such a humour in Trent, and thought to make his Generall recall him, for businesse of the Congregation, Richard of Versells dieth with griefe. and so to remooue him honestly. But there was no neede; for the poore Father fell sicke a little after with griefe of minde, and the twentie sixth of Nouember died. In that Congregation Friar Iohn Baptista, Generall of the Serui, maintaining the negatiue also, to ouerthrow the ground of the oppo∣sites, The Generall of the Serui extolleth the Councell of Constance. spake at large concerning the Councell of Constance, which first de∣creed that matter, and commended the authority thereof; exalting it aboue other generall Councels, and saying that it had deposed three Popes. This did not please; but was passed ouer, because they would not thrust many matters together. The giuing of voyces beeing ended, the Legates were desirous to giue the The Cup is denied, by pluralitie of voyces. Emperor satisfaction, but could not, because the party of the negatiue preuai∣led: they resolued therefore to labour that it might bee referred to the Pope, hoping that, by perswasions, some of the negatiue might be drawen into that middle opinion. And they gaue commission to Iacobus Lomelinus, B. of Maz∣zara, and to the Bishop of Ventimiglia, to imploy themselues herein, with dex∣teritie and circumspection. The Legates themselues spake with the three Patriarches, and perswaded them; by whose meanes all the Prelates and Fa∣thers of the Venetian State were pacified, which was a considerable num∣ber. Hauing gayned as many as seemed sufficient, they beleeued they had ouercome the difficulty. They brought the matter to this point, to write a letter to the Pope in the ordinary forme, and to send a note of all the voyces. But the Bishop of Fiue Churches did not approue it, except a Decree of the Ses∣sion did appeare. For these two Articles hauing been reserued in the last Ses∣sion, to be handled in this, and they now beeing handled, and resolued, it is necessary that the resolution of the Session should appeare in the Actes. Ʋarmiense shewed him how hard and dangerous it was to propose the De∣cree, and that he ought to bee content with the letter, if hee desired to ob∣taine. The Bishop not beeing pacified herewith, they resolued to make a Decree, to bee read in the Session; in which hee desired it should bee sayd, That the Synode, knowing it is expedient to grant the vse of the Cup, did referre vnto the Pope to grant it, to whom, and vpon what conditions hee pleased. The Legates shewed him that many who were for the remissi∣on, did doubt whether it were expedient, and therefore would oppose the Decree, so that it was impossible to cause any such declaration to bee made; and that, if hee were firme in this opinion, it were better to let a weeke passe, that this great heat might bee cooled. The Bishop of Fiue Churches was content; and so, this point beeing deferred, they purposed to establish the Decree of the Sacrifice, that this beeing ioyned with it, they might make the proposition for the Communion. Varmiense did oppose, who beeing perswaded by the Iesuites, Laynez, Salmeron and Torre, did propose another forme of Decree for the Sacrifice in matter of the oblation of CHRIST in the Supper, and they had much adoe to make him desist. Finally, beeing al∣most out of hope to bee ready to hold the Session at the time appointed, the Decree of the Sacrifice was established in the Congregation of the seuenth day by consent of the maior part, howsoeuer Granata laboured to interpose impediments and delayes. After this, tenne Articles for reformation of the abuses, occurring in the Masse, were proposed, and eleuen more in diuers other points of reformation; which were purposely chosen of easie matters, not subiect to contradiction, and fauourable to the authoritie of Bishops, that their proceeding might not bee hindered by the opposition of any; which was well knowen to the Ambassadours and Prelates who complained of it. These began to be han∣dled the ninth of September, and the Prelates deliuered their opinions brief∣ly, fourty in a Congregation. There was no remarkable opposition, one∣ly Philadelphia sayd, that Germany expected that matters of weight and im∣portance should be handled in Councell. Hee named diuers, and, amongst others, the creation of Cardinals, and pluralitie of Benefices. Ioannes Zuares, Bishop of Conimbria, sayd, that small matters were not to bee neg∣lected, but thought that the dignitie of the Synode did require that some spe∣ciall order should bee followed, that it may appeare why these particulars The Councel is taxed by di∣uers Prelates, for omitting the chiefe points of Re∣formation. are proposed before others; that the reformation ought to begin from the Head, and passe to the Cardinals; from the Cardinals to the Bishops; and from them to other degrees; otherwise he feared that the Catholikes would be offended, and the protestants laugh. Paris sayd, that, for these hundred and fiftie yeeres, the world hath demanded a reformation in the Head, and the members, and hitherto hath beene deceiued; that now it was time they should labour in earnest, and not by dissimulation; that he desired the French men should bee heard for the necessities of that Kingdome; that in France a farre more profitable reformation was made, then that which was propo∣sed in Councell. The Bishop of Segouia sayd, they did imitate an vnskilfull Physician, who gaue a lenitiue, or anointed with oyle, in mortall diseases. The Bishop of Oreate sayd, that the Pope ought not to grant so great faculty to the Crusado, and the Fabrique of Saint Peter, by vertue of which, euery one in Spaine will haue Masses in his house, which if it be not moderated, the pro∣uisions of the Councell will bee in vaine; that it was necessary to declare that the Decrees of the generall Councell doe binde the Head also. Where∣at buzzing beeing raised, hee made a signe they should bee silent, and added, that hee meant in respect of the direction, and not of coaction. He procee∣ded, and sayd that it was necessary to finde a meanes to take away contenti∣ons, and suits, or, at the least, to make them fewer and shorter, in causes of Benefices; that this caused great expences, hindered the worship of GOD, and scandalized the people. The Bishop of Fiue Churches spake concerning the point of conferring Bishopriques, expounding the wordes hee had said, that base and vnworthy persons were promoted, and declaring that the abuse proceeded from Princes, who did importunately recommend them to the Pope, saying they would bee better bestowed vpon the horse-keepers of his Holinesse. And he complained that his words had been ill expounded. The Spanish Agent complained in the Kings name, that in the eight Ar∣ticle too much authority was giuen to Bishops ouer Hospitals, Mountaines of pietie, and such places; and particularly in Sicilia, against the priuiledge which that Kingdome aunciently hath; for whose satisfaction the Legates caused a clause to bee added for reseruation of the places which are immediately vnder the protection of the King. These things bee∣ing ended, the Legates were in a strait, because there were but three dayes to the Session, and many things vnresolued, especially that which was of greatest importance, in which euery one was carried with ā strong affection, that is the communion of the Cup. But one accident made them to prolong the time. For the French Ambassadour in Rome, hauing earnestly desired the Pope in the Kings name, to cause a delay vntill the comming of his Pre∣lates, his Holinesse, though nothing could more displease him then the pro∣longing of the Councell, aswell in regard of his owne inclination, as of the Cardinals and Court, who were in hope, and much desired to see it ended in December, notwithstanding, to conceale his feares, did answere, that it was all one to him, and that it did depend on the Prelates, who if they did ab∣horre euery delay, it was no maruell, in regard of their long and incommo∣dious abiding there, saying that they ought to be respected, and that he nei∣ther could nor would compell them, or impose a law vpon them, contrary to the ancient vse; that hee would write to the Legates, concerning this in∣stance, and shew hee was contented with the dilation; that this is all that can be required of him, and enough to satisfie the King. Thus he wrote, adding that they should make vse of this permission; as it should seeme most reaso∣nable to the Fathers. This letter, and the backwardnesse in their businesse, and that which was written by Delphinus, Nuncio with the Emperour, and the instance of the Emperours Ambassadours, that the Decree of the Masse, might not bee published, made some of the Legates incline to deferre the Ses∣sion. But Simoneta, who vnderstood the Popes minde, rather as it was in his head, then as it was expressed in the letter, opposed so strongly, that the contrary was resolued. And he sent aduice to Rome how dangerous a thing it was to change the absolute commands formerly giuen, to come quickly to the conclusion of the Councell, onely to giue verball satisfaction to o∣thers, encouraging those who had bad intentions to crosse good resolutions, and laying burthens vpon them to make them odious, to lose reputation, and to make them vnfit to doe the seruice of his Holinesse. Simoneta was fauoured by the euent. For, there beeing no opposition of moment, the Ar∣ticle of the abuses of the Masse was established, together with the eleuonth of reformation, and the Decree of the Communion had lesse difficulty then was beleeued. It did not passe at the first proposing, because it said, that the Pope, by consent and approbation of the Councell, should doe what he thought good. This was impugned by those who held the negatiue, and the remissiue part; which made the Legats resolue to omit this matter whol∣ly, and excused themselues to the Imperialists, because the fault did not pro∣ceed either from the Pope, or from them. The Ambassadours desired that it should bee proposed without the clause of consent and approbation; which the Legates thinking would cause a delay of the Session, did refuse. The Ambassadours protested, that seeing so small esteeme was held of the Em∣perour, they would assist no more either in Congregation or Session, vntill his Maiestie aduised hereof, had giuen those orders that befitted the Imperi∣all dignity. Hereupon the Legates were content, not onely to propose it againe without the clause, but to vse perswasions themselues, also, and to em∣ploy others. And the day following, which was the next day before the The grant of the Cup is re∣ferred to the Pope. Session, the Decree, corrected, did passe by the maior part (though contra∣dicted by all of the negatiue) to the great ioy of the Legats and Papalins, aswell because the Session was not prolonged, which they greatly feared, as also because they thought it more honour for the Pope, that the grace should totally depend on his authority. The Ambassadours were well satisfied with this particular; but perceiuing that the Session would bee in order, and that the publication of the sacrifice of the Masse could not bee hindered, as they had desired in the Emperours name, they ioyned with the French-men, who were mal-content, because the request which their King had made in Rome was denied. Therefore the same day, in the afternoone, all the Ambassa∣dours A generall consultation of the Ambas∣sadours. met in the house of the Imperialists, saying they would consult of a thing common to all Princes. The Venetians and Florentiue, beeing called, excused themselues, saying they could not come, without expresse commissi∣on from their Masters. In that Assembly, the Bishop of Fiue Churches made a long discourse, to shew, that hitherto nothing of worth had beene handled in the Councel; that they had vainely disputed of points of doctrine, which did the heretiques no good, who were resolued not to change their opinion, nor the Catholiques, who are sufficiently perswaded already that, for refor∣mation, nothing hath beene proposed but things of no moment, of Nota∣ries, Receiuers, and such like; that it did plainely appeare, that the Legates would make the next Session according to the same stile, and afterwards spend the time in disputes, deciding of Doctrines, making Canons, of Order, Marriage, or some other sleight matter, to auoyd, as they haue done the sub∣stantiall points of reformation. And, by these and other reasons, well am∣plified, he perswaded the Ambassadours to ioyne together, and to goe to the Legats, and desire that for that Session they would omit to speak of the sacra∣ments, of doctrines, or canons, because it was now time to thinke vpon a good reformation, to take away so great abuses, to correct bad manners, and to labour that the Councell may not bee vnfruitfull. The Spanish Secretary would not assent. For his King, desiring that the continuation should bee de∣clared in the end of the Councel, feared hee should preiudice himselfe, if the manner of proceeding, which was to handle the doctrine and reformation together, should be changed, because that alteration might bee vsed for an ar∣gument that it was a new Councel. The Ambassadour of Portugal, hauing made a long vnconcluding speech, to shew he desired a reformation, but vp∣on more pleasing termes, retired from the company. The Susse, seeing the examples of those two, and that the Venetians were not present, fearing to commit an errour, said, it were good to consider of it againe, before they re∣solued. All the others were resolute to goe. Lansac (by consent) spake for them all; saying, They were sent by their Princes to assist and fauour the Councell, and to procure that the proceeding should bee pertinent, not by disputing of doctrine, whereof none of them; being Catholikes, doe doubt, and is superfluous, in absence of those who doe Who choose Lansac to speake for them. impugne it, but by making a good, holy, and absolute reformation of man∣ners. Now, because, notwithstanding all their remonstrances, they saw they would determine principall points of controuersed doctrine, and touch the reformation but slightly, he prayed them to change their purpose, and to employ the next Session in reformation onely, proposing more important and necessary Arguments then those whereof hitherto they had spoken. The Legates answered in the vsuall forme; That the desire of the Pope and The answere of the Legats. theirs was to doe the seruice of God, procure the good of the Church, and satisfie and gratifie all Princes; but yet that it was not conuenient to breake the order alwayes obserued in the Councell to handle doctrine and reforma∣tion together; that the things already done were but a beginning; that they had a good intention to doe better; that they would most readily receiue the Articles which the Ambassadours would propose; that they maruelled that the Articles determined at Poisi in France were not sent to the Pope, who would haue approued them. Lansac replied, that the Pope hauing re∣ferred all matters concerning Religion to the Councell; the French Prelates, when they came, would propose both those and many other things. The Legats answered they should be welcome, and willingly heard; but that they ought not for that cause to deferre the Session, in regard that nothing should bee handled in it in preiudice of their propositions; that most of the Fathers were resolued the Session should bee held; that it was dangerous to giue them distaste, and that if they expected in Trent, with great discommoditie, those who liued at their ease, and deferred their comming which they promi∣sed, it was not fit to discontent them more, by making them remaine idle. This cunning perswasion being not strongly opposed by the Ambassadours, they held the Congregation, and framed the Decrees; which being establi∣shed, when they came to appoint the time and the matter for the next Sessi∣on, Granata counselled them to prolong the time, that the French-men, and Polonians might haue space, not onely to come, but to informe themselues, and that they would not proceede to a precise declaration of that which was to be handled, but stand vpon the generall, as formerly they had done, and resolue according to occurrences. For so many persons beeing to come, it could not bee but that they would bring some new matters, which might cause new determinations. This opinion was followed by the Spaniards, and many others, and was like to haue beene generally approoued. But it be∣ing noysed, that the Popes absolute commandement was come, that the Session should not be deferred aboue two moneths, and that the Sacraments of Order and Marriage should bee handled together, the Papalins were in∣duced to perswade that the time might not bee prolonged, and that both those Sacraments might be discussed. The Legates shewed they were forced to make the Decree in conformitie heereof. But there were two other true causes of it; the one the quicke dispatch of the Councell, because they ho∣ped, by so doing, to finish all in that Session alone, the other, that the Spani∣ards and other fauourers of the reformation, might not haue time, beeing busied in matters of faith, to handle any thing of importance; and particu∣larly that they might be hindered to promote, or insist vpon Residence. Af∣ter that this point was established, all the Decrees beeing read together, new contradictions were raised, besides the vsuall contentions, which the Legats could hardly stoppe with faire words. The Congregation lasted vntill two houres within night, with small satisfaction of the parties, and scandall of honest men. In the end all was resolued; but by the greater part only, which did not much exceed in number those who contradicted. The seuenteenth of September, the day appointed for the Session, beeing The Session. come, the Legats Ambassadors, and 180. Prelats went to the Church, with the vsuall ceremonies; and after prayers made in time of the Masse, the Bishop of Ʋentimiglia preached: who, with an Episcopall and Senatorious grauitie, vsing the comparison betweene ciuill bodies and naturall, shewed how mon∣strous a Synod would be, if it had no head; he shewed the office of it, in ma∣king an influence of vertues into all the members, and the thankefulnesse and duety of these, in hauing more care of it, then of themselues, exposing them∣selues also to the defence of it, hee said that the chiefe fault of an heretique, according to Saint Paul, was, that hee doth not acknowledge an head, on which the connexion of the whole body doeth depend; hee added, in few words, that CHRIST was the inuisible Head of the Church, but in many, that the Pope was the visible. Hee commended the exact diligence of his Holinesse, in making prouision for the Synod, and put euery one in minde of his duty in presenting the dignity of his Head: hee praised the pietie and modestie of the Fathers; prayed GOD that that Councell might proceed, and end as gloriously as it had begun. The Masse being ended, the letters of Cardinall Amulius were read, who, The letters of Cardinall A∣mulius con∣cerning the Orientall Christians. as Protector of the Orientall Christian Nations, informed the Synod that Abdisu, Patriarch of Muzale, in Assyria, beyond Euphrates, was come to Rome, who had visited the Churches, rendred obedience to the Pope, and receiued the confirmation and Cope from his Holinesse. Hee related that the people subiect vnto him had receiued the faith, from the Apostles, Thomas and Thaddeus, and one of their Disciples called Marcus, wholy conformable to the Roman, with the same Sacraments and Rites, whereof they had Bookes written euer since the time of the Apostles. In the end, hee told the large∣nesse of the Countrey, subiect to that Prelat, which extendeth it selfe vnto, the further India, with innumerable people, subiect, partly to the Turke, part∣ly to the Sophi of Persia, and to the King of Portugall. The letter beeing read, the Ambassadour of Portugall protested, that the Easterne Bishops subiect to his King, did not acknowledge any Patriarch for their Superior, and said that by acknowledging of this Patriarch, they might not doe themselues and the King a preiudice. Afterwards the Confession of his faith, made in Rome the Are confuted by the Portu∣gall Ambassa∣dour . 17 of March, was read, in which hee swore to maintaine the faith of the ho∣ly Church of Rome, promising to approoue and condemne that which it did approue and condemne, and to teach the same to the Metropolitans and Bi∣shops subiect vnto him. Afterwards his letters, directed to the Synode, were read, in which hee excused his not comming to the Councel, by reason of the length of the iourney, and prayed them, that when it was ended, the Decrees thereof might be sent vnto him, which he promised he would cause to be ful∣ly obserued. The same things had been read in the first Congregation, but not regarded. The Portugals protestation made men consider diuers absur∣dities in that narration, and there was a whispering, and the Portugall Pre∣lates began to speake. But the Speaker, by order of the Legates, told them, that this should be spoken of in the Congregation. And proceeding in the actes of the Councell, the Masse Bishop read the The doctrine of the Massè. doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Masse, diuided into nine heads; which contai∣ned in summe: 1. That, for the imperfection of the Leuitical Priesthood, another Priest, according to the order of Melchisedec, was necessary; which was CHRIST our LORD: who, although he offered himselfe but once vpon the Crosse, to leaue in the Church a visible Sacrifice, representing that of the Crosse, and applying the vertue thereof, declaring himselfe to be a Priest after the order of Melchizedec, offered to GOD the Father his body and blood, vn∣der the Bread and Wine, and gaue them to his Apostles, commanding them and their successors to offer them. And this is that pure offering foretolde by Malachie, which Saint Paul calleth the Table of the LORD, and was figu∣red by diuers Sacrifices, in the time of Nature, and of the Law. 2. Because the same CHRIST is sacrificed in the Masse without blood, who was sacrifi∣ced on the Crosse with blood, this sacrifice is propitiatory, and GOD, appea∣sed with this offering, bestoweth the gift of repentance, and remitteth all sinnes, the offering, and (by the Priests) the offerer beeing the same, who for∣merly offered himselfe vpon the Crosse, onely in a diuers manner; so that this of the Masse doth not derogate from that of the Crosse, yea, by this, the fruits of that are receiued, which is offered for the sinnes, punishments, and necessi∣ties of the faithfull, and also for the dead, not fully purged. 3. And though some Masses bee celebrated in memory of the Saints, the sacrifice is not offe∣red to them, but to GOD onely. 4. And, to offer him with reuerence, the Church hath, for many ages, instituted the Canon, free from all errour, com∣posed out of the words of the LORD, tradition of the Apostles, and constitu∣tions of Popes. 5. And, for the edification of the faithfull, the Church hath instituted certaine Rites to pronounce in the Masse, some things with a lowe, and some with a loud voice, adding benedictions, lights, odours, and vestments by Apostolicall tradition. 6. And the Synode doeth not con∣demne as priuate and vnlawfull, but doeth approoue those Masses, in which the Priest doeth communicate alone (which vse is common) in regard the people doeth communicate spiritually, and that they are celebrated by a publique Minister, and for all the faithfull. 7. And the Church hath commanded to put water into the wine, because CHRIST hath done so, and from his side did issue water and blood together, by which the vnion of the people, signified by the water, with CHRIST their head is represented. 8. And howsoeuer the people doe not receiue much instruction by the Masse, yet the Fathers haue not thought it fit that it should bee celebrated in the vulgar. Therefore retaining the vse of the Romane Church, that the peo∣ple may not bee deceiued, the Priests ought to expound something which is read in it, especially vpon Holy dayes. 9. And to condemne the errours which are spread against this doctrine, it doeth adde nine Canons. 1. Anathematizing him that shall say, that a true and proper sacrifice is not offered to GOD in the Masse. 2. Or that shall say that CHRIST, by these wordes, Doe this in remembrance of mee, hath not instituted Priests, and The Canons of the Masse. commanded them to offer. 3. Or shall say, that the Masse is a sacrifice onely of prayse, or thankesgiuing, or a bare commemoration of the sacrifice of the Crosse, and not propitiatory, and that it doeth helpe onely him that doeth receiue it, and ought not to bee offered for the huing and the dead, for sinnes, punishments, satisfactions, and other necessities. 4. Or shall say, that the sacrifice of the Masse doeth derogate from that of the Crosse. 5. Or that it is a deceit to celebrate Masses in honour of Saints. 6. Or that errors are contained in the Canon of the Masse. 7. Or that the ceremonies, vest∣ments, or externall signes vsed in the Masse, are rather incitements to vngod∣linesse, then offices of pietie. 8. Or that the Masses, in which the Priest a∣lone doeth communicate, are vnlawfull. 9. Or shall condemne the Rite of the Church of Rome, to speake part of the Canon and the words of conse∣cration with a low voyce; or that the Masse ought to be celebrated in the vul∣gar, or that water ought not to bee mingled with the Wine. The Fathers assented to the Decree, except onely to that particular, that A decree con∣cerning the a∣buses of the Masse. CHRIST did offer himselfe, which three and twenty Bishops did contradict: and some others sayd, that, howsoeuer they held it to be true, yet they thought not either the time or place fit to decree it. And there was some confusion in deliuering their voyces, because many spake at once. The Archbishop of Granata began to dissent, who, hauing contradicted in the Congregations, that hee might not haue occasion to doe the same in Session, determined to be absent. But the Legats seeing him not at Masse, sent to call him more then once, and constrained him to come; which did more excite him to contra∣dict. Immediatly after another Decree was read for instruction of Bishops, concerning abuses to be corrected in celebration of the Masses: And contai∣ned in substance; That the Bishops ought to forbid all things brought in by auarice, irreuerence, or superstition. It named particularly, for faults of aua∣rice, bargaines for reward, that which is giuen for new Masses, importunate exaction of almes: of irreuerence, the admitting to say Masse of vagabond Priests, vnknowen, and publique and notorious sinners, Masses in priuate houses, & euery where else out of the Churches and Oratories, if the assistants be not in an honest habit, the vse of Musicke in Churches, mixed with lasci∣uious songs, all secular actions, profane speeches, noises, and screeches; of su∣perstition, to celebrate out of due houres, with other ceremonies and prayers then those which are allowed by the Church, and receiued by vse, a determi∣nate number of some Masses, and of candles. It ordained also, that the people should bee admonished to goe to their Parish Churches, at the least on Sun∣dayes and great Holy-dayes, declaring that the things aforesayd are proposed to the Prelats, that they may prohibite and correct as Delegats of the Apo∣stolique Sea, not onely those, but all that are alike vnto them. The decree of reformation contained 11. Heads. 1. That all the De∣crees of Popes and Councels, concerning the life and conuersation of the Clergie, bee obserued hereafter; vnder the same and greater punishments; at the pleasure of the Ordinary, and those reuiued which are antiquated. 2. That none be promoted to a Bishopricke, but he, who, besides the qua∣lities required by the holy Canons, hath beene sixe moneths in holy Orders and if there be not notice of all the necessary qualities in Court, informati∣on The Decree of reforma∣tion. may be taken from the Nuncij, from his Ordinary or neighbour Ordinaries; who ought to bee a Doctor, Master, or Licentiate in Theologie, or the Canon Law, or declared to be able to teach, by publike testimony of an Vniuersity; and the Regulars shall haue the like testimonies from the Superiours of their religion; and the processes and testifications shall be freely giuen. 3. That the Bishops may conuert the third part of the reuenues of Cathedrall or Collegiate Churches into dayly distributions, which notwithstanding those shall not lose, who, not hauing iurisdiction or other office, doe reside in their Parish Church or Church vnited, beeing out of the City. 4. That none shall haue voyce in Chapter, but he that is a Subdeacon; and he that shall here∣after obtaine a benefice to which any charge is annexed, shall bee bound to receiue Orders, within one yeere, that he may execute it. 5. That commis∣sions of dispensations out of the Court of Rome shall be addressed to the Or∣dinaries, and those that are for Grace, shall not take effect; vntill it be knowen by the Bishops, as Delegates, that they haue beene iustly gotten. 6 That commutations of wills bee not executed, vntill the Bishops as Delegats, doe know that they haue beene obtained by expression of the trueth. 7. That superiour Iudges, in admitting appeales, and granting inhibitions, shall ob∣serue the constitution of Innocentius 4. in the Chapter Romana. 8 That the Bishops, as Delegats, shall be executors of pious dispositions, as well te∣stamentary, as of the liuing, shall visit Hospitals, Colledges, and fraternities of Laiques, euen those which are called Schooles, or by whatother name so∣euer, except those which are vnder the immediate protection of Kings; shall visite the almes of the Mountaines of pietie, and all other places of piety; though vnder the charge of Lay-men, and shall haue the knowledge and ex∣ecution of whatsoeuer belongeth to the seruice of God, saluation of soules, and sustentation of the poore. 9 That the administrators of the Fabrique of any Church whatsoeuer, Hospitall, Confraternity, almes of any Mountaine of pietie, or any other pious place, shall bee bound to giue an account euery yeere to the Bishops, and, in case they bee obliged to make an account to o∣thers, the Bishop shall bee ioyned with them, without whom they shall not haue any discharge. 10 That the Bishops shall examine the Notaries, and forbid them the vse of their office in spirituall matters. 11. That whoso∣euer shall vsurpe the goods, rights, or emoluments of Churches, Bene∣fices, Mountaines of piety, or other pious places, whether hee bee Clerke, or Laique, King or Emperour, shall remaine excommunicate, vntill a full restitution or absolution of the Pope; and, if hee bee Patron, hee shall bee depriued of the right of Patronage, and the clerke consenting shall be subiect to the same punishment, depriued of all benefices, and vncapable of any more. Afterwards the Decree for the grant of the Cup was read; of this tenor. That the Synod hauing reserued to it selfe the examination and definition of two Articles, concerning the communion of the Cup, in the former Ses∣sion, hath now determined to deferre the whole businesse to the Pope, who, in his singular wisedome, may do what he thinketh profitable for the Christi∣an Common wealth, and for the good of those who demand it. This De∣cree, as it was approoued in the Congregations by the maior part onely, so it The Decree concerning the Cup. happened in the Session, where, beside those who contradicted, because they thought the Cup could not bee granted for any cause; there were some who required that the matter should be deferred, and examined againe. To whom the Speaker answered, in the name of the Legats, that consideration should be had of it. And finally the next Session was intimated for the twelfth of No∣uember, to determine concerning the Sacraments of Order and Matrimony. The matter of the next Ses∣sion. And the Synod was dismissed, after the vsuall manner, great discourses be∣tweene the Fathers about the Communion of the Cup continuing still. Concerning which, some perhaps will be curious to know, for what cause the Decree last recited, was not put after that of the Masse, as the matter see∣meth to require, but in a place where it hath no connexion or likenesse with the Articles preceding. He may know that there was a generall maxime in A Maxime in the Councell about the Ma∣ior part. that Councell, that to establish a decree of reformation a maior part of voyces was sufficient, but that a Decree of faith could not be made, if a considerable part did contradict. Therefore the Legats knowing that hardly more then halfe would consent to this of the Chalice, did resolue to make it an Article of reformation, and to place it the last amongst those, to shew plainely that they held it to be of that ranke. There were also many discourses at that time, and some dayes after, about the point decided, that CHRIST offered himselfe in the Supper, some saying that, in regard of the three and twenty contradictors, it was not lawfully decided, and others answering that an eight part could not bee called a considerable, or notable part. There were some also who maintained that the maxime had place onely in the Anathematismes, and in the substance of the doctrine, and not in euery clause which is put in for better expression, as this, which is not mentioned in the Canons. The Emperours Ambassadours were very glad for the Decree of the Cup, beeing assured that his Maiestie would more easily obtaine it of the Pope, and vpon more fauourable conditions, then it could haue beene ob∣tained in the Councell, where, for the variety of opinions and interests, it is hard to make many to bee of one minde, though in a good and neces∣sary matter. The greater part ouercommeth the better, and he that oppo∣seth hath alwayes the aduantage of him that promoteth. And their hope was the greater, because the Pope seemed before to haue fauoured their Peti∣tion. But the Emperour had not the same opinion, aiming not to obtaine the communion of the Cup absolutely, but to pacifie the people of his owne States, and of Germanie, who beeing distasted with the Popes authoritie for the things past, could not relish any thing well that proceeded from him; whereas if they had obtained this grant immediatly from the Councell, it would haue giuen them good satisfaction, and bred an opinion in them, that they might haue obtained other requests which they esteemed; so that this motion beeing stopped, and the infected Ministers casseered, he did hope he might haue held them in the Catholique Communion. Hee saw, by former experience, that the grant of Paul was not well receiued, and did more hurt then good; and, for this cause, hee did prosecute the instance no further with the Pope, and declared the cause of it. Therefore when hee receiued newes of the Decree of the Councell, turning to some Prelates who were with him, hee said, I haue done all I can to saue my people, now looke you vnto it, whom it doeth more concerne. But those people which desired and expected the fauour, or, as they sayd, The censure of the de∣crees. the restitution of that which was due vnto them, were all distasted that their iust request hauing been treated on sixe moneths, presented by the interces∣sions of so many, and so great Princes, and after, for better examination; deferred and disputed, and discussed againe with such contention, should, in the end be referred to the Pope, which might haue been as well done at the very first, without loosing so much time, so many perswasions, and so great paines. They sayd, the condition of Christians was according to the Pro∣phecie of Isayas, Hee sendeth, and countermandeth, expecteth, and reexpecteth. For the Pope, who was moued first, referred that to the Councel, which now the Councell remitteth to him; and both of them doe mocke both Prince and people. Some discoursed more substantially; that the Synod had reser∣ued the definition of two Articles. Whether the causes which did formerly moue to take away the Cup, are such as that they ought to make them perse∣uere in the same prohibition; and if not, with what conditions it ought to be granted. The former being vndoubtedly a matter not of fact, but of faith, the Councell did confesse, by a necessary consequence, that it knew the causes to bee vnsufficient; and would not, for worldly respects, make the declarati∣on. For if they had thought them sufficient, they must needes perseuere in the prohibition; if any doubt had remained they should haue proceeded in the examination, and ought not to remit it, but for the insufficiencie of the causes. But if they had made the declaration negatiue, that is, that the cau∣ses were not such as that they ought to perseuere, and referred to the Pope to doe vpon information, what remained to be done defacto, they might haue beene excused. Neither can it bee sayd that this is presupposed by the refe∣rence. For in the Decree of this Session, hauing repeated the two Articles, they resolued to referre the whole businesse to the Pope; and therefore not presupposing any thing. I doe not finde, in the memorials which I haue seene, that the Decree of the sacrifice did rayse any matter of discourse. And the cause perhaps was, for that the words doe not so easily declare the sense, as contayning many strained Metaphors, which draw the mindes of the Readers vnto diuers con∣siderations, who, when they are come to the end, know not what they haue read. Onely concerning the prohibition of the vulgar tongue in the Masse, the Protestants sayd something. For it seemed a contradiction, to say, that the Masse doeth containe much instruction for the faithfull people, and to, approoue that part should be vttered with a lowe voice, and wholly to forbid the vulgar tongue, onely commanding the Pastors to declare something to the people. Whereunto some answered well, that, in the Masse were some se∣crets which ought to be concealed from the people, which are vncapable; for which cause they are spoken softly, and in the Latine tongue, but other things which be of good edification are commanded to be taught. But this was op∣posed two wayes; one, that therefore this second sort ought to bee in the vul∣gar; the other, because they did not distinguish the two sorts. For the Pastors being commanded to declare, often, something of that which is read, and con∣ceale the rest, these two kindes being not distinguished, some of them may mistake for want of knowledge, and so abuse the people. The Antiquaries did laugh at these discourses; because it is certaine that euery tongue which is now brought into Arte, was formerly vulgar, in its owne Countrey; and that the Latin, vsed in the Church, was many hundred yeeres, both in Italie, and in diuers Colonies of the Romans, in diuers Prouinces, the common lan∣guage. And in the Romane Pontificall there remaineth yet a forme of the ordination of Readers in the Church, in which it is said, that they must study to reade distinctly and plainely, that the people may vnderstand. But he that would know what language is to be vsed in the Church, needeth only (with∣out any more discourse) reade the 14. Chapter of Saint Paul, in the first to the Corinthians, which will sufficiently informe him, though his minde be ne∣uer so much prepossessed with a contrary opinion. And hee that would know what the meaning of the Church was, and when and why the Court made this alteration, may obserue, that Pope Iohn the eighth, hauing seuere∣ly reprehended the Morauians, for celebrating of the Masse in the Slauonian tongue, and commanded them to doe so no more, yet beeing better informed afterwards, wrote i the yeere eight hundred eighty eight, to Sfento-Pulero, their King or Counte, a letter, in which, not by way of grant, but of decla∣ration; he affirmeth that it is not contrary to faith and sound doctrine to say Masse, and other prayers in the Slauonian tongue, because he that hath made the Hebrew language, Grecke, and Latine, and hath made others also for his glory, alleadging diuers passages of the Scripture, and, in particular, the admo∣nition of S. Paul to the Corinthians. Onely he commanded that, for a grea∣ter decorum in the Church, the Gospel should first be read in Latine, and after∣wards in the Slauonian tongue, as the vse already was in some places. Not∣withstanding hee gaue leaue to the Count, and his Iudges, to heare the Latin Masse if it pleased them better. To these things wee must adde that which Gregory the seuenth wrote to Vratislaus, of Bobemia, iust two hundred yeeres after, that he could not permit the celebration of diuine Offices in the Slauoni∣an tongue, and that it was not a good excuse, to alleadge, that it was not for∣merly prohibited. For the Primitiue Church hath dissembled many things, which afterwards, Christianitie beeing established, vpon exact examination, haue been corrected. And he commanded that Prince to oppose the people herein with all his forces. Which things he that shall obserue plainely, shall see which were the ancient incorrupt institutions, and how corruptions be∣gan for worldly respects and interests. For when men began to place hea∣uen below the earth, good institutions were published to be corruptions, one∣ly tolerated by antiquitie, and abuses, brought in afterwards, were canonized for perfect corrections. But to returne to the Decrees of the Councell, that of the reformation displeased many; considering, that in times past the Eccles as call goods be∣longed to the whole Church, that is, to all the Ch ans of one Congre∣gation; the administration where of was commit d to the De cons, ∣cons, and other dispensers, with the superintendencie of the Bishops , to distribute them for the maintenance of Ministers, widowes, sicke, and o∣ther poore persons, for education of children, in hospitalitie, ing of prisoners, and other workesofpi ty. Notwithstanding, the Clergie, though fitly, yet tolerably, began to desire to separate, and to know then part, and to vse it as they pleased afterward the ab s came to the ight. For the people was wholly excluded from all right in the goods, and the Ec∣clesiasti es being but administrators before, declared themselues to be of them, conuerting that to their owne vse, which was destinated for the poore, for hospitalitie, schooles, and other workes of pietie; whereof the world hauing a long time complained, and demanded a remedie in va ne, some Laiques haue, in some places, piously erected other hospitals, and Schooles, &c. and appointed Administrators of the Ea ty. Now the world, in this age, demanding a remedy more earnestly, that Hospitals, and Shooles &c. vsurped by Pri sts, may be restored, the Councell, in stead of granting a demand s iust, and restoring Hospitals, Colledges, Schooles, and other places of piety, as was expected, hath opened a way, in the eight and ninth Articles, to vs pe those also which haue been instituted since, by or∣daining the superintendencie of Bishops; which no man can doubt, but that as it hath bin a meanes formerly to diuert goods destinated for good workes, and to appropriate them to vses not pious, so it will, in a very short time, produce the same effect againe. The Parliaments of France spake much of this particular, and said plainely, the Synode had exceeded their authoritie, medling with the goods of Seculars, it beeing cleere, that the title of a pious worke giueth no right to a Priest, that euery Christian may apply his goods to what good worke he pleaseth, without giuing the Clergie power to make lawes therein, otherwise the Laity would bee in extreame seru , if they might doe no good but what pleased the Priests. Some con d also the Article, by which power is obliquely giuen to change w ls and ∣ments, by prescribing how and when they may bee changed it being plaine, that Testaments haue their strength from the Ciuill lawe, by which onely they may bee changeth And if any say that their strength is from the law of nature the authority of Priests will be excluded the more, because where that-law is dispensable, none can dispense but hee that eth the higher place in the Common wea or his ministers. But the Ministers of CHRIST must remember that Saint Paul doeth allow them onely the administration of the Ministers of God. And any Common wealth hath giuen, at any time, to their any iurisdiction concerning Will s, they are, his not spirituall Iudges, and ought to receiue lawes herein, not rom Councels, but from that Maiestie which gouerneth the Republique, and d , not as ministers of CHRIST, but as members of the Common-wealth; as they are called by diuers names, and a in pub∣lique gouernments. But the fifth Article, in matter of dispensations, was no lesse noted. For it is plaine, that, in ancient times, euery dispensation was administred by the Pastors in their seuerall Churches, and that afterwards in successe the Popes reserued to themselues the most principall things; which one might say was done, that the most important matters might not bee managed by vnsufficient persons, howsoeuer the reason formerly alleadged to the contrary by the Bishop of Fiue Churches seemeth very strong. But now the Councell decreeing that dispensations shall bee committed to the Ordinaries, to whom they should belong, if reseruations did cease, one may demaund to what end power is taken from any person, to bee giuen to the same againe? It is plaine that, by reseruing dispensations, nothing was meant in Rome, but onely that their Bulls might bee vttered; because this beeing done, they thinke it better the worke should be executed by him that should haue done it, if hee had not been forbid, then by any other. Diuers other oppositions were made, by those who more willingly censure the actions o others, when they proceede from eminent persons; which because they bee of no great moment, are not worthy of an history. The Pope beeing aduised of the holding of the Session, and of that which happened in it, was very glad, as deliuered from the feare hee appre∣hended, that, in the contention about the Cup, his authority would bee drawen into disputation; and because this way of composing differences, by referring them vnto him, was opened, hee hoped the like might bee done in the Article of residence, or in any other that should be controuersed: by which meanes the Councell would be ended quickly. But hee foresaw two causes which might crosse his desseigne; one, the comming of the Card. of Lorraine with the French Bishops, which did much trouble him, especially in regard of the vast thoughts of that Prelat, much contrary to the affaires of the The Pope plotteth to make a maior part in the Councell. Papacie, so incorporated in him, that he was not able to conceale them; for which hee saw no remedie, but by making the Italians so farre exceede the Vltramontans, that in their voyces they should not passe for a considerable number. Therefore he continually sollicited all the Bishops, whether titu∣lar, or others who had renounced, to goe to Trent, offering to beare their charges, and loading them with promises. Hee thought also to send a number of Abbats, as had beene done in some Councels. But beeing adui∣sed better, he thought it fit not to shew so much affection, nor to prouoke others to doe the like. Hee feared another crosse in regard of the purposes which he had discouered in all Princes to hold the Councell open with do∣ing of nothing; in the Emperour, to gratifie the Dutchmen, and to gaine their fauour in the election of his sonne to be King of the Romans; in the French King, to worke his will with the same men, and with the Hugonots. He con∣sidered much of the Congregation of the Ambassadours, which seemed to be a Councell of Seculars in the middest of that of the Bishops; thinking that the Congregations of the Prelates would bee dangerous, without the pre∣sence and presidence of the Legates to keepe them in order, and therefore, that the Ambassadours much more, might handle things preiudiciall, and that there was danger if they continued, that they might bring in some Pre∣late, in regard there were Ecclesiastiques amongst them, and so vse licence, vnder the name of liberty. In this perplexity hee conceiued hope, because he saw the greater part of the Ambassadours oppose the propositions, and that none were combined but onely the Ambassadours of the Emperour, and of the French King, who hauing no Prelats could preuaile but little. Notwith∣standing he thought fit to sollicite the conclusion of the Councell, and to cherish the diuision which hee saw amongst the Ambassadours. Therefore he wrot immediatly that they should hold Congregations often, and digest, and put in order the matters quickly. And because to giue one thankes, doth oblige him to perseuere, he commanded that the Ambassadors of Portugall, & of the Suisses, and the Secretary of the Marquisse of Pescara, should be com∣mended, and heartily thanked, on his part, for refusing to consent with o∣thers to an impertinent proposition. Hee caused thankes to be giuen to the Venetians, and Florentine, for the good intention they shewed in denying to come to the Congregation, praying them not to refuse to come hereafter if they were called, because he knew their presence would euer be seruiceable to the Apostolique Sea, and hinder the bad desseignes of others. Neither was his Holinesse deceiued in his opinion. For it made them all say, that they had done so, because in those times, the seruice of God did require that the Popes authoritie should bee defended, resoluing to per∣seuere in that resolution. And they professed they were more obliged by the courteous thankes of his Holinesse for doing that, to which their duety did bind them. THE SEVENTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. T He custome of those who write Histories is, The forme of this History. to propose, in the beginning, a modell of what they meane to handle. Which I haue thought fit to deferre vntill this place, making it an ab∣stract of the which is related already, and a desseigne of that which is to follow. Hauing resolued to giue to the memorials, which I had collected, some forme, which might not ex∣ceed my power, and yet best befit the matter, I considered, that, of all the negotiations which haue hapned amongst Christians in this world, or perhaps will hap∣pen hereafter, this is the most principall, and that most men are desirous to know whatsoeuer doth belong to that which they doe esteeme euen the least things of all. Therefore I thought first that the forme of a Diarie would best agree to this subiect. But two oppositions did crosse mine opinion: One, that that forme could not befit the occurrences of twenty nine yeeres, spent in making preparation for the birth of this Councell, nor of the foure∣teene yeeres which passed while it slept, it not beeing knowen whether it were aliue or dead. Another, that all the matter which a continuate Diarie doth require, could not possibly be found. Therefore, fitting the forme to the matter, as nature doth, not the matter to the forme, as the Schooles, I thought it not absurd to write the preparatory and interconciliary times by way of Annals, and in those of the celebration to make a Diarie of the occurrences of those dayes, the knowledge whereof I was able to attaine; hoping that whosoeuer shall reade this Treatise, will excuse the omission of those which could not be knowen. For if of things, the intire memorie of which those who haue interest doe labour by all meanes to preserue, often times a great part is quickly lost, how much more will it happen in this, which many men of great place, and exact iudgement, haue vsed all diligence, amd spa∣red no paines wholly to conceale. It is true that matters of great weight ought to bee held in a mystery, when it is for the common good; but when it doeth damnifie one, and profit another, it is no maruaile if men who haue contrary ends, doe proceed in contrary courses. The common and famous saying of the Lawyers is true, that his cause is more to be fauoured who la∣boureth to auoyd losse, then as who seeketh gaine. For these causes this Treatise of mine is subiect to some disequalitie of Narration; and howbeit I might say, that as much might bee found in some famous Writer, yet this shall not bee my defence; but this, that if others haue auoyded it, they haue not written the History of the Councell of Trent, nor any other like vnto it. The Ambassadours of France, so soone as the Session was ended, receiued The petition, of the French Ambassadors. letters from their King, that they should make instance for the deferring of it. Wherefore though the time was past, they came to the Legates, and told them they had a new commission from the King to make request, that they would labour in the reformation, and, for points of doctrine, expect the comming of his Prelates; adding that, if the matter of Order and Matrimonie were disputed by the Diuines, and handled by the Prelates, no more points of doctrine would remaine, and the comming of the Frenchmen would bee to no purpose. Wherefore then request was, that they would be pleased to deferre them vntill the end of October, imploying themselues, in the meane space, in the matter of reformation, or one day in that, and another, in mat∣ter of doctrine, not deferring as they had done, all the matter of reformati∣on vntill the last dayes immediatly before the Session, so that there scarce re∣mained time so much as to see the Articles, much lesse to consult vpon them. The Legates answered that their propositions did desire to be weighed well, To which the Legates an∣swered. and that they would be carefull to giue them all possible satisfaction; deman∣ding a copie of their instructions, that they might resolue the better. The Ambassadours gaue them a writing, of this tenour: That the King hauing seene the Decrees of the sixteenth of Iuly, concerning the Communion Sub v∣traque, and deferring two Articles in the same matter, and those proposed in the Congregations concerning the sacrifice of the Masse, howsoeuer hee commendeth that which is done, yet he cannot conceale that which is gene∣rally spoken, that is, that the matter of discipline and manners is either quite omitted, or slenderly handled, and the controuersed points in Religion, in which all the Fathers doe agree, hastily determined. Which although hee thinketh to bee false, yet hee desireth that the propositions of his Ambassa∣dours may bee expounded, as necessary, to prouide for the good of Christen∣dome, and the calamities of his Kingdome. And hauing found, by exper∣ence, that neither seuerity nor moderation hath beene able to reduce those who are separated from the Church, hee thought fit to haue recourse to the Generall Councell which hee hath obtained of the Pope; that hee was sory that the tumults of France did hinder the comming of his Prelates; that hee saw well that the constancie and rigour, in continuing the forme begunne by the Legats and Bishops, was not fit to reconcile peace, and make an vnity in the Church; that his desire was, that nothing might bee done to aliene the mindes of the aduersaries, now in the beginning of the Councell, but that they may bee inuited, and, in case they come, receiued as children with all hu∣manitie, hoping that by this meanes, they will suffer themselues to be taught, and brought backe to the bosome of the Church. And because all that are in Trent doe professe the same Religion, and neither can nor will make doubt of any part thereof, hee thinketh the disputation and censure in poynts of re∣ligion to bee not onely superfluous, but impertinent for the Catholiques, and a cause to separate the aduersaries the more. For hee that thinketh they will receiue the Decrees of the Councell in which they haue not assisted, doeth not know them well; neither will any thing bee done by this meanes, but ar∣guments ministred of writing more Bookes. Therefore the King thinketh it better to omit the matter of Religion, vntill the other of Reformation bee well set in order: and that this is the scope at which euery one must ayme, that the Councell, which now is great, and will bee greater by the comming of the Frenchmen; may produce fruit. Afterwards the King demandeth, that in regard of the absence of his Bishops, the next Session may bee put off vntill the end of October, or the publication of the Decrees deferred, or a new order expected from the Pope, to whom hee hath written, labouring in the meane while in the matter of Reformation. And because he vnderstan∣deth that the ancient libertie of Councels is not obserued, that Kings and Princes, or their Ambassadours may declare the necessities of their States, his Maiestie demandeth that their authoritie may bee preserued, and all reuoked which hath been done to the contrary. The same day the Emperours Ambassadours came to the Legats, requi∣ring The petition of the Empe∣rors Ambas∣sadors. that the Articles sent by his Maiestie, and presented by them, might bee proposed, and were very earnest that the points of doctrine might bee defer∣red vntill the comming of the Frenchmen; and, that the reformation may bee seruiceable not onely for the whole Church, but for the Church of euery particular Kingdome, their desire was that two of euery Nation might bee deputed, to put them in minde of that which did deserue to bee proposed, and discussed in Councell. The Legats made a common answere to them both, that they could not alter, without great preiudice, the order set downe, which was to handle Doctrine and Reformation both together, and, if they should, that other Princes would oppose; but, to content them, they would ordaine that the Diuines and Prelates should examine the matter of Order onely, and afterwards handle some poynts of Reformation, obseruing still the former vse, that euery one, of what condition soeuer, may put them, the Legats, in minde, of what they thinke necessary, profitable, or conuenient; which is a greater liberty then to haue two deputed for euery nation: and af∣terwards they would treat of Matrimonie. The Ambassadours being not one iote contented, the Legats sent all their demands to the Pope. The Frenchmen complained to all men of this austeritie, and for that the Pope had lately commanded other Prelats to goe to the Councell, that hee might exceed in number: which the Papalins themselues did not like should bee done so openly, and iust when the newes was spread of the comming of the French-men; desiring to be secured by a maior part, yet so, as not to haue it knowne for what cause it was done. But the Pope did of set purpose pro∣ceede openly, that the Cardinall of Loraine might know that his attempts would be in vaine, and so resolue not to come, or that the Frenchmen might take some easion to make the Councell dissolue. Neither was the Pope o ly of pinion, but all the Court, fearing some great preiudice by the Cardinals desseignes; which howsoeuer they might not succeede (a thing which they could scarce hope hope ) yet his comming onely would hinder, prolong, and disturbe the Councell. Ferra told Loraine, his kinseman, his iourney would bee of no moment; and of small reputation to him∣selfe, in regard hee would arr ue after all was determined; and Biancheto, a familiar friend of the Cardinall of Armignac, who also had credit with Lo∣raine, as much to them both; and the Secretary of Seripando, who had ritie the President Ferrier, olde him the same; all which was though too bee do by commission from the Pope, or to please him, at the least. But t ir care of the actions of the Councell was not intermitted for all The Articles of the Sacra∣ment of Or∣der. this. For the Articles; concerning the Sacr ment of Order, were presently giuen foorth, to be disputed by the Diuines, the disputants elected, and di∣stinguished into foure rankes, each of them being to di two. For they were eigh . Whether Order be truely and properly a Sacrament, insti∣tuted by CHRIST, or an humane inuentions or Rite, to elect Ministers of the word of GOD, and of the Sao ments? Whether Order bee one Sa∣orament onely and all others bee meanes and degrees vnto Priesthood? 3. Whether there be an Hierarchie in the Catholique Church, consisting of Bishops, Priests, and other Orders, or whether all Christians bee Priests, or whether the vocation consent of the people or secular Magistrate bee ne∣cessary, or whether a Priest may become a Laicke? Whether there be a visible and externall Priesthood in the new Testament, and a power to conse∣crate and offer the body and blood of CHRIST, and to remit sinnes, or onely the ba e Ministery to preach the Gospel, so that those who preach not are not Priests? Whether the holy Ghost is giuen and receiued in ordination, and a Character imprinted? 6. Whether Ʋnction, and other ceremonies, be necessary in consering Order; or superfluous, or pernicious? Whe∣ther Bishops bee super to Priests, and haue peculiar power to confirme and ordaine, and whether those who are brought in by any other meanes then Canonicall ordination, are true Ministers of the Word and Sacraments W the Bishops called and ordained by the Pope, be lawfull & the those bee true Bishops who come in by any other way then Canonicall institution? The of the moneth the Congregations of the Diuines ga and were held twice la day, and ended the second of October. I will, ac∣cording vse, late those opinions onely which are remarkeable, ther for singularity o among themselues. In the first Congregation foure Dillines of the Pope spake, who did all Are disputed in the Con∣gregations. in ning that Order was a , by places of Scripture ally by that of S The thing hich from God, are , then by the adition of the Apo le, s yings of the , v iso , and aboue all, by the Councell of Florence adding also this reason; that the Church would bee a confusion if there were not gouernnment and obe∣dience. But Friar Peter Soto was copious, in shewing that there were seuen Orders, and each properly a Sacrament, and all instituted by CHRIST, saying, it was necessary to make a declaration herein, because some Canonists; pas∣sing the limits of their profession, haue added two more, the first Tonsure, and the Bishopricke; which opinion may cause many other errors of grea∣ter importance. He likewise shewed at large, that CHRIST had, when hee was on earth, exercised all these Orders, one after another; all whose life as it was addressed to the last of these Sacraments, so it is plaine, that all the others serue onely as a ladder, to climbe vp to the highest, which is the Priesthood. But Ierolamus Brauus, a Dominican Friar, hauing protested that hee con∣stantly held that there were seuen Orders, and each of them a Sacrament, and that the vse of the Church ought to be obserued, to proceed from the infe∣riour to the superiour, and so to the Priesthood, he added, that hee was not of opinion that so particular a declaratiō ought to be made, in regard of the dif∣ference betweene the Diuines, amongst which one can hardly find two of the same minde. For which cause Caietan, in his old age, wrote, that he that collecteth the things taught by the Doctours, and in the auncient and mo∣derne Pontificals, will see a great confusion in all other Orders but Priesthood. The Master of the Sentences maintayned, that Sub-deaconship and inferiour Orders, were instituted by the Church, and the Scripture seemed to haue in∣stituted the Deaconship, as a ministery of Tables, and not as one of the Altar. The difference concerning inferiour Orders in the old Pontificals, where that which is in one is not in another, doeth shew they are Sacramentall, and not Sacraments. And reason doth lead vs hereunto. For the actions which one ordained doth, may be done by one not ordained, and are of the same vali∣ditie, effect, and perfection. Saint Bonauenture also, though hee thinketh that all seuen are Sacraments, yet he holdeth two other opinions to be probable; one, that onely Priesthood is a Sacrament, and the inferiours, being imployed about corporall things, as to open doores, reade Lessons, light Tapers, and the like, doe not seeme to expresse any celestiall matter, and are therefore one∣ly dispositions to Priesthood. The second, that the three holy Orders are Sa∣craments, and, concerning the common saying, that the inferiour are degrees to the superiour, Saint Thomas affirmeth, that in the Primitiue Church many were ordained Priests immediatly, without passing by the inferiour Orders, and that the Church did ordaine that this passage should be made for humi∣liation onely. It appeareth plainely, in the Actes of the Apostles, that Saint Matthias was immediatly ordayned an Apostle, and the seuen Deacons did not passe by the Subdeaconship, and the inferiour Orders. Paulinus saith of himselfe, that, hauing a purpose to apply himselfe to the seruice of GOD in the Clergie, he would, for humiliation, passe by all Ecclesiasticall degrees, be∣ginning from the Ostiarie; but while hee was thinking to begin, beeing yet a Laicke, the multitude tooke him by force in Barcelona on Christmas day, ca∣ried him before the Bishop, and caused him to be ordained Priest at the first; which would not haue beene done if it had not beene the vse in those times. Therefore this Brauus concluded, that the Synod ought not to passe beyond those things which are agreed on by the Catholiques, and that it was better to begin with the Order of Priesthood, which would make a connexion be∣tweene this Session and the last, which handled the Sacrifices, and to passe from Priesthood to Order in generall, not descending to any particularitie. The Congregation being ended, and most of the Prelates departed, Fiue Churches, with his Hungarians, and some Polonians, and Spaniards, taried be∣hinde; to whom he made a speach, and sayd, that the Emperour, being freed from all suspicion of warre; by the truce concluded with the Turke, tooke The Bishop of Fiue Churches maketh a speech con∣cerning re∣formation. nothing so much to the heart as the reformation of the Church; which would surely be effected, if some of the Prelates in the Councell would assist. Therefore he exhorted and prayed them, for Gods sake, and for the charitie which euery Christian oweth to the Church, that they would not abandon so honest, iust, and profitable a cause, that euery one would put downe in writing what hee thought might be constituted for the seruice of God, with∣out any respect of man, not reforming one part, but the whole body of the Church, both in the head and in the members. Granata did second him, shewing the necessity and opportunity thereof, thanking the Bishop of Fiue Churches for his admonition, and said, they would consult amongst them∣selues. For this cause the Spaniards, being assembled together, discoursed of And is secon∣ded by the Spaniards. the necessitie of reformation, and the hope thereof, in regard of the Empe∣rours inclination, from which their King also, who was most piously addi∣cted would not disseut, and the French Prelates, who would shortly be there, would vndoubtedly promote and assist the worke, in earnest. They repeated diuers abuses, and shewed that the fountaine of them all was the Court of Rome, which is not onely corrupt in it selfe, but the cause of deformation in all Churches; and particularly the vsurpa ion of the Episcopall authoritie, by reseruations, which if it were not restored, and the Court depriued of that which they haue taken from Bishops, it would bee impossible the abuses should bee redressed. Granata considered, that, it beeing necessary to lay a good foundation for so noble a Fabrique, a way was open for them now that they were to speake of the Sacrament of Order, if it bee determined that the authority of Bishops is instituted by CHRIST; because it will follow by consequence, that it cannot bee diminished; by which meanes that will bee restored to the Bishops, which hauing been giuen them by CHRIST, hath by the ambition of others, and their owne negligence, been vsurped from them. Braganza added, that it was so much the more necessary, be∣cause the Episcopall authority was brought to nothing, and the Order ere∣cted superiour to Bishops, vnknowen to the Church in former ages, that is, the Cardinals, who at the first, were esteemed in the number of Priests, and Deacons, and, after the tenth age began to exalt themselues aboue their de∣gree. Notwithstanding they were still accounted inferiour to Bishops vn∣till the yeere 1200 since which time they haue so farre aduanced themselues, that they hold Bishops as seruants in their houses, and it will bee impos∣sible to reforme the Church, vntill both of them bee reduced to their due places. These propositions and discourses were heard with applause; so that they resolued to elect sixe of them, to put in writing the things necessary and fit, as well for the reformation in generall, as particularly for this point of the institution of Bishops, whence they purposed to begin, Oranata, Iasper Cor∣nante, Archbishop of Messina, the Bishop of Segouia, and Martin di Cardoua, Bishop of Tortosa were named, the last of which was cause why the proiect did not proceed. For, hauing secret intelligence with the Papalins, he excu∣sed himselfe, alleadging his owne insufficiencie; and the vnfitnesse of the time, adding that Fiue Churches was not mooued with pietie, and had no o∣ther end then to make vse of them, to constraine the Pope, by meanes of the reformation, to grant the vse of the Cup, wherein they had beene auerse. And seeing they were disposed to heare him, hee preuailed so much with them that they passed no further for the present, but interposed a delay. Not∣withstanding it was not long deferred. For Granata, Braganza, Messina, and Segouia, hauing obtained audience of the Legates, desired that they might handle the Articles proposed heretofore by Cardinall Crescentius in this same Councell, and concluded, though not published, that is, that the Bishops are instituted by CHRIST, and are superiour to Priestes iure diuino. The Legates, after they had conferred together, answered, that the Luthe∣rans hauing affirmed that a Bishop and a Priest is the samething, it was fit to declare that a Bishop is superiour, but that it was not necessary to say quo iure, nor by whom a Bishop is instituted, because there is no controuersie of it. Granata replyed that there was a controuersie, and that if the Diuines did dis∣pute it, the necessity of deciding this point would be knowne. The Legates would not consent by any meanes; and, after some few sharpe words on both sides, the Spaniards departed without hauing obtained any thing; yet resolued still to perswade some of the Diuines to bring this particular into The Legates wi l not sulter the inst tution of Bishops to be discussed. the discussions, and to make mention of it when they were to giue voices in congregation. But the Papalins, vnderstanding hereof, did cause it to be voyced amongst the Diuines, that the Legates did forbid all speach of that question. But to returne to the congregation, when the second ranke spake, consi∣sting of Diuines and Canonists, Thomas Passius, a Canon of Valentia, said, that all doubt made of the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie, did proceede from grosse ignorance of antiquity, it being a thing most knowne that in the Church the people hath alwayes beene gouerned by the Clergie, and, in the Clergie, the inferiours by the superiours, vntill all be reduced vnto one vniuersall Rector, which is the Pope of Rome. And hauing declared the proposition at large, he added that there was no need to doe any thing herein, but to make this trueth appeare, by remoouing the contrary errours, which haue bin brought in by the Schoolemen, who sometimes, by too much subtiltie, doe make plaine things obscure, opposing the Canonists, who place the first tonsure, and the Bishopricke in the number of Orders. Of the latter he said, it seemed strange to him, how they could confesse, that confirmation, ordination, and so many other consecrations doe so peculiarly belong vnto it, that they can∣not possibly bee done by any else, and yet deny it to bee an Order, when as they giue that name to the keeping of the doore, which may as well be done by a Lay-man. For the first tonsure, he hath euer heard the Diuines say, that a Sacrament is an externall signe which signifieth a spirituall grace, and that the tonsure is the signe, and the thing signified is the deputation to the seruice of God; and therefore hee wondered why they would not haue it to be a Sa∣crament, and the rather, because one entreth into the Clergie by it, and doth participate of Ecclesiasticall exemptions; so that, if it were not instituted by CHRIST, it could not be said, that either Clergiship, or the exemption thereof were de iure Diuino; that it was plaine that the Hierarchie consisteth in the Ec∣clesiasticall Orders, which is nothing but an holy order of superiors and infe∣riors, which can neuer bee well established without making, as the Canonists Of Ecclesia∣sticall Hie∣rarchie. doe, the Tonsure the lowest, and the Bishopricke the highest; which being done the Hierarchie is all established, because the first and last being giuen, those of the middle will necessarily follow, which cannot subsist without the former. Concerning the other part of the Article, they said, it was very plaine by the Canons, that in the choyce of Bishops and deputation of Priests, and Deacons, the people of al sorts was present, & gaue voice or approbation, but this was by the Popes tacit or expresse consent; because no Laicke can haue authority in matters Ecclesiasticall, but by priuiledge from him. And this was granted in those times, because the common people, and Grandies also, were deuout, and did, by this meanes, entertaine themselues in spiritual things, and shewed more obedience and reuerence to the Clergie, beeing more ready to inrich it with oblations and donations, which hath made the holy Church to be in that state in which it now is. But since deuotion did cease, the seculars haue armed only at the vsurpation of the Church goods, & to place their ad∣herents in the Clergie. And now the new Heretikes haue made a deuilish in∣uentiō, saying, that was due to the people which was granted by fauor which is one of the most pestiferous heresies which hath euer bin set on foot, because it doth destroy the Church, without which faith cannot stand. He alleadged many reasons and congruities, to shew that the ordination ought to be in the power only of the Ordainer, which he confirmed by the Popes Decretals and concluded in the end, that not only the Article was to be condemned as here∣ticall, but that, the voice and consent of the people in ordinations being taken away, for iust and necessary reasons, the Pontifical also ought to be corrected, and those places remoued which make mention thereof; because, so long as they continue there, the heretikes wil make vse of them, to proue that the as∣sistance of the people is necessary. He said the places were many; but to recite one, in the ordination of Priests, the Bishop ordaining saith, that it hath been constituted by the Fathers, not without cause, that the people should haue voice in the ordination of the Rectors of the altar, that they may be obedient to him whom they haue ordained, in regard of their consenting to his ordi∣nation. If this, and other Rites shall remaine, the heretikes will alwayes de∣tract from the Catholike Church, saying the ordinations now are but sha∣dowes and shewes, as Luther did wickedly say. Francis Forrier, a Dominican of Portugal, said the Hierarchie of the Ca∣tholike Church, could not be doubted of, it being proued by the Apostolicall tradition, by testimony of all antiquity, and by the continuall vse of the Church. And howsoeuer the word bee not vsed by all, yet the thing sig∣nified hath euer been in practise. Dionysius Areopagita hath made a proper treatise of it, and the Nicen Councell hath approoued it, and called it an an∣cient custome: and that which hath been called ancient in the beginning of the fourth age, must needes haue its originall from the time of the Apostles. Onely he thought it not fit to handle this poynt ioyntly with the Sacrament of Order, howsoeuer many of the Schoole-men doe handle it in that place, putting the Hierarchie in the superiour and inferiour Orders; a thing which cannot subsist, it being certaine that the Pope is the highest Hierarch, and that the Cardinals do follow, & then the Patriarchs, Primats, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Arch-Priests, Arch-Deacons, and other inferiour degrees vnder the Pope, as Head. And to omit the disputation whether the Bishopricke be an Order, it is certaine that the Arch-bishoprike, Patriarkship, and Papacie are not Orders, and doe signifie only superiority and iurisdiction ouer Bishops. There∣fore the Hierarchie consisteth in iurisdiction, and the Councel of Nice placeth it in that, when it speaketh of the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. Therefore the handling of Hierarchie must not be ioyned with that of Order, for feare of giuing way to calumnie. There was much varietie in the discussion of these Articles, those of the second ranke returning to the former, and some disputing that the degree of a Bishop was an Order, and others, that aboue Priesthood, there was no∣thing but Iurisdiction, some alleadging Saint Thomas, and some Saint Bo∣nauenture, and some beeing of a middle opinion, that is, that it is an eminent dignitie, or office in the Order. The famous saying of Saint Hierom, and the authority of Saint Austin were alleadged, who say that the degree of a Bishop hath beene most ancient, but yet an Ecclesiasticall Constitution. Michael of Medina did oppose, and say, that the Catholique Church, as Saint Epiphanius saith, did condemne Aerius of heresie, for saying that the Degree of a Bi∣shop is no greater then that of a Priest: into which heresie it is no wonder if Hierom, Austin, and some other of the Fathers did fall, because the matter was not cleere in all poynts. This boldnesse, to say that Hierom and Austin did sauour of heresie, gaue great scandall; but hee insisted the more vpon it, and maintained his position. And the Doctors were equally diuided into two opinions in this poynt. Others placed this Hierarchie in Orders onely, alleadging Dyonisius, who in naming the Hierarchs, maketh mention of none but of Deacons, Priests, and Bishops. Some followed Forrier, that it did consist in Iurisdiction. At the last a third opinion came foorth, that it was a mixture of both, which afterwards was more generally approoued. For placing it in Order, it did not appeare how Arch-bishops, Patriarches, and, which is of more importance, the Pope himselfe could enter, all beeing of accord that these Degrees are not Orders aboue the Degree of a Bishop. Yet some did alleadge the common saying to the contrary, that the Episcopall Order is diuided into foure parts, Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarches, and the Pope: and placing it in Iurisdiction, none of the holy Orders did enter. There was a great disputation amongst them about the forme of the The forme of the Hierarchy Hierarchie; some saying it was Charitie, some Faith informed, and others, according to Cardinall Turrecremata, Vnitie. To this last was opposed that vnitie is a genericall qualitie in all that is one, and is an effect of the forme which doth produce it. Those who were for charitie brought very many places of the Fathers, which doe attribute the vnitie of the Church vnto it. But others said that it was the heresie of Wigles. For, if it were so, a Prelate, loosing charity, would bee out of the Hierarchie, and lose authoritie. Not∣withstanding they did not auoyd the difficultie, by making faith informed to bee the forme, because a Prelate might externally counterfeit, and bee se∣cretly vnfaithfull, who not being of the Hierarchie, the Christian people could not know whom to obey, because they might doubt of all, and sometimes had cause to doe it. And as the Diuines, especially the Friars are free in ex∣emplifications, they alleadged the Pope, saying, that, in case he should bee incredulous, the whole Hierarchie would perish by his default, whether one did make faith or charitie to bee the forme. And therefore they sayd, Bap∣tisme was. But the same difficulties did arise in regard of the vncertaintie thereof, because the intention of the Minister, according to the determina∣tion of the Councell, is essentially required, which is more secret then the o∣ther two: for which cause it cannot bee certainly affirmed of any that hee is baptized. The Articles, whether there bee a visible Priesthood? or whether all Christians bee Priests? or whether a Priest may become a Layman? or whe∣ther his office bee preaching? were not handled with any discussion, but with declamations against the Lutherans, who depriue the Ghurch of com∣merce with GOD, and of the meanes to appease him, making it a confusion without gouernement, and bereauing her of all her beauty and comelinesse. Friar Adamantius, of Florence, a Diuine of this ranke, belonging to Cardi∣nall Madruccio, said, that the greatest part of those who had spoken, had al∣leadged onely probable reasons, and conueniencies, which when Articles of faith are discussed, doe not onely not force the aduersaries, but confirme them more in their opinions; and, for proofe hereof hee brought a direct place of Saint Austin. Hee added that discussions in Councell should differ from disputations in Schooles. For in those how much the more things are minced, and curiously handled, the better it is; but it doth not become a Councell to examine any thing, but that which may bee cleered and made plaine. Notwithstanding many questions were disputed, the knowledge whereof cannot in this life (in which GOD doth not suffer all to bee disco∣uered) possibly bee attained. For this Article, it is abundantly sufficient that the Church hath an Hierarchie; that the Hierarchie consisteth of Prelates and Ministers, that these are ordained by Bishops, that Order is a Sacrament, and that Seculars haue no part herein. Petrus Romirius, a Franciscane Friar, following the doctrine of Iohn Scot, said, that Order ought not to bee called a Sacrament, because it is inuisible and permanent, whereas all the Sacra∣ments are necessarily visible, and (except the Eucharist) consist in action. Therefore to auoyde all difficulties, one must not say that Order, but that Or∣dination is a Sacrament. But hee was much opposed, because all the Di∣uines, and (which is of no lesse importance) the Councell of Florence also doe call Order a Sacrament. And it would bee a great boldnesse to taxe all the Doctours, a generall Councell, and the whole Church for speaking impro∣perly. In the third ranke, there was no lesse varietie of opinions concerning the Of the holy Ghost giuen in Ordination fift Article. For howsoeuer all agreed that the holy Ghost is giuen and re∣ceiued in Ordination, yet some said, hee was giuen in his proper person, and others, in the gift of grace onely. They disputed much on both sides, but those especially who affirmed grace. Another question was, whether grace of Iustification bee conferred, or onely a gift to exercise the office. For the former was alleadged, that all the Sacraments giue grace of Iustification; for the later, that a man cannot without repentance receiue grace, and yet may receiue Order. For the Character, as they all agreed that it is imprinted in Of the Cha∣racter. Priesthood, so they dissented in all the rest. For some said it was imprinted in the holy Orders onely, and others in all the seuen; both which opinions Saint Bonauenture doeth thinke to bee probable. Some were better pleased with the distinction of Durandus, that vnderstanding, by Character, a power to worke a Spirituall effect, the Priesthood onely hath it, which onely can con∣secrate, and remit sinnes; and the others haue it not, in regard their actions are corporall, which a Lay-man, without any the least veniall sinne, may doe as well as they. But if by Character be vnderstood a deputation to a spe∣ciall office, so all the Orders haue a proper Character. Others opposed that it was a Lutherane opinion, contained in the first Article, and said, that therefore it was necessary to affirme a proper and indeleble Character in all. And some said it was in the first Tonsure also, because it was not reiterated in those who are degraded, as would be necessary if a Character were not im∣printed; and because, by it, one is inuested in the Clergie, and made partaker of Eclesiastical exemptions, and immunities. Neither would it bee possible to maintaine that Clerkeship, and the immunities thereof were de iure Diuino, but by saying, that the first Tonsure is a Diuine institution. Concerning the degree of Bishops the controuersie was greater, and the question was reui∣ued whether it bee one of the Orders. For hauing two properactions so fa∣mous, to confirme, and ordaine, a Spirituall power is necessary to it, which is a Character, without which ordination and confirmation would bee to no purpose. The auditors were weary with hearing so many difficulties, and did willingly giue eare to those who said they ought to omit them, and speake onely in generall termes. But the Friars grumbled, and were angrie to see in them a disposition to define Articles, and pronounce Anathemaes, not vnderstanding the poynts, and abhorring those who would informe them. In the sixt Article they all condemned the Lutherans, for detracting from vnctions, and ceremonies vsed in conferring Orders. Some desired that those which are necessarie, and belong to the substance of the Sacrament (as was done in the Councell of Florence) might bee distinguished from the rest, and him declared to bee an heretique, who should say that Order might bee giuen or receiued without them; and for the others, that hee should bee condemned in generall termes, who did call them pernicious. Hereupon a great contention arose which were necessary, and which were added for ornament, or deuotion. Melchior Cornelius, a Portugall, seemed to speake What cere∣monies be ne∣cessary ∣ferring Orders much to the purpose; who sayd, the Apostles did vndoubtedly vse impositi∣on of hands in Ordination, so that none is mentioned in the holy Scripture without that ceremony; which, in succeeding ages, was thought to be so essentiall, that Ordination was called by that name. Notwithstanding, Gre∣gorie the ninth saith, it was a rite brought in, and many Diuines doe not hold it to be necessary, howsoeuer others be of the contrarie opinion. It appea∣reth also by the Decretall of Innocentius the third in this point, that vnction was not vsed in all Churches. And the famous Canonists, Hostiensis, Iohannes Andreas, Abbas, and others doe affirme, that the Pope may ordaine a Priest with these words onely, Be thou a Priest, and (which is of more importance) Innocentius, Father of all the Canonists, sayth; that if the formes had not been inuented, it had beene sufficient if the Ordainer had vsed these words onely, Be thou a Priest, or others equiualent, because they were instituted by the Church afterwards to be obserued. For these reasons Cornelius gaue counsell not to speake of necessary Ceremonies, but onely to condemne those who hold them to be superfluous, or pernicious. Although the Congregations of the Diuines did take vp almost all the time, yet the Prelates did more intend, and discourse amongst themselues of reformation, some promoting, and some declining it, then of the points of doctrine discussed by the Theologues; so that the frequent and publique speeches which were heard throughout all Trent, cherished by the Ambas∣sadours of the Emperour, and French King, induced the Legates to thinke it necessary to make shew they were not auerse from it; especially because they had promised to propose it so soone as the matter of Order was discussed, and vnderstood, that a discourse of the Ambassadour Lansac was receiued with The Legates are much tro∣bled with the speeches that pasted concer∣ning Refor∣mation. great applause made in an assembly of many Ambassadours and Prelates, in which hee concluded that if the reformation, proposed and demanded by the Emperour, was so feared and abhorred, yet, at the least, a way ought to bee found out without making new constitutions, to cause those things which haue beene established in ancient Councels to bee obserued, by re∣moouing the impediments which doe nourish the abuses. The Legats cau∣sed the propositions of the Imperialists, and all the instances made vnto them in matter of reformation vntill that day, and their owne answers to bee put together, and an abstract to bee made of the Constitutions of the Assembly in France, and of the demands of the Spanish Prelats: all which they sent to the Pope, and told him it was impossible to entertaine them any more with And send to the Pope. words, and that it was necessary to shew the world by some effect, that they haue a purpose to handle this matter, and to giue satisfaction in some sort to the Ambassdours of Princes, especially in that which they desire for the interest of their Countreys; yet with such circumspection as that they may not preiudice the Papall authoritie, or prerogatiues of the Church of Rome. The Pope seeing the instruction of the French King, which did import the prolonging of the Councell, was much displeased. For he had conceiued hope, that all which did remaine to be discussed, might be defined in the next Session of the 12. of Nouember, or if not, yet that the Councell would bee concluded, suspended or dissolued in the end of the yeere, at the latest. He therefore answered the French Ambassadour residing with him (who desi∣red the points of doctrine might bee deferred vntill the comming of their Prelats, and the matter of reformation handled in the meane time) that hee was informed that the Cardinall of Loraine meant to tarrie vntill the surprise of Burges, & to attend the King to Orlience, so that his departure out of France would be very late, and perhaps neuer, and that it was not iust to entertaine so many Prelates in Trent, vpon disseignes so remote, that the demaunds for delay were not made, because the French-men desired to goe to the Coun¦cell, but to put himselfe and the Prelats to more charges, protesting, that, if his money were consumed by this meanes, he should not be able to continue in assisting the King. He made it a greater matter, that their Prelats had been expected eighteene moneths, and himselfe lead along with diuers friuolous excuses. He complained of his condition, that if the Councell vseth any re∣spect towards him, which it doth but seldome, the Ambassadours, there pre∣sent, say it is not free, and yet themselues to desire him to ordaine a dilation, which is a thing more vniust, and more abhorred by the Fathers then any other. His conclusion was, that when hee had assurance or likelyhood of their comming, he would endeuour that they should be expected, saying, hee had giuen order to bee aduertised, by an expresse Currier, of the Cardinals departure, that hee might presently employ himselfe in the businesse, and, in the meane while, hee thought it not iust that the Fathers should be idle. He sayd the matter of reformation was more fit to bee deferred then this of do∣ctrine which doth not concerne him, as being a good Catholique, who will vndoubtedly not dissent from others. But in matter of reformation it is fit to heare him, because it doth concerne him, as beeing a second Pope, hauing many Benefices, and a reuenue of three hundred thousand Crownes of Church liuings, whereas himselfe hath but one Benefice, wherewith hee is content; that notwithstanding hee had reformed himselfe, and all parts of the Court, to the hinderance and losse of many of his officers, and would do more, but that he saw plainely, that, by diminishing his reuenues, and by weakening the forces and the sinewes of his Stae; hee encourageth the ad∣uersaries, and exposeth all Catholiques, who are vnder his protection, to the iniuries of his enemies. And, for the Countreys which are not subiect to him in temporall matters, he said the ouerthrow of discipline did arise from themselues, and from the Kings and Princes, who, with vnfit and importu∣nate requests, doe force him to make extraordinary prouisions, and graunt vnusuall dispensations; that his condition was miserable, who if hee did de∣nie vnfit requests made vnto him, euery one complained of the iniury, if he granted them, all the inconuenience ensuing was ascribed vnto him, and men began to speake of reformation, as the Kings Ambassadours had done in Trent, in such generall termes, that it cannot bee vnderstood what they meane. Hee said, let them come to particulars, and say what they would haue reformed in the Kingdome, and they shall haue satisfaction in foure dayes; that the Prelats in Poisi, haue made many constitutions, which he wil confirme when he shall be requested: but to stand vpon vniuersalities only, and to find fault with all that is done, without proposing any thing, sheweth they beare no good affection. The fourth ranke of Theologues remained, who were to handle the supe∣riority The superio∣rity of Bi∣shops aboue Priests. of Bishops aboue Priests. Those who spake first followed the do∣ctrine of Saint Thomas and Bonauenture, who say a Priest hath two powers, one to consecrate the Body and Blood of CHRIST, and the other to remit sins, in the former wherof a Priest is equal, in regard a Bishop hath not greater authority then a simple Priest, but inferior in the later, because not the power onely of Order, but of iurisdiction also is required. Others added that it was a more excellent action to giue authoritie to consecrate, then to consecrate, and therefore that the Bishop was superior in this also, who cannot only doe it himselfe, but ordaine Priests, and giue them authority. But this beeing disputed sufficiently, they returned to handle the Articles of the Hierarchie, as being the same with this point of superiority; and the question beeing whe∣ther it doth consist in Order, iurisdiction, or in both, Antonius of Mont. Alcino, a Franciscan, said, it ought not to be vnderstood of an imaginary superiority, consisting in preeminence, or perfection of action, but in superioritie of gouernement, so that it may make lawes, giue commands, and iudge causes, as well in the Court of Conscience, as in the externall; which superiority is to bee discussed, because it is denied by the Lutherans. He said there must be an authority in the Church to gouerne it, the vnitie whereof could not other∣wise be preserued. Hee prooued it by the example of Bees, and Cranes, say∣ing, that in enery particular Church a speciall authority was necessary to go∣uerne it, which was in the Bishops, who haue part of the charge, the totality whereof is in the Pope as Head of the Church; which containing authority to iudge, and to make Processes and Lawes, it must needes bee a power of iu∣risdiction. Concerning Order, hee said a Bishop was of an higher degree then a Priest, hauing all the power of him, and two powers more; yet not∣withstanding cannot bee called his superiour; as a Subdeacon is foure degrees higher then a doore-keeper, yet not superiour vnto him. Hee prooued this his opinion by the generall vse of the whole Church, and all Christian Nati∣ons, and alleadged diuers authorities out of the Fathers. Finally, hee came to the holy Scripture, citing many places of the Prophets, to shew that this authority is called the authority of a Pastor, saying, that the vniuersalitie of it was giuen to S. Peter, when CHRIST said, Feede my Lambes, and some of it imparted by Peter to the Bishops, when he bad them, Feede the flocke which they haue in their custodie. And this opinion had great applause. But before those of this fourth ranke made an end of speaking, the Spa∣nish Prelates resoluing the point should bee handled whether Bishops are in∣stituted by CHRIST, after they had consulted together, did conclude that it was better the first motion should begin in the Congregations of the Di∣uines, that themselues might with more shew of reason, resuming the things spoken before, discourse vpon them, and compell others to doe the like. Therefore, in the Congregation of the first of October, Michael Oroncuspe, a Diuine of the Bishop of Pampelona, said to the seuenth, that being to qualifie or condemne a proposition which hath many significations, it was necessa∣ry to distinguish them, and afterwards to examine them one by one: and hee thought the proposition whether Bishops bee superior to Priests to be such. For one must distinguish whether they be superiours de facto, or de iure. That they are superiours de facto it cannot be doubted, because present experience, and the Histories of many ages doe shew, that Bishops haue exercised superi∣ority and Priests obedience. Therefore this Article being without question, the other, de iure, remaineth to bee discussed. Wherein there is another am∣biguitie also, whether Iure Pontificio, or Diuine. In the first sense the case is cleere, that they are superiours, there beeing so many Decretals which say it expressely: which howsoeuer it bee true and certaine, yet the Lutherans are not in this regard to be condemned for heretiques, because that cannot bee an article of faith which is grounded only vpon the law of man, and deserue to be condemned for denying the superiority of Bishops, onely in case it bee d iure Diuino. He added that he thought this point very cleere, and that he could euidently prooue it, and resolue anything alleadged to the contrarie, saying hee must not proceed further, beeing prohibited to speake of it. And here he shewed that the Ministery of Confirmation and Ordination is pro∣per to Bishops. And hauing spoken vpon the eighth Article, in conformitie of the others, he ended his discourse. Iohannes Fonseca, a Diuine of the Archbishop of Granata, followed; who The instituti∣on of Bishops is discussed. entred brauely vpon the matter, saying, it neither was, nor could be forbidden to speake of it. For the Article being proposed to be discussed, whether it be hereticall or no, it is necessary to vnderstand whether it bee against fayth, a∣gainst which it cannot be, if it doe not repugne to the Law of GOD. He sayd hee knew not whence the report came, that one might not speake of it, be∣cause, by the very proposition of the Article, it was commanded to be dis∣cussed. And here hee proceeded to handle, not the superiority alone, but the institution also affirming that Bishops are instituted by CHRIST, and by his diuine ordination, superiours to Priests. He said, that if the Pope be in∣stituted by CHRIST, because hee hath said to Peter, I will giue thee the keyes of the Kingdome, and, Feede my Lambes; Bishops are likewise instituted by him, because he hath said to all the Apostles, That which you bind on earth shall be bound in heauen, and whose sinnes you remit they are remitted, saying to them afterwards, Goe into the whole world, and preach the Gospel. And (which is more) he said vnto them, As my father hath sent me, so I send you. And if the Pope be successour of S. Peter, the Bishops are successors of the A∣postles; alleadging many authorities out of the Fathers, that the Bishops are successours of the Apostles. And, in particular, he recited a long discourse of S. Bernard in this point to Eugenius the Pope; and a place of the Actes of the Apostles, where S. Paul saith to the Ephesians, that they were made Bishops by the holy Ghost to gouerne the Church of GOD. Hee added, that to bee confirmed or created by the Pope, did not conclude that they were not instituted by CHRIST, or had not authority from him. For the Pope himselfe is created by the Cardinals, and yet hath his authoritie from CHRIST: and Priestes are created by the Bishop, who doeth ordaine them; but receiue their autho∣ritie from GOD: So the Bishops receiue the Diocesse from the Pope, and au∣thoritie from CHRIST. Their superiority ouer Priests he proued to be iure diuino, by authoritie of many Fathers, who say that Bishops doe succeed the Apostles, and Priestes the seuenty two disciples. Concerning other particles of this point, he said the same things which others had spoken before, Car∣dinall Simoneta was impatient, and turned often to his Colleagues, and was a∣bout Which vex∣eth Cardinall Simoneta. to interrupt the discourse: but being entred into vpon so good rea∣son, and heard by the Prelates with such attention, hee knew not how to resolue. After him followed Antonius Grossetus, a Dominican Friar, who, hauing briefly passed ouer the other articles, insisted vpon this. Hee stood much vp∣on the wordes of Saint Paul spoken to the Ephesians in Miletum, exhorting them to haue a care of the flocke; ouer which the holy Ghost had made them ouerseers: vpon which place hee made many obseruations. He sayd it was first necessary to declare that Bishops haue not commission for their of∣fice from men, for so they would be hirelings, to whom the Lambes doe not belong, because the man, who had committed the care vnto them, beeing sa∣tisfied, they had no more to thinke on. But Saint Paul sheweth that the com∣mission to gouerne the people of GOD is diuine, giuen by the holy Ghost, to conclude that they could not be excused by any dispensation of man. He alleadged the famous passage of Saint Cyprian, that euery Bishop is bound to giue an account of CHRIST onely. Then he added that the Bishops of Ephe∣sus were not of those who were instituted by CHRIST our LORD, while hee was in the flesh, but by Saint Paul or some other Apostle, or disciple; yet no mention is made of the ordainer, but all is attributed to the holy Ghost, who hath not giuen authority to gouerne, but diuided a part of the flocke, and consigned it to be fed. And here hee made an inuectiue against those, who a few dayes before, sayd, that the Pope doeth disturbe the flocke, inculca∣ting that it was not well spoken, and that it would bring againe into vse that which Saint Paul did detest; I am of Paul, and I am of Apollo. He sayd the Pope was the ministeriall Head of the Church, by whom CHRIST, the principall Head doeth worke, vnto whom also the worke ought to bee ascri∣bed, saying according to Saint Paul, that the holy Ghost doth giue the flocke to be gouerned. For the worke is neuer ascribed to the instrument or mi∣nister, but to the principall Agent; that this forme of speach hath alwayes beene vsed by the Ancients, that GOD and CHRIST doe prouide the Church of gouernours; that Saint Paul wrote to the Ephesians, that CHRIST, ascending to heauen, hath furnished the Church with Apostles, Euangelists, Pastours, and Masters, shewing plainely that he did prouide Pastours after he was ascended into heauen, and that the institution of Pastours and Masters, in which number Bishops are, ought as much to be ascribed vnto CHRIST, as vnto the Apostles and Euangelists themselues. The Theologue perceiued that he displeased the Legates, and some more besides; and fearing some bad Antonius Grossetus ex∣cuseth him∣selfe. incounter, as had happened vpon other occasions, hee added that hee had spoken without premeditation, beeing caried along by consequence of wordes; and heat of discourse, not remembring that that point was forbid∣den to be spoken of. And entring againe to examine the proper offices of Bishops, and contradicting the Lutherans, who holde them for superfluous, shewing they haue been very ancient in the Church, and come from Apo∣stolicall tradition, he concluded. The Legats did perceiue that this was the arte of Granata, and the other Spaniards, to giue the Prelats a field to enlarge themselues in this matter. Therefore they tooke order that the contrary o∣pinion should be defended by some of the foure Prelates, who onely remay∣ned to speake the next day; and the Popes Prelats, vsed to this arte, were pre∣pared to contradict the Spanish Bishops, if they had begun to speake of this matter in the Congregations. The next day, the second of October, two Diuines went about to prooue, that as the superioritie of Bishops was certaine, so it was hard to bee decided quo iure, and in case it were, would be of no fruit; and therefore was to bee omitted. Two others maintained, that it was de iure Pontificio. And Friar Simon, a Florentine, and a Diuine of Seripando, discoursed, according to the opinion of Caietanus and Catharinus, in this forme, that Bishops are instituted by CHRIST, to gouerne the Church; that his Maiesty did create Bishops all the Apostles, when he said, I send you, as I haue beene sent by the Father; that this institution was personall, and ended with them; that one of them was constituted, to remaine perpetually in the Church, which was Peter, when he said, not to him alone, but to all his succession, Feede my lambes; that Saint Austin did meane so when he said, that Peter did represent the whole Church, which was neuer spoken of any of the other Apostles; that Saint Cyprian said that Saint Peter is not onely a Type and figure of the vnity, but that the vnity doeth begin from him. In this power, giuen onely to Peter and his successors, the care of gouerning the Church is contained, and of or∣daining other Rectors and Pastors, not as Delegates, but as Ordinaries, diui∣ding particular Prouinces, Cities, and Churches. Therefore when it is de∣manded, whether any Bishop bee de iure diuino, one must answere affirmatiue∣ly, One onely, the successour of Peter. Besides, the degree of a Bishop is de iure diuino, so that the Pope cannot take order that there may be no Bishops in the Church, but euery particular Bishop is De iure Pontificio. Whence it com∣meth that he may create and translate them, diminish or enlarge their Dio∣ces, giue them more or lesse authority, suspend them also and depriue them; which he cannot doe in that which is de iure diuino. For from a Priest, he can∣not take away authority to consecrate, because he hath it from CHRIST, but may take iurisdiction from a Bishop, because he hath it from himselfe. And thus the famous saying of Cyprian must bee expounded; there is but one Bishopricke, and euery Bishop holdeth a part thereof in solidum; otherwise, it cannot bee defended that the gouernement of the Church, is the most perfect of all, that is Monarchicall, and must necessari∣ly fall into an Holigarchie, which is the most imperfect, and condem∣ned by all those who write of gouernment. Hee concluded, that quo iure Bishops are instituted, by the same they are superiour to Priests, and that, when this matter is to bee discussed, the declaration is to bee made thus. Hee alleadged Saint Thomas, who saith, in many places, that eue∣ry spirituall power dependeth on that of the Pope, and that euery Bishop ought to say, I haue receiued part of that fulnesse. He said that the old schoole-men were not to be regarded, because none of them had handled this mat∣ter; but the Modernes, hauing after that the heresie of the Waldenses arose, studied the Scripture and the Fathers, haue established this trueth. The last Diuine laboured to contradict him, in that he said the Apostles were ordained Bishops, saying, when he sent them, as himselfe was sent by the Father, that he sent them to preach, and to baptize, which belongeth not to a Bishop, but to a Priest, and that onely Peter was ordained a Bishop by CHRIST, who after the ascension, ordained the other Apostles Bishops. Concerning the o∣ther parts of this Article, and the next, they all agreed to comdemne them. And so the Congregations of the Theologues were concluded. After which the Legates, beeing obliged to propose the reformation, considering with themselues what particulars might be proposed not preiu∣diciall, and yet might giue satisfaction, were much troubled. For that which would be gratefull to the Ambassadours, would damnifie the Court, and distaste the Bishops, neither could they meddle with any thing that wold please the Bishops, which would not bee preiudiciall to Rome, or the The Legates demand of the Pope by let∣ters what they shall doe con∣cerning the reformation. Princes. Their resolution was to dispatch a Currier to the Pope, and expect an answere, and in the meane time, to draw the businesse in length, by ma∣king the Prelates speake in the matter of Order. In particular, they gaue his Holinesse an account of the contention which they did foresee, concerning the Article of the superioritie of Bishops, in regard of the petition made by the panish Prelates, and the entrance made by their Diuines. And how∣soeuer they knew not their ende, yet, obseruing how earnest their re∣quest was, and knowing how the Spaniards doe vsually ayme at things farre off, they could not choose but suspect. They put him in minde that this was the time in which they promised to speake of residence; whereof some motion was made already. For the Archbishop of Mesina demanded of those of Cyprus, and Zara, what their opinion would bee, in case it were pro∣posed, and many practises were discouered, though they were not able to penetrate the ground of them. That they gaue order to Otranto and Venti∣miglia, to learne cunningly of what opinion the Prelates would bee in case they proposed to referre it to his Holinesse; who, hauing sounded them ex∣actly, found that 60 would bee rigidly opposite, of whom there was but small hope that they could possibly bee perswaded. For howsoeuer the Se∣cretary of the Marquisse had, at their instance, dealt effectually with the Spaniards, yet he brought from them no more then this, that they would not oppose with bitternesse but deliuer their opinions quietly, and without cla∣mour. That they knew the maior part were of the contrary opinion, be∣cause they depend on Rome; but they ought to disburden their conscience. That they were assured that this was not contrary to his Holinesse, of whose religious and godly disposition they could not doubt, but vnto the Bishops onely who are about him. They added, that the Spaniards, hauing disco∣uered that there was a purpose to remit the businesse to his Holinesse, sayd the same was done in the matter of the Chalice, and that it was in vaine to hold a Councell to handle that which was of no importance, and to referre that which deserueth prouision. They aduised him of the promise made to the Ambassadours, to propose the reformation, and of the impossibility to de∣ferre it any longer, and being aduertised of the comming of Loraine, and the French-men, and vnderstanding that they were full of conceits, and designes of nouitie, they concluded that they would vndoubtedly ioyne with the mal-contents of Trent. Therefore not knowing, in these ambiguities, what course to take, they told him they had resolued to expect the commande∣ments of his Holinesse. The Pope being aduised, at the same time, from other places of the pro∣iects With whose aduertisemēts and others his Holinesse is much trou∣bled. of Loraine, and particularly, that hee would reforme the election of the Popedome, that the Ʋltramontans might also bee partakers of it, it pierced deepely into his minde. Therefore resoluing not to expect the blow, but to preuent, hee informed all the Italian Princes heereof, shewing them what a dishonour it would bee to the Nation, if it should succeede; that hee spake not for himselfe, whom it did not concerne, but for publique respects, and for the loue of his Countrey. And knowing that a Spanish Pope could not bee acceptable to the King of Spaine, in regard of the naturall propensi∣on that Clergie hath, to free themselues from the exactions of the King, and that a French man would haue pleased him lesse because of the enmity betweene the Nations, and that the greatest part of his trustie friends were in Italy, hee wrote vnto his Nuncio, to communicate vnto him the designe of the French men, to make a Pope of their Nation, that, by his meanes, they may possesse Naples and Milan, to which they pretend right. And, not to bee wanting on his part, that hee might remoue some of the foundations, on which the Cardinal might build, which were the abuses of the times past, lately reuiued, he made a Bull in this matter; which howsoeuer it contained only the prouisions formerly made by diuers Popes, which were antiquated; yet it might bee sayd there was no neede of more reformation in that be∣halfe, because the Bull did remedie all the inconueniences which happened, or, at the least, tooke all strength from them, so that it could not bee preten∣ded they were in force. And to him that would prognosticate that it would not be obserued, as others made before, it might bee answered, that hee who doth euil doth thinke ill, and that it is the duety of Christian charity to expect good from euery on. The Bull was dated the ninth of October 1562. After∣wards newes came, that many Congregations were held in Spaine, to make a generall reformation, and to giue commission to the Ambassador, who was to goe to Trent, to make the Spanish Prelats ioyne, and aime all at one marke. The newes that the King would send another Ambassadour did please nei∣ther the Pope nor the Legats. For the Marquis of Pescara did much conforme himselfe to the Popes will, and the Ministers he vsed were of Milan, much ad∣dicted to the person of his Holines and his kinred, and to Card. Simoneta, who imployed them in the Popes seruice vpon all occasions. But the Count of Lu∣na, who was designed to be sent, had remained with the Emperor, and with the King of the Romans, and was very deare vnto them, and had their proiects imprinted in him. And they feared him the more because there was a fame (and it was indeed so resolued, though not effected) that he should beare the name of the Emperors Ambassador, to auoid the difference of precedencie with France, but really should be Ambassador of the K. And the Pope did sus∣pect for many causes, the coniunction of those Princes; especially in regard of the K. of Bohemia, who, in diuers things, had shewed he was auerse from him. And the nomination of the Count of Luna was more displeasing to him, be∣cause he could not come before the Diet of Francfort was ended, which being likely to last vntil the end of the yeere, he coniectured the King had a purpose to prolong the Councel. But hauing receiued the last aduice from the Legats, he was perplexed most of all, seeing the Prelats, euen his owne also, were con∣spired to make it longer, by meanes of vnseasonable perswasions, howsoeuer their interests did require a quicke dispatch. He caused the letters to be read in Congregation of the Cardinals, and gaue order that euery one should thinke of the best meanes rather to oppose an infinitie of imminent difficulties, then to take away the present grieuance, in regard the Councell the longer it con∣tinued the harder it was to bee managed. Neither could any order bee giuen from Rome, but, because of the great distance, it was vnseasonable before it came to Trent, a thing which in continuance of time would produce some great inconuenience. Hee complained that the Vltramontans did consent to prolong it, for their proper interests; the Emperor to gratifie the Duch-men, and to make his sonne King of the Romans; France, to make vse of it, in case of composition with the Hugonots; and Spaine, to keepe the Low Countreys in hope. He repeated all the difficulties which arose from the diuers inter∣ests of the Prelates in Councell, the armes which were discouered in the Spa∣niards, and what was suspected of the designes of the French-men, whose comming was expected. At this time, the French King sent the Abbat of Mante, expresly, to Rome, to giue the Pope an account of his resolution, to accept the Decrees of the Councell, and of the Cardinall of Loraine his going to Trent, accompa∣nied with many Bishops to propose the meanes to reunite Religion in his Kingdome; because both himselfe and his Counsell were of opinion, that none was more sufficient for that charge, as well for learning as for experi∣ence. The Pope did seeme to bee pleased with the resolution, both in sen∣ding the Cardinall, and in accepting the Decrees of the Councell. Hee pro∣mised the Legats and Fathers should receiue the French Prelates honourably and courteously, expecting their assistance in matters of Religion in which they were so much interested, especially the Cardinall, who is the second Ecclesiasticall person in the world, not much inferiour to a Pope. Hee said the Bishops had discreetely handled the points of reformation, in the assem∣bly of Poisi, offering to cause the greater part of them to be confirmed by the Councell. Hee added, that hee was forced to hasten the ende of the Sy∣node in regard of his great charge, which if it did continue long, hee could not bee able to continue in assisting the King in his warre; so that hee ho∣ped hee would ioyne with him to conclude it. The conclusion of his discourse was, that hee had no authoritie in Councell, but to approoue, or reiect the determinations of it, without which they would be of no force, and that his purpose was to goe to Bolonia when the Councel was ended, and to assemble all the Fathers there, that he might know them, and thanke them, and make the approbation. This French messenger gaue the Pope also the letters of the Cardinall of Loraine, of the same tenour, with an addition of pro∣fers, to preserue by all meanes, the authority of the holy Sea. The Pope as∣ked him in particular what the Cardinal meant to propose; but receiuing one∣ly a generall answere, that is, necessary remedies for the Kingdome of France, hee answered, to make the Cardinall be thinke himselfe what to doe, that all should bee maturely aduised on, euery thing being decided in Councell by pluralitie of voyces. It was resolued, in the Congregation of the Cardinals, to answere the Le∣gates that they should labour to conclude the Article of residence, before the The answere made to the Legates. comming of the French-men, and to referre it to the Pope, without any De∣cree, if it were possible; but if not, yet, at the least, with a Decree. If nei∣ther could bee obtained, then to make the declaration with rewards and punishments, not touching the poynt, whether it were de iure Diuino. That the Article of the institution of Bishops seemed difficult, and of great con∣sequence, and therefore that they should procure that it should be remitted likewise; which in case they could not doe, yet they should inuiolably ob∣serue not to suffer a determination to passe, that it was de iure Diuino: Con∣cerning reformation, that his Holinesse was resolute that none should med∣dle with the Papacie, and Court, who already had made so many reforma∣tions, (which all the world did knowe) as that euery disorder was redres∣sed; and, if any thing remained, was willing to adde it; that, for all other matters, they should tell all men plainely that the Pope did remit the refor∣mation freely to the Councell; and of those things which were proposed by the Imperialists, and decreed by the French-men in Poisi, they should propose in Councell what they thought expedient, but not resolue, before they sent aduise againe. The proposition, to finish the Councell, was esteemed by the congrega∣tion to bee of greater moment; not because the necessitie to doe it was not manifest, but because they saw not the meanes, in regard so many things did remaine to bee handled, and that the Prelates could not bee induced to speake briefly, nor to agree in their discourses; which things were necessary for a sudden dispatch, and, without them, it was impossible to conclude, but in a long time. To suspend it without consent of the Princes, seemed dangerous and scandalous, in regard of the aduice, sent by the Legates, that the Ambassadours de Ferriers and Fiue Churches had said, that if the Councell were suspended they would not depart from Trent, nor suffer the Prelates, their adherents, to goe, before they had commission from their Princes, To haue commission from them did require much time, because they would vndoubtedly know one anothers minde, before they would answere. There∣fore they knew not what to resolue in this matter, but to solicite the Legates, to dispatch the points, which remained to bee handled. The comming of Loraine did trouble them more, being aduised, from diuers places, that, be∣sides the businesse of the election of the Pope, hee meant to propose many nouities, about the collation of Bishoprickes, pluralitie of Benefices, and, which was of no lesse importance, the Communion of the Cup, marriage of Priests, and Masse in the vulgar tongue. And, presupposing hee would not begin his iourney before hee had answere from the Abbat of Mante, sent by the King and himselfe, they gaue counsell to recall the Cardinall of Ferrara, and to offer the legation of that Kingdome to Loraine, which they The Cardinal of Loraine had a desire to be Patriarch in France. did thinke might stoppe him, because he so much desired to command that Clergie, that hee had formerly plotted to make himselfe Patriarch in France; but if he came, that more Prelates ought to be sent to the Councel, and some Cardinals also, to counterpoise him. And the Cardinals of Bordisiera, and Nauagero were named. But this resolution was not then taken, because they feared that Loraine would disdaine, and take occasion to doe worse, and because it was not so well knowen whether these were able to make so great an opposition, as also because they were willing to know the opinion first of those who were in Trent, for feare of giuing them distast. They considered the charge which would increase, which was not fit to bee indured, with∣out great vtilitie. Therefore they resolued to write to the Legates, not to suffer any the least discourse concerning the election of the Pope; which if they could not resist, yet they should not giue any permission, but rather returne to Rome, lest they should preiudice the Colledge of Cardinals, and Italie. But, in Trent, the Deputies for composing the Anathematismes and do∣ctrine, hauing considered the opinions of the Diuines, made a draught; and put into it, that Bishops are superiours iure Diuino. For the Arch-bishop of Zara, and the Bishop of Conimbria, chiefe of the Deputies, were of that opi∣nion. But the Legates did not permit it, saying, that nothing ought to bee put into it which was not contained in the Articles; notwithstanding that it should bee thought on, if the Fathers did desire it in the Congregations. The Spaniards therefore did immediatly resolue to desire it; and the Le∣gates, vnderstanding so much, gaue order to their Prelates, who were wont to contradict, that, if this matter were proposed, they should bee silent, and not dispute, that they might not giue the Spaniards occasion to replie, by which meanes the Congregations might be drawen in length, and inconueniences arise, which happened in the matter of residence, but if the instance were prosecuted by Granata, or others, the Cardinall Ʋarmiense should interrupt them, answering that it was not a poynt to bee handled in Councell, because it was not controuersed with the Pro∣testants. The thirteenth of October 1562. when the first Congregation of the The Arch-b. of Granata discourseth concerning the institution of Bishops. Prelates was held, the Patriarchs, and some Arch-bishops, hauing approoued, in few words, the Anathematismes, as they were composed, the Arch-bishop of Granata, did so likewise concerning the sixe first Canons; in the seuenth hee desired it should be sayd, that Bishops, instituted iure Diuino, are superiours to Priests; saying, that hee might with reason desire it, because it was proposed in this forme in the Councell, by Cardinall Crescentius, vnder Iulius the third, and approoued by the Synode. For witnesses hee brought the Bishop of Se∣gouia, who assisted, as a Prelat, in that Councel, and Friar Octauianus Preconius, of Messina, Arch-bishop of Palermo, who beeing not then a Prelate, was there as a Theologue. He sayd they must needes declare both of these two points, that is, that Bishops are instituted iure Diuino, and are iure Diuino supe∣riour to Priests, because it is denied by the heretiques: and hee confirmed his opinion at large, with many reasons, arguments and authorities. He allead∣ged Dionysius, who sayth, that the Order of Deacons is included in that of Priests, that of Priests in that of Bishops, & that of Bishops in that of CHRIST, who is Bishop of Bishops. He added Pope Eleutherius, who, in an Epistle to the Bishops of France, wrote, that CHRIST had committed the Church V∣niuersall to them. That Ambrose, vpon the Epistle to the Corinthians, saith, that the Bishop holdeth the place of CHRIST, and is Vicar of the LORD. He added also the Epistle of Cyprian to Rogatianus, where hee often repeateth that the Deacons are made by the Bishops, and the Bishops by GOD: and that famous place of the same Saint, that there is but one Bishopricke, and euery Bishop holdeth a part of it. Hee sayd the Pope was a Bishop, others are, because they are all brothers, sonnes of one father, which is GOD, and of one mother, which is the Church. Therefore the Pope doth also call them brethren; so that if the Pope bee instituted by CHRIST, so are the Bi∣shops also. Neither can it bee said that the Pope calleth them brethren in ci∣uilitie, or humility onely, because the Bishops also, in the incorrupt ages haue called him brother. There are extant Epistles of Cyprian to Fabianus, Corueli∣us, Lucius, and Stephanus, Popes, where he giueth them the title of brothers; and of Austine, written in his owne name, and of the other Bishops of Africa, in which the Popes, Innocentias, and Bonifacius, are likewise called brothers. But which is most plaine, not onely in the Epistles of those two Saints, but of many others also, the Pope is called Colleague. And it is against the na∣ture of a Colledge to consist of persons of diuers kindes: and if there were such difference, that the Pope should bee instituted by CHRIST, and Bishops by the Pope, they could not be in one Colledge. In a Colledge there may bee an Head; as in this Colledge of Bishops the Pope is Head, but for edificati∣on onely, and, as it is said in Latine, in beneficientem causam. St. Gregory saith, in his Epistle to Iohannes Syracusanus, that when a Bishop is in a fault, hee is subiect to the Apostolique Sea, but otherwise, all are equall, by reason of humility; which Christian humility is neuer separated from the trueth. He alleadged St. Ierome to Euagrius, that wheresoeuer a Bishop shall bee, whether in Rome, or in Augubium, or in Constantinople, or in Rheggio, all are of the same merit, and of the same Priesthood, and all successors of the Apostles. Hee inueighed against those Theologues, who said that St. Peter had ordained the other Apostles Bishops. Hee admonished them to study the Scriptures, and to obserue, that power to teach throughout all the world, to administer the Sacraments, to remit sinnes, to binde and loose, and to gouerne the Church, is equally giuen to all: and finally, they are sent into the world, as the Father hath sent the Sonne, And therefore as the Apostles had autho∣ritie, not from Peter, but from CHRIST, so the successours of the Apo∣stles haue not power from the successour of Peter, but from CHRIST him∣selfe. Hee brought to this purpose the example of the tree, in which there are many branches, but one body onely. Then hee iested at these Diuines, who had said, that all the Apostles were instituted by CHRIST, and made equall in authoritie, but that it was personall in them, and ought not to passe to their successours, except that of, St. Peter, asking them, as if they had beene present, with what ground, authority, or reason, they were induced to make such a bold affirmation, inuented within these fifty yeeres onely, expressely contrary to the Scripture, in which Christ said to all the Apostles, I will bee with you, vntill the end of the world; which words because they cannot bee ex∣pounded of their particular persons onely, must be necessarily vnderstood of the succession of all, and so they haue beene vnderstood by all the Fathers and Schoolemen, to whom this new opinion is directly contrary. Hee ar∣gued, that, if the Sacraments be instituted by Christ, by consequence the Mi∣nisters of them are instituted also and hee that will say that the Hierarchie is de iure diuine, and the chiefe Hierarche instituted by his Maiestie, must say that the other Hierarche▪ also haue the same institution. That it is a perpetuall do∣ctrine of the: Catholique Church, that Orders are giuen by the hand of Mi∣nisters, but the power is conferred by GOD. Hee concluded that all these things being true and certaine, and denied by the heretiques, in many pla∣ces, which the Bishop of Segouia had collected, it was necessary they should bee declared, and defined by the Synode, and the contrary heresies condemned. Cardinall Varmiense tooke occasion hence to interrupt him, saying, as they had agreed, that there was no controuersie of this, yea, that the Confessionists did maintaine the same. Therefore that it was superfluous, and vnprofita∣ble to put it in question, and that the Fathers ought not to dispute of any thing in which the Catholiques and heretiques doe agree. Granata, rising vp, replied, that the Augustane Confession did not confirme this, but contradi∣cted it, putting no difference betweene a Bishop and a Priest, but by humane constitution, and affirming, that the superioritie of Bishops was first by cu∣stome, and afterwards by Ecclesiasticall constitution. And hee demanded againe, that this definition might be made in the Councell, or the reasons and authority, alleadged by him, answered. The Cardinall replied, that the he∣retiques did not denie these things, but onely did multiply iniuries, maledi∣ctions, and inuectiues, against the present vses. And some other replies pas∣sing betweene them, Granata, full of disdaine and heare, said, hee referred himselfe to the Nations. After this, there being some tumult raised and appeased, they spake of the other points, receiuing the things as they were proposed, some grounding themselues vpon the saying of Varmiense, and some holding that the Pope onely is instituted iure diuino, vntill it came to the Arch-bishop of Zara, who said, it was necessary to adde the words (de iure Diuino) to condemne that which the heretiques say to the contrarie, in the Augustane Confession. Ʋar∣miense said againe, that in that Confession the heretikes did not dissent in this; and Zara alleadging the place, and the words, the contention was so long, that the Congregation did end with it. In the Congregations following, the opinions were diuers also. In parti∣cular, the Arch-bishop of Braga demaunded the same adiunct, saying, it could not be omitted. He prooued at large the institution of Bishops De iure Diuino, bringing reasons and arguments, like to those of Granata, and said, that the Pope could not take from Bishops the authoritie giuen them in their consecration, which doth containe in it the power not onely of Order, but of iurisdiction also, because, in it, the people is assigned to him to be fed and gouerned, without which the Ordination is not of force; whereof this is a manifest argument, that to titular and por atiue Bishops a Citie is allotted, which would not be necessary if the Episcopall Order could subsist without iurisdiction. Besides, in giuing the Pasto all this forme is vsed, that it is a signe of the power which is giuen him to correctvices. And, which is of more importance, when the Ring is giuen him it is said, that with it he doth marry the Church; and, in giuing the booke of the Gospell, by which the Episcopall Character is imprinted, it is said; that hee must goe to the people, committed to him: and in the end of the consecration, that prayer is say'd, Deus omnium fidelium Pastor & Rector which since hath beene in the Mis∣sals appropriated to the Pope, by turning himselfe to GOD, and saying, that his will is, that the Bishop should gouerne the Church. Moreouer, Inno∣centius the third said; that the spiritual mariage of the Bishop with the Church is a bond, instituted by GOD, not to bee loosed by the power of man, and that the Pope cannot translate a Bishop, but because hee hath speciall autho∣ritie to doe it; all which things would bee very absurd, if the institution of Bishops were De iure Diuino. The Arch bishop of Cyprus sayd, that it ought to be declared that Bishops are superiors to Priests Iure Diuino, but reseruing the authority in the Pope. The bishop of Segouia, adhearing wholly to the conclusions and reasons of Granata made a long repetition of the places of the heretiques; where they denie the superiority of Bishops, and their institution to be De iure diuino. Hee said, that as the Pope is successour of Peter, so the Bishops are of the Apostles: and that it was plaine by the Ecclesiasticall Hi∣story, and by the Epistles of the Fathers, that all Bishops gaue an account one to another, of all that happened in their Churches, and receiued appro∣bation thereof from others. The Pope did the same for the occurrences of Rome. Hee added, that the Patriarches, when they were created, sent a circu∣lar Epistle to the others, to giue them an account of their Ordination, and faith, which was as much performed by the Popes to others as by others to them; that if the power of the Bishops be weakened, that of the Pope is weak∣ned also; that the power of Order, and iurisdiction, is giuen to the Bishops by GOD, and that the diuision of Diocesses, and the application of them to the person proceedeth from the Pope. He alleadged an authoritie of Anacletus, that Episcopall authoritie is giuen in the Ordination, with the vnction of the holy Chrisme; that the degree of a Bishop is as well an Order instituted by CHRIST, as the Priest-hood; that all Popes, vntill Siluester, haue either professedly, or incidently sayd it is an Order, which commeth immediatly from God, that the words spoken to the Apostles, Whatsoeuer yee shall binde on earth, &c. giue power of iurisdiction, which is necessarily conferred vp∣on the Successors; that CHRIST did institute the Apostles with iurisdicti∣on, and since that time the Church hath euer instituted Bishops in the same sort. Therefore this is an Apostolicall tradition, and, it beeing defined that points of faith are taken out of the Scripture, and Traditions, it cannot bee denied that this of the Episcopall institution is an Article of faith; and the rather, because S. Epiphanius, and S. Austine, doe put Aerius in the number of heretiques, for saying that Priests are equall to Bishops, which they would not haue done if Bishops had not beene De iure diuino. Fifty nine Fathers were of this opinion, and perhaps the number had been Simoneta v∣seth practises in the point of institution of Bishops. greater if many had not been ill at case at that time, of a defluction of rheume, which then did generally raigne, and some others had not fained the same impediment, that they might bee out of the crowde and offend none, in a matter, handled with such passion; especially those, who, for speaking what they thought in the matter of Residence, found they had incurred the dis∣pleasure of their Patrons; as also if Cardinall Simoneta, when hee saw matters proceed so farre, had not vsed diuers perswasions, employing herein Iohannes Antonius Fa binet us, Bishop of Nicastr , and Sebastianus Vantiue, Bishop of Oruieto; who perswaded, with much cunning, that the enterprise of the Spa∣niards was to shake off their obedience to the Pope, and that it would bee an apostacy from the Apostolike Sea, to the great shame and damage of Italy, which hath no other honour aboue the Nations beyond the Mountaines, but that which it receiueth from the Papacy. Fiue Churches said, it was fit that it should bee declared quoiure all the Orders and degrees of the Church are instituted, and from whom they receiue authoritie. Some others adhe∣red to him, and, in particular, Pompeius Picholhomini, Bishop of Tropeia; who, making the same instance, added, that when all the degrees of the Church were handled, from the greatest to the least, and declared quo iure they were, he would deliuer his opinion also concerning the degree of Bishops, if the Legats would giue leaue. In this number some briefely adhered to the opinion of others who had spoken in this matter, and some amplified the same reasons, and turned them into diuers formes, so that it would be too long to make a narration of all the suffrages which are come into my hands. That of George Sincout, a Franciscan Friar, Bishop of Segna, doth well deserue to be repeated, who, adhering to Granata, said, that hee would neuer haue beleeued that any could haue doubted whether Bishops are instituted, and haue authority from Christ. For it they haue it not from his diuine Ma∣iestie, neither can the Councell haue any from him, which consisteth of BB. that it is necessarie that a Congregation, though very populous, haue their authoritie from whom the particular persons haue it, that if Bishops are not instituted by CHRIST, but by men, the authoritie of them altogether is humane, and hee who heareth it spoken, that Bishops are not instituted by CHRIST, must needs thinke that this Synod is a Congregation of profane men, in which CHRIST doth not preside, but a power receiued precarily from men, and so many Fathers would in vaine reside in Trent, to their great charge and trouble, because hee who hath giuen the power to Bishops; and the Councell, may, with more authoritie, handle the same things; and it would bee a great illusion generally of all Christendome to propose it, not onely as the best, but as the onely and necessarie meanes, to decide the pre∣sent controuersies. He added, that he had beene fiue moneths in Trent, with this perswasion, that neuer any would haue doubted whether the Councell hath authoritie from GOD, and whether it may say as the first Councell of Ierusalem did, It seemed to the holy Ghost and to vs; that hee would neuer haue come to the Councell, if hee had beleeued that CHRIST had not beene in the midst of it. Neither can any one say, that, where CHRIST assisteth, the au∣thoritie commeth not from him; that if any Bishop should beleeue and thinke his authoritie to bee humane, it had beene great boldnesse in him to denounce, in the former difficulties, anathematismes, and not rather referre all to him who hath greater authoritie. And if the authoritie of the Coun∣cell bee not certaine, it was fit in the yeere 1545. when this was first assem∣bled, that this matter should haue beene sifted, and decided what the autho∣ritie of Councels is, as is vsually done in places of iustice, where, in the begin∣ning of the cause, it is disputed, and decreed whether the Iudge bee compe∣tent, least in the end, there bee a nullitie in the sentence, for want of authori∣tie. The Protestants, who doe take all occasions to detract from, and wrong this holy Synod, cannot haue any more fit, then that it is not certaine of its owne authoritie. He concluded, that the Fathers should take heed what they did resolue, in a point, which beeing resolued truely, doeth establish all the actions of the Councell, and if otherwise, ouerthroweth all. The nineteenth of October, all the Fathers made an ende of speaking in this matter, except Father Laynez, Generall of the Iesuites; who, beeing to speake last, did purposely absent himselfe that day, that hee might haue a whole Congregation for himselfe alone. And to make the cause hereof vn∣derstood, Laynez spen∣deth a whole congregation himselfe. The impor∣tance of this point of the institution. we must returne a little backe, and remember, that when the que∣stion was set on foote in the beginning, the Legates thought that the aime was onely to make great the authoritie of Bishops, and to giue them more reputation. But before the second Congregation was ended, they perceiued, very late, by the voyces giuen, and reasons vsed, of what importance and con∣sequence it was. For it did inferre, that the keyes were not giuen to Peter onely; that the Councell was aboue the Pope, and the Bishops equall vnto him, who had nothing left but a preeminence aboue others. They saw that the dignitie of Cardinals, superiour to Bishops, was quite taken away, and that they remained meere Priests, or Deacons; that, by that determination, residence was inferred by a necessary consequence, and the Court brought to nothing; that the preuentions and reseruations were remooued, and the collation of Benefices was drawen to the Bishops. It was noted that the Bi∣shop of Segouia had, a few dayes before, refused to admit one to a Benefice in his Diocesse, to whom it was giuen in Rome. And these things did still ap∣peare more plainely, as new suffrages were dayly giuen, and new reasons al∣leadged. For these causes the Legates did vse the sollicitations aforesaid, for feare that more Italians might ioyne with the Spaniards. Yet they were not able to preuaile so much, but that almost the halfe were of that opinion. And the other Papalins reprehended the Legates, because they foresaw not what might happen, but suffered such great preiudices to come vpon them, say∣ing, they proceeded by chance, and admitted not counsels and aduertise∣ments of wise men; that, so soone as Granata deliuered his suffrage, they were put in minde to vse effectuall sollicitations, which afterwards they were for∣ced to vse, when it was too late; that by their want of care (if not malice in some) matters haue beene handled of the greatest importance that can possi∣bly happen in Councell. They added, that the Ambassadour Lausac had, by many sollicitations, vsed to diuers of the Prelates, discouered himselfe to be not onely a fauourer, but a promoter of that opinion; and considered what an addition would be made vnto it, when the French-men came, who were expected. And they spake so openly, that some words came to the eares of the Legates themselues; who, seeing now the danger not foreseene, thought (in regard the matter had proceeded so farre, and so many had put themselues on that side) that it was not fit to thinke of diuerting the question, but of fin∣ding a temper, to giue the Spaniards some satisfaction. And, after long con∣sultation, they determined to compose the Canon, with these words; That Bishops haue the power of Order from GOD, and, in that, are superiour to Priests; not naming iurisdiction, for feare of making them suspect. For, by such a forme of wordes, it might be inferred, that the iurisdiction remained wholly in the Pope, without saying it. They sent Father Soto, to treat with the Spanish Prelats, concerning this forme, not so much with hope to remooue any of them, as to penetrate to what they might be brought. Granata gaue him audience, but no answere. He laboured with others also, and gained the reputation of a good Courtier of Rome, in stead of the other, of a good Friar, as he was before. And, to win some that wauered, and some who vnaduisedly fell into that opinion, beeing otherwise deuoted to the Pope, they resolued to vse solicitations vnto them, that, vnderstanding the difficulty, they might bee content to referre it to his Holinesse, or, at the least, to speake more sparingly. To performe this, with the two aforenamed, they ioyned the Archbishop of Rosano, and the Bishop of Ventimiglia. And, that those who would acknowledge their error might haue colour to retire, they gaue order that Laynez should make an exact ful Lecture on this matter; and, that it might be heard attentiuely, and make an impres∣sion, they would not haue him, as hath beene sayd, speake after the others, in the ende of the Congregation, but allowed him one wholly for himselfe. The foure Iesuits consulted together concerning the opinion, and Caueglione, laboured more then the rest. And, not to omit any good meanes of diuer∣sion, they busied the Prelates in another matter. For, to returne to the oc∣currences of that Congregation, after that the Generall of the Serui (who was the last) had giuen his voice in conformitie of the Spaniards, the Cardi∣nall of Mantua admonished the Fathers deputed for the Index, and shewed how important a businesse they had in hand, in regard all subuersions doe a∣rise, and all heresies are spread by meanes of bookes, he exhorted them to bee diligent, and to let the Synod see the end of the work quickly, he said he knew it required much paines and time, but considered withal that all the Fathers would contribute their labours to the assistance of the deputies, saying, that the Congregations were spent in handling questions of no profite, and a worke so necessary deferred. Hee exhorted in the end, that this particular of the Index might be concluded in the next Session. The morning being come, Laynez spake more then two houres, very fitly, The discourse of Laynez. with great vehemence, and master-like. The argument of his discourse had two parts; the first he spent in proouing, that the power of iurisdiction was giuen wholly to the Bishop of Rome, and that none in the Church besides hath any sparke of it, but from him; and the second, in resoluing all the con∣trary arguments, vsed in the former Congregations. The substance was, that there is great difference, yea, contrariety betweene the Church of CHRIST and ciuill societies. For these haue first their beeing, and then they frame their gouernement, and therefore are free, and all iurisdiction is originally in them which they doe communicate to Magistrates, without depriuing them∣selues of it. But the Church did not make it selfe, nor its gouernment, but CHRIST, who is Prince and Monarch, did first constitute Lawes, by which it should be gouerned, and then did assemble it, and, as the Scripture saith, did build it; so that it is was borne a seruant, without any kinde of liberty, power, or iurisdiction, and absolutely subiect. For proofe hereof, he allead∣ged places of the Scripture, in which the Congregation of the Church is compared to a sowing, to the draught of a net, and to a building: and where it is said that CHRIST came into the world to assemble his faithfull people, to gather together his sheepe, to instruct them, by doctrine and example. Then he added that the first and principall ground, vpon which CHRIST built the Church, was Peter and his succession, according to the words which hee spake to him; Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke, I will build my Church. Which rocke howsoeuer some of the Fathers haue vnderstood to be CHRIST himselfe, and others the faith of Peter, or the confession of his faith, yet the more Catholique exposition is, that Peter himselfe is vnder∣stood, who, in the Hebrew and Syriacke, is called a stone. And, continu∣ing his discourse, hee sayd, that while CHRIST liued in the mortall flesh, hee gouerned the Church with an absolute Monarchicall gouernment, and, be∣ing to depart out of this world left the same forme, appointing, for his Vi∣car Saint Peter and his Successors, to administer it as hee had done, giuing him full and totall power and iurisdiction, and subiecting the Church to him, as it was to himselfe. This he proued of Peter, because the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen were giuen to him onely, and, by consequence, power to bring in, and shut out, which is iurisdiction. And to him alone it was sayd; Feede, that is, gouerne my sheepe, animals, which haue no part or iudge∣ment in gouerning themselues. These things, that is, to bee a Key-keeper, and a Pastour, beeing perpetuall offices, must bee conferred vpon a perpetuall person, that is, not vpō the first only, but vpon all his succession. So the Bishop of Rome, from S. Peter to the end of the world, is true and absolute Monarch, with full and totall power and iurisdiction, and the Church is subiect vnto him, as it was to CHRIST. And as when his diuine Maiestie did gouerne it, it could not bee sayd, that any of the faithfull had any the least power or iurisdiction, but meere, pure, and totall subiection, so it must bee said, in all perpetuitie of time, and so vnderstood, that the Church is a sheepefold, and a kingdome; and that which Saint Cyprian saith, that there is but one Bishop∣ricke, and a part of it held by euery Bishop, is to bee expounded, that the whole power is placed in one Pastor, without diuision, who doeth impart and communicate it to his fellow ministers, as cause doth require. And in this sense Saint Cyprian maketh the Apostolique Sea like vnto a roote, an head, a fountaine, and the Sunne; shewing, by these comparisons, that iuris∣diction is essentiall in that alone, and in others by deriuation or participa∣tion. And this is the meaning of the words, so much vsed by antiquitie, that Peter and the Pope haue fulnesse of power, and the others are of their charge. And that he is the onely Pastor, is plainely prooued by the words of CHRIST, when hee sayd, he hath other sheepe which hee will gather toge∣ther, and so one sheepefold should be made, and one Shepheard. The Shep∣heard, meant in that place, cannot bee CHRIST, because hee would not speake in the future, that there shall be one Shepheard, himselfe then beeing a Shepheard, and therefore it must bee vnderstood of another Shepheard, which was to be constituted after him, which can be no other but Peter, and his Successors. And here hee noted that the precept, Feede the flocke, is found but twice in the Scripture: once giuen by CHRIST to Peter onely, Feede my sheepe: againe by Peter to others, Feed the flocke allotted to you. And if the Bishops had receiued any iurisdiction from CHRIST, it would bee equall in all, and no difference betweene Patriarches, Arch-bishops, and Bishops; nei∣ther could the Pope meddle with that authoritie, to diminish or take it all a∣way, as hee cannot in the power of Order, which is from GOD. Therefore he aduised them to beware, lest, by making the institution of Bishops, de iure Diuino, they doe not take away the Hierarchie, and bring in an Oligarchie, or rather an Anarchie, Hee added also, that, to the end Peter might gouerne the Church well, so that the gates of hell might not preuaile against it, CHRIST, being neere vnto his death, prayed effectually that his faith might not faile, and gaue him order to confirme the brethren, that is, he gaue him a priui∣ledge of infallibilitie in iudgement of faith, manners and religion, binding all the Church to heare him, and to stand firmely in that which should be determined by him. Hee concluded, that this was the ground of Christian doctrine, and the rocke vpon which the Church was built. Then hee cen∣sured those who held there is any power in Bishops receiued from CHRIST, because it would take away the priuiledge of the Roman Church, that the Pope is the Head of the Church and Vicar of CHRIST. And it is very wel knowen what is constituted by the olde Canon, Omnes fiue Patriarchae, &c. that is, that hee who taketh away the rights of other Churches com∣mitteth iniustice, and hee that taketh away the priuiledges of the Church of Rome is an heretike. Hee said it was a meere contradiction to say the Pope is Head of the Church and the gouernement Monarchicall, and then say that there is a power or iurisdiction not deriued from him, but receiued from others. In resoluing the contrary arguments, hee discoursed that, according to the order instituted by CHRIST, the Apostles were ordained Bishops, not by CHRIST, but by Saint Peter, receiuing iurisdiction from him onely; and many Catholike Doctours doe hold that this was obserued: which o∣pinion is very probable. But the others who say the Apostles were orday∣ned Bishops by CHRIST, doe adde, that his Diuine Maiestie in so doing, did preuent the office of Peter, by doing, for that one time, that which belonged to him, giuing to the Apostles that power which they ought to receiue from Peter, euen as God tooke some of the spirit of Moyses, and diuided it amongst the seuenty Iudges. So that it is as much as if they had beene ordained by, and receiued authoritie from Peter; who therefore did remaine subiect vnto him, in respect of the places where, and the manner how to exercise the same. And howsoeuer it is not read that Peter did correct them, yet this was not for want of power, but because they did exercise their charge aright. And hee that shall reade the renowned and famous Canon, Ita Dominus, will assure himselfe, that euery good Catholique ought to defend, that the Bishops, suc∣cessors of the Apostles doe receiue all from Peter. Hee obserued also, that the Bishops are not successors of the Apostles, but onely because they are in their place, as one Bishop succeedeth another, not because they haue beene ordayned by them. To those who inferred, that therefore the Pope might refuse to make Bishops, and so himselfe remaine the onely man, he answered, it was Gods ordination there should bee many Bishops in the Church, to as∣sist him, and therefore that hee was bound to preserue them: but there is a great difference, to say a thing is de iure Diuino, or that it is ordained by God. Those de iure Diuino are perpetuall, and depend on God alone, both in gene∣rall, and in particular at all times. So Baptisme, and all the Sacraments are de iure Diuino, in euery one of which GOD hath his particular worke, and so the Pope is from GOD. For when one Pope doeth die, the keyes doe not re∣maine to the Church, because they are not giuen to it, but a new Pope beeing created, GOD doeth immediatly giue them vnto him. Now it is not so in things of diuine ordination, in which the generall onely proceedeth from GOD, and the particulars are executed by men. So Saint Paul saith, that Princes and temporall powers are ordained by God, that is, that the generall pre∣cept, that there should be Princes, commeth onely from him, but yet the par∣ticulars are made by the ciuill Lawes. After the same maner, Bishops are by diuine ordination, and Saint Paul saith they are placed by the holy Ghost, to gouerne the Church, but not de iure Diuino. Therefore the Pope cannot take away the generall order of making Bishops in the Church, because it is from God, but euery particular Bishop, being de iure Canonico; may bee remooued by the Popes authoritie. To the opposition that then the Bishops would be Delegati, and not Ordinarij, hee answered, that there was one iurisdiction fun∣damentall, and another deriued; and the deriued is either delegate, or ordi∣nary. In ciuill Common-wealths the fundamentall is in the Prince, and the deriued in all the Magistrates: neither are the Ordinaries different from the Delegates because they receiue authority from diuers persons, yea, all doe equally deriue from the Souereignty; but the difference standeth, because the Ordinaries are by a perpetuall law, and succession, and the others haue a particular authority, either in regard of the person, or the case. Therefore the Bishops are Ordinaries, because they are made by the Popes law a dignity of perpetuall succession in the Church. Hee added, that those places where authoritie seemeth to bee giuen to the Church by CHRIST (as these, that it is a pillar and foundation of trueth, that hee who will not heare it, shall bee estee∣med an Heathen and a Publicane) are all vnderstoode in regard of its Head, which is the Pope, and therefore the Church cannot erre, because hee can∣not, and so hee that is separated from him who is Head of the Church, is separated also from the Church. To those who sayd the Councell could not haue authoritie, if none of the Bishops had it, he answered, that this was not inconuenient, but a very plaine and necessary consequence, yea if euery particular Bishop in Councell may erre, it cannot bee denied that they may erre altogether; and if the authoritie of the Councell proceeded from the authoritie of Bishops, it could neuer bee called generall, because the num∣ber of the assistants is alwayes incomparably lesse then that of the absent. He He prooueth that the Pope is aboue the Councell. tolde them, that in this Councell, vnder Paul the third, principall Articles were defined, concerning the Canonicall Bookes, interpretations, paritie of Traditions with the Scriptures, by a number of flue, or a lesse; all which would fall to the ground if the multitude gaue authoritie. But as a number of Prelates, assembled by the Pope to make a generall Councell, bee it how small soeuer, hath the name and efficacie to bee generall from the Pope onely, so also it hath its authoritie; so that if it doeth make Precepts or Anathematismes, neither of them are of force but by vertue of the Popes fu∣ture confirmation. And when the Synode sayth, that it is assembled in the holy Ghost, it meaneth that the Fathers are congregated, according to the Popes intimation, to handle that, which, beeing approoued by him, will bee decreed by the holy Ghost. Otherwise how could it be said that a Decree was made by the holy Ghost, and could be made to be of no force by the Popes authoritie, or had neede of greater confirmation. And therefore in the Councels, be they neuer so frequent, if the Pope bee present, hee onely doeth decree, neither doeth the Councell any thing but approoue, that is re∣ceiue the Decrees; and therefore it hath alwaies beene sayd, Sacro approbante concilio, yea, euen in resolutions of the greatest weight (as was the disposition of the Emperour Frederic the second, in the generall Councell of Lyons) Inno∣centius the fourth, a most wise Pope, refused the approbation of the Synode, that none might thinke it to bee necessary, and thought it sufficient to say, Sacro praesente concilio. And for all this the Councell cannot bee sayd to be su∣perfluous, because it is assembled for better inquisition, for more easie per∣swasion, and to giue satisfaction to men. And when it giueth sentence, it doth it by vertue of the Popes authoritie, deriued from God. And for these reasons, the good Doctours haue subiected the Councels authority to the Popes, as wholly depending on it, without which it hath not the assistance of the holy Ghost, nor infallibilitie, nor power to binde the Church, but as it is granted by him alone to whom CHRIST hath said, Feede my sheepe. There was not any discourse in this Councell more praysed and dispray∣sed, The censure of this dis∣course. according to the affections, of the hearers. The Papalins sayd it was most learned, resolute, and substantiall, others did condemne it of flattery, and some of heresie: and many made it knowen they were offended by his sharpe censure, and that they purposed in the Congregations following, to con∣fute him vpon all occasions, and to note him of ignorance, and temeri∣tie. The Bishop of Paris, who was sicke at home when hee should haue giuen his voice, told euery one that, when a Congregation was held, he would deliuer his opinion against that doctrine, without respect, which not be∣ing heard in former ages, was, within these fifty yeeres, inuented by Caietan, to gaine a Cap; that in those times it was censured by the Sorbone; that, in stead of a celestiall Kingdome (for so the Church is called) it maketh it not a Kingdome, but a temporall tyranny; that it taketh from the Church the title of the Spouse of CHRIST, and maketh it a seruant, prostituted to a man. He will haue but one Bishop instituted by CHRIST, and the others not to haue any authority but dependant from him, which is as much as to say, that there is but one Bishop, and the others are his Vicars, to bee remooued at his pleasure. Hee said this should excite all the Councell, to thinke how the E∣piscopall authoritie, so much debased, might bee kept aliue, and that it may not come to nothing; because euery new Cogregation of Regulars which doth arise, doth giue it a great shake. The Bishops haue held their authori∣tie intire vntill the yeere 1050. when it receiued a great blow by the Clunia∣censian and Cisterciensian Congregations, and others which arose in that age, because many functions, proper and essentiall to Bishops, were, by their meanes reduced to Rome. But when the Mendicants beganne after the yeere one thousand two hundred, almost all the exercise of Episcopall authoritie was quite taken away, and giuen to them, by priuiledge. Now this new Congregation, borne but the other day, which is neither secular nor regular (as the Vniuersitie of Paris did well obserue eight yeeres since, knowing it was dangerous for matter of faith, a perturber of the Churches peace, and fit to destroy Monasticall life) to goe beyond their predecessours, doth labour to take away all iurisdiction of Bishops, by saying it is not giuen them by GOD, and that they ought to acknowledge that they haue receiued it precarily from men. The Bishop hauing repeated these things to diuers men, mooued many to thinke of the matter, who before did not regard it. But those that were seene in Histories did speake no lesse of that obseruation, Sacro praesente Concilio: which beeing in all the Canonicall Textes, seemed new vnto them all, because they had not marked it. And some approoued the Iesuites interpretation, and some, on the contrary, sayd that the Coun∣cell had refused to approoue that sentence. Some proceeding another way, sayd, that the question beeing of a temporall matter, and wordly conten∣tions, the businesse might passe either one way or other; but that no conse∣quence could bee drawen from hence, that the same might be done in mat∣ter of faith, or Ecclesiasticall Rites, especially it beeing obserued, that, in the Councell of the Apostles, which ought to bee a rule and paterne, the De∣cree was not made by Peter, in presence of the Councell, nor by him with approbation, but the Epistle was intitled with the names of the three degrees, assisting in that Congregation, Apostles, Elders, and Brothers, and Peter was included in the first, without prerogatiue. An example, which in regard of antiquitie, and diuine authoritie, is of more credit then all those of the times following, yea then altogether. And, for that day, in respect of these other points, the discourse of the Iesuite gaue matter of talke throughout all Trent, and nothing else was spoken of. The Legates were not pleased that this remedie, applied for a medicine, did worke a contrary effect, perceiuing that, in the Congregations, the voy∣ces would bee longer in giuing; neither did they know how to hinder it. For that Father hauing spoken more then two houres, it did not appeare how hee that would contradict him could be interrupted, especially it bee∣ing in his owne defence. And vnderstanding that Laynez enlarged his dis∣course, with purpose to publish it, they forbade him to impart it to any, that others might not take occasion to write against it, obseruing what mischiefe succeeded, because Catharinus published his opinion concerning Residence, whence all the euill did spring, which still continueth stronger then euer. But hee could not forbeare to giue copies to some, as well to honour him∣selfe, and oblige the Papalins to his societie, then rising, as also to mode∣rate in writing some particulars, deliuered with too much petulancie. Ma∣ny did make preparation to write against him; and this motion continued vntill the French-men came, who caused this difference to be forgotten, by bringing in others more considerable, and important. Yet the Papalins The coming of the French men did hin∣der the an∣swering of it. continued their counsels against the Spaniards, and their practises with the Prelates, whom they thought they might winne. And a Spanish Doctour, called Zanel, did fitly offer himselfe to the Legates, and proposed meanes to put the Prelates of that nation vpon their defence, and giue them something else to thinke on. And hee proposed to them thirteene points of reformati∣on which did touch them at the quicke. But they could not hence gather the fruit they expected, because those reformations required others also be∣longing to the Court, which made them desist, lest, according to the pro∣uerbe, by taking one eye from their aduersaries, they might loose both their owne, The practises were so manifest, that, in a banquet of many pre∣lates in the house of the French, Ambassadours, discoursing of the cu∣stome of ancient Councels, not obserued in this, that the presidents of the Synod, and the Ambassadours of Princes deliuered their voyces, Lansac said The Legates giue auricular voyces. aloud, that the Legates gaue auricular voyces; and was well vnderstood by all that hee meant their practises. When these Congregations were held, Fiue Churches presented the Empe∣rours letters to the Legates; who wrote vnto them, that, hauing satisfied The Emperor desireth that the doctrine may be defer∣red, and onely the reforma∣tion handled. themselues in publishing the Canons of the sacrifice of the Masse, they would forbeare to proceed in the Sacraments of Order, and Matrimonie, and handle the matter of reformation in the meane while, referring to their wisdome to handle what part pleased them best, of those things which were proposed to them, in his name. Fiue Churches spake in conformitie of the letter, and made the same request, that, the matter of Order being so farre proceeded in, they would, at the least, forbeare to handle that of Marriage, that, in the meane space, the Emperour might induce the Germanes in the Diet to goe and sub∣mit themselues to the Councell. For so long as the Dutch and French-men continue in their resolution, not to goe to it, nor acknowledge it, the Fathers doe in vaine abide there, to their great cost and incommoditie; and when his Maiestie shall see they cannot be perswaded, he will procure a suspension of the Councel, thinking it will bee a greater seruice to God, and benefit to the Church, to leaue matters vndecided, and in the state they are, expecting a more fit time for the conuersion of those who are separated, then by pre∣cipitating, (as hath beene done vntill that time) the decision of controuer∣sies, in absence of those who haue put them in disputation, to make the Pro∣testants irreconciliable, without any benefit of the Catholiques; saying, that, in the meane while, they might treat of the Reformation, that the Eccle∣siasticall goods may bee distributed to persons of desert, and all haue part of them, and the reuenues may be well dispensed, and the part belonging to the poore not vsurped by any; and such other things. In the end, hee demaun∣ded of them, whether, the Count of Luna comming with the title of the Emperours Ambassadour, the difference betweene Spaine and France for precedence will cease. The Legates answered to this last, that they did not see what pretence the French-men could haue to contend; and, for the rest, they sayd they could not forbeare to handle the points of doctrine, but that, with them, they would handle the Reformation effectually, according to the order set downe by the Synode. They commended the Emperours in∣tention to desire the Protestants to submit, but added, that, for this hope, the Councell ought not to bee prolonged. For the Emperour Charles, in the Papacie of Iulius the 3. made meanes for the same, and obtained it also; but the Dutch-men proceeded with dissimulation, to the damage of the Church, and of the Emperour himselfe. Therefore it was not fit the Councell should change its pace, before the Emperour was assured of the intentions of the Princes and people, aswell Catholique as Protestant, and what kinde of obe∣dience they will yeeld to the Decrees made already, and to be made in this Councel and in the former, requiring the obseruation of the Synode, with authenticall Mandats of the Prouinces and Princes, and obligation from them for the execution of the Decrees, that their cost and labour may not be in vaine, and laughed at. And in conformity heereof they answered the Emperour. A Congregation was held the 25. of October, to rece ue Valentinus Er∣bu us The Ambas∣sador of Polo∣nia is recei∣ued. Bishop of Premisa, Ambassadour of Polonia, who made a short spe concerning the Kings deuotion, the tumults of the Kingdome about religi∣on, the necessity of a good reformation, the vsing of some remission in yeel∣ding to the desires of the people, in matters which are de iure positiuo. The Speaker answered in the Synods name, thanking the King and the Ambassa∣dour, and offering to giue assistance in all the occasions of that Kingdome. The Legats did not permit that any thing else should bee handled in that Congregation, for the cause which shall be related. The Court in Rome, and the Popes Ministers in Trent, were no lesse troubled with the Spaniards, and their adherents in Councell, then with the expectation of the comming of Loraine; and of the french-men; with which they were not so much mooued, so long as there was hope that some rubbe might stoppe them, as after that certaine newes came that they would The cōming of the French Prelates doth much trouble the Pope and Court. keepe the day of All Saints with the Duke of Sauoy. The Cardinal, either vainly or of purpose, made it knowne at the french Court, before he parted, and in many places in the iourney, that he would handle diuers things in diminution of the popes authority and commodities of the Court, which beeing reported diuers waies, both in Rome and Trent, made an impression in both places, that the generall intention of the French-men was, to pro∣long the Councel, and, according to occasions, to discouer, and put in pra∣ctise their particular desseignes: and they had coniectures to make them be∣leeue, that it was not without the knowledge of the Emperour, and of other Princes and Lords of Germany. And howsoeuer they were assured, that the Catholique King held not full intelligence with them, yet they had strong arguments to make them beleeue, that his desseigne was to prolong the Councel, or, at the least, not to suffer it to end. To crosse this purpose, they How the re∣formation of Princes be∣gan. determined to propose the abuses of the Kingdome of France, and to let the Ambassadours vnderstand that they would make prouision for them; be∣cause all Princes, who desire a reformation in the Church, would not wil∣lingly endure any at all of themselues, so that they thought, that if any mat∣ter of importance were handled to their preiudice, they would forbeare, and make their Prelats forbeare also to speake of things preiudiciall to the Apo∣stolique Sea. Therefore after some packets had passed betweene Rome and Trent, it beeing iudged a good course, the abuses were collected, which were said to be principally in France, and partly in other Dominions. And hence the reformation of Princes began, which, in the relation of the things that follow; will affoord vs much matter. Besides, in Rome it was thought to bee a good remedie, that the Legates should bridle the transcendent boldnesse of the Prelates, vsing their authority and superiority, more then they had done. And, in Trent, it was thought to be a good course, to keepe the Prelates, their adherents, vnited, well edified, and satisfied. For howsoeuer the voyces of the contrary part might encrease, yet they should euer exceede in number, and bee Lords of the resolutions. And they thought fitte also proceed to finish the Councel, or suspend, or translate it. They wrot also, and made many of the popish Prelates to write to their friends and Patrons in Rome, that there could bee no better re∣solution or prouision, then to giue occasion, (which might easily bee done) that some Prince might desire the suspension, not suffering any to slippe: and, for this end, they demanded diuers Briefes to be sent from Rome, in mat∣ter of translation, suspension, &c. that they might make vse of them, as occa∣sion was offered. They counselled the Pope also to goe to Bolonia in person. For besides the receiuing of more frequent and fresh aduices, and the sudden making of incident, and necessary prouisions, hee might haue a colourable reason to translate the Councel to that Citie, vpon euery small occasion, or to suspend it; desiring him that, as they had imparted nothing to the Cardinall Madruccio, so nothing might come to the eares of the Cardi∣nall of Trent, his vncle, who, for many respects, and particular interests would certainely vse all meanes that it might not bee transferred from Trent. To quench the boyling heat in the controuersie about the institution of Bishops, that it might not increase, by meanes of so many who were prepa∣red to contradict Laynez, they would not hold any Congregation for many daies. But this leasure did strengthen their opinions, and they spake of no matter but of this, in euery corner, and almost euery day three or foure of them ioyned together, and went to some of the Legates, to renew the in∣stance. And, one day, the Bishop of Gadici with foure more, hauing, after the proposition made, added, that as they confessed that the iurisdiction be∣longed to the Pope, so they were content it should bee expressed in the Canon. The Legates beleeued that the Spaniards, acknowledging their er∣ror, would confesse that all iurisdiction was in the Pope, and deriued from him: but, desiring a further declaration, that Bishop said, that as a Prince doth institute in a Citie a Iudge of the first instance, and a Iudge of appeale, who though he be superior, yet cannot take authority from the other; nor vsurpe the causes belonging to him, so CHRIST, in the Church, hath in∣stituted all Bishops, and the Pope superiour, in whom the supreme Ecclesi∣asticall iurisdiction was, yet so, that others had theirs, depending on CHRIST alone. Fiue Churches complained to euery one, that so much time was lost without holding any Congregation, which might bee profitably spent, but that the Legates did, according to their vse, purposely suffer it to bee spent in vaine, that they might giue forth the Articles of reformation the last day, that there might not be time to consider, much lesse to speake of them. But the Legates were not idle, still thinking how they might finde a forme for this Canon, which might bee receiued, and changed it more then once a day: which formes going about, and shewing the hesitation of the Legates, the Spaniards were not onely encouraged in their opinion, but spake also with more liberty; so that, in a meeting of many Prelates, Segouia was not afraid to say, that one word would bee cause of the ruine of the Church. Seuen dayes being past without any Congregation, the thirtieth of Octo∣ber, the Legates being in consultation, as in the dayes before, all the Spaniards, with some others, required audience, and made a new instance, that the in∣stitution and superiority of Bishops De iure Diuino, might bee defined, saying, that if it were not done, they should faile to doe that which is iust and neces∣sary in these times, for clearing of the Catholique trueth, and protesting they would assist no more in Congregation or Session. This being diuulged, ma∣ny Italian Prelates agreed together in the house of Cardinall Simoneta, in the Chamber of Iulius Simoneta, Bishop of Pescara, and came to the Legates the next morning three Patriarches, sixe Arch bishops, and eleuen Bishops with a request, that it might not bee put into the Canon, that the superiority is De iure Diuino, in regard it sauoured of ambition, and was vnseemely that themselues should giue sentence in their owne cause, and because the greater part would not haue it put in, the occasion might not bee giuen to speake of the Popes authority, which they would, and ought to confirme. When this was knowen in Trent, many did beleeue that this instance was procured by the Legats themselues: whereupon after Euensong, a greater number as∣sembled themselues in the vestry, in fauour of the Spanish opinion, & others in the house of the B. of Modena, for the same end: and there were foure other assemblies in the houses of the Arch-bishops of Otranto, Taranto, Rosano, and of the Bishop of Parma. The tumult proceeded so farre, that the Legats were afraid of some scandall, and thought they could by no meanes hold the Sessi∣on at the time appointed, and that there was a necessitie to discusse some points of doctrine, and propose some matter of reformation, before they came to the resolution of the Article which was the cause of so greate a motion. And Simoneta complained often that he had little assistance from Mantua and Seripando, who howsoeuer they did some thing, yet could not hide their thoughts, which did incline to the aduersaries. Letters of credence came from the Marquis of Pescara, to the principall The letters of the Marquis of Pescara. Spanish Prelats, with commission to his Secretarie, to vse the strongest per∣swasions with them, and to aduise them not to touch any thing in preiu∣dice of the holy Sea, assuring them that the King would be displeased, and that great inconueniences in his kingdomes would ensue; saying, it could not be expected from their wisedome that they would resolue in any particular, before they vnderstood his Maiesties pleasure. And he gaue him order to aduise whether any of the Prelates made small account of this admonition, or were refractary in obeying, because it was the Kings pleasure that they should stand vnited in the deuotion of his Holinesse, and should dispatch The answere of the Arch-bishop of Granata. expresse Curriers: if there were occasion. Granata answered, that he neuer meant to say any thing against the Pope, and thought that whatsoeuer was spoken for the authority of Bishops, was for the benefit of his Holinesse, being assured, that if their authority were diminished, the obedience to the holy Sea would decrease also, though by reason of his oldage, he knew that it would not happen in his time; that his opinion was Catholike, for which he would be content to die; that, seeing such contrarietie, he was not wil∣ling to remaine in Trent, because hee expected but small fruit, and therefore had demanded leaue to depart of his Holinesse and his Maiesty, much de∣siring to returne; that at his departure out of Spaine, he receiued no com∣mandement from the King and his Ministers, but to ayme at the seruice of God, and the quiet & reformation of the church, which he had truly per∣formed; that he thought he had not crossed the Kings will, though he made not protession to diue into it but hee knew that Princes when they are re∣quested, especially by their Ministers, doe easily content them with general tearmes. Segouia answered, that his meaning neuer was to do the Pope any The answere of Segouia. ill office, but that he could not gaine-say his opinion, because it was for the Catholique truth, nor could speake more then he had spoken already, hauing neuer since seene or studied any thing concerning this matter. Afterwards they retired all together, and sent to the King a Doctor, of the family of Se∣gouia, with instruction, to informe his Maiestie that neither they, nor any o∣ther Prelats could bee reprehended, if they knew not how to promote the proiects of Rome, because they could not propose any thing, but onely deli∣uer their opinion concerning that which was proposed by the Legates, as his Maiestie did well know; that it would bee hard so interrogate them, and binde them to answere against their conscience; that they were assu∣red they should offend GOD and his Maiestie, if they should doe other∣wise; that they could not bee blamed for speaking out of season, because they did not propose, but answere; that when they did commit any errour, they were ready to correct it, according to the commandement of his Ma∣iestie; that they had spoken according to the Catholique doctrine, in such plaine tearmes, that they were re he would approue all, beseeching him to vouchsafe to heare them, before hee did conceiue any finister opinion of them. Those Prelats were not deceiued in belcouing it did proceed rather from The Legues vse meane, to curbe the Spa∣nish Prelats. the Ministers, then the King. Simoneta vsed perswasions, at the same time, to another Spanish Secretarie of the Count of Luna, that the Count bee∣ing to assist at the Councell, it was necessary hee should come prepared, to keepe those Prelates within their bounds, otherwise there would ensue, not onely preiudice to the Church of GOD, but to the dominions of his Maiesty also, because their principall intent was to assume all authority to themselues, and to haue free administration in their Churches. And hee perswaded the Secretary of Pescara to meete Luna on the way and to informe him of the dis∣signes, and boldnesse of those Prelates, and to perswade that it would bee good seruice for the King to represse them. In conformitie whereof Ʋar∣miense wrote a long letter to Petrus Canisius to the Emperours Court, that hee would vse the same perswasion to the Count. The doctrine collected out of the voyces, deliuered in the former Con∣gregations, being giuen foorth, they began againe to speake their opinions concerning it the third of Nouember. But Cardinall Simoneta forewarned his adherents to speake reseruedly, and not to runne out into words of pro∣uocation, because that time did require that mens minds should rather be pa∣cified. Hauing spoken hereof three dayes, and returning often to the con∣trouersie, by reason of the connexion of the matter, the Legates thought it necessary to propose some matter of reformation, especially because, the French-men approaching the Bishop of Paris said publikely, that it was time to begin to giue satisfaction to the French, and other Nations, deputing some Prelates of each, to consider of the necessitles of those Countreys, because the Italians, neither in Trent; nor in Rome, could know them; that vntill then no reformation had been made, because that which was decreed was to no purpose. But the Legats being to propose some thing of reformation, thought it necessary, that they might not giue occasion of many inconueniences, to begin with residence. It hath been related already what the Pope wrote in this businesse. Af∣terwards, the Legates and their adherents were in continuall cogitation how to compose a Decree, that might satisfie his Holinesse, without preiudice of the promise which Mantua made to the Prelates. For to propose at the first, the reference of it to the Pope, seemed contrary to that promise; and there was great difficultie what Decree to propose, which not beeing accepted, might giue them occasion to returne to the businesse of reference. They made a calculation of those who might bee drawen to their side, and of those who were totally opposite, and found that the Councell was diuided into three parts, almost equall, that is, into these two, and a third, who desired a definition to bee made in Councell, without offence of his Holinesse: of which there was hope to gaine the maior part, and so to ouercome the aduer∣saries. Therefore they diuided themselues, and perswaded so effectually, Some Prelates are ouercome by practises. that, besides others they gained seuen Spaniards, amongst whom were Astor∣ga, Salamanca, Tortosa, Patti, and Elma, the Bishop of Macera labouring strong∣ly herein. Foure courses were proposed to come to the execution; one, to make a For courses proposed con∣cerning Resi∣dence. Decree, onely with rewards and punishments; another, that many Prelates should desire the Legates, that the businesse might be remitted to the Pope, which request should bee read in Congregation, hoping that, by perswasi∣ons, so many would come vnto them, that their number would exceed the other, by one halfe; the third that the Legates should propose the remission in Congregation; the fourth, that the Pope should presently make an effe∣ctuall prouision, which should be printed immediately, and published euery where before the Session, that the opposites, beeing preuented, might bee The obiecti∣ons against them. forced to yeeld. To the first was obiected, that all those who demaunded the declaration de iure Diuino, would bee contrary, and thinke that rewards and punishments cannot bee so effectuall as the declaration, especially there being already Decrees of Councels and Popes, which haue neuer been estee∣med: and there would bee difference also concerning the rewardes and pu∣nishments. That the Prelates will make impertinent demands; that, at the least they will desire the collation of Benefices with Cure. That they will demaund the abolition of the Priuiledges of the Regulars, and o∣ther exorbitant things; and that they shall euer bee in danger of mutation after the proposition made, vntill it bee passed in Session, especially when the French-men come, who may demaund a retractation. It was oppo∣sed to the second, that the Prelates could not bee brought to make re∣quest, without clamour; that those who were not called, would disdaine and goe to the aduerse part; that the aduersaries also would make vnions, and clamours, and complaine of the practises. To the third was ob∣iected that the opposites would say, that the consent was not voluntary, but for feare of seeming to distrust his Holinesse, and because there was not liberty to speake, and if it were refused, it were as much as to call the Popes authority into question: besides it would bee sayd that this refe∣rence was desired by his Holinesse. Against the fourth was sayd, that the Popes Bull being not read in Councel, occasion was giuen to the Fathers to demaund the definition, and if it were, it might bee feared that some would demaund a greater prouision, and so all would succeede with small reputa∣tion. Seeing so many difficulties they prolonged the businesse, which did not giue satisfaction, because it had beene published, that the Fathers should speake of it. Finally, beeing forced to resolue, the sixth of Nouember, em∣bracing that course to propose a Decree with rewards and punishments, af∣ter that some of the Fathers had spoken concerning the businesse of that Congregation, the Cardinall of Mantua proposed it in good tearmes, saying in substance; that it was a thing necessary, desired by all Princes, and that the Emperour had often made request for it, and complayned that this point was not immediatly dispatched; and that, by troubling themselues with vaine questions, which bee of no importance, the principall conclu∣sion hath been deferred; that this is not a matter which needeth disputation, but a meanes onely remaineth to be found, to execute that which euery one thinketh to bee necessary; that the Catholique and most Christian Kings had made instance for the same, and that all Christendome did desire to see the prouision; that this matter was spoken of in the time of Paul the third, and passed ouer by some, very impertinently, with superfluous questions, which then were wisely buried in silence; that it appeareth, by the same reasons, that there is no neede to handle any thing now but that which was proposed in the Decree. And, amongst other things, hee sayd, that they were confirmed by the speach of the Ambassadour Lansac, who had often shewed by good reasons, that nothing was to bee required, but that resi∣dence should be executed, and that it was to no purpose to shew whence the obligation came. Amongst other particles, there was in the Decree, that the Bishops residing should not be bound to pay Tenths, Subsides, or any other Taxe, imposed by what authoritie soeuer, though at the instance of Kings and Princes. This mooued all the Ambassadours very much; but Lansac, dissembling, complained that the Cardinall of Mantua had named him, without telling him of it before, granting hee had spoken so much vn∣to him, but as a particular friend, not as an Ambassadour. And to make his complaint the more grieuous, hee found fault also, that the Catholike King was named before the most Christian. Of the Tenths hee sayd nothing, hoping that, by that which he had said, and by some opposition, which the fauourers of ius diuinum would make, that forme of Decree would bee hindered. Fiue Churches sayd onely, that hee did not beleeue that the Empe∣rours minde was as the Cardinall had proposed. But the Secretary of the Marquis of Pescara demanded openly, that the words might be amended, so that they might not preiudice the grace granted by the Pope to his Catholike Maiestie, for the Subsidie of the Gallies. The Legates did beleeue they had by this meanes gained the Prelates: but after they vnderstood the exception for Spaine, they began to say amongst themselues, that they were fauoured in that which could not bee granted. For in Spaine and France, and vnden euery other Prince they should bee forced to pay; and in the state of the Church also, with a Non obstantibus, the grace would bee made of no force. The next day they passed from residence, to Episcopall Order. And Sego∣uia replied, that the institution of Bishops de iure Diuino, was handled, and A difference betweene the Cardinall of Mantua and the Bishop of Segonia. resolued, in the same Councell vnder Iulius the third, with a generall consent and that himselfe had deliuered his opinion therein, and specified the day and hour when it was. The Cardinall of Mantua caused the actes of that time to be searched, and that to be read by the Secretary which was then defined to be published, expounding them so, as that hee concluded that it was nei∣ther decided, nor examined, nor proposed in that manner, as it was sayd by Segouia. The Bishop answering, though reuerently in appearance, there pas∣sed so many replies, that they were forced to breake vp the Congregation. And because some will perhaps desire to knowe which of them spake with most reason, it will bee fit to recite heere that which was then decided in the Congregations, though not published in Session, by reason of the sudden dis∣solution of that Councell, before related. Three heads of doctrine were then composed, the third where of was inscribed, of the Hierarchie, and of the difference of Bishops and Priests: and hauing spoken much of the Hierarchie, it saith thus afterwards, as it is translated verbatim out of the Latine. Besides, the holy Synod doth teach, that those are not to be bearkened vnto, who say that Bishops are not instituted Iure diuino, it appearing manifestly, by the words of the Gospel, that CHRIST our Lord hath himselfe called the Apostles, and promoted them to the degree of the Apostleship, into whose place the Bishops are subrogated; neither ought wee to thinke that this, so eminent and necessary a degree, hath beene brought into the Church by humane institution; for so wee should detract from, and disesteeme the diuine proui∣dence, for failing in the most noble things. These were the wordes vsed in that point of doctrine. There were noted also eight Canons; the last whereof said thus: Hee that shall say that Bishops are not instituted iure Diuino, or are not superiour to Priests, or haue not authoritie to ordaine, or that this doeth belong to Priests, let him be anathema. Euery one being prepossessed with an opinion, doth finde it in all this that is read; and it is not wonder, if each of those two Prelates did finde his owne in the same words, which the Papa∣lins did interprete onely of the power of Order, and the Spaniards of all, which containeth order and iurisdiction. Yet some of the Popish Prelates did beleeue that Mantua, studiously faining to thinke as they did, caused the old determination to bee read, not to confirme his owne opinion, but the Spanish, which secretly hee defended. The Cardinall of Loraine beeing entred into Italie, the Pope could not de∣nie the French-men, to cause that he should be expected. And hee wrote to Trent, that they should prolong the Session, yet not so as to passe Nouember. The Legates receiuing aduice that the Cardinall was vpon the Lago di Garda, in the Congregation of the ninth of Nouember, Mantua proposed the de∣ferring of the Session vntill the 26. of the same moneth, which Loraine not knowing, sent Carlo de Grassi, Bishop of Monte Finscoue, and wrote letters also to the Legates, that, if it would please them to tary for him, he would be in Trent within a few dayes. And they resolued to make no more Congre∣gations vntill his comming, to giue him the more satisfaction. The Bishop related, that the Cardinall did shew a good intention in all his discourses, and that hee would send his opinions to his Holinesse, that hee might see them; that the Prelates in his company came for the seruice of God, and with a good mind toward the Apostolique Sea, and did hope that their comming would make a concord in the Councell, and cause them to bee diligent in making a fruitfull reformation, without any respect of their owne interest; and many such things hee said: which though they were testified by Grassi, and confir∣med by the Ambassador de Ferriores, yet the Popish Prelates did beleeue them onely in complement, and purposed to vse all the remedies, desseigned both in Trent and Rome. Loraine entred Trent, and was met a mile on the way by Card. Madruccio The entrie of the Cardinall of Loraine in∣to Trent. and many Prelats, and by all the Legates at the gate of the Citie; from which place he was accompanied to the house where he was lodged. Hee rode be∣tweene the Cardinals Mantua and Seripando, which honour they thought ne∣cessary to doe vnto him, because the same was done vnto him by Monte, and Sancta Croce, Legates in Bolonia, when the Councell was helde in that Citie, at the time when he went to Rome for the Cap. In the euening he went to visit the Cardinall of Mantua, and had audience the next day before the Legates, He visiteth the Card. of Mantua, had audience the next day, and maketh a speach. with the Ambassadours, Lansac and de Ferrieres. He presented the Kings let∣ters directed to the Councell, and then made a long discourse, to shew his inclination to serue the Apostolique Sea, promising to communicate all his designes to the Pope, and to them the Legates, and not to desire any thing, but to the good satisfaction of his Holinesse. Hee said, hee would not bee curious in vnprofitable questions, adding, that the two controuersies, of the institution of Bishops, and of residence, which were spoken of euery where, had diminished the authority of the Councell, and taken away the good opi∣nion the world held of it. For his owne part he professed hee was more in∣clined to the opinion which doeth affirme them de iure diuino, yet though it were certainely true, hee saw no necessitie, or opportunitie to proceede to the declaration thereof; that the end of the Councell ought to bee to re∣unite those to the Church who were separated; that himselfe had beene at a parley with the Protestants, and had not found them so different, but that they may bee reduced, if the abuses were taken away; and that no time is more fit to win them then this, because it is certaine they were neuer so vni∣ted to the Emperour, as now; that many of them, and in particular, the Duke of Wittemberg, was willing to assist in Councell: but it was necessary to giue him satisfaction, by a beginning of reformation, in which the seruice of GOD did require that their Excellencies should imploy their labour; hee shewed the desire of the King, that fit remedies might bee applied to the necessities of his people, seeing that, as he had warre now with the Hugo∣notes, so if the abuses were not prouided against, hee should haue more to doe with the Catholiques, whose obedience will bee quite lost; that these were the causes why his Maiestie had sent him to the Councell. Hee com∣plained that, of all the money which the Pope promised to lend the King, he could receiue but fiue and twentie thousand crownes, disbursed by the Car∣dinall of Ferrara, in regard of the limitations, put in the Mandats, because they could not be exacted but vpon certaine conditions, to take away the Prag∣matikes of all the Parliaments of the kingdome, a thing of so great difficul∣tie, that there was no hope euer to receiue one pennie. In the end hee said hee had brought new instructions to the Ambassadours; and therefore when hee had spoken to the Synode, in the Kings name, in the first con∣gregation, he would afterwards only deliuer his suffrage as an Arch-Bishop, not medling with the affaires of the kingdome, but leauing the care thereof to them. The Legats answered, without consultation, as euery one thought good, The answere of the Legats. commending his pietie and deuotion towards the Apostolike Sea, and offe∣ring to impart all their affaires vnto him. They shewed what patience they vsed in suffering the libertie, or rather the licence of Prelats, in their speeches, who went vp and downe, and mooued new questions: but now, his excel∣lencie being ioyned with them, they doubted not but by his aduice and as∣sistance they might be able to represse this great boldnesse, and compose the differences risen, and proceede heereafter in so comely a manner, that the world might receiue edification, which before had conceiued a bad opinion, that the euill will of the Protestants was too much knowne, who when they shew themselues not auerse from concord, then it is to bee doubted that they inuent new occasions of greater difference; that it is certaine that they haue demanded a Councell, because they thought it would bee denied them, and at the same time when they required it, they indeauoured by all meanes to hinder it, as now those, who are assembled in Francfort, laboure that it may not proceede, and vse meanes to the Emperour to interpose some impedi∣ment; that they hate the very name of the Councell, as much as of the Pope, neither haue they formerly made any other vse of it, then to couer and excuse their apostacie from the Apostolike Sea, that there was no hope of their conuersion, and therefore meanes only was to bee vsed to preserue the good Catholikes in the true faith. They commended the pietie and good intention of the king, and shewed the desire of the Pope for reformation and what hee had done to reforme the court, not regarding the diminuti∣on of his owne reuenues, and that hee had alwaies written to the Councell, that they would labour in the same businesse, whereunto themselues the Le∣gates were much inclined and disposed, but were hindred by the contenti∣ons of the Prelates, which consumed almost all the time; that if in France there bee danger to loose the obedience of the Catholikes, it is a matter to bee treated of with his Holinesse. Concerning the loane of money, they saide the paternall charitie of the Pope towards the King and Kingdome was so great, that they might bee assured that the conditions were put in for pure necessitie. And after diuers complements, they concluded that on Mun∣day hee should bee receiued in the generall congregation, to declare to the Fathers the occasion of his comming, and to reade vnto them the Kings letters. The Legates were troubled with these wordes of the Cardinall, that hee would not meddle with the affaires of the Kingdome, but leaue them to the Ambassadours, which were not conformeable to those which Lansac and de Ferrieres had vttered a little before; saying, they were glad of the Cardinals comming, because they should be eased of all paines, all being (as they said) to depend vpon his Honourable Lordship. They concluded that they were to take heede of those dissimulations, and the rather, because Cardinall Si∣moneta had receiued certaine aduice from Milan, that the French Abbots, lodged in Saint Ambrose, said they would ioyne with the Spaniards, Dutch-men, and Vltramontanes, and treat of matters which would not please the Court. Besides, the French-men were heard to say in all their discourses, that time was not to bee lost in questions, but the reformation to bee spoken of; that they ought to begin with taking away pluralitie of Benefices, and that the Cardinall would bee the first to leaue them, to giue example; that dispen∣sations are to bee giuen gratis; that the Annates, preuentions and small dates ought to be remooued, and onely one prouision made for a Benefice: ampli∣fying also the matter, that the Pope had a most excellent occasion to gaine immortall glory, by making the foresaid prouision, to satisfie Christian peo∣ple, and to vnite, and appease them by prouiding against these abuses and in∣conueniences; and that in recompense they would pay vnto his Holinesse an halfe Tenth; that they were come thither, resolute not to depart, before they had attempted to make all these prouisions, how long soeuer they taryed there; that in case they saw they could not preuaile, they would make no clamour, but returne quietly into France, and make the same prouisions at home. The Legats also had notice, that the Cardinall held great intelligence with the Emperour, and (which was of more importance) with the King of Bohemia, who were manifestly inclined to giue satisfaction to the Princes of Germanie, who did vndoubtedly hate the Councell, and would bee glad it might not proceede, but dissolue in some aduantagious manner for them, and dishonourable for the Apostolike Sea and the Synode. They suspected also the Catholike King in regard of an aduice which came to the Secretarie of the Count of Luna, that the instruction being alreadie made in Spaine for that Count, it was resolued to send Martin Gazdellone, who had beene Secre∣tarie to Charles the fift, to bring him, instruction by word of mouth, which they would not commit to writing, by reason of diuers aduices which lately had come vnto them. And confronting this with another aduice receiued out of France, that the Cardinall of Loraine had, before he departed, commu∣nicated to his Catholique Maiestie the petitions, hee purposed to handle in Councell, and knowing assuredly that he had beene solicited by Germanie, to make instance for the reformation, they doubted that the comming of that Cardinall might hatch some great nouitie, and were not pleased one iot with his speach in the audience, concerning the comming of the Dutch-men to the Councell, considering the conference he had with the Duke of Wittenberg. In summe, presupposing that a person of so greate authoritie and wisedome would not haue come, without a sure ground to build his designes vpon, they resolued to send presently all these considerations to the Pope. And ha∣uing obserued that whensoeuer any extraordinaries came to Trent, or depar∣ted, the Prelats tooke occasion to talke, to seeke out the cause, to whisper, to make a noise, and to lay plots also, which, now that the Cardinall was come, might produce more dangerous effects, they dispatched secretly, and wrote that order might bee giuen to the Curriers to leaue their guide and baggage at the next Post to Trent, and enter slowly into the Citie, with the dispatch onely. The Cardinall went not into the congregation at the day appointed, by reason of a small feuer, which had seased on him; and therefore hee desired they would proceede slowly, that he might be present before the resolution. The Legats desired the or∣der should bee giuen to the Curriers to enter secretly into Trent. The Legates resolued to giue him satisfaction, and therefore they began the Congregation later then they were wont. In which the French Bishops and Abbats beeing present, a general muster was made (the number of the Prelates beeing found to bee two hundred and eighteene) and a place assig∣ned to euery one. The next day, there beeing some difficulty about prece∣dence, they made a new assignation of places, making all the Prelates to enter into the Congregation one by one, and conducting euery one to his seate. In those Congregations none of the Frenchmen spake, either because they expected the Cardinall to beginne, or because they were willing to see the manner first. The nineteenth of Nouember the Arch-bishop of O∣tranto appointed a banquet at night for many Prelates, and hee that had A factious banquet. the charge to inuite them, saying, that they ought not to faile, in regard of the seruice they might doe the Apostolique Sea, by comming thither, it was immediately published in Trent, that the Popish prelates, were assem∣bled, to make a combination against the Frenchmen. This distasted them much, and the more, because after the banquet, they were assured that such discourses had been vsed at the table, and obseruing that since their com∣ming, some new Prelate did arriue euery day, they thought they were mis∣trusted, and held to bee opposites. Therefore the Legates, to make shew of all confidence, and respect of honour to the Cardinall, in the Visitations which each of them made while hee was sicke, they perswaded him to take so good an occasion to compose the controuersies which the questions haue made; a thing which would bee easie for him, and of great reputation, be∣cause no man hath been able to effect it. The Cardinall seemed to bee wil∣ling, and offered his endeauours. The Pope, who in those dayes had been in some danger, by reason of A plot of the French Am∣bassadour whē the Pope was sicke. a greate vnexpected accident, hauing recouered his health, receiued aduices from the Legates, and from diuers other places, by which the Frenchmen had passed, all vniformely full of their desseignes. Besides, when hee was sicke, Monsieur de l' Isle vsed practises, and layd plottes, that, if hee had died, the Pope might bee created in Trent by Nations, and the Sea held vacant vntill the reformation were made. For so the Councell would bee free, and the new Pope would accept the reformation, which was established before his creation. This mooued him most of all, as well because euery man, and Princes especially, are displeased when any thing is desseigned to bee Troubleth his Holinesse. done after their death, as also because hee was by this most assured, that the Frenchmen were resolued to reforme the Court, and the Popedome. These things, and the differences in Trent about the institution of Bishops and resi∣dence, caused him to hold a Congregation euery day, and hee could not for∣beare to tell euery one, that hee had no businesse more important, and dan∣gerous to him then the Conncell. And relating in Consistorie the diffe∣rences in Trent about the institution, and the new proposition of residence, hee breake out into this exclamation, that all the Bishops beneficed by him were his opposites, and that hee maintained an armie of enemies in Trent. There was an opinion that hee secretly wished some good successe to the Hugonots in France, and some aduantage to the Protestants in the Diet of Germanie, that the Councell might be dissolued, and not by his meanes. But, And maketh him exclaime. beeing wholly bent to prouide remedies, he gaue order to the Bishops who Hee sendeth some Bishops to Trent, and withholdeth others. were not parted from Rome as yet, to depart immediatly, and caused Marcus Antonius Boba, Bishop of Asti, Ambassadour for the Duke of Sauoy, residing with him, to goe thither also. On the other side, hee forbade the Archbi∣shop of Turris, and the Bishop of Cesena to goe thither; the former, because hee had defended residence to bee de iure diuino; with more constancie then the times did comport, in the Councell vnder Paul; the other because hee was a familiar friend of the Cardinall of Naples, of whom hee doubted much, by reason of the slaughter of his two vncles, and of the executions made against his person: and hee feared, because it was said, that the Count of Montebello; father of the Cardinall, had, in his custodie, an obligation vn∣der Fearing to be accused of S ∣monie. his hand, by which, beeing Cardinall in the Conclaue, hee promised a summe of money to the Cardinall of Naples for his voyce to bee Pope. But howsoeuer his greatest diffidence was in the Frenchmen, yet hee thought fit to dissemble it. Hee sent into France fourtie thousand Crownes, the residue of the hundred thousand which hee promised. And hee caused Sebastianus Gualterus, Bishop of Viterbo and Ludouicus Antinori to goe to Trent, who, hauing bin in France, had some acquaintance with some of those Prelats, and had made themselues knowne to the Cardinall, vnder colour to honour him. And hee wrote to this Cardinall and to Lansac letters full of complement, and confidence. Yet they thought that these men were sent to discouer the Cardinals intention, and to obserue his proceedings; and the rather because they had receiued aduice from Rome, that the Bishop had exhorted the Pope not to be so much afraid, in regard the Cardinall also would finde difficulties and impediments, more then he beleeued hee should, and said that himselfe would make more to arise. The 22. of Nouember, the Cardinall resolued to enter into the Congre∣gation the day following; and it was agreed that the Kings letters should be read, and himselfe make a speach. But Loraine proposed also, that the Am∣bassadour de Ferrieres should make another. To this the Legates did not con∣sent, because if this had beene once permitted, both hee and all other Am∣bassadours, would still bee desirous to speake, and propose, with danger of making greater confusion; but, concealing this cause, they said, that neither in this Councell, nor vnder Paul or Iulius, it was euer permitted to Ambassa∣dours to speake in Congregation, but onely when they were first receiued; and that without the Popes consent they could not yeelde to such a nouitie. But Loraine answered, that the Kings letter, and the instruction beeing new, it might bee called a new Ambassage, and that, the first entrance. After many answeres and replies, Loraine hauing giuen his word, that they should not desire to speake any more, the Legates, to giue him satisfaction, and that hee might not haue cause of open distast, were contented. Therefore the next day, the Congregation beeing assembled, the Kings letter was read, with this inscription. To the most holy and most reuerend Fathers, assembled in Trent to celebrate the sacred Councell. In which hee said, that, it hauing pleased God to call him to the Kingdome, it hath pleased him also to afflict him with many warres; but hath so opened his eies, that, howsoeuer hee be yong, hee knoweth that the principall cause of the euils is The French Kings leters. the diuersitie of religion. By meanes of which diuine illumination in the beginning of his Kingdome, hee made instance for the celebration, of the Councel, in which they were then assembled, knowing that in them the anci∣ent Fathers haue found the most proper remedies to the like infirmities, and, that he was grieued, that being the first to procure so good a worke, hee had not beene able to send his Prelates with the first; the causes whereof beeing notorious, hee thought hee was sufficiently excused; and the rather, because the Cardinall of Loraine was now arriued; accompanied with other Prelats. That two principall causes hath mooued him to send that Cardinall; the first, his owne great and frequent instance, to haue leaue to satisfie his duty, in regard of the place he holdeth in the Church; the second, because, being of his Priuie Councell, and exercised from his youth, in the most important affaires of the Kingdome, he knoweth the necessity thereof, better then any other, and whence the occasions doe arise: so that he will be able to make a relation vnto them, conformable to the charge which is giuen him, and de∣mand in his name the remedies which are expected from their wisdome, and fatherly affection, as well for the tranquillity of the Kingdome, as for the generall good of all Christendome. Hee beseeched them to proceede herein with their wonted sincerity, that they may come to an holy refor∣mation, and that the ancient lustre of the Catholique Church may appeare, in the vnion of all Christendome in one religion; which will bee a worke worthy of them, desired by the whole world, recompenced by God, and commended by all Princes. In conclusion, for the particulars; hee referred himselfe to the Cardinall, praying them to beleeue him in whatsoeuer he should say vnto them on his part. After this the Cardinall spake. In the begining, hee shewed the mise∣ries The speech of the Car∣dinall of o∣raine. of the Kingdome, deplored the warres, the demolitions of Churches, occisions of religious persons, conculcation of the Sacrament, burning of the libraries, images and reliques of Saints, ouerthrowing of the monu∣ments of Kings, Princes, and Bishops, and expulsion of the true Pastours. And, passing to ciuill matters, hee shewed the contempt of the Kings Maie∣stie, vsurpation of his rents; violation of the lawes, and seditions raised a∣mongst the people. He attributed the cause of all this to the corruption of manners, to the ruine of Ecclesiasticall discipline, and negligence in repres∣sing heresie, and in vsing remedies instituted by God. Turning to the Ambass. of Princes, he told them that that which they doe now behold at leasure in France, they shall find at home, when it will be too late to repent, if France, tumbling downe with its owne weight, shall fall vpon places neere vnto it. He spake of the vertue and good disposition of the King, the counsels of the Queene, and King of Nauarre, and of the other Princes, but said, the princi∣pall matter was expected from the Synode, whence the peace of God, which passeth all vnderstanding, ought to come. That the most Christian King be∣ing assured hereof, in regard of his obseruance towards that Synod, and of his sorrow for the differences of religion, did demand two things of them. The first, that they would auoyd new discords, new and vnprofitable questions and cause a suspension of Armes amongst all Princes and States, that scan∣dall may not bee giuen to the Protestants, and occasion to beleeue, that the Synode doth more labour to incite Princes to warre, and to make confede∣rations and leagues, then to keepe the vnity of peace. That King Henry hath first established it, and then Francis continued it, and that the present King, vnder age, and his mother, haue alwayes desired it; which how soeuer it hath vnhappily succeeded, yet they might feare that the accidents of the warre would bee more vnfortunate. For all the states of the Kingdome beeing in danger of shipwracke, one cannot helpe another. Hee therefore desireth that some account may bee held of those who are gone astray from the Church, pardoning them as much as may be done without offending God, and holding them for friends, as much as is possible, euen as farre as vnto the Altars. The second request, common to the King with the Emperour and other Kings and Princes, was, that a reformation of maners, and of Ecclesiasticall discipline, should bee handled seriously; wherein the King did admonish and coniure them by CHRIST our LORD, who will come to iudgement, that, if they meant to restore the authoritie of the Church, and retaine the Kingdome of France, they would not balance the incommodities of the French men with their owne. He said hee was glad, that Italy was all in peace, and that Spaine did gouerne the Helme; but that France was fallen, and scarce held it with one finger. Hee added, that, if they will demand, who hath caused this tempest and fortune, hee can say nothing but this, that this fortune is come by our owne meanes, cast vs into the Sea. Therefore that there was need of boldnesse, and courage, to looke vnto themselues, and the whole flocke. In the end, he said, hee had ended his Legation, and, that the Ambassadours would say the rest; but himselfe and the Prelates who came with him, did protest that, after God, they would bee subiect to the most blessed Pope Pius, acknowledging his Primacie on earth, aboue all Churches, whose commands they will neuer refuse; that they doe reuerence the Decrees of the Catholike Church, and of the generall Synod, that they did honour the Legates, offer concord and vnion to the Bishops, and were glad that the Ambassadours were witnesses of what they sayd, all for the honour of the diuine Maiestie. Hauing made an end of speaking, the Cardinall of Mantua, in few words, commending him for the pains he had taken for the seruice of God, said, that The answer. all the Synode was glad of his comming, made honourable mention of his brothers, who in their profession shewed no lesse readinesse in the seruice of God and the kingdome, and referred himselfe to the answere which the Arch bishop of Zara, deputed hereunto, should make, in the name of the Councell. Who said that the Synod was sory to heare of the seditions and dif∣ferences of religion in France, whose quiet and tranquilitie was alwayes deare vnto them, and the more then, because by the narration of his Excellencie, they were so liuely set before their eyes, but hoped that shortly the King, imi∣tating the vertue of his predecessors, would be able to represse them, that the Synode will labour, by all means, to make the true worship of God knowne, to reforme maners, and restore tranquillitie to the Church, which end they might more easily attaine, if they were assisted by his Excellencie, and the Prelates who came with him. Hee spake largely in commendation of the Cardinall, and concluded that the Synode thanked God for his comming, and gaue him ioy of it, and offered to giue care to whatsoeuer should be deli∣uered by the Ambassadors, in fit time and place, not doubting, but that it would bee for the glorie of God, benefit of the Church, and great dignitie of the Apostolique Sea. Afterwards the Ambassador de Ferrieres spake. He began with the com∣mendation The speech of de Ferrieres the French Ambassadour. of the Kings disposition, inclined to Religion, which appeared more by the comming and discourse of the Cardinall; by whom it might be knowne, how great care France did take of the good of the Catholique Church, because euery on might see that most potent reasons had induced the King to send him, in regard he had euer imployed him in his counsell, in the greatest affaires of the Kingdome, that the King could appease all the se∣ditions in three dayes, and keepe all his Subiects in their naturall obedience, if he aimed onely at his owne good, and did not desire to maintaine the Ca∣tholique Church, and retaine the dignitie and authoritie of the Pope in France; for which hee exposeth to danger the Kingdome, his life, and the goods of all the Grandees and Nobles. And, descending to the requests, he added, that they would not be troublesome, nor obstinate in them, that they did demand nothing but that which all the Christian world demandeth that the most Christian King doth request that which Constantine the great reque∣sted of the Fathers in the Councell of Nice, that all his demaunds are contai∣ned in the holy Scripture, in the old Councels of the Catholique Church, and in the ancient Constitutions, Decrees, and Canons of the Popes and Fa∣thers; that the most Christian King doth demand the restitution of the Ca∣tholique Church to its integritie, by meanes of them the Fathers, constituted by CHRIST as the chiefe iudges, not by a Decree with a generall clause, but according to the forme of the expresse words of that perpetuall and diuine E∣dict, against which, neither vsurpation nor Prescription can take place, so that those good orders which the deuill hath taken away by force and concealed a long time, may bee restored, as it were, out of captiuitie to the holy city of God, and to the sight of men. He exemplified in Darius, who composed the tumults of Iudea, not by armes, but by executing the ancient Edict of Cyrus; in Iosias, who reformed Religion, by causing the booke of the Law to bee read and obserued, which had been concealed by the malice of men. Then hee spake acutely, and sayd, if they shall demand why France is not in peace, hee could answere nothing, but that which Iehu say to Ioram; How can there be peace, there remaining? and concealed the words following, but added, you know the text. Then he said, that if they doe not seriously labour in the reformation, the assistance of the King of Spaine, of the Pope and of other Princes, will be in vaine, and the blood of those who perish, though iustly, for their owne sinnes, will bee required at the hands of them the Fathers. Hee concluded, that, before they would descend to the particulars which they meant to demand, they desired that the things which they had begun to handle, might bee dispatched quickly, that they might, as soone as was possible, apply themselues to other matters of more weight, and of greater necessity in that time. The biting liberty of this Ambassadour did no lesse displease, then that of his Colleague Pibrac, at their first comming to Trent; but the feare they had of the French-men made them forget all. The next day the Congregations were continued, and the first was all spent by Friar Iaspar of Casal, Bishop of Liria: who, to informe the Cardinall of Loraine of all the reasons of the Spaniards, did recapitulate, with great elo∣quence, whatsoeuer they had said in this matter. He added besides, that no∣thing was more in fauour of the Lutherans, then to say that Bishops are insti∣tuted by the Law of man; that by this meanes, their nouitie is approued, in making Preachers, or Predicants, or Ministers to gouerne the Church, in stead of Bishops instituted by CHRIST. He said that to him that readeth the Epistles of Saint Gregorie, to Iohn of Constantinople, and to others against him, for calling himselfe Vniuersall Bishop, it doth plainely appeare, that it cannot be said, that the institution of the Pope is from Christ, if it be not said that the institution of Bishops is from him also. The Cardinall of Loraine made a congregation of Prelats and French Di∣uines in his owne house, to vnderstand their opinion concerning the Iuris∣diction of Bishops; in which it was vniformely resolued amongst them, that they did receiue it from GOD, and that it did belong vnto them iure diuino. The Papalins are distasted with the French Con∣gregations. And this singularitie of congregation was vsed afterwards by the Cardinall in all occurrences to the great distast of the Papalins, who said hee helde a Councell apart, and feared that the Spaniards would imitate the example, which might in time make a manifest schisme, as it happeneth in the first Councell of Ephesus, by the Congregations which Egyptians and Syrians held apart. But the Papalins had, amongst the Spaniards Barthomeus Seba∣stianus Bishop of Patti, who a Spaniard by nation, because hee had a Bisho∣pricke in Sicilie, had great intelligence in Rome, and had discouered all the Spanish practises and counsels. Amongst the Frenchmen, about the time Iacobus Hu∣gonius betray∣eth y e French Prelates. when the Cardinall of Loraine put himselfe in order for the iourney, the Nun∣cio in France did gaine Iacobus Hugonius, a Franciscan Friar, a Diuine of the Sorbone, elected by the Cardinall for his company; with whom hee had some cause of acquaintance because he was constituted Proctour for the Councel, by Iohannes , Bishop of Triguier, where of he sent newes to Rome, and addressed him for correspondence in Trent, with his letters to Lactantius Ro∣uereda Bishop of Ascoli. But Simoneta was not willing to put such confidence in that Bishop, nor would suffer him to know the intelligence which was to be held with that Diuine. Therefore when Loraine was neere vnto Trent, hee caused the Bishop of Ventimiglia to send another Friar of S. Francis, called Pergola, to meete Hugonius, to tell him from him, that he was informed by the Nuncio of France, of a letter which hee brought to the Lord Bishop of As∣coli, who had written also vnto him that hee should speake with him before he did deliuer it. Pergola did this businesse cunningly, so that the Diuine pro∣mised to doe so, and accordingly went to Ventimiglia a few dayes after hee came to Trent; and after that they knew one another, and the tokens that they were to treat together; the Friar made him a relation of the state of all things, and said, that one ruine of the kingdome did especially proceede from the Queene, who fauoured the heretiques, as himselfe saw plainely, in the dis∣purations which hee often had with them in her presence. Concerning the Ambassadours in Trent, he sayd they were corrupted also. The Cardinall hee held to be a good Catholique, but inclined to impertinent reformations of Ecclesiasticall Rites, of the vse of the Cup, of taking away images, of bring∣ing in the vulgar tongue, and such other things, whereunto hee was per∣swaded by the Duke of Guise his brother, and others of his kinred, and that the Queene at his departure, had effectually perswaded him to it, and giuen him twenty thousand crownes. Hee said, that amongst the Bishops there were three of the same faction; but, aboue all, that the Bishop of Ʋalence helde intelligence with the Queene, and was sent expresly by her, as the prime man to whom the Cardinall was to beare respect. In the end, they set downe an order how to meete, and treate together, Ventimiglia gaue him fifty crownes in gold, as the Legates had appointed, which at the first hee refused to accept; but Ventimiglia perswaded him with good termes to bee content. Notwithstanding himselfe did not take them, but called his seruant, who was with him, and gaue him order to keepe them in the name of his Religion. I haue often rehearsed, and continue still, many particulars, which I am sure many will thinke not worthy of mention, as I haue thought my selfe; but finding them preserued and noted in the memorials of those who were present in the actions, I perswade my selfe, that for some respect, vnknowen to me, they haue deemed them worthy of commemoration, and therefore, according to their iudgement rather then mine owne, I haue thought fit to relate them. Perhaps some sharpe witte may discouer in them some thing which is not penetrated by mee, and those who doe not esteeme them will lose but a little labour in reading them. The sixe and twentieth of Nouember, destinated for the Session, Cardinall Seripando proposed in Congregation, that it might be deferred, in regard the Decrees which they were to publish were not established. And he admoni∣shed the Prelates of their long discourses, by meanes whereof they could not determine any certaine day for the Session, which therefore was necessarily to bee deferred during pleasure. Hee tolde them that many of them spake of abuses, not remembring that to spend so much time, in vaine disputati∣ons without any fruit, was the greatest abuse of all, which was necessarily to be taken away, if they desired to see the end of the Councell, with edifica∣tion. Loraine confirmed the same, and exhorted the Fathers to leaue those questions, which were nothing to the purpose in that time, and to bee briefe and diligent in dispatching the things already proposed, that they may come to things of more importance and necessitie. Many of the Prelates did not consent that the Session should bee deferred during pleasure, and required a determinate time. To whom it being replied, that it was not possible, be∣cause they knew not when they should end the matter now in hand, which was so much controuersed amongst them, it was concluded that the deter∣minate time should bee set downe within eight dayes. The same day the Senator Molines arriued, sent by the Marquis of Peseara, to renew and giue strength to the perswasions, vsed to the Spanish Prelates, in fauour of the Pope, which hauing beene made by the Secretary resident, had done no good. Hee brought new letters of credence to them all from the Marquis, and laboured with great diligence▪ Which wrought a con∣trary effect. For the Prelates did interprete it to bee a practise of the Car∣dinall of Arragon, brother of the Marquis, without any expresse commission from the King. It appearing now, that the further they proceeded about this point of the institution, the more difficultie did arise, the Ambassadours of France vsed meanes, that a temper might befound, that they might rid them∣selues of those superfluities and come to the businesse of the Reformation, that they might know what they might hope for from the Councell. And the Bishop of Nismes told them, when he gaue his voyce, that if the Fathers were delighted to decide a curiositie, which in conclusion will bee nothing but words, yet they ought not to entertaine others with it, but deferring it vntill another time, to handle that now which is more necessary. Diego Co∣uarruuias, Bishop of Citta di Rodrigo, who spake after him, excusing the Fa∣thers for spending time in that question, sayd, that, it hauing been proposed by the Lords the Legates, the Prelates could not choose but deliuer their o∣pinions. Wherewith Cardinall Simoneta beeing mooued, did denie that the proposition was made by them; and Seripando did second him more fierce∣ly, and sayd, that themselues assuming too much licence, did not thinke it sufficient to discourse of the superioritie of Bishops which was proposed, but had set on foote also the other of the institution, and added Ius diuinum vnto them both; and not contented with the patience vsed in suffering them to say what they will, they began also to lay the blame vpon the Legats. He sharply reprehended their too much liberty in entring into these questions, and their boldnesse in treating of the Popes power, vainly and superfluously repeating the same things, more then tenne times, some also vsing friuolous reasons, and foolish, vnworthy of that assembly. And, in the progresse of his speach, perceiuing he had been too bitter, he began to set them downe a forme how euery Prelate should giue his voyce in Councell. Speaking of the questions proposed, hee shewed that both the opposite opinions were probable, and that in case that de iure Diuino had more probabilitie, yet it was not a thing to be decided in Councell. Hee could not by this meanes pacifie the mindes of many that were moued; neither did he absolutely please the Cardinall of Lo∣raine, who made all possible demonstration to gaine a good opinion. For he made meanes to know the men, and to informe himselfe what was possi∣ble to be done, that he might not vndertake the businesse before he knew it would succeed; and he affected also to be the man who should compose the differences, and be iudge of the question. For dispatch of the matter, a pro∣position was made to depute some Prelates of euery nation, as it were to compromise the resolution by them. But it could not bee done, because the French and Spaniards desired an euen number of euery nation, and the Itali∣ans, as they were more in number then the others, so they would haue a greater number in this deputation. Simoneta was the first to oppose this proposition, for feare of reuiuing the custome of the Councell of Basill. At this time a new matter of contention was prepared. For the Count of Luna gaue the Legates to vnderstand, that hee was to come to Trent Am∣bassadour of the King of Spaine, and not of the Emperour, but would first knowe what place would bee allowed him. The Legates called the French Ambassadours, and told them of it, desiring them to finde some meanes to compose the difference for precedence. They answered that they were not A question a∣bout prece∣dence be∣tween France and Spaine. sent to compose differences, but to hold the place due, and alwayes graunted to their King; that they meant not to preiudice the King of Spaine in any thing belonging to him, but to doe him all honour and seruice, as beeing a cousin, and a friend to their King, and that they had charge, if their place was not giuen vnto them, to make protestation of the nullity of the actes of the Councel, and to depart with all the French Prelates. The Cardinal of Mantua proposed this course, to make the Spanish Ambassadour set apart from the others ouer against the Legates, or vnder the Ecclesiasticall Ambassadours, or vnder the Secular Ambassadours. But the Frenchmen were contented with none of these courses, saying that by all meanes he should haue his place after them, and no where else. In the Congregation of the first of December Melchior Auosmediano, Bi¦shop The Bishop of Guadice causeth a great stirre in the Councel. of Guadice, speaking of that part of the last Canon, where it was deter∣mined that Bishops, called by the Pope, are true and lawfull, said, that the manner of expressing it did not please him, because there were also Bishops not called by the Pope, nor confirmed by him, who notwithstanding were true and lawfull. For example he brought foure suffragans, elected and or∣dained by the Arch-biship of Salzburg, who take no confirmation from the Pope. Cardinall Simoneta did not suffer him to proceed, saying, that what∣soeuer the Bishop of Slazburg, or other Primats did, was all by the Popes au∣thority. Friar Thomas Castello, Bishop of Caua, and the Patriarch of Venice stood vp both at once, and said that he ought to be put out of the Councell, as a Schismatike. And Egidius Falceta, Bishop of Caurle, cryed aloud, Out with the Schismatike. And there followed a great noyse amongst the Pre∣lats, as well of whispering, as of feete, partly in offence of the Prelate that gaue his voyce, and partly in defence: which gaue but small satisfaction to the Prelates beyond the mountaines. The Cardinall of Loraine was diplea∣sed, The Card, of Loraine saith the Councel was not free. but made no demonstration of it; and the Legats did hardly appease the stirre, by making others proceed who were to speake in that Congregation; which being ended, the Cardinall of Loraine said, in presence of many of the Popish Prelates, that the insolencie had beene great, that the Bishop of Gua∣dice had not spoken ill, and that, if hee had beene a Frenchman, hee would haue appealed to another Councell more free, and that in case prouision were not made that all might speake freely, the Frenchmen would returne, to make a Nationall Councell in France. And indeede it was found that the Bi∣shop had not spoken ill, and the Canon was corrected; for whereas it sayd, The Bishops called by the Pope of Rome, it was altered thus, The Bishops as∣sumed by authority of the Pope of Rome. The next day, in which they were to determine the iust time for the Session, the Cardinall of Mantua proposed, that it might bee prorogued vntill the seuenteenth; and if, in the meane while, the Decrees of reformation, be∣loging to the matter which was handled, could not be put in order, it should be deferred vntill the next Session. The Cardinall of Loraine consented for that day, but with condition, that the whole matter might be handled, and nothing deferred vntill the next Session, in which it was necessary to beginne the generall reformation. The Arch bishop of Prague, Fiue Churches, and the Orator of Polonia, agreed in the same opinion. and, after much conten∣tion, betweene those, who (as the Bishop of Nismes had said) would haue those questions deferred vntill another time, and others, who would haue them decided, it was resolued to appoint the Session for the day aforesayd, with order, that, to dispatch all the matter, they should hold two Congrega∣tions euery day, and if they would not decide all, yet they should publish those Decrees which could bee made by that time, deferring the vndecided points vntill another, handling the reformation in the next Session, before they entred into matter of doctrine. Mantua did also reprehend the noyse made with feete, and wordes, the day before, concluding that, if hereafter they would not speake with that respect and reuerence which might be∣seeme their owne dignitie, the presence of them the Legates, who represent his Holinesse, and of the Cardinals and Ambassadours, who represent the Princes, they would goe out of the Congregation, that they might not en∣dure so great disorders. The Cardinall of Loraine commended the admo∣nition, and sayd, that as the Legates ought not to goe out of the Congrega∣tion for any occasion whatsoeuer, so it was most iust that the perturbers of it should be punished. The Bishop of Caua would neither excuse himselfe for that which hee had said, nor receiue the admonition with silence, though it was in generall, but said, that the causes ought to bee remooued that the effects might cease; that if the words of the Bishop of Guadice had offended his owne person, he would haue endured it, for Christian charitie, which as it requireth patience in wrongs committed against ones selfe, so it maketh men sensible of the iniuries done vnto CHRIST, whose diuine Maiestie is offended, when the authoritie of his Vicar is touched, that hee had spoken well, yea, as well as might be, and confirmed the same with other words of the same sence, which were generally condemned of petulancie. Iacobus Gilbertus, of Nogueras, Bishop of Aliffe, in deliuering his voyce, The suffrage of the Bishop of Aliffe con∣cerning the institution of Bishops. said, that, concerning the institution of Bishops, one could not speake with better ground, then considering well and vnderstanding the words of Saint Paul to the Ephesians. For as it is most true that CHRIST did rule the Church with an absolute gouernment, while hee liued in mortall flesh, as others had iudiciously said, so it was a great vntruth which was added, that is, that, being in heauen, he hath abandoned the same gouernment, yea, hee doeth exercise it rather more then before. And this is it which he spake to his Apostles, at his departure; I am with you vntill the end of the world; adding also the assi∣stance of the holy Ghost; so that now also not onely the inward influence of graces commeth from CHRIST, as from the Head, but an externall assistance also, though inuisible to vs, which doeth minister occasions of saluation to the faithfull and driueth away the temptations of the world. Notwithstan∣ding, besides all these things, hee hath instituted also some members of the Church for Apostles, Pastours, &c. to defend the faithfull from errours, and to direct them to the vnitie of faith, and knowledge of GOD. And vpon these he hath best owed a gift, necessary for the exercising of this holy office, which is the power of iurisdiction, which is not equall in all, but so much as euery one hath, is giuen him immediatly by CHRIST. Nothing is ord contrary to Saint Paul, then to say, that it was giuen to one onely, to impart it to whom he listed. It is true that it is not equall in all, but according to the diuine distribution, which, as Saint Cyprian saith, that the vnitie of the Church might bee preserued, did ordaine, that the supreame should be in Pe∣ter and his successors; not that it should bee absolute, and, according to the Prouerbe, that the will may bee a law, but, as Saint Paul saith, for edification of the Church onely, not for destruction so that it cannot bee extended to abrogate lawes, and Canons, made by the Church, for a foundation of gouernement. And heere hee began to alleadge the Canons cited by Gra∣tian, in which the ancient Popes doe confesse themselues to be subiect to the Decrees of the Fathers, and to the constitutions of their predecessors. The Cardinall Varminese interrupted him, and sayd, that the subiect to speake on was the superioritie of Bishops; so that this discourse was beside the matter. The Bishop answered, that the authority of Bishops being handled, it was necessary to speake of that of the Pope. And Granata stood vp, and said, that others had spoken of it superfluously, not to say perniciously, mea∣ning Laynez, and therefore that Aliffe might speake of it likewise. The Bi∣shop of Caua stood vp, and sayd, that others had spoken of it, but not in that manner; and whisperings beginning to arise amongst the Prelates, Simo∣neta made a signe to Caua to hold his peace, and admonishing Aliffe to speake to the point, he quieted the noyse. But he continuing to alleadge the Ca∣nons, as hee had begun, Varmiense interrupted him againe, not speaking vn∣to him but making a formall discourse to the Fathers, concerning that mat∣ter. He said the heretikes pretend to proue, that Bishops, elected by the Pope, are not true and lawfull, and that this is the opinion which ought to be con∣demned, but whether true Bishops are instituted iure Diuino, or not, there is no difference betweene the heretikes and the Catholikes, and therefore the que∣stion doth not belong to the Synod, which is congregated only to condemne the heresies. He aduised the Fathers to abstaine from speaking things which might giue occasion of scaudall, and exhort them to leaue these questions. Aliffe desired to replie; but Simoneta with the assistance of some other Pre∣lates, did pacifie him, though with some difficulty. And after him spake Au∣tonius Maria Saluia , Bishop of Saint Papulo; who sayd, that all were as∣sembled for the seruice of GOD, and proceeded with a good intention, though some one way, and some another. And, hauing sayd many things which serued partly to accord the opinions, but principally to reconcile their mindes, was a cause that the Congregation did quietly ende; and that words of humanitie and reuerence did passe betweene the Cardinall and the Bishop. The fourth of December, the Cardinall of Loraine deliuered his opinion The suffrage of the Card, of Loraine. concerning the same matter, and spake at large, saying, that iurisdiction was giuen by God immediatly to the Church. Hee alleadged the place of Saint Austin, that the keyes are giuen to Peter, not vnto one person, but vnto the vnitie, and, that Peter, when CHRIST promised him the keyes, did repre∣sent all the Church, who if hee had not been a Sacrament; that is, represen∣ting the Church, CHRIST would not haue giuen them vnto him. And hee shewed a great memory in reciling the places word by word. Then he said, that that part of iurisdiction which is ioyned with Episcopall order, the Bishops doe receiue immediatly from God; and declaring in what it doeth consist, amongst other things, hee specified, that power of excommunicati∣on is contained in it, inlarging himselfe much in the exposition of that place of Saint Matthew, in which CHRIST doeth prescribe the manner of bro∣therly correction, and iudiciall of the Church, with authority to separate the disobedient from the body thereof. Then hee disputed against that opini∣on, alleadging diuers reasons taken out of the wordes of CHRIST, spoken to Saint Peter, and from the exposition which S. Leo the Pope doeth giue vnto them in many places. Hee exemplified in many Bishops who had acknow∣ledged all their iurisdiction to come from the Apostolike Sea, and spake with so much eloquence, and in such sort, that it could not clearely bee discoue∣red, what his opinion was. Afterwards hee sayd, that Councels had autho∣ritie immediately from God; alleadging the words of CHRIST, Where two or three shall be assembled in my name, I will be in the middest of them, and the Councell of the Apostles, which ascribeth the resolution to the holy Ghost; and the stile of all Councels, in saying they are congregated in the ho∣ly Ghost and, in particular of that of Constance, which sayth plainely, that it hath authority immediatly from CHRIST. But hee added, that speaking of Councels, his meaning was that the head should bee ioyned with it, and that nothing was of more seruice for the vnion of the Church, then to con∣firme well the Popes authoritie; that himselfe would neuer consent to deter∣mine any thing in diminution thereof, and that all the Prelates and Clergie of France were of the same opinion. And returning to the institution of Bishops, and speaking still with the same ambiguitie, hee concluded in the ende, that the question was boundlesse. Afterwards exhorted the Fathers to leaue it, and himselfe gaue a forme to the Canon, in which the wordes, iure diuino, were omitted; and, instead of them, it was sayd, Instituted by CHRIST. The French Prelates, who spake then after Loraine, and the dayes follow∣ing, vsed not the same ambiguity, nor the same respect towards the Aposto∣like Sea, but maintained openly, that the authoritie of Bishops was, de iure di∣uino, alleadging the reasons, deliuered by the Cardinall, and expounding them; who howsoeuer, while they spake, leaned his head vpon his hand, as if hee had been displeased, yet they noted him for ambition, as if he had pur∣posely procured a Comment to bee made vpon his opinion. But the Spani∣ards were not satisfied with the French men; though they did openly defend their opinion, as well because the Cardinall had spoken ambiguously, as for that hee and the other Prelates did not hold the institution and superiorritie of Bishops de iure diuino to be necessary to be determined in Councell, but ra∣ther that it ought to be omitted. And they were more displeased with the forme of the Canon, proposed by the Cardinall, in which the words de iure diuino, were left out, howsoeuer, more for their satisfaction, then for a∣ny other respect, these words were put in, That they are instituted by CHRIST. The Frenchmen and Spaniards had the same end, to prouide against the ambition and auarice of the Court, which did domineere at their pleasure, with precepts, vnprofitable, and of no fruit, and drew a great quantitie of money from Christian nations, by collation of Benefices, and dispensations. But the Spaniards iudged, in regard of the deuotion which the people of their Countrey beare to the Pope, and of the inclination of the King, and of his counsell, abhorring nouities, if this had been done directly, and openly, it would haue raised a scandall, and could not haue been effected, and that the Pope would easily haue interposed so many difficulties with the Princes, that they should neuer haue been able to come to the declaration thereof; but that according to the custome of that nation, they ought to take their aime afarre off, and, by declaring that iurisdiction and residence are from CHRIST, and de inre diuino, to put that order in reputation with the peo∣ple, to withstand the violent courses which the Court of Rome might take against their persons, that so in progresse of time, they meght haue meanes to reforme the Churches, for the seruice of GOD, and tranquillity of the people, restoring the libertie vsurped by the Romans. But the Frenchmen, who by nature doe proceede openly, and with pas∣sion, esteeme these artes vaine. They said, there would not want meanes at Rome to make them vnprofitable, and that they required so much time be∣fore they could be brought to effect, that no good hope could bee concei∣ued of them; that the true meanes was, without art, directly and plainely to rush downe the abuses, which are too cleare and manifest, and that there was no greater difficultie to obtaine this which was the principall end, then there was to obtaine the pretence, which, beeing obtained, would bee as much as nothing. And their councels were no lesse different in another par∣ticular also. They all agreed; in iudging it necessary that the execution of the Decrees of the Councel should bee so firme and stable, that it might not bee altered. But there was some difference betweene the Frenchmen and Spaniards, about the manner how to order that the Decrees of that Councel might neither bee derogated from, nor altered by the Pope, by dispensations; non obstanties, and such other clauses of Rome. And therefore the Frenchmen disseigned that the superiority of the Councell aboue the Pope should bee decided, or a constitution made, that the Decrees thereof could nither bee derogated from, nor dispensed with, which would bee an absolute remedie. The Spaniards thought it a hard point, and therefore not to bee attempted, because the Pope would alwayes bee fauoured by Princes, when hee should complaine that his authoritiy was diminished, and would bee assisted by the greater part of the Italian Prelats, in regard of the dignity of their Countrey, and for many priuate interests. And, for themselues, they thought it suffici∣ent that the Councell should make the Decrees, purposing afterward to ob∣taine a pragmatique from the King vpon them, by which meanes they would so bee established, that the Popes dispensations to the contrary could not en∣ter into Spaine. The Legates dispatched an expresse Currier, with a copie of the propo∣sition of the Cardinall of Loraine, and of the animaduersion of some Cano∣nists made vpon it; shewing that the Papall authority was in question, de∣manding that order should bee sent them what to doe. Whereof the Cardi∣nall, when he knew it, was very sensible, and complained that hauing gi∣uen the copie before hee spake in the Congregation, and the Legates seem∣ing to bee pleased, they had afterwards shewed so much distrust of him. He The Legates send the pro∣position of the Card, of Lo∣reine to Rome said hee thought it strange, that feare was apprehended by euery thing that either himselfe, or any of the French Prelates said, or did. Hee complai∣ned that his Nation was wronged by the Italians, affirming, that, with his Wherewith he is displeased. owne eares, hee had hard some Italian Prelates scornefully vse that scurrile prouerbe, which was already made common throughout all Trent, that is; That from the Spanish scabbe, we are fallen into the French poxe: of which the o∣ther Frenchmen did complaine vpon euery occasion, and the Spaniards al∣so. Whose complaints, as the custome is did more incite the curious; and A disgrace full prouerbe in Trent. the suspicions and diffidences btweene the Nations did, with very great danger, encrease: neither were the Legates and wiser sort of Prelates able to stop the motion, though they opposed both with authoritie and with per∣swasions. The, Frenchmen, being prouoked, did resolue to make proofe of their libertie, and agreed that, in the Congregation of the seuenth day, the Cardi∣nall of Loraine should not bee present, and that their Prelates who were to speake should vse freedome, and that, if they were reprehended, their Am∣bassadours should protest; and Lansac, that they might knowe it and be∣ware, in presence of many of them, said to Antonius Lecius, Bishop of Orange, one of the speakers, that hee ought to speake freely, and without feare, and that the Kings protection was sufficient to maintaine him. This beeing reported to the Legates, was a cause that they were heard with much patience, though they said that the institution and iurisdiction of Bishops The French opinion con∣cerning the Popes autho∣ritie. was de iure diuino, as well as that of the Pope, and that there was no diffe∣rence, but in degree of superioritie, and that the Popes authority is confi∣ned within the limits of the Canons, relating, and commending the stile of the Parliaments of France; that, when any Popes Bull is presented which con∣taineth any thing contrary to the Canons receiued in France, they pro∣nounce it to bee abusiue, and forbid the execution. This libertie made the Papalins vse more respect in their speaches, though the prouerbe plea∣sed them so well, that sometimes some of the merrie Prelates could not for∣beare to vse it. The pretence for the absence of the Cardinall of Loraine, was the aduice of the death of the King of Nauarre, which came to Trent that day. This The death of the King of Nauar made a great change in Trent, and in France Prince, wounded with a bullet at the siege of Roan, in September, was neuer well cured, and at the last, died. Neere vnto his death, hee receiued the Communion after the Catholique manner, at the perswasion of his Physiti∣an Visentius Laurus, and afterwards wauered towards the doctrine of the Protestants, and so died the tenth of Nouember. This accident made a great mutation in the Councell; and Loraine did suddenly change all his des∣seignes. For that King had a principall hand in the Commissions giuen to the Cardinall at his departure, so that hee was vncertaine whether, after his death, the Queene, and others, would continue in the same heat. Besides, he saw a manifest change in the whole gouernement, and therefore desired to bee in France, that himselfe might beare part of it also. For the Prince of Conde beeing in open dissention, distrusting the Queene and those who had power with her, the Cardinall of Bourbon vncapable, Montpensier in small credit, the Constable old, of whom many also were emulous, hee had a great conceit that his brother might bee the Chiefe for Armes, and himselfe for counsell. And hee ruminated these things in his minde, thinking but little of the Councell, and of Trent, where hee was. The other French∣men sayd openly, they ought to thanke God for the death of the King, because he be∣gan to wauer, and to ioyne his owne interests with those of his brother, and of the other Hugonots. The next day, being the eighth of December, was all spent in ceremonies, for the election of Maximilian King of the Romanes. The Arch bishop of Prague sang the Masse of the holy Ghost, with the assistance of the whole Councell: the Bishop of Tininia made a sermon, in commendation of the Prince, and the Cardinals and Ambassadours were inuited by Prague. So soone as the Diet was assembled in Francfort, the Prince of Conde sent, not onely to demaund assistance from the Protestant Princes, but also to treat an vnion of the Hugonots, with those of the Confession of Ausburg; and in particular, to make a ioynt demand for a free new Councel, in which the resolutions of Trent might bee examined, the French-men of the old Catho∣like Religion giuing hope also that they would agree vnto it, because it had been promised to the Ambassadour of France, (who afterwards was created Cardinall della Bordissiera) that it should be done. But the Dutch Protestants were most auerse from the Councell, so long as Germany might bee in peace without it. And therefore a booke was printed in Francfort, full of ex∣cuses, and reasons, why they neither would, nor could come to Trent, with protestation of the nullitie of all that was, and would be done in that place. The King was first anointed, and crowned King of Bohemia, in Prague, The corona∣tion of the King of Bo∣hemia. in presence of his father, the Emperour, by that Arch-bishop who went from Trent into Bohemia, to performe that ceremonie, that the King might haue a voyce in the Imperiall Diet. Beeing come to Francfort, they were forced to expect vntill the Canons of Colon had elected their Arch-bishop, because that Sea was then void; so that the Princes had much time to handle many matters, expecting still in that place, that the number of seuen might bee full, by the Coronation in Bohemia, and the election in Colen. They were trou∣bled in Rome with these thimgs, and afraid, that the Diet would send to Trent, to protest, and that some new forme would bee vsed in the corona∣tion, and the old abolished, which would shew an inclination to depart from the ancient Rites; or that some promise would bee made, by the new King, preiudiciall to the Popes authoritie. But the Emperour, and the King vsed much arte to diuert the handling of points of Religion before the Ele∣ction, which was made the 24 of Nouember, and the coronation the last The election of the King of the Ro∣manes. of that moneth. In which the Electors, and other Protestant Princes stood at the Masse vntill the Gospell was read, and then they went foorth. This onely was new. But the Popes Nuncio tooke place aboue the Electours and Ambassadours. The coronation being past, the Emperour beganne to pra∣ctise with some of the Protestants, that they would adhere to the Councell of Trent; who, not to bee preuented, assembling themselues together, pre∣sented to the Emperour the answere, promised 20. moneths before to his Ambassadours, in the assembly at Namburg, which was deferred vntill then. Conditions required by the Protestāts of Germany, before they would assist the, Councel. In which hauing declared the causes why they had, inmany Imperiall Diets, appealed and did appeale againe vnto a free Councell, they added the condi∣tions, which they held to bee necessary, with which they offeredto assist in a future generall Councel. 1. That it should bee celebrated in Germanie. 2. That it should not bee intimated by the Pope. 3. That hee should not preside, but bee part of the Councel, subiect to the determinations thereof. 4. That the Bishops and other Prelates should bee freed from their oath gi∣uen to the Pope, that they may freely, and without impediment, deliuer their opinions. 5. That the holy Scripture might bee iudge in the Coun∣cel, and all humaine authority excluded. 6. That the Diuines of the States of the Augustan Confession, sent to the Councel, might not onely haue a con∣sulting, but deciding voice also, and might haue a Safe-conduct, both for their persones, and for the exercise of their religion. 7. That the decisions in Councel, should not be made, as in Secular matters, by pluralitie of voices, but the more sound opinions preferred, that is, those which were regulated by the word of God. 8. That the acts of the Councel of Trent should bee made void, because it is partiall, celebrated by one part onely, and not go∣uerned according to promise. 9. That if a concord in religion cannot be concluded in the Councel, the conditions of Passau may remaine inuiolable, as also the peace of religion, made in Ausburg, in the yeere 1555. may con∣tinue in strength and force, and euery one bound toobserue it. 10. That, concerning the foresaid conditions, a fit and sufficient caution be giuen. The Emperour, hauing receiued the writing, promised to labour for concord, and to vse meanes that the Councell may be celebrated, where they cannot refuse, with reason, to assist, so that on their part they would lay aside hatred and passion, which are contrary to Christian peace. And, to this end, hee offered to goe in person to Trent, and resolued to passe to Ispruc, so soone as the Diet was ended, where beeing distant from Trent but foure small dayes iourney, he might in a short time effect whatsoeuer was necessary. But in Councell the Prelats hauing made an end of giuing voyces concer∣ning the Institution, so much discussed: no resolution was made, because the Legates did expect it from Rome: But they gaue foorth the Canon of Resi∣dence, hauing first imparted it to the Cardinall of Loraine, which was, as was sayd before, without the declaration whether it was de iure diuino, or no, but with rewards and penalties. And Loraine, giuing his voyce first, said it was necessary to grant power to the Bishops to absolue from cases reserued In caena Domini: which he protested hee spake, not to diminish the authoritie of his Holinesse, but because, hauing seene in France that no transgressour there∣of did care to goe or send to Rome for absolution, he thought it worse, both for the soules of the people, and for the dignitie of the Apostolique Sea, to leaue them in those censures. Hee added also that hee thought it not fit so to tye Bishops to residence, that they might not bee absent for iust causes, which were to be referred to the iudgment of his Holynesse. Hee said moreouer, that the publike emploiments in the affaires of Kingdomes, and republikes, were to bee accepted, because they seeme not to be aliene from the Episcopal charge, especially in Kingdomes, where the Ecclesiasticall order is a mem∣ber of the State, as in France, and the Kingdomes, of Spaine also. The Cardi∣nall was very prolixe; and howsoeuer he repeted often that Residence was necessary, and that it was fit to make prouision for it, yet hee interposed so many exceptions, and excuses, that, in the end, no man could iudge whether he would haue any constitution to be made for it or no. The Legates imparted the Articles of reformation for the future Session to the Ambassadors also, according to promise, before they were proposed in Congregation; which were all for remedies of the abuses in the Sacrament of Order. And therefore the French Ambassadours and Bishops met in the house of Loraine, to consider of them, and deputed foure Bishops to examine whether any thing was contained in them preiudiciall to the priuiledges of the French Church, or whether any thing might bee added for the seruice of their Countrey, and withall they gaue order to the Ambassadour de Ferrieres, to collect, in Congregation of the same Bishops, all the reformations, for∣merly proposed in Trent, vnder Paulus, and Iulius, and in the present Coun∣cell also, and in the Congregation of Poisi, to make an abstract of them, and, adding vnto them those which were contained in the Kings instructions, and whatsoeuer seemed good vnto them besides, should compose Articles for all Christendome, and France especially. But the Imperialists, seeing that none of the Reformations mentioned by them were proposed, called together all the Ambassadors. Prague spake vn∣to them, and told them, that much time was consumed in Councell with doing of nothing; that the Legates had often promised to handle Reforma∣tion, and yet they were entertained with speculations, or with prouisions a¦gainst small abuses; that it was time to make an effectuall instance that they would begin to handle important and vrgent matters, and that if all would ioyne in requesting the execution of so many promises, made by the Pope and the Legates, there might be hope to obtaine. All consented; but when they came to particulars, they were so different, that they could not agree but in the generall, onely to demand a Reformation. Whereupon it was re∣solued, that Prague, in deliuering his voyce, should desire it, in the name of all; and so he did. And, in the matter of residence, he said in few words, that the entertain∣ments being taken from the Prelates, which they enioy in the Courts of Rome and other Princes, any Decree would suffice. The opinion of the Arch-Bishop of Otranto was, that the Decree of the said Councell vnder Paul the third was sufficient, adding onely the Popes Bull, dated the fourth of Sept. 1560. Others demanded that the causes of absence, which the Synode deemeth to be lawfull, should be expressed, because the greatest difficultie is like to arise vpon this point. The Bull, named by Otranto, did containe a command of personall residence, vnder the penalties, declared by the Coun∣cell, and foure graces to those which reside. That is, that they may not be cited to the Court, but with Commission signed by the Pope. That they shall be free from all impositions, ordinary and extraordinary, though imposed at the petition of Princes. That they may exercise iurisdiction against euery Secular Clerke, or Regular, dwelling out of his Cloyster. That no appeale may lye from their sentences, but onely from the definitiue. Others were con∣tent with the Decree; as it was porposed by the Legates, but with some alte∣ration, all fit for their owne respects, which were as many as there were per∣sons. Some required that the declaration de iure diuino, might be made. And there was a fourth opinion, that although it be de iure diuino, yet it was not fit to make declaration thereof. The Cardinall of Loraine assembled the French Prelates to dispute vpon this poynt; who concluded vniformely, that it was de iure diuino. The Bishop of Angiu, was the first that gaue his opinion so, and all the rest did follow him. But in the generall Congregation of the Synode, the Prelates were vn∣speakeably tedious; whereof the Cardinall of Loraine complained to the Le∣gates, desiring to haue those matters dispatched, that they might come to the reformation, repeating the words so often vsed, that if satisfaction be not gi∣uen them in Trent they will take it at home. Frier Albertus Duimius Bishop of Veglia, alledging that the point of Resi∣dence The suffrage of the Bishop of Veglia con∣cerning resi∣dence was discussed in the Councell vnder Paul the third, and the decision deferred vntill another time, said, that therefore it was necessary to see the reasons then alledged by the Prelates; that now they had giuen their voyces without alledging reasons, which himselfe would not doe, esteeming rea∣sons more then authoritie and multitude of opinions. And then he began to recite all the reasons for proofe that it is de iure diuino, and to resolue the contrary. He insisteth much vpon the saying of CHRIST, A good shepheard go∣eth before the flocke, calleth euery sheepe by name, runneth through the desert to seeke that which is lost, and layeth downe his life for them. He sheweth that this was vn∣derstood of all those whom CHRIST hath instituted Pastors; which are all those who haue cure of soules, especially the Bishops, as Saint Paul, said and wrote to the Ephesians; that whosoeuer did hold himselfe not to be bound by the Decree of CHRIST to performe these offices, or was more fit for the affaires of Kingdomes, or Common-wealths, ought to leaue the charge of a Pastor, and apply himselfe to those matters onely; that it is very much to performe one charge well, but to performe two, which be contrary, is im∣possible. His prolixitie did not please the Cardinals, because he was the first that disputed that matter with reason. Hee spake with great vehemencie, v∣sing many phrases and words, taken out of Saint Hierome. Simoneta would willingly haue interrupted him, but forbare, in regard of the occurrence of the Bishop of Guadice. But hee called him, in the presence of many Prelats, and reprehended him sharpely for speaking against the Pope. The Bishop defended himselfe humbly, and with reasons: and a few dayes after, alleadg∣ing indisposition, asked leaue to depart, and had it, and departed the one Who quieteth Trent for feare. and twentieth of the moneth. After this time the controuersie about residence changed state, and those The Prelats are terrified with y e Popes authority. who did abhorre it, did labour no more to demonstrate by reasons or autho∣ritie, as vntill then they had done, that it was of the law of man, but began to terrifie those of the contrary opinion, by saying, that to maintaine that it was de iure diuino, was to diminish the Popes authority; because it would follow that hee could not enlarge or diminish, diuide or vnite, change or transferre Episcopall Seas, nor leaue them vacant, or gaue them an administration, or commenda; that hee could not restraine, much lesse take away the authoritie to absolue; that, by this determination, all dispensations granted by Popes, were condemned at once, and power taken away to grant them hereafter. The other part, who saw the necessitie of those consequences, which they thought were not vnfit, but that it was the trueth, and the lawfull vse of the ancient Church, and that the declaration was proposed for no other ende then to remooue those inconueniences, themselues also omitting to vse rea∣sons and authority, to prooue it to bee de iure diuino, began to shew, that resi∣dence beeing restored by that declaration, it would turne to the inlargement of the Popes power, and encrease the reuerence towards the Clergie, and especially towards the Pope, who hath lost authority in so many Prouinces, because Bishops, not residing, but gouerning by vnable Vicars, haue left a way open for the sowing of new doctrines, which, with so much detriment of the Popes authoritie, haue taken roote. If Bishops doe reside, his authori∣tie will be preached euery where, and confirmed where it is acknowledged as yet, and restored where it hath been shaken. Neither of the parties could speake with such termes, but that their dissimulation was perceiued on both sides, and their inward thoughts, which they would haue concealed, were but too manifest. They were all masked, and yet all knowen. Being assem∣bled againe the sixteenth of December, one halfe of the Prelates hauing not as yet giuen their voyces, Cardinall Seripando proposed the prorogation of the Session; and beeing not able then to foresee when they could dispatch, they resolued to prefixe a certaine time, within fifteene dayes. And the Car∣dinal admonished the Prelats of their great prolixitie, in giuing their voyces, which did ayme only at ostentation, tooke away the reputation of the Coun∣cell, and did prolong it, to the great in commoditie of them all. The Pope was much afflicted with the death of Fredericke Boromeo his ne∣phew, which happened in the end of the last moneth; vpon whom thinking to conferre all the greatnesse of his house, hee had married him to a daugh∣ter of the Duke of Vrbin, made him generall gouernour of the Church, and purposed also to giue him the Dukedome of Camerino, and because hee was old, and oppressed with griefe, hee fell into a dangerous sicknesse; out of which beeing recouered, hee applyed his minde to the affaires of the Coun∣cell. Hee held diuers Congregations, to finde a temper concerning the two Canons, of the Institution, and of Residence, which were thought by all the Court to bee very dangerous for the Popes authoritie; as also to make some prouision against the prolixitie of the Prelats, in deliuering their opinions, be∣cause it did prolong the Councell, and left a gate open for all those to enter, who would attempt any thing against his dignitie. Aboue all, that which was desseigned by the Frenchmen did trouble him, especially, because hee did neuer receiue Letters from Trent; in which it was not sayd, that either the Cardinall of Loraine, or some of the Ambassadours did make request for re∣formation, with this addition, that if they could not obtaine those prouisi∣ons they demanded, they would make them at home, making mention often of prouiding against the annats, preuentions, and other things properly be∣longing to the Pope of Rome. He resolued to deale plainely with the French-men; and to those which were in Rome he sayd, that, hauing so often offered to treat with the King concerning his owne rights, and to come to a friend∣ly composition, and seeing that his ministers in the Councell doe alwayes make shew that they will speake of them in the Synode, hee was resolute to see whether hee would breake out into an open dissention with him. Hee gaue order, by an expresse currier, to his Nuncio in France to speake hereof; and wrote to the Cardinall of Loraine, that those matters could not be pro∣posed in Councell, without breach of the Kings promises, expressely made vnto him, by Monsieur d' Auxerres. Hee complained in Consistory of the impertinencie of the Bishops in Trent, in making euery thing long, to no purpose. Hee exhorted the Cardinals to write to their friends, and him∣selfe wrote to the Legats, to vse threats and authoritie, seeing that perswasi∣ons did no good. Concerning the Articles of the Institution he wrote, that to make the institution of Bishops absolutely de iure diuino, was a false opini∣on, and erroneous; because the power of Order was from CHRIST, but of iurisdiction from the Pope, which, in this respect, may bee said to be from CHRIST, because the Papall authoritie commeth from his Diuine Maie∣stie, so that whatsoeuer the Pope doeth, CHRIST doeth by him. And, for a resolution, hee wrote, that either the words de iure diuino, should bee quite o∣mitted, or they should be vsed in that forme which hee sent, in which it was sayd that CHRIST did institute Bishops to be created by the Pope, who may distribute to them what and how much authority it pleased him to giue them, for the benefit of the Church, hauing absolute power to restraine and amplifie that which is giuen, as seemeth good vnto him. Then hee wrote, that, in the particular of Residence, it being a cleere case that the Pope hath power to dispense, they should, by all good caution of words, reserue his authoritie in the Decree, in which the words de iure Diuino, could by no meanes bee put; as Catharinus had well prooued, from whose opinion, beeing Catholique, they ought not to depart. For holding the Session, hee wrote confusedly, that it should not bee deferred aboue fifteene dayes, nor celebra∣ted before the matter were in order, that the enuious might not take occasion to calumniate. A solemne Ambassage from the Duke of Bauaria passed by Trent to goe The Duke of Bauaria son∣deth Ambas∣sadours to Rome. to Rome, to obtaine of the Pope the communion of the Cup. They had audience with the Legate, and secret conference with the Cardinall of Lo∣raine. This wakened the controuersie in that matter, which was asleepe; and the Spaniards, and many Italians, (howsoeuer the matter was referred to the Pope by the maior part) sayd it would bee a preiudice to the Coun∣cell, if, while that lasted, that vse should bee permitted. And all the Fathers were in a hurly burly, because letters came from Rome to diuers Prelates, that the Councell should be suspended, which report was confirmed by Don Iohn Manriques who passed by Trent, from Germany to Rome. But the Legats, hauing receiued the Popes letters, thought it impossible to execute the orders he had sent, and that it was necessary to giue him a more particular account of the occurrences, then could be done by writing, and make him vnderstand that the Councell cannot bee gouerned as at Rome they thinke it can, that they might receiue a more plaine instruction from his Holinesse what they should doe. And it being necessary to send a man of iudgement, well infor∣med, and of credite with the Pope; they found none better then the Bishop of Ʋentimiglia, whom they resolued to dispatch with speed. The Holy-daies The Legates send the B. of Ventimiglia to the Pope. of Christmasse approaching gaue them fit occasion first to proceed slowly, and afterwards to intermit the congregations and so to haue leasure to make that dispatch; which was done the sixe and twentieth of December. The eight and twentieth, newes came to Trent, of the battell in France, which hapned the seuenteenth of the moneth, in which the Prince of Conde The battell & other troubles in France. was taken prisoner. That Kingdome was very turbulent all that yeere, for the differences of religion, which gaue a beginning first vnto a gentle, and afterwards vnto a furious warre. For the Hugonots encreasing in Paris, to the great discontent of the Catholiques, who are many in the Citie, and adhe∣ring to the Prince of Conde, the Constable, with his sonnes, and the house of Guise, with some others, to hinder the greatnesse vnto which that Prince did aspire, made a league, and desseigned to make themselues leaders of the people of Paris, and to chase, by their meanes, from that Citie and the Court, the Prince and his followers. Each of them departing from his house, to goe towards Paris, and in the iourney slaying and dispersing the Hugonots, whom they found assembled in diuers places, they entred into Paris; and, hauing drawen the King of Nauarre to their side, and caused the city to arme in their fauour, the Queene was constrained to ioyne with them. Heereupon the Prince going out of Paris, and retiring, with his adherents, to Orlience, ma∣nifests and writings passed on both sides, each protesting they did nothing but for the libertie and seruice of the King. But the Constable and Guise waxing euery day stronger, in Aprill the Prince wrote to all the reformed Churches of France, demanding souldiers, and money, and declaring warre against the defenders of the Catholike partie, calling them perturbers of the publike quiet, and violaters of the Kings Edict, published in fauour of the Reformatists. The Princes letters were accompanied with others of the mi∣nisters of Orleans, and of some other cities, which caused those of that Re∣ligion to arme. And there fell out an accident which did incite them more▪ For at the same time the Edict of Ianuary (whereof wee haue already made mention) was published againe in Paris, with an addition, that neither in the suburbs of the Citie, nor within the space of a league any assembly of Religion should bee held, or Sacraments administred but after the old Rite. And in the end of May the King of Nauar made all the Reformatists goe out of Paris; but proceeded with such moderation, that none of them were offended. Warre brake forth in all the Prouinces of France, betweene these parties; and that summer there were at the least, urteene formall Armies, all at one time, in diuers parts of the Kingdome. The sonnes fought against their fathers, brothers against brothers, and euen women tooke Armes on both sides, for defence of their religion. There was almost no part in Dolphinie, Languedoc, and Gascoigne, which was not vexed oftentimes, the Catholiques, remaining conquerours in some places, and the Reformatists in others, with such variety of accidents, that it would bee redious to repeat them, and besides our purpose, which requireth that nothing should bee related by vs but concerning Trent, except those which haue a connexion with the Coun∣cel, as the things following haue. Where the Hugonots ouercame, the ima∣ges were beaten downe, the altars destroyed the Churches spoiled, and the ornaments of gold and siluer melted, to make money for souldiers pay where the Catholiques were conquerors, they burned the Bibles in the vul∣ger tongue, rebaptized children, and remaried those who had beene maried according to the new ceremonies. And the condition of the Clergie on both sides was most miserable, who, whensoeuer they were taken, were cru∣elly murthered, without all humanity. In Iulie the Parlament of Paris made a Decree, that it should bee lawfull to slay all the Hugonots, which, by pub∣like order, was read euery Sunday in euery Parish. Afterwards they added another, declaring them rebels, publike enemies, themselues infamous, and all their posterity, and the goods of those who tooke Armes in Orliens confis∣cated, A bloody de∣cree made by the Parlia∣ment of Paris. except Conde, vpon pretence that they held him by force. And how∣soeuer there were many treaties betweene the parties, and a verball confe∣rence also betweene the Queene Mother, and the Prince, yet such was the ambition of the Grandies, that it was impossible to find out any meanes of composition. But the King of Nauar being dead, who perhaps would not haue suffe∣red them to proceed to an open warre, the Queene resoluing to regaine obe∣dience The Low Countries doe itate France. with armes, demanded aide of all the Princes. And because the peo∣ple of the Low Countreys did learne, by this example, to bee more contu∣macious, and obstinate, the Kings authority diminished euery day, and could not be repaired by the Gouernours. And the King refused to goe thither to oppose his person against the ill disposition of the people, and the dessignes of the Grandies, as Granuel, the chiefe in that Gouernment, had giuen him counsell▪ For that wise King knew how dangerous it was to be contemned to his face, and doubted that, in stead of gaining Flanders hee should make it more contumacious, and, in the meane while, loose Spaine. But he thought The Queene mother resu∣seth the Spa∣nish armie. that by subduing the Frenchmen, who rebelled against their King, hee might make an absolute prouision against the contumacie of his owne. Subiects. And therefore he offered the Queene great assistance of men and money, suf∣ficient to subiect the whole Kingdome vnto her. But the Queene refused the men and demanded the money, knowing that if she had receiued a Spa∣nish armie, she should haue beene forced to gouerne France, not according to her owne intrests, but of the King of Spaine. Yet taking a middle course, she receiued sixe thousand men, with which, and with her owne forces, con∣ducted by the Constable, and the Duke of Guise, the battell was made the sea∣uenteenth day aforesaid, in which three thousand Hugonots; and fiue thou∣sand Catholiques were slaine, and the Generals on both sides Conde, and the Constable taken prisoners. Neither of the armies was discomsited, by venue of the Lieutenants on both sides, Guise for the Catholiques, and Colignie for the Hugonots. The Queene did make Guise the Generall, which did not de∣terre Collignie from maintaining his armie, preseruing the places he possessed, and making some progresse also. For this victorie (for so it was called, though it deserued not the name) thankes were giuen to God in Trent, by all the Fathers assembled together making a procession & singing a Masse, Franciscus Belcarrus Bishop of Metz, made an Oration also, in which, relating all the storie of the confusions of France, since the death of Francis the second, and the successe of the last war e, Solemnities are vsed in Trent for the victory in France. hee gaue the praise of all that was well done to the Duke of Guise only. Hee said Martin Luther was cause of all those troubles, who, though but a little sparke, had raised a great fire, first in Germanie, and afterwards in all the Pro∣uinces of Christendome, except Italie and Spaine. Hee exhorted the Fathers to assist the Christian common-wealth, because they onely were able to ex∣tinguish that flame. Hee told them that this was the sixe and twentieth yeere since Paul the third began to heale this disease, by intimating the Councell there; which was first deferred, then dissembled, and finally cele∣brated with diuers factions, vntill it was transferred to Bolonia, where there were many dilations, and greater contentions, and more bitter factions then before. Afterwards it was recalled to Trent, and, by reason of the warres dissolued. Now that they were come to the last, there was no more place for dissimulation, because the Councell would either reconcile the whole world, or cast it headlong into an infallible ruine. Therefore it was fit that the Fathers should not regard their priuate interests, nor haue particular de∣signes, nor speake in fauour of others, in regard the cause of religion was in question, which will be vtterly ouerthrowne, if they cast their eye vpon any thing besides. This libertie of speach hee tempered with flatterie, first to∣wards the Pope, then towards the Emperour, kings of the Romanes, and of Polonia. He passed to the commendations of the Queene Mother of France, and of the King of Portugal, and, in the end, exhorted them to reforme the Ecclesiasticall discipline. The Cardinall of Loraine, hauing receiued newes of the imprisonment of the Prince; was very glad, particularly for the honour of his brother, and de∣sired the more to returne quickly into France, to assist him in the Court and in the Kings Councell, and to raise himselfe also one degree higher, in regard Nauar and the Constable, to whom hee was neccessarily to yeeld, were both taken away. The Pope was full of suspicion for the iourney to Ispruc, which the Em∣perour The Pope is troubled that the Emperour will goe to Ispruc. had published, thinking hee would not goe thither without great designes, and without assurance to effect them. Hee beleeued hee had se∣cret intelligence with France and Spaine, but knew not to what ende, but onely in generall, that it was a plot against him. Therefore hee resolued to goe in person to Bolonia, to send eight or tenne Cardinals to Trent, to make greater alliance with the Italian Princes, and to confirme the Prelates his ad∣herents in Councell, vntill bee could finde some occasion to dissolue or sus∣pend it. And o hinder all treaties in Trent of reforming the Court, hee laboured much himselfe in that businesse. Hee reformed the Rota, publi∣shing a Briefe, dated the seuen and twentieth of December, in which he or∣dained, that no Audit r should proceede to a definitiue, howsoeuer the case might be plaine, before he made the proposition to the whole Colledge, with∣out 1563 PIVS 4. FE INAND.—ELIZABETH. CHARLES 9. PHILIP 2. consent of the parties; that the sentences propounded in writing, should be produced within fifteene dayes; that the causes of the Auditors themselues, or of their kinsfolke vnto the second degree, or of any of their familie, shall not bee heard in the Rota, that the parties shall not bee forced to receue an Aduocate; that no decision shall bee made against those which bee printed, except two thirds of the voyces doe consent: that they shall bee bound to re∣mit euery cause which seemeth to bee criminall. In the same Bull hee made also a taxe for moderation of fees. Hee reformed likewise by other Bulls, pub∣lished the first of the next Ianuarie, the signature of iustice, the tribunals of Rome, the office of the Friscall Aduocate, ordaining what fees they should haue. But the vsuall extorsions were so farre from being redressed by those prouisions, that by transgressing the new orders, they learned to violate the olde which were in some vse. The Courtiers in Rome thinking the Catholikes in France had gotten an absolute victorie, and that the Hugonots were reduced to nothing, were ex∣ceeding glad. For beleeuing that France had obtained that by Armes which it expected from the Synode, and there being no further regard to bee had of Germanie, which protested against it, they thought that all causes of holding the Councel were ceased, so that it might be suspended or deferred, and them selues deliuered from feare, which had increased euery weeke, by reason of the nouities which happened in Trent. But the Pope made no great mat∣ter of it. For being informed that the Catholike forces were not augmen∣ted, nor the Hugonots diminished, and that this battell would giue occasion to treate a peace, which could not bee without his preiudice, nor with∣out giuing matter of more nouities in Trent, hee was more afraide and troubled then before. And the yeere 1562. ended thus; a congregation in Trent hauing beene helde the thirtieth of the moneth, in which it was resolued to prolong the Session, and appoint a day for it within fifteene dayes. The yeere 1563. began in Councell with the presentation of the articles, of reformation made by the French Ambassadours, which seemed very hard to the Legates and all the Papalins; especially in those particulars in which 1563 The Articles of reformati∣on. they would haue the Rites of the Roman Church altered, and in which the emoluments and profits, which the Apostolike Sea receiued from other Churches, were touched. The Ambassadors added the vsuall Appendix, not to call it a protestation, that if their propositions were not imbraced, they would prouide for their necessities in France. The Legates were sure the Pope would bee vexed heerewith, in regard of the promise made vnto him, that they would not treat in Councell of the Annats, and other pecum∣arie Rites; but friendly compose the matter with him. Therefore they thought it necessarie to send them to him by a Prelate, and to informe The Bishop of Viterbois sent to the Pope. his Holinesse. And they elected the Bishop of Viterbo, as being well in∣structed in the affaires of France, where hee had beene Nuncio many yeeres∣and in the designes of the Cardinall and French Prelates of the Coun∣cell, with whom hee had conuersed since their arriuall. The Car∣dinall of Loraine, informed heereof, perswaded them to doe so, and himselfe gaue him instructions, to speake with the Pope. The Bi∣shop was so nimble, that howsoeuer the Cardinall held that hee was sent vnto him for a spie, and an obseruer, yet hee carried himselfe so well, that he gained the confidence of him and the Ambassadours, without losing that which the Pope and Legates had in him. The Prelate went with in∣struction to represent to the Pope all the difficulties which the Legats found, and to bring backe a resolution how they should gouerne themselues in e∣uery particular. Hee had instructions from Loraine to desire his Holinesse to take in good part that which was desired by the King for the necessitie of his Kingdome, and by them to execute the commands of his Maiestie, and to offer his endeuours to accommodate the differences of the instituti∣on of Bishops, and of residence, which held the Councell employed in small matters. The Emperours ministers, seeing the Reformation of the Frenchmen, and considering the Proheme, thought they were noted to haue but small authoritie. They complained to the Legates that the Articles of reforma∣tion, mentioned by the Emperour and by them, had not been proposed, though they had giuen copies of them, sent them to Rome, and spread them throughout Trent; desiring they may bee put together with those of the Frenchmen. The Legats excused themselues, in regard of the libertie which the Emperour by letters, and themselues by word of mouth had giuen them, to propose and omit what seemed them good, adding, that they did expect a fit time, and that indeede the Frenchmen had not found a good conie∣cture, while the differences of the two Canons doth continue, which giueth much trouble to his Holinesse. The Amdassadours were not so satisfied, saying, there was a great difference betweene omitting all, and a part; and betweene deferring, whiles in the meane space things are concealed with due respect, and diuulging them, and putting them in derision. And Simo∣neta replyed, that it was hard to discerne which were fit to bee proposed, but easie to know which were to bee omitted, in the end they were content to expect what the Pope would say to the French propositions, so that after∣wards theirs might bee proposed. The French Prelates had consented, in ge∣nerall termes, to the Articles belonging to Rites, and to the grieuances of Bi∣shops, which in their secret thoughts they did not approoue, because they beleeued that, in the discussion of them, they should haue the Spaniards, and many of the Italians their opposites; but seeing they were sent to Rome, they were afraid that the Pope opposing those which touched his reuenues; would yeeld to the others, and by composition be content to giue way to those which were preiudiciall to them, to auoyde others which concerned his owne interest. For this cause they made secret practises with the other Prelats, perswading a moderation; which being done after the French fa∣shion, without much caution, was knowne to the Ambassadours. There∣fore Lansac assembled them all, and reprehended them sharpely, for daring to oppose the will of the King, Queene, of the whole councell, and of the Kingdome. Hee exhorted them, not onely not to labour against, but to promote the Kings determination. And the admonition was very ri∣gorous. But before wee relate the negotiation in Rome, it will not bee amisse to declare the substance of the French proposition, which presently was prin∣ted in Ripa and Padua, and conteined: That the Ambassadours had de∣termined long since, in performance of the Kings command, to propose to the Councell the things conteined in that writing; but the Emperour ha∣uing proposed almost the same things, not to importune the Fathers, they had expected to see what the Pope would resolue concerning the proposi∣tions of his Imperiall Maiestie. Now hauing receiued a new commande∣ment from the King, and seeing the instance of the Emperour deserred lon∣ger then they thought, they resolued not to make any more delay, not desiring any thing singular, or separate from the residue of Christendome; and that the King, expecting that esteeme should bee held of his proposi∣tions, doth notwithstanding referre the iudgement and knowledge of them all to the fathers. The points were foure and thirtie. 1. That Priests The French propsitions. should not bee ordained before they were old, and had a good testimonie of the people, that they had liued well, and that their carnalities and transgressi∣ons should bee punished according to the Canons. 2. That holy Orders should not bee conferred at the same time when the inferiour were, but that euery one should bee approoued in these, before hee ascended to those. 3. That a Priest should not bee ordained, before hee had a Benefice, or ministerie, according to the Councell of Chalcedon, at which time a pres∣byterall title without an Office was not heard of. 4. That the due fun∣ction should bee restored to Deacons, and other holy Orders, that they may not seeme to bee bare names, and for ceremonie only. 5. That the Priests and other Ecclesiasticall Ministers should attend to their vocation, not medling in any office, but in the diuine ministery. 6. That a Bishop should not be made but of a lawfull age, manners, and doctrine, that hee may teach, and giue example to the people. 7. That no Parish Priest should bee made but of approued honestie, able to instruct the people, celebrate the sacrifice, administer the Sacrament, and teach the vse and effect of them to the recei∣uers. 8. That no Abbat or Conuentual Prior should bee created, who hath not studied diuinity in some famous Vniuersity, and obtained the degree of Master, or some other. 9. That the Bishop, by himselfe, or by other prea∣chers, as many as are sufficient, according to the proportion of the Diocesse, should preach euery Sunday and Holyday, & in Lent, on fasting dayes, and in Aduent, and as often as it shall bee fit. 10. That the parish Priest should doe the same as often as hee hath auditors. 11. That the Abbat and Conuen∣tuall Prior shall reade the holy Scripture, and institute an Hospitall, so that the ancient Schooles and hospitality may bee restored to the Monasteries. 12. That Bishops, Parish Priests, Abbats, and other Ecclesiastiques, vnable to performe their charge, shall receiue Coadiutors, or leaue their Benefices. 13. That concerning the Catechisme, and summarie instruction of Christi∣an doctrine, that should be ordayned which the Emperour hath proposed to the Councell. 14. That no man should haue more then one benefice, ta∣king away the differences of the quality of persons, and of Benefices compa∣tible and incompatible, a new diuision not heard of in the ancient Decrees, and a cause of many troubles in the Catholique Church; and that the regu∣lar Benefices should bee giue into regulars, and secular to seculars. That he who now hath two or more, shall retaine that only which he shall choose within a short time, or shall incurre the penalty of the ancient Canons. 16. That to take away all note of auarice from the Clergie, nothing bee ta∣ken, vpon any pretence whatsoeuer, for the administration of holy things; but that prouision be made that the Curates, with two Clerkes or more may haue whereon to liue and mainetaine hospitality, which may bee done by the Bishops by vniting benefices or assigning tenths vnto them, or, where that cannot bee done, the Prince may prouide for them by or collections, imposed vpon the Parishes. 17. That in parish Masses, the Gos∣pel be expounded cleerely, according to the capacity of the people, and that the prayers which the Parish-Priest maketh together with the people bee in the vulgar tongue, and that, the sacrifice being ended in Latine, publike pray∣ers bee made in the vulgar tongue likewise, and that at the same time, or in other houres; spirituall hymnes or Psalmes of Dauid, approoued by the Bi∣shop, may bee sung in the same language. 18. That the ancient Decree of Leo and Gelasius, for the Communion vnder both kinds, bee renewed. 19. That before the administration of euery Sacrament, an exposition bee made in the vulgar, so that the ignorant may vnderstand their vse and efficacie. 20. That according to the ancient Canons, benefices may not bee conferred by the Vicars, but by the Bishops themselues, within the terme of sixe mo∣neths, otherwise that the collation may bee deuolued to the next Superiour, and, by degrees to the Pope. 21. That the Mandats of Prouision, expe∣ctatiues, regresses, resignations in confidence, and commendaes bee reuoked, and banished out of the Church, as contrary to the Decrees. 22. That the re∣signations in fauour be wholly exterminated from the Court of Rome, it be∣ing as it were an election of ones selfe, or a demanding of a successour, a thing prohibited by the Canons. 23. That simple Priories, from which the cure of soules is taken away, contrary to the foundation, and assigned to a perpetuall Vicar, with a small portion of tithes, or of other renenue, bee restored to their former state at the first vacancie. 24. That benefices, vn∣to which no office of preaching, administring the Sacraments, nor any other Ecclesiasticall charge is annexed, may haue some spirituall cure imposed vp∣on them, by the Bishop, with the councell of the chapter, or bee vnited to the next parishes, because no Benefice ought or can bee without an office. 25. That pensions bee not imposed vpon benefices, and those abolished which are imposed already, that the Ecclesiasticall reuenues may bee spent in maintaining the Pastors, and poore, and in other workes of pietie. 26. That Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction throughout the whole Diocesse be restored to the Bishops, all exemptions being taken away, but of the chiefe gouernors of the Orders and Monasteries subiect vnto them, and those who make generall Chapters, to whom exemptions are granted by a lawfull title, but yet with prouision that they bee not exempted from correction. 27. That the Bi∣shop may not vse iurisdiction, and handle matters of great weight concer∣ning the Diocesse, without the counsell of the Chapter; and that the Canons may reside continually in the Churches, bee of good conuersation, learned, and at the least 25. yeeres of age, in regard the lawes, not giuing them the free disposition of their goods before that time, they ought not to bee made counsellours to Bishops. 28▪ That the degrees of affinity, consanguinity, and spirituall kindred be obserued, or reformed, and that it may not bee law∣full to dispence therein, but with Kings and Princes, for the publique good. 29. That, in regard many troubles haue risen by meanes of images; the Sy∣node would make prouision, that the people may be taught what they ought to beleeue concerning them; and that the abuses and superstitions, if any be vsed in the worship of them may be taken away: and that the same be done concerning indulgences, pilgrimages, reliques of Saints, and of companies or con∣fraternities. 30. That the publike and ancient penance in the Catholike Church forgrieuous & publike offences, be restored and brought into vse as also fastings and other exercises of sorrow, and publique prayers to appease the wrath of God. 31. That excommunication be not decreed for euery sort of offence, or contumacie, but onely for the greatest, and in which the of∣fender doth perseuere after admonition. 32. That, to abbreuiate or quite take away suits of law for benefices, by which the whole Clergie is blemi∣shed, the distinction of petitorie and possessorie, newly inuented in those causes, may bee taken away, nominations of Vniuersities abolished, and a commandement giuen to Bishops, to giue benefices not to those that seeke them, but to those that auoid them, and are worthy of them: and their me∣rit will be knowen, if, after their degree receiued in the Vniuersitie, they shall haue spent some time in preaching, with the consent of the Bishop, and ap∣probation of the people. 33. That there beeing a suit for a benefice, an Economique may bee created, and arbitrators elected by the litigants; which in case they refuse to doe, that the Bishop may nominate, and that these may determine the controuersie within six moneths, and that no appeale may lie from them. 34, That the Episcopall Synods may bee held once a yeere at the least and the Prouinciall once in euery three yeeres, and the Generall, if th ere bee none impediment, euery tenth yeere. The first of Ianuarie Vintimiglia arriued in Rome, hauing made the iour∣ney The negoti∣ation of the Bishop of Vintimiglia in Rome in seuen daies. Hee presented the letters to the Pope, and declared his credence, relating the cogitations and diuers ends and humours which were in the Councell, and in what sort the Legates and other good seruants of his Holinesse thought the difficulties ought to bee managed. The Pope held a congregation the third day, and gaue account of the relation of Vintimiglia, shewed he was satisfied with the diligence and wisdome of the Legates, and commended the good will of Loraine, and gaue order that they should con∣sult vpon the point of the institution of Bishops, which did then especially presse them. The sixth day beeing the anniuersarie of his coronation, hee held another Congregation, in whch hee published Cardinals Ferdinando de Medici, and Frederico Gonzaga; the former to consolate his father for the mi∣serable death of another sonne, who was Cardinall also, and the other to gra∣tifie the Legate Mantue, and others of the family neerely allied to him by a marriage of the Legates nephew to a sister of Cardinall Borromeo. Yet the Pope did not omit to assist at the Consultation concerning the affaires of the Councell, and resolued to write to the Legates, that the Canon of the insti∣tution of Bishops should be thus composed: That the Bishops doe hold the principall place in the Church, depending of the Pope of Rome, and that they are by him assumed, in partem solicitudinis. And in the Canon concerning the Popes power, that it should be said; that he hath authority to feede and gouerne the Vniuersall Church, in place of Christ, from whom all authori∣tie hath beene communicated to him, as Generall Vicar: but in the Decree of doctrine they should enlarge the words of the Councell of Florence; which are, that the holy Apostolike Sea, and Pope of Rome hath the Primacie in all The Popes tter to the Legates. the world, and is Successor of Saint Peter Prince of the Apostles, the true Vi∣car of CHRIST, the Head of all Churches, Father and Master of all Christi∣ans, to whom, in Saint Peter, by CHRIST our LORD, hath beene giuen full power to feede, rule, and gouerne the Vniuersall Church: adding, that by no meanes they should depart from that forme, which hee was certaine would bee receiued. For the substance of it beeing taken out of a generall Councell, hee that should oppose, would shew himselfe to bee a Schismatike, and fall into the censures, which, by the prouidence of God, hauing alwayes beene inflicted vpon the contumacious, with the greater exaltation of the Apostolique Sea, hee was confident that the cause of the Church would not bee abandoned by the Diuine Maiestie, nor by the good Catholiques; and he hoped that in the meane space Vintimiglia would be returned, whom he meant to dispatch shortly, with more ample instructions. Hee resolued to goe to Bolonia, that he might bee neere, and so the better imbrace all occa∣sions of finishing or translating the Councell, which, before they could bee aduised to Rome, did vanish. Hee caused a Bull to be made, and in case hee should die before his returne, the Election should bee made in Rome by the Colledge of Cardinals. The Currier was not so soone dispatched for Trent with these Letters, The negotia∣tion of the Bishop of Viterbo. but Viterbo arriued with the French Reformation, and reuiued his trouble. The Pope, when hee heard it first read, was extreamely impatient, and brake out into these words, that the end of it was to take away the Datarie, the Ro∣ta, the Signatures, and finally all the Apostolique authoritie. But afterwards he was much pacified the Bishop, who told that his Holinesse might bee able to diuert some things, and moderate others, granting some few of them. He deliuered to him the instruction of Loraine; which was, that Princes de∣mand many things, to obtaine those of which they haue most neede; which do not much cōcerne the Apostolike Sea; as the vse of the Cup, vse of the vul∣gar tongue, and mariage of Priests, in which, if his Holinesse would giue sa∣tisfaction, it would be easie for him to receiue honour from the Councell, and to obtaine his wished end. Hee shewed that many of those Articles did not please the French Bishops themselues, who endeuoured to crosse them. The Pope vnderstanding these things, gaue order that the Articles should bee discussed in Congregation, and that Viterbo and Vintimiglia should bee present, to informe the occurrences at large; in which it was resolued, that the Diuines and Canonists should write concerning those propositions, and euery one deliuer his opinion in paper; And to make some diuersion in France, he gaue order to Ferrara to release those fourty thousand Crownes to the King, without any condition, and to tell him that the Proposition of his Ambassadours in Trent, were fit in many parts for the Reformation of the Church, which hee desired not onely to haue Decreed, but to bee put in exe∣cution also, yet so, as that he did not approue them all, because some were to the diminution of the Kings authoritie, who will bee depriued of the colla∣tion of Abbies, which is a great helpe to his Maiestie to reward his good ser∣uants; that the ancient Kings, hauing their Bishops too potent, in regard of their great authority, and con acious against the Regal power, did de∣sire the Popes to moderateiy; but now the Ambassadours by their proposi∣tions, would restore that licence, which the Predecessours of his Maiestie did wisely procure to be cur ed. Concerning the Popes authority, that it could not be taken away, because it was giuen by CHRIST, by whom Saint Peter and his successors were made Pastor of the vniuersall Church, and Admini∣strators of all Eclesiasticall goods, that, by taking away the pensions, he shall not haue power to giue almes, which is one of the most principall charges which the Pope hath throughout all the world; that faculty to conferre some Benefices hath beene by fauour graunted to Bishops, as Ordinaries, which is not fit to bee extended to the preiudice of the Vniuersall Ordinarie, which is the Pope, that as Tithes are due to the Church de iure diuine, so the tenth of the Tithes of all Churches is due to the Pope, that, for more com∣moditie, this hath been changed into Annats; that in case they were incom∣modious for the Kingdome of France, hee did not refuse to finde a temper, so that the right of the Apostolique Sea were in some conuenient manner, pre∣serued; but that, as he had often giuen him to vnderstand, this could not bee handled in Councell, nor by any but himselfe. In the end he gaue the Cardi∣nall charge, that hauing put all these things to the Kings consideration, hee should exhort him to giue new Commissions to his Ambassadours. The Pope sent also to Trent the censures concerning those Articles, made by diuers Cardinals, Prelates, Diuines, and Canonists of Rome, with order The Pope writeth again to the Pre∣lates. that they should deferre to speake of them as long as was possible; that the Article of Residence, and the abuses concerning the Sacrament of Order, might entertaine them many dayes; that when there was necessitie to pro∣pose them, they should begin with those which were least preiudiciall, as those which appertaine to manners, and doctrine, deferring to treat of those which concerne Rites, and Benefices; that, in case they were forced to pro∣pose them, imparting their obiections to the Prelates their adherents, they should put them in discussion and controuersie, and that, in the meane while, hee would giue order for that which he had resolued besides. And this hee wrote to the Legates. In the end of the moneth, he deliuered in Consistory, that the greatest Princes of Christendome did demand reformation, which could not be de∣nied them, neither by true reasons, nor by pretences: and therefore that hee was resolued to giue a good example, and, not to faile of his duetie, to begin with himselfe, prouiding against the abuses of the Datary, taking away the coadiutories, regresses, resignations in fauour, and that the Cardinals ought not onely to consent vnto it, but to publish it to all. The good intention of his Holinesse was generally commended. But some considered that those vses were brought in to take away greater abuses of manifest Simonie, and vn∣lawfull bargaines, and that they were to take care, that, remoouing those tolerable inconueniences, which indeede are but against the law of man, a gatebee not opened for the returne of those which are against the Law of GOD. The Cardinall of Trent said, that it would bee a great preiudice to take away the Coadiutories in Germany, because those Bishoprickes being an∣nexed to principalities, if Coadiutories could not bee had for both together, they must be had for the principalitie alone, and so the temporall would bee diuided from the spirituall, which would bee the vtter ouerthrow of the Church. The Cardinall Nauaggiero opposed the making of Germanie diffe∣rent, saying that the Dutchmen being the first that demanded reformation, they ought to bee comprehended at the last. Afterwards the Pope related how many enterprises were vsed in Councell against the priuiledges of the Romane Church, and spake of Annats, Reseruations, and preuentions. He said they were necessarie Subsidies, to maintaine the Pope, and Colledge of Car∣dinals, whereof as themselues were partakers, so it was fit they should la∣bour to defend them, and that hee would send a number of them to Trent, for this seruice. In which place, the next day after the arriuall of the currier, who brought The Canons sent from Rome. from Rome the canons of the institution, which was the fifteenth of Ianua∣rie, a day appointed to resolue on the certaine time of celebrating the Session, a Congregation was helde, and a resolution made to deferre the determina∣tion vntill the fourteenth of February. And a copy was giuen of the decrees of the Institution, with order that the Congregations should begin, in which they should bee discussed. And the care of reforming the decree of Resi∣dence was committed to Loraine, and Madruccio, together with those Fathers whom they pleased to take vnto them. In the congregations following the formes which came from Rome were, with facilitie, approoued by the Pa∣triarchs, and the most ancient Archbishops, but many difficulties were al∣leadged against them by the Spaniards, and more by the Frenchmen. This passage (That Bishops doe holde the principall place depending of the Pope) was que∣stioned, Doe not abso∣lutely please the Fathers. because the forme of speech was ambiguous, which ought to haue beene plaine. After long discussion, they were content to admit that it should be said, Chiefe vnder the Pope, but not dependent. Some also oppugned those words, that Bishops were assumed by the Pope into part of the charge, but would haue it said. That they were appointed by CHRIST, to take part of the cure: alledging the place of Saint Cyprian: There is but one Bishopricke, of Which euery one holdeth a part in solidum. And for the point of the authoritie to feed, and to gouerne the Church vniuersall, they said that the Church was the first, tribunall vnder CHRIST, to which euery one ought to bee subiect, and that Peter was addressed to it as vnto a Iudge, by the words of CHRIST Goe, tell it to the Church, and hee that will not heare the Church, let him bee accounted an Heathen, and a Publican. And they were content it should be said that the Pope hath authoritie to feede, and gouerne all the Churches, but not the Church vniuersall: wherein there was small difference in the Latin betweene Vniuersa em Ecclesiam, and Ecclesias vniuersas. And Granata said, I am Bishop of Granata, and the Pope Arch-bishop of the same Citie; inferring that the Pope hath the superintendencie of the particular Churches, as the Archbi∣shop hath of the Churches of his Suffragans. And it beeing alleadged, that this word, Church Vniuersall, was vsed in the Councell of Florence, it was re∣plyed, that the Councell of Constance, and Martin the fifth, in condemning the Articles of Iohn Wiglef, doth condemne the Article against the supremacy of the Apostolique Sea, onely for saying, that it is not set ouer all particular Churches. And here a disputation began betweene the Frenchmen and the Italians, these saying that the Councell of Florence was generall, that of Con∣stance partly approoued, and partly not, and that other of Basil schismaticall; A difference between the Italians and the French-men about the Councels of Constance, Basil, and Flo∣rence. and the others maintaining that those of Constance and Basil were generall Councels, and that this name could not agree to that of Florence, celebrated onely by some few Italians, and foure Grecians. Neither did they grant that the Pope had all the authoritie from CHRIST, no not with the restrictions and limitations, as he was a man, and in the time of his mortalitie; but they were content it should bee said that hee had authoritie equall to that of Saint Peter. This manner of speech was suspected by the Papalins, who saw they would make the life and actions of Saint Peter a paterne for the Pope, which would, as they said, reduce the Apostolique Sea to nothing; which they de∣fended to haue an vnlimited power, to be able to giue a rule for all emer∣gents as the times doe require, though contrary to the actions of all his pre∣decessours, and of Saint Peter himselfe. And the contentions were like to proceed further. But the Legats, to giue some intermission, to haue time to send the Pope the corrections of the Vltramontans, and receiue his command how to gouerne themselues in the businesse, that they might set another matter on foot which might make this to be forgotten, returned to the point of Residence, concerning which, Loraine and Madruccio had composed a forme, and presented it some dayes before to the Legats, who without con∣sidering of it, did approoue it, vpon the first sight. Afterward, hauing con∣sulted with the Canonists, they disliked one parte, in which it was said, that Bishops are bound by the commandement of God, to attend and watch ouer the flocke, personally; and doubting that those words would not please in Rome, they changed them, and so proposed the forme in congregation. Lo∣raine The Cardi∣nals of Lo∣raine & Trent are offended with the Le∣gats. and Madruccio were much offended with this mutation, and thought they were disparaged: and Loraine said, that hereafter he would take no more care in those things, nor treat with the Prelats, but onely giue his voice with modestie, and serue the Legats out of his loue, in any honest worke, as farre as he was able. And Madruccio did not forbeare to say, that there was a se∣cret Councell within the Councell, which did arrogate more authoritie. A Councell within the Councell The Legates perceiuing that euery thing turned against them, caused the Congregations to be omitted, Neither was this sufficient. For the Prelats Practises to dissolue the Councell. made priuate congregations amongst themselues, and the Legats continuall consultations. The Arch-bishop of Otranto, and others, who aimed at the Cardinalitie, of which they thought themselues assured if the Councell were separated, agreed together to oppose euery thing to make some tumult arise, and went passionately about, euen in the night also, making practises, and causing men to set their hand to papers. Which, though in effect, it pleased the Legats, yet, for the manner, it displeased the most of them, as beeing of bad example, which might giue scandall. And, on the contrary side, there wanted not those who desired a dissolution. But each partie expected an occasion that the cause of it might be attributed to the other: so that the sus∣picions did encrease on both sides. The Cardinall of Loraine complained to all, that plots were laid to dissolue the Synod, and especially to the Ambassadours of Princes, desiring them to write to their Masters, to perswade the Pope that the Councell may bee con∣tinued, that the practises might bee moderated, and the Fathers left to their libertie; saying, that otherwise a composition would bee made in France, that Of which the Card of Lo∣raine com∣plaineth. euery one might liue as hee would vntill a free Councell, as this was not, in which nothing could be resolued but as pleased the Legates, nor by the Le∣gates, but as the Pope listed; that he would be patient vntill the next Session, And of the want of liber∣tie in Coun∣cell. and then, if he sawe not things goe better, hee would make his protestations, and, together with the Ambassadours and Prelates, returne into France, to make a Nationall Councel, in which perhaps Germanie would concurre with them; a thing which would be displeasing vnto himselfe, in regerd of the dan∣ger that the Apostolique Sea would not bee acknowledged any more. In those dayes many Curriers passed betweene Rome and Trent. For the Le∣gates As did also the French-men in Rome aduised the frequent contradictions, and the Pope sollicited the propo∣sing of the Canons which he sent. And the French-men in Rome made the same complaint to the Pope, which Loraine had done in Trent, and vsed the same threats of a Nationall Councell, and the assistance of Germanie. But The Pope an∣swereth reso∣lutely. the Pope, who had been vsed to these things, said hee was not daunted with words, was not afraid of Nationall Synods, did knowe that the French Bi∣shops were Catholiques, and that Germanie would not subiect it selfe to their Councels. He said that the Councell was not onely free, but might be cal∣led licentious; that the practises of the Italians in Trent were not with his knowledge, but did arise because the Vltramontans would tread the Popes au∣thoritie vnder their feete; that hee hath had three good occasions to dissolue the Councell, but was willing it should continue, hoping that GOD would not abandon his Church, and that euery attempt against it would come vp∣on the head of the Innouators. Fiue Churches departed, and went to the Em∣perours Court, in the time of these confusions, to giue his Maiestie an ac∣count of the state of the Councel, and of the combination of the Italian Pre∣lates; and it was discouered that Granata, and his adherents, had desired him to perswade the Emperour to write to the Catholique King concerning the Reformation and Residence, that both in those, and in other occasions they might speake freely, according to their conscience; all which the Legates did beleeue to proceede from Loraine. And therefore, for a counterpoise, them∣selues also, a few dayes after, sent the Bishop Commendone to the Emperour, vpon pretence to excuse, and render the causes why the demands of his Maie∣sty could not as yet be proposed. And they gaue him commission to exhort the Emperour to be content not to demand of the Councel, bot of the Pope him∣selfe, those points of his petition which concerne his authoritie; as also other instructions, such as seemed them good. But Martinus Crame , Bishop of Vormis, Ambassadour of the King of Polonia to the Emperour, being come to Trent, vpon pretence to visit the Cardinall of Varmia, his ancient and in ward friend, there was a great suspici∣on that he was sent by the Emperor, to be an eye-witnes of the proceedings in Councell, and to relate them to him. All these things made the Legates doubt that the Councell would be dissolued, in some manner dishonourable to the Pope, and themselues, obseruing that it was desired by many, euen by some of the Papalins themselues, and that disorders were purposely procu∣red by others, to iustifie themselues, in case it should happen. They sent vn∣to all the Ambassadours a writing, which conteined the present difficulties, and desired their counsell. But the French Ambassadours answered, vpon this occasion, that which they desired to say many dayes before; that as the Councell was assembled to remedie abuses, so some were willing to make vse A free speech vsed by the French Am∣bassadours. of it to encrease them; that before any thing else were done, it was fit to withstand such manifest practises; that they were intolerable; that if they were remoued, and euery man had libertie to speake freely what hee thought a good accord would easily bee made; that the Pope was Head of the Church, but not aboue it; that he was to gouerne and direct the other mem∣bers, but not to domineere ouer the body; that to remedie the differences, it was necessary to follow the Councell of Constance, which hauing found the Church most disorderly by meanes of these opinions, did reduce it into tole∣rable tearmes. They sayd that one cause of discord was, because the Secre∣tary Seconded by the Imperi∣alists. did not set downe their voyces faithfully, so that the greater part seemed in the acts to be the lesser, and that could not be taken for a resolution which was concluded by the common opinion; and therefore that it was fit to ioyne another with him. The Imperialists said almost the same things, and were more earnest for another Secretary. The other Ambassadors stood vpon generall tearmes, desiring a continuation of the Councell, and an vni∣on of mindes. Things standing thus, Ventimiglia, redispatched by the Pope, returned The B of Ven∣timiglia re∣turneth to Trent. to Trent the nine and twentieth of Ianuary, who made a relation of his cre∣dence to the Legates, and by their aduice, sought to remooue two opinions spread in the Councell: one, that the Pope could not liue long; the other that hee desired a dissolution of the Councell. Hee testified the desire of his Ho∣linesse, that laying aside all contentions, they would labour for the seruice of God, and to end the Councell quickly. Hee spake of Bulls, of offices, and Be∣nefices, conferred vpon some of the kinsmen of some Prelats, and a Referen∣dariship to the Secretarie of the Portugal Ambassadour, and a very great pensi∣on to the sonne of the Spanish Secretary, and diuers promises to others, accor∣ding to their pretensions. But to the Cardinall of Loraine he made great com¦plements, in the Popes name, shewing that hee had confidence in him onely, for a sudden and a good end of the Councell. The comming of the Bishop of Asti, the Ambassadour of the Duke of The Legates vse perswasi∣ons to the-Card. of Lo∣raine by the B. of Siniga∣glia. Sauoy, gaue a fit occasion to reassume the Congregations: in which the Le∣gats designing, after they had receiued him, to renew the proposition of the Canons, they sent the Bishop of Sinigaglia to the Cardinal of Loraine, to pray him to finde a meanes that the french-men might bee satisfied. The Bishop shewed him, that those words (to gouerne the Church Vniuersall) were vsed in many Councels; that the other (that they were assumed into part of the care) Who answe∣reth. were vsed by S. Bernard, a writer much commended by his exce . The Cardinall answered, that the whole world was a spectator of the actions of the Councell; that the opinions and voices of euery one were knowne; that one ought to beware what he saith; that writings had beene sent out of France, against the opinions maintained in Trent in the questions that were handled; that many complained of him that hee proceeded with do much respect, especially in that matter, and in that other of residence; that hee not beene so earnest as he ought for the declaration that they are de diui∣no; that by a word vsed by an Author one cannot presently conclude what his meaning was, because the antecedents and consequents must bee consi∣dered, which may inferre a contrarie sence; that the wordes doe not trouble him, but the sence, which they would cano ; that to say the Pope hath au∣thoritie to gouerne the Church vniuersall, could not bee admitted by the French men by any meanes; that if it were proposed againe, the Ambassa∣dours would protest in the name of the King, and of the twentie French Prelates, from whom they should alwayes haue authoritie to doe it; that this would bee a preiudice to the opinion which is generally helde in France, that the Councell is aboue the Pope. Sinigaglia relating these things to the The French opinion is that y e Coun∣cell is aboue the Pope. Legates, in presence of many Italian Prelates, assembled to consult vp∣on this matter, made them feare that it was impossible to reduce the French-men. The comming of Martin Guzdellun of whom wee spake before, which Martin Guz∣dellun cōplai∣neth that the Councell is not free. happened at the same time, gaue great courage to the Spaniards; who, ha¦uing seene the passages of one day, said hee vnderstood plainly that the Coun∣cell was not free. He praised Granata, and said the King had a very good o∣pinion of him, and that if the Bishop like of Toledo were voide, hee would be∣stow it vpon him. Things being thus managed, sunday, the last of Ianuary came, when the generall congregation was intimated, to receiue the Ambas∣sadour of Sauoy, who made a short speach, to shew the dangers in which The Ambas∣sadour of Sa∣uoy is receiued in Congrega∣tion. the state of his Prince was by the vicinitie of the heretikes; and what charge hee was put vnto; he exhorted them to finish the Councell quickly, and to thinke of some meanes to make the contumacious receiue the Decrees there∣of, and offered all the forces of his master. In the answere made, the pietie and wisedome of that Duke was commended, and ioy giued the Ambassa∣dour of his comming. As the congregations continued, so the dissentions increased, and many demanded that the Decree of residence, composed by the two Cardinals, should bee proposed. But the Legats, seeing such variety of opinions, after long consultation amongst themselues, and with the Pre∣lates their friends, resolued it was not a time to make any decision, but neces∣sarie to interpose so great a delay, that the humors might coole of themselues, or some meanes might bee found to compose the differences, by prolonging the time of the Session. And to make Loraine agree to it, they went all to his house, to impart their purpose vnto him, and to demand his counsell and assistance. He complained of the conuenticles, and that they sought by vn∣lawfull meanes, to giue the Pope that which belongeth not vnto him, and to take frō Bishops that which is giuen them by CHRIST: he said he did not like the deferring of the Session so long though he was cō to yeeld vnto then; but prayed them, that in regard this was done to moderate ens minds, they would indeauor effectually to curbe those who were vnquiet and ambitious, In the congregation of the third of Februarie Mantua proposed, that, in regard Lent was neere, and that the holy dayes and feasts of Easter would fol∣low quickly, they would deferre the Session, vntill after that time, and, in the meane while, in the congregations, handle the reformation belonging to ho∣ly Order, and the matter of the Sacrament of mariage. But the proposition had much contradiction. The French and Spaniards, almost all, were earnest that a short prorogation should bee determined, and the matter of Order, to∣gether with its reformation, defined, before they treated of Matrimonie; to which opinion also some Italians did adhere. Others desired that the Ses∣sion should bee helde with the things decided alreadie, and in particular, that the Decree of recidence, composed by the Cardinals, should bee established: and some added that it was a great indignitie to the Councell, to haue the Session so often deferred, shewing there was a desire to violence the Fathers by wearinesse, to consent to those opinions, which they did not beleeue in their conscience; and therefore that it ought to bee held, and matters to bee resolued by the maior part. Some did not forbeare to say, that the distincti∣on of Session and generall congregation was not reall, and that, in regard No real diffe∣rence between a Session and a general con∣gregation. the persons, and the same number were in both, that ought to bee helde for decided in the one which was determined in the other. After great conten∣tion, the dilation vntill the two and twentieth of Aprill was concluded by the maior part, the others still contradicting. The Cardinall of Loraine, howso∣euer hee seemed to consent only to content the Legates, yet hee was willing, in regard of his owne interest; and that for foure causes. To know whether the Pope would recouer his health. To haue commoditie to treat with the Emperour. To vnderstand the Catholike Kings mind. And to see the successe of the affaires of France, that hee might resolue what to doe, vpon better ground. The next day the French Ambassadours made a great and long instance to the Legats, to handle the reformation, and to propose their petitions, be∣fore they beganne to treate of Matrimonie. They answered, that the Sy∣node was not to receiue lawes from others; that if things conuenient bee proposed by Princes, consideration is to bee had of them, at such times as the President shall thinke fit; that if, in their petitions, any thing bee found belonging to Order, they will propose it together, and afterwards the other things in their time. This answere not conten∣ting the Ambassadours, they desired, that if they would not make the proposition, they would bee content that themselues might doe it, or else giue them a plaine negatiue; adding, as it were in forme of a protestation, that, if they continued to giue these ambiguous answeres, they would hold them to bee equiualent to a scornefull negatiue. The Legates tooke three dayes time to giue a more precise answere, and, in the meane while, de∣sired Loraine to pacifie them, and to make them contented to expect vntill they had receiued an answere from Rome concerning the Articles which they had sent thither. The next day the Articles of Matrimonie were giuen foorth, to bee discussed The Articles to be disputed by the Diuines, the weeke following; in which a dispute presently arose be∣tweene the French and Spaniards, about precedence, which could not bee composed to the satisfaction of both parties, but by changing the order obserued vntill then, and by giuing precedence according to promotion vnto the doctorship. The Popes Diuines, opposed saying, that, the difficul∣tie beeing betweene the French and Spaniards, the prouision should bee made for them alone, and their place not altered, which was vndoubtedly the first. The Legates, saying they had reason, concluded that the first ranke, in which the Papalins were, should speake as formerly they had done, and the other A question of precedence betweene the French and Spanish Pre∣lates. three according to the order of promotion: wherewith the Frenchmen were not content, except one of them were put into the first ranke. The Spanish Secretary desired that a publique instrument might bee made of the decree, that it might appeare, that if any Frenchman speake before the Spa∣niards, it was not by reason of precedence of the Kingdome. In conclusion, to giue satisfaction to all, an instrument was made, and a grant to the French-men, that, after Salmeron, the first of the Popish Diuines, the Deane of Paris would speake, and the others of the first ranke should proceede according to promotion. The Articles were eight, vpon which they were to dispute whether they were hereticall, and ought to bee condemned. 1. That Matrimony is not a Sacrament instituted by God, but an humane introduction in the Church, and that it hath no promise of grace. 2. That the Parents may make voide secret marriages, and that those which are so contra∣cted are not true marriages, yea, that it is expedient that hereafter they should bee made voide in the Church. 3. That it is lawfull, in case the wife bee diuorced for cause of fornication, to marrie another, in the life time of the former, and that it is an error to make a diuorce for any cause but fornica∣tion. 4. That it is lawfull for Christians to haue many wiues, and that the prohibition for marriage in certaine times of the yeere, is a tyrannie, which proceeded from the superstition of the Gentiles. 5. That Matri∣monie ought to bee preferred before chastitie, and that God giueth more grace to those that are married then to others. 6. That the Priests of the West may lawfully contract Matrimonie, notwithstanding the vow of Ec∣clesiasticall law, and that to say the contrary is to condemne Matrimonie, and that all those who haue not the gift of chastitie, may marrie. 7. That the degrees of consanguinitie, and affinitie, mentioned in the eighteenth of Leuiticus, ought to bee kept, and neither more nor lesse, 8. That inabi∣litie to carnall copulation, and ignorance in the contract of mariage are onely causes to dissolue Matrimonie contracted, and that the causes of Matrimony doe belong to Secular Princes. Of which Articles that they might briefly speake, they were diuided into foure parts, according to the foure rankes of Diuines, and two appointed for each. The Bishop of Renes, Ambassadour of France to the Emperour, arri∣ued in Trent, who, hauing treated with Loraine, that Cardinall went to the Legates, and told them, that, euer since his departure out of France, hee hath had commission from the King to goe to the Emperour, which hee would doe within a few dayes, because he would bee in Ispruc, and because Renes was come to fetch him. He gaue an account also of the iourney to the Pope by letters, in which hee touched the manner of the proceeding of the Ita∣lians in Councell; adding, that if they so continued, hee would pray God that hee might doe some thing for his holy seruice. They had talked of this iourney a moneth before, and therefore when it was published, the suspici∣ons were not so great as if it had not been foreseen. All men assured them∣selues, that it was to make a combination concerning the Councell, and, particularly, to bring in the vse of the Cup; and the rather, because the Car∣dinall had said to many Prelates, vpon diuers occasions, that the Emperour, Discourses a∣bout the Car∣dinall of Lo∣raine his go∣ing to Ispruc. Kings of the Romanes, and of France, would neuer leaue to make petitions for Reformation, vntill they had obtained the vse of the Chalice, though they were to remaine two yeeres in Councell; but that fauour beeing gran∣ted, they would easily bee quieted, and that to giue satisfaction to those Princes, was the best meanes to retaine those Kingdomes in obedience; that it was impossible to obtaine it of the Pope, in regard of the opposition of the Cardinals, who abhorred the grant; that it was not hitherto obtained in Councell, because the businesse was not well mannaged, and that there was hope, that vsing good meanes, it might bee gained. But those who did more attentiuely marke the Cardinals proceedings, obserued a great va∣rietie in his speaches, For sometimes hee said, that, in case matters were not resolued, hee should bee forced to depart at Easter or at Whitsuntide; some∣times, that hee would remaine in Trent two yeeres; sometimes proposing meanes to dispatch the Councell, and sometimes taking courses to make it euerlasting; manifest arguments, that as yet hee knew not his owne inten∣tion. And they suspected his cautelous proceeding, which did argue a de∣sire to iustifie his reasons by Art, and make his cause honest. And conside∣ring that in Ispruc would bee the King of the Romanes, the Duke of Baua∣ria, the Arch-Bishop of Salzburg and the Arch-duke Ferdinand, it was thought that this conference must needes produce some nouities; especially in re∣gard of the small satisfaction which the Councell had hitherto giuen the Emperour, and of the vnion, in all matters betweene France and him. And it might bee thought also that the King of Spaine, so neere vnto him in blood, would adhere to that partie; and the rather, because it was diuulged, that, by his letters of the eight of Iune, hee had giuen commission to the Count of Luna to hold intelligence with the Emperour, and the King of France, in matters of reformation and libertie of the Councel. In these dayes Friar Felicianus Ninguarda, Proctor of the Archbishop of Salzburg, presented the letters of that Prince, and made instance, that the Proctors of the Bishops of Germanie might giue voice in Congregations; affirming, that, if it were granted, other Bishops of Germanie would send Proctors, if otherwise, both himselfe and others would depart, because they would not bee idle. It was answered, that consideration should bee had of it, and a resolution taken ac∣cording to right. And they gaue an acount hereof to Rome, and would not resolue so much as this small particular without aduice from thence. But in regard of greater businesses in both places, there was no more speach of it. The ninth of February the first Congregation of Diuines was held, to dispute of Matrimonie. Salmeron spake in a very lofty stile; and concer∣ning the first Article, deliuered the vsuall sayings of the Schoolemen. For the second, hee alleadged the determination of the Councell of Florence, that Matrimony receiueth perfection only by the consent of the contractors, nei∣ther hath the Father; or any other, any authority ouer it. He defended; that they ought to bee condemned for heretiques, who attribute power to the father to make it void; that the authoritie of the Church was very greate con∣cerning the matter of Sacraments, that it can alter whatsoeuer is not of the essence; that the condition of publique and secret beeing accidentall, the Church had power therein. Hee shewed the great inconueniences of secret mariages, and innumerable adulteries which follow, and concluded that it was expedient to vse a remedie, by making them voide. He insisted much vpon this inextricable case; if, after matrimony contracted and consumma∣ted in secret, one doth contract in publique with another, from which be∣ing desirous to depart, and returne to the first lawfull wife, is forced by censures to remaine in the publique contract; the poore man is intangled on both sides, either in perpetuall adultery, or in censures, with scandall of his neighbour. The next day the Deane of Paris followed; who spake copiously out of schoole doctrine, of the institution of marriage, of the grace which is re∣ceiued in it, and of condemning him that doth affirme it to bee an humane inuention. But vpon the article of clandestine matrimonie, hauing dispu∣ted, that they were true mariages and sacraments, he put a doubt whether the Church hath power to make them void. He contradicted the opinion, that there is authority in the Church ouer the matter of Sacraments; hee discour∣sed that the Church cannot make any Sacrament which is now lawfull, to be of no force for hereafter, hee exemplified in the consecration of the Eu∣charist, and went through all the Sacraments. Hee said the Ecclesiasticall power was not such, as to bee able to hinder all sinnes; that the Christian Church hath beene 1500. yeeres subiect to that which is now described to bee intolerable, and, (which is of no lesse importance) secret mariages haue beene accounted good euen from the beginning of the world, and no man hath euer thought to make a nullity in them, howsoeuer a publique contract hath often followed them; that it seemeth to bee insoluble, though it hath inconueniences on both sides; that the mariage of Adam, and Eue, a patterne for all other, was without witnesses. The opinion of the Doctor was not disesteemed; but the Italian Prelats were well pleased, that hauing once na∣med the Pope, hee gaue him this Epithite, with the exposition following, Gouernour and moderator of the Roman Church, that is, of the Vniuersall. And this did minister much discourse. For the Papalins concluded, that it might likewise be said in the Canon of the institution, that the Pope hath power to gouerne the Vniuersall Church. But the French men answered, that there was great difference betweene saying absolutely the Church Vniuersall, by which is vnderstood the Vniuersality of the faithfull, and saying the Roman Church, that is the Vniuersall, where the word Roman doth declare the word Vniuersall, inferring that hee is Head of the Vniuersall, and that all places, in which authority is giuen to the Pope ouer all the Church, are vn∣derstood disiunctiuely, not coniunctiuely, that is, ouer euery part of the Church, not ouer all together. The eleuenth of February, the French-men presented, in Congregation, a letter from their King, of the eighteenth of Ianuary; in which hee said, that howsoeuer hee was assured that the Cardinall of Loraine had imparted to the Synode, the happy victory against the enemies of religion, whose bold∣nesse hee hath and doth daylie oppose without respect of difficulty, or dan∣ger, euen exposing his owne life, as becommeth the eldest and most Chri∣stian sonne of the Church, yet himselfe was willing to make them partakers of the same ioy also, knowing that the wholesome remedies, for the euills Letters from the French K. are presented in Congre∣gation. which doe afflict Christian Prouinces, haue alwaies beene expected from Councels. He desired of them, in the name of CHRIST, an emendation and reformation, answerable to the expectation the world hath conceiued of them; and that as himselfe, and so many besides, haue consecrated life and blood to God in those warres, so they, in respect of their charge, would, And de Fer∣rieres maketh a speach. with sinceritie of conscience, be carefull of the businesse for which they are assembled. The letters being read, the Ambassadour de Ferrieres spake to the Fathers in this substance. That they hauing vnderstood by the Kings let∣ters, and before by the orations of the Cardinall of Loraine, and Bishop of Mentz the desolation of France, and some victories of the King, he would not relate them againe, but onely say, that the last, in regard of the forces of the enemie, was miraculous; whereof this is an argument, that being ouer∣come, yet hee doth liue, and committeth spoiles, running through the very bowels of France. But hee said, hee would turne his speech to them onely, who are the onely refuge of the miseries, without whom France will not bee able to preserue the tables of shipwracke. Hee exemplified in the armie of Israel, which had not beene able to ouercome Amalec, if the hands of Moyses, lifted vp to God, vnderpropped by Aaron and Vr, had not assisted the combar∣tants; that the King of France doth not want forces, a valiant Captaine the Duke of Guise, the Queene Mother, to mannage the affaires of warre and peace; that there is no other Aaron and Vr but themselues, to hold vp the hands of the most Christian King, with Decrees of the Synode, without which the enemies will neuer bee reconciled, nor the Catholiques preserued in the faith; that the humour of Christians now, is not the same as it was fiftie yeeres since; that all Catholiques are now like to the Samaritanes, who did not beleeue the womans relation of CHRIST, vntill they had inquired, and informed themselues; that a great part of Christendome doth study the Scriptures, and that the most Christian King, had giuen no instructions to his Ambassadours, but conformable to them, which they haue presented, to the Legates, who presently will propose them, as they haue promised, to them the Fathers, to whom the most Christian King doth principally send them, expecting their iudgement vpon them; that France doth not demand any singular thing, but common to all the Catholique Church; that if any maruell that the most necessary things are omitted in the propositions, hee may assure himselfe that they beginne with the smaller matters, that they may propose the other of more weight, in their fit time, as also to giue an easie execution to those; which if they the Fathers will not beginne before they depart from Trent, the Catholiques will cry out, the aduersaries will laugh, and will both say, that the fathers of Trent doe not want knowledge, but a will to doe good, and that they haue constituted good lawes, without touching them so much as with one of their fingers, but leauing the obser∣uation of them to their posterity. And if, in the demands exhibited, any doe thinke that some thing is contained conformable to the bookes of the aduersaries, he holdeth them vnworthy of answere: to those who hold them immoderate, hee will say nothing but that of Cicero, that it is an absurdity to desire temperance of mediocrity in the best things, which are so much the better, by how much the bigger they are. He said the holy Ghost did say to lukewarme moderators, that hee would cast them out of the body; that they should consider the small good the Church had, by the moderate reformati∣on of the Councel of Constance, and of the next, which he would not nomi∣nate, for feare of offending the eares of some, and likewise of the Councels of Ferrara, Florence, the Laterane, and the first of Trent, and how many sorts of men, how many Prouinces, Kingdomes, and Nations, haue since depar∣ted from the Church. Hee turned his speech to the Italian and Spanish Fa∣thers, that a serious emendation of Ecclesiasticall discipline was more for the good of them, then of the Bishop of Rome, the chiefe Vicar of CHRIST, and successour of Peter, who hath the highest authority in the Church of God, that their life and honour was in question, and there∣fore that he would say no more. In the answere to the letters and the Ambassadours Oration, the King The answere. was commended for his pious & noble actes, and exhorted, as if he had been present, to imitate his predecessors, turning all his cogitations to the defence of the Apostolike Sea, and preseruation of the ancient faith and to giue eare to those who preach vnto him the Kingdome of God, and not to those who preach a present vtility, and an imaginary tranquillity, which will neuer be a true peace; adding, that the King would surely doe so by the help of GOD, and in regard of the goodnesse of his disposition, of the Counsell of the Queene Mother, and of the Nobility of France; that the Synod will labour to define things necessary for the reformation of the Church vniuersall, and for the good and interests of the particular of the Kingdome of France. In the end of the Congregation, the Cardinall of Mantua proposed, that, to make a more quicke dispatch, the Congregations of the Diuines might bee held twice a day, and Prelates deputed to propose the correction of the abuses, in the matter of Order; and so it was decreed. The biting speach of the Ambassador did pierce the mindes of the Papa∣lins; and particularly, when hee sayd, that the Articles were addressed prin∣cipally to the Synode: Which words they thought were contrarie to the De∣cree, that the Legates onely should propose, a principall secret to preserue the Popes authoritie. But they were mooued more, that he said that he had deferred the proposition of more important matters, vntill another time, whence they drew great consequences, especially hauing alwayes feared, that they had not as yet discouered their desseignes, and that they did plot greater matters. As also to speake vnto the Italian and Spanish Fathers, as if they had other interests then the Pope, seemed a seditious manner of trea∣ting. The Ambassadour gaue a copie of his Oration; and by those words which hee spake of the Pope, That hee hath supreame authoritie in the Church of God, some Popish Prelates noted, that, in reciting them, hee had sayd, Who hath full power in the Church vniuersall; drawing them to the fauour of their opinion, and disputing that it was as much to haue full power in the Church-vniuersall, as to gouerne the Church-vniuersall, which the French-men did so much abhorre, in the Decree of the institution. But himselfe and the other Frenchmen affirmed, that hee had pronounced them as they were written. The next day Loraine went to Ispruc, to visit the Emperour and King of The Card of Loraine go∣eth to Ispruc. the Romans, accompanied with nine Prelats, and foure Diuines of the most learned amongst them. He had first a promise from the Legats, that while hee was absent, the Article of the marriage of Priests should not be handled, which he did instantly desire, that nothing might be determined or precon∣ceiued contrary to the commission which he had from the Kings, to obtaine of the Councell a dispensation for the Cardinall of Bourbon to marry. Car¦dinall Altemps also went to Rome, recalled by the Pope, to be Generall of the A dispensatiō to marry for the Card of Bourbon. Card. Altemps is to be ene∣ ll of the Popes army. souldiers, which he purposed to raise for his owne securitie. For vnderstan∣ding that leuies were made in Germany, by the Dukes of Saxony and Witten∣berg: and by the Landgraue of Hassia, howsoeuer it was generally beleeued, that all was done to assist the Hugonots of France, yet considering that the Count of Luna had written, that the Dutchmen had a great desire to inuade Rome, and did remember the Sacke sixe and thirtie yeeres since, hee thought it was wisedome not to bee vnprouided, and, for the same cause, reuiued the treatie of making a combination with all the Italian Princes, for the defence of Religion. In the congregations, the Diuines of the first ranke did vniformly agree in condemning the first article, & euery part thereof, as hereticall; as also the se∣cond saying that secret marriages were true mariages. But there was the diffe∣rence before metioned betweene Salmeron and the Deane of Paris, whether the Church hath power to make them void. Those who held the negatiue, stood vpon that ground, that the matter, forme, minister, & receiuer are essen∣tial in euery Sacrament, in which, as being instituted by God no Ecclesiastical power hath any thing to doe. They said that the Councell of Florence hauing declared, that the consent of the parties onely is necessary to Matrimonie, he that would inferre the word, Publique, for a necessary condition, doeth in∣ferre, that the consent only is not sufficient, and that the Councell of Florence hath failed in a necessary declaration. That CHRIST sayd in generall of Matrimonie, that man cannot separate that which GOD hath ioyned, mea∣ning both the publique and the secret coniunction. That in the Sacraments nothing ought to be affirmed without authoritie of the Scriptures, or tradi∣tion, neither of which doe allow this authoritie to the Church; yea, by tra∣dition wee finde the contrary, because all Churches in all nations through∣out the world are vniforme; in not pretending any power herein. On the contrary, it was said to be a cleere case, that the Church hath power to make any man vncapable of marriage, because many degrees of consanguinitie and affinitie are made hinderances by the Ecclesiasticall law onely; and like∣wise the impediment of a solemne vow was made by the Popes law; and therefore secrecie may bee likewise made an impediment, by the same autho∣ritie. The other part answered, that the prohibition by reason of kinred, is de iure diuino, as Saint Gregory the Pope, and many of his successors haue de∣termined; that matrimonie cannot be contracted betweene two, vntill it bee knowen in what degree of kinred they are ioyned, and if other Popes haue restrained this vniuersalitie to the seuenth degree, & afterwards to the fourth, this was a generall dispensation, as Diuorce was to the Iewes, and that a so∣lemne vow doeth hinder de iure diuino, not by the Popes authoritie. But Camillus Campeggius, a Dominican Friar, agreeing with the others, that no humane power is extended to the Sacraments, added, that whosoe∣uer can destroy the essence of the matter, can also make it vncapable of the Sacrament; that no man can make water not to be the matter of Baptisme, or some bread of wheat not to bee the matter of the Eucharist; but hee that shall destroy the water, turning it into ayre, or shall burne the bread, tur∣ning it into ashes, shall make those matters not to bee capable of the forme of the Sacraments: So in Matrimony, the ciuill nuptiall contract is the mat∣ter of the matrimoniall Sacrament, by Diuine institution; which beeing de∣stroyed, and made of no force, can no more bee the matter of it. Therefore it cannot bee said that the Church can make a nullity in the secret marriage, for so it would haue authority ouer the Sacraments, but it is true that the Church can nullifie a secret nuptiall contract, which, as beeing voyd, cannot receiue the forme of a Sacrament. This doctrine did much please the gene∣rality of the Fathers, because it was plaine, easie, and resolued all the diffi∣culties. But Antonius Solisius, who spake after him, did contradict, saying, the speculation was true, but could not bee applied to this purpose. For the reason, as it is meant of Baptisme and the Eucharist, that whosoeuer doeth destroy the water and the bread, doeth make them vncapable of the formes of those Sacraments, doeth not argue an Ecclesiasticall power, but a natu∣rall, so that whosoeuer hath vertue to destroy the water, may, by this meanes, hinder the Sacrament; whereby it would follow, that hee that can nullifie a ciuill nuptiall contract, may hinder Matrimonie, but the annullation of such contracts belongeth to the ciuill Lawes, and to secular Magistrates; there∣fore they must take heede, lest while they would giue authoritie to the Church to make voyd secret marriages, it bee not rather giuen to the secu∣lar power. Amongst those who attributed this power to the Church, it was disputed whether it were fit that the Church should vse it. And there were two opi∣nions. One, to make voyd all the secret, in regard of the inconueniences which ensue. The other, that the publique, made without consent of pa∣rents, in whose power they are, should be made voyd also. And these allead∣ged two reasons; one, that as great inconueniences did follow by these, in respect of the ruines which happen to families, by mariages vnaduisedly, con∣tracted by yong men, the other that the Law of GOD, commanding obe∣dience to parents, doeth include this case as principall. That the Law of GOD doeth giue this particular authoritie to the Father, to giue his daughter in marriage, as it plainely appeareth in Saint Paul and Exodus. That there are examples of the Patriarches in the olde Testament, all married by their fathers. That the humane ciuill Lawes haue esteemed the marriages voide, which haue beene contracted without the father. That as then it was iud∣ged expedient to nullifie secret marriages, so now, seeing that the Popes pro∣hibition is not sufficient, which hath forbidden them without addition of nullitie, there is more reason, in regard the malice of man will not obey the Law of GOD, which forbiddeth to marry without consent of parents, that the Synode should adde vnto it a nullity also; not because the Fathers haue authoritie to make voyde the marriages of children, which is heresie to af∣firme, but because the Church hath authoritie to nullifie both these and o∣ther contracts, prohibited by diuine or humane Lawes. This opinion, as ho∣nest, pious, and as well grounded as the other, pleased many of the Fathers. And so was the Decree framed, howsoeuer the publication was omitted, for causes which shall be related hereafter. But the Prelates did not for beare to discusse the controuersies about the Popes authoritie, and institution of Bishops. And the Frenchmen did perse∣uere in their resolution, not to admit the words, Church-Vniuersall, lest they should preiudice the opinion held in France, of the superioritie of the Coun∣cell; and if it had beene proposed, would haue made protestation of the nul∣litie, and departed. The Pope wrote it should bee proposed, whatsoeuer did The Legates dare not pro∣pose the Arti∣cle of the in∣stitution of Bishops. follow. But the Legats fearing that euery little stirre would be much out of season now the Emperour was so neere, wrote backe, that it was better to deferre it vntill the Article of Matrimony was finished. The seuenteenth of February Father Soto was the first that spake in the se∣cond ranke; who, vpon the Article of Diuorce, did first distinguish the ma∣trimoniall coniunction into three parts: the bond, the cohabitation, and the carnall copulation; inferring that there were as many separations also. He shewed at large that the Ecclesiasticall Prelate had authoritie to separate the married, or to giue them a diuorce, in respect of cohabitation, and carnall copulation, for all causes which they shall iudge expedient and reasonable, the matrimoniall bond still standing sure, so that neither can marrie againe; saying, that this was it which was bound by GOD, and could not bee loosed by any. He was much troubled with the words of Saint Paul, who granteth to the faithfull husband, if the vnbeleeuing wife will not dwell with him, to remaine separated. Hee was not contented with the common exposition, that the Matrimonie of the vnbeleeuers is not insoluble, alleadging, that the insolubilitie is by the law of Nature, as also the words of Adam, expounded by our SAVIOVR, and the vse of the Church, that married vnbeleeuers, af∣ter they haue beene Baptized, are not married againe; and that their matri∣monie is not different from that of the faithfull. And he refolued to approue the exposition of Caietan, that the separation, mentioned by Saint Paul, of the faithfull from the vnbeleeuer, is not vnderstood of the matrimoniall bond, and that it was a thing worthy to be considered by the holy Synod. For For∣nication he sayd, that it ought not to be a cause of separation from the bond, but from copulation, and cohabitation onely. But he found himselfe much intangled, because hee had said first that diuorce might bee granted in many respects, and for many causes, whereas the Gospel doth admit but one, which is Fornication, which must needes be vnderstood in respect of the bond, be∣cause Diuorce in the other two respects may haue many causes. Hee gaue many expositions of that place of the Gospel, without approcuing or dis∣proouing any of them; and concluded that the Article ought to be condem∣ned, because the contrary is made an Article of faith, by Apostolicall tradi∣tion, howbeit the words of the Gospel are not so plaine as that they are suffi∣cient to conuince the Lutherans. Concerning the fourth Article of Polygamic, hee sayd it was against the law of Nature, nor could bee permitted so much as to infidels, who are sub∣iect to Christians. Hee said the ancient Fathers had many wiues by dispen∣sation, and the others, who were not dispensed with by GOD, did liue in per∣petuall sinne. For the prohibition of marriages at certaine times, he briefly alleadged the authoritie of the Church, and the disconuenience of marriage with some times: and tooke this occasion to say, that no man had reason to be grieued, because the Bishop might dispence. Hee returned to the causes of Diuorce, and concluded that the world would not complaine of any of these things, if the Prelates did vse their authoritie with wisedome and cha∣rity. But the cause of all the euils is, because they doe not reside, but giue the gouernement to a Vicar, and oftentimes, without conuenient maintenance, so that Iustice is ill administred, and graces not well bestowed. And here hee spake at large of Residence, saying, that if it were not declared to bee de iure diuino, it was impossible to remooue those and other abuses, and to stoppe the mouthes of heretiques, who not obseruing that the euill commeth from the bad execution, lay the blame vpon the Popes constitutions; and therefore the Popes authoritie will neuer be defended well, but by Residence well esta∣blished; nor that well executed without the declaration, de iure diuino; and that they did notoriously erre, who thought it preiudiciall to the authority of the Pope, whereas it is the onely foundation to vphold and preserue it. Hee concluded, that the Councell was bound to determine the trueth, and spake with such efficacie, that he was willingly heard by the Vltramontans, but did displease the Papalins, who thought the time impertinent to touch that matter. And it gaue occasion to both parties to renew their practises. In the Congregation of the twentieth of February, Iohn Ramirez, a Fran∣ciscan Friar, after hee had spoken vpon the same Articles, according to the common opinion of Diuines, of the insolubilitie of mariage, sayd, that the same reasons which are betweene man and wife, are also betweene the Bi∣shop and the Church, and that as the man ought not to depart from his wife, so ought not the Bishop to depart from his Church, and that this Spi∣rituall bond was of no lesse force then the other which was corporall. Hee alleadged Innocence the third, who decreed that a Bishop could not bee trans∣ferred but by the diuine authoritie because the matrimoniall bond, which is lesse (sayd the Pope) cannot be dissolued by any power of man. And he was copious in shewing that the Popes authoritie was rather increased then di∣minished hereby, who, as a generall Vicar, might make vse of Bishops in an other place, where there was more neede: as the Prince may employ maried men for publique occasions, sending them to other places, without dissol∣uing the matrimoniall bond. And hee laboured to resolue the cotrary rea∣sons with much prolixity. In the Congregation of that afternoone, Doctor Cornisius said, that both these Aricles, the third and fourth, were hereticall, because they were con∣demned by many Decretals of Popes, and oxalted the authority of the Aposto∣lique Sea in many words, saying, that all ancient Councels, in the determi∣nations of faith, did perpetually follow the authority and will of the Pope: Hee exemplified in the Councell of Constantinople in Trullus, which followed the instruction sent by Pope Agathone, the Councell of Chalcedon, which did not onely follow, but worship the sentence of St. Leo the Pope; calling him also Ecumenicall, and Pastour of the Vniuersall Church. And after hee had alleadged many authorities and reasons, to show that the words of CHRIST, spoken to Saint Poter (Feede my sheepe) doe signifie as much as if hee had sayd, rule and gouerne the Church Vniuersall, he amplified very much the Popes authoritie in dispensations, and other things also. Hee brought the authori∣tie of the Canonists, that the Pope may dispence against the Canons, against the Apostles, and in all the law of GOD, except the Articles of faith. In the ende, hee alleadged the Chapter, Si Papa, that euery one ought to ac∣knowledge that his saluation doth depend, after GOD, vpon the holinesse of the Pope; amplifying these words, because they proceede from a Saint, and a Martyr, of whom no man can say that he did respect any thing but the trueth. At this time Commendone returned from the Emperour, whose negotia∣tion had not that successe as the Legats desired. For the Emperour, hearing his propositions, answered, that hee must haue time to thinke on them be∣cause of their importance, and that hee would consider of them, and answere The relation of Commen∣done returned from the Em∣perour. the Councell by his Ambassadour. Hee presently gaue an account heere of by letters, adding, that hee found the Emperour was grieued, and had an ill conceit of the actions of the Councell. Beeing now returned, hee sayd further, that by the words of his Maiestie, and by that which he had vnder∣stood by his counsellers, and obserued by their proceedings, hee thought hee knew that hee was so firme in that bad opinion, that hee feared some disorder would ensue. That as farre as hee could comprehend, the cogitati∣ons of his Maiestie were wholly bent to obtaine a great reformation, with such prouisions as that it might bee obserued; and that hee could certainely affirme, that he would not bee content that the Councell should be finished. That hee had vnderstood, that Delphinus, the Nuncio resident, hauing named suspension or translation, the Emperour was offended. Then hee related that there was an opinion in that Court that the Catholique King held in∣telligence with the Emperour concerning the affaires of the Councel, which hee did beleeue, because hee was assured that the Spanish Prelates had sent letters to him, in which were complaints against the proceedings of the Ita∣lians, and many Articles of Reformation, which 'tis like they would not dart to doe, except they knew their Kings minde. Hee said also, that the Count of Luna, when the Popes ministers had spoken of the too much li∣cence of the Spanish Prelates in their speaches, answered thus, what could bee done if those Prelates should say that they spake as they thought in their conscience; Hee layd moreouer, that in the conference hee will haue with the Cardinall of Loraine, hee was of opinion that they would conclude to make their petitions to bee proposed by the Ambassadours; and that his Maiestie had caused his Diuines to consult vpon them, and vpon other con∣ciliarie affaires; and that howsoeuer himselfe and the Nuncio Delphinus had vsed much diligence yet they were not able to learne the particulars. But within a short time they came to light. For the Iesuite Canisius do rote to the Generall Laynez, that the Emperour was ill affected towards the Councell and made many points to bee consulted on, that hee might resolde how to proceede, in case the Pope did prefeuere in refusing to propose the reformation or in giuing words contrary to his deeds. One point was, what Points consul∣ted on in the Emperours cour. the Emperours authoritie might be in Councell; and that Fredericus Staphi∣lus, Confessor to the Queene of Bahemia, was the chiefe man in the consulta∣tion. Canisius desired that one of the Societie might be sent vnto him, whom he might bring into the consultation, and by him discouer all. Whereupon Laynez hauing conferred with Cardinall Simoneta, they resolued to send Father Natalis, by whom all was discouered. And the Articles con∣sulted on were seuenteene. 1. Whether a generall Councell, lawfully In number 17 assembled by the fauour of Princes, may change the order determined by the Pope to be obserued in handling the matters, and bring in a new man∣ner. 2. Whether it be profitable for the Church that the Councell should handlematters, and determine them as it is directed by the Pope or Court of Rome, so that it may not doe otherwise. 3. Whether, if the Pope die in time of the councell, the Fathers thereof ought to choose another. 4. What the Emperours power is, the Sea of Rome being voyde, and the Coun∣cell open 5. Whether, when matters are handled concerning the peace and tranquillitie of the Christian common wealth, the Ambassadours of Princes ought to haue a deciding voice, howsoeuer they haue it not concer∣ning matters of faith. 6. Whether Princes may recall their Orators and Prelates from the councell, without imparting it to the Legats. 7. Whe∣ther the Pope may dissolue or suspend the Counsel without the participation of Princes, and especially of the Emperour. 8. Whether it be fit that Princes should interpose, to cause more necessarie and expedient matters to be handled in Counsell. 9. Whether the Orators of Princes may ex∣pound to the Fathers in person, those things which the Princes commit vnto them, to be expounded. 10. Whether a meanes may be found, that the Fathers, sent by the Pope and Princes, may bee free in giuing their voyces in Councell. 11. What course may be taken, that the Pope and Court of Rome may not interpose in ordayning that which is to be handled in Coun∣cell, that the libertie of the Fathers may not bee hindered. 12. Whether a meanes may be found that no fraude, violence, or extortion bee vsed in deliuering the opinions of the Fathers. 13. Whether any thing may bee handled, bee it point of doctrine, or reformation of the Church, be∣fore it bee discussed by the learnell. 14. what remedie may bee found, if the Italian Prelates doecont inue their obstinacie in not suffering matters to be resolued. 15. What remedie may be vsed to him the con of the Italian Prelates, when the Popes authoritie is in question. 16. Now the practises may bee remoued which hinder the determination of the point of residencie. 17. Whether it bee seemely that the Emperour should per∣sonally assist in Councell. But a long and serious consultation was held in Rome, whether the pe∣titions A consultati∣on in Rome. of the French-men ought to be proposed? and they consideredred not so much the weight of the things themselues, as the consequences thereof. For obseruing what de Ferrieres had said in his Oration, that the petitions ex∣hibited were of the lighter sort, and that others remained of more weight, they coniectured that the French-men, hauing not made those demands be∣cause they desired to obtaine them, they aimed to make entrance by that way, to propose others which they had in their minde, and that, by these which they call light, the gate being opened, passage might not bee denied them what attempt soeuer they would make besides. For these and other respects it was resolued to write to the Legates, that, absolutely, they should not bee proposed, nor a negatiue giuen, but onely a delay interposed; and the meanes they were to vse, were written also. At the same time, a writing of an vncertaine Authour came from Rome, in answere of those petitions, A writing published in Rome against the French petitions. which immediately was spread in Trent, and in the Emperors Court. And it was beleeued in Rome, that, by these meanes, they had giuen a good coun∣terpoise to the instances of the French-men. But the Pope was more troubled with the nouitie at the Emperours Court to consult of matters so preiudiciall to him, knowing well that the Papall dignitie is preserued by the reuerence, and certaine perswasion of Christians that it cannot bee called into question, that when the world doeth begin to examine matters, apparant reasons will not be wanting to disturbe the best things. He obserued that his predeces∣sors had vsed potent remedies in like occasions, and that when the foundati∣on of faith is questioned, that precept, to resist the beginnings, taketh place. For as, in the breaches of riuers, if the smallest ruptures be not stop∣ped, the chanell cannot be kept full, so when there is but a small ouerture against the supreame authoritie, and not stopped, it is easily caried to an ab∣solute downefall. Hee was counselled to write a Briefe to the Emperour, concerning this his distaste, as Paul the third did to the Emperour Charles, about the Colloquies of Spira, and reprehend him for questioning those Ar∣ticles, as things that are most cleare, and in another Briefe to reproue the Counsellers, for perswading him to it, and to admonish the Diuines who haue assisted in the businesse, to seeke an absolution from the censures. But hauing thought well on it, hee considered that the state of things was not then as it was vnder Paul. First, because that disputation was publike, whereas this was priuate, and concealed of purpose that it might not bee knowne, so that hee might dissemble all notice of it, whereas if it should continue after his publike reprehension of it, hee should put himselfe into greater danger; that it was cōuenient for Charles to stand vnited with the Pope that he might not subiect himselfe to the Dutch Princes, whereas this Emperour is, as it were, subiect vnto them alreadie; finally that this remedie might bee deferred, because it would alwayes bee in season, but by dissembling a while, hee might obliquely make triall to hinder the resolution of the consultations which were made, by sending the Cardinall of Mantua to his Maiestie. The writing which went about against the petitions of the French-men, did not one displease them, who tooke it for an affront, but the Emperour Displeaseth the French-men, and the Emperour. also very much. And the Legates hauing receiued commission from Rome concerning them, were but ill satisfied, and thought that this was not to giue commission to Presidents of Councell, but aduertisments rather to ministers to make vse of intreaties by way of negotiation. They wrote backe onely to demand what they should doe, in case the Imperialists should make in∣stance to haue their petitions proposed: and they caused Gabriel Paleotto, Auditor of the Rota, to write a full information of the difficulties, which they sent. But the Cardinall of Mantua, in regard the Emperour had tolde Commendone, that hee would giue answere to the Councell by his Ambas∣sadour, thought it not conuenient to goe vnto him before they recei∣ued that resolution: besides, the Cardinall of Loraine being at the Emperors Court, and the effect of his negotiation not knowne, hee should be doubtfull in what manner to proceede. Vpon these reasons hee excused himselfe to The Card. of mantua wri∣teth freely to the Pope. the Pope, and besides wrote to him with his owne hand, that hee had not a face to appeare any more in Congregation, to giue wordes onely, as hee had done two yeeres together; that all the Ministers of Princes doe say, that howsoeuer his Holinesse doth promise much for reformation, yet seeing nothing to bee executed, they doe not thinke hee hath any in∣clination to it; who if hee had performed his promises, the Legates could not haue beene Wanting to giue satisfaction to the instances of so many Princes. Neither ought any to maruaile that this Cardinall, a Prince con∣uersant so many long yeeres in many great affaires, and of a most com∣pleate conuersation, should vse this passage with his Holinesse, it bee∣ing a thing naturall to men that are neere their graue, for some intrin∣ficall cause, vnknowen euen vnto themselues, to bee distasted with hu∣mane matters, and to neglect pure ceremonies; to which gaole hee was then very neere, there remayning but sixe dayes of his life from the date hereof. But in the Congregation, the last that spake in the second ranke was Adrian, a Dominican Friar; who, touching but lightly the matter in questi∣on, discoursed at large of dispensations, and, with Theologicall tearmes and formes defended the things mentioned by Doctour Cornisius, and speake of them, not without scandall. Hee sayd that authoritie to dispence in hu∣mane lawes, was absolute, and vnlimited in the Pope, because hee was su∣periour to them all; and therefore when hee did dispence, though without any cause, the dispensation was notwithstanding to bee held for good: that in diuine lawes he had power to dispence, but not without a cause. Hee alleadged Saint Paul, who saith, that the Ministers of CHRIST are the dispencers of the mysteries of God; and that to him the Apostle, dispensa∣tion of the Gospel had beene committed. Hee added, that howsoeuer the Popes dispensation concerning the Diuine Law bee not of orce, yet euery one ought to captiuate his vnderstanding, and beleeue that hee hath granted it for a lawfull cause, and that it is temeritie to call it into question. Then hee discoursed of the cause of dispensations; which hee reduced to pub∣lique vtilitie, and charitie towards priuate men. This discourse gaue oc∣casion to the French men to speake of the matter, with the ill satisfaction of the Papalins. The secondranke hauing made an end of speaking, for obseruation of the promise made to Loraine, not to handle the mariage of Priests in his absence, they changed the order, and made the fourth ranke speake next. Iohn Ʋer∣dun, handling the seuenth Article of the degrees of affinitie and consangui∣nitie, passed immediatly from it, and came to the matter of dispensations, and seemed to haue none other aime, then to contradict Frier Adrian, labou∣ring to weaken the Popes power. First hee expounded the places of Saint Paul, That the Ministers of CHRIST are the dispensers of the mysteries of God, and of the Gospel, and said the glosse was contrary to the text. For the place doth not prooue a dispensation, that is, a disobligation from the Law, but a publishing and declaring the diuine mysteries, and the word of God, which is perpetuall, and remaineth inuiolable for euer. Hee granted, that in humane lawes a dispensation might lie, in regard of the law-makers imper∣fection, who could not foresee all cases, and, making generall lawes, must needes reserue power to him that gouerneth the Common-wealth, because of Sundrie occurrences, which may bring acceptions in particular matters. But where God is the Law-giuer, from whom nothing is concealed, and by whom no accident is not foreseene, the law can haue no exception. There∣fore the law of God and Nature ought not to be called a written Law, which in some cases ought to bee expounded, and made more gentle, but all that Law is euen equitie it selfe. In humane lawes, in which some cases by rea∣son of particular accidents, if they had been foreseene, would not haue been comprehended, a dispensation may well bee granted. But the dispencer cannot, in any case, free him that is bound, and if hee denie a dispensation to him that deserueth it, the partie refused shall notwithstanding remaine without all obligation. That the world hath conceiued a wrong opinion, that to dispence, is to bestow a fauour, and that the dispensation is requisite to be giuen, as any other part of distributiue iustice to bee exercised; that the Prelate doth offend if hee giue it not to whom it is due. And, in summe, he said, that when a dispensation is desired, either the case is such, as, if it had been foreseene, it would haue been excepted, and here there is an obligation to dispence, or would haue been comprehended, though it had been thought on by the Law-maker, and to this the power of dispensing is not extended. Hee added that flatterie, ambition, and auarice haue perswaded, that to dis∣pence is to bestowe a fauour, as the master would doe to his seruants, or one that giueth of his owne. The Pope is not Lord, and the Church a seruant, but hee is seruant of him who is spouse of the Church, and by him set ouer the Christian familie, to giue, as the Gospel saith, to euery one his owne mea∣sure, that is, that which is due vnto him. And, in conclusion, hee said, that a dispensation was nothing but a declaration or interpretation of the Law, and that the Pope could not, by dispencing, vnbinde any that was bound, but declare onely to him that is not bound, that hee is exempted from the Law. The last day but one of February, the Cardinall of Loraine returned to Trent, hauing remained fiue dayes in Ispruc, which hee sent in continuall The Card. of Loraine re∣turneth. negotiation With the Emperour, King of the Romans, and their Ministers. At his returne he found the Popes letters to him; in which hee said, that hee did desire a reformation should bee made and not deferred any longer, and that they might haue time to labour therein, the words of the decree of Order, which were in difficultie, should bee taken away. The Cardinall did publish these letters purposely in Trent, where it was generally knowen that the Legates had a contrary Commission. But the Papalins vsed all diligence to find what businesse the Cardinall had by meanes of those who were in his company and in particular, what resolution was taken concerning the seuenteene Articles; and the rather because Count Fredericke Massei, who came from Ispruc but the day before related that the Cardinall was euery day in priuate conferrence, more then two houres, with the Emperour and King of the Romans. The Frenchmen made show to vnderstand nothing of the Articles, and said that none of the Dutch diuines had treated with the Cardinall but Staphilus onely who presented him with a booke which hee had made in matter of residence, and Canisius when hee went to see the Colledge of the Iesuites, that the Diuines had not spoken to the Emperour, but onely when going to see the Librarie, they ouertooke him and the King his sonne, who demanding what they thought concerning the grant of the Cup the Abbat of Claneual, who was first of them, answered, that he thought it could not be granted; then the Emperour, turning to the King of the Ro∣manes, spake this verse of the Psalme in Latin; Fourtie yeeres haue I endured this generation, and haue alwayes found them to erre in their will. But Loraine, in visiting the Legates, said nothing, but that the Emperour was very well and zealously affected towards the Counsel desiring it might produce some fruit, and that if occasion were, he would assist in person, and goe to Rome also, to pray the Pope to haue compassion of Christendome, and to suffer a reformation to be made, which might not diminish his autho∣rity, to which he bare exceeding great reuerence nor would haue any thing spoken of touching his Holinesse and the Court of Rome. But to others in priuat he said, that if the Councel had beene gouerned with that wisedome as was conuenient, it would haue had a sudden and prosperous end; that the Emperour was resolued, that a good and a strong reformation should bee made, which if the Pope would continue to crosse, as hitherto he had done, some great scandall would ensue, that his Maiestie purposed to goe to Bolo∣nia, in case the Pope came thither, with desseigne to receiue the crowne of the Empire; and such other things. It is not to bee doubted, that the Cardinall spake of the affaires of the The points on which the Cardinall of Loraine treat∣ed with the Emperour. Councel, and informed the Emperour of the disorders, and deliuered his o∣pinion what remedies might be vsed, to oppose the Court of Rome, and the Italian Prelates of Trent, to obtaine in Councel the communion of the Cup, the mariage of Priests, the vse of the vulgar tongue in holy matters, the re∣laxation of other precepts of positiue law, a reformation in the Head and the members, and a meanes to make the Decrees of the Councel indis∣pensable, and how in case they were not able to obtaine, they might haue a colourable occasion to iustifie their actions, if, of themselues, they should make prouision for the necessities of their people, by making a Nationall Councel, assaying also to vnite the Germans with the French-men, in mat∣ters of religion. But this was not his negotiation onely. For he treated a mariage also, betweene the Queene of Scotland and the Arch duke Ferdi∣nand, the Emperours sonne, and another betweene a daughter of his Maie∣stie and the Duke of Ferrara, and to find a meanes to compose the diffe∣rences of precedence betweene France and Spaine, which things, as dome∣sticall, doe touch Princes more neerely then the publique. After the returne of Loraine the Congregations continuing, Iames Alan, a French Diuine, entred likewise into the matter of dispensations, and sayd, that authority to dispence was immediately giuen to the Church by Christ, and by it, distributed to the Prelates, as neede required, according to times, places, and occasions. Hee extrolled the authority of Generall Councels, which represent the Church, and diminished the Popes, adding that it be∣longeth to the Generall councel to enlarge or restraine it. The second of March, the Cardinall of Mantua, hauing beene sicke a few, The Cardinal of Mantua di∣eth. daies, passed to another life; which was cause of many mutations in Coun∣cel. The Legates did presently send aduice hereof to the Pope; and Seri∣pando, who remained prime Legate, beside the common letter, wrote in par∣ticular, that he would be glad his Holinesse would send another Legate, his superiour, to gouerne the Councel, or remooue him: but in case hee would The three Le∣gats remay∣ning write to the Pope. leaue him prime Legate, he told him he would proceed as God should inspire him; and that otherwise it were better to remoue him absolutely. The Cardinall of Varmia wrote a part also, that his Church had great neede of the presence of a Pastor, and that the communion of the Cup was brought in, and other notable abuses, desiring leaue to goe thither, to make prouision heerein, and that generally in all Polonia, there was neede of a person, who might keepe the residue of the people in obedience, saying, he should doe the Apostolique Sea more seruice in those quarters, then he could by remaining in the Councel. But Simoneta, desirous that the weight of the whole busi∣nesse should lie vpon his shoulders; hoping to guide it with satisfaction of the Pope and his owne honour, considering that Seripando was satiated with it, and not inclined to gouerne it, and that Varmiense was a simple man, fit to beled, he wrot to the Pope, that, the affaires of the Councel being not in a good state, euery nouity would shake it much, and therefore did thinke fit to continue without sending other Legates, and promised a good issue. In those dayes aduice came from Rome, that a cause of the Bishop of Sego∣uia, which was to be proposed in the Rota, was refused, and that one of the Auditors told his Proctor, that the Bishop was suspected of heresie. This made a great stir, not onely amongst the Spaniards, but all the Oltramontanes also, complaining that, in Rome, calumnies and infamies were raised against those who did not absolutely adhere to their wils. The fourth of March the third ranke beganne to speake: and, for the fift Article all agreed that it was hereticall, and to be condemned; and so they did of the sixt. Yet there was a difference, because some said, that how∣soeuer the Orientall Church and the Occidentall did differ, in regard this did admit to Priesthood and holy Orders continent persons onely, and that did admit maried men, yet no Church did euer grant that Priests might marie and that this is so by Apostolicall tradition, not by reason of vow, or of any Ecclesiasticall constitution; and therefore that, absolutely, they were to bee condemned for heretiques, who say it is lawfull for Priests to marie, though they restraine not themselues to the West, nor make mention of vow or law of the Church. And others said, that no disp could bee granted for Priests to marry for any cause whatsoeuer. Some said that matrimonie was forbidde to two sorts of persons, for two causes. To secular Clerkes, in re∣gard of holy Orders, by Ecclesiasticall law; to regulars, in regard of their solemne vow. That the prohibition of mariage by constitution of the Church, may bee taken away by the Pope, or, in case that remaine in force still, the Pope may dispense with it. They alleadged the examples of those who haue bene dispensed with, and the vse of antiquitie, that, if a Priest did marry the mariage was good, but the man was separated from the Ministery; which hath continually beene obserued vntill the time of Innocenntius the 2. who, first of all the Popes, ordained that there should bee a nullity in the ma∣riage. But with those who are bound to continencie by solemne vow, this beeing de iure diuino, they said the Pope could not dispense. They alleadged Innocentius the third, who affirmed that the obseruation of chastity, and the abdication of the proprietie of goods, doth so cleaue to the bones of Munkes, that the Pope cannot dispense therein. Then they added the opi∣nion of Saint Thomas, and of other Doctors, who affirme, that the solemne vow is a consecration of the man to God, and that, because no man can make a thing consecrated to returne to humane vses, no man likewise can make a Munke to returne to the power of marrying, and that all Catholique Wri∣ters doe condemne Luther, and his sectaries of heresie, for saying that Munkship is an humane inuention; and doe affirme that it is by Apostolicall tradition: whereunto the opinion that the Pope may dispense, is directly contrary. Others did maintaine that the Pope might dispense, euen with these also, and marueiled at those, who, granting the dispensation of simple vowes, did deny that of solemne, as if it were not most cleare, by the determination of Boniface the eigth, that euery solemnity is de iure positiuo, making vse also of the examples of things consecrated to prooue their opinion. For as a thing consecrated, remaining so; cannot bee imployed in humane vses, but yet the consecration may bee remooued, and the thing made prophane, whereby it may lawfully returne to a promiscuons vse, so a man consecrated to Munk∣ship, remaining so, cannot marry, but, the Munkship and consecration, ari∣sing from the solemnity of the vow, which is de iure positiuo, being remoued, hee may, without any hinderance, liue as others doe. They brought pla∣ces of Saint Austin, by which it doth manifestly appeare, that in his time, some Munkes did marry. And howsoeuer it was thought they offended in it, yet the mariage was lawfull, and Saint Austin reprehendeth those who did separate them. They said moreouer it was necessary to dispense with Priests, or to take away the precept of continencie. And the Duke of Bauaria hauing sent to Rome, to demaund of his Holinesse the Communion of the Cup, requested also that married men might haue leaue to preach, vnder which name all the Ecclesiasticall ministery was vnderstood, exercised by Parish-Priests, in the cure of soules. Many reasons were alleadged to perswade the graunt, which were resolued into two; scandall giuen by incontinens Priests, and want of continent persons, sit to exercise the ministerie. And the famous saying of Pope Pins the second, was in the mouth of many that Priests were by the Occidentall Church forbid to marry for good reason, but there was stronger reason to restore mariage to them againe. Those of the contrary opinion said, that it is not the part of a wise Physician to cure one disease; by causing a greater, that if Priests are in continent and ignorant, yet the Priest-hood is not to bee prostituted to d And here many Popes were alleadged, who did not permit it; because they said it was impossible to at∣tend to the flesh and to the spirit, and that was a carnall estate; that the true remedie was to make prouision of continent and learned per∣sons, by education, by diligence, by rewards and punishments, and, in the meane time, not to ordaine any but m n of an approoued life; and, for do∣ctrine to cause Homilies and Catechismes to bee printed in the Dutch and French tongues, composed by learned and religios men, to bee read to the people out of the booke by the learned Priests, by which meanes the Parish Priests, though vnsufficient, might satisfie the people. The Legates were blamed for suffering this Article to be disputed; as being dangerous; because it is plaine that married Priests will turne their affections The principal reason why Priests are forbid to marry. and loue to their wiues and children, and by consequence to their house and Country, so that the strict dependance which the Cleargie hath on the Apo∣stolike Sea, would cease, and to grant mariage to Priests, would destroy the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie, and make the Pope to bee Bishop of Rome onely. But the Legats excused themselues, that, to please the Bishop of Fiue Chur∣ches, who had made this request in the name of the Duke of Bauaria, and of the Emperor also, & to make the Imperialists not to be so earnest in the mat∣ter of reformation, which was of more importance, they were forced to yeeld to this disputation. The French-men, perceiuing it was the more common opinion that the mariage of Priests might bee dispensed with, consulted together whether it were fit to demaund a dispensation for the Cardinall of Borbon, as Loraine and the Ambassadours had commission. Loraine was of opinion, that it was not fit; saying, that, without doubt, the Councell would hardly be perswa∣ded that the cause was reasonable, and vrgent, in regard it was not necessary he should haue posterity, the King being young, there being two Brothers, and other Princes of the blood, Catholikes: and for gouerning, during the minoritie of the King; hee might doe it, remaining in the Cleargie, that, in regard of the differences betweene the French and Italians, about reforma∣tion, and the authoritie of the Pope and Bishops, their opposities would dili∣gently oppose this demaund; that it was better to go to the Pope, or expect a better occasion, and that it was sufficient for that time, to prouide that no doctrine should be established in preiudice of it. Some thought that Loraine did not like, in his priuate opinion, that Borbon should marry, in regard it might cause an emulation, or diminution of his house; but others did not thinke it probable. First, because by this meanes all hope was taken from onde, whom he ist sted much more; yea that hee did much desire that Borbon should returne to the secular state, that himselfe might be the prime France, and that, if a Patriarke were made, as hee much desired, hee might vndoubtedly be the man, which could not bee, if Borbon did still re∣maine in the Cleargie. The Pope hauing receiued aduice of the death of Mantua, and consulted with his inward friends, thought it necessary to send other Legats, who be¦ing new, not intangled with promises and treaties, might follow his instru∣ctions with more ease. And therefore the seuenth of March, the second Sunday in Lent, not intimating a Congregation, as hee was wont, but the Two new Legates are created. Cardinals being assembled in the Chamber where they put on their robes to goe to the Chappell, according to the vse, hee stayed, and, excluding the Courtiers, caused the doores to bee shut, and created Legats, the Cardinals, Iohn Morone, and Bernardus Nauaggerus, that, by the perswasions of Princes or Cardinals, he might not bee forced to name others that pleased him not. The Pope thought to doe it secretly; but it came to the eares of the French-men, and the Cardinall of Bordissiera spake to the Pope before hee went out of the Chamber, and told him many reasons, that, in case hee would create new Legats, hee could not commit the charge to a more worthy person then the Cardinall of Loraine. But the Pope being resolute, and displeased that the matter was not so secretly carried, answered freely, that the Cardinall of Loraine came to the Councell as Head of one of the pretendent parties, and that he would depute those who were Neutrals, and without interests. The Cardinall being about to reply, the Pope made haste away, and went downe out of the Chamber so fast, that there was not time to make answere. The Congregation being ended, the Pope let the Cardinals goe to the Chappell, and himselfe returned to the Chamber, because hee would not bee in cere∣monie, when he was so much vexed with the words of that Cardinall. The ninth of March newes came to Trent, that the Duke of Guise, bro∣ther The Duke of Guise is slains vnder Orli∣ence. to the Cardinal of Loraine, as he returned from the trenches vnder Or∣lience, was shot, by Iohn Poltrot, a priuat Gentleman of the reformed religion, and sixe dayes after died, to the great discontent of all the Court, and that, after he was wounded, he exhorted the Queene to make peace, and said open∣ly, that he was an enemie to the kingdome who was against it. The Homi∣cide being interrogated of his complices, named Coligni, the Admirall, and Theodore Beza, and afterwards excused Beza, but perseuered in accusing the other. Yet hee wauered so, that one could not tell what to beleeue. The Cardinall aduertised hereof, prouided a greater guard then formerly hee had: and, being exceedingly grieued for the death of his brother, who was so deare vnto him, first of all hee wrote a consolatorie Letter to Antoniette de The Card. of Loraine wri∣teth to his mother. Borbon, their common mother, full of exquisite conceits, to bee compared, or rather as his friends said, to bee preferred to those of Seneca, in the end whereof hee said, hee was resolued to goe to his Church of Reims, and to spend the residue of his life in preaching the word of GOD, instructing the people, bringing vp his brothers children in Christian pietie, and neuer to cease performing of these offices, but when the Kingdome, for some publike affaires, had need of his paines. The Letter was no sooner parted from Trent, but the Citie was full of copies of it, rather importunely offered by his friends, then requested; so hard it is for the affection of selfe loue to bee quiet, though in the occasion of greatest sorrow. After this, the Cardinall, thinking of the change of things by this variation, altered all his desseignes. And this caused a change also in the affaires of the Councell. For hee being the man which the Emperour and Queene of France had, vntill then, whol∣ly employed, they were forced, for want of so fit a minister, to bee more re∣misse in their purposes, and to proceed more slowly. But it happeneth in humane affaires, as it doeth in fortunes at Sea, where, the windes being cea∣sed, the waues doe tumultuate, for some houres after. So the great weight of the affaires of the Councell could not easily be appeased, in regard of their former impetuous motion. But it is certaine, that the death of that Duke The death of the Duke cau∣sed a great al∣teration in the Councell. was a great beginning of the quiet which succeeded some moneths after, especially after the death of the other brother, great Prior of France, and the peace made with the Hugonots, and the instances of the Queene to the Car∣dinall to make his peace with the Pope, and returne into France: of which things wee will speake in due place. Hereby the Cardinall saw, that the af∣faires as they stood, would not bee profitable, neither for himselfe, nor his friends. The death of Guise was lamented both in Trent and Rome, because euery one thought hee was the onely maintainer of the Catholique partie in the kingdome of France; neither did it appeare what other person could suc∣ceed, in supporting that weight; the rather, because euery one was daunted by the example of his death. The French Prelats in the Councell were trou∣bled in minde, because they vnderstood that an accord was treated with the Hugonots, who pretended, amongst other things, that the third part of the Ecclesiasticall reuenues should bee employed for maintenance of the refor∣med Ministers. In this varietie of businesses, and perplexitie of mindes, Fiue-Churches returned to Trent, and, with the other Ambassadours of the Emperour, had audience with the Legats, and presented to them the Emperours letter which The Empe∣rours letters to the Legats and the Pope. hee brought, and the copy of another written by his Maiestie to the Pope. They all made request for the reformation, but in generall termes onely, and very remissely. The Emperours letter to the Legats, did signifie his desire to see some fruitfull proceeding of the Councell, for which it was necessary to remooue some impediments, whereof hauing written to the Pope, he prayed them to labour in Councell, and to vse perswasions to his Holinesse, that the future progresse might be for the seruice of GOD, and benefite of Christen∣dome. In his letter to the Pope hee said, that, hauing dispatched great busi∣nesses with the Electors, and other Princes and States of Germanie, nothing was more precious vnto him, being Aduocate of the Church, then to promote the affaires of the Councell; that hee was come to Ispruc for that cause, where, to his griefe, he vnderstood that matters did not proceed as he hoped, and as the publike tranquillitie did require; that hee feared, if better order wer not taken, the Councell would end with scandall of the world, and laughter of those who had forsaken the obedience of the Church of Rome, who would bee incited to retaine their opinions with greater obstinacie, there had beene no Session held of a long time; that while Princes did la∣bour to vnite the aduersaries differing in opinions, the Fathers came to con∣tentions, vnworthy of them; that there was a fame that his Holinesse meant to dissolue or suspend the Councell, perhaps mooued thereunto by the pre∣sent state thereof: but that his opinion was to the contrary. For it had beene better it had neuer beene begun, then left vnperfect with the scandall of the world, contempt of his Holinesse, and of the whole Clergie, preiudice of this and other future generall Councels, losse of that small remainder of Ca∣tholiques, and opinion of the world, that the end of the dissolution or sus∣pension was onely to hinder the reformation; that, in the intimation of it, his Holinesse did desire his consent, and of other Kings and Princes, which he did, in imitation of his predecessors, who alwayes haue thought it neces∣sary, for many respects; that the same reason doth conclude, that it cannot be dissolued or suspended without the same consent. And he exborted him, not to hearken to those who would haue him to dissolue it, a thing shamefull and vnprofitable, which vndoubtedly would be a cause of Nationall Councels, so much abhorred by his Hol. as contrary to the vnity of the Church, which as they haue been hindred by Princes to preserue the Popes authoritie, so they cannot be denyed, or deferred any more. Hee perswaded him to maintaine the libertie of the Councell, which was impeached principally by three cau∣ses. One because euery thing was first consulted of at Rome, another, because the Legats had assumed to themselues onely the libertie of proposing, which ought to be common to all; the third, because of the practises which some Prelats, interested in the greatnesse of the Court of Rome, did make. He said, that a reformation of the Church being necessary, and the common opinion being, that the abuses haue their beginning and growth in Rome, it was fit, for common satisfaction, that the reformation should bee made in Councell, and not in that Cittie. And therefore desired his Holinesse to be content that the demands exhibited by his Ambassadours, and by other Princes, might be proposed. In the conclusion, he told him, hee purposed to assist in Councell personally, and exhorted his Holinesse to doe the like. This letter was dispatched the third of March, and it gaue much offence With which his Holinesse is offended. to the Pope. For hee thought that the Emperour did embrace much more then his authoritie did reach vnto, and passed the termes of his Predecessors, men more potent then himselfe. But he was displeased more when hee was aduised by his Nuncio, that hee had sent copies of the same Letter to other Princes, and to the Cardinall of Loraine also; which could bee done to no other end, but to incite them against him, and to iustifie his owne actions. Besides, Doctor Scheld, great Chancellor to the Emperour, perswaded Del∣phinus, the Popes Nuncio in that Court, that he would be a meanes that the words, Ʋniuersalem Ecclesiam, might bee taken away, which did inferre the superioritie of the Pope aboue the Councell, saying, that these times did not comport they should be vsed, and that the Emperour and himselfe also did know, that Charles the fift, of happy memory, did hold the contrary opi∣nion in this article, and that they should take heed of giuing occasion to his Maiestie and other Princes to declare what they thinke . The Pope considered that Loraine also had written, that it was not to the difficultie of the words, Ʋniuersalem Ecclesiam, &c, and the aduice which came from Trent, that the Cardinall said, that neither himselfe, nor the French Prelats could endure them, that they might not an nize an opinion, con∣trary to all ance, which, when men came to speake plainly in the discussion of this point, would haue more fauorers then was beleeued, & that they were deceiued who thought she contrary; which shewed clearely, that hee had treated hereof at the Emperours Court. These things considered, the Pope thought fit to make a good answere, and to send about also, to iustifie him∣selfe. Therefore hee wrote, to the Emperour, that hee had called the Councell with the participation of him, and of other Kings and Princes, not because And answe∣reth the let∣ter thus. the Apostolike Sea had need, in gouerning the Church, to expect the con∣sent of any authority whatsoeuer, because hee had pleni ude of power from CHRIST; that all the ancient Councels haue beene assembled by authori∣ty of the Bishop of Rome, nor any Prince euer interposed, but as a meere exe∣cutor of his will, hee had neuer had any purpose either to dissolue or to sus∣pend the Councell, but hath alwayes purposed to giue a compleat end; for the seruice of GOD; that, by consulting Rome of the same matters which were disputed in Trent, the libertie of the Councel was not only not hindred, but promoted rather, that no Councell was euer celebrated in absence of the Pope, but that hee hath sent instructions, which the Fathers haue also followed; that the instructions doe still remaine, which Pope Celestinus sent the Eph sine Councell, Pope Leo to that of Chalcedon, Pope Agatho to than of Trullus, Pope Adrian the first to the second of Nice, Pope Adrian the se∣cond to the eighth generall Councell of Constantinople, that, for proposing in the Councell, it hath alwayes belonged to the Pope whensoeuer he hath bin present, yea, he alone hath resolued, and the Councell done nothing but ap∣prooue; that in absence of the Pope, the Legats haue euer proposed, or o∣thers, deputed by them; in conformitie whereof, the Councell of Trent hath determined, that the Legates should propose; that this is necessary for the keeping of order, in regard there would be a great confusion, if the Prelats, iltuously and one against another, might set on foote matters seditious, and in conuenient; that the Legaes haue neuer refused to propose any thing that is profitable, that the practises, made by dide s against the authoritie of the Apostolike Sea, hath much displeased him; that all the bookes of the Fa∣thers and Councels are full, that the Pope, successour, of Peter, and Vicar of CHRIST, is Rastor of the vniuersall Church, that many conuenticles and haue beene made in Trent, against this trueth, how soeuer the Church hath alwayes vsed this forme of speech, as his Maiestie might feel the place which he sent him cited in a paper inclosed, present A paper full of quotations. haue because his Legates, vsing bad g take occasion to speake against the libert of the Councell, had to bee contemned, so that the Councell might be that; for reformation, hee de it should and absolute, and hath continually solli ted his Legates to resolue vpon , concerning the Court, the world knew how any pro∣ with the diminution of his rents, and that, if any thing Would no it, that could not bee done in , being no informed well, instead of reforming, would more, that, in the meane while, hee desi ed to second it formation in other Courts also, which had no lesse neede of it, in the affaires of the Church onely, and that perhaps from the abuses therein the euill doth principally arise; that, concerning the petitions proposed by his Maiesties Ambassadours, and others, he hath alwayes written they should be examined and discussed, each of them in its fit time, and that an oder being instituted, and continued to handle in Councell matters of faith, and reformation of the abuses concerning them, both together, it could not be altered, without confusion and indignitie; that his Maiestie hauing touched diuers disorders of the Councell, had omitted the principall, and fountaine of the others, which is, that those who ought to receiue law from Councels, would giue it vnto them; that if the pietie of Constantine, and the two Theodosi j were imitated, and their examples followed, the Councell would haue had no diuision betweene the Fathers, and been in great reputation with the world; that he desired to assist personally in Councell, to remedie the disorders thereof, but in regard of his age, and of his important affaires, it was inpos∣sible for him to goe to Trent, and would not speak of translating it to a place whither he might goe for feare of giuing suspicion. The Pope thought that the interests of the Emperor and of France could not be vnited with his, and therefore could promise himselfe but little, and hope lesse of them. For they did not thinke of the Synode but for the inte∣rests of their estates, & therefore did desire nothing from it but what might giue satisfaction and contentment to their people, and in case they cannot obtaine it, to hinder the ending of the Councell, and so to keepe their sub∣iects still in hope. But these interests could not mooue the King of Spaine, whose people are Catholikes, and therefore he might conforme himselfe to his wil, without preiudice to his states, yea that it was good for him to stand vnited with him, that he might obtaine graces; and therefore he thought it necessarie to solicite him, with continuall perswasions, and to giue him hope of all satisfaction. And Lewis d' Auola did opportunely arriue in Rome, sent expresly by his Catholike Maiestie. The Pope honoured him aboue measure, lodged him in the palace, in the roomes formerly inhabited by Count Fre∣deric A Spanish Ambassador commeth to Rome. Boremeo, his nephew, and vsed him with all effectuall courtesie. The causes of his comming were, to obtaine of the Pope a prorogation for fiue yeeres more of the Subsidie of the Cleargie, graunted vnto him, and power to sell fiue and twentie thousand crownes of the Fees of the Churches. Hee had commission also to procure a dispensation of marriage betweene the Princesse, Sister of the King and his Sonne Charles, which, in Spaine, was thought easie, because many, euen priuate men, were dispensed with to mar∣rie the daughter of their brother or sister, which is as much as to take the sister of the father, Besides, Moyses and Aaron were borne of such a matri∣monie. For the mariage, the Pope said he would doe as much as his autho∣ritie would stretch vnto, and would cause the matter to be consulted on. But the Treatie did not proceede, in regard of the infirmitie of the Princesse which succeeded, and made her vnfit for marriage. Concerning the Sub∣sidie, and alienation, the Pope shewed a willing minde, but made difficulty to doe it while the Prelates were at charges in the Councell, promising to gratifie the King if hee would assist him to finish it, and to free him from it. For matters of the Councell, Don Lewis did not proceed farre in the first au∣diences, onely he offered to procure the preseruation of the Popes authori∣tie, and exhorted his Holinesse not to treat a league betweene the Catholikes, least the heretickes should doe the like, and France runne headlong to any ac∣cord with the Hugonots. In the meane while diuers assemblies were held in Trent: the Emperours Ambassadours called together the Spanish Prelates, in the house of the Arch-bishop of Granata, to perswade them to consent that the vse of the Cup might be granted in Councell, purposing to propose it againe: but they found them so auerse, that they were forced to bury it in silence. The Cardinall of Lo∣raine held many congregations with his Prelats and Diuines to examine the places, sent by the Pope to the Emperour, in the paper before mentioned, and by the Emperour to him, concerning the words, Vniuersalem Ecclesiam, to see whether they were iustly cited, and whether the true sence was giuen them, that they might, as they did, make another writing, in confutation of it. The Emperour gaue order that these places might bee imparted to the Spanish Prelates, that he might know their opinion; which Fiue Churches hauing done, when they were all assembled to this ende, Granata answered that his Maiestie needed not to haue taken such paines with them who doe receiue the Councell of Florence, but should aske the French-men, who receiue that of Basil. Vpon this occasion some of them, when Fiue Churches was gone from them, did perswade, that a letter should bee written to the Pope, to take from him the bad opinion hee had conceiued of them. But Granata refused, and said, it was sufficient that hee knew by their voyces that they were not opposite heerein; yet so, as it was not fit they should imitate the flatterie of the Italians. And hee vsed these very words. Let him restore vnto vs our owne, that wee may leaue vnto him more then is his; and it is not iust, that of Bishops wee should bee made his Vicars. Another day the Ambassadours of the Emperour and French King met to∣gether, to set downe an order that the Decree of residence, composed by the Cardinall of Loraine, might bee proposed: which neither they, nor Loraine could obtaine of the Cardinal of Varmia, and Simoneta, Seripando being sicke, and absent. In the congregation of the seuenteenth of March, one of the Diuines, fin∣ding opportunitie to digresse from the continencie of Priestes to residence, spent his whole large discourse therein. Hee brought authoritie and exam∣ples to perswade that it was de iure diuino, and to answere that obiection, that many Canons and Decrees doe command it, which needed not, if it were commanded by God. Hee vsed this conceit, that Ius diuinum is the foun∣dation, or pillar of residence, and Ius Canonicum the Edifice or roofe, and that as the building is ouerthrowne when the foundation is remooued, and as the roofe falleth when the pillar is taken away, so it is impossible to preserue re∣sidence with Ius Canonicum onely, and those who ascribe it onely vnto that, haue no other ayme then to destroy it. Hee brought the examples of an∣cient times, noting that residence was exquisitely obserued by all, before any Canons or humane Decrees were made, because euery one held that hee was bound by God. But since that some haue perswaded themselues, that there was no obligation but that which is deriued from humane Lawes, howsoeuer these haue often beene renewed, and fortified with penalties; yet all hath still growen worse and worse. The same day Cardinall Seripando dyed, to the great griefe of all the Pre∣lates, and of all Trent, hauing in the morning receiued the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which hee tooke out of his bed vpon his knees. After that hee re∣turned into his bed, and in the presence of fiue Prelates, and of the Secre∣taries of Ʋenice and Florence, and of all his familie, hee made a long Orati∣on The death of Seripando. in Latin, vntill his spirits did faile him; hee confessed his faith, wholly confortable to the Catholique of the Romane Church; spake of the workes of a Christian, of the Resurrection of the dead, of the affaires of the Coun∣cell, recommending the progresse of it to the Legates, and the Cardinall of Loraine; but striuing to set downe the meanes, his spirit did faile him, and he sayd, that GOD had forbid him to proceede further, but that his Diuine Maiestie would speake himselfe in time and place: and so passed, without saying any more. The Count of Luna wrote from the Emperours Court, to Martin Gusde∣lun, the Secretary, and sent a copy of a letter, written to him from the King, in which his Maiesty did aduise, that the Pope had complained to him of the Spanish Prelates; and howsoeuer hee beleeued that his Holinesse was not well informed, thinking that the Prelates would shew deuotion towards the Apostolique Sea, yet hee gaue order to the Count, that, at his comming to Trent, hee should cause them to fauour the Pope, as farre as their consci∣ence could permit, and so to carry themselues, that his Holinesse might not haue cause to complaine of him. And to this purpose the Count wrote also to Granata, Segouia, and Leon. The eighteenth of March, in which no Congregation was held, by rea∣son of the obsequies of Seripando, the French Ambassadours appeared so∣lemnely before the two Legates, and complained that, these eleuen moneths, since the first day of their arriuall in Trent, vntill then, they had made knowen the desolations of France, and the dangers of Christendome, for the differences of Religion, and declared that the most vnecessary and principall remedie was a good intire reformation of manners; and s moderation of positiue Lawes, and had alwayes receiued good hope, and gracious wordes, but could neuer see any effect of them; that the refor∣mation is auoyded, as much as is possible; that the greater part of the Fathers and Theologues are now more hard and seuere th , i yielding to the necessitie of the time; they prayed them to consider how many good men dyed, before they were able to doe any good worke for the publique seruice; whereof the Cardinals of M and Seripando were examples; desiring them to doe something for the discharge of their conscience, while they had ti The answered that they were displeased with this long deferring of matters and Seripando were cause; that themselues so great a weight, praying them to expect and N would presently arriue. They were with the the ther, because the Imp made instance would ly, expecting the negotiation of the Emperours Ambassadours in Rome, who together with Lewis , made request to the Pope, that a generall re∣formation of the whole Church in the Head, and in the members, might bee made not in Rome, but in the Councell, and also that the Decree, that the Legates onely might propose in Councell should be reuoked, as contra∣ry to the liberty of the Ambassadours and Prelates, in propounding what they thought profitable, these for their Churches, and those for their States. The negotia∣tion of the Ambassadors of the Empe∣rour & King of Spaine in Rome. This instance the Emperour the tight fit should be first made to the Pope and afterwards to the Councell. Notwithstanding, these Princes were not absolutely of one minde. For howsoeuer Don Lewis made the same demands apart, yet afterwards, hee de∣sired the Pope to perswade the Emperour not to seeke the communion of the Cup, and marriage of Priests, saying, that the King had giuen com∣mission to his Ambassadour to goe to Trent, and perswade that it should not bee spoken of, or, if it were, that the Spanish Prelates should oppose it. Hee exhorted the Pope to endeuour to winne the heretiques by gentlenesse, not sending Nuncij, but vsing the meanes of the Emperour, and of other Princes of authoritie, to accept the demands of the Frenchmen, and to leaue the Councell free, that all may propose, and no practises bee vsed in making the resolutions. The Popes answere to the Ambassadours was, that the de∣cree, The Popes answere. Proponentibus Legatis, should bee so expounded; that euery one might propose what he would, and that to the Legates, which parted lately, hee had giuen libertie to resolue all things, which might o urre in Councell, with∣out writing at all; that the reformation was desired by him, and that he had often made instance for it, and that, if the world would haue had it from Rome, it should haue beene done by this time, and put in execution also; but seeing they would haue it from Trent, if it were not effected, the cause ought to bee as ed onely to the difficulties which were amongst the Fathers, that hee desired to see an end of the Councell, and did procure and solli∣cite it, nor had euer any thought to suspend it; that, in conformitie hereof, hee would write to the Legates, and did write, that the Decree, proponenti∣bus Legatis, was made to take away confusion; but that his will was, that of the Prelates should bee hindered to propose what hee thought fitte and that they should dispatch the , according to the voyces of the Fa∣thers, without expecting any order from Rome. But this letter was to giue satisfaction, and not to worke any effect. For Morone, the prime Legate, Secret instru∣ctions giuen to Cardinall Morone. had instructions apart, to giue a to the orders also which should come from Rome. The Pope answered Don Lewis in particular, that hee had opened the Councell upon promise of his Maiestie that hee would protect it, and pre∣ rue the authoritie of the Apostoli Sea, but that he found hee was decer∣ted, in regard he had his Prelates, then from he was not pleased it should haue license, nor be in seruitude to those Princes, who preach liberty, and are desirous to command, that euery one made re∣quest to him for the libertie of the Councell, but hee did not know whether they had all well considered of what importance it would bee, if the Pre∣lates had the raines laid on the necke; that howsoeuer there were amongst them, some men excellent for integrity and wisedome, yet there were of those also, who wanted either one of them or both; all which would bee dange∣rous if they were not kept in order, that perhaps it did least of all concerne him to thinke of it, because, his authority being grounded vpon the promi∣ses of God, hee did trust in those; that Princes had more neede to beware, in regard of the preiudices which may ensue, and that, if the Prelates had such superfluous liberty, perhaps his Catholique Maiestie would haue cause to bee sorie for it, that, for reformation, the impediments did not proceede from him; that he would continue to deferre the demands of Princes concerning the communion of the Cup, and mariage of Priests, desiring his Maiestie to consider, that as hee dissented from others in these particulars, so in euery thing else there are some who make requests for it, and others who oppose. Hee concluded, that it was in the power of his Maiestie to see a fruitfull, and a sudden end of the Councell, from which so soone as hee was free, hee might promise himselfe all fauour from him. The twentieth of March, the Diuines made an end of the Articles of Ma∣trimony; and the Legates consulted priuately, whether it were good to pro∣pose the doctrine, and canons thereof in the congregations of the Fathers. But, considering that the French-men and Spaniards would oppose, and that greater controuersies might be raised then euer were, and that if they should propose the abuses onely, they should giue the Emperours and French Am∣bassadours fit occasion to enter againe into the matter of reformation, they were much perplexed what to doe. Ʋarmiense thought good to make triall, to accommodate some of the difficulties: but Simoneta▪ feared that some great preiudice might ensue, in regard of the instability of his colleague; and attributing the blame of all the disorders, which haue hapned in Coun∣cell, to the two Legates dead, who proceeding in the matter of residence ra∣ther according to their owne opinion, then the necessities of the Church, haue, by too much integrity, caused all the mischiefe, and sayd it was not fit to put themselues in danger of raising greater, and therefore did not consent that any of them should bee spoken of. Finally, they concluded to intermit all discussions, vntill the comming of the new Legates. In the meane time, The Cardinal of Loraine re∣solueth to goe to Venice. Loraine resolued to goe to Ʋenice, to recreate his mind possessed with griefe, for the death of his brother, the great Prior, which also had reuiued his for∣mer sorrow, for the death of the Duke, his other brother. The difficulties which were spoken of, were sixe. One concerning the The 6. diffi∣culties which trouble the Councell. Decree, made long before, that the Legates onely should propose. . Whe∣ther residence were de iure diuino. 3. Whether Bishops are instituted by CHRIST. 4. Concerning the authority of the Pope. 5. To ncrease the number of the Secretaries, and to hold an exact account of the Suffrages. 6. (Which was of most importance) concerning the generall reformation: which I was willing to repeate , as a recapitulation of that wherein the Councel hath beene troubled vntill this time, and a pro of the troubles which shall be related hereafter. The newes was now stale in Trent, of the instance made in Rome to the Pope. For the Emperours Ambassadours and the French, had published it should be done, and that afterwards they would make the same requests to the Councel. The Cardinall of Loraine, who was wont to speake variously, said, that if those Princes did receiue satisfaction, by proposing their petiti∣ons of reformation, and the reformation made, without diminution of the Popes authority, those instances would immediatly cease. And hee added afterwards, that the Pope might haue a good proceeding in the reformation, and a quicke dispatch of the Councel, if hee would declare himselfe plainely what points hee would not haue to bee discussed, that they might labour in discussing the others; by which meanes the contentions would be taken a∣way, which haue caused all the delayes. For some, who desire to shew their af∣fection to his Holinesse, supposing that a part of those petitions may be pre∣iudiciall to the Apostolique Sea, doe oppose them all: and others, denying that any of them doe preiudice, doe cause the businesse to bee drawen in length. But if his Holinesse would declare himselfe, the difficulties would cease. The Emperours Ambassadours gaue a copie to many in Trent, of his Maiesties letter to the Pope; which made the Legates resolue to spread also the copie of the letter which themselues had written in answere to the Em∣perour, when hee sent them that which hee had written to the Pope; which letter beeing composed according to the instructions sent from Rome, did containe the same conceipts, as the letters of his Holinesse did. The Pope, comparing the propositions of all the Ambassadours with the speech of Loraine, whereof aduice was sent him, was so much the more resolute, not to consent to the propositions of reformation, made by the French-men. And indeed, not onely a person of a great spirit, and experien∣ced in the world, as the Pope was, but euery meane capacitie might disco∣uer the cunning vsed, to draw him into the net, in case he had not beene wa∣rie. He considered, that to say he should declare which of the petitions did not please him, did signifie nothing but that, by suffering the others to be dis∣cussed, hee should leaue a way wide open to bring in the others afterwards, which were to his preiudice. And who could doubt that to obtaine the first would not bee an end, but a degree to passe to that at which they aymed; and that to release the Ecclesiasticall precepts, belonging to thrites, as the communion of the Cup, marriage of Priests, vse of the Latin tongue, which seeme, at the first view, not to derogate from the Popes authoritie, would notwithstanding cause immediatly a totall destruction of the foundations of the Church of Rome. Some things make a faire shew, and seeme that they may bee admitted without losse; but a wise man must consider the conclusion of things, rather then their beginning. Being therefore resol∣ued to stop these first passages, and considering what other remedies there might bee, hee returned to his first cogitations, that the King of Spaine had neither interest; nor any affection to prosecute the instances made, that the Emperor and French men did bour in them, hoping by this meane to satisfie their people, and to appease the discords; not knowing that the heretikes doe inculcate the reformation that they may haue a pretence for their separation from the Church, and would not bee reduced though it should be made. Hee thought therefore, that if the Princes were made to vnderstand this, they would abandon their instance, and suffer the Councell to end quietly. Wherefore he wholely bent his endeuours to ouercome the difficulties, by this meanes. And considering well all respects, he thought it more easie to perswade the Emperor, who could determine of him selfe, and was of a more gentle and sweete disposition, farre from any cunning, and not intangled with warre, whereas in France, the King being a child, many that were partakers in the gouernment, vsing many artifices, and hauing diuers interests, it would be very hard to doe any good. Where-vpon he re∣solued that Cardinall Morone before he entred into the affayres of the Coun∣cell, should goe to the Emperour for this end. And remembring what Lo∣raine The Pope re∣solueth to send Car∣dinal Morone to the Em∣perour. said in Trent, that the Emperour would goe to Bolonia to receiue the Crowne, he resolued to try whether he could induce that Cardinall to bee a mediatour herein, and so to translate the Councell to that Citie. He gaue or∣der to the Bishop of Vintimiglia to insinuate with him, and to perswade And hath a plot vpon the Cardinall of Loraine. him to it; and, to giue him a meanes of entrance, he caused Boromeo to giue him commission, to condole with him, for the death of his brother the great Prior. But before this order came, the Cardinall was gone for Padua. The Bi∣shop therefore conferring with Simoneta, concluded that the importance of the matter did not admit any losse of time, nor could bee negotiated but in presence. Wherefore he resolued to follow him, pretending to see a Nephew of his, who was very sicke in Padua. Being come thither, hee visited the Cardinall, presented the letters of Boromeo, and condoled with him making no shew of any other businesse. Talking together, the Cardinall demaun∣ded what newes there was in Trent, since his departure, and whether Cardi∣nall Morone would goe to the Emperour, as was reported. After many dis∣courses on both sides, the Bishop began to put him in minde that his Excel∣lencie had formerly told him in Trent, that, in case the Pope would go to Bo∣lonia, the Emperour would goe thither also, and would make it an occasion to receiue the Crowne, which would turne to the great aduantage of his Holinesse to maintaine the possession of coronation, which Germanie did op∣pugne. The Cardinall affirming this againe, the B. added, that hee had then sent aduise therof to Rome, and now had receiued an answer by which he did conclude that a very faire occasion was presented to his Excellencie of doing much good to the Church of GOD, by labouring to bring so profitable a disseigne to effect. For in case he could perswade his Maiestie to go to Bolonia, calling also the Councell thither, he might assure himselfe that his Holinesse would resolue to be there likewise, and that, by the assistance of them both, the affaires of the Synod would haue a quicke dispatch, and a happy successe. The Cardinall desired to see what was written to him; and the Bishop, ma∣king demonstration to proceede freely with him, shewed him the letters of Cardinall Boromeo, and a writing of Ptolemeus Gallus; the Popes Se∣cretarie. The Cardinall hauing read all, answered, that at his returne to Trent, bot should better vnderstand the Emperors mind, and what answere the Pope had sent to his Maiestie, whereby hee might resolue better, and would not faile to bestow his paines, if there were occasion. The Bishop replying, that he might plainely vnderstand the Popes mind, by the letters which he shew∣ed him, and that there was no cause to expect better information, the Cardi∣nall entred into other discourses, neither could the Bishop, though he often returned to the same matter, draw any other answere from him. Hee sayd indeed, that the Emperour had spoken of his going to Bolonia, because the Pope had told him of his purpose to make the reformation; but seeing that it is now plaine, by long experience, that howsoeuer his Holinesse promi∣seth many things, yet nothing is executed in Councell, his Maiestie and other Princes do beleeue, that hee hath no true meaning of performance, and that, otherwise, the Legates would not haue failed to haue executed his will. Hee sayd the Emperour was not satisfied, for that the Pope hauing, in Ianuary, shewed a purpose to go to Bolonia, was cooled on the sudden, and that when his Maiestie told him of of his desire to assist personally in Councel, his Holi∣nesse laboured much to diswade him, vsing his wonted varietie of speeches. He said also that the Emperour would not resolue to goe into Bolonia, lest he should displease the Princes, who might doubt; that when he was there his Holinesse would gouerne all after his owne manner, & conclude the Synode as he listed, without making any reformation. He said he had receiued aduise of the instance, made by Don Lewis d' Auila in the name of the Catholique King, and was glad to heare it. And speaking at large of the particulars, hee added, that it was necessarie it should bee performed, euen from Al∣pha to Omega, and that it was fit to remooue from the Councell fiftie Bi∣shops at the least, who doe alwayes oppose all good resolutions. Hee sayd that formerly he thought there were more abuses in France, then else where, but now he knew that there were enough in Italy also. For the Churches are in the hands of Cardinals, who, ayming at profit onely, doe wholly aban∣don them, and leaue the cure to a poore Priest; by which meanes the Churches are ruined, and Simonies, and an infinitie of other disorders com∣mitted. For remedie whereof, the Princes and their ministers did proceed moderately, hoping that, at the last, the desired reformation would be made. That himselfe also had proceeded with respect; but now, seeing that it was time to labour in earnest for the seruice of GOD, hee would burthen his conscience no more; but, in the first voyce hee should giue, was resolued to speake hereof. That his familie had suffered, as euery one knoweth, the losse of two brothers; that himselfe would spend his blood in the same cause, though not in Armes, as they did; that his Holinesse ought not to hearken to those who would diuert him from so pious an intention, but to resolue to obtaine a reward at the hands of GOD, by the merit of remouing the abuses of the Church. Hee sayd also, that, when the new Legates came, who no doubt would be well informed of the Popes minde; it would hee knowne what his purpose was concerning the reformation, in regard they could haue no cause to delay it, if they meant to make it at all. And howsoeuer the Bishop did often assay to bring him backe to speake of the iourney to Bo∣lonia, yet hee alwayes turned the discourse another way. Vintimiglia sent ad∣uice of all to Rome, and gaue his censure, I that, howso euer the Car had heere to fore made mention of this iourney, his mind was contrarie, and spake it only in cunning, to discouer the intention of his holinesse and of the County and that he was glad he had found his purpose. For if he had promised to labour herein, he might haue prolonged the businesse, and caused diuers pre∣iudiciall inconueniences to arise. Aduise came to Rome that, the French King had made peace with the Newes out of France. Hugonots, the particular conditions being not knowen as yet. And the Pope thinking it proceeded from some Prelats, who, though they did not openly declare themselues to be Protestants, yet did follow that party, hee resolued to discouer them, and was wont to say, that he was wronged more by the masked heretiques, then by the bare-faced. Whereupon, the last of March, hauing caused first the Emperours letter written to him to be read, as also his owne answere, he passed from that businesse, and related the confusions of France, adding, that the Cardinall Chastillion, hauing changed his name of Bi∣shop of Beauuois, into Count of Beauuois, had also pronounced himselfe de∣priued of the Cardinals Hat, all the disorders to him, to the Arch-bishop of Aix, the Bishop of Ʋ and some others. Which things, how soeuer they were notorius, and needed no further proofe to come to the declaration thereof, yet he gaue order that the Cardinals, who gouerned the Inquisition, should proceed against them. The Cardinall of Pisa answering, that there was need of proper and speciall authoritie, the Pope ordained, that a new Bull should be made, which was dated the seuenth of April, and contained in substance; That the Pope of Rome being Vicar of CHRIST, to whom he hath recommended the feeding of his sheepe, to reduce those that wander to bridle with temporall penalties those who can not be gained by admonitions, hee hath not, finde the beginning of his assumption, omit∣ted to execute this charge. Notwithstanding some Bishops are not onely fallen into hereticall errours, but doe also fauour heretikes, opposing the faith. For prouision wherein, hee commandeth the generall Inquisitors of Rome, to whom he hath formerly ended this businesse, proceed against such, though Bishops and Cardinals, inhabiting on places where the Luther sect is potent, with power to one them Rome, Edict, or to the consines of the Church, to appeare personally, or, if appeare,, to proceed to sentence, which hee will pronounce onsistorio. The Cardinals, in conformitie of the Popes or inaud, cited, by Edict, to appeare personally in Rome, to purge themselues from imputation of here∣sie, and of being of heretikes, Cologui, Cardinall de Chastilion, Saint Maine, Arch-bishop of Iohn luc, Bishop of Valence, Iohannes Antonius , Bisop of Tr jes, Iohn Blankan son, Bishop of Apo , Bishop of . But the absence of Loraine in Trent, and of the of the new Legates, with opinion that the forme of pro councell should bee changed, and the dayes of the Passion and Easter approaching, gaue some negotiations. Cardinall to hon the Lagate, M , who was th expect∣ed, The entry of Card. into Trent. and arriued the next day late at night. Hee made his entry pontifically vnder a canopy, was met by the Legats, Ambassadours, and Fathers of the Councell, and Clergie of the Citie, and conducted to the Cathedrall Church, where the ceremonies vsed in receiuing Legats, were performed. The mor∣row, which was Easter day, he sung the solemne Masse in the Chappell. The Count of Luna came to Trent also this day and was met by the Prelates, and Ambassadours. He entred into the Citie betweene the Ambassadors of the Emperour and of France, with many demonstrations of friendship. He was also visited by the French, who tolde him, they had commission from the King and Queene to communicate all their affaires vnto him, and offered to ioyne with him in all the seruices of the Catholique King his Master. Luna answered, that he had the same order, to communicate with them and that he would holde good correspondencie. Hee visited the Legats, vsing many louing words, and generall offers. The thirteenth of Aprill there was a congregation, to receiue Cardinall Card. Morone is receiued in congregation Morone, where, after the Briefe of his Legation was read, hee made a speech, fit for the occasion, and said, that the warres, seditions, and other calamities, present, and imminent, for our sinnes, would cease, if a meanes were found to appease GOD, and to restore the ancient puritie, for which and the Pope had, with great iudgement, assembled the Councell, in which are two Car∣dinals, Princes, famous for nobilitie and vertue, Ambassadours of the Em∣perour, and of so many great Kings, Princes, free Cities and Nations, and Prelats of excellent learning and integretie, and most skilfull Diuines. But, Mantus and Seripando being dead, the Pope had substituted him, and ioyned Nauaggero with him, which he had refused, knowing the weight of the bur∣then, and the weakenesse of his strength. But the necessitie of obedience hath ouer come feare, that he was commanded to goe to the Emperour; and would returne shortly, to treat with the Fathers, in company of the other Legates, that which doth concerne the saluation of the people, the honour of the Church, and the glory of CHRIST; that hee brought with him two things one, a good meaning of the Pope to secure the doctrine of faith, to correct bad manners, to prouide for the necessities of Prouinces, and to esta∣blish peace and vnion, euen with the aduersaries, as much as pietie and the dignitie of the Apostolique Sea can permit the other, his owne readines, to doe what his Holinesse hath commanded him. He prayed the Fathers, that contentious and discord; and vnprofitable questions being layd a side, which doe grieously offend Christendom, they would handle seriously the things that are necessarie. The Count of Luna vsed perswasions to all the Prelats, vessals of his Perswasions of the Count of Luna. King, Spaniards or Italians, or beneficed in his states, exhorting them in the name of his Maiestie, to stand vnited in The seruice, of God and reue∣rence towards the Apostolique Sea, and not to doe themselues wrong, say∣ing he had commission to aduise particularly of the proceedings of euery one, and that his Maiestie will keepe a particular come of those who will carrie themselues according to his desire, and that he would not haue them say any thing against their conscience. And he spake to, that euery one vn∣derstood, that these last words were spoken seriously, and the other in Ce∣remonie. Morone was willing to see Loraine, before he went to the Emperour, who because hee would not speake with him, deferred his returne. For hauing spoken in Ʋenice with Nauaggero, and vnderstood a good part of the Popes instructions, hee was willing to auoyd occasion, that Morone, communica∣ting vnto him all, or part of that which hee was to treate with the Emperour, should put him into some obligation. Whereupon Morone parted the six∣teenth of Aprill. Hee sayd, he was sent onely to iustifie the Popes good in∣tention, The negotia∣tion of Moro∣ne with the Emperour. that the Councell might proceede, and an absolute reformation of the Church bee made without any exception. Notwithstanding his other commissions were knowen, which were to disswade his Maiestie from com∣ming to Trent, because many impediments of the reformation would be cau∣sed thereby; to excuse the Pope, that he could not personally assist in Coun∣cell, and to pray him to hasten the end of it, proposing the translation to Bolonia, where his Maiestie and the Pope might meete, which would bee a good meanes for him to receiue the Crowne of the Empire in so famous an assembly; a fauour which neuer had beene done to other Emperours. He had charge also to pray him to maintaine the authoritie of the Apostolike Sea, against all the plots, made to diminish it, or rather to bring it to nothing; and that the reformation of the Court of Rome might not be made in Trent, but by the Pope himselfe; that no mention might bee made of renewing the things determined vnder Paul and Iulius, in the same Councell, that his Ma∣iestie would bee content, that the Decrees should bee made in Councell, by the proposition of the Legates onely, first imparting them, and hauing the consent of the Ambassadours of his Maiestie and of other Princes. He had commission also to giue the Emperour hope of a particular grant of whatso∣euer hee would demand, for his people, and to disswade him from holding in∣telligence with the French King, in this matter of the Councell, shewing him that as the State of France and Germanie was not the same, so the ends of his Maiestie and of that King must needes be diuers, and their counsels different. The Legates, remayning in Trent, did willingly giue the Prelates leaue to de∣part, and especially those who held the institution of Bishops and residence to bee de iure diuino. The 20. of Aprill Loraine returned, and was met by the Ambassa∣dours of the Emperour, of Polonia, and of Sauoy; and the same day newes came of the peace concluded by the French King with the Hugonots, which was more for the aduantage of the Catholique party. For after the battell before mentioned, the factions were equally balanced, vntill the death of Guise. Afterwards Colignie tooke, by assault, the fort of Cadome, with so much reputation to himselfe, and diminution of the Catholiques, that it was re∣solued in the Kings Councell to conclude the treaty of peace, which was continually managed euer since the battell. To this end, the seuenth of March an assembly was made, to which the prisoners, Conde and the Consta∣ble, were brought. And; after some speech, they being released vpon promise, to conclude the conditions, the Hugonote Ministers assembled, and resol∣ued not to consent to any agreement, except the Edict of Ianuary might bee obserued, without any exception, or condition; adding also, that hereafter their religion should not bee called new; that children baptized by them should not bee rebaptized; that their marriages should bee esteemed lawfull, and their children legitimate. From which conditions because they would by no meanes depart, Conde and the Nobility, weary of warre, without cal∣ling the Ministers any more, did make the agreement. And the capitulati∣ons, concerning religion, were these. That where the Noblemen of the Hu∣gonots haue high iustice, they may liue in their houses, in liberty of consci∣ence, and exercise of the reformed religion, with their families, and subiects. The conditi∣ous of the ac∣cord in Frace. That other Gentlemen, who hold in fee, not dwelling vnder other Catho∣lique Lords of high iustice, but immediatly vnder the King, may exercise the same in their houses, for themselues, and their families onely. That, in euery Bayliweeke, an house shall bee appointed, in the Suburbs, in which the reformed religion may be exercised, by all of that iurisdiction. That eue∣ry one may liue in his owne house without being enquired into, or molested for his conscience. That in all Cities, where that religion hath beene exer∣cised vntill the seuenth of March, it shall bee continued in one or two places of that citie, so that the Catholike Churches be not taken for that vse, which also shall be restored to the Ecclesiastiques, in case they haue beene surprised by them, yet so as that they shall not pretend any thing for demolitions made. That, in the Citie and Precincts of Paris, there shall bee no exercise of that religion, but those who haue houses or reuenues there, may returne and enioy them, without being molested for matters either past or to come, concerning their consciences. That all shall repossesse their goods, honors, and offices, notwithstanding the sentences to the contrary, and executions of them, since the death of Henrie the second vntill now. That the Prince of Conde, and all his followers shall be said to haue a good end and intention, for the seruice of the King. That all prisoners of warre, or iustice, for mat∣ter of religion, shall freely be set at libertie. That an obliuion of things past shall be published, and iniuring and prouoking one another, as also dispu∣ting and contending about religion shall be forbid, and that they shall liue as brothers, friends, and fellow Citizens. This accord was established the twelfth of March, to the discontentment of Colignie, who sayd, their af∣faires were not in state to make such aduantagious conditions. That it was proposed vnto him in the beginning of the warre, to make peace with the Edict of Ianuary, and now that they might require more aduantage, the conditions were worse. To say that in euery Bayliweeke there shall be one place for the exercise of religion, is to take away all from GOD, and to giue him a portion. But the common inclination of all the Nobility did force him to be content. Concerning these conditions the Kings letters were dis∣patched, the nineteenth of the same moneth in which it was sayd; That it hauing pleased God to permit, for some yeeres, the kingdome to be afflicted with seditions and tumults, raised for matter of religion, for which cause armes were taken, with infinite slaughters, sacking of cities, ruines of Chur∣ches, and now, by continuance of the euill, hauing experience that warre is not the proper remedie for this maladie, the King hath thought fit to reunite his Subiects in good peace, trusting that time, and the fruit of an holy, free, generall, or Nationall Councell will establish the same. And heere the Ar∣ticles, concerning religion, were added, besides the others in matters of State: which letters were published, and registred in Court of Parliament, and pub∣likely proclaimed in Paris, the seuen and twentieth of the same moneth. This was blamed by the greater part of the Fathers in Councell, who said it was to preferre the things of the world, before the things of GOD, yea to ruine both the one and the other. For the foundation of a state, which is religion, being remoued, it is necessarie that the temporall should come to desolation; whereof the Edict made before was an example, which did not cause peace and tranquillitie, as was hoped, but a greater warre then before. And some of the Prelats did dare to say, that the King and the whole Coun∣sell had incurred the excommunications of many Decretals, and Bulls, for ha∣uing giuen peace to the heretikes; and that there was no hope that the af∣faires of that Kingdome would prosper, where there is a manifest disobedi∣ence vnto the Apostolike Sea, vntill the King and the Councel did cause them∣selues to bee absolued from the censures, and did persecute the heretikes with all their forces. In defence whereof the French-men saide, that the tribu∣lations, continually supported by all France, and the manifest danger of the ruine of the Kingdome did sufficiently iustifie this action against the oppo∣sition of those, who, regarding onely their owne interests, doe not consider the necessitie in which the King was, which is more potent then any law alleadging that of Romulus, that the good of the people is the most principall law of all. But these reasons were not esteemed, and the King was blamed aboue all, because hee said in the proheme, that the time, and the fruite of an holy, free, generall or Nationall Councell would cause the establishment of tranquillitie; which they sayde was an iniurie to the generall Councell, to bee put in alternation with a Nationall, and that the Cardinalls of Borbon, and of Guise should bee named amongst the Authours of the Councell to make peace, saying it was a great iniurie to the Apostolique Sea. The Synode beganne also to bee troubled amongst themselues, for a small cause, which did giue much matter of discourse. Friar Peter Sota a∣bout The letter of Soto to the Pope. this time, and three dayes before his death, did dictate and subcribe a letter to bee sent to the Pope, in which, by way of confession, he declared his opinion concerning the points controuerted in Councell, and did particu∣lary exhort his Holinesse to consent, that residence, and the institution of Bishops might bee declared to bee de iure diuino. The letter was sent to the Pope, and Friar Ludouicus Sotus, his companion, kept a copie of it; who thin∣king to honour the memorie of his friend, begann to spread it. This caused much speach. Some were mooued with the action of a doctour of an ho∣nest life, and at the time of his death. Others saide he did it not by his owne motion, but at the instigation of the Arch-Bishop of Braganza. Simoneta la∣boured to get in all the copies; which did increase curiositie, and made them published the more, so that they were in the hands of all. And it is certaine that the maintainers of these opinions were incouraged by this accident. The Spaniards did often meete in the house of the Count of Luna, where Granata informed him of the present and past occurrences of the Councell; and, the Bishops of Leria, and Patti being departed, he saide, these are for∣lorne men, who, like to animals, suffer the burthen to be laid vpon them, and themselues to bee gouerned by the will and opinion of another, who are good for nothing but to make a number: adding, that if in their resolutions they proceeded by number of voyces, as hitherto they had done, little good could bee hoped for; and that it was necessary that matters should bee hand∣led by way of Nations. The Count said, it was necessary to prouide for that and many other things, beginning from the reuocation of the Decree that the Legates onelymay propose, and from establishing the liberty of the Councell; for which things hee had speciall commission from the King; which being well setled, the residue would bee prouided for with ease. The Legats and other Papalins were displeased to see that the Spaniards, their op∣posits, did neuer go from the Count: and as it happeneth when oneentreth new in a place where are contrarie factions, euery one hopeth to gaine him, the Legats also did striue to put him on the side of the Prelats the Kings Subiects, whom they called their well-willers, because they had intelligence with them, that they might doe a good office, and, as they saide, vndeceiue him, and make him to know the truth. They imployed also herein the Am∣bassadour of Portugal, who, hauing much opportunitie to speake often with him, because those Kings had almost the same interest in respect of mat∣ters Ecclesiasticall, did cunningly (because hee was much obliged to the Pope) lay before him the things which the Popes ministers had suggested to him, for the seruice of the Court of Rome. The 22. of Aprill, appointed for the Session, drawing neere, a congrega∣tion was held the day before, to consult about the prorogation of it. The Legates did propose the deferring of it vntill the third of Iune. But Loraine said it was a great scandall to all Christendome to prorogue the Session so of∣ten, and neuer to hold it? which would be increased also if it were put off to another day, and afterwards deferred againe? therefore, seeing that none of the things proposed and handled concerning Residence, and the Sacraments of Order and Matrimony were resolued, it was better not to prefixe a certaine day, but to expect vntill the twentieth of May, and then to resolue vpon the time, because the progresse of all things would then more plainely appeare; and, in the meane while, not to loose time, voyces may bee giuen concerning the Articles of the abuses of the Sacrament of Order, before the ende whereof Cardinall Morone would be returned from the Emperour, with ample resolu∣tion, wherby the matters in controuersie may bee composed, and diligence v∣sed to finish the Councell within two or three moneths. Cardinall Madruc∣cio and so many of the Fathers followed that opinion, that it preuailed, and it was decreed that the day to celebrate the next Session should bee prefixed the twentieth of May. The Congregation being ended Antonius Chierelia, Bishop of Budua, who, in deliuering his voyce, was wont to entertaine the Father, with some witty conceit, and oftentimes to adde some merrie Prophecies, which were spread abroad in diuers parts, did then also deliuer one concerning the citie of Trent. Hee said in substance; that Trent had been fauoured, and elected for the citie; in which the generall concord of Christendome was to bee establi∣shed, but beeing made vnworthy of that honour, by reason of the inho∣spitalitie thereof, would shortly incurre a generall hatred, as the semina∣rie, of greater discords. The sence was couered with diuers enigmaes, in a Poeticall Propheticall forme, yet not so but that it was easily vnderstood. Loraine hauing obtained the generall consent, with so much reputation, the Papalins grew iealous; who, considering the honour which was done to him the day before by those who met him, and now by the receiuing of his opinion, thought it not onely an indignitie to the Legats, but an en∣trance also to breake the Decree, that onely the Legates should propose. And they speake Publiquely, that the Pope said well, that the Cardinall was Head of a partie, and that hee prolonged the quicke dispatch of the Councell, and hindered the iourney to Bolonia. But Loraine, not ca∣ring what was said in Trent, and intending his negotiation with the Emperour, dispatched a Gentleman to him, with the opinion of the Doctours, concerning the Articles put into consultation by his Maiestie, Loraine sen∣deth a gen∣tleman to the Emperour. whom hee caused to tell him, that, for the good proceeding of the Councel, it was necessary hee should speake earnestly to Morone, and shew his great desire to see good resolutions, for the glory of God; as also of the desire of all the good Fathers that hee would not remooue further from the Coun∣cell, in regard of the fruit which they hoped for, by meanes of his vi∣cinitie, which will keepe euery one in his dutie, and hinder the attempts of those who would translate it into another place, as hee was aduised that some did lay plots to doe, and that before he parted from Ispruce, his Maie∣stie would bee assured that the libertie of the Councell, whereof hee is pro∣tectour, might bee preserued. Hee sent him a copie of the Edict of Pacifi∣cation in France, and of a letter of the Queene of Scotland, in which she gaue account of her deliuery from a great conspiracie, and of her resolution to liue and die in the Catholique Religion. In the end, the Cardinall pray∣ed his Maiestie to vse some meanes that there might bee no dispute in Coun∣cell for the precedence, betweene France and Spaine, that the good procee∣ding thereof might not bee hindered. The two Legats, that they might not doe nothing in the absence of Morone, did, the 24. of April, impart to the Ambassadours the Decrees com∣posed concerning the abuses of Order, that they might consider on them: and the 29. day they gaue them to the Prelats. The first, of the election of Bishops, in which were expressed their qualities conformable to the ancient Canons, the Ambassadours did not approue, because it seemed to restraine too much the authoritie of their Princes in the presentation or nomination of them. And they all laboured very much, especially the Count of Luna, that it might bee amended, or rather quite omitted; a thing which did likewise much please the Legates. And the Emperours ministers made difficulty also in regard of their desseigne to make an occasion arise of handling the election of Cardinals, and by consequence, of the Pope. The same day at night Cardinall Nauaggero (hauing giuen out, to auoid The Legate Nauaggero commeth to Trent. meetings and ceremonies, that hee would enter the next day) arriued in Trent; who said, that, at their departure from Rome, the Pope had told them, that they should make a good and a rigorous reformation, preseruing the au∣thority, of the Apostolique Sea, which is absolutely necessary, to keepe the Church in good forme and order. But not with standing all this, his Holinesse in his speaches to the Ambas∣sadours residing with him, desired them to tell him what reformation their Princes would haue. And his end was, that, their demands beeing giuen to him, they might forbeare to present them to the Councel, and so haue means, by shewing the inuincible difficultie in euery particular, to pacifie the ra∣ging humour of reformation. And hee said often to the Ambassadors, that their Princes were deceiued if they thought a reformation would reduce the The Popes discourse to the Ambassa∣dours. heretiques, who first of all made themselues Apostates, and then alleadged the abuses and deformations, for a pretence; that the true causes which haue mooued the heretikes to follow their false teachers are not the abuses of the Clergie, but of ciuill gouernements; that if all defects of the Ecclesiastiques were wholy corrected, yet they would not returne, but would inuent other colours, to perseuere in their obstinacie; that these abuses were not in the primitiue Church, nor in the time of the Apostles, and yet as many here∣tiques, in proportion of the faithfull, were then as now; that himselfe did desire, in sincerity of conscience, that the Church might bee amended, and the abuses remooued, but saw plainely that those, who doe procure it, doe not aime at this good marke, but at their particular profit, which in case they should obtaine, greater abuses would arise, and the present not bee ta∣ken away, that the reformation is not hindered by him, but by the Princes, and by the Prelates in Councell; that himselfe would make one, and that very rigorous also, but in case hee should come to the conclusion, the con∣tentions betweene Princes, some desiring it after one manner, some after another, and those of the Prelates, who are no lesse opposite, would hinder all; that hee knoweth very well that it is vnseemely to attempt that which would onely discouer the common defects and wants, and that those who desire reformation, mooued with zeale, doe, as Saint Paul saith, vse it with∣out Christian wisedome, and nothing would bee effected, but as now it is knowen that the Church hath defects, so it would appeare that they are in∣curable, and which is worse, men would begin to defend and to iustifie them, as lawfull vse. Hee did expect, with impatience, the end of the negotiation of Morone; from whom hee had aduice that the Emperour tooke time to answere, and still continued in consulting vpon the Articles. Hee thought that all the orders and resolutions which came out of France to Rome, and to the Coun∣cell, did proceede from the opinion and counsell of Loraine; and therefore, The Popes plot to gaine the Cardinall of Loraine. not to omitte any meanes of gaining him, the Cardinall of Ferrara beeing to returne into Italy very shortly, with whom Loraine was to speake, for many causes concerning their common nephewes, hee wrote vnto him to vse per∣swasions that hee would be content with the translation of the Councell to Bolonia; and, that hee might bee well informed of the affaires of Trent, hee gaue order that Vintimiglia should meete Ferrara, before his parley with Lo∣raine, and carie with him the instructions of the Legats, besides that which himselfe did know. The moneth of May did begin with new discourses of the peace of France, For the Kings letters came to Loraine and the French Ambassadours, to in∣forme them thereof, with commission to impart all to the Fathers of the Councell either in generall or in particular, as seemed them best. The let∣ters were dated the fifteenth of the last moneth, and did shew principally, that by the peace he had no intention to fauour the introduction or esta¦blishment of a new religion in the kingdome, but that, with lesse contradi∣ction and difficultie he might reduce all his people into one holy Catholike religion, by laying downe of armes, and remoouing, the ciuill dissentions and calamities. But he added, that a pious and serious reformation (alwaie expected from a generall and free Councell) would assist him most of all, in this good worke; for solicitation of which, hee was resolued to send the Pre∣sident Birague to Trent. But, in the meane while, he gaue to the Ambassadoures already in that Citie, to let the Fathers know, vpon good occasion, that he was sensible still of the ruines and afflictions which the diuersity of opinions in religion haue caused in his kingdome, with the apparant decay, and greater danger of the State; that rather then hee would returne to that extremity, hee was resolued, in case the generall Councell would not performe its duty, and that which is expected from it, by so holy and necessary a reformation, to call a Nationall hauing first giuen satisfacti∣on to GOD and men, by continuall perswasions vsed to the Fathers and the Pope to obtaine of them a remedy against the common euill; that, to effect this with greater ease, he had dispatched the Lord of Oysel to the Catholique King, and the Lord d' Allegres to the Pope, and commanded Birague, that af∣ter he had performed his charge with the Fathers of the Councell, he should passe to the Emperour, to try, if, by meanes of these Princes, bee might gaine so great a benefit. It is certaine that the Pope was much distasted with the peace, as well for the preiudice of his authority, as because it was concluded without his knowledge, hauing made so great contributions to the war. But the King of Spaine was displeased more. For beeing, by his souldiers, a party in the warres, and the victory, and hauing spent so much, hee thought all was lost, and that it was not iust to conclude a peace without him, to the preiudice of religion, which hee vndertooke to defend and maintaine; especially hauing so great interests therein; in respect of the damage hee did receiue in the go∣uernment of the Low Countries: it beeing plaine, that euery prosperity of the Hugonots in France; would encourage the people of Flanders, and strong then them more in their contumacie. For these reasons, the Catholique Ambassadour in France, made great complaints; which was the principall cause, why these extraordinary Ambassages were sent to Rome, and into Spaine, to make knowen that the King and his Councel were not induced to make this accord by their owne will, but by meere necessity, and for feare that grosse Armies would bee sent out of Germany to the Hugonots, which, as was reported; were prepared about Strasburg, and in other places. For those Dutch men, who had made warre in France, beeing returned home, loaden with spoiles they inuited others to goe thither and make themselues rich. Neither were they without feare that the Princes, of the Empire would, vp∣on that occasion assay to Monte , ; and other Cities of the Empire, and that the Queene of England would assist Hugonots more potently then she had done; to possesse some other places, already shee had possessed Haure de Grace. But, besides this principall end of both the Am∣bassages, d'Oysel was afterwards to make a proposition for translating the Councel from Trent to Constance, Wormes, Ausburg, or some other place in Germany, and to represent to the King, that, in regard it ought to bee celebra∣ted for the Dutch, English, Scottish, and part of the French-men, and other Nations, who were resolute not to adhere to, nor euer to accept that of Trent, it was in vaine to continue in that place. Conde was author of this ne∣gotiation; who hoped by this meanes, if it did succeed, to strengthen his party, by vniting it to the interests of so many Kingdomes and Princes, and to weaken the Oatholiques, by promoting difficulties against the Councell of Trent. But it did not take effect. For the King of Spaine hauing heard the proposition (which I say by way of anticipation that I may not returne to this matter) did perceiue what the aime was; and made a full answere that the Councell was assembled in Trent with all the solemnities, with consent of all Kings, Princes, and at the instance of Francis the French King; that the Emperour had superiority in that City, as in the others that were named, and might giue full security to all, in case the former Safe conduct were not suffi∣cient, that hee could not choose but fauour it in the place where it was, and accept the determinations thereof. And hee aduised the Pope of all, assuring him hee would neuer change that resolution. The French men in Trent thought it superfluous to make instance to the Fathers, as the King had commanded, before the returne of Morone, it being generally resolued that all Conciliary actions should bee deferred vntill then. But the Emperour had not dispatched that Cardinall, and informed Loraine at the same time, that, for diuers accidents, and because the propositions were of the weight and importance, as that they did deserue mature deliberation and consultation, he had not beene able as yet, to giue a resolute answere but hee hoped it should bee such, as to make all men know, that his actions were answerable to his desire, to see the affaires of the Councell set straight, for the common benefit. Therefore, notwithstanding the occasions and vrgent necessities of his other Prouinces, hee resolued to continue his residence in Isprue, to fauour the liberty of the Councell, by his presence, vntill hee had hope to see some good fruit. This delay did not please Morone, not that the Emperour should referre, as hee did, all the negotiations to the Diuines, and Counsellors: and both hee and the Pope did doubt that the answere would be deferred vntill he had heard Birague, who as they were informed, was to propose the translation of the Councel into Germany, to giue satisfaction to the Hugonots; whereunto the Pope was resolute not to consent, as well by his owne inclination, as in regard of the instance made vnto him by the Colledge of Cardinals and all the Court. And he maruelled at the humor of the French-men, who demanded reformation and a translation at the same time, and desired to haue a supply from the Clergie, for payment of the Kings de ts, and yet would make shew to be fauourers of the Church. But the truth was that the French-men, being assured they could obtaine nothing fit for their ce, so long as the Italians did make the maior part, beganne to despaire, and to hold no esteeme of the Councel while it remay∣ned in Trent. Therefore they tooke from the Diuines, sent by the King, their publique allowance, and gaue them all leaue either to depart, or ine there; so that almost all went away, one after another. The two Benedi∣ctines remained vntill the ende, who were haintained by chest Monasteries, as also Hugonius, whom the Papalins caused to be lodged, and defrayed, in the Monastery, and gaue him fifty crownes euery three moneths. Loraine, hauing ed the all gations sent by the Pope to the Empe∣rour, and made a con ure vpon them, sent it to his Maiestie: thought The con ure of vp∣on the allegations. he had done all secretly, but Hagonots had not onely discoured it, but gi∣uen a copie to the Legates, who, expecting Morone shortly, wrote, by order from the Pope, to the Bishops departed from Trent, that they should re∣turne, to resume the actions of the Councel. In the meane while a congre∣gation was made the tenth of May, to reade the letters of the Queene of Scot∣land, presented by the Cardinall of Loraine, in which she declared, that shee did submit herselfe to the Councell, made mention of her succession to the Kingdome of England, promising that in case it did happen, she would sub∣iect both those Kingdomes to the obedience of the Apostolique Sea. The letters beeing read, the Cardinall made an cloqnent Oration to use the Queene, for sending neither Prelates nor Ambassadouts to the Councell, be∣cause they were all heretiques, and promised that she would neuer vary from the true Religion. For answere, thankes were giuen, in the name of the Sy∣node. Some laughed, because the negotiation was as if it had been of a pri∣uate person, not of a Prince, and maruelled that she had not so much as one Ca∣tholique subiect to send. But the wiser sort did beleeue this was begged, and extot ed from her, because shee was able to doe like a Prince, in regard shee had euer many Catholiques about her. The Secretarie of Loraine was returned whom he sent to Rome, to cleere him of the imputation that he was a Head of a faction; whom the Pope re∣ceiued with demonstration of loue, and seemed to beleeue his exposition, and wrote to the Cardinall that he was content that the contentious matter should be omitted, the doctrines of Order and Residence not spoken of, but the reformation onely treated on. Loraine, imparting this letter to , that order might be taken to begin, was deferred vntill the returne of Morone; where with hee was distasted, as if he had been mocked by the Pope. And, ioyning this with the aduice which came vnto him, that Morone, speaking with the Emperour of the libertie of the Councell, sayd that himselfe and the French Ambassadours did hinder it more then others, he complained vpon euery occasion to all with whom hee spake; that the Councell had no libertie, and that not onely the resolution of euery litle particular was made a Rome, but that the Fathers, and especially the Gardinall M , and himselfe were not thought worthy to know what was commaunded by the Pope, that they might conforme themselues to the will of his Ho , and that it was that so many should bee disparched from Trent to Rome by the Lega s, for euery shall , and sometimes con∣cerning the same matter, and yet it could heuer be kno what resolution or answere came from the The hereat, because the things went so apparant, and publike, that they could neither be denied, no Loraine, full of these ll satisfactions, beeing called the consultation, to treat of begining the Congregations, because Morone had w would bee in Trent within eight dayes, t parties steel a good, while without speaking one word, & afterwards entring into complements, they from another, without talking of the bus sse. The Proctor the French Prelats, who remained in the Kingdome, be∣ing in Trent, they dessired the Ambassadours that they might bee ad∣mitted in Congregation, which refusing, Lansae replied, that they La spor∣ had doth anded it in reuerence, not because they did acknowledge the Le∣gats for Iudges, and that hee was resoliue that the difficulty should be propo∣sed in Councell. This made the Legats a per their perpose to expect Morone, and appointed a Congregation for the fourteen the of May, to handle the abu∣ses Where Loraine, giuing his voice the first point (which The Cardi∣nal of Lorain, in deliuering his sus rage. afterwards was taken away for the causes which shall bee related hereafter) spake at large of the abuses ring in that matter. And, that hee right more gh against the disorders of Rome, he begain with France, not sp ring the King, he could the Concordate, said that the distribution of the Benefites of the Kingdome, which ought belong to the Chapters, was diuided betweene Pope , and King F , scareely forbearing to say, as the prey is diuided amongst Hunters. He disliked that the King and Prin∣ces all the nomination of Prelatures, and that Cardinals did possesse Bishop∣ also the vaccord lately made by the King with the Hugo∣nots, But, leauing France, hee sayd that Rome was the fountaine whence all di that no Cardinall was without a Bishopricke, yea, with∣out how charges were incompatible; that the inuention of Commendaes, Vnions for life, administrations, by which, against all law, ma∣ny Benefic with appearance that hee had but , was king of the Maiestie of GOD. Hee often al∣lead that place of Saine P Take heede of errours, for God is not mocked, and one shall reape only that which hee hath so ed. Hee spake much against dispen∣ by which the strength of all lawes, is taken away; as also against ma∣ny other abuses, and with such cloquened, that hee spent the whole Congre∣gation. His discourse was not taken by the Papalins. Simoneta, did o∣penly treats with Preiats said he spake like the Lu∣ , and God grant that hee were not of their opinion, wherewith Lo∣ , was to the Pope. In the Congrega∣tions following one thing ordinary, of memorie, was spoken, except obliquely vsed, by those who had vn∣ by Loraine. In this inter i Cardinall Morone had his dispatch, in writing from the Emperour, very generall terme ; that bee would defend the authoritie of Is thought to speake like a Lutheran. and Hope against heretikes would remaine at and passe further, that the no to be made without , of the King for because being done on the sudden, much matter of discourse manie that bee would est satisfied with the proceeding in vpon the conditions, that the reformation Trent, and that euery one might propose: desiring they would presently begin to handle the Articles exhibited by him and France. Concerning this negotiation of the Cardinall, and of the answere made, I haue related what I haue found regi∣stred in publike monuments; but I ought not to omit the fame, then diuul∣ged in Trent, and beleeued by men of the greatest vnderstanding, that the Cardinall had treated with the Emperour, and with his sonne, King of the Romans, more secret matters, and shewed them, that in respect of the diuers The secret ne∣gotiation of the Cardinall Morone with the Emperor. ends of Princes and Prelats, and of their diuers and important interests, which were contrary, it was impossible the Councell should haue such an end as some of them did desire. Hee told them, that, in the matter of the Chalice, marriage of Priests, and of the vulgar tongue, things desired by his Maiestie and the French King, neither the King of Spaine, nor any Prince of Italie would euer consent; that, in matter of reformation, euery sort of persons would remaine in their present state, and reforme others; whence it commeth that euery one demandeth reformation, and yet, when any Article thereof is proposed, more doe oppose then fauour it; that eue∣ry one thinketh of himselfe onely, and doth not consider the respects of an∣other, that euery one would haue the Pope a minister of his designes, not thinking whether others will remaine offended for it; for whom it is neither honest, nor profitable, to fauour one with the disseruice of another; that e∣uery one would haue the glory, to procure the reformation, and yet per∣seuere in the abuses, laying the burthen vpon the Pope onely. The Cardi∣nall discoursed also, that, for the reformation of the Pope himselfe, he would not say what the minde of his holinesse was; but for that which neither doth nor can touch him, how can any one perswade himselfe that hee would not condescend, but that hee knoweth that which is vnknowne to others, be∣cause the respects of all are referred vnto him alone. Hee saide moreouer, that the experience of these fifteene moneths since the opening of the Coun∣cell, hath shewed, that the pretensions are multiplied, and the diuersitie of opinions increased, and doe still proceede forward to the height; that, in case it should continue long, some notable scandall must necessarily hap∣pen. Hee told him of the iealousie which did possesse the Princes of Ger∣manie, and the Hugonots of France, and concluded that seeing it was plaine that the Councell could doe no good, it was expedient to finish it in the best man∣ner it was possible. It was sayd that those Princes were perswaded that they could neuer obtaine any thing that was good by meanes of the Councell, and therefore thought it better to bury it with honour, and that they gaue their word to that Cardinall to vse conniuencie heereafter, and not to take it ill if the Councell were ended. And hee that shall obserue what ende the Who giueth his word to conniue here∣after. Councell had, and that those Princes had no satisfaction in any of their de∣mands, will easily beleeue that the fame was true; but considering, on the other side, that the instances of the Emperours ministers did not cease after this negotiation, hee will thinke it a vaine rumour. But to a∣uoyde both the absurdities, one may beleeue that those Princes did then lay hope aside, and resolue not to oppose the ending of the Councell; yet so, as that they helde it not honourable to make a sudden retreate, but to remit their instances by degrees, that they might not publish their want of iudgement, for conceiuing hope of good by that meanes, and for not beleeuing the obseruation of Saint Gregory Nazianzen, who testifieth, that contentions haue alwayes been increased by the Episcopall assemblies. The trueth of this particular I put in the number of those things, the knowledge whereof I cannot attaine vnto. But it is certaine that the catastrophe of the Councell, which it was thought could not possiblie haue a quiet con∣clusion, had beginning in this time. THE EIGHTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COVNCELL OF TRENT. T He seuenteenth of May, Cardinall Morone re∣turned to Trent from his Legation in Ispruc; and the Legates presently beganne to treat a∣mongst themselues about the certaine day of the Session, because the twentieth was neere when it was to bee determined. And, because they knew not when the matters would bee in order, in the Congregation of the nineteenth day, a prorogation was made vntill the tenth of Iune, to determine then the prefixed time. In that Congregation two notable things did happen. One was the conten∣tion; whether it did belong to the Legates, or to the Councell, to determine A question about the au∣thority of the Legats. whether the Proctors of the Bishops ought to be admitted in Congregation, begunne (as we haue said) by Lansac. The French Prelates did maintaine, that the Legates had no other prerogatiue but to be the first, and had no au∣thority, as they were separated from the Fathers of the Councell; alleadg∣ing the Councell of Basil, and other monuments of antiquity. On the o∣ther side, it was said, that the Councell could not bee lawfull, except it were called by the Pope, and that it belongeth to him onely to determine who may assist and haue voyce in it; and that to giue this power to the Councell, would be to giue it authority to generate it selfe. After some contention, the matter did remaine vndecided. In giuing of voyces concerning the abuses of Order another question succeeded. For the Bishop of Philodelphia made a great and a long exclamation, that Cardinals haue Bishopriques without maintai∣ning so much as a Suffragan; which was much derided by many, as if the Bishop, being but titular, had spoken for the interest of himselfe, and of such as he was. In the Congregation of the 21. of May the Count of Luna was receiued, The Count of Luna is re∣ceiued in Congregati∣on. forty dayes after his arriuall, in regard of the difficulties for precedence with the French Ambassadours. In the meane while, many consultations were held to compose them; but the French would by no meanes yeeld that hee should haue any place but below, and after them. Whereupon he thought to stand on his feet in the midst of the place amongst the Emperors Ambas∣sadours (who had order from their Master to accompany him,) and to stand by them vntill hee had finished his oration, and then to returne presently to his house. But this seemed dishonourable for the King. Therefore hee la∣boured to perswade the French not to enter in Congregation that day; whereunto they not consenting, He thought to force them to it, by making some Spanish Prelat demaund, that Secular Ambassadours might not assist in the Congregations, because they were neuer admitted in the ancient Coun∣cels. But thinking that this would offend all Princes, hee purposed to vse meanes that some Prelats should propose the handling of some things, at which it would not be reasonable that the French Ambassadours should bee present; as might be, the preiudices which might come to Christendome by the capitulations made with the Hugonots; or some such thing. This, com∣ming to the eares of the Cardinall of Loraine, put another course in his head; and, consulting with the other French men, they resolued not to contest any more, if a place were giuen him a part out of the order of the Ambassadours. Therefore the Count, entring into the Congregation the day before menti∣oned, and comming to the place assigned for him, which was in the midst of His protesta∣tion about place. the assembly ouer against the Legates, he presented the Mandat of his King; which being read by the Secretarie, hee immediatly protested, that, howsoe∣uer, in that and all other places, he ought to be next after the Emperors Am∣bassadours, yet because that place, the cause which was handled, and the time did not comport that the course of diuine matters, and of the publique welfare should be hindred by humane contentions, he did receiue the place giuen him, but protesting that his modesty, and the respect hee had not to hinder the progresse of the Councell ought not to be preiudiciall to the dig∣nity and right of his Prince, Philip, the Catholike King, nor of his posteri∣ty, but that they remaine intire, so that they may alwayes make vse of them, as if his due place had now beene giuen vnto him; requiring that his pro∣testation might be written in the Actes, and that they may not be published without it, and a copy thereof giuen vnto him. After this the French Am∣bassadors did protest also, that if they should set in any other place then next to the Ambassadors of the Emperour, and before the Ambassadors of other Kings, which their Predecessors haue alwayes held, and namely in the Coun∣cell of Constance, and the Lateran, they should bee wronged; and if the new place in which the Ambassador of his Catholike Maiestie did set, should bring any preiudice to them, or to the Orators, the Fathers of the Councell, representing the Church vniuersall, should reduce them to the ancient or∣der, or giue them the Euangelicall admonition. But the Fathers holding their peace, and the Emperors Ambassadours saying nothing, whose interest is common with those of France, because they sit next vnto them, and so pre∣serue the ancient possession of their King, the French Ambassadours in re∣gard of the amity and alliance betweene the Catholike and most Christian Kings, demanded nothing but that the Fathers of the Councell would de∣clare that the Count his fact could not preiudice the ancient prerogatiue and perpetuall possession of his most Christian Maiestie, and register this in the Actes. The Oration was made, in the name of the Count, by Petrus Fontidonius, a Diuine; who said in substance. That, the end of the Councell drawing neere, his Catholike Maiestie had sent that Ambassadour, to shew himselfe readie to doe for it that which Martianus the Emperour did in the Councell The Oration made in his name. of Chalcedon, that is, to maintaine and defend the trueth, declared by the Sy∣node, to pacifie the tumults, and to conduct to an happie ende that Councel which his Father, Charles the fifth, Emperour hath protected in its birth and growth, for the cause whereof hee hath made most difficult and dangerous warres, and which his Vncle, the Emperour Ferdinand doeth maintaine, that his King hath omitted no office of a Catholike Prince, that it might be called and celebrated; that he hath sent the Prelats of Spaine, and most learned Do∣ctors besides; that hee hath preserued religion in Spaine; that he hath hin∣dered the entrance of heresie at all the passages of the Pirenies, nor suffered it to passe to the Indies, whither it hath laboured to penetrate, to infect the rootes of Christianitie, springing in that new world; that, by meanes of that King, faith and puritie of doctrine doeth flourish in that kingdome, so that the holy mother the Church, when shee seeth other Prouinces infected with errours, taketh great consolation, that Spaine is the holy anchor for re∣fuge of all her calamities. Hee added, would to GOD that other Catholike Princes and Christian common-wealthes would imitate the seueritie of that King, in bridling the Heretikes, that the Church might bee deliuered from so many miseries, and the Fathers of Trent from the care of celebrating the Councell; that his King maried with Mary, Queene of England, for no other ende then to reduce that Island to the true religion. Hee repeated the late assistance sent to the King of France, adding, that, by the vertue of his Soul∣diers, though but few, sent for defence of religion, the victorie inclined to the Catholike partie. Hee saide the King desired the establishment of the do∣ctrine of religion and the reformation of manners. Hee commended the Fathers, because in the handling of these two, they would not separate the one from the other, howsoeuer great instance was made vnto them to cause them to omit the doctrine, and proceed in the reformation only. He said the Kings desire was they should examine well the petition, more pious then circum∣spect, of those, who say that some thing ought to bee graunted to the prote∣stants, that, being ouercome with kindnesse, they may returne to the bosome of the Church; saying, that they haue to doe with persons, who cannot bee bowed neither with benefits nor with pittie. Hee exhorted the Fathers, in the Kings name, to proceede in such sort, as to shew they haue a greater care of the Maiestie of the Church, then of the desires of those that wander, and that the Church hath alwayes vsed this grauitie and constancie in repressing the boldnesse of her enemies, not to grant them so much as that which it honestly might. He said, the King desired that superfluous questions might be omitted; and concluded, that the Fathers being assembled to doe so good a worke, as to cure the diseases which afflict Christendome, if this were not effected, posteritie would blame none but them, and wonder, that, being a∣ble, they would not also bee willing to apply the remedie. Hee praised the vertues of the Ambassadour, and the glorie of his house; and so ended. An∣swere was made, in the name of the Synode, that, in their griefe for the com∣mon miseries, they receiued consolation, hearing the pietie of the Catholike K. related, and, aboue all, that his promise to defend the Decrees of the Coun∣cell was most acceptable; which the Emperor, and other Christian Kings and Princes being willing to doe also, the Synod was stirred vp to take care that The answere. her actions may be answerable to their desires, as it hath done already, both by their own inclination and by the exhortation of the Pope, alwaies imploying themselues in the emendation of maners, and in the explication of the Catho∣like doctrine; that it gaue the King many thanks, as for his singular affection towards religion, and good will towards the Synod, so for sending such an O∣rato, from whom they did hope for honour and assistance. The Oration displeased all the Ambassadours, because it was a manifest reprehension of all Princes, for not imitating the Catholike King; and they complained thereof to the Count, who answered, that those wordes did as much displease him, yea that he gaue order to the Doctor to leaue them out, and not to speake them by any meanes, and that he would be sensible of his disobedience. The French-men in Rome blamed much those in Trent, for The French-men in Rome complaine of the Cardinall of Loraine. consenting to the place giuen to the Spanish Ambassador. They saide that Loraine, for his owne interests, and to gratifie the Catholike King had done this great preiudice to the Crowne of France, as also because hee had counsel∣led the Pope not to grant the King the alienation of 100000. crownes of Ecclesiasticall goods, as he demanded. They added that in all things he ay∣med only at his owne interests, and therefore because neither he, nor his bro∣ther, did manage the money, he did not care though the King should receiue none at all. But the difference for precedence was not as yet well ended. For howsoeuer there was a place found for the Spanish Ambassadour in the congregations, the same could not bee giuen him in the Sessions. Where-vpon the Legates wrote to the Pope, to haue order how to gouerne them∣selues. After the Spanish Ambassador was receiued, Loraine parted to meet with the Card. of Ferrara; who, being arriued in Piemont, found the affaires of that The state of religion in Piemont. Countrey in no better state then those in France. For in diuers places of the Marquisate of Saluzzo all the Priests were hunted away; and in Cherie, and Cu∣ni, places belonging to the Duke of Sauoy, and in many other Cities neere vnto them, many were of the same opinions with the Hugonots, and many euen in the Dukes Court also did professe them, and more were discouered euery day. And howsoeuer the Duke had set forth a Proclamation, a moneth be∣fore, that all that followed those opinions should within eight dayes part out of the Countrey, and some also were departed, yet afterwards he commanded that there should bee no proceeding against them, yea pardoned many con∣demned by the Inquisition, and made their processes void, as also of those who were in the Inquisition, and not condemned, and gaue leaue to some that were departed, to returne. But the Cardinall, vnderstanding the reasons of the Duke, was forced to beleeue that which hee was vsed to say of the affaires of France, that to doe so, would turne to the seruice of the Church. This Cardinall receiued institution in the same place, from the Bishop of Vintimiglia, who went expresly to informe him (as hath beene said before) of the affaires of the Councell, and how to treate with Loraine. Both the Cardinals met in Asti the foure and twentieth of May. Ferrara hauing rela∣ted the estate of France, and of their familie, since the death of the Duke of Guise, and of the Prior, exhorted him to a Sudden returne, showing what necessitie the family had of his presence. Hee told him, that, since the peace The Cardi∣nals of Lor∣aine and Fer∣rara meet in Ostia. was made with the Hugonots, there formation would not produce those good effects in France as was beleeued. But he found (which hee could not haue beleeued before) that hee had a great impression, that his honour did re∣quire that he should abandon the negotiation. Loraine complained that Morone, turned from the Emperour, had acquainted him with no part of his businesse, saying that hee had beene aduised of all by his Maiestie. Hee said that the Catholique King was well vnited with the Emperour, and that there was good intelligence betweene the Count of Luna,, and him. In the matter of residence, hee said it was necessary it should bee declared, and that this was the opinion of the Emperour, and of almost all the prelates, ex∣cept some few Italians, and that the declaration was demanded, that the Pope might not dispeuce; so that the labour of the Cardinall of Ferrara did little good. And the Cardinall of Loraine returning to Trent; did diuulge, that the Cardinall of Ferrara had perswaded him, in the name of the Pope and Legates, that the residence might bee determined with a penall. Decree, without declaring that it is de iure diuino; whereunto hee said hee would ne∣uer assent. But Cardinall Morone; to pacifie Loraine before hee entred seriously into the affaires of the Councell, knowing it was necessary to make shew of re∣ferring And their cō∣ference was to no purpose all matters vnto him, went to visite him, pontifically; with the Crosse before; accompanied with many Prelates; and after complements told him that his desire was he should giue counsell, and commaund, and proceed as if hee were one of the Legates; that the Pope did desire re∣formation and had famous. Articles, very seuere; and written, that those which were mentioned by the Emperours and French Ambassadors, should be proposed also, leauing those which belong to the Court of Rome, which his Holinesse will himself, for the vpholding of the authority of the Apostolique Sea. But Loraine suspecting that Morone had a purpose to lay some bad matter vpon him, and to make the Spaniards mistrust him, answe∣red, that the weight of a Legate was too heauie for his strength, who was not able to then to giue his voyce a an Archbishop, that he com∣mended the deale of his Holinesse to reforme other Churches, and desired he would bee content that the Bishops should giue as many Articles also for the Cardinalls and the residue of the Court, that the Apostolique Sea was worthy of all ; and respect, but the abuses ought not to be couered with that . The answere of this Cardinall made the Legates re∣solue in order. And, in the meaned while, the Prelates were secretly and seriously perswa∣ded hot that the Decree of residende &c. , might bee . There fell out an accident which was sufficient to confound and diuide the Popish Prelates amongst themselues. For aduice came to Trent that Cardinals should be created the next Ember weeke, and a list of those who were in Rome was sent. The pretendants, who were manie, were ill satis∣fied, and, as passionate men vse to doe, did not containe themselues with∣in such bounds, but that their words did shew their affections, and that they were very sensible of it. In particular, Marcus Antonius Columna, Archbishop of Taranto, and Alexander Sforza Bishop of Parma, (who, in re∣gard of the great power of their families in Court, had more hope then o∣thers) were noted to haue said, that they would hold intelligence with Lo∣raine; which Simoneta beleeuing, did aduise it to Rome: wherewith they were both much offended, and spake very feelingly of it. The distastes did continue certaine dayes: but no promotion of Cardinals beeing made, and satisfaction beeing giuen to these bishops, all things were finally well accommodated. After this time Loraine began to remit his rigor. For France, beeing now, by obseruation of things past, assured, that nothing fit for the seruice Loraine doth remit his ri∣gor. of that kingdome could possibly bee obtained in Trent, and seeing also that the peace was accommodated with great facilitie, so that there was hope to restore absolute obedience to the King, without medling with Religion, and perhaps beeing informed by the Emperour of the treatie with Morone, as also in regard of the perswasions which the Pope vsed to the Queene mo∣ther by his Nuncio, did resolue not to labour anymore, with such affection, in matters of the Councell, but rather to gaine the good will of his Holi∣nesse; and if any good came from Trent, to receiue it, and onely to take care that nothing should be done to their preiudice. Therefore the Queene The Queene mother wri∣teth to the Pope and the Cardinall of Loraine. wrote to Rome, and offered the Pope to ioyne with him to finish the Coun∣cell quickly, to curbe Loraine, and the French Prelates, that they may not impugne his authoritie, and to cause all the Hugonot Souldiers to depart from Auignion, and the territorie thereof. Shee wrote likewise to the Car∣dinall of Loraine, that the affaires of France did proceede exceedingly well, and that to giue them perfection, nothing wanted but his presence, where beeing able to doe more good then in Trent, in which place he had found by experience that no profitable thing can bee done hee should vse meanes to quitte himselfe of those affaires, and returne assoone as was possible, seek∣ing to giue the Pope all satisfaction, and to make him his friend and, for matters of the councell, not to thinke on them, more then his conscience and honour did compell him. Shee added, that hee should haue the same authoritie in the kingdome as hee had before; and therefore should hasten his returne. The Queenes letters came to Rome and Trent in the end of May; which, as they were very gratefull to the Pope; and made him beleeue he should see a good end of the Councel, so an other accident did much displease him. For, in France, consultation beeing had how to pay the debts of the Crowne, the Ecclesiasticall goods are ali∣ened in France without the Popes leaue. Decree, for aliening the valew of one hundred thousand crownes of Ecclesi∣asticall immooueable goods, was confirmed by the Kings Edict; and sen∣tence of the Parlament. This raised a great tumult of the Priests, who said, their priuiledges and immunities were violated, and that sacred things could not bee aliened for any cause whatsoeuer, without the authority and decree of the Pope. To pacifie which noise, the Ambassadour desired his Holinesse to giue his consent, alleadging, that the King was exhausted by the last warres, deseigning to put his affaires in order, that hee may beginne, as his purpose euer was since the making of the peace, to reunite all the Kingdome in the Catholique religion; and, that hee might be able to force whosoe∣uer should oppose, he meant to impose a subsidie, and to cause the Clergie to contribute their part also; whereunto the Church was so much more bound then others, by how much her interests were more in question; that, all beeing considered, nothing was found to bee more easie then to supply that necessity with the alienation of some few Ecclesiasticall reuenues; wherein he desired the consent of his Holinesse. The Pope answered, that the demand was painted foorth with a faire pre∣tence Which ma∣keth the Pope angry. of defending the Church, but was the onely way to ruine it, for the auoiding whereof, his securest course was not to consent to it. And howso∣euer some might thinke that the French would proceed to execution with∣out him; yet he was of opinion that leaue would not haue beene demanded, in case they could haue found buyers without it, thinking that none would dare to aduenture their money, fearing (as the affaires of the world are vn∣certaine) a time might come in which the Ecclesiastiques would resume their rents, and not restore the price. Therefore, hauing proposed the bu∣sinesse in Consistory, by the deliberation of the Cardinals, he resolued not to consent, but, by diuers excuses, to shew it was impossible to obtaine that demand at his hands. Loraine, bearing an irreconciliable hate to the Hugo∣nots, not so much for religion, as for faction, which himselfe and his house had alwaies with them, beeing assured it was impossible to reconcile friend∣ship, was much displeased that the matters of the peace did proceed. For his returne into France, hee thought fit to consider very well when and in what manner it ought to bee; and, for his particular affaires, hee thought it necessary to hold good intelligence with the Pope, and Court of Rome, and with the Ministers of Spaine also, more then formerly he had done. There∣fore he beganne from that day not to be so seuere in procuring the reforma∣tion, and to shew greater reuerence to the Pope, and to haue good correspon¦dence with the Legats. But besides the trouble for the demand of the alienation, the Pope had another, of no losse weight. For, hauing often promised the French Am∣bassadour Agreat diffe∣rence in Rome about prece∣dence be∣tweene the French and Spanish Am∣bassadours to giue him his due place at Whitsontide, and desiring to performe it, he assembled some Cardinals to find a meanes to giue the Spanish Am∣bassadour satisfaction. The courses were proposed, one to giue him place vnder the Deacon on the left hand; another, vpon a stoole at the top of the Deacons bench. But these did not take away the difficulty. For there re∣mained still matter of our currencie in bearing the traine of his Holinesse and giuing water for his hands, when hee did celebrate the Masse, and in recei∣uing incense and the pax. The difficulty of the traine and the water did not presse the because the Pope was not to celebrate, and the Emperours Ambassadour was to bee there. For the incense and the pax, a temper was found, that they should be giuen to all on the right side, euen to the Ambas∣sadour of Florence also, who was the last, and then to those on the left. The French was not content with this, and said, that the Pope had promised him his place, and that the Spaniard either should not come, or should stand vn∣der him; and would depart from Rome, if this were not performed. And it pleased the Spanish Ambassadour as little: whereupon the Pope sent him word that he was resolute to giue the French Ambassadour his place. The Spaniard answered, that, if the Pope were resolute to doe him that grieuance, hee would read a writing to him. The Cardinals, who treated with him in the Popes name, shewed him it was not good to doe so, before his Holinesse had seene it, lest, not being knowen before some inconuenience might arise. The Ambassadour was vnwilling to giue it, but, in the end, was content. Which the Pope hauing read, was very angry at the forme of words, which The Protesta∣tion of the Spanish Am∣bassador. he said were impertinent. Finally, he was brought into the Popes Chamber with foure witnesses, where he read his protestation, on his knees; which did containe. That the King of Spaine ought to precede the French King, in regard of the antiquity, power and greatnesse of Spaine, and of the mul∣titude of his other Kingdomes, by which he is the greatest and most potent King of the world; because the Catholike faith, and Church of Rome, haue euer beene defended, and preserued in his states; that, if his Holinesse will declare, or hath declared, in words or writing, in fauour of France, the grie∣uance and iniustice was notorious. Therefore he, in the name of his King, doeth contradict all declaration of precedence, or equality, in fauour of France, as frustrate and void, against the notorious right of his Catholique Maiestie: and, if it hath beene made, there is a nullity in it, being done with∣out knowledge of the cause, and citation of the party, and that his Holinesse doing this, will because of great inconueniences in all Christendome. The Pope answered admitting the Protestation, Si, and in quantum, excusing him∣selfe for the citation omitted, because hee gaue nothing to the French men, but preserued the place in which he had euer seen them, next the Emperors Ambassadours; but offered notwithstanding to commit the cause to the Col∣ledge of Cardinals, or to the whole Rota, adding, that he loued the King and would doe him all the good offices he could. The Ambassador replied, that his Holinesse had depriued himselfe of doing the King any good office, by giuing him so great a grieuance. The Pope answered againe, not for out cause, but your owne and for the benefi s by vs to the King, these words were not worthy to bee put into the protestation made vnto . The President Birague arriued in Trent at the same time, whom (as we said before) the French King had sent to the Councel and the Emperour, who Trent. was receiued in Congregation the second of ; where no Ambassadors inferior to the French were present that he might them place, be∣cause Is receiued in congregation. he had not the title of Ambassadour in the Kings He presen∣ted the letters of the King, dated the fifteenth of April which saiel in sub∣stance. That the troubles and , raised in the kingdome, for cause of religion, were very well knowe also his with the and assistance of Princes and his friends by armes; that it pleased God, in his incomprehensible Iudgements, not to suffer those remedies of armes to produce any thing but , slaughters, sackings of cities, ruines of Churches, losse of Princes, Lords, Knights, and other calamities and desolations, so that it is easie to know that they were not fit to heale the infirmitie of Spirits, which are ouercome onely by rea∣son, and perswasion; that this hath caused him to make a Pacification, accor∣ding to the contents of his letters, dispatched vpon that occasion; not to permit the establishing of a new faith in the kingdome, but that, armes being layd aside, he might, with lesse contradiction, make an vnion of all his Sub∣iects in the same holy and Catholike religion; a benefit which he did expect from the mercy of God, and from a good and serious reformation, which he did promise himselfe from the Synod. And because hee had many things to represent to them, and to desire of them, he resolued to send Monsieur Renaut Birague, who would informe them of all by word of mouth, praying them to receiue and heare him with courtesie. The letters being read, the President spake, relating very particularly the And maketh an oration. discords, warres, and calamities of France, the State and necessitie into which the King and kingdome were reduced, the imprisonment of the Constable, and death of the Duke of Guise, which made them to bee as it were without armes. Hee iustified the accord at large, as being made for pure and meere necessitie, and with more aduantage to the Catholike partie, then to the con∣trary. That the intention of the King and Councell was not to suffer an in∣troduction, or an establishment of a new religion, but, on the contrary, armes and disobedience being remoued, to reduce, with lesse contradiction, and by the wayes obserued by his ancestors, to the obedience of the Church those that were out of their way, and to reunite all in an holy Catholique profession, knowing very well that the exercise of two religions cannot long subsist and continue in one kingdome. Then he said that the King did hope to reunite quickly all his people in one opinion by the singular grace of GOD, and by meanes of the Councell, a remedy vsed alwayes by the anci∣ents against such euils as those were, which did then afflict Christen∣dome. Heprayed the Fathers to further the Kings good intention, by a se∣rious reformation, by reducing manners to the and puritie of the ancient Church, and by composing the differences in religion, promising that the King would alwayes bee Catholike, and deuoted to the Church of Rome, according to the example of his ancestours. Hee said, in conclusi∣on, that the King did trust in the goodnesse and wisedome of the Fathers, that they would compassionate the miseries of France, and labour to cure them. The President had commission to demaund, that the Councel might be translated to a place where the Protestants might have free accesse. For, notwithstanding all the securitie giuen by the Pope and the Councell, they held Trent suspected, and desired a place where the Emperour might secure their. But he touched not this point, by the aduie of Lordiu and the French Ambassadours, who ought it not fit to make , and held it of which ker should answer Birague in the name of the Synod, condoling the misfor∣tunes and calamities of the kingdome of France, and exhorting the King, that hauing beene forced to make peace, and to grant something to the Hu∣gonots, to restore religion intirely, he would, for the seruice of GOD, when the kingdome was in peace, labour without any delay, that this good end might be obtained. And they shewed this answer to Loraine after the Masse, before they entred into the Congregation. Who said, hee did not like they should approue the Kings fact, whereof they should rather complaine, as preiudiciall to the faith; and therefore that it was better to take time to an∣swere, as the vse is in matters of importance. Whereupon they gaue order that Birague should be answered thus insubstance. That in regard the things related and proposed by him were of great weight, and had need of much consideration, the Synod would take a fit time to answere him. The French Ambassadours were much displeased with this fact of Loraine, thinking that, if the Legates had not beene disposed to commend the Kings actions, hee ought to haue incited them, yea to force them as much as hee could, whereas on the contrary, they iudging a commendation of the fact to bee iust and reasonable, as indeed it was, he had disswaded them. But consulting amongst themselues, they resolued not to write thereof into France, for many respects; and Lansac, being to returne shortly, might make that relation which should be thought necessary. The moneth before there hapned a great tumult and popular commoti∣on in Bauaria, because the Cup was not allowed, nor married men suffered A tumult in Bauaria for the Cup, and mariage of Priests. to preach; which disorder proceeded so farre, that, to appease them, the Duke promised in the Diet, that, if in all Iune a resolution were not made in Trent, or by the Pope, to giue them satisfaction, himselfe would grant both the one and the other. This newes comming to the Councel, made the Le∣gats dispatch in diligence Nicolaus Ormonetus, to perswade that Prince not to make such a grant, promising that the Councell would not bee wanting to his necessities. To whom the Duke answered, that, to shew his obedi∣ence and deuotion to the Apostolike Sea, hee would vse all meanes to enter∣taine his people as long as he could, expecting and hoping that the Councell would resolue that which they saw to bee necessary, notwithstanding the de∣termination made before. But the Congregations proceeding in handling the Conciliarie matters, The Bishopof Nimes spea∣keth against Annates. in one of them the Bishop of Nimes, speaking of the abuses of Order, discour∣sed of Annates. He said, that howsoeuer it could not bee denied that all Chur∣ches ought to contribute to the Pope for maintenance of his Court, yet hee could not commend that payment, as well for the maner, as the quantitie; because it would be enough if the twentieth part were payd, whereas this is perhaps more then the tenth; and for the manner, that no man ought to bee forced to pay them but after the yeere was ended. And seeing that the Court of Rome must bee maintained by the contributions of all Churches, it is iust that they should receiue some profit thence, whereas many, and almost all the abuses of Christendome doe arise, by meanes of the Officers thereof; of which the Synod ought to aduertise his Holinesse, that might make pro ∣uision therein. Hee descented to speake in particular of the ordina of Priests made at Rome; saying, that the Canons and decrees are not obserued in them, and that it would be necessary to decree, that in case the Priests or∣dained in Rome were not sufficient, the Bishops (notwithstanding the ordi∣nation) might suspend them, and that the suspended might not, by way of appellation or other recourse, hinder the determination of the Prelate. The last that spake in that Congregation, was the Bishop of Osmo; who said, that as the abuses of Order are collected, so it were good to handle penances, and Indulgences also, because all those three matters are of affinity, and goe hand in hand. In another Congregation the Bishop of Guadice spake very long; and, a∣mongst other things, made, as it were, an inuectiue against the ordination The Bishop of Guadice spea∣keth against titular Bi∣shops. of titular Bishops, vpon occasion of speaking on the fourth Article of the abuses, in which he said, that to redresse the great scandals which doe arise by meanes of such Bishops, there should be no more created without vrgent necessitie, and in that case, before they were ordained, the Pope should make prouision that they might liue according to the dignitie of a Bishop. He said, that to the dignitie of a Bishop is annexed the hauing of a place and a Dio∣cesse, and the Bishop and Church are relatiues, as man and wife, of which one cannot be without the other; and therefore it did imply a contradiction, to say, that titular Bishops were lawfull. He said their ordination was an in∣uention of the Court, and vsed these words, Figmenta humana; that there is no mention of them in antiquitie; that if any Bishop were depriued, or did renounce, he was not held to be a Bishop, as he is not an husband who wan∣teth a wife, that the old Canonists do write, that there is a nullity in the ordi∣nations made by him who hath renounced his Bishoprick; that the Simonies and indecences which do arise by meanes of these Bishops, and the other cor∣ruptions of discipline, are nothing in comparison of this abuse of giuing the name of Bishops to those who are not, and to alter the institution of CHRIST, and the Apostles. Simon de Negri, Bishop of Sarzaua, entring into the same matter, sayd, Who are de∣fended by the Bishop of Sarzana. that in a Bishop are to bee considered Order, and Iurisdiction; in respect of Order he hath nothing, but that he is minister of the Sacraments of Order and Confirmation, and, by Ecclesiasticall constitution, hath authoritie of many consecrations and benedictions, which are forbid to simple Priests. But in respect of iurisdiction, hee hath authoritie of gouernment in the Church, whereas titular Bishops haue the power of Order onely, without in risdiction; and therefore it is not necessary they should haue a Church. And if a Bi∣shop was not consecrated in former times, except hee had a Church giuen him, this was because no Deacons or Priests were consecrmed without a itle. Afterwards, it appearing that more seruice was done to God, and to the great∣nesse of the Church hauing Priests without title, the same ought to bee con∣cluded of Bishops; yet so, as that, to auoyd abuses, it was conuenient not to ordaine any, without giuing them where on to liue, that they may not be for∣ced to indignities; but otherwise it is necessary they should bee created to supply the places of vnable Bishops, or of those who haue a lawfull cause to bee absent from their Churches, or of great P elates,, imployed in greater affaires, and therefore he did approue the Article as it was vnfolded. The Bishop of Lugo discoursed of Dispensations, saying, that there were many matters, concerning which if the Synod would make decrees, decla∣ring them to be indispensable, it would bee a great seruice to God, and bene∣fit to the Church. Which hee did not say, because the Synod might giue a Law to his Holinesse, but because they are things in which dispensations of Popes cannot be admitted; and if in a rare case, in a whole age, a reasonable cause to dispense, might happen once, yet the dispensation would not be iust Of Dispensa∣tions. in that case neither. For it is conuenient that a priuate person should support some grieuance, when there is a great publike benefit, as also, where many cases deseruing dispensations may occurre, to take away occasions of obtai∣ning surreptions, supplications, and graces, it is better to bee auaritious then liberall. One of the difficulties of the Councell; which was about Bishop Tilefius, the Secretary, in regard of whom frequent instance was made, that the Actes of the Councell might be written by two, did cease of itselfe. For he, not a∣ble to support the paine of the stone any longer, resolued to bee cut. After he was retired, that charge was giuen to the Bishop of Campania, whose first action was in the Congregation of the seuenth of une, to reade the answer The answere to Birague. which the Legats had made, to giue to the President Birague, which, being long and proposed on the sudden, not assisted in voice by any of the Legats, and very ambiguous, with words which might be drawen to the commen∣dation or the dispraise of the accord made by the King, was not vnderstood by all in the same sence; whereupon there were diuers opinions amongst the Prelats. The Cardinall of Loraine first spake at large of it, and was not vnderstood whether hee did approoue it or not. The Cardinall of Ʋarmia, vrged to it by Morone, desired him, after hee had made an end, to declare, plainely what he thought; and he answered that it did not please him: to the great distaste of Morone, who had shewed it to him before, and he seemed to be content. Madruccio, who followed, referred himselfe to the Fathers; of the others some did approue it, and some not. The French Prelats complai∣ned, that, against the orders obserued in the Synod in like occasions, the an∣swer was deferred and disputed. The Bishop, Ambassadour of the Duke of Sauoy, when it was his turne to speake, said, that the matter ought to bee referred absolutely to the Legats, and the two Cardinals. When all the voices were deliuered, the Archbishop of Lanciano stood vp, and said, that howsoe∣uer hee had concluded otherwise in his suffrage, yet hauing heard the Am∣bassadour, he was of his opinion, and the same was approued almost by the voice of all together. The eleuenth of Iune a consultation was held by the Legates; Cardinals, and tie s, to finde a meanes to establish the doctrine of the Insti∣tution of Bishops, Loraine, in deliuering his minde, touched the opinion of the Frenchmen, that the Councell is aboue the Pope, alleadging also, that it was so defiued in the Councels of Constance and Basille Hee concluded that hee did not do sure another declaration from that Councell, but said, that if they would be o accord with the Frenchmen, it was necessary that no words should be put in the Decrees, which were to be composed, which might pre∣iudice that their opinion. The Archbishop of Otranto, comming to speake, enlarged himselfe with many words to conuince that Cardinall, resuming and refuting whatsoeuer hee had said in fauour of the superioritie of the Councell. Hee added, that some held opinion of the superioritie of the Councell to be as true as Ʋerbum caro factum est, saying hee knew not how they could secure themselues in their conscience; wherein he meant Loraine, who was said to haue vsed this comparison. And, descending afterwards to discourse of the Institution of Bishops, hee said there had beene no contro∣uersie A contestati∣on betweene the Arcbi∣shop of O∣tranto, and the Cardinal of Loraine. in this matter, if the forme proposed by the Cardinall of Loraine had not giuen occasion. The Cardinall answered, that, at his comming to Trent, he found the difficulties already mooued; that he had composed that forme, being requested, with intention to make peace and concord, and to remedy the differences; that this not succeeding, hee would bee glad that the Arch-bishop might obtaine that honour which himselfe could not doe; thanking him besides, that, as his master, he had put him in minde of that wherein hee had failed. And, for the question of the superioritie of the Councell, hee said, that being borne in France, where this opinion is common, neither hee nor the other Frenchmen could leaue it, and did not beleeue, that, for hol∣ding it, they should bee forced to make a Canonicall abiuration. The Arch-bishop replyed, that he disliked the forme, because it was imperfect, whence the difficulties did arise; but, for the rest, it was not a place to answere him, and that he did little esteeme the iniuries he did him. But he complained of some who did professe to accuse the actions of the Legats, wherein they did not shew a good minde. The Cardinall was silent, and made no shew hee was offended. The Count of Luna, whether of his owne accord, or at the instance of the Frenchmen, reprehended the Archbishop, saying, that if it came to the eares of his Catholique Maiesty, it would certainly displease him. And a French Prelate, either by order from Loraine, or of himselfe, did aduertise Morone, that the Archbishop did much passe his bounds; that hee vsed bad speeches, in handling the matter of Residence; and that the Cardinall was aduised, that hee was continually abused in his house, and that the most honourable title he gaue him, was, a man full of poison; so that, in re∣gard of these things, and of this last accident also, it would not bee good to call them both together to consultation, because the Cardinall would not rest satisfied. Morone answered precisely, that hee had order from Rome to call that Archbishop to all consultations, and that it was conuenient to hold esteeme of him, because hee had at the least fourtie voices which did The Archbi∣shop of O∣tranto had 40 voices at his command. follow him. This, being related to Loraine, did make him exceeding angry against Cardinall Morone; and the rather, because a few dayes before the Le∣gats and Cardinals consulting together about the answer to bee giuen to Bi∣rague, referred to them by the Congregation, Morone did vpbraid him, that hee was content with the answere first made, afterwards said the con∣trary in the generall Congregation. And Loraine considered very much with himselfe, in what manner hee might shew himselfe sensible of the small ac∣count was made of him, especially being aduised from Rome, that the Pope did accuse him for a man scandalous, and desirous to vnite the Catholiques and Protestants. But weighing his owne interests, which did mooue him not to separate himselfe from Rome, but rather to seeke meanes to bee reuni∣ted, his profit ouercame his passion, and so hee resolued to continue in pro∣moting the conclusion of the Councell, and giuing the Pope satisfaction. But the President Birague, hauing expected an answere as long as hee thought his honour would permit, the thirteenth day parted from Trent, to goe to Ispruc, to negotiate the other part of his instructions with the Empe∣rour; which was to giue him ioy of the election of the King of the Romans, and an account for what causes the Peace was concluded with the Hugonots, Birague par∣teth from Trent with∣out his an∣swere. and to answere him concerning the restitution of Metz, and of other Impe∣riall Cities. Hee had instruction also, that, ioyntly with the King of Spaine, they should vse perswasions for the translation of the Councel into Germany. His negotiati∣on with the Emperour. This particular being imparted to Loraine, to receiue aduice from him in what maner to proceed in it, or whether hee should omit it, as hee had done in Trent, the Cardinall resolued for the same reasons, that hee should make mention of it, as of a thing rather to bee desired, then hoped for, or attempted. The Count of Luna had expresse order in his instructions, to demaund a The Spanish Ambassadour maketh in∣stance that the Decree, Pro∣ponentibus Le∣gatis, may be abrogated. retraction of the Decree, Proponentibus Legatis; and after his arriuall in Trent, he receiued a letter from the King, which told him, that hee was desired by the French Queene, that the Councell might be translated into Germany, that it might be in a free place, and that hee had answered, that hee did not thinke it necessary, in regard there was meanes to procure the liberty of it in the place where it was; therefore hee gaue him commission to labour, that it might haue full liberty, beginning from the reuocation of that Decree; be∣cause, that continuing, the Councell could by no meanes be called free. The Ambassadour, thinking hee could not deferre any longer, imparted this commission to the Legates, and, in conformity thereof, made effectuall in∣stance in the Kings name, that the Decree might bee abrogated, or expoun∣ded, saying, it was conuenient so to doe, because the Germanes did forbeare to come to the Councel for this cause amongst others, and because the Em∣perour did thinke it necessary, that hee might bee able to induce them to re∣ceiue the Councel. They answered, that the Decree was made by common consent of all the Fathers, notwithstanding, they would consider on it, and resolue that which should seeme iust, after hee had presented the instance in writing. The Ambassadour gaue it, and the Legates sent it to the Pope: howsoeuer Morone said, it was superfluous, and that nothing was to be done but to delay the answere, without troubling his Holinesse. In the negotia∣tion of Princes, especially those which doe not touch the substance of their State, it happeneth, that howsoeuer they do change opinion by the change of occurrences, yet by the perswasions made before the change, things contrary to their new will do fall out. And so it was that the perswasions made by the Queene mother to the King of Spaine, before she resolued to giue totall satis∣faction to the Pope concerning the Councell, did produce the effect of that Letter of the King. Therefore Morone, who did penetrate the bottome, did not hold that esteeme of it as some thought. The fifteenth of une Morone proposed in Congregation, that the fifteenth of Iuly might bee appointed for the determinate day of the Session. Segouia, and some few others said, they saw not how the difficulties which were vpon their hands could be resolued in so short a time, of Hierarchie, of Order, of the institution of Bishops, of the preheminence of the Pope, and of Residence; and that it was better to decide the difficulties first, and afterwards to appoint a short terme for the day of the Session, then to appoynt it now, and after∣wards to prolong it with indignitie. But the contradictors being but few, the proposition was established, as it were without difficultie. The next day Laynez, Generall of the Iesuites, in giuing his suffrage, bent all his forces The suffrage of Laynez. to answere whatsoeuer had beene said by others, not conformable to the de∣ctrine of the Court, with so great affection, as if his saluation had beene in question. In the matter of dispensations he was exceeding copious; saying; it was spoken without reason that there is no other power of dispensing but interpretatiue and declaratiue, for so the authoritie of a good Doctor would bee greater then of a great Prelate; and that to lay the Pope cannot by dis∣pensation, disoblige him who is obliged before God, is nothing but to teach men to preferre their owne conscience before the authority of the Church; which conscience, because it may bee erronious, as it is for the most part, to referre men to that, is nothing but to cast euery Christian into a bottom lesse pit of dangers; that as it cannot be denied, that CHRIST had power to dis∣pence in euery law, nor that the Pope is his Vicar, nor that there is the same tribunall and consistory of the Principall and the Vice-gerent, so it must bee confessed that the Pope hath the same authority, that this is the priuiledge of the Church of Rome, and that euery one ought to take heede, in regard it is heresie to take away the priuiledges of the Church, because it is nothing but to denie the authority which CHRIST hath giuen it. Then hee spake of reforming the Court; and said, that it is superiour to all particular Chur∣ches, yea to many ioyned together; and if it doeth belong to the Court of Rome to reforme each Church, which doeth appertaine to euery Bishop in Councel, and none of them can reforme the Roman, because the scholar is not aboue his master, nor the seruant aboue his Lord, it followeth, by necessary consequence, that the Councell hath none authority to meddle in that busi∣nesse; that many did call those things abuses, which, if they were examined and sounded to the bottome, would be found to be either necessary, or profitable; that some would make the Sea of Rome, as it was in the time of the Apostles, and of the Primitiue Church, without distingushing the times; not knowing what doth belong to those, and what to these, that it is a plaine case, that, by the prouidence and goodnesse of GOD, the Church is made rich, and that nothing is more impertinent then to say that God hath giuen riches, and not the vse. For Annates hee sayd, that it is de iure diuino that Tythes and first Fruites should bee payd to the Cleargie, as the Iewes did to the Leu es: and as the Leuites payd the Tenthes to the high Priest, so ought the Eccle∣siasticall order to the Pope, the rents of Benefices being the Tythes, and the Annates the Tythes of the Tythes. This discourse displeased many, and par∣ticularly the French-men; and there were Prelates who noted some things which they meant to answere, if occasion serued, when their turne was to speake. The Spaniards and French-men thought, that that Father spake thus, by Fauours done vnto him. order, or by consent of the Legates, alleadging for an Argument the many fauours which were done vnto him, vpon all occasions, and especially, be∣cause, whereas other Generals were wont to stand on their feete, and in their place when they gaue their voyce. Laynez was called into the middle, and made to sit downe, and many times a congregation was made for him onely, to giue him commoditie to speake what hee would; and howsoeuer none was euer halfe so prolike as hee, yet he was praysed, and those against whom hee spake could neuer bee so briefe, but they were reprehended for being too long. But Laynez, knowing what offence the French-men did pre∣tend His excuse. to haue receiued, sent his companions, Torre and Cauillone, to make an excuse to Loraine, saying, that his redargutions were not meant of his Excellencie, or any of the French Prelates, but of the Diuines of the Sarbone, whose opinions are not conformeable to the Doctrine of the Church. This beeing related to the Cardinall, in a Congregation of Giueth distast to the French-men. French-men, held in his house, the excuse did much distast the Prelates, some saying it was petulant, and others scornefull, and those few Diuines which remained were sensible of it; so that Hugonias himselfe, whom they had bought, did thinke it vnsufferable. Ʋerdun thought hee was touched in particular, and obliged to reply, and prayed the Cardinall to giue him leaue, and occasion. Hee promised to speake modestly, and to shew that the doctrine of the Sorbone was orthodoxe, and that of the Iesuite new, and neuer heard of in the Church before, that is, that the key of autho∣ritie is giuen by CHRIST, without the key of knowledge; that the holy Ghost, giuen for the gouernement of the Church, is called, by the holy Scripture the spirit of trueth, and the operation thereof in the gouernours of the Church, and Ministers of CHRIST, is to leade them into all trueth, that, for this cause, CHRIST hath made his Ministers partakers of his authority, because hee hath withall imparted to them the light of doctrine; that Saint Paul to Timothie, writing that hee is constituted an Apostle, doeth expound it thus, that is, a Doctor of the Gentiles, who, in two places, prescribing the conditions of a Bishop, saith, he must bee a Doctour; that, obseruing the vse of the primitiue Church, it will appeare, that the faithfull did goe to Bi∣shops for dispensations, and declarations, because those onely were assumed to that charge who were most of all instructed in Christian doctrine; that, to omit antiquitie, the Schoole-men and greater part of the Canonists haue con∣stantly said, that the dispensations of Prelates are good, Claue non errante, and not otherwise. Hugonius also did offer to prooue that assertion, that there is the same tribunall of CHRIST and of the Pope, to bee impious and scanda∣lous making mortalitie equall to immortalitie, and corruptible iudgement of man, to the incorruptible iudgement of GOD, and that it did proceede from ignorance, that the Pope is that seruant, which is set ouer the familie of CHRIST, not to performe the office of the Master of the familie, but onely to distribute to euery one, not arbitrarily, but that which is ordained by the Master; that he was amazed that Christian cares could endure to heare that the whole power of CHRIST is imparted to any. They all spake, some censuring one, some another of the Iesuites assertion. But the Cardinall told them, that it would be no small matter if they could obtaine that, in the pub∣like Decrees of the Councell, way might not bee giuen to that doctrine; at which it was conuenient that all should ayme; to which end they should more easily come, if the matter were passed ouer in silence, and suffered to dye in obliuion, which, by contradiction, might doe some preiudice to the trueth. They were pacified; yet not so, but that, in their priuate meetings, they spake of it very much. But the Legates did so accommodate the two Articles of the Insti∣tution of Bishops, and of Residence, with generall tearmes, that they The Decrees of the Institu∣tion, and of Residence. gaue satisfaction to both parties, and to Loraine also. But hauing con∣sulted on them with the Popish Diuines, and some Canonists, Prelates, these sayd, that they did admitte an interpretation, preiudiciall to the au∣thority of the Apostolique Sea, and the vses of the Court. The Bishop of Nicastro, who had often contended in this matter in fauour of Rome, sayd plainely, that, by that forme of speach, it was inferred that all iurisdi∣ction of Bishops did not proceede from the Pope, but a part of it im∣mediatly from CHRIST; which was by no meanes to bee endured. Other Papalins maintained the same, and made a bad interpretation of all, if it were not plainely sayd, that Bishops haue all iurisdiction from the Pope. Therefore the Legates sent the Articles thus reformed to the Pope, not so much that they might bee examined in Rome, as because, in a matter of so great importance, they would propose nothing without the Popes know∣ledge. The Cardinals deputed for these affaires, hauing seene and examined them, did iudge that the forme was sufficient to make all Bishops in their Diocesses equall to the Popes. And the Pope reprehended the Legates for sending them, because hee knew that the maior part in the Councell were good Catholikes, and deuoted to the Church of Rome, and in confidence hereof, was content that the propositions and resolutions should bee deter∣mined in Trent without his knowledge. Notwithstanding hee thought he ought not to consent to any preiudiciall thing, for feare of giuing bad ex∣ample to them, and beeing a cause that they also should assent vnto it against their conscience. At this time they had another very hard negotiation also. For the King A difficultie whether the King of the Romanes ought to pro∣mise obedi∣ence to the Pope. of the Romanes being to send Ambassadours, to giue him an account of his election, would not doe as other Emperours and Kings had done, who, ha∣uing no cause to make difficultie, did promise and sweare whatsoeuer the Popes would haue them. But hee hauing respect not to offend the Princes and Protestants of Germanie, would first know what words must bee vsed. The consultation hereof being committed in the Cardinals, they resolued, that hee must demaund confirmation of the election, and sweare obedi∣ence, according to the example of all other Emperours. Whereunto he an∣swered that they were deceiued, and that hee would consent to nothing which might preiudice his successors, as the actions of his predecessors were alleadged against himselfe, and that it was to confesse he was Ʋassall. And he proposed that his Ambassadour should vse these wordes, that his Maiestie will performe all reuerence, deuotion and duty to his Holinesse and the Apo∣stolique Sea, with promise not onely to preserue, but to enlarge as much as hee can the holy Catholique faith. This negotiation continued this whole yeere without agreement; and, finally, in Rome they thought they had found a temper for it, proposing that hee should sweare obedience not as Emperour, but as King of Hungarie and Bohemia, because it could not bee denyed, they sayd, that King Steuen did giue the kingdome to the Aposto∣lique Sea, in the yeere of our LORD 1000, acknowledging to receiue it from the sayd Sea, and making himselfe vassall; and that Ʋlad slaus, Duke of Bo∣hemia, did receiue from Alexander the second power to weare a miter, binding himselfe to pay an hundred markes of siluer euery yeere. These things be∣ing considered of in Germanie, because there was no proofe of them but the bare affirmation of Gregorie the seuenth, were derided, and answere was made, that they desired more fresh examples, and more certaine, and more lawfull titles. Messengers went to and fro, with diuers propositions, answeres, and replyes, of which we will now relate the issue, that wee may returne no more to them: Which was; that, twenty moneths after Count Elfestain, Ambas∣sadour of that King, arriued in Rome, with whom the same treaties were re∣newed, to demaund confirmation, and sweare obedience. Hee answered that the Oration, which he was to recite punctually, was in writing and that hee had commission not to alter one iote. The Pope therefore proposed the businesse to the Cardinals, in a generall Congregation; who after long consultation, concluded, that, howsoeuer the confirmation were not de∣maunded, nor obedience promised, yet, in the answere to the Ambassa∣dour, it should bee sayd, that his Holinesse did confirme the election, sup∣plying all defects thereof de facto & de iure, and did receiue the Kings obe∣dience, without saying it was demanded, or not demanded, promised or not promised. This ceremony gaue but small content to the Pope, and lesse to the Colledge of Cardinals. But to returne to the time whereof I write, the Pope was to answere the frequent instances, made vnto him by the Ambassadours, resident in Rome, and by the Count of Luna in Trent, for abrogation of the Decree of Propouentibus Legatis. And, beeing satiated with this trouble, hee wrote to the Legates, that the suspension of it should bee proposed in Congre∣gation. But Morone answered the Ambassadours, who vrged the Popes order, that rather then hee would condescend vnto it, hee desired that his Holinesse would remooue him. This answere being giuen without parti∣cipation of the other Legates, and many other things resolued by him alone, Morone is thought to take too much vpon by the o∣ther Legates. put them in a iealousie, that hee tooke too much vpon him; saying, that howsoeuer hee might haue instructions apart, yet hee ought not to execute them without aduising them first, and communicating all vnto them, at least in the execution. In the Congregation of the one and twentieth of Iune, the answere to bee made to the President Birague, composed by the Legates and Cardinall of Loraine, was read; which passed without difficultie. And because he was not present, that it might not bee giuen him by word of mouth, they sent it af∣ter him in writing. And Adamus Fumanis was deputed Secretary, ioyned with Tilesius, who continued in his indisposition. But the differences about the Articles of the institution of Bishops, and of the authoritie of the Pope remayning still, or rather increasing, and it beeing plaine, that to speake of them in Congregation, would augment them more, the Prelates, as it were, with a common consent, began to handle them particularly, and to propose courses to finde a temper for them. Some, desirous to burie these contro∣uersies, and to proceede, seeing no meanes of concord, gaue counsell to omit both the matters absolutely: which opinion, howsoeuer in conclusion it was receiued, in the beginning had much contradiction. The Spaniards did oppose; who, by all meanes would haue the Episcopall iurisdiction to proceede from CHRIST; and the Cardinall of Loraine went further, and, would haue it defined, that their vocation and place were immediatly from God. And the French-men did desire, that the Popes authority might be so declared as that it might neither contradict, nor dispense with the Decrees of the Generall Councel. Others sayd that this course serued onely to defer, without assurance that the delay would doe any good. For when they came to the conclusion of the Councel, it would bee necessary to define all matters which haue beene examined; so that the difficulty would returne; and, in case the French-men should depart first, as they resolued to doe, there would bee danger of schisme, if afterwards any controuersed point should bee hand∣led. Besides, in regard of the intelligence of Loraine with the Emperour, those who knew not their new thoughts, did beleeue, that the French-men being gone, his Maiestie would recall his Ambassadours also: in which case it would bee small reputation to continue the Councell, and, to determine any thing, would bee thought to bee a thing done without authority. Another difficultie as great as this was in the election of Bishops. For many of the Fathers would haue it sayd, that there is an obligation to elect the most worthy, and, for confirmation, alleadged many Canons, and holy Doctors. The Papalins said, on the contrary, that this was to binde the au∣thority of the Pope, that hee could not gratifie any, and that the vse of the Court time out of minde, hath beene, to thinke it sufficient if a man worthy were elected. The French and Spanish Ambassadours also did not agree, because it did too much restraine the power of Kings in nominations, if they were bound to goe about and seeke the most worthy. Many Prelates went vp and downe, vsing perswasions, that the Article might not bee receiued, though it were without the addition of electing the most worthy, and es∣pecially the Bishop of Bertinoro, and the Generall Laynez, distributing some annotations, and aduertisements, made by them, shewing that great inconue∣niences would ensue by that Decree. For in it was contayned, that a Cathe∣drall being vacant, the Metropolitane should write vnto the Chapter, the name of him who was to be promoted; who should afterwards be published in pulpit in all the Parish Churches of the Citie on Sunday, and hanged on the doore of the Church, and afterwards the Metropolitane should goe to the Citie vacant, and examine witnesses concerning the qualities of the person; and all his letters patents and testifications beeing read in the Chapter, euery one should be heard who would oppose any thing against his person; of all which an instrument should bee made, and sent to the Pope, to bee read in Consistory. This constitution they said would bee a cause of calumnies and seditions, and that heereby some authority was giuen to the people, with which they would vsurpe the election of Bishops, which formerly they were wont to haue. Others beeing stirred vp herewith; made the same op∣positions against the Article, concerning those who are to bee promoted to the greater orders, in which it was sayd, that their names ought to bee publi∣shed to the people three Sundayes, and affixed to the doores of the Church, and that their letters testimoniall ought to bee subscribed by foure Priests, and foure Laiques of the Parish; alleadging, that no authoritie ought to bee giuen to the Laitie in these affaires, which are purely Ecclesiasticall. In these perplexities the Legates knew not what to doe, but to enioy the benefit of time, and to expect some ouerture, to come to the end of the Councell, to which they saw not how they should be able to arriue. Another trouble beganne about the reformation of Cardinals. And the Pope vnderstanding that this was spoken of in all Courts, and that in Trent, The refor∣mation of Cardinals. the Ambassadours of France, Spaine, and Portugal, were combined to de∣mand it of the Councel, hee wrote to the Legates for aduice, to know whe∣ther it were better to handle it at Rome, or in Trent. He proposed the same in Consistorie, ordayning also a Congregation to consult on it, and, particu∣larly, to finde a meanes that Princes might not intermeddle in the Conclaue, in the election of the Pope. And, to proceede with all circumspection in a businesse of so great weight, hee sent many Articles of reformation to Trent, drawen out of the Councels, with order that the Legates should impart them to the principall Prelats, and signifie their opinions. The Cardinals of Lo∣raine, and Madruccio, answered, they would not deliuer their owne opinions, before they vnderstood the Popes minde, and afterwards it would bee neces∣sary to thinke very much on it. And Loraine said, that there are many things which are thought worthy of correction, which himselfe did thinke could not iustly be reprehended, and others which might in part, but not absolute∣lie. Hee descended to the particular of hauing Bishopriques, saying, there was no inconuenience that a Cardinall Priest should haue a Bishoprique, but did not like that a Cardinall Deacon should bee a Bishop; and that, for this cause, hee had counselled his brother, the Cardinall, to leaue the Arch-bishop∣rique of Sans. But this matter of reformation of the Cardinals was quicke∣ly put to silence. For those who were in Trent, inclining rather to haue it Did quickely vanish. handled by the Pope and Colledge, and those who pretended for the red Cap, doubting their desires might be crossed, they did, with great facility, leaue to speake of it. The Pope also thought to make a constitution, that no Bi∣shops should haue any temporall offices, either in Rome, or in the Ecclesia∣sticall Dominion. But he was aduertised by Simoneta, and other Prelats, that it would bee a great preiudice to the Ecclesiastiques of France, Polonia, and o∣ther Kingdomes, where they are Counsellers of Kings, and haue the princi∣pall offices, of which they might easily bee depriued, if Princes should take example by his Holinesse, and the Secular Nobility incite them to it, for their owne interests. Therefore if hee would execute this his determination, hee should doe it in effects, and not in writing, lest he should damnifie the Clergy in other Kingdomes very much. The Emperour found by experience, either at this time, or two moneths before, when Morone was with him, that his vicinity to the Councell did not onely no good, as hee thought it would, but the contrary rather. For the popish Prelates, suspecting his deseignes were against the authority of the Court, were afraid of euery thing, so that the difficulties and suspitions did turne into bitternesse, and increase in number. Therefore hauing other bu∣sinesse wherein to employ himselfe with more profit, he departed, and wrot to the Cardinall of Loraine, that the impossiblity of doing good in the Councel being palpable, he thought it was the dutie of a Christian and wife Prince, rather to support the present euill with patience, then by curing it, to cause a greater. And to the Count of Luna, who went vnto him by Post, three dayes before, he gaue order to write to the Catholike King, concerning The Empe∣ror parteth from Isorut. the Decree Proponentibus Legatis exhorting his Maiestie in his name to bee content not to desire the reuocation, or declaration, and if hee did thinke that the not declaring of it might preiudice other Councels, the declaration might, if need were, be made in the end of this. And notice beeing giuen, that they consulted at Rome and in Trent, to proceed against the Queene of And dehor∣teth the Councell frō proceeding a∣gainst the Q. of England. England, he wrote to the Pope and the Legates, that if the Councell would not yeeld that fruit, as was desired, that they might see an vnion of all Catho∣liques to reforme the Church, at the least they should not giue occasion to the heretickes to vnite themselues more, which they would doe, in case they proceeded against the Queene of England. For vndoubtedly they would by that meanes make a generall league against the Catholikes, which would bring forth great inconueniences. And his admonition was so effectuall, that the Pope desisted in Rome, and reuoked the Commission giuen to the Legats in Trent. After that the Pope had giuen distast to the Spaniards, in not gi∣uing place to the Ambassadours, to appease them againe, he gaue care to the instance of Ʋargas, who had troubled him many dayes together desiring that as meanes was found that the Count of Luna, the Ambassadour of his King, might come into congregations, so, the time of celebrating the Sessi∣on drawing neere, his Holines would find a way that he might be there also; Whereof hauing considered well, and consulted with the Cardinals, hee re∣solued finally that a place, separated from the other Ambassadours, should be giuen the Count in the Session also, and to remedy the comperency which would be in giuing the Incense & the pax, he gaue order that 2. Censers should be vsed, and Incense giuen to the French-men, and the Spaniard both at once; as also two Paxes to be kissed at the same instant. And hee wrote to the Le∣gats to doe so, commanding that they should conceale all vntill the time of the execution, for feare some inconueniences might bee prepared if it were knowen. Morone, according to the Popes command, concealed the order, neither A difference about prece∣dence. did the French-men know of it at all. On Saint Peters day, the 29. of Iune; the Cardinals, Ambassadours, and Fathers being assembled in the Chappell of the Cathedrall Church, and the Masse being begun, which the Bishop of Asti, the Duke of Sauoy his Ambassadour, did celebrate, on the sudden a mur∣rey veluet chaire came out of the Vestry, and was placed betweene the last Cardinall, and the first Patriarke: and by and by the Count of Luna, the Spa∣nish Ambassadour, came in, and sat vpon it; whereat the Prelats kept a great murmuring, Loraine complained to the Legats of this sudden act, concealed from him. The French Ambassadors sent the Master of the Ceremonies to make the same complaint, telling the of them ceremonies of the Incense and the Pax. The Legats answered there would be two Censers and two Paxes; wherewith the French were not satisfied, and said plainely, that they would be maintained, not in paritie, but in precedence, and would protest against euery innouation, and depart from the Councell. These goings and com∣mings continued vntill the end of the Gospel, so that the Epistle and Gospel were not heard, by reason of the great whisperings. The Theologue being gone into the Pulpit to preach, the Legats, with the Cardinals, Ambassadors of the Emperour, and de Ferrieres, one of the French, retired into the Vestry, where this matter was handled, and the Sermon was ended before any thing was concluded. In the midst of the Credo a silence was made, and Madruccio, with Fiue Churches, and the Ambassadour of Polonia, came out to speake with the Count of Luna, and to pray him in the name of the Legats, that, for that time, hee would bee content, that neither Incense nor the Paxe should be giuen to any, to hinder this sudden tumult, which might cause some great euill, promising that, at any other time when hee requested, they would execute the order of his holinesse of two Censors and two Paxes at once, which being considered on before hand, both hee and they, and all might be able to resolue how to gouerne themselues with wisedome. After long discourse, they returned with this resolution that the Count was con∣tent. So they all came out of the Vestry, and went to their places, and the Masse proceeded without Incense or Paxe. And as scone as these words were said; Ite, missaest, the Count of Luna, who, in the Congregations, was wont to goe out last, did goe then before the Crosse, followed with a great part of the Spanish Prelats, and Italians, subiect to his King. Afterwards the Legat, Ambassadours, and residue of the Prelats departed also, after the vsu∣all manner. The Legats, to bee freed from the imputation layd vpon them for this secret, and almost fraudulent proceeding, n a matter of so great weight, were faine to publish the expresse orders, receiued from Rome, to doe so in that time, in that maner, and without participation of any. De Ferrieres said pub∣liquely, that but for the respect he bare to the worship of God, hee would haue protested, as he had in commission from his King, which he would doe hereafter, in case the vsuall ceremonies of Incense and paxe were not restored, and giuen them in their due place. The Cardinall of Loraine also wrote a sharpe letter to the Pope, declaring the wrong that should haue beene done them, and said modestly, that his Holinesse had made him bee told that hee trusted so much in him, that hee would that all the affaires of the Councell should be communicated vnto him; whereof, though he saw no effect, yet he did not complaine; but he was troubled that he had commanded the Le∣gats not to impart vnto him their owne proper affaires, and especially, that, in which he might haue done more good then another, adding, that more mischiefe had insued, but for his mediation. Hee sayde moreouer, that the blame of all was imputed to his Holinesse, and prayed him that he would not be the authour and cause of so great an euill. Hee sent Musottus vnto him al∣so, by post, to informe him more particularly of the resolution of the French Ambassadours, and of the imminent danger. The Count of Luna complai∣ned of the stiffenesse of the French Ambassadours, and magnified his owne great patience, and modestie, and desired the Legates, that the next Sunday he might be admitted to equall place, & ceremonies, according to the Popes order. Some thought it was a stratagem of the Pope to dissolue the Coun∣cell; and the Papalins, called Amoreuoli, said, that, if they must come to a dis∣solution, they desired it should rather happen for the controuersie about the words of the Councell of Florence, That the Pope is Rector of the Church vni∣uersall; thinking it would be more easie to iustifie his Holinesse in that, and to lay all the blame vpon the French-men. The next morning, the last of Iune, the Count hauing assembled the Spa∣nish Prelats, and many Italians, told them, that the day before hee went into the Chappell, not to giue occasion of any disturbance, but to keep the right of his King, and make vse of the Popes order; that since he had vnderstood, that, in case he should returne to the Chappel againe, the French-men would protest: which if they should doe, hee must not faile to answere them, in the same maner and termes that they should vse, as in regard of his Holinesse, so also in the behalfe of the Maiestie of his King. The Prelats answered, that if it came to this, they would be readie to doe his Holinesse seruice, and not faile to hold esteeme of his Catholique Maiestie as farre as did concerne them. The Count prayed them againe to consider well of all which might happen in such a case; saying, that himselfe would come prepared also. And know∣ing that the French-men could take but three courses, either against the Le∣gats, or against the King, or against him the Ambassadour, hee meant to be prouided for an answere for all. All the Ambassadours of other Princes per∣swaded the Legats to find a temper; that so great disorder might not happen: who answering, that they must needs execute the Popes command, which was precise, and without any reseruation, and the rather because they had promised the Count to doe it whensoeuer he would request it, the Cardinal of Loraine protested to them, that, in case they did so, hee would goe into the pulpit, and shew of what importance the matter was, and what a ruine it would bring to all Christendome, and with the crucifixe in hand, would cry, Misericordia, perswading the Fathers and people to goe out of the Church, that they might not see so fearefull a schisme, and crying, Hee that desires the welfare of Christendome, let him follow me, would depart out of the Church ho∣ping he should be followed by euery one. The Legats mooued heerewith, perswaded the Count to be content that no Chappell should be helde the next Sunday, nor any procession made, according to the vse, and sent the Pope aduise of all. Continuall congregations were held in the house of the French and Spa∣nish Ambassadours. The Spaniard sometimes gaue hope he would bee con∣tent, and sometimes made instance to goe to Church, to execute the Popes order for the Incense and Pax. And the French Ambassadours were resol∣ued to protest, and depart, and said openly, that they would not protest a∣gainst the Legates, being but meere nor against the King of Spanic, or the Count his Ambassadour, in regard they did prosecute their cause, nor against the Apostolike Sea, which they would alwayes honour, following the steps of their predecessours, but against the person of the Pope, from whom the preiudice and innouation came, as making himselfe a partie, and giuing cause of schisme, and for another cause also, appealing vnto the future Pope, lawfully elected, and to a true and lawfull councell, threatning to depart, and to celebrate a Nationall. The Prelats, and other Frenchmen apart, did commonly say to euery one, that the Ambassadors had protestations against the person of the Bishop, who caryed himselfe for Pope, being not lawfull because there was a nullitie in the election for Simonie, intimating particu∣larly the obligation which Cardinall Caraffa had from the Duke of Florence, The Prench∣men make a question whether the Pope were lawfully e∣lected. with promise of a certaine summe of money, which that Cardinall sent after∣wards to the Catholike King, pretending it could not be made, but by con∣sent of the Pope before his assumption, as also another obligation made by the Popes owne hand, then Cardinall in the Conclaue, to the Cardinall of Naples, wherof mention hath bin made before. And the President de Ferrieres prepared a very sharpe Oration in Latine, and a protestation: which howsoe∣uer it was not made, yet it was printed, and was shewed by the Frenchmen, and is still to be seene in print, as if it had beene recited; to relate the sub∣stance whereof, is not besides our present purpose, that it may be seene, not what the French said only, but what opinion they brought to the Councel. He said in substance; That that Councel hauing bin called by means of Fran∣cis The protesta∣tion. and Charles, brothers, French Kings, they, the French Kings Ambassadors, were sory they should be forced to depart, or consent to the diminution of the Kings dignitie; that the prerogatiue of the French King was knowen to whosoeuer hath reade the Popes Law, and the Histories of the Romane Church; as also those who haue read the volumes of the Councels must needs know what place themselues ought to holde, that the Ambassadours of the Catholique King, in former generall Councels, haue followed the Ambassadours of the most Christian, that now the mutation was made, not by the Fathers, who, if they had beene in libertie, would not haue depriued any Prince of his possession, nor by the Catholique King, so neerely allied in amitie and kinred with their King, but by the Father of all Christians, who, in stead of bread, hath giuen his eldest sonne a stone, and for fish, a serpent, to wound, with one sting, the King and the French Church together, that Pius 4. dooth sow seeds of discord, to disturbe the peace of Kings who are in amitie, changing by force and iniustice, the order of sitting, alwayes vsed by the Ambassadours, and lastly in the Councels of Constance and Lateran, to shew that he is aboue Councels; that he can neither disturbe the amity of the Kings, nor alter the doctrine of the Councels of Constance and Basil; that the Councel is ab oue the Pope; that Saint Peter had learned to abstaine from wordly matters, whereas this his successor, and no imitator, did pre∣tend to giue and to take honours from Kings, that by the diuine, Nationall, and ciuill Law, account was held of the Eldest sonne, both in the life time and after the death of the father; but Pius doth refuse to preferre the eldest King before those who were borne long after him; that GOD, in respect of Dauid would not diminish the dignitie of Solomon; and Pius the fourth, with out respect of the merites of Pipin, Charles, Lewis, and of other Kings of France, doeth pretend with his decree, to take away the prerogatiues of the successors of those Kings; that, against the Lawes of GOD and man, with∣out any knowledge of the cause, hee hath condemned the King, taken his most ancient possession from him, and pronounced against the cause of a pu∣pil; and widow; that the ancient Popes, when a generall Synod was celebra∣ted; haue neuer done any thing, without approbation thereof, and Pius hath, without that Councell, which representeth the Church vniuersall, ta∣ken away the possession of the Orators of a King, a pupill, not cited, sent not to him, but to the Synod, that, to the end prouision might not bee made a∣gainst it, he hath vsed diligence to conceale his decree, commancing the Le∣gats, vpon paine of excommunication; to keepe it secret; that the Fathers should consider whether these be the facts of Peter, and other Popes, and whether they the Ambassadours are not forced to depart, from the place where Pius hath left no place for Lawes, nor so much as any print of libertie of the Councell, in regard nothing is proposed to the Fathers, or published, if it be not first sent from Rome; that they did protest onely against that Pius the fourth, adoring the Apostolike Sea, and the Pope, and the Church of Rome, refusing onely to obey this man, and to esteeme him the Vicar of CHRIST, that they will alwayes haue in great veneration the Fathers; but, seeing that whatsoeuer is done, is not done in Trent, but in Rome, and that the Decrees published, are rather of Pius the fourth, then of the Coun∣cell of Trent, they will not receiue them for the Decrees of a generall Synod. In conclusion, he commanded the Prelates and Diuines, in the Kings name, to depart, and to returne when GOD should restore the due forme and liber∣tie to generall Councels, and the King receiue his due place. But there was no occasion to protest. For the Count considered finally, that, howsoeuer the Spanish party was greater, in number of Prelats, then the French, yet, because the dependants of the Pope, who at the first were on this side, when they vnderstood the will of his Holines, would now, know∣ing that a dispatch was made to Rome for this cause, thinke fit he should de∣sist vntill the answere and the new order came, and therefore ioyne with the French, his side would prooue to bee the weaker. Therefore inclining to a composition, and all the other Ambassadours, and the Cardinall Ma∣druccio interposing, after many difficulties, they agreed that neither Incense nor the Pax should be giuen in the publique ceremonies, vntill the answere of the King of Spaine did come. This accord displeased the Popes depen∣dants, who would haue beene glad of that occasion to interrupt the pro∣gresse of the Councell, as also those, who beeing weary of Trent, and nor seeing how the Councell could either proceed or be ended, desired the in∣terruption, as the lesser euill, that the discords might not increase. It is cer∣taine that the Pope himselfe, receiuing aduice of this composition, did take it ill, in regard of the same feare, that the discords may not bee made grea∣ter, and some euill en de. And the Spanish ministers in Italy did all blame the Count, for letting slippe so fauourable an occasion for the seruice, of the King. This controuersie being composed, the Legats, intent vpon the celebra∣tion How the dif∣ficulties in the points for the next Sessi∣on were re∣mooued. of the Session, because the time approched, consulted what might done to remooue the differences. Loraine proposed the omission of the two articles, that is, of the Institution of Bishops, and of the authority of the Pope, as things wherein the parties were to passionate, and, concerning Bishos to say nothing, but what concerneth the power of Order. To some of the Pa∣palins this seemed a good remedie, but to others not; who said, that this would bee attributed to the Pope, as if the forme last composed did not please him, and the Princes would wonder, why his Holines should not rest content, hauing the same power giuen him, which Saint. Peter had; which would haue giuen matter of discourse to the heretiques. Besides, the Spaniards would take occasion to haue little hope hereafter to agree together in any thing; whence infinite difficulties would arise in other matters also. Moreouer there might bee a doubt whether it could be effected, because it was probable that many of the Fathers. Would require, that those Articles should bee declared. The Cardinall of Loraine offered that the Frenchmen should not require it, and so to labour with the Spaniards that they also should be content; adding, that, in case the Legats would doe the like with the Italians, who doe with too much passion oppose the others, all would bee composed. And very fitly order camefrom the Emperour to his Ambassadours, to vse all meanes that the authoritie of the Pope should not bee discussed in Councell; which his Maiestie did, because hee saw the maior part was incli∣ned to enlarge it, and feared that something might bee determined, which might make his concord with the Protestants more difficult. The Ambas∣sadours, hauing treated with the Legats in conformitie hereof, as also with Loraine, and other principall Prelates, did cause this Article to bee omitted, as also that other of the Institution of Bishops. But first they made many consultations about it, admitting vnto them the Prelates which were of greatest note, and had most followers, sometimes more, sometimes fewer, that they might so dispose of matters; as that all might rest contented, and the Decrees of the prouisions made against the abuses were giuen sorth Concer∣ning the first point, which was of the election of Bishops; the Ambassadors of Spaine and Portugall did sharply oppose this particular, that the Metropo∣litans should examine the persons promoted to Bishoprikes (whereof much hath beene said before) saying, that this was to subiect the Kings to the Pre∣lats their subiects, because authoritie was indirectly giuen them, to reiect the Kings nominations. The French Ambassadors beeing demanded what their opinion was, made shew they did not c re whether it were decreed or not. Whereupon the Popish Prelats, who thought it as diminution to the Popes authoritie, sayd, that all that point might bee omitted: especially, because, in the fift Session, sufficient prouision was made in that matter. But o∣thers opposing hotely, a conclusion was made by common consent, that it should bee deforred vntill the next Session, that they might haue time so to dispose it, as that it might please all, least the publication of the things agreed on should be crossed, in regard of this. There was the same difficultie about the last of the Articles proposed, in which a forme of confession of faith was prescribed, to bee , by those who were designed to Bishoprickes, Abbies, and other Benefices with cure, before the examination; which did so other with that of the election, as that they could not be separated. It was resolued to this Article also. But because it was deferred, and then resolued not to , and after∣wards, in a tumultuous manner, referred to the Pope, as shall bee said in due place, it is not alieue from our present purpose to recite heere the substance of it. Which was, that not onely it should bee required of them who were designed to Bishoprikes, and other cures of soules, but also an admonition and precept, in vertue of obedience, made to all Princes of what Maiestie or excellencie soeuer, not to admit to any dignitie, magistracie, or office, any person, before they haue made inquisition of his Faith and religion, and be∣fore hee hath voluntarily confessed and sworne the Articles, contained in that forme which, to that end, it did command to bee translated into the vulgar tongue, and publikely read euery Sunday, in all the Churches, that it might bee vnderstood by all. The Articles were. To receiue the Scriptures of both Testaments, which the Church doth hold to bee canonicall, as inspired by God. To acknowledg the holy Catholike Apostolike Church, vnder one Bishop of Rome, Vicar of CHRIST, holding constantly the faith and do∣ctrine thereof, in regard, being directed by the holy Ghost, it cannot erre. To haue in veneration the authority of Councels, as certaine and vndoub∣ted, and not to doubt of the things once determned by them. To beleeue, with a constant faith, the Ecclesiasticall traditions, receiued from one to ano∣ther. To follow the opinion and consent of the Orthodoxe Fathers. To render absolute obedience to the constitutions and precepts of the holy mo∣ther the Church. To beleeue, and confesse the seuen Sacraments, and their vse, vertue, and fruit, as the Church hath taught vntill this time, but aboue all, that in the Sacrament of the Altar there is the true body and blood of CHRIST, really and substantially, vnder the Bread and Wine, by the ver∣tue and power of the word of God, vttered by the Priest, the onely minister ordained to this purpose, by the institution of CHRIST; confessing also that hee is offered in the Masse to God, for the liuing and the dead, for the remission of sinnes. And finally to receiue and retaine most firmely all things which haue beene vntill this time piously and religiously obserued by their ancestours, nor to bee remooued from them by any meanes, but to a∣uoide all nouity of doctrine, as a most pernicious poyson, flying all isme, detesting all heresie, and promising to assist the Church readily and faithful∣ly, against all heretikes. It being (as hath beene sayd) resolued to omit this matter, they laboured to rectifie the matter of Residence, by taking away whatsoeuer might dis∣please those who held it to bee, de iure Diuino, or those who thought it to bee, de iure Positino. Loraine vsed all effect all diligehee to make the parties agree, resoluing, that, by all meanes, the Session should be held at the time appoin∣ted. For hauing receiued lately very louing letters from the Pope, co him to come to Rome, and to speake with him, and determining to giue his Holinesse all satisfaction, his resolution was to giue him this, as an earnest, that is, to end the discorde, and com ose the differences betweene the, Pre∣lates; a thing much desired by him. For his going to Rome, he spake am∣biguously, meaning to expectan answere from France Another matter, though of no great importance, did prolong the progresse, that is, the hand∣ling of the one of Orders, of which a great, long was proposed, wherein all were expounded, from the office of a Decon, to the office of a doore-keeper. This was composed in the beginning by the Deputies, when the Decrees were made, as necessarie to oppose against the Protestants, who say those Orders were not instituted by CHRIST, but by Ecclesiasticall introduction, because there is vse of them, as being offices of good and or∣derly gouernement, but not Sacraments. This Article of the Deeree was taken out of the Pontificall, which would be too long and superfluous to repeat, in regard it may be read in the booke it selfe. And the Decree did The functions of the inferi∣our Orders. declare besides, that those functions cannot be excercised but by him, who, being promoted by the Bishop hath receiued grace from God, and a Cha∣racter imprinted, to make him able to doe it. But when it came to bee e∣stablished, they were troubled to resolue an olde common obiection, what neede there could bee of a Character, and spirituall grace, to exer∣cise corporall Actes, as to reade, light candles, ring bels, which may bee as well or better done by those who are not ordained; especially since it hath beene disused, that men ordained should exercise those functions. It was considered, that the Church was condemned hereby for omitting this vse, so many yeeres. And there was a difficultie how to restore the pra∣ctise of them. For they must ordaine, not children, but men of age to shut the Church doores, to ring the bells, to dispossesse the possessed with deuils: which if they did, they did crosse another Decree, that the inferiour orders should be a necessarie degree to the greater. Neither did they see how they could restore the three offices to the Deaconship, to minister at the Altar, to Baptize, and to preach, nor how the office of the Exorcists could bee ex∣ercised, in regard of the vse brought in, that the Priests onely did dispossesse the possessed. Antonius Augustinus, Bishop of Lerida, would haue had that whole matter omitted, saying that, howsoeuer it was certaine that these were Orders, and Sacraments, yet it would bee hard to perswade that they were brought in in the Primitiue Church, when there were but few Christians; that it was not for the Synods dignitie, to descend to so many particulars; that it was sufficient to say, there are foure inferiour Orders, without descending to any further speciali ie of doctrine, or making any innouation in the practise. Opposition was made, that so the doctrine of the Protestants, who call them idle Ceremonies, would not be condemned. But Loraine was Authour of a middle course, that the Article should be omitted, and in few words the exe∣cution referred to the Bishop, who should cause them to bee obserued, as much as was possible. These things being setled, they resolued to reade all in the consultation of those principall Prelates, that all things might passe in the generall Con∣gregation with absolute quiet. Both parties were agreed, but onely in the s h Anathematisme, that is, that the Hi archie is instituted by Diuine ordi∣nation. The Archbishop of Otranto, and other Popish Prelates suspected, that, by such generall words, signifying that all holy Orders, without making difference, are by ordination of CHRIST, ght be in redthat Bishops are equal to the Pope. But the Popish Diuines and Canon did perswade them not to make difficultie, because it was manifest, by the Canons precedent, and subsequent, that nothing was spoken of Order, in which the Pope doth not exceed the Bishops, and mention made of The same men suspected also the Proheme of the Article of residence; where it was said, that those who haue cure of soules are bound, by Gods com∣maund, to knowe their sheepe, &c inferring, that it was, in some sort, de∣clared that Residence was by the commandement of God. But the greater part of the Papalines were of the contrary opinion, saying, that all those par∣ticulars which are said to bee commanded by God, to him who hath charge of soules, may be obserued in absence, though not so well as in presence, and that the wordes following doe prouide against all preludice to his Beatitude. They said moreouer, that it hauing bin composed by the Cardinal of Ma tu , and often consulted on, this doubt was neuer made, and that at Rome like∣wise they did not thinke it preiudiciall. But Otranto and his followers could not possibly bee remoued from their opinion. Some of the Spaniards were very earnest for the declaration, that the In∣stitution of Bishops, and Residence are de iure diuino, but were forced to de∣sist, because the maior part of their Colleagues were disswad d by Loraine, who vsed tearmes of conscience; saying it was not good, nor acceptable to GOD, when the good desired could not bee effected, to cause euill by a superfluous and vaine instance; that it was sufficient to hinder the preiu∣dice which some thought to haue done the truth, by establishing contrary opinions, and that if all could not bee now obtained which was desired, some thing might bee hoped for hereafter, by the assistance of GOD. But Granuta Segouia, and some others could not bee remooued by any meanes; and on the other side, it was not possible to make quiet the Patr arke of Ie∣rusalem, or the Archbishop of Otranto, and their adherents, who resolued to crosse all that was proposed, as not seruing to remoue the differences, but onely to couer them; beeing assured, that, in the progresse, they would re∣turne with greater force, and thinking it better, in case they must needes breake, to doe it before the Session then after. Neither were the Legates a∣ble to perswade them. Notwithstanding these two contradictions, matters were established with the other principall Prelates; and the ninth of Iuly the generall Congre∣gations began; in which all that belongeth to the doctrine and Canones of Order being first read, the Cardinall of Loraine gaue an example of speaking briefly, and making no difficultie: and was imitated by others, vntill it came to Granata to speake; who said, it was an indignitie, that the Fathers The Spanish Prelats are constant in their opinion cōcerning the Institution of Bishops. should bee thus derided, handling the foundation of the Institution of Bi∣shops so long, and now omitting it; requiring the declaration, de iure diui∣no, and wondring why a point so true and infallible, should not bee decla∣red. He added that all bookes which say the contrary ought to bee condem∣ned as hereticall. Segouia adhered to him, and said it was an expresse trueth, which could not bee denied, and that it ought to bee declared, to condemne the heretiques who defend the contrary. Guadi e, Aliffe, Morte Mara o, and some other Spanish Prelates followed: some of which said, that their opini∣on was as true as the precepts of the decalogue. The Bishop of Conimbri did complaine publiquely, that the trueth was circumuonted by craft; that is by ordaining titular Bishops. For this did shew that diction was not essentiall to a Bishopricke, nor receiued immediatly from CHRIST. And hee required a declaration to the contrarie, repeating the conceipt often v∣sed, that a Church and faithfull subiects were as essentiall to a Bishop, as a wife to an husband. The Decree of Residence being proposed afterwards, Loraine did approoue it with the same breuitie; onely hee aduised, that where the causes of absence are expressed, amongst which is vtility of the Church, vtility of the Common-wealth should bee added also, to remooue all impediment which that Decree might bring to the admission of Pre∣lates to offices and publique Councels; wherein he had a generall applause, Madruccio, who followed, spake in the same manner. The Patriarke of Ie∣rusalem, and the Archbishops Verallo, and Otranto refused to deliuer their opinions concerning that Decree: whereof the Archbishop Braga, when his turne was to speake, complained, and turning to the Legates, told them, after a reprehending manner, that they ought to vse their authoritie, and to force the Prelates to speake their opinions, and that it was a bad example in Councell, as if they were compelled to bee silent, or had an ambition not to speake but when they had followers. Whereupon others, who resolued to imitate them, changed their purpose, and consented to the Decree. The other Decrees were approoued as they were read, but onely that Granata made instance that Residence might bee declared to bee de iure diuino in plaine words, because (hee said) the ambiguous words of the Proheme were vn∣worthy of the Councell, which was assembled to take away, and not to in∣crease the difficulties; that bookes maintaining the contrary should bee pro∣hibited and that Cardinals should expresly and namely bee comprehended in the Decree. This last concerning Cardinals, did seeme to please many. Whereupon Morone answered, that consideration should bee had of it, and that it should be spoken of another time. They proceeded in the residue, and, in the end, the Patriarch and the two Archbishops consented also to the Decree; which was the first thing to make them hope that the Session could be celebrated at the time appointed, a thing thought impossible, but effe∣cted, by the dexterity of the Cardinall of Loraine, The dayes following the Fathers gaue their voyces concerning the other Articles of reformation. In which there was no difference of moment, but onely, that, at the great instance of Pompeius Zambeccari, Bishop of Sul∣mona, one particle was remooued out of the Articles of the first Tonsure; in which it was said, that, if the promoted shall committe any delict within sixe moneths after the ordination, the ordination shall bee presumed to bee fraudulent, and the ordained shall not enioy the priuiledge of the Court; and whereas it is decreed that none should bee ordained before hee was appropriated to some Church, the innouation of the Decrees made by the Later an Councell was added, that those also who were ordained to the title of the Patrimonie should bee applied to the seruice of some Church, in which they should actually exercise themselues, or otherwise should not bee parta∣kers of the priuiledges. This last was taken away also: and for the residue, with a small variation of words, and those not belonging to the substance, satisfaction was giuen to all the Fathers. The Spaniards, who could not obtaine in Congregation the declaration for the institution of Bishops as they desired, did the thirteenth day at night, assemble in the house of the Count of Luna; where Granata and his adhe∣rents, perswa ed him to protest to the Legates, in case the determination of that point should bee omitted; but others disswaded it, as a thing which might raise a great commotion. The whole Congregation was spent in dis∣putes, and ended in contention, deferring the resolution vntill the next mor∣ning. When the Count, hearing againe the diuersitie of opinions, and considering that it would much displease the Pope, all the Italian Bishops, and all the French men, who had reformed their opinions, prayed Grana∣ta to thinke as others did, in regard it was not a matter of conscience, because the question was not in what manner it should bee refined, but whether it should be refined, or omitted. Granata not changing, but saying that hee thought in his conscience the determination was necessary, hee desired him that hee would speake his opinion quietly, and freely, and content himselfe if it were not embraced by others, and abstaine from contentions; which both hee and the others promised to doe. The next day, which was the next before the Session, a generall congre∣gation was held, in which Morone did propose; whether the Fathers were pleased that in the Articles of Residence, and of the age of those who are to bee ordained, mention should bee made of Cardinals; and particularly of the age. Few did consent, and most of them did discourse that there is no cause to make any Cardinals vnder age, except Princes, in whom age is not considerable, because they doe honour the Clergy, of what age soeuer they bee; and that it was to no purpose to make a Decree where there was no a∣buse. But in the particular of the residence, the greater part was of opinion they should bee named. But some contradicted, because it would bee an ap∣probation that Cardinals might haue Bishopriques, and, by consequence, Commendaes; which was not fit to doe, but to leaue them to their consci∣ence, which must needes tell them that they are not exempt from the gene∣rall precept, rather then by naming them, to approoue two abuses at once, plurality of Benefices, and Commendaes. Afterwards some other particulars of small weight beeing handled and concluded, all which was to bee publi∣shed in Session was read againe, the Prelates giuing their opinions onely with the word, placet. Some Spaniards and Italians, in number twenty eight, answered negatiuely, and the others, being 192. did consent; and in the end Morone concluded, that the Session should be held. He thanked the Fathers for accepting the Decrees, and exhorted the others to ioine with them, and prayed the Count of Luna to perswade his Prelats, that, seeing the vniuersall concourse of all the Councell in one opinion▪ they would not dissent. Where∣of speaking with him more particularly, after the congregation, he promised, that, whensoeuer the Popes authority should bee declared, according to the forme of the Councell of Florence, the institution of Bishops should bee de∣clared also to bee de iure diuino. The Spanish Prelates beeing assembled that day at night, in the house of the Count, after many discourses, grounding themselues vpon the Cardinals promise, were content to accept all things. The fifteenth of Iuly beeing come, they went all to Church early in the The Session. morning with the vsuall order; where the accustomed ceremonies were v∣sed. The Bishop of Paris sang Masse, and the Bishop of Aliffe preached, and did offend the French-men, by naming the King of Spaine before their King; as also the Polonians, by naming Portugall before Polonia; and the Venetians, by mentioning the Duke of Sauoy before their Republique. He seemed to say also, that the celebration of the Councell, was a continuation with the prece∣dent of Paul and Iulius; wherein the Imperialists and French-men had ill satisfaction. He spake also of the faith and manners of the heretikes and ca∣tholikes; and said, that as the faith of the Catholiques was better, so the he∣retiques did exceede them in good life; which did giue much distaste, especi∣ally The preacher ostendeth ma∣ny Ambassa∣dours. to those who remembred the saying of our Sauiour, and of Saint Iames, that faith is not shewed but by workes. At that instant nothing was sayd, for feare of troubling the ceremonies. But the next day, the French Ambas∣sadours, the Polonian and the Venetians, desired the Legats that the Sermon might not be printed, nor put amongst the acts of the Councell. The Masse, and the other prayers being ended, the Briefes of the Legation of the Cardi∣nals Morone and Nauaggero were read, as also the Mandats of the King of Po∣lonia, of the Duke of Sauoy, the letter of the Queene of Scotland, and the Mandate of the Catholique King. Afterwards the Decrees of the doctrine of faith were read; in which there was no contradiction, but onely that the maior part of the Spaniards sayd, they did consent vpon condition, that the Lords the Legates, should performe the promise made to the Ambassa∣dour of their King. The Decree of faith did containe in substance. 1. The Sacrifice and the Priesthood, are vnited in each law; therefore there beeing a visible sacri∣fice The Decree of faith. in the New Testament, that is the Eucharist, it must be confessed necessa∣rily, that there is a visible and externall Priesthood, in which power is giuen, by diuine institution, to consecrate, offer, and minister the Eucharist, and to remit and retaine sinnes. 2. Which Priesthood beeing diuine, must haue many Orders of Ministers to serue in it, which must ascend from lower to higher ministeries, because the Scripture maketh mention of the name of Deacons; and from the beginning of the Church the ministeries of Subdea∣cons, Accolythites, Exorcists, Readers, & Ostiaries were vsed, placing the subdea∣conship amongst the greater Orders. 3. And because grace is conferred in the holy ordination, Order is truly and properly one of thé seauen Sacraments of the Church. 4 In which a Character beeing imprinted, which can∣not be blotted out, the Synode doth condemne those who say that Priests haue sacerdotal power for a time, so that they may returne to the world, and not exercise the ministery of the word of God. And doth condemne those who say all Christians are Priests, or haue equall spirituall power; which is nothing but to confound the Ecclesiasticall Hierarchie, which is in an or∣der, as an armie of souldiers. To which Hierarchicall order doe belong es∣pecially Bishops, who are superiour to Priests, to whom it appertaineth to administer the Sacrament of Confirmation, to ordaine Ministers, and to per∣forme other functions. The Synode doth teach also, that, in the ordination of Bishops, Priests, and other degrees, the consent, vocation, or authority of the Magistrate, or of any other secular power is not necessary; and that those, who, called onely, or instituted by the people, secular power or Magistrate, or by their owne temeritie, doe ascend to Ecclesiasticall Ministeries, are not Ministers, but theeues. This doctrine was attended with eight Anathematismes. 1. Against him that shall say, that there is no visible Priesthood in the new Testament, nor any power to consecrate and offer, and remit sinnes, but onely an Office, or naked Ministery to preach the Gospel, and that those who doe not preach are not Priests. 2. Or that, besides Priesthood, there are not greater Orders, The Anathe∣matismes. and lesse, which are degrees to ascend to Priesthood. 3. Or that holy ordi∣nation is not a Sacrament, but an humane inuention, or onely a certaine Rite, to elect Ministers of the word of God, and of the Sacraments. 4. Or that the holy Ghost is not giuen by the holy Ordination, nor any Character im∣printed, or that a Priest may returne to bee a Laique. 5. Or that the holy Vnction, or other Ceremonies which the Church vseth, are not requisite, but may be omitted, or are pernicious. 6. Or that there is not an Hierar∣chie instituted in the Catholique Church; by diuine Ordination, consisting of Bishops, Priests, and Ministers. 7. Or that Bishops are not Superiour, to Priests, or haue not power to confirme and ordaine, or that Priests also haue the same power, or that Orders conferred without the consent or voca∣tion of the people, or Secular power, are voyd, or that they may be lawfull Ministers of the word of God and Sacraments, who are not lawfully orday∣ned by the Ecclesiasticall power. 8. Or that Bishops assumed by authori∣tie of the Pope, are not lawfull and true, but that it is an humane inuention. Afterwards the decree of reformation was read, which contained eigh∣teene The Decree of Reforma∣tion. heads. The first concerning the matter of Residence, so much dispu∣ted on, in which it was sayd, that euery one that hath cure of foules, is bound, by the Commandement of God, to know his sheepe, to offer Sacrifices for them, to feede them with preaching, Sacraments, and good examples, and to attend other Pastorall charges; which things because they cannot be per∣formed by him who doeth not assist and watch ouer the flocke, the Synode doeth admonish them to feede and gouerne, with iudgement and trueth. But that none by a badde interpretation of the Constitutions, made vnder Paul the third in this matter, may thinke the absence of fiue Moneths lawfull, it doeth declare, that whosoeuer hath Bishoprickes, in what title soeuer, though Cardinals, are bound to reside personally, nor may bee absent, but when Christian charitie, vrgent necessitie, due obedience, or vtility of Church or Common-wealth doth require; as also that such cau∣ses of absence must bee approoued for lawfull, by the Pope, or Metro∣politane, except they bee notorious or sudden, in which case the Prouin∣ciall Councels must take knowledge, and iudge of the licences graunted, that there may bee no abuse therein, the Prelates prouiding that the people may not be damnified in their absence. And because a short absence deser∣ueth not this name, though without any the causes aforesayd, it doeth de∣clare that this shall not exceede the space of two moneths, or three at the most, whether it be continuate or at diuers times, so that there be equity of reason in it, and without the dammage of the flocke; which must be refer∣red to the consciences of the Prelats; admonishing euery one not to be absent on Sundayes in Aduent, Lent, Feast of the Natiuitie, Resurrection, Pentecost, or Corpus Christi. Which Decree, he that shall violate, besides the penalties im∣posed vpon Non-residents vnder Paul the third, and mortall sinne, may not, with a good conscience, enioy the Fruits for that proportion of time, de∣creeing the same concerning all those that haue charge of soules, who, be∣ing absent with leaue of the Bishop, must substitute a sufficient Vicar, ap∣prooued by the Bishop, allowing a conuenient stipend; and doeth ordaine that this Deceee, together with the other vnder Paul the third, shall bee pub∣lished in the Prouinciall and Diocesan Councels. The second Article of the Decree concerning Order, was; That whoso∣euer doeth hold a Bishopricke, in what title soeuer, though a Cardinall, not receiuing consecration within three moneths, shall lose the Fruits, and de∣ferring three moneths more, shall lose the Benefice, and that the consecra∣tion, if it bee not in the Court of Rome, shall bee celebrated in the proper Church, or in the Prouince at the least, if there be opportunitie. The third, That Bishops shall celebrate the ordinations in their owne person, and, in case they be sicke, shall not send their subiects to bee ordained by other Bi∣shops, before they bee examined and approoued by themselues. The fourth, That the first Tonsure shall not bee giuen but to him that is confirmed, and hath learned the principles of Faith, to reade and write, and hath chosen a Clericall life to serue GOD, not to auoyd the Secular iudgement. The fift, He that is to be promoted to the inferiour Orders shall haue testimonie from the Parish Priest, and Schoolemaster, and charge shall bee giuen by the Bi∣shop, that his name may bee proposed publikely in Church, and inquisition made of his birth, age, manners and life. The sixth, That none shall haue an Ecclesiasticall Benefice before the age of fourteene yeeres, nor enioy the exemption of the tribunall, if he haue not an Ecclesiasticall Benefice, or, wea∣ring the habit and Tonsure, doeth not serue in some Church, by commission from the Bishop, or dwell in a Seminary, or Schoole, or Vniuersitie, with licence of the Bishop. And, for married Clerkes, the constitution of Boniface the eighth shal be obserued, with condition likewise that they shal serue in the Church, in habit and Tonsure, by deputation of the Bishop. The seuenth, That when an ordination is to be made, all shal be called to the Citie, the Wednes∣day before, and diligent inquisition and examination of them made by the Bishop, with the assistance of who he pleaseth. The eighth, Ordinations shall not be celebrated but in times appointed by the law, in the cathedral Church, in presence of the Canons: and if occasion bee to make it in an other place of the Diocesse, it shall bee in the most worthy Church, in presence of the Clergie. Euery one shall be ordained by his owne Bishop, or, if any bee or∣dained by another, he shall haue letters testimoniall of his owne. The ninth, A Bishop shall not ordaine one of his family that is not his subiect, if he haue not dwelt with him three yeeres, and, in that case, shall presently conferre a Benefice vpon him. The tenth, No Abbat, or other Prelate, shall conferre the first Tonsure, or the minor Orders, but vnto Regulars, their subiects; nor these or other Prelats, Colledges, or Chapters, shall grant dimissorie letters to Secular Clerkes to receiue Orders. The eleuenth, That the minor Orders shall be conferred vpon him that vnderstandeth the Latine tongue, and with interposition of time betweene one Order and another; and these being de∣grees vnto others, none shall be ordained if there be not hope that hee may bee worthy of holy orders; and from the last of the minor Orders vntill the Subdeaconship, there shall be the interposition of a yeere, if the Bishop shall not iudge otherwise for the good of the Church. The twelfth, None shall be ordained Subdeacon before the age of two and twenty yeeres, Deacon be∣fore three and twenty, Priest before sixe and twenty. Neither shall the Re∣gulars haue any exemption herein. The thirteenth, Subdeacons, and Dea∣cons shall bee first proued in the minor Orders, shall haue hope to liue conti∣nently; shall serue the Church to which they are ascribed, and shall thinke it very conuenient to receiue the Communion on Sundayes, and solemne Feasts, when they serue at the Altar. Subdeacons shall not passe to a higher degree, vntill they bee exercised one yeere in their owne; but two holy de∣grees shall not be giuen in one day, by vertue of any priuiledge whatsoeuer. The fourteenth, None shall be ordained a Priest but a Deacon, which hath been exercised in that ministery, a whole yeere at the least, and found suffi∣cient to teach the people, and administer the Sacraments: and the Bishop shall take care that they celebrate the Masse euery Sunday, and holy day, , in case they haue cure of soules, they shall satisfie their charge; and if any be ordained to the superior Orders, before the inferior, the Bishop may dispense, if there be a lawfull cause. The fifteenth, Howsoeuer Priests receiue power, in their ordination to absolue from sinnes, yet none shall heare confessions, who haue not a Parochiall Benefice, or is not approued by the Bishop. The sixteenth, None shall be ordained before hee bee ascribed to some particular Church, or pious place, to exercise the ministery of that Order; and, if hoc abandon the place without consent of the Bishop, the ministery shall be pro∣hibited vnto him; and no strange Clerke shall bee admitted to the exercise of the Ministery without the letters of his Ordinary. The seuenteenth, To bring againe into vse the functions of the Orders from a Deacon to an Ostia∣rie, which, being vsed from the time of the Apostles, haue been intermitted in many places, that they may not be derided by the heretikes, as idle, these Ministeries shall not be exercised, but by those who haue receiued the Orders appertaining, and the Prelates shall restore those functions, and in case they haue not continent Clerkes for exercise of the minor Orders, they may take married men, so that they haue not been twice married, and be in other re∣spects apt for that exercise. The last article was for the institution of Seminaries, in which it was con∣stituted, that euery Episcopall Church should haue a certaine number of boyes, brought vp in a Colledge, neere the Church, or in another conueni∣ent place, the boyes shall bee twelue yeeres olde at the least, legitimate, and distributed into formes, by the Bishop according to their number, age, and progresse in Ecclesiasticall discipline. They shall weare the habit, and tonsure, learne Grammer, Musicke, Ecclesiasticall computation, the holy Scripture, to reade the Homilies of the Fathers, know the Rites and Ceremonies of the Sacrament, and especially that which belongeth to hearing confessions. And to defray the charge thereof, where there is any reuenue deputed for educa∣tion of children, it shall bee applied to this Seminarie, and, to supply that which remaineth, the Bishop, with foure of the Clergie, shall detract a por∣tion from all the Benefices of the Diocesse, and apply simple Benefices also to this vse, and compell those who haue Schoole-houses, or other charge to reade or teach in the Schooles of the Seminarie, by themselues, or by suffi∣cient substitutes; and Schoolemasters places shall not bee giuen hereafter, but vnto Doctors or Masters in Diuinity, or in the Canon law. And if, in any Prouince, the Churches be so poore, that a Seminary cannot bee erected in them, one, or more, shall bee appointed in the Prouince, and in the Chur∣ches of the great Diocesse the Bishop shall erect one, or more if hee thinke fit, besides that of the Citie, which notwithstanding shall depend on that of the Citie. In the end, the Decree, intimating the next Session for the sixteenth of September, was read, expressing that then the Sacrament of Matrimony was to bee handled, and other things pertaining to the doctrine of Faith, as also the prouisions of Bishoprickes, Dignities, and other Benefices, and diuers other articles of reformation. The Session continued from nine vntill six∣teene a clocke, with great content of the Legates and Popish Prelates, that matters did passe so quietly, and with such a generall consent; And they commended the Cardinall of Loraine aboue all, confessing that he had beene the most principall cause of this benefit. No act of this Councell was seene with more desire then this of this Ses∣sion, The censure of the actes of this Session. euery one being curious to know what that was which held in con∣tention so many Prelats in Trent, and all the Courts of Christian Princes in businesse ten moneths together. But it prooued to be according to the pro∣uerbe, The trauaile of mountaines, and the natiuity of a mouse. No man could finde how it could deserue not onely so great and long paines of so many great persons, but euen the least employment at all. And those who vnder∣stood Theologie, did desire that it should be once declared, what the Coun∣cell did vnderstand by the power of retaining sins, which was made one part of the Sacerdotall power; because they had declared the sence of the other, which was to remit sinnes And others wondered at the declaration, that the inferiour Orders are onely degrees vnto the superiour, and all vnto Priest-hood, in regard it doth appeare, in the ancient Ecclesiasticall Storie, that those who were ordained to any ministery or charge, were, for the most part, perpetually entertained in the same, and the ascending to an higher degree happened very seldome, and was vsed onely in case of necessitie, or great vti∣litie. None of the seuen Deacons instituted by the Apostles, ascended any higher; and in the ancient Church of Rome it selfe it doth not appeare, that the Deacons, whose office was to heare the confessions of Martyrs, did passe to the title of Priesthood. The ordination of Saint Ambrose to bee a Bishop, of Saint Hierome, Saint Austin, and Saint Paulinus to bee Priests, and of Saint Gregorie the Great to be a Deacon is described, without mention of any pas∣sage by other degrees. They did not blame the vse begun in later times, but they marueiled that they did alleadge it as a thing alwayes vsed, whereas the contrary was manifest. The Decree, that the ministeries of the Orders from a Deacon to an Ostiary should not bee exercised, but by persons promoted to those proper Orders, made a faire shew; but it seemed a thing hard to bee obserued, that, in no Church none might ring the bels, or open and shut the doores, but the or∣dinarie Ostiaries, nor light the lamps, and candles, but the Accolites, who were to exercise those manuall functions, that they might ascend to Priest-hood. And it seemed some contradiction, to haue determined absolutely, that those ministeries should not bee exercised but by persons ordained, and afterward commanded the Prelats to restore them, as much as conueniently they could. For obseruing the absolute Decree, it is very necessary; that, where persons ordained cannot be had for exercise of those functions, they must not be exercised at all: and if they may bee exercised without Orders, in places where persons ordayned cannot bee found, the absolute definition might haue better been omitted. In the Decree of the ordination of Priests, it was thought very conuenient to prescribe that condition, that they should he able to teach the people; but this did not seeme very coherent with that o∣ther doctrine and vse, that cure of soules is not essentiall to Priesthood, so that to bee able to teach the people is not necessary to those Priests who meane neuer to take that cure vpon them. And to make to a necessary con∣dition in the minor orders, to vnderstand the Latine tongue; was to shew that this was not a Generall Councell of all Christian Nations, in regard this Decree could not be vniuersall, and binde the Nations of Africa, Asia, and of a great part of Europe, where the Latine tongue neuer had place. The sixth Anathematisme was much noted in Germany; in which an Arti∣cle of faith was made of Hierarchie, which word and signification thereof is aliene, not to say contrary to the holy Scriptures; and though it was some∣what anciently inuented, yet the authour is not knowne; and in case he were, yet he is an Hyperbolicall writer, not imitated in the vse of that word, nor of others of his inuention, by any of the ancients: and following the stile of CHRIST our LORD, and of the holy Apostles, and Primitiue Church, it ought to be named not Hierarchie, but Hierodiaconia, or Hierodoulia. And Pe∣ter Paul Vergerius in Valtelina did make this and other obiections against the Vergerius ma∣keth obiecti∣ons against the Councel. doctrine of the Councell the subiect of his Sermons, relating the contenti∣ons betweene the Bishops, and detracting as much as hee could, not onely by words, but by letters also to the other Protestant and Euangelicall Mini∣sters; which they read in their Churches to the people. And howsoeuer the Bishop of Como, by order from the Pope, and the Cardinall Morone, vsed all meanes, and in a very extraordinary manner also, to cause him to depart out of that Countrey yet they were not able to effect it. Concerning the Decree of Residence, of which euery one discoursed, and expected some good resolution, because there was so much spoken and wri∣ten of it, tha nothing seemed to bee more in voice then that, marueiled that in the ende that was pronounced for a decision of which was plaine to euery one, that is, that not to reside was , except there were a lawfull cause: as if it were not all by the law of ture, that whosoeuer doeth absent himselfe from his charge, of what soeuer it be, without a lawfull cause, doeth s The successe of this Session to away the indelligence held vntill then The Spanish Prelats com∣plaine of the Cardinall of Loraine. betweene Loraine and the Spaniards. For these complained, that they w abandoned in the matter of the Institution of Bishops, and of the which hee had very often told them that hee was of their opinion, and pro∣mised to labour effectually to cause that doctrine to bee decreed without ma∣king any condition. They added that there was no hope he would bee con∣stant in any other promise, and that the Pope by making him beleeue hee should bee Legate of France, had wonne him. And other things they said, which were little for his honour. On the other side hee iustified himselfe, saying, that the offer was made vnto him to make his friends mistrust him, and that his answere was, that hee would not hearken vnto it, before are∣formation were made in Councell. Notwithstanding it was not beleeued that hee would perseuere in the same opinion, no not so much as in this matter. The Legates, desirous to finish the Councell, did, so soone as the Session was done, vse meanes to facilitate the residue; which, for matter of faith, was Indulgences, inuocation of Saints, and Purgatorie. And to this end they elected tenne Diuines, two Generals of Friars, and two for euery Prince, that is for the Pope, France, (of which there were but a few remaining) Spaine and Portugall; charging them to consider how the Protestants opini∣on in this matter might briefly bee confuted. And themselues beeing re∣solued, meant to propose their owne opinions in generall Congregation, by which the Canons might be composed, at the same time when Matrimo∣nie should be handled, that they might quickly dispatch those matters, with∣out hearing the disputes of the Diuines, as formerly they had done. In matter of reformation they treated with the Cardinall of Loraine, the Emperours and Spanish Ambassadours, to bee content that the reformati∣on The reforma∣tion of Prin∣ces. of Princes might bee proposed also: who saying it was fit that abuses should be remooued, wheresoeuer they were, the Articles were collected, and hope conceiued that all that remained might bee decided in one Session onely. But the Spanish Ambassadour, for many respects of his King did not like that haste, and therefore did crosse it, with many difficulties. First hee proposed, that it was necessary, before the Councell ended, to vse meanes to bring the Protestants thither, alleadging that it would be labour in vaine, if the Decrees were not accepted by them, and that there was no hope they would accept them, if they were not present in Councell. The Legats answe∣red that the Pope had done for his part whatsoeuer was fit, wrote letters, and sent expresse Nuncij to them all, so that nothing could bee done to make their contumacie more manifest. The Count answered, that hee did not desire it should be done in the name of his Holinesse, because that would not onely not cause them to come, but make them more auerse, but in the name of the Councell, with conuenient promises, and intercession of the Emperour. Whereunto the Legats replying, that they would consider on it, they gaue an account thereof to the Pope, that he might use meanes in Spaine to diuert such discourses, and to perswade the ending of the Councell. The Count desired also that the Diuines might speake publikely, according to the vse, concern∣ing the particulars of Indulgences, and of the other matters, perswading the Prelats, that the order might not be changed, nor the reputation of the Coun∣cell diminished, by omitting the examination of those things, which had more neede of it then any other. The Pope was much troubled with these aduises, and the rather, because Don Lewis d' Auila, and Vargas, the Ambassador resident with him, had giuen their words, that the King would be content that the Councell should end. And calling them vnto him, he made a great complaint of the Counts pro∣position. For the Protestants, he said that none did more desire to reduce them to the Church then hee; that the actions of his predecessors for fourtie yeeres, and his owne, by sending Nuncij expresly to them all, not regarding the indignitie to which hee did subiect himselfe and the Apostolike Sea, was a manifest argument thereof; that he had vsed the Emperors mediation, and the perswasion of all Catholike Princes; that he is assured that the hardnesse of their heart is voluntarie, resolute, and obstinate; and therefore that the re∣ducing of them was no more to be thought of, it beeing impossible, but the preseruation of the obedient; that so long as there was any hope to regaine them, the time did require that all meanes should be vsed to please them, but that beeing lost, it was necessarie to keepe the good, to make the diuision strong, and the parties irreconciliable, that the affaires of their King did require the same, as he would perceiue too late, in case he should temporize in Flanders, and vse termes of mediocritie, that the King should remember what good effects his seuere executions, at his entrance into Spaine, had pro∣duced whereas if hee had proceeded remisly, and desired to gaine the fauour of the Protestants, hee would haue felt those accidents which are seene in France. He complained also that the Count would prescribe a manner of handling matters of Theologie, and determine when they should be well di∣gested. And last of all hee tolde them of their promise, that the King was content that the Councell should end, which the Count did labour to hin∣der. The Ambassadors hauing excused the Count, and confessed what they had said concerning the Kings pleasure for the end of the Councell, the Pope was satisfied, so that they would be content he should say so much, where he thought it necessarie. Whereunto they consenting, hee gaue order to his Nuncio in Spaine to complaine to the King, and to tell him, that he could not penetrate the cause, why the Ambassadours of his Maiestie in Rome and Trent should speake diuersly, and, which imported more, himselfe doing what he could to gratifie him, for what cause he should be crossed by his Ministers, in regard, the Councel continuing, he was hindered from doing his Maiestie many fauors and graces, that if for his affaires in Flanders, or for the inte∣rests of the Emperour in Germanie, he did desire any thing of the Councel, he might know by experience how hard it was to effect it in Trent; that they might promise themselues any thing from him, and that hee was resolute, so soone as the Councel was ended, to send into all Prouinces to prouide for the particular necessitie of euery one, whereas in Trent generall prouisions onely can bee made, which haue infinite difficulties, to bee fitted to euery place. But the perswasions of the Count in Trent made a diuision of the Prelates, some desiring that those matters might bee exactly disputed; and the rather, because very little or nothing was spoken of them by the Schoolemen, and whereas for other things handled in the Synode there were decisions ei∣ther of other Councels, or of Popes, or an vniforme consent of Doctors, these were wholly obscure, and, in case they were not cleered, it would bee sayd that the Councel had failed in the most necessarie things. Others said, that if there were so many difficulties, and contentions in the thing decided already, how much more might they be feared that these which are full of obscuritie, where there is no sufficient light shewed by the Doctours, they might goe in infinitum, because they had a large field, in regard of many abuses which were crept into them for matter of gaine, and of the difficultie which would arise about the interpretation of the Bulls, especially of the words vsed in some, of penaltie, and guilt, as also of the maner of taking Indulgences for the dead. Therefore in these, and the adoration of Saints the vse only might be handled, and the residue omitted, and, for Purgatorie, the opinion of the heretikes condemned only; otherwise there would be no end of the Councel, nor any resolution of this difficultie. While these opinions went about, con∣cerning these matters reserued for the last, the Legats resolued to dispatch that of Matrimonie, and to abbreuiate the time of the Session, and to holde it the 19 of August at the latest. This pleased the Card of Loraine very much: The Card. of Loraine resol∣ueth to goe to Rome. who hauing receiued answere out of France, that hee should giue the Pope satisfaction in going to Rome, did resolue so to do in the end of that moneth, so that the Session were celebrated. And he was forced to ioyne with the Pope and his adherents; not onely in regard of the order receiued out of France, but because the Imperialists and Spaniards did mistrust him for the successe of the last Session. The 22. of Iuly the Anathematismes were giuen forth, not much differing from the manner, in which they were established afterwards. The greatest varietie was, that vntill then they had not sufficiently considered of the fift, condemning diuorces, allowed in the Code of Iustinian: which Anathematisme was aded at the instance of the Cardinal of Loraine, to oppose the opinion of the Caluinists. And it was easily receiued, because it was conformeable to the Schoole doctrine, and the Popes Decrees. But in that of diuorce for adulterie, the composers of the Canons did forbeare to vse the word Ana∣thema, fearing to condemne that opinion which was of Saint Ambrose, and of many Fathers of the Greeke Church, Notwithstanding the others think∣ing that it was an Article of faith, and almost all the Fathers consenting thereunto, the Canon was reformed, and the Anathema added, condemning those that say, that the bond is dissolued by adulterie, and that either of the parties may contract another Matrimonie whilest the other liueth; which Canon receiued afterwards another mutation, as shall be saide in due place. In the Congregations following, the things proposed were easily dispatch∣ed, but almost all the Prelates left those, and spake of land stine mariages, though neither the time, nor the place did comport it, and the difference of opinions therein began to be discouered. In the Congregation of the foure and twentieth day in the morning, the Bishop of Cortona, Ambassador of the Duke of Florence, was receiued; who made a short speech of the deuotion of his Prince towards the Apostolike Sea, and fauour to the Synbd: and thankes were giuen him, In the congregation that night, the French Ambassadors cau∣sed a request to be read in the name of their King, that children which are in The Am∣bassador of Florence is re∣ceiued in con∣gregation. the power of their Parents, might not, without their consent, either many or betroth themselues, or, if they did, that it should be in the power of the pa∣rents to make void, or ratifie the contract, as they pleased. And the same day the Fathers were admonished to put vp in writing to the deputies the abuses obserued by them, in the matter of Matrimonie. The voyces beeing all giuen concerning the Anathematismes, two Ar∣ticles were proposed; the promotion of married persons to holy Orders, and the making voyde of clandestine marriages. For the former, the Fathers Two new Articles con∣cerning mar∣ried Priests and secret mariages. did vniformely, and without difficultie, agree on the negatiue; and the Arch-bishop of Prague, and the Bishop of Fiue Churches, who perswaded them to thinke better on it, were scarcely heard. But the other of clandestine mar∣riage; did not passe so. For one hundred thirty and sixe did approue the making it voyd, fiftie seuen did contradict, and ten would not declare them∣selues. The Decree was composed according to the opinion of the Maior part, that howsoeuer clandestine mariages were good, so long as the Church did not make them voyde (and therefore the Synod doth anathematise him that thinketh the contrarie) yet the Church hath alwayes detested them. And now, seeing the inconueniences, the Synod doth determine, that all persons which hereafter shall either marrie or betroth themselues, without the presence of three witnesses at the least, shall bee vnable to contract, and whatsoeuer they doe therein shall be voide. And another Decree followed, commanding the Banes, but concluding, that if there were a necessitie to o∣mit them, the mariage might be made, so that it were in presence of the Pa∣rish Priest, and of fiue witnesses at the least, publishing the Banes afterwards, vpon paine of excommunication, to him that should contract otherwise. But that great number which would make void the secret mariages, was diuided into two parts, some following the opinion of those Diuines who grant power to the Church to make the persons vncapable, and some, those who say it may make the contract voide. And the Legates themselues did differ. Morone was content with any resolution, so that they might dispatch. Var∣miense thought that the Church had no power herein, and that all mariages, celebrated in what manner soeuer, with consent of the persons contracting, are good. Simoneta said, that the distinction of the contract of Matrimonie from matrimonie it selfe, and the giuing of power to the Church ouer the one, and not ouer the other, seemed to him sophisticall, and chimericall, and was much inclined not to make any innouation. Concerning the abuses of Matrimonie, many Prelates considered that the causes to hinder mariages, and to make them voyde though they were contracted, were so many, and happened so often, that there were but few not subiect to some of those defects; and (which was more) persons did con∣tract ignorantly; either not knowing the prohibition, or the fact, or by for∣getfulnesse, in whom, after they knew the trueth, many perturbations and scruples did arise, as also suits and contentions about the legitimation of the issue, and the dowries. The impediment of kinred, contracted in bap∣tisme, was particularly alleadged for a very great abuse, because in some places twenty or thirty men were inuited for God-fathers, and as many women for God-mothers, betweene all which, by Ecclesiasticall constitu∣tion, a spirituall kinred doth arise, who oftentimes, not knowing one ano∣ther, do ioyne in marriage, Many thought fit to take away this impediment; not because it was not well instituted at the first, but for that, the cause of the institution beeing ceased, the effect ought to cease also. They conside∣red that the gossips were then sureties to the Church, for the faith of the children baptized, and therefore were bound to instruct and chatechize them, according to their capacitie, by which meanes they conuersed often, and familiarly with them and their parents as also the gossips amongst them∣selues, by which meanes a certaine relation did arise betweene them, which was a cause to be reuerenced and sufficient to prohibite marriage, as all other causes to which reuerence ought to bee borne. But afterwards, when vse bad abolished whatsoeuer was reall herein, and the God-father did seldome see his God-childe and had no care at all of his education, the cause of reue∣rence ceasing, the relation ought not to haue place. Likewise the impediment of Affinitie by fornication, nullifying marri∣ages vntill the fourth degree, it beeing a matter of secrecie, did ensnare many, who, vnderstanding the trueth after the mariage, were filled with perturbations. For kinred of Consanguinity, and Affinity, it was said, that the same account beeing now not made of it, as formerly was, and, a∣mongst great personages, scarce memorie kept of the fourth degree, that might bee omitted also. Wherein there was much disputation. Some thought, that as seuen degrees of kinred did hinder marriage for many hundred yeeres, and Innocentius the third tooke away three of them at once, restrayning the impediment vnto the fourth, alleadging very com∣mon reasons, that there are foure Elements, foure humours of mans body, so, it appearing now that foure cannot bee obserued without many incon∣ueniences, the impediments may bee more iustly restrayned to the third. Others contradicted, and sayd, that so they might hereafter proceede fur∣ther, and at the last come to that of Leuiticus; which would cherish the opin∣ion of the Lutherans; and therefore did conclude that it was dangerous to innonate. Which opinion, after much examination, did preuaile. Some thought that the impediment of fornication, beeing secret, ought wholly to beetaken away: But they preuailed not, because there appeared an incon∣uenience, in regard that many things which first are secret are published af∣terwards. Many were of opinion that no nouitie should bee made in these pro∣hibitions, but power granted to Bishops to dispence, and maintained that it was better to giue it to them then to the court, because they knowing, bet∣ter the merits of the fact, and the causes, may exercise distributiue iustice more exactly herein. They sayd, the court of Rome doth often giue dis∣pensations to persons not knowen, who obtaine them by deceipt, and that diligence cannot be vsed in regard of the distance of the Countreys. besides the world beeing scandalized, thinking they are not giuen but for money, that imfamie ought to be taken away. The Spaniards, and French-men labou∣red effectually herein; but the Italians said they did it to make themselues all Popes, and not to acknowledge the Apostolique Sea, and that the diffi∣cultie of sending to Rome, and negotiating the expedition with paines and cost was profitable, because by that meanes, few marriages were contracted in degrees prohibited; whereas, if by granting power to Bishops there were a facility herein, the prohibitions would, in a short time, come to nothing, and so the Lutheranes would gaine their opinion. Here upon a common in∣cl natio grew, that none should bee dispensed with, in these prohibitions, but for a very vrgent cause; into which opinion those who could not pre∣uaile for the Bishops did enter also, thinking it was more for their credit, if that which was forbid to them, were not granted to others. After many discourses in the Congregations, it was resolued to restraine spirituall kinred; and affinity by mariage and fornication, and to confine the dispensutions also with in the limits which shall be spoken of in reciting the Decrees. There was some contention also about the ninth poynt, in which Supe∣riours Whether one may be forbid or forced to marry. are forbidde to force their subiects to marry, with threats and punish∣ments naming the Emperour, and Kings. Gulielmus Cassodorus, Bishop of Bacellona, opposed, and saide, that it could not bee presupposed, that great Princes would meddle in mariages but for great causes, and for the pub∣lique good; that threats and punishments are then bad, when they are vsed contrary to order of law, but penall precepts, conformable to the law, are iust, and can not bee reprehended. If there be any case (he said) in which the Superiour may iustly command a mariage, he may force the celebration of it, by penall commands, alleading also that it is a thing decided by the Diuines, that iust feare doth not cause an inuoluntary action. Hee desired that lawfull causes might be excepted, and those Superiours only compre∣hended in the Decree, who doe compell against iustice, and order of the law, saying, that many cases may occurre, in which the necessity of the publique good doth require the celebration of a mariage, which hee that would say, that a prince could not command, and cause, by compulsion, to bee celebra∣ted, should offend against the law of God, and man. To this reason he ad∣ded an example, that, in the yeere 1556. the second of Ianuary, Paul the 4. sent a monitorie to Dame Ioan of Arragon wife of Ascanius Columna, that she should not marry any of her daughters without his leaue, or, if she did, the matrimony, though consummated, should be void; which that most wise and sincere Pope would not haue done, if Princes had not power to marry their subiects, in case of the publique good. In the point of not mentioning Princes he was followed by many, and the name of the Emperour, Kings, and Princes, was taken away. But for the residue hee was much opposed, with this reason onely, that Matrimony is an holy thing, in which the Secular power hath no authority, and if there be any lawfull cause to compell any to marry, it must be done by the Ecclesi∣asticall power onely. The relation of the monitory of Paul, raised a great wispering in the Congregation, and afterwards gaue matter of diuers dis∣courses. Some sayd he did it, not as Prince, but as Pope, and that he had rea∣son to doe it, in regard Ascanius Columna being a traytor vnto him, he would not haue him get new adherences, by mariage of his daughters, by which hee might bee confirmed in his contumacie. Others said, that the Pope, as Vicar of CHRIST, hath no traitors intemporall matters, and that the opini∣on of those who thinke that mariages may be made void by Apostolique au∣thority is not well grounded, except it bee by course of law, or generall ca∣nons, but not for particular persons, and that, for this, neither reason can be brought, nor example found. Some denied, that one might ground himselfe vpon such actions of popes, which shew rather how farre the abuse of their power can stretch, then how farre the lawfull vse thereof is extended. And there was no lesse difficulty, because the Decree did comprehend fathers, mothers, and other domesticall Superiours, who might compell their children, especially daughters, to marry: and it was considered, that to come to excommunication, in cases of this kind, was very hard. Yet those who before had defended, that children were bound to obey their Fathers in this particular, did maintaine it. A temper was proposed, that hauing first com∣manded politique Superiours vpon paine of excommunication, domesticall Superiours should bee admonished not to compell their children against their will. But the same men still opposed, and said, it was not iust to take from fathers that power which God hath giuen them. And, in the end, it was resolued to take this part quite away. But the bishop of Barcellona, and some few besides, were not of the same opinion, as to say, that as the authority of fathers and other domesticall Superiours ouer mariages was manifest, or, at the least, not to bee doubted, and therefore not to bee spoken of, so the same consideration ought to bee had of the authoritie of Politique Supe∣riours. The Congregations, assembled to discusse this point, beeing ended, the last whereof was the last of Iulie, they beganne to speake priuately of secret mariage. And both parties continuing in their owne opinions, some said that the difficulty doth presuppose a doctrine of faith, and therefore cannot bee determined, beeing contradicted by a notable number. This troubled them much who desired they should bee made voide, and thought that they were wholly barred from all possibility to obtaine it. At this time a difficulty arose, though priuate, yet very contentious. A difficulty a∣bout censu∣ring the Archbishop of Toledo. For the Deputies concerning the Index, hauing giuen the worke of Bartho∣lomeus Caranza, Arch-bishop of Toledo, to some Diuines, to bee perused, and they hauing related that nothing worthy of censure was found in it, the Congregation did approoue it, and made publique faith thereof at the peti∣tion of his Agent. But because the booke, and the authour were vnder the censure of the Inquisition of Spaine, the Secretary Castellunne complained to the Count of Luna, and the Count to the Fathers of that Congregation, de∣siring a retractation. The fathers not inclining to reuoke the Decree, because they thought it iust, the bishop of Lerida, either mooued by the Count, or for some other cause, beganne to speake against it, and to taxe it, alleadging places of the booke, which, by a bad interpretation, did seeme to deserue censure, and, which was more, touched the iudgement and conscience of those Bishops. The Arch bishop of Prague, the chiefe of that Congregati∣on, in defence of himselfe and his colleagues, complained to the Legates, de∣siring they would shew themselues in the businesse, and protesting not to as∣sist in any publique act, vntill the Congregation had due satisfaction. The Cardinall Morone interposed, and made peace, with these conditions, that no other copie of the faith made should bee giuen, and that Lerida should giue satisfaction of words to the Congregation, and to Prague in particular, and that all should bee forgotten on both sides. And the Count of Luna, with vnresistable entreaties, got the testimonie out of the hands of the Agent of Toledo: and so this stirre was appeased. The Legates gaue the Articles of reformation to the Ambassadours, in number thirty eight, that they might commend to their consideration what pleased them, before they were giuen to the Fathers to bee discussed; which 38. Articles of Reforma∣tion. Articles were diuided, and one halfe allotted for the next Session, and the o∣ther for the Session following, for the reasons which shall bee related here∣after. The Count of Luna perswaded the other Ambassadours, to demaund, that deputies might be elected for euery Nation, to consider what was fit to be reformed, because the modell giuen by the Legates, made for the interests of Rome, could not be fitted to other countreys. But the Cardinall of Loraine, and the French and Portugall Ambassadours contradicted, alleadging that e∣uery one might speake his opinion concerning the Articles proposed, and propose others, if there were cause, so that there was no need to giue this di∣stast to the Pope, and the Legates, who could not endure to heare speach of Nations in Councell. And the Imperialists comming to this opinion also, the Count retired, but said that diuers considerations ought to bee had con∣cerning those which were proposed. The Cardinall of Loraine counselled the Legats to facilitate the businesse, and to take away those points which might seeme to cause contradiction, adding, that the fewer matters were handled, the better it would be; where∣at Ʋarmiense seeming to wonder, Loraine asked him, whether hee marueiled The Card of Loraine ex∣cuseth the change of his minde. because hee saw not in him that heate and desire of reformation, as hee had made demonstration of at other times: and he added, that his desire was the same, and had the same disposition of minde to imploy all his force therein, but that experience hath taught him, that not onely nothing perfect or ordi∣narie can bee done in Councell, but that euery enterprise in that businesse turneth to the worst. He perswaded also the Count of Luna not to seeke to hinder the reformation totally, but if there were any thing which did not fully satisfie him, hee should make the partcular knowen, and hee would la∣bour that contentment should be giuen him. The Emperours Ambassadours first of all gaue their answere in writing, the one and thirtieth of Iuly; in which they said, that, desiring a generall re∣formation in the head and members, and hauing read the Articles exhibited, they had added some things, and noted others, desiring they might be corre∣cted accordingly, and discussed by the Fathers. And because the Emperour, with the Ambassadours of many Princes, did hold a Diet in Ʋienna, to han∣dle many things concerning the Councell, they hoped they would take it in good part, if, hauing receiued a new commandement from his Maiestie, they should present other considerations also; and that, for the present, they ad∣ded eight Articles to those proposed by them. 1 That a serious, and The Imperia∣lists adde 8. Articles more. durable reformation of the Conclaue might bee made in Councell. 2. That alienation of Ecclesiasticall goods, without the free and firme consent of the Chapter, might be prohibited, and especially in the Roman Church. 3. That Commendaes, and Coadiutories, with future succession, might bee taken away. 4. That Schooles and Vniuersities might be reformed. 5. That the Pro∣uinciall Councels may bee inioyned to correct the Statutes of all the Chap∣ters; as also that authoritie may bee giuen to reforme Missals, Breuidries, Agends, and Graduals, not in Rome onely, but in all Churches. 6. That Lay-men may not bee cited to Rome in the first instance. 7. That causes may not bee remooued from the Secular Court to the Ecclesiasti∣call, vpon pretence of iustice denyed, before the trueth of the supplica∣tion bee knowen. 8. That Conseruators may not bee giuen in prophane matters. And, concerning the Articles exhibited by the Legates, they noted many things, part whereof, as being but of small weight, it will not be amisse to omit. Those of importance were. That Cardinals might bee chosen out of all Nations, that the Vniuersall Bishop might bee created by Electors of all Countreys. That the prouisions against Pensions, Reseruations and Regresses, should bee extended, not onely to the future, but to those also that are past. That the kissing of the Gospel should not be taken from the Emperour and Kings, who ought to defend it. That it may be declared what secular affaires are prohibited to Ecclesiastiques, that that which is determined in the de∣cree of Residence may not be crossed. That, in the Article of not laying taxes vpon the Ecclesiastiques, the cause of Subsidie against the Turkes and other Infidels may be excepted, The proposition, though it were of hard dige∣stion, did not so much trouble the Legats, as the doubt mooued, that some extraordinary demaund for change of Rites, receiued by the Church of Rome, and relaxation of Precepts de iure Positiuo, might come from the Diet in Ʋienna. The third of August the Frenchmen gaue their obseruations, the essentiall whereof were. That the number of Cardinals might not exceed foure and The articles exhibited by the French-men. twentie, and that no more might be created, vntill they were reduced to that paucitie. That they may bee elected out of all Kingdomes and Prouinces. That there may not be two of one Diocesse, nor more then eight of one Na∣tion. That they may not bee lesse then thirtie yeeres of age. That the ne∣phew or brother of the Pope, or of any Cardinall liuing, may not bee cho∣sen. That Bishoprickes may not bee giuen them, that they may the better assist the Pope, and, that their dignitie being equall, their reuenew may bee equall also. That none may haue more then one Benefice, and that the dif∣ference, vnknowen to the good ages of the world, of Benefices simple, and with cure, compatible, and incompatible, may be taken away, and that hee that hath two at this present, may choose and keepe one only, and that with∣in a short time. That resignations in fauour may be quite taken away. That it may not bee prohibited to conferre Benefices onely vpon those who haue not the language of the Countrey, because the Lawes of France forbid all strangers, without exception, to haue Offices, or Benefices in the Kingdome. That the criminall causes of Bishops may not be iudged out of the kingdome, in regard of the ancient priuiledge of France, that none may bee iudged out of the Kingdome, neither voluntarily, nor by compulsion. That power may bee restored to Bishops to absolue from all cases, without exception. That, to take away suits for Benefices, preuentions, resignations in fauour, man∣dats, expectatiues, and other vnlawfull wayes to obtaine them, may be remoo∣ued. That the prohibition, that the Clergie may not meddle in secular mat∣ters, may be expounded, so that they may abstaine from all functions, which are not holy, Ecclesiasticall, and proper to their order. That the Pensions, al∣readie imposed, may be taken away and abrogated. That, in causes of Patro∣nage, the ancient institution in France may not be changed, to giue sentence in the possessorie, for him who is in the last possession, and in the petitorie, for him who hath a lawfull title, or a long possession. That the lawes of France concerning Ecclesiasticall causes may not bee preiudiced, that the possessorie may beiudged by the Kings Iudges, and the petitorie by the Ecclesiastiques, but not out of the Kingdome. That none may be assumed to bee Canon in a Cathedrall Church, before he be fiue and thirtie yeeres old. That, for the Article containing the reformation of Princes, the Clergie may bee first in∣tirely reformed in this Session, and that which belongeth to the dignity and authoritie of Kings and Princes, may bee deferred vntill the next, and that nothing may be decreed therein, before they the Ambassadours bee heard, who haue giuen account to the King of those and other things, which they had to propose. But howsoeuer they proposed these difficult matters, yet they said indifferently to all, and with affectation, that it might be published, that they would not be earnest in any thing, but that which concerneth the rights and Secular affaires of their Kingdome. The Venetian Ambassadours proposed, that the Article of Patronage might be so accommodated, that it might not giue occasion of nouitie, concerning those who belong to their Republique, and Prince. The Ambassadours also of Sauoy and Tuscane made the same instances. At this time the Imperialists receiued commission from their Prince, to mediate, as they did, with the Legats, that, in the reuiew of the Index of the bookes, mention might not bee made of the Recesses, of the Diets in Germa∣nie, formerly prohibited by Paul 4: and the Emperors order was somewhat sharpe, that, in stead of handling of Ecclesiasticall matters, they would not giue a forme to the policie of Germanie, and occasion to the people who are gouerned by such Lawes, to aliene themselues from the Church of Rome a∣gainst their wills. Answere was made, that the Bishop of Prague, one of them, who was chiefe of the Congregation, might know whether any speech were made of it, and if there was not, his Maiestie might trust to his Ambassadour, who, in all causes concerning him, should bee fauoured both by them, and by the Pope. The seuenth day the Spanish Ambassadour presented his writing; in which hee said he was well satisfied with all the Articles, and would not de∣mand any thing, but onely the change of some words, which seemed vnto him to be superfluous, or that they may be expounded better. And hee tou∣ched almost all things which did enlarge the authoritie of Bishops, so mode∣rating the words, that the alteration did not seeme to be substantiall, but that indeed he did rather restraine then augment it. Hee made request also that they would treat of the Conclaue, saying, that the King did much desire it; as also that the part concerning fecular Princes might be deferred vntill ano∣ther Session. After he had exhibited his writing, hee desired the Legates, that, so soone as voices were giuen concerning the things proposed, they would depute Fathers of euery Nation, to collect what they should thinke necessary for reformation of their Countreys, that all might bee determined with a generall satisfaction. Morone answered in the name of all, that they could not consent to proceede otherwise then they had done hitherto in o∣ther matters. Wherein many things being said by both parties, by the Count to intimate the Councell was in seruitude, and by the Cardinall to shew the libertie, Morone added, that no man could complaine that hee was hindered in his libertie of speaking. The other replyed, that he could not beleeue that any thing of worth had beene done by them, and did not forbeare to tell him, that there was a great murmuring in the Councell for the particular congregations assembled a few dayes since, and that it was supposed that they were made to get voices. The Legates said, it was their duety, in the di∣uersitie of opinions, to vnderstand the trueth, and to accommodate the diffe∣rences, that matters may bee determined with vnion. The Count replyed, that it was well if it were so, but that Italians onely were called, except two or three Spaniards, and as many Frenchmen, who differed from others of their Nations. The Legats defended themselues, that they were not called in proportion, because there were an hundred and fiftie Italians in Councell, and not aboue threescore of all other Nations. The Count seemed to be sa∣tisfied, and, being parted, said to his Prelats, that the Legats hauing begun a discourse to shew that esteeme ought not to bee held of Nations, had con∣cluded it, shewing that they had euer held esteeme of them. The next day, the Legats and two Cardinals consulted about the aduer∣tisments of the Ambassadours, and how to amend the Articles of reforma∣tion, to be giuen to the Fathers and of the maner to bee held in speaking on them. In which Loraine hauing receiued new letters from France, and order, that both himselfe, and all the other French Prelats should fauour the Popes affaires, wholly bent to satisfie the Legats, perswaded them not to suffer so many points to be handled at once, but to diuide them into parts, according to the subiects, and when one part was ended, to propose another, and to hasten the Session, omitting all the things which had any difficultie, and concluding those onely, in which all, or the greatest part would agree, and particularly not to propose, in the beginning, those in which the Ambassa∣dours did not consent. The eleuenth day the Congregations began to be celebrated, to establish the Anathematismes, and decrees of Matrimonie. The proposition of the French-men was handled, to make mariages voide, contracted by children, without consent of parents, in whose power they are. And the first that gaue voice, did differ in opinion. The Cardinall of Loraine did approue it, al∣leadging places of the Scripture which giue to the Fathers power to marry their children, examples of mariages of the Patriarkes Isaac and Iacob, ad∣ding the Imperiall lawes of the Institutions and the Code, made by Christian Princes of famous memorie; as also the Canon vnder the name of Euaristus, and another of the Councell of Carthage, produced by Gratian. And hee re∣lated the inconueniences arising herein. The Arcbishop of Otranto was of the contrary opinion; saying, that this was to giue authority to Lay-men ouer the Sacraments, and make them beleeue that the authoritie in making them voide, doeth depend on the paternall, not on the Ecclesiasticall▪ Besides, it would be a decree directly contrary to the holy Scripture, which expressely faith that a man shall leaue father and mother, and cleaue to his wife. And, for inconueniences, it will cause more, referring the sonnes to their fathers in matters of conscience. And if a father would not consent to the mariage of a sonne, who hath not the gift of continencie, hee would be infinitely per∣plexed. Nine and twentie spake in that Congregation, and twentie were of opinion to omit that matter. Of the others, some approoued the decree so generally, and some restrained it in sonnes to the age of twentie yeeres, and of eighteene in daughters. In the end of the Congregation, the Venetian Ambassadours caused a The Veneti∣an Ambassa∣dours doe ex∣hibite a petiti∣on cōcerning diuorces in the Greeke Church. demaund of theirs to bee read, concerning the Anathematismes of diuorces; which did continue in substance. That their Republique hauing the king∣domes of Cyprus, Candie, Corfue, Zante, and Cephalonia, inhabited by Grecians, who haue from all antiquitie vsed to put away their wiues for fornication, & take another, for which Rite, well knowen to the whole Church, they were neuer condemned, nor reprehended by any Councell, it was not iust to con∣demne them in absence, hauing not been called to this Councell. Therefore that the Fathers would bee pleased so to accommodate the Canons concer∣ning this matter, that they may not doe them any preiudice. The Legates hauing receiued this demaund, did cause it to bee proposed, without making any particular examination of it; which caused a whispering amongst the Fathers. And in the next Congregation, some of them touched that string, repeating the same, that it was not iust to condemne the Grecians, not heard, nor cited, The Archbishop of Prague opposed, and said, that, by the generall citation of all Christians, they also were vnderstood to be cited by the Pope, To which the Cardinall of Ʋarmia added, that his Holinesse had sent particularly to inuite the Duke of Muscouia: and howsoeuer he knew not wel that hee had inuited other of the Greeke Church in speciall, yet it ought to bee presupposed that the whole nation was called, euen by speciall inuita∣tion, besides, the generall intimation was sufficient, as the Archbishop had said. Whereupon the Legates gaue order to the Secretarie, to take that particular out of the petition of those Ambassadours, that is, that the Grecians haue not beene called. But as well in regard of their proposition, as of the opinion of Saint Ambrose, they would not vse the word Anathema, but found a temper, that is, not to condemne those that say that Matrimony may bee dissolued for adulterie, and another contracted, as Saint Ambrose and some Greeke Fathers did say, and as the Easterne Church doeth practise, but to anathematize those who say, the Church may erre, teaching that the Matrimoniall bond is not broken by adultery, and that it is not lawfull to contract another, as the Lutherans doe maintaine. This forme was generally approued, & many did praise it, and say, that the Councel was assembled only to condemne the opinions of the Protestants, and not those of other Nati∣ons. Yet some doubted how one could bee condemned for saying the Church did erre in teaching an article, the contrary whereof was not con∣demned. But seeing that it was fauoured by so many, they contented them∣selues. And because the proposition about the mariage of children did bring in a generall question, whether the Church could make mariages void, all be∣ganne to speake of it, howsoeuer it had beene spoken of before, the voices collected and the Decree composed accordingly, as hath been said. Cardinall Madruccio maintained the negatiue, and alleadged many reasons and argu∣ments, saying, that he would oppose in Session also. And Ʋarmiense, and Simoneta, spake as much. But Laynez, Generall of the Iesuites, hauing dis∣persed a writing against the irritation, made a greater confusion, and gaue occasion to many to be more constant and courageous in the other opinion. And in the Congregations they beganne to answere one anothers reasons, with such prolixity, that the Legats were almost of opinion to omit that mat∣ter, for feare it would hinder the Session, and the rather, because the Bishop of Sulmona did first make a question in publique Congregation, whether that matter of irritation did belong to doctrine, or reformation. The Bi∣shop of Segouia, who spake after him, made a long discourse, to shew, that it could not be reduced to doctrine, and therefore the maior part hauing ap∣prooued the irritation, the Decree was as good as established. The Bishop of Modena followed the same opinion, adding, that to handle that matter by way of doctrine, would take away all meanes of making any reformation whatsoeuer. For in all Articles the same difficultie might be moued, whe∣ther the Church hath authoritie in that particular which is handled: which would bee as much as to put Armes into the hands of heretikes, and to take all authoritie from the Church, because it would not bee fit to meddle with that, to which it might be doubted whether their authoritie did extend. He complianed, that that question was moued by him, who ought to hold it, as cleare and decided. This opinion pleased many, who sayd that it neuer ought to bee disputed whether the Church can doe any thing or not, but to take it for granted, that as all power in heauen and earth is giuen to CHRIST, so the Bishop of Rome, his Ʋicar, hath as much, which being communicated by him to the generall Councel, it must be defended that it wanteth no power to doe whatsoeuer is profitable, without disputing whether it concerne do∣ctrine or not. It pleased those also who desired the dispatch of the Councel, perceiuing that the difficultie promoted might hinder the ending thereof, and cause a scandall. And the Legates and principall Italians vsed perswasions that it might not bee spoken of, in regard there was no cause to treat of it with the French men or the Spaniards, who did all agree in opinion, that se∣cret mariages ought to bee made voide. And many assemblies of Prelates were made both amongst themselues, and with the Legates, to this end: and it was resolued that the decree should not onely not bee placed with the do∣ctrine, that it might not seeme to be a part of it, but also that it should not bee so much as in a Chapter apart, lest it might bee doubted whether it was held to be such, or not, but that it should bee inferted amongst the articles of Re∣formation. And to remooue all difficultie the more, it was resolued also so to compose the decree, that they might not seeme to handle that matter pur∣posely, but to mingle it with the first article of the abuses, which was a pro∣uision to restore the Banes, ordained by Innocentius the third, which had been intermitted, and in decreeing as well this, as all the other conditions appro∣priated for the publike forme of Matrimonie, it should bee added, in two wordes onely, as it were incidently, that all contracts made otherwise were void, and so passe it ouer, and say no more. And the Decree was composed ac∣cording to this sence, and reformed often, alwayes very intricately, and the la∣ter had euer more difficulty then the former. And amongst other alterations, this point, established before, as hath been said, was changed, that the presence of three witnesses was sufficient for absolute validity, and, in stead of one wit∣nesse, it was substituted, that euery Matrimonie should be void, contracted without the presence of the Priest; a thing which did much exalt the Clergie, seeing that so principall an action, in Politicall and Economicall administra∣tion, which vntill then had beene onely in the hands of those to whom it be∣longed, came to be in the power of the Ecclesiasticall order, there remayning no meanes to contract Matrimonie, if two Priests, that is the Parish Priest, and the Bishop interested for some respects, shall refuse to afford their pre∣sence. I haue not found in the memorials who was Author of this great ad∣uantage; as many other particulars of importance are hid from mee also, whereof I would willingly make mention. I ought not to defraud Francis Beaupere, Bishop of Metz, of his due honour, who, thinking it impossible to reduce this Decree into such a forme as might giue satisfaction to various opinions, and to represent them with reseruations and nice distinctions, gaue this forme to it, in which it now is; which as it is subiect to diuers interpre∣tations, so it may bee fitted to diuers opinions: and being proposed in Con∣gregation, it had one hundred thirty and three voyces in fauour of it, and nine and fifty did expresly contradict. The Legates informed the Pope of all, and demanded order what they should doe, and whether the contradiction of such a number, it beeing im∣possible to perswade them, should hinder the Decree, or not. There was a A vaine feare of the plague in Trent. report, which caused some feare amongst the Fathers, that the plague was in Ispruc, and many would haue been gone, if the Cardinal Morone, who thought that matters were in good terme to finish the Councel, had not vsed meanes to know the certaintie; which was, that in Sborri, a place twentie miles distant from Ispruc, many of those poore men who laboured in the mines, died of a contagious sicknesse, by an infection taken vnder the ground, and that those of Ispruc had prouided so well, as that there was no danger the disease would come thither, which also did decrease in Sborri. A great stirre happened likewise amongst the Italian Prelates, especially those of the kingdome of Naples, and Dukedome of Milan. For the Catho∣like A stirre about the Inquisiti∣on in Milan. King moued the Pope, the moneth before, to place the Inquisition in the state of Milan, as it is in Spaine, and to make a Spanish Prelate the Head of it, alleadging, that in regard of the vicinity of places infected, it was necessary to vse exquisite diligence for the seruice of God, and defence of religion: and notice came that the Pope had proposed it in consistory & did shew (howso∣euer it was contradicted by some Cardinals) some inclination to it, at the per∣swasion of Cardinall Carpi, who told him, that it was good for the keeping of the citie of Milan in deuotion towards the Apostolike Sea, which office hee performed, for a secret hope, cherished by the Spanish Ambassador, that, by this meanes, hee should gaine the fauour of the King of Spaine to make him Pope. The cities of that state sent Sforza Morone to his Holinesse, and Ce∣sare Tauerna, and Princisuale Bisosto to the Catholike King, and Sforza Briuio to the Councell. This last to pray the Prelates, and Cardinals of that state, to haue compassion on their Countrey, which being brought into misery, by excessiue impositions, would bee wholly dissolued by this, which goeth beyond all, many citizens preparing themselues to abandon the Countrey, knowing well that that office had neuer proceeded in Spaine to heale the con∣science, but very often to emptie the purse, and for many other mundane respects also. And if the Inquisitors, vnder the Kings owne eyes doe domi∣neere so rigidly ouer their owne Countrey men, how much more will they doe it in Milan, where remedy will hardly bee found against them, towards persons whom they care lesse for. Briuio declared how the Cities were generally perplexed with this ill newes, desiring the fauour of the Prelates. This did more displease the Prelates, then the Seculars, and those of the Kingdome did doubt, that, the yoke being put vpon the state of Milan, them∣selues should not bee able to keepe it from their owne neckes, as they had done before. The Prelates of Lombardie did assemble, and resolue to write letters to the Pope, and to Cardinall Borromeo, subscribed by them all. They tolde the Cardinall it would bee a preiudice to him, to whom it be∣longed, as Arch-bishop, to bee the chiefe in that office. And they said to the Pope, that there were not such causes and respects as are in Spaine, to put so ri¦gorous an Inquisition amongst them; which, besides the euident ruine which it will bring to that state, will be a great preiudice to the holy Sea. For he could not refuse to place it in Naples also; which would giue occasion to other Princes of Italie to desire the like. And that Inquisition hauing authority▪ o∣uer the Prelates, the holy Sea would haue but little obedience from them, be∣cause they would be forced to seeke the fauor of secular Princes, to whom by this meanes they would be subiect; so that, in occasion of a new Councel, he should haue but few Prelates whom hee might trust, and commaund freely. Neither ought hee to beleeue that which the Spaniards might say, that the In∣quisition of Milan should bee subiect to that of Rome; as doeth appeare by their proceeding in the cause of the Arch-bishop of Toledo, euer refusing to send the Processes which haue beene demanded from Rome: as also doe the Inquisitors of the Kingdome of Sicilie, who depend on Spaine. The Prelates, not content with this and other reasons alleadged vnto the Cardinals, and others of Rome, by euery one to those with whom hee had any power, did perswade also that some word might bee inserted in the Decrees of the Councel, in fauour of the Bishops, to exempt or secure them, and that the man∣ner of making processes in that matter might be decreed, which if it could not be done in the first Session, it might in the next. Morone gaue them hope of sa∣tisfaction. And this accident did trouble the Councell very much, because many were interested in it. But newes came, a few dayes after, that the Duke of Sessa had found the generall distaste it gaue, and, for some reports which came vnto him, doubting that the Dutchie of Milan would follow the exam∣ple of the Flemings, who became Gueux (for so the reformists are called in those Countreys) by the attempt of putting the Inquisition vpon them, know∣ing it was not a fit time to handle that businesse, stopped their Ambassadors, promising to vse meanes that the State should haue satisfaction. And, but for this, some ma er of great moment had ensued. The Pope seeing the answeres of the Ambassadors, made to the Articles proposed by the Legates, was more confirmed in opinion, that it was ne∣cessary to finish the Councell; otherwise hee thought some great scandall would follow: and the inco ugniences foreseen hee esteemed but light, and feared some greater not thought on. But seeing the difficulty to make an end, The Pope la∣bo eth to finish the Councell. without determining the things for which the Councel was called, if the Princes were not content, he resolued to treat with all of them herein. There∣fore hee wrote concerning this to his Nuncij in Germanie, France, and Spaine, and spake of it to all the Ambassadours residing with him, and to the Mi∣nisters of the Princes of Italie also, vsing this concept, that to him that assisted to finish the Councell, hee should bee more obliged, then if hee had assisted him with armes, in some great necessitie. To the Legates hee answered that they should principally ayme at the conclusion of the Councell, and should grant what∣soeuer was necessary to obtaine it, admitting as few preiudiciall things as was possible: all which hee did referre to their wisedome who were in the businesse, so that the Councell might end with speede. But the Legates, hauing together with some of the Prelates, conside∣red the propositions of the Ambassadours concerning the reformation, and, And so doe the Legats. at their instance, omitted sixe of the Articles proposed, and reduced them to the number of two and thirtie, the one and twentieth of August gaue them to the Prelates to bee discussed. Loraine made particular congregati∣ons of the French-men to examine them: which did please the Legates, not onely because they were assured hee had the same intention as they had, but because they were desirous to accommodate them to the common satisfacti∣on, before they were spoken of in generall Congregation. And they gaue order to the Archbishop of Otranto, and Taranto, and to the Bishop of Parma, to assemble their adherents in their priuate houses, to examine them, and search what would giue a generall contentment. This continuing some dayes, the Spaniards, and some Italians, who were not called, murmured very much, resoluing to make a mutinie, and to oppose. The Archbishop of Otranto went to the Catholique Ambassadour; who The Spanish Ambassadour is displeased with the pri∣u te congre∣gations. admonished him, and sayd, hee was not willing to write to the King those things that would not please him; and told him that those particular con∣gregations were so well vnderstood by all Prelates, that he could not choose but giue his Maiestie an account of it. Hee excused himselfe, and sayd all was for a good end, to facilitate the matter, and to prouide against the dif∣ficulties before the generall Congregation. And the Bishop of Ischia com∣ming iust then to speake with the Count, from the Cardinall Morone, hee told him the same, that those priuate Congregations did displease him, and that his opinion was they could not bee for any other end then to cause diffi∣culties, and to omit part of the Articles, that the Session might sooner bee ce∣lebrated▪ Notwithstanding the Legates, ayming more to satisfie the Pre∣lates, then the Ambassadour, hauing considered on the things obserued in those particular congregations, held them for good aduertisements, and did alter and compose the Decrees, according to them. But as they were about to giue them foorth, so corrected, the Archbi∣shop of Prague, vpon an instruction newly brought vnto him by a Currier from the Emperour, did instantly desire the Legats, not to propose the Re∣formation of Secular Princes, vntill they had answere from his Imperiall Maiestie, and afterwards was seconded by the Count of Luna. The Legates were much perplexed herewith, considering that France first, and now the Emperour, and King of Spaine were not satisfied. And, on the other side, the common desire of all the Fathers was, that the reformation should bee made all together. Whereupon being assembled in the house of Nauaggero, who was sicke, they proposed, whether all the reformation should be put off, The Refor∣mation of Princes, and some Articles of the other Reformation are differed. or onely that part which concerneth Princes. Loraine was of opinion that onely this should be deferred, and the residue proposed, which would haue pleased, but that they doubted they should make the Prelates afraid, that the secular reformation should bee wholly omitted, whereby they might take oc∣casion to exclaime both priuately, and in the publique Congregations. Whereupon they resolued to satisfie the Ambassadours, deferring the re∣formation of Princes; and, that the Prelates might not take it ill, to deferre halfe at the least of the other Articles, and those the most important, giuing foorth the rest, as they had corrected them, that the voyces might bee giuen, and the Session celebrated, though the difficultie about the Decree of clan∣destine marriages did make them doubt. The sixt of September one and twenty Articles of reformation were giuen foorth, with order to beginne the congregations on the morrow. In the composition of these, Cardinall Simoneta, and his adherents, vsed all their Arte and ingenie, to proceede with such a temper, that the Court of Rome might not bee preiudiced, and the world which desired reformation, and the Ambassadours who did solicite it, satisfied, and, which was of most importance, the Bishops contented. For beeing desirous to finish the Councell, it was necessary that they should willingly concurre. The BB. had all one ayme, to haue the gouernment more free: which they thought they should obtaine, if three prouisions were made. One, that Parish Priests should depend on them; which would happen, if the collation of Be∣nefices with cure were giuen vnto them, which point, besides other diffi∣culties, did touch Reseruations, and the rules of the Chancerie, which was to discouer a great part of the secrets of the Court of Rome. For it did plainely appeare, that a gate would bee opened to take all collations from them, which was as much as to take from them all power, and life it selfe. There∣fore they came to a temper, to hold the Reseruations firme, but to make the Bishops. Patrons to giue the Cure to whom they please, vpon pretence of ex∣amination. And, to this end the 18. Article was framed, with exquisite artifice, as euery one may see; which, with a faire shew, giueth power to the Bishop to bestow the Benefice on whom he pleaseth, and yet taketh no pro∣fite from the Court. Another point was of exemptions, wherein they had formerly receiued many satisfactions, and now the 11. Article was added for a totall complement. The exemptions of the regular Orders remained; and the Bishops were in hope, either to take them quite away, or, at the least, so to moderate them, that they should be subiect vnto them, in a great part. Euer since the beginning of the yeere, there was a congregation erected about the reformation of the regulars, which, by the assistance of the Gene∣rals, and aduice of other religious persons in Councell, had made a great pro∣gresse, and established good decrees, without contradiction; for outward∣ly, and in shew the Regulars did not onely not abhorre, but desire them; but secretly they made account to interpret and practise them as they listed: yea they thought it good to haue a strict reformation in writing; as indeede all The Refor∣mation of the Regulars. their rules are one thing as they are written, and another as they are obser∣ued. But when they beganne to speake of moderating their exemptions, and subiecting them, at least in part, to the Bishops, the Generals, and the Diuines of the Orders did mutiny all together; and treating with the Am∣bassadours of Princes, they shewed them what seruice they did to people, Ci∣ties, and publique Gouernements, offering, that if any abuse whatsoeuer were amongst them, it should be amended; that they would bee contented, with any reformation, and returning to their gouernements, would execute it with more seuerity then it was ordayned; but to subiect the Monasteries to the Ordinaries, was absolutely to put them out of order. For they, not vnderstanding a regular life, nor the seuerity of discipline wherewith it is maintained, would disorder euery thing. The Bishops sayd, that a priui∣ledge is euer with detriment and derogation of the Law, and the reuocation fauourable, reducing things to their owne nature; and therefore to take them away was not to innouate, but to restore things to their ancient state. On the other side it was answered, that the exemption of the Regulars was so well prescribed by antiquity, that it could no more bee called a priuiledge, but common-law; that when the Monasteries were subiect to Bishops, the Ecclesiasticall discipline both in them and their Canons, was so well gouer∣ned, and so seuere, that it merited to superintend ouer all; that if they will restore antiquity, they must doe it in all parts, that if Bishops would returne to bee as they were in those times, Monasteries might bee subiected to them now, as then they were, but it was not iust that they should demand the su∣perintendency ouer Monasteries, before they made themselues to be such as was necessary the Rectors of a regular life should bee. The Regulars were fauoured by the Ambassadours, and by the Legates, for the interests of the Court, which would haue lost a great instrument, if they had not depended wholly on it. And they wanted not the fauour of some Prelates, who con∣fessed their reasons were good. This contention continued certaine dayes, but did abate by little and little, because the Bishops who had mooued it, did discouer euery day more difficulty in it. The third Article was concerning the impediments which Bishops re∣ceiue from secular Magistrates, who, to preserue the temporall power, doe not suffer them to exercise that absolute dominion which they would, not only ouer the Cleargy, but ouer the people. To this effect, the reformation of Princes was made, whereof wee haue spoken already, and will hereafter, more at large. This part, and others which cohere with it, were deferred vntill another Session, because it was thought a difficult matter, and that it would haue much prolonged the businesse. But the Bishops did expound this delay as if they had meant to haue done nothing in it. And they com∣plained, that, purposing to reforme the whole Church, the Cleargie onely should be reformed. The Legates vsed all meanes to appease them; shewing; that not this only was deferred, but other matters also, which were necessary to be handled, promising that the delay was only to proceed with more ma∣turitie, and that they should certainely bee discussed; that it was necessary to facilitate the dispatch of that Session, which should be a preparatorie for the other, in which all that remaineth should be handled. The Legats were all bent to hold the Session at the time appointed, thinking it necessary for the quicke dispatch of the Councell: for which the Pope, by euery ordinary Currier, and sometimes by an extraordinary, did sollicite them, that he might be set at liberty from it. In the Congregation of the seuenth of September Friar Martinus Roias, Ambassador for the Hospitalaries of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, now called Knights of Malta, was receiued; which was deferred by reason of the great opposition of some principall Bishops, that hee might not haue The Ambas∣sadour of the Knights of Malta is re∣ceiued. place aboue them, saying it was not iust that a religion of Friars should pre∣cede the whole body of so many Prelats. But, finally, the matter was accor∣ded, and published in Congregation, that place was giuen him amongst the Ambassadours, without preiudice of the Prelates, who pretend precedence. The Ambassador made an Oration, and excused their grand Master, who did not send to Trent sooner, by reason of the rumors of the Turkish Armada, and His Oration. of the incommodities they receiued by Dragut, the Pyrate. He exhorted the Fathers to remedie the present euils, which also did not a little touch the Fri∣ars of their religion, who are not idle members of the Christian Common-wealth. He perswaded the extirpation of heresies, offering that their grand Master, and Societie, would take vpon them the patronage and defence of the cause, spending not their goods onely, but their life and blood. Hee related the beginning of their religion, which was fourtie yeeres before Godfrey did goe to the conquest of the holy land; the heroicall workes done by their an∣cesters, the like whereof they could not performe now, because they were spoiled of a great part of their lands, and possessions; that they are a Barracado of Sicilie and Italie aginst the Barbarians. Therefore hee prayed the Fathers to take notice of the antiquitie, nobilitie, merits, and dangers of that Societie, and to cause their possessions, and Commendaes, vsurped from them, to bee re∣stored, and that it might be decreed by the Councel, that they should be con∣ferred vpon none but of their order, ratifying the immunities and priuiled∣ges thereof. The Speaker receiued the excuse in the name of the Synod, and promised that they would haue that consideration, as his demand, for the preseruation of the Commendaes and priuiledges of that religion, did deserue. But howsoeuer hee made the same instance afterwards to the Legates, and the relation to the Pope, his Holinesse would neuer answere any thing, but that it belonged to him onely to make prouision herein, and that hee would doe it, in time conuenient. In that Congregation and those that followed, voyces were giuen con∣cerning the 21 Articles of reformation, proposed; in which though there was nothing of great moment, yet for the order of the storie, and declarati∣on of many things which happened afterwards, it is not amisse to make mention of the principall. In the first, which was of the election of Bi∣shops, it being said that there was an obligation to prouide the most worthy, the difficultie formerly mooued did returne, that it would binde very strait∣ly the hands, as of the Pope in collations, so of kings and Princes in the no∣minations, if they were tyed to nominate one person onely. And the grea∣ter part was of opinion to remooue the comparatiue, and to say onely, that they were bound to prouide a worthy person. But on the other side, some considered that the Fathers haue alwayes vsed this maner of speech, that In the p mo Pr ther worthy to be prefer∣red. the most worthy should be preferred, and alleadged the reason, that hee can∣not bee without blame who preferreth the least worthy, though fit, before an other of more desert. There was much disputation herein; but, a meanes was found to compose all, leauing, in shew, the word, more worthy, and spea∣king first in positiue termes, and passing afterwards to comparatiues, that the prouision might bee vnderstood to be free; and so that forme was vsed which is now in Print: that is, that there is an obligation to prouide good and fit Pastours, and that he doth mortally sinne who doth not preferre the more worthy, and more profitable to the Church; leauing a naturall expo∣sition to these words, that many are more worthy and more profitable, in re∣spect of others, who are lesse; in which compasse the will of him that is to prouide hath a large field. In the third Article there was some difficulty about the visitation of Arch-bishops. These alleadged the Canons, and ancient customes, that the Suf∣fragans did sweare obedience to the Metropolitans, and were wholly subiect to their visitation, correction, and gouernement, and would not consent that their authoritie should be preiudiced, and, amongst these, the Patriarke of Venice was exceeding warme. On the contrary, the Bishops, especially those of the Kingdome of Naples, laboured to mainetaine the custome, by which they differ not in authority, but in name onely. But the number of the Bishops being great, and of the Arch-bishops small, and the Legates and Papalins fauouring those, that these might not, by granting authoritie and re∣putation by their subiection, exempt themselues more from subiection to the Court, they would obtaine nothing, but one word onely of satisfaction; that is, that they were not forbid to visit, when there was cause, approoued by the Prouinciall Councell. Whereof the Arch-bishops did complaine, and say, it was iust nothing. For there beeing one Arch-bishop in the Prouinciall Councel, and many Bishops, it is certaine that the cause would neuer bee approoued. The sixt Article was concerning the exemption of Chapters of Cathe∣drals, from Episcopall authoritie; in which the Spanish Bishops, and, in con∣templation of them, the Count of Luna hauing great interest, many restricti∣ons & ampliations were made, but not such as did content the Prelats how∣soeuer they were often changed, and in the end deferred vntill another Ses∣sion, as shall be said, The thirteenth Article, concerning Pensions, spake generally that no Be∣nefice should be burthened with greater Pensions then of the third part of the fruits, or of their value, conformeable to that which was vsed when the Pen∣sions began. This seem conuenient to the Cardinall of Loraine, because there are some very rich benefices which could not be said to be burthened, if they should pay two thirds, and others so poore, that they cannot beare any pension at all. And therefore he said, that this was not a iust distribution, and that it was better to prohibite, that Bishopriques of a thousand crownes and benefices of an hundred, should be burthened, and concerning the others, to say nothing. This opinion preuailed to the great content of the Legates, and Papalins, for the absolute power which was left to the Pope in good Benefices, Those who demaunded a moderation of the pensions of reserua∣tions of fruits formerly imposed of accesses and regresses, made many and long discourses. But the difficultie compelled euery one to bury all in silence, for the confusion and disorders which were foreseene would ensue For all would haue excused themselnes that they would not resigne their Bene∣fices without those conditions, and those especially who had payd compo∣sition to the Chamber for the obtaining of such graces, would haue complai∣ned that the graces should bee taken from them, and the money not resto∣red; the restitution wereof was a thing impossible. Finally euery one thought it enough to prouide for the future, without thinking of that which is past. The fourteenth Article, which did detest and forbid all payment of part of the fruits for the collation, prouision or possession, did much please the French men. They saide the payment of Annats was taken away by those words. And indeed he that doth consider, and examine them, cannot giue them any other sence, howsoeuer the euent hath shewed, that they haue not been so vnderstood in Rome. In the seuenteenth, in which pluralitie of Be∣nefices is forbid, and dualtie granted when one is not sufficient, some desired an addition, that they should not be distant aboue a dayes iourney, that the incumbent might make part of his residence in each of them. But they could not obtaine it, neither did they much labour, foreseeing that that addi∣tion, as also the whole Article, would not bee executed but against those of the poorer sort onely. The eighteenth, howsoeuer it did please in that it did restore in effect the prouision of Benefices with cure to Bishops; yet the French-men did oppose against the forme of the examination, because it did seeme to binde the Bishops hands to strait. Their reason was, that, by that concourse, too open and to publike a way was giuen to ambition; that antiquitie made profession to giue benefices to him that refused them, where∣as, by this new manner they would not only procure them but professe them∣selues to be worthy of them. In the nineteenth, the Bishop of Conimbria spake at large against the Expe∣ctatiues or Aduowsons, because they did make the incumbents death to bee de∣sired, and sometimes procured. And for mentall Reseruations, hee sayd they were fraudes, and neere thefts, and that it was better to leaue to the Pope the whole collation of all Benefices, then to vse such vnworthy Artifices, as was to giue vertue to a secret thought, not published, and to leaue a su∣spicion that it was not a reseruation in the minde, but an inuention after the fact. But Simoneta crossed his discourse, saying, that it was good to reprehend abuses for which no prouision was determined, that it might be procured, but seeing a common disposition to the remedie, and the De∣cree composed alreadie, it was sufficient to establish it, by consenting, with∣out multiplying words of reprehension, ambitiously, when there was no neede. The eleuenth of September, the French Ambassadours receiued letters from the King, of the eight and twentieth of August; in which hee signified, that hee had receiued the Articles, imparted to them by the Legates, and did see that matters were farre from the hope hee conceiued, because to establish these was to pare the Kings nayles, and to make those of the Ecclesiastiques The French King writeth to Trent, con∣cerning the Reformation of Princes. longer. Which because hee would not endure, hee commanded to represent to the Fathers with wisedome, dexteritie, and courage, that as euery Prince, so long as the Councell doth proceed aright, is bound to fauour it with all heate of zeale, so to couer the sore, which causeth the present euils, and to make a greater, with the preiudice of Kings, is farre from that which was expected. That he saw how lightly they passed ouer the reformation of the Clergy, who onely haue giuen the scandals to those that haue separated themselues from the Romish Church, and how they assume authoritie to take away the rights and prerogatiues of Kings, to breake their Constitutions and Customes, pre∣scribed by time out of minde, to anathematize and excommunicate Kings and Princes, all tending to sowe disobedience, sedition, and rebellion of sub∣iects against their Soueraignes; whereas it is manifest to the whole world, that the power of the Fathers, and of the Councel, extendeth onely to the reformation of the Clergie, without touching matters of State, or of Secular power and iurisdiction, which is wholly distinct from the Ecclesiasticall, and that alwayes, when the Fathers and Councels haue presumed to handle such things, Kings and Princes haue made resistance; whence many seditions and warres, to the great damage of Christendome, haue proceeded. That they should exhort them to bee carefull in that which belonged to their charge, and was necessarie for the present occasions, and to leaue those at∣tempts, which, hauing neuer done good heretofore, would produce a worse effect in those times. The King added, that, if the Fathers would not retire vpon these perswasions, they, the Ambassadours, should make a strong oppo∣sition; which being done, without expecting their iudgement, or referring themselues to their discretion, they should depart, and goe to Ʋenice, letting the French Prelats know that they ought to continue in Councel, and inde∣uour to doe God seruice, being assured, that, in case any thing shall be treated against the rights, prerogatiues and priuiledges of the King and French Church, they will not faile to absent themselues, as his Maiestie would haue them doe. He wrote also to the Cardinal of Loraine in the same manner, as he gaue order should be told the other Prelates; that is, that hee should not ap∣proue any thing with his presence, that should be handled in Councel against the Kings rights, but should absent himselfe, if he shall see that the Fathers do sally without the limits of their charge, referring him, for the residue, to the instructions sent to the Ambassadours. The Ambassadours hauing receiued these letters, and consulted of all with the Cardinall of Loraine, by his aduice, did impart them to the Legats, and caused a voyce thereof to passe in the Councel, that the Bishops, hearing of it, might desist from demanding the reformation of Princes, and them∣selues might not haue occasion to oppose, and protest. But this brought foorth a contrarie effect. For the Bishops who were quiet, in regard of the expectation that, when the Session was ended, the reformation of Princes should be proposed, vnderstanding this newes, and perceiuing that the ayme was to passe it ouer in silence, began to treat among themselues, not to pro∣ceed any further in the actes of the councell, if that also which concerneth Princes were not giuen forth; and put in consultation, together with the other articles. And they proceeded so farre herein, that a hundred of them gaue A combinati∣on of an hun∣dred Prelates concerning the Reforma∣tion of Prin∣ces. their word one to another to bee constant in this resolution; and hauing drawen a writing to this purpose, which was subscribed by all, they went to the Legats, requiring that the articles of the Reformation of Princes might be proposed and giuen to the Fathers, declaring, as it were by way of protestati∣on, that they would not proceed, nor conclude any thing in the others, but to∣gether with these. The Legates gaue good words, purposing, and hoping to diuert the humor. And, in this trouble, the Count of Luna appeared againe, and demanded, as he had done before, a reuocation of the Decree, propenenti∣bus Legatis, that euery Prelate might propose what he thought worthy of re∣formation: and demanded also that the sixt Article might bee amended, to please the Spanish Prelates, taking quite away the exemptions of the Chapters of the Canons of Cathedrall Churches, and subiecting them to the Bishop. And there being in Trenta Proctor of those Chapters, who laboured to the contrary, he commanded him to speake no more in it. Things standing in these termes, the Legates thought to hold the Sessi∣on with the matter of matrimony onely. But it was opposed, that the dif∣ficulties of Clandestine marriage were not well digested as yet, and that the Ambassadours would suspect, that if the Session were held, and the reforma∣tion not spoken of, all hope was lost that it would euer bee handled. And it being euident that no part of the reformation could bee in order, at the time determined for the Session, they proposed, in the generall Congregation of the fifteenth of the moneth, to prolong it vntill the eleuenth of Nouember; and so it was resolued. The cause of this long delay was, that the Pope, see∣ing the difficulties to finish the Councell, arising partly by the controuersies of the Prelates, and partly by the oppositions of the Spanish Ambassadour, put all hope of ouercomming them in the Cardinall of Loraine. Whereupon The Popes confidence is onely in the Cardinal of Loraine. hee wrote to the Legates, that, in case the Session could not bee held at the time appointed, it should be deferred for two moneths. And this hee did that the Cardinall might haue time to come vnto him, that hee might treat with him, of that which was impossible to doe by letters or messengers, and that, by this meanes, euery preuious disposition for the conclusion of the Coun∣cell might bee prepared. Vntill that time the Pope had no other determina∣tion then to finish the Synode, but hee firmely resolued then, that, if that The Pope is resolued by all meanes to be freed from the Councel. could not be done, there being a necessitie to rid himselfe of it, hee would by all meanes dissolue it. Hee sent the Legates facultie to make a suspension, or a translation, as they thought best, by aduice of the Fathers, and wrote vnto them that hee would, by all meanes, be freed from it, by an end of it, if it were possible, which hee did much desire, but, if it could not be, they should vse one of those two remedies: and therefore that they should endeuour to make some occasion arise, that they might bee requested to doe it, that hee might not seeme to bee the author; as also that they should sollicite the iourney of Loraine; who parted the next day after the resolution was made to prolong the Session. All the distastes of France for matter of the Councel were ceased in the Pope, though he receiued continuall troubles from that kingdome. He was much vexed with the dayly instance, made vnto him, that he would not con∣sent to the alienation of 100000. crownes of Ecclesiasticall goods, and by the The Cardi∣nal of Lo∣raine goeth to Rome. continuall detraction which he vnderstood the Hugonots vsed against him, and the Apostolique Sea. And particularly, hee was grieued at the Cardinall Chastillion, who, as hath beene sayd, layd aside the clericall habite, and called himselfe Count of Beauvois, and, vnderstanding that the Pope in Consistory had depriued him of the Cap; the last of May, hee resumed the habite of a The Cardinal Chastillion mocketh the Pope. Cardinall, and was married in it: and in a great solemnitie in Roan, the thir∣teenth of August, when the King was declared in Parliament to bee of age, he appeared in the solemnitie, in the same habite, in presence of all the French Nobilitie; which was generally thought to bee a great contempt of the Papal dignitie. Wherewith the Pope beeing mooued, hee made his de∣priuation And is depri∣ued by him. to bee printed at this time, and many copies to bee dispersed in France. The Popes Nuncio resident in France, came to Rome, a few dayes before the arriuall of the Cardinall of Loraine; who was dispatched by the Queene, to propose to the Pope a conference betweene his Holinesse, the Empe∣rour, and the King of Spaine; and the King her sonne, in whose traine her selfe would be. The proposition did not displease the Pope, because it might serue him to finish the Councell, but hee thought the execution was impossi∣ble. And he promised to send Nuncij to the Emperour and King of Spaine, to this end; and appointed the Bishop of Vintimiglia for Spaine, whom hee therefore recalled from Trent, and the Bishop of Ischia for the Em∣perour. To the Cardinall of Loraine he made excessiue demonstrations of honor, lodged him in the palace, (a thing vnusuall) went publiquely to visite How the car∣dinall of Lo∣raine was treated in Rome him in his lodging. Their discourses were partly about the Conference, though the Cardinall did not thinke it feasable. They treated about the sale of a 100000. crownes which whether the Cardinall did promote or draw backe, was not discouered. But the Pope hauing, vpon a new instance made by the French Ambassadour, answered, that he did referre it to the Coun∣cell, many thought it to be an excuse inuented by Loraine. But the prin∣cipall businesse was about finishing the Synode, which the Pope thought to be of greatest importance, and knew to bee most difficult. Wherein there was great confidence betweene them. For the Cardinall discouered to him that his interests were turned the same way, and that, since the death of his brothers, he saw plainely, that there was no meanes to maintaine Religion in France, and his house, but his coniunction with the Apostolique Sea. The Pope promised to make Cardinals at his instance, and gaue him such words as shewed an intention to make him his Successour in the Popedome: and that they might haue more credite, he made shew, that the greatnesse of that Cardinall was profitable for the endes hee had, in ayming at some mat∣ter of great moment. And the conclusion of his discourses to euery one was; We must shut vp the Councell, prouide money, and afterwards that will happen which shall please GOD. The Pope told the Cardinall, that as often as he heard of the discords, and delaies, which some did plot, he thought to suspend the Councell; but chan∣ged his opinion, for feare of the scandall which the world would take, which knew not the trueth: and that sometimes he thought this the greatest euill that could occurre, and sometimes iudged it lesse then the danger in which his authoritie was, which was the marke at which the Princes, Bishops, and all sorts of persons did shoot: but finally, that it was necessary to lay aside all respects, and come to this resolution. The Cardinall disswaded him, shew∣ing that this was not a medicine to cure the euill, but to deferre it onely, with greater danger, because hee would, in a short time, haue new demands to restore it, and plots would be laid by those who were not satisfied with him; and that to suspend was as difficult as to finish it, For there was no need to alleadge causes for this, it being sufficient to bring things to the con∣clusion, and so to ende, whereas the suspension did require an allegation of the cause, whereof euery one would speake his opinion; that it was more honourable to finish, then to suspend it; and hee vsed other reasons, which made the Pope know that his counsell was good and faithfull. And after∣wards he aduised him to deale plainely with the King of Spaine. Therefore calling the Ambassadours of that King, hee complained, in grieuous termes, saying, that he had called the Councell, vpon hope and pro∣mise, that the affaires of the Papacy would haue beene fauoured by his Ma∣iestie, to whom he had giuen all imaginable satisfaction, and would giue him more, according to his demands, if the impediments, caused by the Councel, were taken away; that he had not demanded any fauour of his Maiestie and his Ministers, but the ending of the Councell, for the seruice of GOD, and the publike good, and therein was ill vsed, though it was rather a losse to the King, then a benefit. Therefore hee was forced to hold esteeme of him by whom he was esteemed, and to cast himselfe into the armes of those that would assist him. And he dispatched also a Currier to the King, with a let∣ter of his owne hand, complaining of the offices, done by his Ambassadour and Prelats in Trent, contrarie to his Ministers in Rome, each party saying, hee doth the commission of his Maiestie. Hee shewed that it was conuenient for the seruice of GOD, of the Apostolike Sea, and of his Maiestie, that the Councell should end; and in conclusion, he desired him to declare himselfe plainely whether he would assist him heerein, or not. The Cardinall did counsel him also not to be auerse from granting to the Emperour the Cup, and marriage of Priests, by which meanes he should gaine both him and the king of the Romans, not to consent onely to the ending of the Councell, but to be fauourable, and to promote it. He told him likewise, that it was ne∣cessary to omit the reformation of Princes, because it would prolong the businesse more then any thing besides. After the departure of Loraine, nine French Bishops parted from Trent, and returned home, so that there remained but eight, besides sixe who went with the Cardinall to Rome. This departure caused an opinion, that they were recalled, and that there was a purpose, at the perswasion of the Hugo∣nots to recall the others, that, the end of the Councell approaching, no French men might bee present when they should bee anathematized. The Legates, to facilitate the difficulties of secret mariage, caused the Diuines who were maintainers and opposers of it, to make a publike disputation. This was neuer done before in any occurrence, and then did so little good, that euery one was more confirmed in his owne opinion. After this, to reassume the Congregations, and to handle the reformation, they gaue foorth the re∣sidue of the Articles, the last of which was the reformation of Princes, being forced thereunto by the mutinie of the Prelats. Of which matter concerning Princes hauing often made mention, and now being come to a place, in which it is necessarie to recite it, for the vnder∣standing of the things that follow, it must bee knowne that it did containe a propheme, with thirteene Articles, and a very pregnant Epilogue; the sub∣stance whereof was. That the Synode, besides the things constituted con∣cerning Ecclesiasticall persons, hath thought fit to correct the abuses of the Seculars, brought in against the immunitie of the Church, hoping that the Princes will be content, and cause due obedience to be rendred to the Clergie. And therefore it doth admonish them to cause their magistrates, officers, and temporall Lords, to yeeld that obedience to the Pope and constitutions of the Councell, which themselues are bound to performe. And, for facilitation heereof, it doth renew some things decreed by the holy Canons, and Imperial The Articles of the Refor∣mation of Princes. lawes, in fauour of Ecclesiasticall immunitie, which ought to bee obserued vpon paine of Anathema. 1. That Ecclesiasticall persons may not bee iudged in a secular Court, howsoeuer there may bee doubt of the title of the Clerkeship, or themselues consent, or haue renounced the things obtained, or for any cause whatsoeuer, though vnder pretence of publike vtilitie, or seruice of the King, nor shall be proceeded against there, in cause of murder, if it bee not truly and properly a murder, and notoriously knowne, nor in other cases permitted by the law, without the declaration of the law going before. 2. That in causes spirituall, of matrimonie, heresie, patronage, beneficiall, ciuill, criminall, and mixt, belonging, in what manner soeuer, to the Ecclesi∣asticall Court, as well ouer persons, as ouer goodes, tithes, fourths, and other portions appertaining to the Church, or ouer beneficiall Patrimonies, Eccle∣siasticall Fees, temporall iurisdiction of Churches, the temporall Iudges shall not meddle, neither in the Petitorie nor in the Possessorie, taking away all ap∣peale vpon pretence of iustice denied, or as from an abuse, or because the things obtained are renounced: and those who shall haue recourse to the Se∣cular magistrate, in the causes aforesaid, shall bee excommunicated, and depri∣ued of their rights, belonging vnto them in these things. And this shall be obserued also in causes depending in what instance soeuer. 3. That the Seculars shall not appoint Iudges in causes Ecclesiasticall, though they haue Apostolike authoritie, or a custome time out of mind: and the Clerkes who shall receiue such offices from the Lakes, though by vertue of any priuiledge whatsoeuer, shall bee suspended from their orders depriued of their Benefices, and offices, and made vncapeable of them. 4. That the Secular shall not command the Ecclesiasticall Iudge, not to excommunicate without licence, or to reuoke or suspend the Excommunication denounced, nor forbid him to examine, cite and condemne, or to haue Sergeants, or Ministers for exe∣cution. 5. That neither the Emperour, Kings, nor any Prince whatso∣euer, shall make Edicts or Constitutions, in what manner soeuer, concerning Ecclesiasticall causes, or persons, nor meddle with their persons, causes, iu∣risdictions, or tribunals, no not in the Inquisition, but shall bee bound to affoord the seculat Arme to Ecclesiasticall Iudges. 6. That the tem∣porall iurisdiction of the Ecclesiastikes, though with meere and mixt power, shall not bee disturbed, nor their subiects drawne to the Secular tribunals, in causes temporall. 7. That no prince or magistrate shall pro∣mise by Briefe, or other writing, or giue hope to any to haue a Benefice within their dominions, nor procure it from the Prelates, or Chapters of Re∣gulars, and hee that shall obtaine it by that meanes, shall bee depriued, and yncapeable. 8. That they shall not meddle with the fruites of Bene∣fices Vacant, vnder pretence of custodie or patronage, or protection, or of withstanding discords, nor shall place there either Bayliefes, or Vicars: and the Seculars who shall accept such offices, and custodies, shall bee excommunicated, and the Clerkes suspended from their Orders, and de∣priued of their Benefices. 9. That the Ecclesiastikes shall not bee forced to pay taxes, gabels, eithes, passages, subsidies, though in the name of gift or loane, either in respect of the Church goods, and of their Patrimonial, except in Prouinces, where by ancient custome, the Ecclesiastikes them∣selues doe assist in publike Parliaments, to impose Subsidies both vpon the Laitie and the Clergie, to make warre against the infidels, or for other vr∣gent necessities. 10. That they shall not meddle with Ecclesiasticall goods, mooueable or immooueable, vassallages, tenths or other rights, nor in the goods of communities or priuate men, ouer which the Church hath any right: nor shall rent out the depasturing or herbage which groweth in the lands and possessions of the Church. 11, That the letters, senten∣ces and citations of Iudges Ecclesiasticall, especially of the Court of Rome, so soone as they bee exhibited, shall bee intimated, without exception, published, and executed, neither shall it bee necessarie to require con∣sent or licence, which is called Exequatur, or Placet, or by any other name either for this, or for taking possession of Benefices, though vpon pretence of withstanding falshoods, and violences, except in fortresses and those Benefices in which Princes are acknowledged by reason of the temporalitie, and in case there shall bee doubt of falsitie, or of some great scandall or tumult, the Bishop, as the Popes delegate shall constitute what hee thinketh needefull. 12. That Princes and Magistrates shall not lodge their officers, seruants, souldiers, horses or dogs, in the houses or Monaste∣ries of the Ecclesiastikes, nor take any thing from them for their foode or pas∣sage. 13. And if any Kingdome, Prouince, or place shall pretend not to be bound to any of the things aforesaid, by vertue of priuiledges from the A∣postolike Sea which are in actuall vse, the priuiledges shall bee exhibited to the Pope, within a yeere after the end of the Councell, which shall bee con∣firmed by him, according to the merites of the Kingdomes or Prouinces, and, in case they be not exhibited before the end of the yeere, they shall be vnder∣stood to bee of no force. And, for the Epilogue there was an ad ∣tion to all Prindes to haue in veneration the things which concerne the Clergie, as peculiar to God, and not to suffer them to bee offended by o∣thers, renewing all the constitutions of Popes and holy Canons, in fa∣uour of Ecclesiasticall immunitie, commanding vnder paine of Anathema, that neither directly nor indirectly; vnder any pre ence whatsoeuer, any thing bee constituted, or executed against the persons or goods of the Cler∣gie, or against their libertie, any priuiledges or exemptions, though imme∣moriall notwithstanding. And this is it which was first imparted to the Ambassadours, and by each of them, sent to their Princes, whereupon the French King gaue the order to his Ambassadors before mentioned, And the Emperor hauing seene them wrot to the Cardinall Morone, that hee could not possibly assent, either as Em∣peror, Are distast∣full to the Emperour. or as Arch-Duke, that they should speake in Councell of reforming the iurisdiction of Princes, nor to take from them authority to receiue assi∣stance and contributions from the Clergie, putting him in minde, that all the former euils did arise from the oppressions attempted by the Ecclesia∣stikes against people and Princes. That they should beware not to prouoke them more, and cause greater inconueniences to arise. After Loraine was departed, the French Ambassadours put their protesta∣tion in order, to make vse of it if need were. In the Congregation of the two and twentieth of September one of the Fathers made a long speach to shew. that the cause of all deformation proceeded from Princes; that they had more neede of reformation; that the Articles were already in order, and was now time to propose them, that they might not vanish to nothing by delaies. After hee had spoken, the Ambassadour de Ferrieres made a long querulous The speach of de Ferrieres. Oration, or, as the Frenchmen say, a complaint. The contents where∣of, in the principall points, were. That they might say to the Fathers as the Ambassadours of the Iewes did to the Priests. Ought wee also to continue fasting & lamenting: That there are more then 150. yeres part since the most Christian Kings haue demanded of the Popes a reformation of the Ecclesi∣asticall discipline; that for this end only they haue sent Ambassadors to the Sy∣nods, of Constance, Basil, and the Lateran, to the first of Trent, & finally to this second. What their demands were, Iohn Gerson, Ambassadour in that of Con∣stance, the Orations of Petrus Danesius, Ambassadour in the first of Trent, of Guido Faber, and of the Cardinall of Loraine in this second, doe testifie: in which nothing was demanded but the reformation of the manners of the ministers of the Church; and notwithstanding this they must still fast and lament, not seuentie yeeres, but two hundred, and GOD grant they be not three hundred, and many more. And if any should say, that satisfaction hath beene giueth them, by Decrees and Anathematismes, they did not thinke that this was to satisfie, to giue one thing in payment for another. If it shall bee said that they ought to bee satisfied with a great bundle of reformations proposed the moneth before, they had spoken their opinion concerning that, and sent it to the King, who had answered, that he saw few things in it befitting the ancient discipline, but many things contrary. That that is not the plaster of Isaias, to heale the wound, but of Ezekiel, to make it raw, though healed before. That these additions of excommunicating and ana∣thematizing Princes, was without example in the ancient Church, and did make a way to rebellion; and all the Articles concerning the reformation of Kings and Princes, haue no ayme but to take away the libertie of the French Church, and offend the Maiestie of the most Christian Kings, who, by the example of Constantine, Iustinian, and other. Emperours haue made many Ecclesiasticall lawes, which haue not onely not displeased the Popes, but they haue inserted some of them in their Decrees, and iudged Charles the Great, and Lewis the ninth, principall authors of them, worthy of the name of Saints. He added, taht the Bishops had, with them, gouer∣ned the Church of France, not only since the times of the Pragmatique, or Con∣cordate, but foure hundred yeeres and more before the booke of the Decre∣tals; and that these lawes haue beene defended and renewed by the later Kings, since that the Decretals, substituted in place of them, haue deroga∣ted from them in the times following. That the King, beeing now of age, would reduce those lawes, and the libertie of the French Church into obseruation, because there is nothing in them contrarie to the doctrine of the Catholique Church, to the ancient Decrees of Popes, nor to the Councels of the Church vniuersall. Hee said moreouer that those lawes doe not prohibite Bishops to reside all the yeere, and to preach euery day, not onely nine moneths, and in the feasts, as was decreed in the last Session; nor forbid them to liue in sobrietie and pietie, and hauing the vse onely, and not the benefit of the reuenues, to distribute them, or rather to render them to the poore, who are owners of them. And hee proceeded in naming o∣ther things of the Councel, with the like ironicall manner, that hee see∣med to iest at them. Hee added, that the power giuen by GOD to the King, the lawes of France, and the libertie of the French Church, haue al∣wayes forbid Pensions, Resignations in fauour or with Regresse, pluralitie of Benefices, Annats, Preuentions, and to litigate for the Possessorie before any but the Kings Iudges, or for the propriety, or other cause, ciuill or criminall, out of France, and forbid also the hindering of appeales, as from abuse, or to hin∣der that the King, Founder and Patron of almost all the Churches of France, may not make vse of the goods and reuenues, though Ecclesiasticall, of his Subiects, for instant and vrgent necessitie of the Common-wealth. Hee said afterwards, that the King marueiled at two things. One, that they, the Fathers, adorned with so great Ecclesiasticall power in the ministerie of GOD, assembled onely to restore Ecclesiasticall discipline, not regarding this, should binde themselues to reforme those whom they ought to obey, though they were stiffenecked. Another, that they should think they can and ought, without any admonition, excommunicate and anathematise Kings and Princes, which are giuen by GOD to men, which ought not to bee done to any ordinary man, though perseuering in a most grieuous offence. He said, that Michael, the Archangel, durst not curse the Deuill, or Micheas, or Daniel, the most wicked Kings, and yet they, the Fathers, were wholly con∣uersant in maledictions against Kings and Princes, and against the most Christian, if hee will defend the lawes of his ancestors, and the liberty of the Gallicane Church. His conclusion was, that the King did desire them not to decree any thing against those , or if they should, that hee commanded his Ambassadors to oppose the Decrees, as they did oppose them. But if, ting the Princes they would attend seriously to that which al the world expectch, it would bee most ble to the King, who did command them, the Ambassador to that hee spake in the Kings name. Afterwards hee did the heauen, earth; and the Fathers, to consider whether the King demand were iust, whether it were honest for them to make orders for themselues throughout the whole world; whether this were a me to take compassion, not vpon the Church, nor vpon France, but vpon themselues, the Fathers, their dignity, reputati∣on, and s, which cannot do preserued but by the Arts by which they were gained in the beginning; that in so great confusions they must bee wa∣ry, and not cry when CHRIST commeth, s nd Vs into the heard of ▪ that if they would restore the Church to the ancient reputation, comp the aduersaries to repentance, and reforme Princes, they should follow the ex∣ample of Ezekias, who did not imitate his father, nor his first, second, third, and fourth grand-father, who were vnperfect, but went higher to the imi∣tation of his perfect ancestors; so it was not fit at that time to respect the next predecessors, though very learned, but to ascend as farre as Ambrose, Augustine, and Chrysostome, who ouercame the heretiques, not by arming Princes to the warre, themselues in the meane while picking their nailes at home, but with prayers, good life, and sincere preaching. For they, hauing framed themselues first like Ambrose, Austine, and Chrysostome, will make the Princes also to become Theodosii, Honorij, Arcadij, Valentiniani, and Grati∣ani; which he said they hoped for, and praied God it might bee so; and here hee ended. The Oration, when it was pronounced, did anger very much, not onely the Papalins, but the other Prelates more, and French-men also: Is censured. and, when it was ended, there was such a whispering, that it was necessary to finish the Congregation. Some did taxe it of heresie; and others said, it was much to bee suspected, at the least; and others, that it was offensiue to godly eares. They said, hee had taken occasion to doe it, in absence of the Cardinall of Loraine, who would neuer haue endured those termes, and that his end was to dissolue the Councell, that hee did attribute to Kings more then belongeth to them; that hee inferred that the Popes authority is not necessary for the vsing of Church goods; that hee made the French King like to the Queene of England. But nothing did so much offend, as that hee said that the authority of the French Kings ouer persons and goods Ecclesi∣asticall, was not founded vpon the Pragmatique, Concordates, and priuiledges giuen by Popes, but vpon the law of Nature, holy Scripture, ancient Coun∣cels, and lawes of the Christian Emperours. The French Ambassadours were reprehended also, because they did not follow the steps of the Emperours and Spanish Ambassadors, who, though they had the same interests, made not such a commotion, because they knew there was no reason for it. De Ferrieres defended himselfe, & said, that the Le∣gates had promised the Cardinall of Loraine, that this matter should not bee spoken of, but with such moderation, as that it should not touch the affaires of France, which was not performed; that the Kings instruction had beene, imparted to the Cardinall, who, if he had beene present, would not onely haue consented to, but counselled Protestation; that those were great Igno∣rantes, who hauing seene nothing but the Decretals, Lawes of foure hundred yeeres, did thinke that there were Ecclesiasticall lawes before them; that if any would reforme the King by the Decretals, he would reforme them by the Decrees, and lead them also to more ancient times, not onely of Saint Austine, but of the Apostles also; that he did not make the French King as the Queene of England, but did oppose them, who haue begunne long since to enlarge their owne authority, by di ing the Kings; that if those Arti∣cles did so much damnifie the Emperour, and Catholique King; as they doe France; they would neuer haue beene proposed, and therefore he was not to take example by those, who haue not equall interests. The Arch-bishop of Sant, and the Abbat of Claraual were distasted most of all, who went vp and downe, saying, that the Ambassadours had done ill to protest, and that their end was to make a confusion, and giue occasion for a Nationall Councel in France; that they were men not well affected, creatures of the King of Na∣uarre, sent by him to the Councel, for his owne deseignes, had protested without the Kings commission & that it was fit to make them shew their in∣structions & to frame an Inquisition against them, as not hauing a good opini∣on in matter of faith. Where in great differences did arise between the Ambas∣sadours and them. The next day the Ambassadors gaue the King an account of the causes why they had deferred the protestation vntill then, and how they were forced, at that time, to come vnto it, adding, that they would de∣ferre the registring of it in the acts of the Councell, vntill his Maiesty had seene it, and commanded them what they should doe. The Legats not hauing a copie of the Oration made a collection of it by the memory of those who had beeene most attentiue, to send it to the Pope; of which de Ferrieres, hauing gotten a copie, complained, that many things were expressed against his intention, and in particular, where hee named Ec∣clesiasticall lawes, it was repeated, spirituall lawes, and that Kings might take Church goods at their pleasure, whereas hee had sayd onely for necessa∣ry cause. By this he was forced to giue foorth his Oration, and sent a copie of it to Rome, to the Cardinall of Loraine, excusing himselfe for not hauing vsed words of such acrimony as he was commanded in the last instructions, and in the first, which are reconfirmed in those; adding also that he thought it necessary to obey the King, and was not willing to vndergoe the reprehen∣sions of the Counsellors of Parliament, who would haue taxed him, if in a Generall Councell, matters of so great importance had beene determined against that which hath beene by them so exactly maintained; besides, the Kings authority, which hee defended, hauing beene vpheld foure hundred yeeres by the Kingdome of France, against the war, in opposition of it, made by the Court of Rome, it was not iust that the Fathers of the Councell, the greater part of whom are Courtiers, should be Iudges of the ancient differen∣ces, which the kingdome hath with that Court. He gaue a copie of the ora∣tion to the Ambassadors also, and to as many as did desire it, and some saide, that he had pronounced it otherwise then it was written. Whereunto hee replyed, that that could not bee said by any that had any meane vnderstan∣ding of the Latine, and that, howsoeuer it was the same pronounced, and written, yet if they thought otherwise, they must remember that the stile of the Synod was neuer to iudge of things as they were deliuered in voyce, but as they were exhibited in writing, and therefore they should moue no con∣trouersie herein, or, if they would, himselfe was to bee beleeued before any other. The oration being published, it was answered in the name of the Synod, And answe∣red. by a namelesse man. Hee said, that the French Ambassadours had reason to compare themselues to the Ambassadours of the Iewes, because they had both made an vniust complaint against GOD; and that the same answere might be giuen them, which the Prophet gaue to that people, in the name of GOD, that if they had fasted and lamented so many yeeres, or ate and drunke, all was for their owne interests; that the Kings of France were cause of all the abuses of that Kingdome, by naming to Bishoprickes vnlearned persons, ignorant in Ecclesiasticall discipline, and more inclined to a lasciuious then to a religious life; that the French-men would not haue a resolution in the controuersies of faith, that Christian doctrine might allwayes be vncertaine, and place might be giuen to new masters, who might rub the itching eares of that vnquiet Nation, that they spared not to say in those turbulent times, that it belonged to the King, though very yong as yet, to dispose of all the gouerment of the Church; that they had sayd, with asseueration, that be∣neficed men had onely the vse of the reuenues, whereas in France time out of mind they haue carried themselues for Vsufructuaries, making Testaments, and receiuing inheritances from their kinsfolke, who die intestate; that to say the poore are owners of the reuenues, was much contrary to another saying in the same oration, that the King is Patron of all Ecclesiastical goods, and might dispose of them at his pleasure; that it was a great absurdity, to say, that the King might not bee reprehended by a generall Councell, seeing that Dauid was reprehended by the Prophet Nathan, and tooke it in good part; that it did a little sauour of heresie to taxe Bishops of these later times, as if they were not true Bishops. In the end, hee spake at large against the saying of the Ambassador, that Kings are giuen by GOD, confuting it as he∣reticall, condemned by the extrauagant of Boniface the eight, Vnam sanctam, if hee did not distinguish, that they are from GOD, but by mediation of his Vicar. The Ambassadour published an Apologie in answer of this writing, as if Which cau∣seth him to make an A∣pologie. it had beene made to the Synod, saying, that the Fathers could not answere them as the Prophet did the Iewes; for they demaunded a reformation of the Cleargie, principally in France, knowing the defects of it, and not as the Iewes, to whom the cause of their fasting and lamentation was imputed be∣cause they were ignorant of their owne defects; that the Fathers, ascribing the cause of the Ecclesiasticall deformation to their Kings, should take heede they did not like Adam, who layd the blame vpon the woman which God had giuen him for company; saying, it was a great fault in the Kings to pre∣sent vnworthy Bishops, but a greater in the Popes to admit them; that they had desired the reformation before the doctrine, not to leaue it vncertaine, but because, all Catholiques consenting therein, they thought it necessary to begin with corrupted manners, the fountaine and source of all heresies, that he was not sorry hee had said, that, in the Articles proposed, there are many things repugnant to the ancient decrees, yea, he would adde that they did de∣rogate also from the constitutions of the Popes of later times; that hee had said that Charles the great, and Lewis the ninth, had constituted Ecclesiasticall Lawes, by which France had beene gouerned, not that the present King did meane to make new, and if he had, he had spoken conformably to the holy Scripture, the ciuill lawes of the Romans, and to that which the Ecclesiasti∣call authors, Greeke and Latine, doe write, before the booke of the Decrees; for saying that beneficed men had onely the vse of the reuenues, hee asked pardon, because he should haue sayd that they were onely Administrators, and that those who take his saying in ill part, must complaine of Ierom, Au∣stin, and the other Fathers, who did not say onely, that the Ecclesiasticall goods did belong to the poore, but that Clergy men, like seruants, did gaine all for the Church; that he neuer said that the King had free power ouer Ec∣clesiasticall goods, but that all did belong to the Prince, in time of instant and vrgent publike necessitie, and he that knew the force of those words, did vnderstand well, that, in such a time, neither request, nor authoritie of the Pope could take place; that he had reprehended the Anathema against Kings in that manner as it was set downe in the Articles, and did grant that Prin∣ces and Magistrates might bee reprehended in that sort as Nathan did, but that they should not bee prouoked with iniuries and maledictions; that ha∣uing incited them, by the example of Ezekias, to make a reformation, accor∣ding to the paterne of the ancient times, it could not bee inferred that he did not thinke the Bishops of the last times to be lawfull, knowing very well that the Pharises and Popes sit in Moyses chaire: that in saying the power of Kings commeth from God he hath said absolutely and simply, as the Prophet Da∣niel, and Paul the Apostle haue written, not remembring the distinction of mediate & immediate, nor the Constitution of Boniface, of which if hee (being a French-man) had thought, he would haue repeated what the Stories say of the cause and beginning of that extrauagant. This Apologie did not diminish the bad opinion conceiued against the Ambassadours, but increased it rather, it being (as they sayd) not an excuse The gouern∣mēt of France is taxed by the Fathers. of the error committed, but a pertinacie in maintaining it. And many dis∣coursed not so much against the Ambassadours, as against the Kingdome. They sayd, it did plainly appeare of what mind they were who managed the affaires of France. They noted the Queene Mother, that shee gaue credit to the Chastilons, especially to him that had quitted the Cardinals Cap; that the Chancellor, and the Bishop of Valence had too much power with her, at whose instance that vnluckie checke had beene giuen to the Parliament of Paris, with the detriment of Religion; that she had inward familiaritie with Cursor, and with his wife, whom, in respect of their Religion, shee should not haue endured to looke vpon; That the Kings Court was full of Hugonots, exceedingly fauoured; that sollicitation was still vsed to sell Ecclesiasticall goods, to the great preiudice of the Church; and other things they sayd of this nature. But while the Councell was in this motion, by meanes of these differen∣ces, the Count of Luna, according to his vse, to adde difficulties to those which were proposed by others, made instance for the abrogation of Pro∣ponentibus Legatis. A thing which did much trouble them, because they knew not how to content him, without preiudice of the formed Sessions. For not onely the reuocation, but euery modification or suspension, did seeme to bee a declaration, that they had not lawfully proceeded in the things past. But the Ambassadour, seeing nothing done concerning his demand, so often The abroga∣tion of propo∣nentibus Le∣gatis is pro∣moted againe. made, said, that hitherto he had negotiated modestly, but should bee forced to alter his course; and spake more boldly, because the Pope, vpon his for∣mer instances, had written that they should doe that which was conuenient, and did wholly referre himselfe vnto them. The Legates, to be quit of his importunitie, answered, that they would leaue it in the liberty of the Coun∣cell to make the declaration, if he thought good; and so the name of libertie of the Councel did serue to couer that, which did proceed from others. For the Legates did at the same time vse strong perswasions with the Prelates their friends, that a delay might bee interposed, to referre this particular to the end of the Councel, and to enioy the benefit of time, that some ouerture might bee made to some course lesse preiudiciall. But the Count, hauing dis∣couered the practises, prepared a protestation, desiring the Emperours, French, and Portugal Ambassadours to subscribe it; who perswaded him not to bee so earnest, at that time. For Morone, hauing promised the Emperour, that prouision should bee made herein before the end of the Councel, vntill it were vnderstood whether that would be performed or not, they knew not how hee could protest concerning the other. And Cardinall Morone, to pa∣cifie the Count, sent Paleotto often to negotiate with him, in what maner his request might be granted: which himselfe did not well vnderstand; because his meaning was not to preiudice the decrees past, and, with this condition, it was hard to finde a temper. In conclusion, the Legates gaue the Count theirword that the declaration should be made in the next Session, so that a meanes were found to satisfie the Fathers. Newes being come to Rome of the French protestation, the Pope, and the whole Court were wonderfully moued, thinking it was purposely done to dissolue the Councel, and imputed it vnto them. But the Pope complained aboue all, that while the King did demaund a fauour, and a grant of a hun∣dred thousand crownes of the reuenues of the Clergie of France, his Ambas∣sadours should say, in the face of the whole Councell, that hee might take them without him. And the Cardinall of Loraine was troubled more, be∣cause he thought it would be a great crosse to his negotiation with his Holi∣nesse. He laboured to make it appeare, that this did happen against his will, and that he would haue diuerted it, if he had been in Trent, that that instructi∣on was a remnant of the Councels taken in the life time of the King of Na∣uar, and the execution procured by the dependants of that faction, of which de Ferrieres was one; that that faction, though it professed the Catholique reli∣gion outwardly, did hold strict intelligence with the Hugonots, who desired a dissolution of the Councell without a quiet end, that they might not be ana∣thematised. But he said, that those who gouerne the affaires in Trent, were not without blame, in regard, that before his departure from that Citie, the things concerning that matter, stood in good tearmes, the Legates hauing promised morethings, with which the Ambassadours were contented. One, that they would not speake of Kings, and Soueraigne Princes, but onely of certaine little Lords, who grant to Bishops no exercise of Ecclesiasticall iuris∣diction; the other, that all things depending on graces done by the Pope, should bee excepted, as indulgences, priuiledges, and graunts of the holy Sea, & notwithstanding, since his departure, they had giuen to the Fathers the first forme, with the same things in it, which they had promised to take away. But he assured his Holinesse, that, notwithstanding this, the Councel should haue a quiet end, and promised to write to the King, and complaine of that which was done, and to vse meanes that the Ambassadours should returne to Trent, which he hoped to obtaine. According to this promise, he wrote into France, and to the Ambassa∣dours. These, he told that their action had this excuse, that it was done, but that hereafter they should continue in doing their duty, without making any more innouations. He wrote to the King, that the opposition made by the Ambassadours seemed vnto him very strange; and the rather, because they had done it without his priuitie, and that there was neither reason, nor occa∣sion for it; that his absence from Trent was the cause why the Ambassadours had applied, out of season, a sharpe plaster, to a small sore; that, at his re∣turne, he would make prouision therein with great case. But because things done alreadie could not bevndone he praied his Maiestie to write to the Am∣bassadours, to continue in doing their dutie, and to abstaine from violent courses. He added, that he found the Pope well inclined, and disposed to an holy and serious reformation of the Church; that Christendome was happy in hauing so worthy a Pastor, that hee sent him backe to Trent, so well in∣structed of all his holy intentions, for the ending and conclusion of the Councel, that he might hope for an happy successe. And because, in the end of the Councel, the decrees must bee subscribed by the Fathers, and Ambas∣sadours, who haue assisted in the name of their Princes, he desired the King to cause his Ambassadours to returne, that they may bee present, and accom∣plish that which is the complement of the protection, and of all the fauours done to the Councel by his Maiestie, by his Brother, Father, and Grand-father. The Cardinall had much adoe to defend himselfe, not onely with the Pope, but with the Colledge of Cardinals also in Consistory; who said, that Princes desired the liberty of the Councell, yet not in the least and iustest thing that concerne them, but onely for the destruction of the Ecclesia∣stiques. The Pope gaue order that better consideration should be had of that which was to bee written to Trent about that reformation, saying, hee did it, not to meddle in the affaires of the Councel, because hee meant to let the Fathers alone, but onely to instruct the Legates, by way of counsell. But, in the meane while, hee wrote to the Legates, that if the French-men would depart, they should doe it, but that they should not giue them occasion, but should bee very carefull to hold the Session at the time appointed, when Lo∣raine should be returned, and to finish the Counsel with one Session more, holding it within two or three weekes at the most; and that they should conceale this order, imparting it to none but to Loraine. And if the Empe∣rours Ambassadours should mooue them, they should answere, that, at the arriuall of that Cardinall, they would resolue what to doe. And he encōura∣ged them; saying, that hee had brought Germany and France to his purpose, and that nothing remained but Spaine, which answered, that it was not good to finish the Councell, because many things, and the most principall did remaine to be handled. Notwithstanding he had hope, he said, to reduce it, and to conclude the Synode, with a generall satisfaction. And indeed hee was secure of France and Germanie. For besides his treatie with Loraine, who did abundantly secure him of France, hee receiued at the same time a resolu∣tion from the Emperour, that he was content with the end, and would pro∣mote it. And howsoeuer his Nuncio aduised that his Maiestie was doubtfull in resoluing, and that there was danger he would change, yet, vnderstanding that the King of the Romanes was author of the resolution, saying, that it was good to finish it, because it did no good, nor gaue any hope that it would doe, he was assured that that King, mooued by himselfe, and by good reason, would perseuere in his purpose, and, by consequence, keepe his father in that opinion. But the French Ambassadours, after the Oration, did no more appeare publiquely in Trent. They let those few Prelats remaining know, that the Kings pleasure was that they should oppose the fift Article and the second, because the persons, and causes of France might by vertue of those two, bee drawen to letigate out of the Kingdome; and the ninteenth, because by it, the preuentions were canonized, and the Parlaments depriued of their prero∣gatiues, in matter of benefices. The Legates, so soone as the Fathers had made an end of speaking of the 21. Article proposed vnto them the others also; wherein all the Ambassa∣dours opposed, in regard of the matter concerning Princes. The Fathers complained, that, being to reforme, as alwaies hath been said, all the Church, in the Head and in the members, in the end, the Princes would haue no re∣formation but for the Clergie onely; which could not bee reformed neither, if the Prelates were hindered in performing their charges, and the Ecclesia∣sticall liberty not preserued. Notwithstanding, the Princes, who seemed to desire reformation, did oppose that decree which did restore vnto them their liberty and iurisdiction, necessarie for it. The Legates excused them∣selues, and said, they must needs giue some satisfaction to the Prelates; that the Ambassadours had had time to alleadge their grieuances, and to handle the cause with reason, and that it was too much violence to oppose onely de facto, and to shew that the Councell is onely for reformation of the Cler∣gie, and not of the whole Church. Newes came at the same time, that the Emperour was very sicke, and his The Empe∣rors sicknesse troubleth the Fathers. Ambassadours said, that, in case hee should die, the Councell would not be se∣cure, because the safeduct would bee ended. The Legates sent presently to the Pope, for order what to doe, and the Prelates began to thinke more of pa ting from Trent, then reforming Princes. Therefore a Congregation was holde the seuenth of October, to resolue what should bee done with the o∣ther Articles of Reformation, besides the one and twentie, and especially with that which concerneth Princes. In which after long discussion, it was concluded that the Session should be celebrated with the matter of Matrimo∣nie, and the 21. Articles of reformation, and that of the Princes should bee de∣ferred. The next day the French Ambassadors parted from Trent to Venice, according to the Kings order. The Pope, though well satisfied of Loraine, and of the French-men, his dependants, yet prouoked against that faction from which hee thought the The French Ambassadors goe to Venice. motiue of the protestation, made in Councell, came, hee resumed his deter∣mination, made at the time of the Edict of pacification with the Hugonots, to proceede in Trent against the Queene of Nauarre: which hee had put off, foreseeing that the Emperors Ambassadors would oppose as they did when mention was made of proceeding against the Queene of England, & resolued to it in execution in Rome. And the thirteenth of the moneth hee cau∣sed The procee∣ding against fiue Bishops of France, and of the Queen of Nauarre. a sentence to be published against the fiue French Bishops formerly cited, as hath been sayd, and a Citation to bee affixed to the gates of Saint Peters Church, and in other publique places, against Iohan Queene of Nauarre, the widow of Antonie, that, within the terme of sixe moneths, shee should ap∣peare to defend her selfe, and to shew reasons why she should not bee depri∣ued of all her Dignities, States, and Dominions, and the marriage betweene Antonie of Ʋandome, and her, made voyd, and the issue illegitimate, and that she had not incurred other penalties, declared by the Canons, against here∣tiqdes. The Cardinall of Loraine, before the Pope came to those sentences, and processe, vsed perswasions to him, and put him in minde, that the maximes held in France did much differ from those of Rome. For it would bee ill taken in that kingdome, that the causes of BB. in the first instance should bee iudged in Rome, and that the Citation against the Queen, as well for the same cause, as in regard it was with temporall punishments, would giue matter of talke, and bad satisfaction to many. But those perswasions being vnderstood by the Pope, as they were made, brought forth no other fruit, but that which the Cardinall did secretly desire. For the conference, which the Queene Mother so much desired, by euery Currier that came from her, new in∣stance was made to the Pope. But newes came from the Emperours Court, that hee would not hearken vnto it; and out of Spaine, though complemen∣tall words of the Kings desire to haue it effected, yet a resolution that the times and coniunctures did not comport it. The Cardinall of Loraine was of opinion, that howsoeuer there was no hope, yet the Pope should not for∣beare to send expresse Nuncij for this purpose, as beeing an office whereon many other negotiations, for the seruice of the Apostolique Sea, might de∣pend, and, in particular, to remooue impediments of the conclusion of the Councell, in case any should arise. Whereupon Visconte was dispatched into Spaine, and Santa Croce into Germanie, in shew, to treat of this conference, but indeede, with other particular instructions. In Trent, the Legates, being not willing to giue occasion of any difficul∣tie while the Session was expected, did propose Indulgences, Purgatory, wor∣shipping of Saints and images, not to publish the Decrees in the next Session, but in the other following, adding the manner how the Diuines ought to handle those matters, that is, to giue their opinion in writing only cōcerning the vse of them, and not to speake of the other Articles, and giuing order to the fathers to deliuer their voyces in short termes, protesting that whosoeuer would delate besides the point, should be interrupted. Notwithstanding the Diuines made long writings, and so diuers, that the Fathers knew not what to resolue in that doctrine. For the reformation, howsoeuer twentie Articles were concluded, and the one and twentieth treated on with the Count of Luna, the Spanish Prelates complained that the Article of the exemption of Chapters, and the last, of the first instances, and appeales, were altered from that which was noted by the Prelats. Whereat the Legats, and Deputies for making the Decrees, dis∣daining, answered, that either they should iustifie what they saide, or holde their peace. And some words of distast passing, the Count of Luna appea∣red in their fauour, demanding that the oppositions made by his Prelates a∣gainst those two Articles might bee considered on. Afterwards, he desired that in the first Article, in which the criminall causes of Bishops were reser∣ued to the Pope, a declaration should be made, that no preiudice should bee done to the inquisition of Spaine; which request the Ambassador of Portugal had first made for his kingdome. And the Legates answering, that those matters were already decided, the Count replyed, that if they should be pro∣posed so, he would not go into the Sessiō, nor suffer any of his Prelats to enter. Whereupon Cardinal Morone said, that if they would not go into the Session, it should be done without them. The Count ascribing this rigiditie of the Legats to the Proctor of the Chapters of Spaine, he commanded him to de∣part immediatly from Trent; which displeased the Legats. But that nothing might hinder the Session, the time whereof did draw nigh, to please the Am∣bassador in the Article of the causes of Bishops, they caused kingdoms, where the Inquisition was, to bee excepted. For that of the first instances, because they would wholly take from the Pope all authoritie to make commissions in Rome, the Legats thought it too hard. The sixt also did import very much. For the Chapters of Spaine are a very principall member, and doe more depend on the Apostolike Sea them Bishops doe; because these are all by the nomination of Kings, whereas more then halfe of the Canonries are of the Popes pure collation. Therefore they resolued to deferre this matter vntill the next Session, rather then to preiudice the Canons. And they imployed the Emperours Ambassadours to perswade the Count to be content with it, by which meanes that difficultie also was ouercome. The declaration of Propenentibus Legatis did remaine. For which not being able to find a temper, they tolde the Count, that hee should propose a forme how he would haue it done. Wherein hee excusing himselfe, they deputed three Canonists to treat with him, and to find a meanes that might please him, so that it were not to alter the way prescribed by the Pope. But The Card of Loraine retur∣neth to Trent and hasteneth, the end of the Councell. the Cardinall of Loraine came fitly for that occasion, who being parted from Rome with instruction and conclusion of all things, and hauing tooke Venice in his way, to perswade the Ambassadours to returne before the end of the Councell, and now arriued in Trent, caused, with his desteritie, the Count to approoue that manner, by which that difficultie, so much agitated, receiued an end, with satisfaction of all and it was made the one and twentieth Article of reformation, proposed in the Congregation of the ninth of Nouember held for this purpose, and approoued with small resistance. After this, the second Article was taken away, which being done, all the Articles were read ouer againe, and the suffrages briefly deliuered. In which Loraine, to salue his honour, said, that howsoeuer he desired a greater reformation, yet, knowing that in the beginning one could not come to the last remedies, hee assented to the Decrees, not iudging them sufficient, but hoping that the Pope, either by bringing the old Canons into vse, or by celebrating other generall Councels, would adde a perfection. It is worthy of memorie that, in this Congregation, hee made a long di∣gression, He maketh an Oration in of the Pope in forme of an encomiasticall Oration, of the Popes good will, of his desire to see the Church reformed, the Episcopall degree restored to its anci∣ent dignitie, and the Councell ended, with the fruit of all Christendome. The Arch-Bishop of Granata, when it was his turne to speake, brake out into the Popes commendation also, attributing as much vnto him as the other, but ad∣ded, that either the Pope did iudge that he could not doe as he would, or had not authority to make his ministers and dependants to execute his will Here I must make a great mutation of stile. For whereas in the former narration I haue vsed that which is proper to describe varietie of minds, and opinions, The state of the Councel is quite altered. one crossing the designes of another, and delayes of resolutions interposed, framing my selfe to declare the counsels of diuers, sometimes contrary a∣mongst themselues, hereafter I must make relation of one aime only, and vni∣forme operations, which seeme rather to flie then run to one only end, where∣of I can giue but one cause, not to repeate it in all places, that is; the ioynt reso∣lution to precipitate the Councell. Therefore to speake simply, I must say, that Letters came from the Pope, with resolution that the Councell should bee ended, though with distast of the King of Spaine, because hee had meanes to make an agreement with him that they should establish the Decree of secret marriage, with as much vnion as was possible, but yet to doe it, though the same opposition should continue; that, for the reformation of Princes, and restitution of Eccle∣siasticall iurisdiction and libertie, they should not descend to any particu∣lar but renew the ancient Canons, and without Anathemaes; that if any difficultie did arise, concerning the other Articles, they should reserue it for him, who would make prouision therein; referring them, for the re∣sidue, to the Cardinall of Loraine, who was fully informed of his whole will, whom they ought to beleeue. Afterwards, hee sent a forme in what sort they should finish the Councell; which did containe, that all things done vnder Paul and Iulius should be confirmed, and declared that they were all done in this one Councell, and that, in all things, the authoritie of the A∣postolike Sea should be preserued; that of the things decreed the Popes con∣firmation should be demanded, that all the Fathers should subscribe, and, after them according to the example of the ancient Emperours, there should be a subscription of the Ambassadors, that the Princes might be bound to the ob∣seruance of the Decrees, and to persecute with Armes those of the contrary religion, leauing it in the power of them, the Legats, together with Loraine to adde, diminish, or alter, according to opportunite. All which things were kept most secret vntill after the Councel that they might the better as shall be said. The eleuenth of Nouember came in which the Session was held with the vsuall ceremonies. Voyces beeing to bee giuen in the matter of clande∣stine mariage▪ Cardinall Ʋarmiense, who held it a matter of and thought the Church had no authoritie ouer it, would not bee sing himselfe that in a matter of positi law, be thought The Session. deliuer his minde freely, though the contrarie were hee should bee forced to say, for satisfaction of his Sy∣nod could not make that decree, which might haue used, same distates, such as hee was not willing to giue. Francis Richar made the Sermon in which hee admonished the Fathers that this most holy Synod hauing beene in trauaile these two yeeres, and euery one beeing in expectation of what it will bee deliuered, it was not fit it should produce childe because the worlde doth expect a sound and perfect issue. For effecting hereof, it was conuenient to imitate the Apostles, yrs, and Primitiue Church, making them a patterne whence to take the of the infant which is to come into the world. These were hee said, do∣ctrine religion and discipline, all which, beeing degenerated in these times, must bee restored to their ancient integritie. And that this is it which hath been expected so long, and is expected still. The ceremonies being ended the letters of Madam, Regent of Flanders, concerning the sending of Prelates to the Councell, were read, as also the Mandates of the Duke of Florence, and of the grand Master of Malta. Afterwards the doctrine and the anathematismes of matrimonie were read by the Masse Bishop to which all consented. The Articles of reformation of Matrimony beeing read to the first, of the annullation of the clandestine, Cardinall Morone said, that it Varietie of o∣pinions about clandestine mariages. pleased him, if it pleased the Pope. Simoneta said it did not please him but referred himselfe to the Pope. Of the others sixe and fifty did absolutely de∣nie, and all the rest did approoue it. Afterwards the Decrees of reformation were read. And beeing come to The Decrees of reformati∣on. the fift, of the criminall causes of Bishops, perceiuing the Kingdomes, where the inquisition is, were excepted, a great commotion was raised a∣mongst the Fathers, the Lombards and Neapolitans saying confusedly, that that exception was neuer proposed in Congregation, and that it ought to bee remoued; which they were forced presently to doe. Afterwards the Cardinall of Loraine sayd, concerning the same poynt, that hee did ap∣prooue the Decree, vpon condition that it did not preiudice any of the pri∣uileges, rights, and constitutions of the Kings of Frange, as had been con∣cluded in the Congregation the day before, declaring that they did not pre∣iudice the authoritie of any Prince. And, in the end of the Decrees, hee made a protestation, in his owne name, and of the other French Prelates, wholly conformable to that other, made two dayes before, in the Con∣gregation; that is, that their nation did receiue those decrees, not as a per∣fect per∣fect reformation, but as a preparation to one entire, hoping the Pope would supplie the defects in time, and occasion, by bringing into vse the old, Ca∣nons; or by celebrating other generall Councels, to giue a perfection to the things begun. And hee desired, in the name of all the French Bishops, that this might bee inserted in the Actes of the Councell, and a publique instrument made of it. Diuers other things were added by others, and some oppositions, of no great moment, made against some of the Articles, where in some differences arising, it was said, they should be accommodated in a general Congregation because it was then late 2 houres within night. And for the conclusion of the Session, the Decree of the intimation of the next for the ninth of December, was read, with power to anticipate, declaring that the sixth Article now deferred, and other Articles of reformation exhibited, and other things belonging thereunto, should then bee handled, adding that in case it shall fit, and the time comport, some doctrines may be han∣dled, as they shall bee in their times proposed in the Congregations. The doctrine of the Sacrament of Matrimonie did containe. That A∣dam did pronounce the bond of Matrimonie to be perpetuall, and that one∣ly two persons may bee ioyned therein, a thing more plainely declared by CHRIST who also by his passion, hath merited grace to confirme it, and to sanctifie those who are ioyned. Which is intimated by Saint Paul, when hee sayd that this was the great Sacrament in CHRIST and the Church. Whereupon Matrimony in the Euangelicall Law, exceeding the ancient mariages, by addition of grace, it is iustly numbred amongst the Sacra∣ments of the new law. Therefore the Synode, condemning the here∣sies in this matter, doth constitute the Anathematismes 1. Against him that shall say, that Matrimonie is not one of the seuen Sacraments, instituted by CHRIST, and doth not conferre grace. 2. Or that it is lawfull for Christians to haue many wiues at once, and that this is not forbidden by any Law of God. 3. Or that onely the degrees of affinitie, and consan∣guinity, expressed in Leuiticus may nullifie the mariage, and that the Church may not adde others, or dispence with some of them. 4. That the Church cannot constitute impediments, or hath erred in constituting them. 5. That one of those who are maried may dissolue the Matrimony, for heresie, trou∣blesome conuersation, or voluntary absence of the other. 6. Or that lawfull matrimonie, not consummated, is not dissolued by a solemne religi∣ous vow. 7. Or that the Church hath erred in teaching, that the matri∣moniall bond is not dissolued by adultery. 8. Or that the Church doth erre, in separating those who are married for a determinate or indeterminate time, in respect of carnall coniunction, or cohabitation. 9. Or that the Ecclesiastiques of holy Order, or professed Regulars may marry, as also all those who finde they haue not the gift of chastitie, in regard that GOD doeth not denie the gift to him that doeth demaund it. 10. Or that shall preferre the state of mariage to virginitie, and chastitie. 11. Or that the prohibition of mariage, in certaine times of the yeere, is superstition, or shall condemne the benedictions and other ceremonies. 12 Or that ma∣trimoniall causes doe not belong to Ecclesiasticall Iudges. The Decrees of the reformation of Matrimony did containe. 1. That howsoeuer it be true, that clandestine mariages haue beene true and law∣full, so long as the Church hath not disallowed them, and that the Synode doth anathematize him who doth not hold them for such, as also those who affirme, that mariages, contracted without consent of parents, in whose power the maried parties are, is voyde, and that the Fathers may either ap∣prooue or disprooue it, yet the Church hath euer forbid, and detested them. And because prohibitions doe no good, the Synode doth command, that the matrimony shall be denounced in the Church three Festiuall dayes, before it bee contracted, and no impediment being found, shall bee celebrated in the face of the Church, where the Parish Priest hauing interrogated the man and the woman, and heard their consent, shall say, I ioyne you in matrimony in the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, and shall vse other words, ac∣customed in the Prouince. Notwithstanding the Synod doth referre it to the will of the Bishop, to omit the Banes but doth declare those to bee vn∣capable of mariage, who attempt to contract it without the presence of the Parish Priest, or another Priest of equall authority, and of two or three wit∣nesses, making void and nullifying such contracts, and punishing the trans∣gressours. Afterwards, it doth exhort the parties maried, not to dwell toge∣ther, before the benediction, and command the Parish Priest to haue a booke, in which mariages, so contracted shall be written. It doth exhort the par∣ties that are to be maried, to confesse, and communicate before the contract, or consummation of the mariage, reserueth the customes and ceremonies of euery Prouince; and will haue this Decree to bee of force within thirtie daies after it shall be published in euery Parish. Secondly, concerning the impediments of mariage, the Synode doth af∣firme, that the multitude of prohibitions did cause great sins and scandals. Therefore it doth restraine that of spiritual cognation, to that which the bap∣tized and their parents haue with the god-fathers and god-mothers, and the number of these to one man & one woman only Ordaining the same about the kinred which doth arise by the sacrament of Confirmation. 3. It doth restraine the impediment of honestie, which hath its beginning from con∣tracts, to the first degree onely. 4. That of affinity by fornication, to the first and second. 5. It doth take away all hope of dispensations for ma∣trimony, wittingly contracted in degrees prohibited, and to those who haue ignorantly contracted, without the solemnities, in case of probable igno∣rance, a dispensation may be giuen gratis. But to contract in degrees pro∣hibited, a dispensation shall neuer be granted, or seldome onely, for a iust cause, without cost; nor in the second degree amongst Princes, except for a publique cause. 6. Matrimony shall not bee contracted with a woman stollen away, so long as shee is in the power of him that did steale her; and doth declare those Raptors, and those that doe assist them with counsell, aid, or fauour, excommunicated, infamous, vncapable of all dignity; and the Raptor, whether hee many the woman or not, shall bee bound to giue her a dowry, at the pleasure of the Iudge. 7. It doth ordaine, that vagabonds shall not marry without a diligent inquisition first made, and licence of the Ordinary, exhorting the secular Magistrates to punish them seuerely. 8. It doth ordaine against Concubinaries, that being admonished thrice by the Or∣dinary, in case they seperate not themselues, they shall be excommunicated, and perseuering one yeere after the censure, the Ordinarie shall proceed se∣uerely against them, and the Concubines after three admonitions, shall be pu∣nished, and, if the Bishop shall thinke fit, chased also out of the Territorie, by assistance of the secular power. 9. It commandeth euery temporall Lord and Magistrate, vpon paine of excommunication, not to compell their subiects, or any others, to marry, directly or indirectly. 10. It doth restraine the ancient prohibitions of nuptiall solemnities, from Aduent, to the Epiphany, and from Ash wednesday, to the Octaues of Easter. The Decrees of reformation, not as they were read in Session, but as they were corrected the next day in Congregation (which was appoynted The Decrees of Reforma∣tion. to be don) did containe. 1. That publike prayers shall be made, though the Church be vacant, that whosoeuer haue right in the promotion, shall be admonished that it is a mortall sinne, if they shall not vse all diligence to pro∣mote the most worthy, and profitable for the Church, borne of lawfull ma∣trimony, worthy in regard of their life, age, doctrine, and of other qualities required by the holy Canons, & Decrees of this Councel. That in euery pro∣uinciall Synod, a forme of examination shall be prescribed, by approbation of the Pope, fit for euery place, & the examinatiō made according to that pre∣script shall be sent to the Pope, to be discussed by the Cardinals, & proposed in Consistorie; and all other things required by the Synod for age, life, do∣ctrine, & other qualities in the promotion of BB. shal be required in the crea∣tion of Cardinals, though but Deacons, which the Pope, if he can conueni∣ently, shall take out of all Nations, and those that are fit. And it was added; that the Synod being grieued to see such great incommodities of the Church, cannot choose but call to mind, how necessary it is, that the Pope, in regard of his duty, should endeauour to assume Cardinals of excellent worth, and to prouide the Church of fit Pastours, because if the flocke should perish by their negligence, CHRIST will demand an acount of his Holinesse. 2. That the prouinciall Councel shall be called by the Metropolitane, or, the most ancient Suffragane, within one yeere at the most after the end of this Synode, and afterwards euery two yeeres at the least. That Bishops shall not bee forced heereafter to goe to the Metropolitane Church. That those who haue not an Arch-bishop shall elect one in the prouinciall Synod, in which hee ought to assist, and receiue the constitutions thereof, their ex∣emptions and priuiledges otherwise remaining firme. And the Diocesan Synods shall bee celebrated euery yeere, in which the exempted, except those who are subiect to general Chapters, shall assist. Which generall Chap∣ters hauing secular Churches annexed, in regard of them, shall assist also. 3. Bishops shall bee bound to visite the Diocesse euery yeere, either in per∣son, or by visitors, and all of it, if they can, or, if it be large, in two yeeres at the least. Metropolitans shall not visite the Diocesse of the Suffragans, but for a cause, approoued in the prouinciall Councel. The Arch deacons, and other inferiours, shall visite in person, and shall take a Notary, by consent of the Bishop. The Visitor shall goe with a modest traine of men, and hor∣ses, dispatching the visitation as soone as may bee; and shall not receiue any thing but frugall and moderate diet, which may be giuen either in kind or money; yet so as that if there bee a custome in any place not to receiue so much as these, it shall be obserued also. That Patrons shall not meddle with that which concerneth the administration of Sacraments, or the visitation of the ornaments of the Church, immoueable goods, or rents of houses, ex∣cept it do belong vnto them by right of the foundation. 4. That Bishops shall be bound to preach in person, or, hauing a lawful impediment, by o∣thers. And in case the Parish Priest be hindred that hee cannot preach in his owne Church, hee shall, at his charge, maintaine another to doe it, deputed by the Bishops. And he shall preach euery Sunday and solemne feast, and in Aduent and Lent, euery day, or thrice a weeke at the least. That the Bishop shall admonish euery one to go to his owne Parish, to heare the sermon. That none shall preach against the Bishops will, whose cure shall be, that Christi∣an doctrine be taught in euery Parish. 5. That criminall causes against Bi∣shops that be of great weight, shall bee iudged by the Pope, and if there shall be occasion to commit them to any out of the Court, they shall be commit∣ted onely to the Metropolitan, or to Bishops elected by the Pope, and to take information onely, reseruing the definitiue to the Pope: but small matters shall bee iudged in the Prouinciall Councell, or by Iudges deputed by them. 6. That the Bishops shall dispense in the Court of Conscience, with all their subiects, in all their irregularities, and suspensions for secret offences, except voluntary murther, and absolue from all cases reserued to the Apostolike Sea, either by himselfe or his Vicar, as also from the excesse of heresie, by himselfe, but not by a Vicar. 7. That the Bishop shall haue care that the force and vse of the Sacraments shall be expounded to the people in the vul∣gar tongue before they bee administred, according to the forme of a Cate∣cechisme, which the Synod will compose, which the Bishop shall cause to be faithfully translated into the vulgar, and to be expounded to the people by the Parish Priests. 8. That to publike offenders publike Penance shall be giuen, but the Bishop shall haue power to change it into a secret. In euery Cathedrall Church a Penitentiarie, Master, Doctor, or Licentiate in Theolo∣gie, or Canon, of the age of fourtie yeeres, shall bee appointed by the Bishop. 9. That the Decrees of the Councell, vnder Paul the third, and Pius the fourth, concerning visitation of benefices exempted, shall be obserued in the Churches which are not of any Diocesse, which shall bee visited by the next Bishop, as Delegate of the Apostolike Sea. 10. That where visitation or correction of maners is in question, no exemption or appeale, though to the Apostolike Sea, shall hinder or suspend the execution of that which is de∣creed or adiudged. 11. That for titles of honour which are giuen to Proto∣notaries, Count Palatines, Kings Chaplaines, or seruants in war, Monasteries, Hospitals, those persons shall not be exempt from the authoritie of Bishops, except they shall reside in the houses, or vnder their obedience, and Kings Chaplaines, according to the constitutions of Innocentius the 3. And exempti∣ons granted to the seruants of Cardinals, shall not be extended to that which concerneth benefices. 12. That no person vnder the age of twenty fiue yeeres, shall be promoted to dignities with cure; and the Arch-deacons, if it may be, shall be Masters in Theologie, or Doctors, or Licentiate in the Ca∣non Law. And none, vnder the age of two and twenty yeeres, shall be pro∣moted to any dignitie without cure. Those that are promoted to Benefices with Cure, shall bee bound to make profession of their faith with in two moneths; and Canons shall doe the same. And none shall be receiued to any dignitie, Canonry, or portion, except he shall haue that order, which it doth require, and that age which is necessary for the receiuing of it. That in Ca∣thedrall Churches, all the Canons and Portionaries shall be Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, and the Bishop, with the Chapter, shall distribute how many shall bee of euery order, but so, as that one halfe at the least shall bee Priests. The Synod doth exhort also, that all the dignities, and halfe the Canonries in the Cathedrall and famous Collegiat Churches may bee conferred vpon Doctors in Diuinitie, or in the Canon Law, and that none may bee absent more then three moneths in the yeere. That the daily distributions may not be giuen vpon any pretence whatsoeuer, to any that hath not beene pre∣sent in the offices, and that euery one shall performe his office in his owne person, not by substitutes. 13. There being many poore Cathedrall Chur∣ches, a remedy shall bee consulted on in the Prouinciall Councell, and the Pope desired to make prouision according to his wisedome. The Bishop also shall haue care to prouide for poore Parish Churches, either by vnion of some Benefice not regular, or by assignation of first fruits, or tithes, or by contributions and collections of the Parishioners. Parish Churches shall not be vnited to Monasteries, Canonries, simple benefices, and religious or∣ders of Souldiers, and those that are vnited shall bee reviewed by the Ordina∣ries, and the Cathedrall Churches, not exceeding a thousand crownes, and the Parish Churches, not exceeding an hundred crownes, shall not be here∣after burthened with pensions, or reseruations of fruits. Where the Parishes haue no certaine confines, but the Sacraments are administred indifferently to those that doe demaund them, the Bishop shall confine them, and they shall haue their proper Parish est. And in Cities which haue no Parishes, they shall bee erected as fast as may bee. 14. The Synod doth detest, and for∣bid all institutions or customes of paying any thing for the obtaining of ti∣tles, or possessions, except it be conuerted into pious vses, declaring them to be simoniacall who shall vsurpe herein. 15. In Cathedrall and Collegiate Churches where the Prebends and distributions are too smal, the Bishop shal haue power to vnite simple Benefices, or to reduce them to a smaller number. 16. The Episcopall Sea being voyd, the Chapter shall elect one or two Economickes, or a Vicar, within eight dayes, or, if not, this authoritie shall be deuolued to the Metropolitane. And the Bishop when he shall bee created, shall take of them an account of the administration; and punish them, if they haue offended. 17. That no Ecclesiasticall person, though a Cardi∣nall shall haue more then one Benefice, which not being able to maintaine him honestly, another simple Benefice may bee added, so that they doe not both require personall residence, which shall be vnderstood of all Benefices, as well secular as regular, of what title or qualitie soeuer, though commen∣ded. And hee that hath now more Benefices then one shall bee bound to leaue all but one, within sixe moneths, or if not, they shall be all voyd. Not∣withstanding, the Synod doeth desire that some prouision should bee made for those that resigne, in some conuenient manner, as shall seeme best to the Pope. 18. In case of vacancie of any Church in any manner whatsoeuer, all shall be written downe that are proposed or doe propose themselues, and shall bee all examined by the Bishop with three examiners, at the least, and amongst all those which shall bee iudged fit, the Bishop shall elect the most sufficient, vpon whom the collation of the Church shall be made; and in Ecclesiasticall patronages, the Patron shall present to the Bishop him that is most worthy. But in Lacke patronages he that is presented by the Patrons shall be examined by the examiners, and not admitted, except he be found to be fit. And Examiners shall bee proposed euery yeere in the Diocesan Synod, of which the Bishop shall elect three, who shall bee Masters, or Do∣ctours, Secularor Regular, shall sweare to performe their duety, and shall not receiue anything, either before or after the examination. That expe∣ctatiue graces for Benefices shall not bee granted hereafter, nor any other, extending to Benefices that shall bee vacant; and withall, the mentall reser∣uations shall be prohibited. 19. That causes Ecclesiasticall, euen benefi∣ciall also, shall bee iudged by the Ordinarie in the first instance, and ended within two yeeres at the most. That there shall be no appeale but from the definitiue sentence, or from that which shall haue the force thereof, except in those which the Pope shall thinke fit to call to himselfe, for an vrgent and reasonable occasio That matrimoniall and criminall causes shall bee re∣serued to the Bishop onely. That in matrimoniall, those that are proo∣ued to be poore, shall not bee forced to litigate out of the Prouince, neither in the second or third instance, except the aduerse part will allow food and charges of the suit. That the Legats, Nuncij, and Ecclesiasticall gouernours, shall not hinder Bishops in their causes, nor proceed against Ecclesiasticall persons, but in case of the Bishops negligence. That the Appellant shall be bound to bring at his charge, the actes made before the Bishop, to the Iudge of the appeale, which the Notarie, being conueniently payed, shall be bound to giue within one moneth at the farthest. 20. That in the words of the decree, made in the first Session vnder the present Pope Pius the fourth, that is, Proponentibus Legatis, the meaning of the Synod was not to change in a∣ny part the vsuall manner of handling matters in generall Councels, nor to adde or detract any thing, besides that which hath beene constituted hereto∣fore by the sacred Canons, and by the generall Synods. In the end, the next Session was intimated for the ninth of December, with power of anticipa∣tion to handle the sixt Article, and the other which were proposed, and de∣ferred, and other points also, as opportunitie should serue, and as they should be proposed in Congregation. There was not such expectation of the issue of this Session, as of the last, as well because the generall curiositie was then satisfied, as because it did seeme that the matter of Matrimonie could not affoord any thing of any great obseruation. The world was more attentiue to see what issue the pro∣testation made by the French Ambassadours would haue: which was read with varietie of affections. Those who were ill affected to the Court of Rome, did commend it, as true, and necessarie. But the Popes adherents thought it as abominable, as the Protestations formerly made by Luther. In the sixt Anathematisme of Matrimonie, many did wonder, that the dis∣solution The censure of the De∣crees. of mariage not consummated, for a solemne vow, should bee made an Article of faith, because the matrimoniall coniunction, though not con∣summated by carnall copulation, is a bond instituted by the Law of GOD. For the Scripture doeth affirme, that there was a true mariage Mary and Ioseph, and the solemnitie of the profession being or re po , as Boniface the eighth hath decreed, it seemed strange not so humane bond should dissolue a diuine, as that he should bee condemned for an hereticke, who will not beleeue, that an inuention of man, borneth any hundred yeeres since the Apostles, should preuaile against a diuine instituted on, made at the first creation of the world. In the seuenth it was thought to bee a captious speech, to condemne for an hereticke him that shall say that the Church hath erred, in reaching that, Matrimonie is not dissolued by adulterie. For if one should say absolutely, that Matrimony ought to be dissolued for that cause, without saying or thin∣king that one hath erred, or not erred in teaching the contrary, it seemeth that this man should not bee comprehended: and yet it doeth not appeare how one can thinke so, except the hold the contrary to bee an errour. It was iud∣ged, that they should haue spoken plainely and said absolutely, that no dissolued by adulterie, or that both opinions are probable, and not to make an Article of faith concerning a word onely. But these men would not haue made the difficultie, if they had knowen the causes before mentioned, why they did speake in that maner. The ninth Canon did affoord matter of speech also, by that affirmatiue, that God doth not deny the gift of chastitie to him that doth demaund it a right, because it did seeme to be contrary to the Gospel, which affirmeth that it is not giuen to all; and to Saint Paul, who doth not exhort to demaund it, which was more easie then to marry. The Polititians knew not what to thinke of the twelfth Anathematismem; that it should bee heresie to hold that matrimoniall causes doe not belong to Ecclesiasticall Iudges, it being certaine, that the Lawes of mariage were all made by the Emperours, and the iudicature of them administred by the se∣cular Magistrates, so long as the Roman Lawes were in force, which the rea∣ding onely of the Theodosian and Iustinian Codes, and of the Nouels, doth eui∣dently demonstrate. And in the formes of Cassiodore there is mention of termes vsed by the Gothish Kings in the dispensations of degrees prohibited, which then were thought to belong to ciuill gouernment, and not to bee matters of religion, and to him that hath any skill in story, it is most knowen, that the Ecclesiastiques began to iudge causes of this nature partly by com∣mission, and partly by negligence of Princes and Magistrates. But in the beginning of the Decree of reformation of Matrimony, ma∣ny wondred, how it could bee defined as an Article of faith, that clande∣stine mariages are true Sacraments, and that the Church hath alwayes de∣tested them, because it doeth implie a contradiction to detest Sacraments, And to command that the Parish Priest should gate those that are ioyned, and vnderstanding their consent, should say, I ioyne you in Matrimo∣ny in the Name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, was derided by the criticks; saying, that either they are ioyned by those words, or not if not, then that is not true which the Councell of Florence hath determined, that matrimony receiueth perfection from consent if so, what coniunction is that which the Priest maketh of persons ioyned before. And if the word, I ioyne, should be expounded, I declare them ioyned a way would be layd open to conclude, that the words of the absolution are declaratory also. But howsoeuer it was, they said the decree was made to no other end, but that within a short time it might bee made an Article of faith that those words pronounced by the Pa∣rish Priest were the forme of the Sacrament. For making void clandestine mariages, they spake as much as was spo∣ken of it in the Councell it selfe. For some did extoll the decree to the hea∣uens; and others said, that if those matrimonies were Sacraments, and con∣sequently instituted by CHRIST, and the Church hath alwayes detested them, and finally made them voyd, it did not appeare how those who had not made prouision for it in the beginning, could be excused from the blame of ignorance, or negligence. And when the distinction, on which they founded the decree, was published, that the contract was nullified, which is the matter of the Sacrament, it was hard to vnderstand a long time, because the matrimoniall contract hath no distinction from the matrimony, nor the matrimony from the Sacrament: and the rather, because the matrimony was indissoluble before it was a Sacrament, in regard CHRIST doeth not pronounce it insoluble, as instituted by him, but as by GOD, in the earthly Paradise. But, it being admitted, that the Matrimoniall contract is an hu∣mane and ciuill thing, separate from the Sacrament, which is nullified, some said this annullation would not belong to the Ecclesiasticall Iudge, but to the Secular, to whom the discussion, and cognition of all ciuill contracts doeth appertaine. The cause alleadged to moderate the impediments of mariage, was much commended, as reasonable; but it was obserued withall, that it did necessa∣rily conclude many more restrictions then those that were decreed, in regard there are no lesse inconueniences by the impediments confirmed, then by those that were abolished. The end of the Article of matrimoniall dispensa∣tions mooued a vaine question in the curious, whether the Pope, by re∣seruing them to himselfe alone, did more good or hurt to his authoritie. For the good, was alleadged the great quantitie of gold which did flow into the Court, through this chanell, and the obligations of so many Princes, gai∣ned by this meanes, as to be satisfied in their appetites, or interests, so to de∣fend the Papall authoritie, on which onely the legitimation of their children was grounded: For the hurt, the losse of the reuenues of England, and of the obedience of that crowne was produced, which did weigh downe all gaine or friendship, which the dipensations might procure. The Frenchmen did not like the decree, that hee that stealeth a woman shall bee bound to endow her, at the pleasure of the Iudge, saying, that the Law concerning dowries, cannot be made by Ecclesti all authoritie, and that it was an artifice to take the iudicature of that delict from the secular Magistrate. For if the Ecclesiastique may make the Law, hee may iudge the cause. And howsoeuer they said absolutely, at the pleasure of the iudge, yet there is no doubt, but that in the declaration, they would say they meant the Ecclesiasticall onely. And they thought it an vsurpation of temporall autho∣ritie, to punish Seculars with infamie, and incapacitie of dignities. Neither did they approoue the constitution against conculinaries, any a yeere in excommunication, that they should be punished by the Ecclesiastique, be∣cause excommunication is the extreme, last and greatest of Ecclesiasticall pu∣nishments, according to the doctrine of all the Fathers; so that to passe that, was to enter vpon the Temporall power, and the rather, because they giue themselues power to course concubines out of their countreys, deriding the secular Magistrates, by imploring their arme, if there shall bee need; which is as much as to affirme, that, ordinarily, the execution of this banishment may be made by the Ecclesiastique himselfe. The Decree of reformation in the first Article was noted either of de∣fect, or of presumption. For if the Synode had authoritie to giue Law to the Pope, especially in things so iust, it was not fit to doe it by way of narration, or by obloquitie of words. But if it ought to receiue Law from the Pope, it cannot bee excused for hauing passed its bounds, because it doeth sharpely reprehend the former actions of this and other Popes, though it doeth it obliquely: Those that were seene in the Ecclesiasti∣call stories, said, that to draw all the causes of Bishops to Rome, was a new policie to make the Court great, whereas all the examples of antiquitie, and Canons of the Counsels of those times doe shew, that the causes of Bishops, though of depositions, were handled in the countries of each of them. Those who expected a prouision against the abuse of pensions, seeing what was de∣creed in the 13. Article, did iudge that the matter would passe to a greater cor∣ruption as the euent also hath shewed. The fourteenth Article was com∣mended by euery one, because it did seeme to take away the Annates, and paying for Bulls, dispatched at Rome, for collation of Benefices. But in progresse of time, it appearing that those remained still, and that there was not so much as any cogitation either to remooue or moderate them, they re∣membred, that, onely the small abuses of other Churches being prouided against, the saying was verified, that onely moates were taken out of the eyes, and beames neuer. Euery wise man thought that this age was not worthy of that Decree for the vnitie, or, at the most, dualtie of Benefices, and that it would not be obserued but in the poorer sort onely. Likewise for the examination in concurrence, in the collation of Benefices, euery one did prognosticate that it would bee deluded by some sinister interpretation. And the prophecie was quickly verified. For in Rome, within a short time, they began to declare, that concurrence was not to bee obserued in case of resignation, but that hee onely was to bee examined, to whom the resig∣nation was made; which was as much as to abolish the Decree for the most part, because the better sort were excluded by resignation, and hee onely preferred who pleased the resignant: and Benefices are not vacant for any other cause but casually. The Decree of the cognition of causes in the first instance was quite destroyed, by the exception added, that is, except those which the Pope will commit, and call to himselfe. For causes were neuer ta∣ken from the lawfull tribunals, but by commissions, and auocations of Popes; and now the cause of the disease was preserued, and the symptom onely cured. And howsoeuer the adiunct (for vrgent and reasonable causes) did seeme to moderate the matter wel, yet men of vnderstanding knew that it was as much as to say, for any arbitrary cause. But in the last poynt, which was in expectation so many moneths, tou∣ching the essentiall liberty of the Councell, seeing it was declared, that the meaning of the Synod was, not to change the manner of proceeding, nor to make any addition, or diminution of the old constitutions, wise men said, that concerning this Councell it was a declaration contrary to the fact, and published when it did no good: neither was there any more vse of it, then of a medicine applyed to a dead body. And some mocked, and said, that it was as much as the consolation of an honest man, whose wife had brought him children by other men, and said she did it not to doe him wrong. But, by an example giuen to posteritie, it did teach how all violence, and exorbi∣tancie might bee vsed in Councell, from the beginning to the end, and all inconuenience done excused by such a declaration, yea iustified, and maintai∣ned for lawfull. At this time, besides the aduice of the Session helde, three other sorts of distastfull newes came into France. The first was the Popes answere about the hundred thousand crownes. The second, the protestation made in Coun∣cell, and the displeasure taken at it, in Trent, and Rome. The last, was the sentence against the French Bishops, and the citation of the Queene of Na∣uarre: The French-men, hauing much considered on these things, resolued The Alienati∣on of Ecclesi∣asticall reue∣nues in France. not to treate any more with the Pope for his fauour in the alienation, but to execute the Kings Edict, approued in Parliament, without any consent of his Holinesse. This being suddenly performed, few buyers could bee found, as well because men doe not easily resolue to lay downe their money, as because they were disswaded by the Ecclesiastiques, who told them, that the sale, wan∣ting the Popes confirmation, would not hereafter be esteemed to bee good. This was a hinderance to the King, and no fauour to the Clergie. For the sale was made, but it was done at a low rate; neither was there raysed more then two millions and halfe of Francks, small, in regard of the things aliened, seeing that it was made at twelue for an hundred, whereas it had beene a small price if they had giuen an hundred for foure. And it is worthy to bee repeated heere, that, amongst the things solde, one was, the iurisdiction which the Arch-bishop of Lions had held vntill that time, ouer that citie, which was sold at the outcry for thirty thousand Francks. But the Bishop complained so much that, in supplement of the price, he had giuen vnto him 400. crownes yeerely. Concerning the protestation made in Councell, the King wrote to his Ambassadors the ninth of Nouember, that, hauing seene what the Cardinall of Loraine had written against their protestation, and heard the relation made by the Bishop of Orlience of all things done in Trent, he was pleased with it, as also with their retire to Ʋenice, and commanded, that de Ferrieres should not depart thence vntill he had new order, which should bee when hee was ad∣uised that the Articles were so reformed that the rights of the King, and of the Gallican Church were not put in question. And he wrote to the Cardi∣nall of Loraine, that himselfe and his Counsel knew that his Ambassadors had protested vpon great and iust occasion. For as hee would continue in the vnion and obedience of the Church, so hee would preserue inuiolable the rights of his crowne, without suffering them to be questioned, or disputed, or himselfe forced to shew them. That they should not thinke to satisfie him, with saying in the ende, Sauing and reseruing the rights, &c. because, vnder this colour, they would binde him to shew a reason in euery opposition. That if hee had seene the Articles as they were proposed, hee would haue iudged, that the Ambassadour could not haue done otherwise then make the opposition: which his desire was they should first haue shewed to him, but said they were to bee excused, in regard of the occasion suddenly arising, and of the circumstances which did produce it, and of the suspitions, which made them doubt of some Artifice to precipitate the decision. And if the Pope had no intention, as hee, the Cardinall, giueth him to vnderstand, that the rights of the Emperour, and Kings should bee touched, and disputed, his Holinesse must turne his anger vpon the Legats, who proposed the Articles, and named Kings, Emperour & Republikes, and not vpon the Ambassadors. That hee thinketh the protestation may be iustified before all Christendome, when the Articles shal be seene. That, the Legats hauing proposed those Arti∣cles against the intention of his Holinesse, he ought not to referre himselfe to their discretion hereafter, nor to cause his Ambassadors to returne, vntill he had ful assurance that those Articles should not be spoken of any more, which being done, he will command them to goe againe to the Councell. Concerning the citation and sentence, the King gaue order to Henry Clu∣tia, The French King taketh part with the Queene of Nauarre. Lord d'Oysel, to tell the Pope, that his Maiestie had vnderstood, to his great displeasure, that which he did not beleeue by the fame which was spread, vntill he had seene a copie of the monitories affixed in Rome, that the Queene was so proceeded against, as that hee was bound to defend her. First in re∣gard the cause and danger was common to all Kings, who therefore were obliged to protect her; and the rather, because she was a widow, and his ob∣ligation was the greater, in respect of the neere kinred hee hath with her, by both lines, and by agnation with her husband, who died but a little before in the warre against the Protestants, leauing his sonnes Pupils. There∣fore hee could not abandon her cause, following the examples of his ance∣sters; and the rather, because hee ought not to indure that any should make warre against his neighbours vnder colour of religon; adding, that it was not pious, to put the Kingdomes of Spaine and France, lately ioyned in friend∣ship, in danger of a bloody warre, for this cause. He said moreouer, that the Queene, hauing many Fees in France, shee could not, by the rights and priui∣ledges of that Kingdom, be compelled to appeare, either in person, or by Pro∣ctor, adding many examples of Princes and Popes, who haue proceeded with due and lawfull moderation. Hee touched the forme of the citation by Edict, a thing not heard of in former times, inuented by Boniface the eighth, and, as too hard and vniust, moderated by Clement the fifth, in the Councell of Ʋienna. He said that such citations could, by no meanes, take place, but against the inhabitants to whom the accesse is not secure, and that, the Queene remayning in France, a great iniurie was done to him and the Kingdome, by vsing that forme; as also was done by expo∣sing to prey, and granting to the Vsurpers, the Fees she holdeth in France, the right whereof belongeth to him. And euery one marueiled (hee said) that his Holinesse who did fauour so affectionately the cause of King Antonie while he liued, in being his mediator with the King of Spaine, would now op∣presse his children, and widow. But he complained most of all, that so many Kings, Princes, and cities hauing departed from the Church of Rome, with in fourtie yeeres, hee had not so proceeded with any other, which shewed well that he did it not for the good of her soule, but for other ends. Hee wished his Hol. to consider, that power was giuen to Popes for saluation of soules, not to depriue Princes of their States, nor to order any thing in earthly possessions, which hauing beene formerly attempted by them in Germanie, did much trouble the publike quiet. Hee intreated the Pope, to reuoke all his Actes against the Queene, protesting, that, in case hee would not, hee would proceede to those remedies which his predecessours haue vsed. Hee complained also of the cause of the Bishops, and commanded his Ambassa∣dor, And with the Bishops. that, declaring vnto him the ancient examples, the liberties and immuni∣ties of the French Church, and the authoritie of the Kings in causes Ecclesi∣asticall, he should pray the Pope not to make any innouation. Monsieur d' Oi∣sel performed this office with great vehemencie, and, after many treaties with the Pope, obtained of him to speake no more either of the Queene, or of the Bishops. But in Trent, the Session being ended, and matters well agreed on be∣tweene the Legates and Loraine, and the businesse imparted to the princi∣pall Papalins, Otranto, Taranto, and Parma , as also to the Emperours Am∣bassadours, The Card, of Loraine pub∣lisheth y e des∣seigne to fi∣nish y e Coun∣cell. Loraine began to publish their deseigne, that the Councel might bee finished with one Session more. Hee sayd hee could not bee in Trent at Christmas; that himselfe, and all the French Bishops must depart before that time; that hee desired to see the Councel ended, and was loath to leaue so honourable an assembly; but that hee could not otherwise doe, beeing commanded by the King. The Imperialists also did publish in the Coun∣cell, that the Emperour did desire the dispatch, and that the King of the Ro∣manes did write, that his desire was it should bee finished by Saint Andrewes day, or, at the longest, in the beginning of the next moneth by all meanes. And indeede that King, not to please the Pope, but because it was his opini∣on, did sollicite the conclusion. For beeing to hold a Diet, hee was not willing his Father should haue Ambassadours in the Councell; and said, that if that were shut vp, the affaires of Religion in Germanie would bee in farre better case. The greater part of the Fathers were glad to heare this; and Morone making a Congregation in his house, the fifteenth of Nouember, of the Le∣gates, two Cardinals, and fiue and twenty Bishops, the principall of euery Nation, hee proposed,, that the Councell, hauing beene assembled for the ne∣cessities of Germanie and France, and now the Emperour, King of the Ro∣manes, Cardinall of Loraine, and all Princes desiring that it should bee fini∣shed, they would speake their opinion concerning the concluding of it, and the manner. Loraine sayd, it was necessary to finish it, not to hold Chri∣stendom in suspence any longer, to shew the Catholikes what they ought to beleeue, and to take away the Interim of Germanie, which could not be done by any other meanes, because it was to continue vntill the end of the Coun∣cell; and to continue it longer, could not bee without great dammage of the Catholique Church. And that it was needefull to finish the generall Councell in Trent, to hinder a Nationall in France. For the manner hee sayd it might bee ended with one Session, handling in it the residue of the reformation, and dispatching the Catechisme, and the Index of the bookes prohibited, which were in order already, referring other matters to the Pope, not disputing the Articles of Indulgences and Images, nor anathemati∣zing particular heretiques, but proceeding with generall termes only. They all agreed, in some sort, to finish the Councell, except the Archbishop of Granata, who referred himselfe to the Ambassadour of his King. Some said it could not absolutely bee ended, because so many matters did remaine to bee handled: but that it might bee done by intimating another ten yeeres after, which also would serue to hinder the calling of Nationall Councels, and to deferre the determination of the things remayning, and the Ana∣thematismes. The Bishop of Brescia proposed a middle course betweene an absolute ende and a suspension; because the former would make the heretiques desperate, and the latter not satisfie the Catholiques. But these opinions had no followers, all the others adhering to that which the Cardi∣nall had sayd. For the manner, Otranto thought it necessary to anathematize the Here∣tiques, because it hath been vsed in all Councels, and is the principall thing which is required of Synods. For many are not capable to vnderstand the trueth or falshood of opinions, by their owne iudgment, but doe fol∣low or abhorre them according to the credit or discredite of the authours. He sayd that the Councel of Chalcedon, full of learned men, to cleere them∣selues whether Theodoret, Bishop of Ciros, were a Catholique or not, would not heare an account of his faith, which hee desired to render, but onely wished him to denounce a plaine anathema against Nestorius; that if Luther and Zuinglius, dead, and their followers aliue, were not a∣nathematized, it might bee sayd, that the Councell had laboured in vaine. The Cardinall replyed, that diuers times did require diuers counsels; that the differences in Religion were then betweene the Bishops and the Priests; that the people were but as an accessory; that the Grandees either did not meddle, or if they did adhere to any heresie, they did not make themselues Heads, and leaders. But now all was quite contrary; because the here∣tique Ministers, and Preachers could not bee sayd to bee heads of the Sectes, but the Princes rather, to whose interests their Ministers and Prea∣chers doe accomodate themselues. Hee that would name the true Heads of heretiques, must name the Queene of England, the Queene of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, the Elector Palatine of the Rhene, the Elector of Saxonie, and many other Dukes and Princes of Germanie. Hee sayd, that this would make them vnite, and shew they were sensible of it; and that the condem∣nation of Luther and Zuinglius onely would so prouoke them, that some great confusion would certainely arise. Therefore to doe, not what they would, but what they could, hee thought that the more vniuersall resoluti∣on was the better. Morone sent to call the Ecclesiasticall Ambassadours: to whom hauing imparted the proposition and opinion of that assembly, they consented to the end and the manner, according to the opinion of Loraine. Which resolu∣tion being also communicated to the secular Ambassadors, they did all assent, except the Spaniard, who sayd, hee knew not the expresse will of his King, and desired time that he might vnderstand it. Notwithstanding this, the Legates, resolute to execute this determination, gaue the matter concerning Princes, omitting the Anathematismes, and all the particular Articles, onely re∣newing the old Canons of the Ecclesiasticall liberty and iurisdiction, spea∣king of Princes with much reuerence, onely exhorting them to cause their ministers not to violate them. The same day at night a Congregation was made, to beginne to speake of the reformation, and an order was set downe, that there should bee two Congregations a day, vntill all the voyces were giuen. Which were deliuered with great shortnesse & resolution except by some A difficulty about subie∣cting the Chapters in Spaine to the Bishops. few Spaniards, who desired to hinder, whereas all the others did endeauour to promote the expedition, with breuity. The greatest difficultie was con∣cerning the sixth Article, of the subiection of Chapters to Bishops, in regard of the great interest, which not onely the Bishops, but the King also had in diminishing the Capitular authoritie, that they might not oppose the subsi∣dies which are often imposed in Spaine, and, on the other side, for the fauours the Legates did the Chapters, by whose meanes, and for the reasons alleadged, many Italians, who first seemed to fauour the Bishops, turned on the Chap∣ters side. The Count of Luna sent a Currier to Rome, in diligence, by whose aduice Ʋargas, the Ambassadour, entreated the Pope for his fauour to the Bishops. Who, according to his custome, referring himselfe to the Coun∣cell, the Ambassadour complained that the Italian Prelates had beene per∣swaded to change their opinion in that matter. Whereunto the Pope rea∣dily answered, that they changed, because they were free, but that the depar∣ture of the Agent for the Chapters from the Councell was not free, hauing beene driuen from thence, and, vpon that occasion, complained, that the Count of Luna, in Trent, did disswade the finishing of the Councel. Not∣withstanding he wrote, according to the Ambassadours request, but in such termes, as did not disfauour the pretensions of the Chapters. And finally the Decree was made, with some enlargement of the Episcopall authoritie in Spaine, but not so much as they desired. The Venetian Ambassadours made instance, that, in the Article of Pa∣tronages, those of the Emperour and Kings being excepted, those of their Republique might bee excepted also. The Legates were willing to please them, but could hardly tell how. For to except all Republiques was too much, and to name them particularly would breed matter of iealousie. They found a temper, to comprehend that in the number of Kings, declaring that amongst those are contained the possessors of Kingdomes, though they haue not the name. In the Congregation of the twentieth day, a proposition was made, to The Popes confirmation is demanded. demand the Popes confirmation of all the Decrees of the Councell, as well vnder Paul and Iulius, as vnder his Holinesse. The Arch-bishop of Gra∣nata opposed; saying, that in the sixteenth and last Session vnder Iulius, when the Councel was suspended, it was ordained that all the Decrees made by the Synode vntill then should be obserued, without saying that there was any neede of confirmation, so that to demaund it now would bee to con∣demne those Fathers, who then thought that the Decrees might bee execu∣ted, without any confirmation at all. Hee professed hee did not say this be∣cause he disliked the demand of a confirmation, but that meanes might bee found to vse words not preiudiciall. Otranto answered, that the Decree, na∣med by Granata, did not onely not fauour the opposition which hee drew from it, but did resolue it rather, shewing plainely, that the Councell did not thinke the ordinations obligatory, because it did not command, but simply exhort that they should bee receiued and obserued, whereof no other cause could bee alleadged, but the want of confirmation. Granata was quiet, and resolued to demand the confirmation, as it was proposed by the common consent. But in the manner there was some difference. Some were of opi∣nion that the Councel should demand confirmation, and dissolue without expecting answere; saying it could not otherwise bee done with dignity, ei∣ther of the Apostolique Sea, or of the Councel, and that it would seeme to bee an accord made betweene them; and if any thing should not bee confir∣med, the prouision must bee made by the same Councel. To satisfie these, who were many, Morone was willing, that, in the Session of the ninth, which, in regard of the multiplicity of the matters, was thought would continue three dayes, the first day a Currier should bee dispatched to demand the con∣firmation, at whose returne another Session should bee held without any action, but to dissolue the Synod. But this opinion had much contradiction. For if the Pope would confirme the Decrees without examining them, the same difficulty did returne; if with examination, the time of some moneths was necessary. Finally, the Cardinall of Loraine told the Fathers, that these difficulties were to prolong the Councel; that himselfe and the other French men must needes depart, being so commanded by the King, and that after their departure the Councel could not bee called Generall, there wanting a Nation, whereby the dignitie and honour of it would bee diminished, and Nationall Synods and other difficulties might bee raised. This halfe prote∣station, with the perswasions of the Imperialists for the expedition, was cause (after many consultations) of a resolution, to demand the confirmati∣on, and dissolue the Synod in the same Session. The Cardinal of Loraine wrote presently to de Ferrieres, who was at Venice, that the matter concerning Princes beeing accommodated, hee might re∣turne to Trent. Who answered hee could not, without particular commis∣sion De Ferrieres refuseth to returne to Trent. out of France, because the King in his letters of the ninth, had written to him, as also to him the Cardinall, that when the Decree was made, and himselfe aduised thereof, hee would send him backe; so that it was necessary to expect the order of his Maiestie. But hee wrote to the King, that hee thought it not fit for his seruice to returne, in regard that the rights of the Crowne, and the liberty of the Gallican Church were violated in other De∣crees also, published in that Session. The reformation standing in good termes, the care of composing the Decree of Purgatory, inuocation, worship, reliques, and images of Saints was committed to the Cardinall of Ʋarmia, and eight Prelates; who, thought they all resolued not to mooue any difficulties, yet they did not agree. Some were willing to make mention of the place of Purgatory, and of the fire, as was done in the Councell of Florence. Others said, that this being hard to doe, and impossible to find words to expresse it, which might giue satisfacti∣on to all, it was better to say onely that the good workes of the faithfull did helpe the dead for the remission of their sinnes. The Arch-bishop of Lanciano said, that, in handling the Masse, mention was made, that that sacrifice is The manner of the Decree concerning Purgatory. offered for those that are deceased in CHRIST, not intirely purged; by which words the doctrine of Purgatorie was sufficiently defined: so that nothing remained to bee done, but to enioyne the Bishops to cause it to bee preached, and to take way the abuses, taking care also that there bee no want of due prayers for the dead. And so the Decree was made. In matter of the Saints they easily agreed to condemne, particularly, all Opinions a∣bout the ado∣ration of Images. the opinions, contrary to the vses of the Roman Church. Onely about Ima∣ges there was some difference. The Arch-bishop said, no honour was due vnto them, but by relation to the thing signified. But Lainez, the Gene∣rall, who also was one of the composers, added, that, when they were dedi∣cated, and put in place of adoration, a worship did belong vnto them, besides the adoration due vnto the Saint worshipped in them, calling this adoration Relatiue, and the other Obiectiue. He prooued his opinion, because the vessels and vestments consecrated deserue a reuerence belonging vnto them, by vertue of the consecration, though they doe not represent any Saint; and so an adoration is due vnto the Image dedicated by vertue of the dedication, besides the reason of the representation. The Cardinall of Ʋarmia, for satisfaction of both, concluded, that the opinion of the Arch-bishop ought to be expressed, as more facile, and plaine, but without words which might preiudice the other. Deputies were appointed also to reuiew the reformation of Friars and Nunnes, besides those Prelates who had composed it, and the Generals of the Orders were added vnto them. These changed nothing, but that it being generally granted, in the third Article, to all Monasteries of Regular Mendi∣cants to possesse immooueable goods, though it bee contrary to their institu∣tion, Friar Francis Zamotra, Generall of the Minor Obseruants, desired that his Order might be excepted; saying, hee meant to liue according to the rule of Saint Francis, from which in was not fit to exempt those who did not de∣maundit. And satisfaction was giuen him by excepting his Order: as also the Capuchins, at the instance of Friar Thomasodi Castello, their Generall. Ge∣nerall Lainez desired also the exception of the company of Iesu; saying, that, howsoeuer the Colledges deputed to entertaine schollars, who were not yet religious, might enioy mooueable goods, yet the house professed, in which the societie doth essentially consist, might not liue but by begging, without possessing any immoueable thing whatsoeuer. This was easily granted. But he returned the next day, desiring the exception might bee remooued, and said, that his societie would alwayes preserue themselues in pure citie, in the houses professed, but did not care to haue this honour with the world, The Iesuites proteste to line with beg∣ging, but will not be bound vnto it. thinking their desert in the sight of God to bee sufficient; which would bee the greater, if, being able to make vse of the power giuen them by the Coun∣cell, they should forbeare to doe it. This resolution was made by consent of all the foure Iesuites in the Councell, proposed by Father Torres, who said, they should, by this meanes, haue libertie to vse or not to vse the grant of the Councell, according to opportunitie. In the fifteenth Article it was constituted, that none should professe, be∣fore the age of eighteene compleate, and that euery one should bee a Nouice two yeeres at the least, at what age soeuer he entred. The Generals opposed; saying, it was not iust to hinder any from entring into Religion, who was capable to know what the Regular vowes did import; which capacitie was iudged by the Church to bee at the age of sixteene yeeres, in a time when the world was not so well awake, and therefore that it was fit rather to make the age lesse then greater: which reason they vsed also against the two yeeres of the Nouiceship. In the end, because they were willing to please all, they resol∣ued to satisfie the Generals also, and to make no innouation herein. Besides the twentie two Articles, there was another, in which power was giuen to the Prouincials, Generals, and Heads of the Orders to expell the incorrigible out of the Order, and to depriue them of the habite. Which Iohannes Antonius Fachinnettus, Bishop of Nicastro, opposed sharpely; saying, that the profession and Act of admission to it are a mutuall contract, and, as it were, a marriage, by which the professed is bound to the Monastery, and the Monastery to him, and as the one could not depart, so the other could not put him away, and that, by meanes of this Decree, all Cities would bee filled with expelled Friars, to the great scandall of the world. The Arch-bishop of Rosano said to the contrary, that the relation was not as betweene man and wife, but as betweene father and sonne, and that the sonne could neuer lawfully refuse the father, but the father might emancipate his sonne, especially if hee were disobedient, and that it was a lesse euill to see expelled Friars in the Cities, then incorrigible in the Monasteries. The Generals were not all of one opinion. The perpetuall did approoue the expulsion, but the temporary did not. The maior part inclined, (according to the custome of a multitude, when it consulteth) to leaue things in the state they were, and not to decree either for the one side or the other. But, in this consultation, it was often repeated, and by many, that the people did receiue great scandal to see some weare a religious habit many yeeres, and afterwards become se∣culars. This brought the secret profession into question, and made a con∣sultation to begin, whether they ought to declare it to bee of force, as it had beene vntill that time, or that no profession doth bind, but that which is ex∣presse. But this had difficulties also; for temper whereof, this resolution was taken, that the religious Prelat, the yeere of probation being ended, should be bound either to giue the Nouice leaue to depart, or admit him to the profession. And this was inserted in the sixteenth Article, as in a place conuenient. Generall Laynez commended the Decree very much, as necessary; but de∣sired that his societie might bee excepted, alleadging, that the condition of it was different from that of other regular Orders, that in those tacite profes∣sion hath place, by ancient custome, and approbation of the Apostolique Sea, which in their society is prohibited; that the cause of scandall which the people receiueth in seeing some in a secular habite, who haue long worne the religious, doth cease in them, in regard the habit of the Iesuits doth not differ from the secular; that their society hath also a confirmation from the Apo∣stolique Sea, that the Superiour may admit to the profession after a long time; which hath neuer beene made to any Regular. All inclined to fauour him with this exception; for extention whereof hee contended, that the Rules of speaking Latine did require that the expression should bee in the plurall, say∣ing, that by these things the Synod doth not intend to alter the institution of the Iesuits, &c. And it was not considered that this manner of speech might bee referred both to the admitting or dismissing of Nouices in the end of the Laymez ma∣keth vse of the negligence of the Fathers in Trent. yeere of Probation, and to the whole Contents of the sixteenth Article; as also that it might be referred to all the things contained in the sixteen heads. But the Father knew how to make vse of the negligence of others, laying a foundation, on which the succeeding Iesuites might build that singularitie which now appeareth in their Societie. The Congregation of the two and twentieth treated of Indulgences; the difficultie and length of which matter made the maior part to bee of opinion to speake of it no more, in regard all were resolued before to auoide impedi∣ments. But some desired to handle them, saying, that otherwise the Here∣tickes would say, that they were omitted, because there was no ground to maintaine them. Others thought it sufficient to speake of their vse onely, and to take away the abuses which the corruption of times hath brought in. The Ambassadour of Portugall said, hee was sorry that prouision was not made for the Crusadoes, but would bee silent, lest occasion might bee taken to prolong the Councell. The Emperours Ambassadours, though they did ioyntly sollicite the Expedition, by commission from their Master, were not of accord in this. Prague would not haue them speake of the points of do∣ctrine. Fiue-Churches said, that if they were omitted, and the abuses of re∣liques, Images, and Purgatorie not taken away, the Synode was quite shamed. The Bishop of Modena tolde the Fathers, that, in case they would handle Indulgences, as they had done Iustification, considering all the causes, and resoluing all the questions, they would finde it difficult, and to require a long time, it being impossible to make that matter plaine, but by determi∣ning first whether they bee absolutions, or compensations onely, and suffra∣ges; or whether they doe remit the penalties imposed by the Confessor one∣ly, The Councel dareth not handle the matter of In∣dulgences exactly. or all that are due: likewise whether the Treasure, which is put for their foundation, doeth onely consist of the merits of CHRIST, or whether those of Saints bee required also; whether they may be giuen, though the re∣ceiuer performe nothing; whether they extend to the dead also; and other things of no lesse difficultie. But to determine that the Church may graunt them, and hath done so in all times, and that they are profitable for the faithfull, who doe worthily receiue them, needeth no great disputation. The authoritie to graunt them is prooued by the Scripture; their continuall vse by Apostolicall tradition, and authoritie of Councels, and the perspicuitie of the whole matter by the vniforme doctrine of the Schoolemen. Vpon this a Decree may be composed without difficultie. The opinion had many followers; and hee, with other Friar Bishops, was deputed to make a Decree in this sense, adding a prouision against abuses. In the Congregations following they handled the Index of bookes, Ca∣techisme, Breuiarie, Missals, and Agends. And all things, determined in the particular congregations of the Prelates, deputed for these matters since the beginning of the Synod, were read. Wherein they did not all agree. Some thought that certaine Authours and Bookes were censured without reason; The Index, Catechisme, &c. and some, that others were omitted which did more deserue censure. And there was no lesse difficultie about the Catechisme, some thinking that that which was made, was not fit to be made the common for the whole Church, in which the greater part are simple, and some desiring that more matter might be put into it. And they differed as much about the Rituall bookes, some desiring an vniformitie in the whole Church, and some maintaining their owne. But it appearing that these matters could not bee decided in a whole yeere, the Legates propoled that all should bee referred to the Pope. Whereunto some few Prelates did not consent, and namely the Bishop of Le∣rida made a long oration to shew, that if any thing were proper to the Coun∣cell it was the Catechisme, it being a booke, which, after the Symbol, ought to hold the first place in the Church; that the Rituall bookes ought to hold the second, in correcting of which there was need of an exquisite knowledge of antiquitie, and of the customes of all countreys, which will not bee found in the Court of Rome; where, though there be men of excellent wit, and of great learning, yet they want skill in this kind which is necessary to doe any thing commendably herein, and that this is more proper to the Councell. But the resolution to finish, and the desire to depart from Trent, caused him to haue but small audience. The fiue and twentieth of this moneth, the Count of Luna came to the Legats, with an instance in writing. Hee complained that the most princi∣pall matters for which the Councell was assembled were omitted, and the others precipitated; that they went about to finish the Synod without the priuitie of his King; concluding, that they ought to heare the opinions of the Diuines concerning the points of doctrine, and expect an answere out of Spaine for the end of the Councell. The Legats answered; that things were in such forwardnesse, that there was no time to expect, nor was possible to withholde so many Bishops, who were already in order to depart. The Count replyed, that if the Councell were ended without the knowledge of his King, besides the instance, he would doe something else, as hee thought conuenient. Hereupon the Legats sent presently to the Pope, and the Count to the Ambassadour Vargas, to treat with his Holines. But Ʋargas thought it superfluous to speake any more herein, both because, at the comming of the currier, the Pope fell extreame sicke, and because hauing made the same instance a few dayes before, the Popes finall answere was, that he referred it The Popes sicknesse. to the Councell, the libertie whereof, so much desired by his King also, hee would not impeach. And the Ambassadour saying, that the Councel ought to bee held open, because all the world did desire it, the Pope demanded what that world was which would haue it open; the Ambassadour answe∣red, Spaine would; the Pope replied, Write into Spaine, that if they buy and studie Ptolomie, they shall finde that Spaine is not the whole world. The Le∣gats vsed many perswasions to the Count of Luna; and so did Loraine also, and the Emperours Ambassadours. But, not being able to preuaile, they la∣boured against him, the Ambassadours in the name of the Emperour, King of the Romans, and of all Germanie, and Loraine in the name of his King, and of the Kingdome of France. The Legats, resoluing to finish the Councell, according to the Popes order, howsoeuer the Spanish Ambassadour might oppose, were diligent in dispatch of the matters. While these things were in doing, the first of December, a currier came from Rome late at night, with aduise, that the Pope was suddenly fallen into a dangerous infirmitie. He brought letters from Cardinal Borromeo to the Le∣gats, Causeth the end of the Councell to be hastened. and Cardinall of Loraine, that they should hasten the Councell as much as might be, and finish it without respect of any, to withstand the inconue∣niences which might occurre about the election of the Pope, in case the Councell should be open in time of vacancie. In the letters there were some few words written with the Popes owne hand, who did commit the same absolutely, and tolde Loraine he should remember his promise. It is certaine (to speake this particular here, though out of place) that the Pope was resol∣ued, in case he did not recouer quickly, to create eight Cardinals, and to take order that no confusion might arise in the election of his successor. The Legats and Loraine purposed to anticipate the time of the Session, and either with the propositions, or without to finish the Councell within two dayes, that the newes of the Popes death might not first come. Therefore they sent to communicate the aduice receiued, & their resolution, to the Ambassadors, and did negotiate with the principall Prelates. They all agreed except the Spanish Ambassadour, who sayd hee had order from his King, that if the Sea were vacant, he should not suffer the Pope to bee elected in Councel, but that the election should be by Cardinals, so that there was no neede to precipitate. But Morone answered, hee knew for certaine, that the Am∣bassadour of France, who was as yet in Venice, had order from his King, to protest that the Kingdome would not obey any Pope, but him that should Notwithstā∣ding the op∣position made by the Count o Luna. bee elected in Councell; so that it was necessarie by all meanes to finish it, for auoyding of danger. The Count of Luna made a Congregation of Spanish Prelates in his house, and spread a fame, that hee was resolued to protest and oppose. Notwithstanding, the Legates held a Congregation the next mor∣ning, in which the Decrees of Purgatorie and of the Saints were read, as they were composed by the Cardinall of Ʋarmia, and the other depu∣ties. Afterward the reformation of Friars was read, and all appooued with very great breuitie, and a little contradiction. Then the Articles of refor∣mation were read. In the first of the manners of Bishops, at the passage, where it is said, that they shall not inrich their kinred and familie by the reuenues of the Church, it was said of the reuenues of the Church, of which they are faithfull dispencers for the Pope. The Bishop of Sal nona did op∣pose this point, saying, that the portions of the poore being diuided by ancient Canon, as also of the fabrique and of the Episcopall table, it cannot bee said that bishops, and other beneficed persons are dispencers, but were Lords of their owne part; which if they did spend ill, they did sinne and in∣curre the wrath of God, as euery other man did, who spendeth his goods a∣misse; but if they were dispencers for the poore, they should bee bound to restitution, which cannot be said. There were many discourses, the ma∣ior part defending that beneficed men were Lords of the fruits, or vsufructu∣aries, and others saying, as the French Ambassadour had done in his Ora∣tion, that they haue but the vse onely. Some defended the words of the Decree that they were dispencers, alleadging the place in the Gospell of the faithfull seruant, and the Doctrine of all the holy Fathers. But the precipi∣tation to finish the Councell, caused those words, that is, of which they are appointed faithfull dispencers for the poore, to be omitted, as also other difficulties to be passed ouer in silence. In the Article of Patronages, the Ambassadours of Sauoy and Florence made request that those of the Princes might bee accepted also, or that all might be comprehended but those of the Emperour and Kings. Satisfacti∣on was giuen them, by accepting, besides the Emperour, Kings, or Possessors of Kingdomes, other great and supreame Princes, who haue soueraignety in A dispute whether the Decrees made vnder Paul & Iulius should be read. their dominions. Afterwards a proposition was made for the reading in Session of all the Decrees made vnder Paul and Iulius, to bee approoued; which Modena opposed, saying that it would bee a derogation to the autho∣ritie of the Councell of those times, if it should seeme that the things then done had need of a new confirmation of the Fathers, and would shew that this and that was not all one, because none can confirme his owne things. Others sayd, it was necessarie to doe it, for that cause that authoritie might not bee taken from them, saying, that they were not of the same Councell. And the same French-men, who before did so earnestly desire that it might be declared that the Councell was new, and not continuated with that vnder Paul and Iulius, did now labour more then others, that all cause of doubting might be taken away, that all the acts from the yere 1545. vntill the ende; were not of the same Synode. Thus it happeneth, as in humane affaires, so in religion also, that one credulity is changed with his interests. Therefore now, all aiming at one marke, it was determined, simply to read them, and say no more. For so the vnitie of the Councell was most plainely declared, and all difficulty remooued which the word confirmation might bring, leauing euery one to thinke what he listed, whether the reading of them, did cousequently import a confirmation, or a declaration of their validity, or an inference that it was one Synode which made them with that which read them. Finally a proposition was made to anticipate the Session, and to celebrate The Session is anticipa∣ted. it the next day; and, if all the actions could not then be dispatched, to con∣tinue it the day following, and to dismisse the Fathers, and subscribe all the acts of the Councell on Sunday. The Spanish Bishops opposed this, saying, that there was no necessity to abbreuiate the time. Notwithstanding Card. Morone sayd, that the Session should bee held. And Loraine and the Emperors Ambassadors renewed their perswasions to the Count of Luna, that he would yeeld to that which is so vniformely resolued. Who in the end, after ma∣ny things spoken and replyed, was content vpon two conditions; one, that a decree might be made that the Pope should make prouision for all things that remaine; another that in the handling of Indulgences it should not bee said that they ought to bee giuen gra ts, nor any other thing that might pre∣iudice the Crusadoes of paine. That day therefore being come, which was Friday, the third of Decem∣ber, they wentto the Church with the vsuall Ceremonies, and the Masse was said, in which Ierolamus Ragazzone, Bishop of Nazianzo, made the Sermon. And held the 3. December. Hee summoned all the world to admire that most happie day, in which the The Sermon. temple of God was restored, and the ship brought into the hauen, after so many tempests, and stormes; and that the ioy had beene greater, if the Protestants would haue had their part in it, which was not the Fathers fault. He said, they had chosen that citie for the councell, scituated in the mouth of Germanie, euen at the threshold of their houses, without any gard, not to giue suspition of want of libertie; that the Protestants had beene inuited, by a Safe-conduct, expected and prayed; that, for the safetie of their soules, the Catholike faith was expounded, and the Ecclesiasticall discipline restored. He shewed the abuses taken away in holy Rites. He said that if there had beene no other cause to call a Councell, it had beene necessary to doe it for the prohibition of Clandestine mariages. And, passing to the things constitu∣ted for reformation, he shewed, from step to step, the publike seruice the Church would receiue by those decrees. Hee added, that the explication of faith, with the reformation of manners, had beene handled in former Coun∣cels, but not more diligently in any, that the arguments and reasons of the heretikes had been often handled and discussed, and many times with great contention, not because there was any discord amongst the Fathers, which cannot bee amongst those who are of the same opinion, but to proceed with sinceritie, and so to cleere the trueth as that more could not haue beene done if the heretikes had beene present. He exhorted all, that, being returned to their Diocesses, they would put the Decrees in execution; as also to thanke God first, and then the Pope, shewing what hee hath done to fauour the Councell, sending Nuncij into the Protestant Countries, Legates to Trent, exciting Princes to send Ambassadours, sparing no cost to maintaine the Councell in libertie. He commended the Legates, as being good guides, and moderators, and, in particular, Cardinall Morone, and concluded with the commendation of the Fathers. After the ceremonies were ended the Decrees were read. In the doct∣rine The Decrees. of Purgatorie it was said that the Catholike Church hath taught, out Of Purga∣tory. of the Scripture, traditions, and in this same Synode, that there is Purgatorie, and that the soules detained in it, are assisted by the suffrages of the faithfull, and the sacrifice of the Masse. Therefore it doth command Bishops to teach sound doctrine in this matter, and cause it to bee preached, without handling subtile questions before the ignorant people, not suffering vncertaine and vn∣likely things to be published; prohibiting curiosities, superstition, and vnho∣nest gaine, procuring that those suffrages bee fully executed which are vsually made for the dead by the liuing, as also that the things ordained in last wils, or in any other manner be fully performed. In matter of the Saints, it doth command Bishops and all others who haue Of Saints. the charge of teaching that they instruct the people, concerning the interces∣sion and inuocation of them, honour of relikes, lawfull vse of Images ac∣cording to the ancient doctrine of the Church, consent of Fathers, and De∣crees of Councels, teaching that the Saints doe pray for men, that it is pro∣fitable to inuocate them, and to haue recourse to their prayers and assist∣ance. Afterwards, all in one periode, it doeth condemne seuen asse ti∣ons in this matter. That the Saints of Heauen ought not to bee inuocated. That they doe not pray for men. That it is idolatrie to inuocate them to pray for vs, though singularly. That it is repugnant to the word of God, contrarie to the honour of CHRIST, and a foolishnesse to pray vnto them, either with heart or voyce. That the bodies of Saints, for whose sake God doeth giue vs many benefits, ought not to bee wor∣shipped. That their reliques and sepultures ought not to bee honou∣red. And that it is in vaine to make mention of them, to obtaine assi∣stance. Concerning images, that those of CHRIST, of the Virgin, and of Saints Of Images. ought to be kept in the Churches, and to haue due honour giuen them; not that there is any divinitie, or vertue in them, but because the honour redoun∣deth to the thing represented, CHRIST and the Saints being worshipped by the images, whose simisitude they beare; as hath beene defined by the Councels, especially in the second of Nice. That for histories, the mysteries of religion, expressed in pictures, are taught to the people, and the Articles of faith called to their mind; and not onely the Benefites of CHRIST are sug∣gested to them, but the miracles and examples of Saints are euen put before their eyes, that they may thanke God for them, and imitate them; anathema∣tizing those that teach or beleeue the contrarie. Afterwards it addeth; that, desiring to take away the abuses, and occa∣sions of pernicious errors, it doeth ordaine, that, if there because to make an image of the Diuinity, to declare the Historical pictures of the holy Scripture, the people be taught that it is not done because it can be seene with bodily eyes, that all superstition in inuocation of Saints, worship of relikes; and vse of images be taken away, that all dishonest gaine bee abolished, all excesse auoi∣ded, images not pictured, nor adorned lasciuiously, nor banquets made in the Feasts of Saints, or visitation of reliques, that no vnusuall image be put in any Church or other place, but approoued by the Bishop, that no new miracles be admitted, or new reliques receiued, and in case of any doubt or abuse hard to be remooued, or great difficultie, the Bishop shall expect the opinion of the Prouinciall Councell neither shall any thing new, or vnusuall in the Church be decreed without the consent of his Holinesse. The Decree of the reformation of the Regulars did containe two and The Decrees of Reforma∣tion of Regu∣lars. twentie heads, with these particular precepts, in summe, 1. That all shall obserue the rule of the profession, especially in regard of the perfectiō, which consisteth in vowes and essentiall Precepts, as also in regard of their common foode and apparell. 2. None shal possesse goods mooueable or immooueable, as their owne neither shall their Superiours grant immooueables, so much as for vse, gouernement, or Commenda, and in the vse ef mooueables, there shall be neither superfluitie nor want. 3. The Synode granteth to all Monasteries, though Mendicant, except the Capuchins, and the minor Obser∣uants, to possesse immoueable goods, with command, that the number of religious in the Monasteries may bee established to containe as many as can be maintained by the rents or vsuall almes, neither shall such places bee built hereafter without licence of the Bishops. 4. No religious person shall goe to the seruice of any place or person, without leaue of his Superiour, nor de∣part from his Conuent, without his command. 5. Bishops shall haue care to restore, and preserue the enclosure of the Nunnes, exhorting Princes, and commanding Magistrates, vpon paine of excommunication, to assist them. Nunnes shall not goe out of the Monasteries, and none shall enter, vpon paine of excommunication, without exception of sex, condition, or age, except it bee with licence. The Cloisters of Nunnes which are without the walles of the Cities and Castles shall be brought within. 6. That ele∣ctions bee made by secret scrutinie, and titulars, shall not bee created to this effect, or the voyce of the absent supplied, otherwise the election shall be voyde. 7. In the Cloisters of Nunnes the Superiour shall bee fortie yeeres of age, and eight yeeres professed or, where this cannot bee of thirtie yeeres of age at the least, and fiue yeeres professed. No woman shall haue superioritie in two Nunries, and he that is to ouersee the Election, shall stand without the gates. 8. The Monasteries, immediatly vnder the Aposto∣lique Sea, shall be reduced into a Congregation, and shal giue order for their gouernement, and their superiours shall haue the same authoritie as others haue, which haue beene formerly reduced into a Congregation. 9. The Monasteries of Nunnes, subiect immediatly to the Apostolique Sea, shall bee gouerned by the Bishops, as Delegates. 10. The Nunnes shall confesse and communicate, once a moneth, at the least, and, besides the ordinarie Confessor, one extraordinary shall be giuen twice or thrice a yeere, and they shall not keepe the Sacrament within the Monastery. 11. That in Monasteries, which haue cure of the soules of Secular men, those who doe exercise it, shall be subiect to the Bishop as farre as concerneth the ministe∣rie of the Sacraments, except the Monasterie of Clugni, or where the Abbats, Generals, or Heads of the Orders doe reside, or where the Abbats haue Episco∣pall or temporall iurisdiction. 12. The Regulars shall publish, and obserue the Papall and Episcopall censures, and interdicts, as also the feasts which the Bishop shall command. 13. The Bishop shall bee iudge of all contro∣uersies for precedence, betweene Ecclesiasticall persons, whether Secular or Regular, and no appeale from him shall lie; and all shall bee bound to goe to publique processions, except those who liue in strict inclosures. 14. The Regular, who resideth in the Cloister, and committeth an excesse abroad shall be punished by his Superiour, when the Bishop shall appoint, who also shall bee certified of the punishment, or otherwise the delinquent may be punished by him. 15. Profession made before the age of sixe∣teene yeeres compleat, and a yeere of probation, shall be voyde. 16. No ronunciation or obligation shall bee of force, except it bee made within two moneths before the profession, and with licence of the Ordinarie; and the time of probation beeing ended, the Superiours, shall admit the N to the profession, or send them out of the Monasteries; but not meaning to comprehend the Iesuites. The Monasterie shall not receiue any thing of a Nouice before the profession, except foode and apparell, and, at his departure, all shall be restored that belongeth to him. 17. No virgin shall receiue the habit, or make profession, except shee bee examined by the bishop, and her will well vnderstood, and that shee hath the conditions required by the rule of that Monasterie. 18. That all such bee anathematized, of what condition soeuer, who shall (except in lawfull cases) force any woman to en∣ter into a Monasterie, receiue the habit, or make profession, as also those who shall, without iust cause, hinder those who would enter willingly, The Pene∣tenti or Con∣uertite are Nunnes who haue beene Courtis us. except the Penitenti, or conuertite. 19. Hee that shall pretend a nullitie in the profession shall not bee heard after fiue yeeres from the first day thereof, and shall alleadge the cause before the Superiour and Ordinarie, before hee depose the habit, and none shall goe to a more large religion, nor haue leaue to weare the habit secretly. 20. The Abbats and Heads of the Orders shall visit the Monasteries, subiect vnto them, though but by Commenda, and the Commendataries shall be bound to execute the Ordinations; and, in those, Priors and Superiours, who haue spirituall gouernement shall bee created by the Chapters, or visiters of the Orders. 21. That the Synode doeth desire to restore discipline in all Monasteries, but seeth it is impossible, in regard of the stiffenecked and difficult age, yet they will not omit to vse meanes, that hereafter prouision may bee made therein, and doe hope that his Holinesse, as farre as hee shall see the times will comport, will pro∣uide that a Regular professed person shall bee made gouernour of Mona∣steries commended, and those that shall bee vacant hereafter shall not bee conferred but vpon Regulars; and those who haue Monasteries in Commenda, and are Heads of Orders, if prouision bee not made within sixe moneths of a Regular successor, they shall make prouision, or quit the place, otherwise the Commendaes shall bee vacant. And, in the prouision of Monasteries, the qualitie of euery one shall bee expressed by name, otherwise the prouision shall bee accounted surreptitious. 22. That it shall bee vnderstood that all Regulars are subiect to these Decrees, notwithstanding any priuiledge, though by foundation; commanding Bishops and Abbats to execute them immediatly, and praying, and commanding Princes and Magistrates, to as∣sist them, as often as they shall be required. The reading of the generall reformation did presently follow; which, The generall reformation. after an exhortation to Bishops for exemplary life, modestie in apparell and food, and frugality, doth forbid. 1. That they shall giue to their kin∣red, or any of their family, any part of the reuenues of the Church, except they bee poore; extending the same to all beneficed persons, secular, or regu∣lar, and also vnto Cardinals. 2. That the Bishops shall, in the first Pro∣uinciall Councell, receiue the Decrees of this Synod of Trent, promise obe∣dience to the Pope, Anathematize the heresies condemned, and euery Bishop promoted hereafter shall doe the same, in the first Synod; and all beneficed men, who are to assist in the Diocesan Synode, shall doe the same therein. Those who haue the care of Vniuersities, and studies generab, shall endea∣uour to make the Decrees to be receiued in them, and the Doctours to teach the Catholique faith in conformitie of them, and shall take a solemne oath herein euery yeere. And for those which are immediatly subiect to the Pope, his Holinesse will haue care that they be reformed in the same manner by his Delegats, or as hee shall thinke fit. 3. That, howsoeuer the sword of excommunication is the sinew of Ecclesiasticall discipline, profitable to keepe men in obedience, it is to be vsed with sobriety and circumspection, ha∣uing found by experience, that it is more contemned then feared, when it is denounced rashly, for a small cause. Therefore it shall not be denounced by any, but by the Bishop for things lost or stollen; who shall not grant it at the perswasion of any secular authority whatsoeuer, though a Magistrate. And in iudiciall causes, in which a reall or personall execution may bee made, they shall abstaine from censures; and in ciuill, belonging in what manner soeuer, to the Ecclesiasticall Court, they may vse pecuniary punishments, or proceed by distraining of goods, or imprisonment of the parties themselues, with their executors or others; and in case they be not able to execute really or personally, they may proceed to excommunication. And the same shall be obserued in criminall causes. The secular Magistrate shall not prohibite the Ecclesiasticall to excommunicate, or reuoke excommunication, vpon pretence that the Decree hath not beene obserued. The person excommu∣nicated shall not onely not be receiued to participate with the faithfull, but, if he perseuere in the censures, he may be proceeded against, as suspected of heresie. 4. It doth giue power to the Bishops, in the Diocesan Synods, and to the Heads of the Orders, in the generall Chapters, to ordaine for their Churches that which shall bee for the honor of God, and benefite of them, when there shall be an obligation to celebrate so many Masses by testamen∣tarie legacies, that they cannot bee performed, or that the almes is so small that none can bee found to performe the charge, but with condition, that memory be alwaies made of those parties deceased who haue left the legacies. 5. That, in the collation, or any other disposition of Benefices, no deroga∣tion bee made to the qualities, conditions, and charges required, or imposed in the erection or foundation, or by any other constitution, otherwise the prouision shall bee accounted surreptitious. 6. When the Bishop, not in time of visitation, doth proceed against the Canons, the Chapter shall elect two in the beginning of euery yeere, by whose councell and consent, the Bi∣shop shall proceed in all the acts, and the voyces of both shall bee as one; and in case they both dissent from the Bishop, a third shall bee elected by them, who shall determine the controuersie; and if they cannot agree, the third man shall bee elected by the next Bishop, But, in causes of concubi∣naries, or other more hainous, the Bishop may receiue information alone, & proceed to retention; and for the residue, shall obserue what is ordained. The Bishop shall haue the first seate in the quire, Chapter, or other publique places, and shall choose his place. The Bishop shall preside in the Chapter, except in cases belonging to him or his which authority shall not bee com∣municated to his vicar; and those who are not of the Chapter shall, in cau∣ses Ecclesiasticall, be all subiect to the Bishop, and where Bishops haue more iurisdiction then the aforesaid, the Decree shall not haue place. 7. Heere∣after no regresse or accesse to any Ecclesiasticall benefice shall bee granted, and those which be granted already, shall neither bee extended nor transfer∣red: and herein the Cardinals shall be comprehended also. Coadiutors, with future succession, shall not be made in any Ecclesiasticall benefices whatso∣euer; and if, in Cathedrall Churches or Monasteries, it shall be necessary to doe it, the cause shall first be knowen by the Pope, and the due qualities shall concurre. 8. All beneficed men shall vse as much hospitality as their re∣uenue will giue them leaue: and it doth command those who haue the go∣uernement of Hospitals, vnder what title soeuer, to exercise it, as they are bound by the reuenues deputed hereunto; and if persons of that sort as the institution doth require be not found in the place, the reuenues shall be con∣uerted to a pious vse as neere as can be to that, as shall seeme good to the Bi∣shop with two of the Chapter. And those who will not giue satisfaction in this charge of hospitality may be compelled (though they be Laikes) by cen∣sures, and other remedies, to performe their duety, and shall be bound to the restitution of fruits in court of conscience, and such gouernements shall not begiuen hereafter to any; for longer time then three yeeres. 9. The title of Patronage shall be shewed to be authenticall by foundation, or donation, or by presentations multiplied time out of mind, or by some other lawfull manner. But in persons and communities, in whom vsurpation is vsually pre∣sumed, the proofe shall be more exact, and time immemoriall shall not suf∣fice, except presentations of fiftie yeeres at the lest bee authentically shewed, and that they haue all taken effect. Other sorts of Patronages shall be vn∣derstood to be abrogated, except those of the Emperour, Kings, posses∣sours of Kingdomes, and supreme Princes, and of generall studies. The Bishop may refuse to admit those that are presented by the Patrons, if they be not fit; and the Patrons shall not meddle with the fruits, neither shall the right of Patronage be transferred against the canonicall ordinations: and the vnions of simple benefices to those which haue right of patronage, if they haue not really taken effect, shall wholly cease, and the benefices shall be re∣duced to liberty, and those that haue beene made within fourtie yeeres, though they haue beene executed, shall be reuiewed by the Bishops, and if a∣ny defect be found, shall be made void, and likewise all Patronages shall bee reuiewed, made within fourty yeeres, for augmentation of dowrie of the Church, or for building it anew; and if they shall not bee found to bee for the euident vtility of the benefice, they shall bee reuoked, and that shall bee restored to the Patrons which is due vnto them. 10. That in Prouinciall Councels or Diocesan, foure persons at the least, shall bee elected, endowed with fit qualities, to whom Ecclesiasticall causes shall bee committed which are to bee delegated by the Legates, Nuncij, or Aposto∣lique Sea, and all other delegations shall bee thought to bee surreptitious. 11. Money shall not bee receiued before hand for Ecclesiasticall goods, in preiudice of the successours, nor Ecclesiasticall iurisdictions rented out, neither shall the Farmours of them haue power to exercise them: and the farming of Ecclesiasticall things, though confirmed by the Pope, done within thirtie yeares, for a long time, that is, for twenty nine or more yeares, ought to be iudged by the Prouinciall Synod to haue bin done with dam∣mage of the Church. 12. Those who are bound to pay tenthes, shall pay them hereafter, to whom they are intirely obliged, and he that with holdeth them ought to bee communicated, and not to be absolued before restituti∣on. And it exhorteth all, to whom God hath giuen wealth, to impart some of it to Bishops and Priests, who haue poore Churches. 13. Whereas the fourth of the funerals was vsually paid, vntill within these forty yeeres, vnto the Episcopall or Parish Church, and was afterwards graunted to pious pla∣ces, it shall bee restored to them againe. 14 It doeth forbid all Clearkes to keepe Concubines, or any suspected women, at home, or abroad, which if they forbeare not to doe after admonition, they shall bee depriued of the third part of their Ecclesiasticall rents, & of all, after the second admonition, and suspended also from administration of the Sacraments; and, in case they perseuere, they shall be depriued of all Benefices, and made vncapable of any other, vntill they shall bee dispensed with: and if, after they haue forsaken them, they shall returne, they shall bee excommunicated also, and the cogni∣tion of these causes shall belong onely to Bishops, summarily. But Clearkes, not beneficed, shall bee punished with imprisonment, suspension, or inhabi∣litie. And if the Bishops themselues shall fall into the like errour, and not a∣mend, after admonition, giuen by the Prouinciall Synod, they shall bee sus∣spended, and, if they perseuere, they shall bee delated to the Pope. 15 The sonnes of Clearkes, not borne of lawfull matrimony, shall not haue any Be∣nefice, or ministery in Churches where their fathers haue, or haue had a Be∣nefice, nor haue any Pensions in Benefices, which the fathers either haue now, or haue had: and if, at any time, the father and sonne shall bee bene∣ficed in the same Church, the sonne shall bee bound to resigne within three moneths; prohibiting also resignations which the father shall make to ano∣ther, that hee may resigne his owne to his sonne. 16. Benefices with cure shall not bee conuerted into simple Benefices, and in those which are conuerted already, if the perpetuall Vicar hath not a conuenient roue∣nue, it shall bee assigned to him, at the pleasure of the Bishop. 17. Whereas some Bishops carry themselues basely towards the Ministers of Kings, men of preheminence, and Barons, as well in the Church, as with∣out, and not onely giue them place, with too much indignity, but serue them in person, the Synod detesting this, and reuiuing the Canons concer∣ning the Decorum of Episcopall dignitie, doeth commaund Bishops to for∣beare this, and regard their Decree, both in Church and without, remem∣bring they are Pastors; and also commaundeth Princes, and others, to giue them honour, and reuerence, due to fathers. 18. The Canons shall be ob∣serued indistinctly by all, and shall not bee dispenced but for a cause, heard with maturity, and without cost. 19. The Emperour, Kings, and Princes, who shall grant duell betweene Christians, shall be excommunicated, and de∣priued of the dominion of the place in which the duell is committed, if they hold it from the Church; and the Combattants, and Iudges of the combat, shall bee excommunicated, haue their goods confiscated, and be perpetually infamous: and if they die in the duell, they shall not bee buried in any sacred place, and those who giue them counsell either in iure or in facto, or perswade them to the duell, and the lookers on shall bee excommunicated. 20. In The reforma∣tion of Prin∣ces. the end, the Article of Ecclesiasticall libertie, or reformation of Princes, which had beene so much examined, was read. In it the Synod doeth ad∣monish secular Princes, hoping they will grant to the Church the restituti∣on of her rights, reduce their Subiects to reuerence the Cleargie, and not per∣mit their officers and inferiour Magistrates to violate the immunitie of the Church and Ecclesiasticall persons, but that, together with themselues, the Princes, they will be obedient to the constitutions of the Pope, and of Coun∣cels, determining that all constitutions of generall Councels, & of the Apo∣stolike Sea, in fauour of Ecclesiasticall persons, and libertie, shall bee obser∣ued by all: admonishing the Emperour, Kings, Republiques, Princes, and all, to reuerence the things that belong to Ecclesiasticall right, and not to suffer them to be violated by inferiour Lords, their Magistrates, or Ministers; that the Clerkes may reside and performe their dutie, without impediment, and with edification of the people. After this a Decree was read, neuer men∣tioned A Decree concerning the Aposto∣like Sea neuer mentioned before. in any Congregation; by which the Synod doth declare, that in all the Decrees of reformation, made vnder Paul, Iulius, and Pius in the Councel, with what words or clauses soeuer, it shall be vnderstood, that the authoritie of the Apostolike Sea is excepted and preserued. Being not able to dispatch all, the day being farre spent, the residue was deferred vntill the next morning, according to a determination made in the The Decrees of Indulgen∣ces, finishing the Councell, and of de∣manding the Popes Con∣firmation, &c. generall Congregation; in which the Congregation was made before day, howsoeuer, newes was come that the Pope was better, and out of danger of death. The decrees of Indulgences, finishing the Councell, and demaun∣ding confirmation were read, and approued by all. After dinner, the Session was held, in which the decree of Indulgence was read, containing in sub∣stance. That CHRIST hath giuen authoritie of granting them to the Church, and hath vsed the same from all antiquitie. And therefore the Synod doeth teach, and command, that the vse of them ought to bee conti∣nued as profitable for Christian people, and approoued by Councels; and doeth anathematize those that shall say, they are vnprofitable, and that the Church hath not power to graunt them. And to preserue the ancient cu∣stome, and prouide against abuses, it doeth commaund that all those offices of Pardonmongers be abolished, and, for the other abuses, it doth command the Bishops, that euery one shall collect all of his owne Church, and propose them in the Prouinciall Synod, to be referred to the Pope, who will take or∣der therein. Concerning fasts, difference of meates, and obseruation of feasts, it exhorteth Bishops to obserue the precepts of the Roman Church; and for the Index, howsoeuer it was finished, in regard the Synod hath not time to iudge of it, it doth ordaine that it shall be carried to the Pope, and re∣ferred to his censure; and the same shall bee done concerning the Catechisme, Breuiaris, & Missall. It published also mother decree, that, by the places assig∣ned to Ambas. it shall be vnderstood that no man is preiudiced. In the end it prayeth the Princes to vse meanes that the decrees of the Councell be not vi∣olated by the heretickes, but receiued and obserued by them, and by all: in which if any difficultie or necessirie of declaration shall arise, the Pope, cal∣ling The Decrees of the two former con∣uocations are recited. those whom he shall iudge fit, from the places where the difficultie is or calling generall Councels, or by some other meanes, will make prouision. Afterwards all the decrees of reformation made in this Councell vnder Paul and Iulius, as well of faith as of reformation, were recited. For the last thing, the Secretarie, going into the midst, did interrogate, whether the Fathers were pleased that an end should bee made of that Synod, and in the name of it, of the Legats, and Presidents, a confirmation demaunded of Pope Pius the fourth, of all things decreed vnder Paul, Iulius, and his Holinesse. And they answered not one by one, but all together, Placet. Cardinall Morone, as chiefe President, granted to euery one that was present in the Session, or had assisted in the Councell, a Plenary Indulgence, and blessed the Councell, The Councel is ended. And a plena∣ry Indulgence is giuen. and dismissed them all; saying, that after they had giuen thanks to GOD, they might goe in peace. It was an ancient custome in the Orientall Churches, to handle the mat∣ter of Councels in a publique meeting of all, and, vpon occasion, popular acclamations did often happen, and sometimes tumultuous, which notwith∣standing did conclude in concord. And, in the end, the Bishops, transported with ioy, for the vniforme determinations, did passe to acclamations, in praise of the Emperours who had assembled and fauoured the Councell, in commendation of the doctrine declared by the Councell, in prayers to The custome of Acclama∣tions is imita∣ted in Trent. GOD for his continuall diuine assistance to the Church, for the welfare of the Emperours, and for the health and prosperitie of the Bishops; which were not premeditated, but as the spirit did excite some Bishop more zealous to breake out fitly into some one of these conceipts, so the common con∣course did cry with him. This was imitated in Trent, yet not giuing place to the extemporary spirit of any, but meditating what should bee proposed, and answered, and repeating it out of a paper. The Cardinall of Loraine Wherein the Card. of Lo∣raine was chiefe. tooke vpon him to bee the chiefe, not onely to compose the acclamations, but to thunder them out also; which was generally construed for a light∣nesse and vanitie, not beseeming such a Prelate, and prince, to doe an office which did belong rather to the Deacons of the Councell, then to so princi∣pall an Archbishop and Cardinall. The Cardinall roaring, and the Fathers answering, A long life for his Holinesse, and eternall felicitie for Paul, and Iulius, were prayed for; likewise eternall memory for Charles the fift, and for the Kings, protectors of the Councell, long life for the Emperour Ferdinand, and for the Kings, Princes and Repuqligues, many thanks were giuen to the Legats and Cardinals, and long life wished vnto them, life and happy returne to the Bishops, and the faith of the holy general Synod of Trent was commen∣ded as the faith of S. Peter, of the Fathers and of the Orthodoxe. An Anathema An excom∣munication of heretiques in generall onely. was denounced against all Hereticks in generall, in one word onely, not spe∣cifying either ancient or moderne. The Fathers were cōmanded, vpon paine of excommunication, to subscribe the Decrees with their owne hand. The next day, being Sunday, was spent in this: and to doe it in order, there was, as it were, a congregation. And the subscriptions were of foure Legats, two The number of those that suscribed. Cardinals, three Patriarkes, fiue and twentie Archbishops, 268. Bishops, seuen Abbats, nine and thirty Proctours of men absent, seuen Generals of Regular orders. And howsoeuer it had beene determined that the Ambassa∣dours should subscribe after the Rathers, yet a contrary resolution was then taken, for two respects. One was, that the French Ambassadour being not The ambassa∣dors did not subscribe, for two causes. there, if the subscriptions of the others should be seene, and not his, it might bee thought a manifestation, that the French-men would not receiue the Councell. The other because the Count of Luna had said that hee would not subscribe absolutely, but with reseruation, because his King had not con∣sented to the ending of the Councell. And the Legats published, that it not being the custome that the Decrees should bee subscribed by any that hath not a deliberatiue voice, it would bee a thing vnusuall, if the Ambassadours should. In Rome when the Pope fell sicke, all fearing his life, there was much Popes e made confu∣ the . confusion in the Court. For neuer hauing knowen a Pope die in time of a Councell, they were very fearefull what might happen. They had the ex∣ample of the Councell of Constance, which, in the election, ioyned other Prelats to the Cardinals; and they were afraid that this, or some worse thing might happen. And howsoeuer the Spanish Ambassadour Vargas affirmed, that the Spanish Ambassadour and Prelats in Trent had commission, that the election should be made by the Cardinals, yet in respect of their small num∣ber, these words did not fully assure them. But the Popes recouerie gaue them much ioy: which was increased by the conclusion of the Councell, as being now fully deliuered from great danger. And the Pope ordained a so∣lemne procession to giue thankes to GOD for this great benefite. In Con∣sistory he shewed what contentment hee had in the Councell. He said hee would confirme it, adde many reformations vnto it; that hee would send three Legats, into Germanie, France, and Spaine, to perswade the execution of the Decrees, to grant things honest, and to ease them in matters of posi∣tiue Law. The Legates, Morone and Simoneta returned to Rome before Christmas, from whom the Pope was willing to haue a particular relation, in many au∣diences, of all that happened, and tooke a note of the names of the Prelates A dispute in Rome about confirma∣tion of the . who had taken paines in the Councell, that he might create them Cardinals. The Court, vnderstanding that the Pope was resolued for the confirmation, changed their ioy into griefe; and all the officers complained of the losse they should receiue in their offices, if that reformation were executed. And they considered moreouer, that those Decrees being conceiued in generall termes, and without clauses of subtill explication, as often as any difficultie did arise, the world now accustomed to barke against the Court, would make an interpretation contrary to their interests; which would be embra∣ced, as a thing of faire shew, couered with the title of Reformation. Sup∣plications and memorials were giuen to the Pope by those, who, hauing bought the offices, and foreseeing this losse, demanded restitution: a thing which the Pope did not neglect, and thought it did deserue a good remedie, lest there might be a desolation in Rome. Whereof of hauing diligently consi∣dered, he deputed Cardinals to consult vpon the confirmation, and to thinke vpon some remedie for the complaints of the Court. Some Cardinals did aduise to confirme immediately the Decrees of faith, and to proceed with maturitie in the other. For some did deserue much consideration, in regard of their small profit, and great confusion they might bring, and others must be necessarily dispensed with, in regard of their impossibilitie, or great diffi∣cultie, at the least; which could not be done with any decorum, nor without giuing much matter of discourse. Besides, it would bee necessary to haue much consideration that they might be so executed, that no man might re∣ceiue losse or preiudice, that prouision not deseruing the name of reforma∣tion, which is with the detriment of any; but by deferring, time, and the dili∣gence of many would discouer what might bee done with common satisfa∣ction of all, without which all reformations are turned in to deformations. The Pope therefore elected eight Cardinals to reuiew them, who after long discussion were almost all of opinion, that it was fit they should bee mode∣rated before the confirmation, and thought, that, being to suffer some op∣position, it was better to doe it in the beginning, then giuing them reputa∣tion by confirming, to moderate them afterwards. It is certaine, that they who did procure the Councell, had no aime but to pull downe the Popes authority, and while the Councell did last, euery one did speake as if it had power to giue lawes vnto him. Notwithstanding, it must now appeare by nullifying or moderating some of those Decrees, that the Pope is not to re∣ceiue lawes, but to giue them to Councels. The Pope being of himselfe inclined to the confirmation, and induced also thereunto by the perswasions of Morone, and Simoneta, yet perplex∣ed with the querimonies of the Court, and the generall opinion of the Cardinalls, that hee might come to a resolution, besides those aforena∣med, hee called the Cardinals of Bordissiera, and Amulius, as also the prin∣cipall officers of the Chamber, Chancery, and Rota: to whom the matter being proposed, the foure Cardinalls did vniformely aduise that the Councell should bee confirmed absolutely. Cardinall Amulius, in whose memorials I haue seene this negotiation, said, that his Holinesse by his patience, wise∣dome, vertue, and with immense charge, and with the paines and charge of so many Prelates, had seene the end of a great and difficult enterprise, to as∣semble direct, and finish the Councell; now a greater did remaine, but with∣out difficulty, that is, to keepe himselfe, the Apostolique Sea, and all the Ec∣clesiasticall order, from returning into the same straits, danger, inconueni∣ences, and expences; that, for these fourty yeeres, the world hath spoken of nothing but of the Councell, which the Popes could not, by any meanes, diuert, in regard of the certaine perswasion conceiued of the necessitie there∣of, and of the fruit it would produce. But if, so soone as it is ended, questi∣on be made of correcting or moderating it, or it bee left in suspence for want of confirmation, it will bee a manifestation that prouision hath not beene made in Trent, for that which was necessary, and expected, and suddenly ano∣ther meanes of prouision will bee vsed, either by Nationall Councels, or an∣other generall. And heere behold the same straights, out of which the Church, with so great difficultie, hath beene deliuered by God. But approo∣uing the Decrees, as a perfect reformation, and giuing them credit, and as much execution as is possible, many wil beleeue that nothing is wanting; and nothing is more profitable for the present times, then to spread a fame, and nourish it, that the Councell hath made an holy, necessary, and perfect re∣formation, not suffering it to be knowen that any Cardinal hath doubted that it hath not performed that for which it was called. By so doing, the humour of the world will be quiet by degrees, and his Holinesse may prouide for his ministors and seruants by dispensations, without violating the Decrees of the Councell, because in them the Apostolike authoritie is reserued; which may serue him for a buckler to denie the importunate demands of those whom hee will deeme vnworthy of fauour, and, in time, things will insensibly, the world not obseruing it, returne vnto the same state. He said this course was taken heretofore when necessity compelled to yeeld to these humors, which vsually are bred in subiects against the gouernours, that when others doe op∣pose the Decrees, it was fit to maintaine them, for reputation of so many of his creatures, of his Legates, and of himselfe also; much more ought he not to nullifie them wholly, as would bee done by euery little moderation, cor∣rection, or delay of confirmation; which the world would iudge to bee a mortall wound vnto them all. Besides, the vulgar, who doe alwayes make the worst interpretation, will haue nothing to say, but that the Court and Pope will not endure a reformation. This was opposed by almost all the officers of the Court, representing their losses and preiudices, and shewing how all would redound to the of∣fence of his Holinesse, and of the Apostolike Sea, and diminution of his re∣uenues. Onely Hugo Buoncompagno, Bishop of Bestice, who was Cardinall afterwards, a man much conuersant in Court affaires, said hee could not choose but wonder at this great feare, which he saw did arise without reason; that, by confirmation of the Councel, more authority was not giuen it then other generall Councels had, or then was giuen to the Decree, or Decretals, by the great number of which, and by their plaine speaking against the pre∣sent manners, many more preiudices and offences might arise, then could do by these few decrees of Trent, much reserued in the former words; that no law doth consist in the tearmes, but in the meaning, not in that which the vulgar and Grammarians doe giue it, but which vse and authority doth confirme; that Lawes haue no power but what is giuen them by him that gouerneth, and hath the care to execute them; that hee, by his exposition, may giue them a more ample, or a more strict sence, yea and contrary to that which the words doe import, and that it would bee no more to restraine or moderate the Decrees of Trent now, then to suffer them to bee restrained by vse, or by exposition, in times conuenient. Hee concluded that hee saw no cause why there should bee any difficultie about the confirmation. But hee put them in minde to withstand presently the inconueniences which might arise by the temeritie of the Doctours, who, the more ignorant they are of gouernment and publike affaires, the more they take vpon them to giue interpretation to Lawes, which doth confound authoritie; that expe∣rience sheweth that Lawes doe no hurt, nor cause any suit, but by the diuers senses giuen vnto them; that by the constitution of Nicolas the third, vpon the rule of Saint Francis, a matter full of ambiguities in it selfe, neuer any disorder did arise, because hee forbade all Glossators, and Com∣mentators to expound it; that if such prouision bee made for the Decrees of Trent, and all men forbid to write vpon them, a great part of that which is feared will bee withstood. But if his Holinesse will forbid all interpreta∣tions, euen to the Iudges also, and ordaine that in all doubts they shall come for exposition to the Apostolique Sea; no man will bee able to make vse of the Councell in preiudice of the Court, which by vse, and by inter∣pretations, may bee accommodated to that which will bee for the benefit of the Church. And as there is a Congregation which, with great fruit, doth take care of the Inquisition, so his Holinesse may appoint another for this particular of expounding the Councell, to whom all doubts shall bee re∣ferred from all parts of the world. This being done, hee said hee foresaw that, by the Decrees of the Councell, the authoritie of the apostolike Sea, the rights and prerogatiues of the Church of Rome will not onely not be dimini∣shed, but increased and inlarged much, in case they know how to make vse of these meanes. Those that heard him were mooued by these reasons; and the Pope saw it was necessarie to come to the absolute confirmation, with∣out any modification; and being perswaded that it would fall out as the Bi∣shop All glosses or interpretatiōs are forbid to be made vpon the Decrees of the Councell. had said, he was peremptorie not to hearken to any thing that could be spoken against it, but, full of hope to collect much fruit by the paines taken for finishing the Councell, hee resolued to confirme it, to reserue the inter∣pretation to himselfe, and to institute a Congregation, as the Bishop had coun∣selled: and, hauing imparted this to the Cardinals apart, hee determined to effect it. Therefore the sixe and twentieth of Ianuary, Morone and Simoneta hauing related in Consistorie the tenor of the Decree, made in the last Session, that the confirmation should be desired by them, they demanded that his Ho∣linesse would vouchsafe to confirme all that which hath beene decreed, and defined in that Councell, vnder Paul, Iulius, and his Holinesse. The Pope, first causing the Decree to bee read, asked the opinions of all the Cardinals. They were all for the confirmation vniformely; except the Cardinals, Saint Clement, and Alexandrinus; who said that too much authoritie had been giuen to Bishops in that Councell, and that it was necessary to moderate it, and then to make an exception of those points that did inlarge it too much, which were noted already. In the end, the Pope concluded, that it was good to confirme all without exception, and so hee did in words, in the consistorie, confirming them, and commanding that they should be receiued; and inuio∣lably obserued by all the faithfull; and the same day he published a Bull, sub∣scribed by all the Cardinals; in which, hauing related the causes of calling the Councell, the progresse, the impediments and difficulties which hap∣pened from time to time, and his diligence in fauouring the libertie thereof, graunting them free power ouer the things reserued to the Apostolike Sea, hee thanked God that it was ended with an intire consent. Therefore, being desired, in the name of the Synod, for confirmation, knowing the Decrees to be all Catholike, and profitable for Christians, hee hath confirmed them in Consistory, and doth confirme them by that writing, commanding all Pre∣lats to cause them to bee obserued, and exhorting the Emperour, Kings, Re∣publiques, and Princes, to assist for the obseruation of them also, to fauour the Prelates, not to permit their people, but rather to prohibite them by all meanes to imbrace opinions contrary to the doctrine of that Councell; and, to auoidconfusion, for bad all sorts of persons, as well Clerkes as Laiques, to make any Commentaries, Glosses, Annotations, or any interpretation whatsoeuer vpon them, or to make any kinde of Statute, though vnder pre∣tence of great strength, or better execution of the Decrees, but that, if any obscure place wanted interpretation or decision, they should haue recourse to the Apostolike Sea, because hee did reserue vnto himselfe power to de∣clare the difficulties or controuersies, as also the Synod had alreadie decreed. This Consistoriall Act of confirmation, and the Bull, were printed, to∣gether with the decrees; which gaue matter of speech, it appearing by the tenor of them, that the Decrees had not vigor, as constituted by the Coun∣cell, but as confirmed by the Pope. Whereupon it was said, that one had The Decrees of the Coun¦cel haue pow∣er from the Popes confir∣mation. heard the cause, and another had giuen the sentence. Neither could it bee said that the Pope had seene the Decrces before he confirmed them, because it did appeare, by the consistoriall Act, that hee had onely seene the De∣cree for desiring the confirmation. They said also, that the Decrees made vnder Paul and Iulius were read in Trent, and that it was fit they should bee confirmed by those that heard them, rather then by him that did not know them. But others answered, that there was no neede the Pope should then see them, because nothing was done in Trent which was not first resolued by him. In many consistories following the Pope spake for the obseruation of the Decrees of the Councell, saying he would obserue them himselfe, though hee was not bound, and gaue his word that hee would neuer derogate from them but for euident and vrgent causes, and with consent of the Cardinals. He charged Morone, and Simoneta, to bee diligent in aduertising him, if any contrary thing were proposed, or handled in consistorie: which was but a small remedie against the transgressions, because not an hundreth part of the grants made in Rome are dispatched in consistorie. He sent the Bishops to their residence, and resolued to make vse of the Protonotaries, and Referenda∣ries in gouerning the citie of Rome, and the Ecclesiasticall state. But how∣soeuer he was freed from great trouble, by the conclusion of the Councell, yet there were some remainders of it in all kingdomes, which brought new difficulties vpon him. Aduice came out of Spaine that the King was offended with the ending of And are exe∣cuted in Spaine by the Kings authority onely. the Councell, and determined to call the Bishops and agents for the Clergie of Spaine before him, to set downe in what manner it might bee executed. And the aduice was not false. For not only all that was done in Spaine, for receiuing and executing the Decrees of the Councell that yeere, partly in the Spring, and partly in the Autumne, was by order and resolution taken in the Kings Councell, but the King sent also his Presidents to the Synods, which were held, causing to bee proposed that which pleased him, and was fit for his seruice; to the great distast of the Pope, who was angry the King should take so much vpon him in matters Ecclesiasticall. But hee made no de∣monstration Which ma∣keth the Pope angry. heereof to his Ministers, purposing to make vse of it in another opportunitie, designed by himselfe; which shall bee related in due place. The President de Ferrieres, hauing, while hee remained in Ʋenice, made obseruations vpon the Decrees of the two last Sessions held after his depar∣ture from Trent, and sent them to the Court, the Cardinall of Loraine, at his The Card, of Lorain is tax∣e in France at his returne. returne into France, had many assaults, and reprehensions, for consenting to things preiudiciall to the Kingdome. They said, that, by the words of the first Article of reformation in the last Session, where it is said, that the Pope hath charge of the vniuersall Church, in Latin, Sollicitudinem Ecclesiae Vniuersae, hee had yeelded the point which himselfe and all the French Bi∣shops had so long contended for, and obtained, that preiudice might not bee done to the opinion of France, of the superioritie of the Councell a∣boue the Pope; that hee might haue remedied this with one little word, by making them say, as S. Paul had done, care of all the Churches, because no man would haue denied that kind of speech which S. Paul did vse; that preiu∣dice was likewise done to the same opinion of the superioritie of the Coun∣cell in the one and twentieth Article of the last session, sauing, in all the Decrees, the authoritie of the Apostolique Sea: and in the last Decree for demanding the Popes confirmation. It was opposed also, that the King, and French Church, hauing contested that the Councell might bee declared to bee new, and not the old continued, the continuation was declared, that it was one Councell with that of Paul and Iulius, in the said one and twen∣tieth Article, and in the Decree for reading the things constituted vnder those Popes; by which all was basely yeelded which had beene two yeeres maintained by the King. They sayd moreouer, that the approbation of the things done vnder Iulius was dishonourable, and preiudiciall to the pro∣testation then made by King Henry the second. But they reprehended a∣boue all, that honourable mention hauing beene alwayes made vnder Paul and Iulius, of King Francis the first, and King Henry the second, together with Charles the fifth, the Cardinall had not caused a memorie to bee made of them in the acclamations, when it was made of Charles, nor the present King to bee named, when the liuing Emperour was. The Cardinall ex∣cused other things, saying, that, with sixe Prelates, (for hee had no more in his company) hee was not able to resist the consent of more then two hundred. But this last opposition hee knew not how to excuse, though hee sayd it was to preserue the peace of the two Kingdomes. For it was replied that he might haue suffered others to make the in onation, and not to haue been the authour himselfe of that preiudice. And so it is seene, that vaine men often times, thinking to gaine reputation by retaile, doe lose it in grosse. But the Counsellers of the Parliament found many other things to op∣pose The censure of the Parlia∣ment of Paris vpon the last Session. against the Articles of Reformation, published in those two Sessions, where the Ecclesiasticall authority they said was inlarged beyond its bounds, with the wrong and diminution of the temporall, by giuing power to Bi∣shops to proceede to pecuniary mulcts, and imprisonment, against the Lai∣tie; whereas no authority was giuen by CHRIST to his Ministers, but meere and pure Spirituall; that when the Clerg e was made a member and part of the policie, the Princes did, by fauour, allow the Bishops to pu∣nish inferiour Clergie-men with temporall punishments, that discipline might bee obserued amongst them, but to vse such kinde of punishments against the Laiques, they had neither from the Law of God nor of man, but by vsurpation onely; that, in the matter of Duell, they pretend to proceede against the Emperour, Kings and other Sou reignes, who graunt it in their Kingdomes, euen by excommunication, whereas their opinion was that to permit Duell, in some cases, was not amiffe, as the permitting of fornication, and other offences, howbeit they are sinnes, was not ill, in re∣gard of publique vtilitie, and to auoyd greater inconueniences. They said, that this power beeing naturall, and giuen to the Princes by God, could not bee taken away, or restrained by any power of man. They thought it also intolerable, to excommunicate Kings and Princes, holding it for a sure ma∣xime in France, that the King cannot bee excommunicated, nor his officers, for execution of their offices. They added, that to depriue Princes of their States, Lords of their Fees, and to confiscate the goods of priuate men, were all vsurpations of the temporall authoritie, because that which was giuen by CHRIST to the Church, doeth not extend it selfe to things of this nature. Concerning Patronages, they said great wrong was done to the Seculars, in disabling their proofes, and that the whole Article was grounded vpon a false maxime, that all benefices are free, if the Patronage bee not prooued. For Churches haue no temporall goods but granted by the seculars, who can not bee presumed to grant them so, as that they may bee managed and dissi∣pated at the pleasure of the Ecclesiastiques: by which meanes it ought to bee presupposed, that euery benefice had a Patrone, from the beginning of it, except an absolute donation, with a totall cession of the patronage, can be shewed. And as the Common-wealth or Prince doth succeed him that hath no heire, so all benefices, the Patronage of which doeth not belong to any, ought to bee vnder the publique patronage. Some mocked that forme of speech, that benefices which had Patrons were in seruitude and the others free, as if it were not plaine seruitude to bee vnder the disposition of the Court of Rome, which doth manage them contrary to the institution, and foundation, whereas the seculars doe preserue them. Besides the censure of some decrees for this cause, they added, that others were against the cu∣stomes and immunities of the French Church; as the reseruation of great criminall causes against Bishops to the cognition of the Pope alone, taking away the power of Prouinciall and Nationall Councels, which haue alwaies adiudged them in all cases, and burthening the Bishops, by forcing them to litigate out of the Kingdome, contrary not onely to the custome of France, but to the Canons of ancient Councels also, which haue determined that such causes should bee iudged, and ended in their proper Countries. They saide it was against iustice, and the vse of France that benefices should bee clogged with Pensions and Reseruations of Fruits, as was obliquely determi∣ned. Likewise, that it was not tolerable, that causes of the first instance should be taken out of the Kingdome by the Pope, because it taketh away a very ancient vse, confirmed by many constitutions of Kings. Neither could it bee iustified by the exception, of vrgent or reasonable cause, experi∣ence of all times hauing shewed, that all causes may bee taken out of the Kingdome by this pretence. For hee that would dispute whether the cause were vrgent or reasonable, doeth enter into a double charge and difficulty, because not onely the principall cause, but that Article also must be discussed in Rome. They did, by no meanes, approoue that the possessing of immoue∣ables should bee granted to begging Friars; and sayd, that they hauing been receiued into France with that institution, it was iust that they should bee maintained in the same state; that this was a perperuail Artifice of the Court of Rome, to take goods out of the hands of seculars, and to draw them into the Clergie, and afterwards to Rome; that the Munkes did first gaine credit, by pretence of the vow of pouerty, as if they aimed at no temporall thing but did all in charity, for the good of the people; afterwards, hauing gained reputation, the Court do the dispence with them for their vow, by which meanes the Monasteries being made rich, are giuen in Commenda, and finally all commeth to the Court. To this they added an exhortation in the twelfth article, made to all the faithfull, to giue largely to Bishops, and Priests; which had beene good, in case they did serue the people as they ought, and were in need. For so Paul doth exhort, that hee that is instructed in matters of faith, should giue some part of his goods to him that doth in∣struct him. But when hee that beareth the name of a Pastor, doth intend rather any other thing then to instruct the people, the exhortation is not fit; and the rather, because Ecclesiasticall goods formerly were for maintaining the poore, and redeeming slaues; for which cause not the immoueables on∣ly, but euen the very ornaments of the Church, and holy vessels were sold. But in these last times it is prohibited to doe it, without the Pope; which hath enriched he Clergie exceeding much. In the Mosaicall law, God gaue the tenth to the Leuites who were the thirteenth part of the people, prohibi∣ting that any more should be giuen vnto them; but the Clergie now, which is not the fiftieth part, hath gotten already, not a tenth onely, but a fourth part, and doth still proceed and gaine, vsing also many Artifices therein. They said that Moses, hauing inuited the people to offer for the fabrique of the Tabernacle, when as much was offered as did fuffice, did forbid them, in the name of God, to offer any more; but here no end will bee found, vntill they haue gotten all, if men will continue in the lethargie. If some Priests, and religious persons bee poore, it is because others are excessiuely rich; and an equall diuision would make them all rich abundantly. But to omit these so euident considerations, if they did exhort the people, to assist the poore Bishops and Priests in their necessities, it would bee tolerable; but to say they should bee assisted to maintaine their dignitie, which is their pride and luxurie, doth signifie nothing but that they are quite without shame. It is true that, in exchange, another Decree was made in the eighteenth Ar∣ticle, infauour of the people, that dispensations should be giuen gra is; which beeing commanded by CHRIST, and not obserued, there was no hope that this Decree would doe any more good. These things being obiected to the Cardinall of Loraine, that hee had au∣thorized them, against the expresse commandement of the King, in his letters of the twentie eighth of August before mentioned hee defended himselfe in one word onely, that in the Congregation of the tenth of Nouember, the The defence of the Card, of Loraine. Decrees being read, to bee published in the Session, the next day, the rights and authority of the French King, and priuiledges of the Gallican Church were reserued. Whereunto Monsieure le Feure replied, that himselfe and his colleague hauing vsed all diligence to haue a copie of that Decrce, they could neuer obtaine it, and that, in humane affaires, not to appeare was as much as not to bee. Besides, this did not serue to excuse the things publi∣shed in the last Session. But that which was saide concerning the Synode in the Councels of the King and Parlament, was nothing to that which the Bishops and Diuines, and their seruants also, according to the French liber∣tie, did relate to euery one, vpon all occasions, making iests at the discords, and contentions betweene the Fathers, at the practises and interests with which the matters of reformation were handled. And those who were most familiar with the Cardinall of Loraine, spake most of all. And The censure made by the French BB. of the Councell, after their re∣turne into France. A Prouer be made in France con∣cerning the Councell. it passed in France, in manner of a Prouerbe, that the moderne Coun∣cell had more authoritie then that of the Apostles, because their owne pleasure onely was a sufficient ground for the Decrees, without admitting the holy Ghost. But, in Germany, the Decrees of reformation were not thought conside∣rable, neither by the Protestants, nor by the Catholiques. The Protestants did examine the matter of faith onely. They said, that to haue spoken one word incidently in handling the Masse, that it doth assist the dead, which The censure of the Coun∣cell in Ger∣manie. also may receiue diuers sences, and, in the decree of Purgatorie, to alleadge it as a definition of the Article, was a thing not to be vsed in Councels, especi∣ally in this, where the matters were minced, and an Article of faith made of euery question, which could be mooued in any matter. And to commend Bishops to teach the sound doctrine of Purgatorie, without declaring what it is, did shew that the Fathers had great hast to depart from Trent. But in the matter of Saints the hast was greater, condemning, in one breath, and in one period eleuen Articles, not declaring what condemnation it was, or whether they were condemned of heresie, or for any other cause, and, after a long dis∣course of Images, anathematising those that speake against the Decrees, without letting them know which it doth comprehend vnder the Anathema, whether the immediatly precedent concerning Images, or all the others a∣boue written. But of Iudulgences they spake more then all the rest; that these gaue occasion of the present diuision amongst Christians; that the Councell was principally assembled for these; that, in that matter, there is no part which is not controuersed, and vncertaine, euen amongst the Schoolemen themselues; and yet the Synod hath passed them ouer, without cleering any doubt, or deciding any controuersie. And concerning the remedy of abu∣ses, they spake in such ambiguous termes, that it could not bee vnderstood what they did approue or disapproue; saying, they did desire a moderation, according to the old custome approued in the Church. For it is certaine, and cannot bee concealed, that, in no Christian Nation of the Easterne Church, either in ancient or moderne times, there neuer was any vse of In∣dulgences, of any kind whatsoeuer. And in the west, if by ancient custome, they meane that which was obserued before Vrban the second, in the yeere 1095. no proofe can bee brought of the vse of Indulgences. If from that time vntill the yeare 1300. It will appeare, that the vse of them hath beene very sparing, and onely to free men from punishments imposed by the Con∣fessor. Afterwards, from the Councell of Vienna the abuses began, which did increase very much, vntill the time of Leo the tenth, so that the Councel de∣siring the restitution of the old custome, approued in the Church, it was necessary to declare in what Church, and in what time. But those words, that the Eclesiasticall discipline is weakened by too much facilitie in graunting Indulgences, are a plaine confession, that they belong not to the conscience, not doe free men from any thing in the fight of God, but touch the externall onely, that is, the Ecclesiasticall discipline. For the difference of meates and fasts, they, said, that to command them was good, but that was not decided of which the world complained, that is, that they did binde the conscience. Therefore the Princes of Germany held none esteeme of this Councell. One∣ly some few ministers of the Augustan confession published a protestation, of which but little account was made. The Catholikes did not thinke of the doctrine of Purgatorie, and of Indulgences, desiring onely to obtaine the Communion of the Cup, mariage of Priests, and relaxation in the multitude of precepts De iure positiuo, concerning fasts, feasts, and such other things. For whose satisfaction the Emperour, and Duke of Bauaria made in∣stance The Empe∣ror writeth to the Pope a∣bout the com∣munion of the Cup. to the Pope. The Emperour wrote letters to him, dated the foure∣teenth of February; saying, that, during the Councell, hee had laboured to obtaine the grant of the Cup, not for any priuate interest, or scruple of con∣science which hee had, but because hee did beleeue, and doeth still, that the graunt is necessary, to bring backe to the Church those that wander; that he did then tolerate the impediments interposed, to treat there of with the prin∣cipall Prelates, and Princes of the Empire, with whom hauing conferred whether it were expedient to renew the same request, they thought fit hee should moue his Holinesse therein. Therefore, calling to mind what the Cardinals Morone and Loraine had caused to bee told him, which was confir∣med also by the Bishop of Liesina his Nuncio, hee would no longer deferre to demand the grace of him, without repeating any more the weighty causes that did constraine him, desiring him to assist the Germane Nation, to which all wise Catholikes doe thinke that the graunt will bee very beneficiall; ad∣ding, that to preserue the remainder of Religion in Germanie, and extirpate heresies, it will be of great moment to graunt, that Priests, who are separated because they are married, may bee reconciled, and retaine their wiues, and that hereafter where there is not a sufficient number of Priests, married men of good life and fame may be admitted to the Priesthood. For this he pray∣ed him in his owne name, and in the name of the Duke of Bauaria, his sonne in law, assuring him that he should doe a thing worthy of his piety, and most acceptable. The letters of the Duke of Bauaria did containe; that, hauing sent often And so doth the Duke of Bauaria. to his Holinesse, to shew the miserable State of Germanie in matters of Reli∣gion, he did hope hee should not long desire the medicine; which seeing it was not applied vntill then, he, together with the Emperour, and Ecclesiasti∣call Electors, did pray him to grant power to the Arch bishop of Salzburg to giue leaue to Catholike Priests to administer the Cup to those who haue con∣fessed, and are penitent, and do beleeue the other Articles of Religion: which grant would giue satisfaction to his Subiects, who remaine in his State, & to those also who goe forth of his Dominions to seeke those who will minister it vnto them; that himselfe will alwayes be content with one kinde, nor will force any to vse the Cup, who, as himselfe, will be content with the bread onely; that for these hee demandeth nothing, but that it seemeth to him not inconuenient for the Vicar of CHRIST to haue pitie vpon the others also. Likewise he prayed his Holinesse that hee would grant, for some time at the least, that married Priests may bee reconciled to the Church, keeping their wiues, and married men ordained also. To these Letters was added a Remonstrance, or consideration, compo∣sed by the Diuines of Germanie; in which it was said: That it was plaine, that the Scripture of the New and Old Testament doeth permit Priests to A Remon∣strance con∣cerning the same Grant. haue wiues, because the Apostles, some few excepted, were married; neither is it found that CHRIST, after their vocation, did separate their wiues from them. That in the Primitiue Church, as well Orientall, as Occidentall, the marriages of Priests were free, vntill the time of Calistus the Pope; that the ciuill Lawes did not condemne the marriage of Clerkes; that it is certaine, that single life is better in the Clergie, and more to be desired, but that, in re∣spect of the fragilitie of nature, and difficulty to bee continent, there are but few who doe not feele the prickes of the flesh. Therefore Eusebius relateth, that Dionysius did admonish Quintus the Bishop, that hee should consider of the weakenesse of the maior part, and not lay the burthen of single life vpon the brethren. And Paphnutius, in the Councell of Nice, saying, that the vse of ones owne wife was chastitie, perswaded the Councell not to impose the law of single life. And the Synod of Constantinople did not for bid the vse of wiues, but in the time when they were to offer sacrifice. That if euer there were cause to permit matrimony vnto Clerkes, it was in that age. That a∣mongst fiftie Catholike Priests, hardly one can bee found that is not a noto∣rious fornicator. That not the Priests onely desire matrimonie, but the Se∣culars also, that they may not such beastly behauiour, and the Patrons of Churches will not giue the benefices but to married men. That there is great want of Ministers onely for the prohibition of Matrimonie. That the Church hath formerly remitted the seueritie of the Canons for this cause a∣lone. That the Pope did confirme a Bishop in Saragosa, who had a wife and children, and a Deacon, who had been twice married, and committed the Sacrament of Confirmation to simple Priests, in defect of a Bishop. There∣fore many Catholiques did then, and doe now thinke better to dispence with the law of continencie, then, by retaining it, to open a gate to vncleane sin∣gle life, leauing marriage free for all; and the rather, because Cardinall Pa∣normitan doeth hold, that it would bee good for the saluation of soules to grant Matrimonie; and that there are examples of the old Church, and in the Anciran Councell, of Adam, and Eupsychius Cesariensis, Priests. That it is certaine, that the Pope may dispence with Secular Priests; which some also extend vnto Regulars. That it seemeth a great absurditie not to admit mar∣ried Clerkes, and to tolerate fornicators and to remooue both would bee as much as to remaine without Ministers, and that if they ought to be bound to the vow of chastitie, none should be ordained but old men. That it is not a good reason to retaine single life with the teeth, to preserue Ecclesiasticall goods, it not being iust, in respect of temporall things to make shipwracke of soules. Besides, prouision might bee made herein, by some other meanes; which being done, concubinate would be banished out of the Church, and the scandall which offendeth many taken away. The Pope, considering these remonstrances, was of opinion to call to Rome pious and learned men, of all Nations, to handle this point with ma∣turity, and spake of it to the Ambassadours residing with him. But Cardi∣nall Simoneta did disswade, saying, it would bee a kinde of Councell, and that if men should come out of France, Spaine, Germanie, and elsewhere, they would bring intelligences and instructions of Princes, and would be gouer∣ned and speake according to their interests, and that, when his Holinesse would be quit of them, he could not doe it at his pleasure; that, if he did not follow their opinion, it would distaste the Princes; that he should remember what troubles the Councel put him to, and not fall into the like dangers. The Pope thought the counsell was sincere, and profitable, and therefore, think∣ing no more of strangers, he deputed nineteene Cardinals, giuing them order to examine diligently the writing that came out of Germany. The twelfth of March the Pope made a promotion of nineteene Cardi∣nals, A promotio of 19. Cardi∣nals. for reward of the great seruice they did him in Councell, in which hee resolued not to comprehend any of those who held the Residence, and In∣stitution of Bishops, to bee de iure diuino, howsoeuer their qualities might o∣therwise deserue the degree; and did not forbeare to discouer so much to all sorts of persons, vpon euery occasion. He created Marcus Antonius Colonna, Archbishop of Taranto. Aluise Pisano, Bishop of Padua. Marcus Antonius Bobo, Bishop of Aosta. Hugo Buon Compagno, Bishop of Bestice. Alexander Sforza, Bishop of Parma. Simon Pasqua, Bishop of Serzana. Carlo Visconte, Bishop of Vintimiglia. Franciscus Abondius, Bishop of Bobio. Guido Ferrier, Bishop of Vercelli. Iohannes Franciscus Commendone, Bishop of Zante. Gahriel Paleotto, Auditor of the Rota: all which had laboured faithfully in Councell for the seruice of his Holinesse. To these hee added Zacharias Delphinus, Bi∣shop of Liesina, who, beeing resident with the Emperour, tooke no lesse paines for concluding the Councell then the others had done in Trent. TO THE READER. Courteous Reader, N Ow that thou hast perused this History, I intreat thee to reade ouer these small parcels following. The first is an Epi∣stle of S. Gregorie the great, who was Bishop of Rome about sixe hundred yeeres after CHRIST, and was as lear∣ned, and as consciencious, as any that pre∣ceded in that Sea, or that followed af∣ter. Thou canst not but perceiue, that howsoeuer hee ascribeth to S Peter as much preheminence as any other ancient writer hath done, if not more, yet hee doth renounce in most ample tearmes, or rather abominate that swelling Antichristian power which was then chalenged by Iohn the Patriarch of Constantinople, but long since hath been practised by the Bishops of Rome, and neuer more, nor more preiudicially to the Church Catholique, then in this pre∣tended Councell of Trent. And that thou mayst not wonder how these Bishops could sore so high as to bee at last aboue Kings and Emperours, to whom S. Gregorie and his predecessours professed and performed all dueti∣full obedience and seruice, I haue tendred vnto thee in the next place three seuerall passages out of the Historie of Francis Guic∣ciardine, a famous Florentine, who knew their practises as well as any, and hath dared to relate them plainly. The Papalins haue been so wise in their wicked generation, as in all late Editions, to cause them to bee left out; thereby the better to conceale their vn∣iust vsurpations, against both Ecclesistiques and Laiques. Now, lest any might vncontrolably say, that howsoeuer they might bee faulty at other times, yet those were worthy who gouer∣ned the Sea of Rome when this Councell was assembled, to cleere the trueth concerning these, looke ouer the passages following, taken out of some Epistles written by men of great esteeme, who resided in the Councell, and gaue account to their Superiours of all that passed, or by their Superiours to them backe againe. By these it will appeare that the spirit of Antichrist, and not the holy Ghost, did gouerne in it. They shew the practises of Rome to be so grosse, and so abhominable, that thou mayest easily beleeue, that Invita Pau∣li 3. Papirius Massonius, a Popish writer, had iust cause to say, speaking of the Popes who liued in the time of this Councell; In pontificibus ne∣mo hodiè sanctitatem requirit; optimi putantur si vel leuitêr mali sint, vel minus boni quam caeteri mortales esse solent. Englished thus: No man expects any sanctitie in Popes now a dayes; they are thought to be excellent Popes, if they haue neuer so little honestie, or be not so wicked as other men vse to be. Last of all, thou mayest reade an Epistle written by that fa∣mous Prelate, Bishop Iewell, as an answere to a friend of his, who liued neere the place, and in the time of this vnlawfull assembly, or conuenticle at Trent. In it thou mayest finde reason enough, why the Church of England did neither send Prelates to it, nor re∣ceiue afterwards the Decrees and Constitutions of it. As like∣wise the Church of France refused to doe, though their Bishops were present in it. When thou hast read these things, consi∣der well of them, and the Lord giue thee a true vnderstanding in all things. GREGORIE GREGORIE to the Emperour MAVRICIVS, concerning IOHN Bishop of Constantinople, who hath assumed the name of Ʋniuersall Bishop. Chap. 76. O Vrmost religious Lord, whom God hath placed ouer vs, Ep. 32. amongst other weighty cares belonging to the Empire, doth labour (by the iust rule of holy writ) to keepe the Clergie in peace and charitie. Hee truely and piously considereth that no man can well gouerne matters ter∣rene, except he can manage well things Diuine also, and that the Common-wealths peace and quiet depends vp∣on the tranquillity of the Church Vniuersall. For (most gracious Soue∣reigne) what humane power or strength would presume to lift vp irreligi∣ous hands against your most Christian Maiestie, if the Clergie, being at vni∣tie amongst themselues, would seriously pray vnto our Sauiour CHRIST to preserue you, who haue so well deserued of vs! or what Nation so barba∣rous as would exercise such cruelty against the faithfull, except the liues of vs, who are called Priests, but indeede are not, were most depraued and wicked. But whilest we leaue those, things which belong not vnto vs, and imbrace those things for which wee are not fitte, wee raise the Barbari∣ans vp against vs, and our offences doe sharpen the swordes of our ene∣mies, by which meanes the Common-wealth is weakened. For what can wee say for our selues, if the people of God, ouer whom wee are, though vnworthily, placed, bee oppressed by the multitude of our offences? if our examples destroy that which our preaching builds, and our works giue, as it were, the lye to our doctrine? Our bones are worne with fasting, but our mindes are puft vp: Our bodies are couered with poore clothing, but in our hearts wee are as braue as may be: We lie groueling in the ashes, but ayme at matters exceeding high: Wee are teachers of humilitie, but patternes of pride, hiding the teeth of wolues vnder a sheepes countenance. The end of all is to make a shew to men, though God knoweth the trueth. Therefore our most pious Souereigne hath been most prudently carefull to set the Church at vnitie, that hee might the better compose the tumults of warre, and to ioyne their hearts together. This verily is my desire, and doe yeeld, for my part, due obedience to your souereigne commands. Howsoeuer, in regard it is not my cause, but Gods; and for that not I onely, but the whole Church is troubled; because religious Lawes, venerable Synods, and the very precepts of our Lord IESVS CHRIST are disobeyed by the inuention of a proud and pompous speech, my desire is, that our most Religious Souereigne would lance this sore; and would tie the partie affected with the cords of his Impe∣riall authoritie, in case hee shall make his resistance. By binding of the Common-wealth is eased; and by the paring away of such excremen as these, the Empire is inlarged. All men that haue read the Gospel doe know, that, euen by the very words of our LORD, the care of the whole Church is committed to S. Peter the Apostle, Prince of all the Apostles. For to him it is sayd, Iohn 21. Peter louest thou me? Feede my sheepe: Luke 22. behold, Satan hath desired to winnow thee as wheate, and I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith should not faile: and thou being at the last conuerted confirme thy brethren. To him it is said, Matt. 16. Thou art Peter, and vpon this rocke I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. And to thee I will giue the Keyes of heauen, and whatsoeuer thou bindest on earth shall be bound also in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth, shall bee loosed also in heauen. Behold, he hath the Keyes of the Kingdome, and the power of binding and loosing is giuen vnto him. The care and the prin∣cipalitie of the whole Church is committed to him; and yet is not called V∣niuersall Apostle: howbeit this most holy man Iohn, my fellow Priest, labou∣reth to bee called Vniuersall Bishop. I am inforced to crie out, and say, Oh corruption of times and manners! Behold, the Barbarians are become Lords of all Europe: Cities are destroyed, Castles are beaten downe, Prouinces depo∣pulated, there is no husbandman to till the ground, Idolaters doe rage and domineere ouer Christians, and yet Priests, who ought to lie weeping vpon the pauement, and in ashes, desire names of vanitie, and doe glory in new and profane titles. Doe I (most Religious Souereigne) pleade herein mine owne cause? Doe I vindicate a wrong done to my selfe, and not maintaine the cause of God Almighty, and of the Church Vniuersall? Who is hee who presumeth to vsurpe this new name against both the law of the Gospel and of the Canons? I would to God there might bee one called Vniuersall, without wronging of others. We know that many Priests of the Church of Constantino∣ple haue been not onely heretiques, but euen the chiefe leaders of them. Out of this schoole proceeded Nestorius, who, thinking it not to be possible that God should be made man, did beleeue that IESVS CHRIST, the Media∣tour betweene God and man was two persons, and went as farre in Infideli∣tie as the Iewes themselues. Thence came Macedonius, who denied the holy Ghost, consubstantiall to the Father and the Sonne, to be God. If then eue∣ry one in that Church doth assume that name, by which hee maketh himselfe the head of all good men, the Catholique Church (which God forbid) must needes bee ouerthrowen when hee falleth who is called Vniuersall. But let this blasphemous name be farre from Christians; by which all honor is taken from all other Priests; while it is foolishly arrogated by one. It was offered to the Bishop of Rome by the reuerend Councell of Chalcedon, in ho∣nour of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles: but none of them either assumed, or consented to vse it; lest while this priuiledge should be giuen to one, all o∣thers should bee depriued of that honour which is due vnto them. Why should we refuse this name when it was offered, and another should assume it without any offer at all? This man, contemning obedience to the Canons, is the rather to be humbled by the commands of our most pious Souereignes. He is to be chastised who doeth iniurie to the holy Catholique Church, whose heart is puft vp, who seeketh to please himself by a name of singularity, wher∣by hee would make himselfe to bee aboue the Emperour. Wee are all scan∣dalized herein: Let the author of this scandall reforme himselfe, and all dif∣ferences in the Church will cease. I am seruant vnto all Priests so long as they liue like themselues, but if any shall vainely set vp his bristles contrary to God Almighty, and to the Canons of the Fathers, I hope in God that hee shall ne∣uer be able to bring my necke vnder his yoke, no not by force of armes. What hath happened in this Citie by occasion of this name I haue more exactly de∣clared to Sabinianus the Deacon, my Agent. Let therefore my religious Souereignes thinke of me their Seruant, whom they haue alwayes cherished and vpheld more then others, as of one who desireth to yeelde them obedi∣ence, and yet am afraid to bee found guilty of negligence in my duety in the later fearefull day of iudgement. Let our most pious Souereigne either vouch∣safe to determine the businesse, according to the petition of the forenamed Sabinianus the Deacon, or cause the man, so often mentioned, to renounce this claime. In case hee doe submit to your most iust sentence, or fauoura∣ble admonitions, wee will giue thankes to Almighty God, and reioyce for the peace of the Church, procured by your clemencie. But if hee shall per∣sist in this contention, wee will hold the saying to bee most true: Luk. 14. 18. Euery one that exalteth himselfe shall bee brought lowe. And againe it is written, Prou. 16. Be∣fore a fall the heart will be lifted vp. In obedience to my Souereignes, I haue written to my brother Priest both gently and humbly that hee would desist from the pursuit of this vaine-glory: if hee giue eare vnto mee, hee hath a brother de∣uoted vnto him: but if hee continue in his pride, I see already what will be∣tide him; hee will make him his enemie of whom it is written, Iam. 4. God resi∣steth the proud, and giueth grace to the humble. A part of the Historie of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE, stollen out of his third Booke concerning Pope ALEXAN∣DER the sixt. B Vt hee could not alwayes auoid domesticall misfortunes, which troubled the affaires of his family with tragicall examples, pro∣ceeding from such lust and cruelty, which would bee accounted horrible euen in any barbarous nation whatsoeuer. For hauing resolued from his first entrance into the Papacie, to put all the temporall greatnesse vpon his eldest sonne the Duke of Candia, the His second sonne. Cardinall of Valen∣tia, whose minde was wholly auerse from all ecclesiasticall profession, and desired rather to be exercised in militarie affaires, not enduring to bee preuen∣ted herein by his brother, and besides beeing impatient that hee had a grea∣ter share in the loue of the Lady Lucretia, who was common sister to them both; caused him to be murthered as hee rid alone one night through Rome, and secretly to bee cast into the riuer Tiber; beeing incited thereunto partly by lust, and partly by ambition, powerfull ministers to effect any wicked∣nesse. There was a fame (if possibly so enormous an abhomination may be beleeued) that not onely the two brothers, but euen the father himselfe were corriuals in the loue of this Lady Lucretia. Before hee was created Pope hee gaue her in marriage to a man of meane degree; from whom, so soone as hee began to sit in Peters chaire, he did separate her, as beeing now vnworthy of her. Then hee married her to Iohn Storz , Lord of Pesaro. Af∣ter that, not enduring that this her husband should bee partaker of her loue with him, hee dissolued the marriage, although consummated, by sub∣orning false witnesses to depose before Iudges, appointed by himselfe for the same purpose, who gaue sentence that this Iohn was frigid and impotent by nature. This did afflict beyond measure, &c. A second place conteining a large discourse by what meanes the Popes of Rome attained to that greatnesse which they now enioy, taken quite out of the fourth Booke of the Historie of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE. F Or the liquidation whereof, and of many other things which happened in after ages, it is necessary to relate what title the Church hath to the territory of Romania, and to many others which it either hath possessed at diuers other times, or doeth pos∣sesse at this present: as also by what meanes, it beeing first instituted (as was fit) for Spirituall gouernement, it came to possesse temporall States and Em∣pires. Likewise it is conuenient to expresse (as a matter belonging to this argument) what contentions haue hapned at seuerall times betweene the Popes and the Emperours vpon these and the like occasions. The Bishops of Rome, the first whereof was the Apostle Saint Peter, their authoritie beeing founded by IESVS CHRIST in things Spirituall onely, did abound with charitie, humility, patience; and many miracles were wrought by them. At the first they were not onely destitute of all tempo∣rall power, but were persecuted by it; neither was their name so much as spoken of, but for the afflictions and the torments which they and their fol∣lowers did endure. For howsoeuer their proceedings were sometimes not obserued, by reason of the multitude and variety of nations and professions in Rome, and some of the Emperours did forbeare to question them, but on∣ly when their actions did seeme to crosse the publique gouernment, yet some others, either because they were inclined to crueltie, or for the loue they bare to their owne Gods, did bitterly persecute them, as inuenters of new super∣stitions, and enemies of true Religion. In this state of life they continued, vntill the time of Siluester the Pope, to be most famous for their voluntary pouerty, sanctity of life, and martyr∣domes. Afterwards, Constantine the Emperor being turned Christian, moued therunto by the holinesse of those who followed CHRIST, & by the miracles done by them, the Popes came to bee secure from those dangers to which they had beene subiect for the space of 300. yeeres before, & had free exercise of their Christian profession. Hereupon, for the reuerence which the holi∣nesse of their life and religion had procured them, and because men are prone to follow the example of their Prince, by reason either of ambition or of feare, Christianity began marueilously to spread it selfe, and the pouerty of Chri∣stians not to bee so great as it was. For Constantine hauing built the Church of Saint Iohn in Lateran, of Saint Peter in the Vatican, of Saint Paul, and many others in diuers places, not onely gaue them plate and ornaments, but also, that these might bee preserued and renewed, the Churches repaired, and the Clergie belonging to them maintained, hee endowed them with possessions and with reuenues. In after times many, perswading themselues that they should gaine heauen more easily by beeing liberall toward Churches, either built and indowed other Churches, or gaue to those which were built be∣fore. In like manner euery one payed them tithes due either by law or cu∣stome, as in the old Testament is commanded. Wherein euery one was the more forward, because Clergie-men in those times contented themselues with necessaries onely, and bestowed the remainder either to repaire their Churches, or to adorne them, or in workes of charitie and pietie. Now the Bishops of Rome (pride and ambition hauing not as yet possessed their harts) were acknowledged by all Christians to bee superiours of all Churches, in all Spirituall gouernment, as successours vnto the Apostle Saint Peter; because that Citie, by reason of the dignitie and greatnesse thereof, retained the name and maiestie of the Empire as head of all the rest, and because Christi∣an Religion was thence diffused into the greater part of Europe, and because Constantine (hauing beene baptized by Siluester) did willingly acknowledge that such authority belonged to him and his successors. Besides, there is a fame that Constantine, beeing constrained to translate the seate of the Empire to Bizantium, now called (by his name) Constanti∣nople, by occasion of some accidents hapning in the Westerne Prouinces, gaue to the Popes the Lordships of Rome, and of many other Cities and Pro∣uinces in Italie. This fame, though cherished by succeeding Popes, and be∣leeued by many, by reason of their authoritie and credit, is not onely dis∣proued by more probable authors, but euen by the very things themselues. For it is most manifest that Rome, as also all Italy obeyed the Emperours and their Magistrates, both then and many yeeres after. Some wil not beleeue any thing at all that hath been spoken concerning Constantine and Siluester, (such is the obscurity of things done so long agoe) affirming that they liued not at the same time: yet no man denieth that the translation of the Empire was the first cause of the Popes authoritie. For the people of Rome withdrew their obedience from the Emperours by occasion of their absence, and of the difficulties which they found in the East, and did the rather performe wil∣lingly some certaine obsequiousnesse to the Bishops of Rome, though indeed no absolute subiection. These things appeared but slowly because of the inundations of the Gothes and Ʋandals, and other barbarous nations into Italy; by which Rome hauing beene often sacked, the Popes, in respect of temporall matters, were obscure and meane, and in Italy the Emperours had very small authoritie, ha∣uing left it as a pray to the Barbarians. Of these nations, the rest being past away like a torrent, the Gothes, who were Christians both by name and by profession, and had their from some parts of Dacia and of Tar∣taria, continued their power there seuentie yeeres together. When these were driuen out of Italie by the Emperours, the Countrey began againe to bee gouerned by Greeke magistrates, the chiefe of which, called (by a Greeke word) Exarke, kept his residence at Rauenna, a Citie very ancient, and then very rich, and much inhabited by reason of the fertility of the Coun∣trey. This Citie beeing much augmented by the great armada which Au∣gustus Caesar and other Emperours continually maintained in the Port neere adioyning, which now is vanished, was inhabited by many Captaines, and after a good while together by Theodorick King of the Gothes, and by his suc∣cessors, who made choyce of it for the seate of their Kingdome, because that Sea was neerer to the Emperours of Constantinople, whose power they suspe∣cted. The Exarks seated themselues in the same place, because of the oppor∣tunity thereof, though vpon a contrary ground, and deputed particular ma∣gistrates, whom they called Dukes, to gouerne Rome and other Cities of Ita∣lie. Hence the Exarchate of Rauenna tooke the name, vnder which was conteined whatsoeuer was not gouerned by particular Dukes. In those times the BB. of Rome had no temporall power at all; and hauing lost their former Spirituall reuerence, because their liues began to be more corrupt, they were subiects to the Emperours, without whose confirmation, or of their Exarks, they durst not accept the Papacie, though they were solemnly chosen by the Clergie and people of Rome: Nay, because the principall seate of Religion followeth the power of the Empire, and of armies, the Bishops of Constan∣tinople and Rauenna did often iustle with them for superioritie. But the State of those Countreys was changed not long after. For the Lombards, a fierce Nation, entred into Italie, possessed that part which was called Gallia isalpina, and now Lombardia from their name, as also Rauenna and the whole Exarchat, and aduanced their forces as farre as the Marqui∣sate of Ancona Spoletum, and Beneuentum: in which two last places they crea∣ted particular Dukes. The Emperours made no prouision against these things, partly by reason of their negligence, and partly because they were hindered by the affaires of Asia; so that Rome, hauing no assistance from them, and the Exarks beeing driuen out of Italie, began to gouerne her selfe by the aduice and authoritie of her Bishops. These, together with the Ro∣mans beeing a good while after oppressed by the Lombards, did finally implore the ayde of Pipin King of France: who passing into Italie with a great armie, chased the Lombards from a part of their Dominion which they had enioyed more then two hundred yeeres. This part (being become his by right of warre) hee gaue to the Bishop and Church of Rome: that is to say, Vrbino, Fano, Agobbo, and much land neere Rome, Rauenna and the whole Exarchat, vnder which is comprehended all from the confines of Placentia which are contiguons to the territory of Pauia vnto Arimini, betweene the riuer of Po, the Apennine mountaine, the lake of the Venetians and the Adriatique Sea: as also from Arimini to the riuer of Toglia, now called Isauro. The Popes beeing molested by the Lombards after Pipins death, Charles his sonne (iustly surnamed the Great, for the great victories he atchieued) vtterly rooted them out, and confirmed his father's donation to the Church; and while hee made warre with the Lombards, hee gaue to the Bishop of Rome, the Marquisat of Ancona, and the Dukedome of Spoleto, which compre∣hendeth the Citie of Aquila, and a part of Abrazzi. These things are repor∣ted for certaine; and some Ecclesiasticall writers adde that Charles gaue to the Church Liguria vnto the riuer Varus, which is the vtmost border of Ita∣lie, Mantua, and whatsoeuer the Lombards possessed in F li; and Histria. An∣other writer sayth as much of Corsica, and of the whole territorie betweene the Citie of Luni and Parma. For these merits the Kings of France haue been magnified by the Popes, and haue obtained the name of Most Christian Kings. Afterwards in the yeere 800. after CHRIST, Pope Leo, and the people of Rome, by the Popes authoritie onely as head of that people, made this Charles Emperour of Rome, separating this part of the Empire from those Emperours which had their seat at Constantinople, because Rome and the Westerne Prouinces, beeing abandoned by them, could not well subsist without a Prince of their owne. The Emperours of the East were not de∣priued by this diuision neither of Sicilie nor of that part of Italie which, coa∣sting from Naples to Manfredonia, is bounded by the Sea, because they were alwayes vnder those Emperours. By this alteration the custome that the Popes election should be confirmed by the Emperours was not changed at all, neither did Rome cease to bee gouerned by them: nay the Popes did date all their Buls, Priuiledges and Grants with these formall words, In the reigne of such an Emperour our Lord and Master. In this easie subiection or depen∣dencie the Popes continued vntill their owne prosperitie gaue them courage to gouerne themselues. But the Emperours power beeing weakened by the discords of Charles the Great his posteritie, and the Empire beeing transfer∣red vpon the German Princes, which were not so potent as those who were before, by reason of the greatnesse of the Kingdome of France, and of the successors of Charles, Rome began to bee gouerned by her owne Magistrates, though but in a tumultuous maner; and the Popes, withdrawing themselues from the Emperours obedience as much as they could, decreed that their election should no more bee confirmed by them. This decree was diuersly obserued according as the Emperours power did rise or fall. This power being become great in the Otho's of Saxonie, Otho the third made meanes to choose Gregorie the fift, his owne countriman, for Pope; who, for the loue hee bare to his owne nation, and for the persecutions which were raysed by the Romans, gaue the Germans, by his Decree, power to choose the Roman Emperors, in that forme as is now vsed. And (to giue some preheminence to the Pope) hee forbad them to vse the title of Emperour or of Augustus, but onely of King of the Romans, or of Caesar, vntill they had receiued the crowne of the Empire. Hence grew the custom of comming to Rome to be crowned. After the Otho's the imperiall power, being not hereditarie to great Kings, was much diminished. Hereupon both Rome and many Cities besides, when Conrade of Sueuia was Emperour, did openly rebell. The Popes, ta∣king aduantage to aduance their power, made themselues Lords of the Romans, though many times they were much troubled by them. But the better to represse them, they obtayned of Henry the second Emperour, when he was at Rome, that the Cardinals onely should choose the Pope. This their greatnesse was increased by a new accident. For the Nor∣mans (the first of which was William surnamed Ironarme) hauing taken Puglia and Calabria from the Empire of Constantinople, Robert Guicciard, one of them, eyther to fortifie himself by this colour, or to make him∣selfe the stronger against these Emperours, or for some other reason, first restored Beneuent to the Church, and then acknowledged that the Duke∣dome of Puglia and Calabria were held in vassallage of it. In con∣formitie of this example Roger, one of his successors, hauing chased Wil∣liam, a man of the same familie, out of this Dukedome, and then possessed himselfe of Sicilie, hee acknowledged in the yeare 1130: that hee held these Prouinces in vassallage of the Church, vnder the title of King of both the Sicilies, the one beyond the other on this side Faros. The Popes refused not to cherish the vsurpation and violence of others, in regard it serued to aduance their owne ambition and profit. For they proceeded further (as the desires of men are neuer satisfied) and depriued one of the Kings of these kingdomes for disobeying their commands, and gaue them to ano∣ther. By this meanes they came to Henry the sonne of Frederick Bar∣barossa; from him to his sonne Frederick the 2. all which three were Em∣perours of Rome successiuely. But Frederick being a bitter persecuter of the Church, and the factions of Guelfs and Ghibelius being on foote, of the one of which the Pope, of the other the Emperor was head, the Pope after the death of Frederick, granted these kingdomes to Charles, Earle of Aniou and Prouence, of whom we spake before, vpon condition he should pay 6000. ounces of gould yearly for tribute, and that neither hee nor any of his successors should accept of the Roman Empire. This condition hath beene specified euer since in the inuestiture of the kingdome of Naples. The kingdome of Sicilie, being usurped by the Kings of Aragon, withdrew it selfe within few yeares from the obedience of the Church, both for the tribute, and for the vassallage. There hath beene a fame, though not so certaine as those things which haue beene spoken of, that the Countesse Maude, a potent Prin∣cesse in Italie, gaue long before to the Church that part of Tuscanie which is bounded by the torrent Pescia, the castle called Saint Quirico in the countie of Siena the Sea called Mare inferum, and the riuer Tiber, now knowen by the name of the Patrimonie of Saint Peter. Some adde that shee gaue to the Church likewise the Citie of Ferrara. These things are not certaine: and it is more vncertaine (which notwithstanding is related) that Authpertus King of the Lombards then flourishing, gaue the Pope the Alpes called Cocciae, in which they say that Genua, and all the tract from thence to Prouence is contained: as also that Suithprandus, King of the same Nation, gaue him Sabina, a Coun∣trey neere to Rome, Naruia, Ancona, and certaine other Lands. As these things did varie, so the affaires of the Popes and Emperours did vary also. At the first, for many ages together, the Popes were persecuted by the Emperours: afterwards they were at quiet, Constantine beeing conuer∣ted to the faith; but so as that they medled with Spirituall matters onely, and were little lesse then wholly subiect to the Emperours. After that they liued a long time in very meane estate, and had no commerce at all with them, by reason of the great power of the Lombards in Italie. But after they had gotten temporall authority by the assistance of the Kings of France, they adhered very much and very willingly to the Emperours, so long as the Em∣pire continued in the posteritie of Charles the Great, in regard of benefites gi∣uen and taken, as also in regard of the greatnesse of the Emperours. But when the Imperiall greatnesse declined, they withdrew themselues from the Emperours, and professed that the Bishops of Rome ought to giue lawes to them, rather then to receiue any from them. Now because they hated to come vnder the old yoke, and feared that some of the Emperours, accor∣ding to the example of their most potent and brauest predecessors, would at∣tempt to recouer the rights of the Empire in Rome, they openly opposed them by warre, assisted by some Tyrants who called themselues Princes, and by some Cities who had set themselues at libertie, and did no more acknow∣ledge the authority of the Empire. Hence it came to passe that the Popes assu∣ming euery day more and more, they conuerted their Spirituall weapons to maintaine their temporall affaires. For making this interpretation, that, as Vi∣cars of CHRIST on earth, they were aboue the Emperors, and that in many cases the whole care of matters terrene belonged to them, sometimes they deposed the Emperours, and mooued the Electors to make choyce of others in their roome, and sometimes the Emperours chose new Popes, or caused them to be chosen by others. By these controuersies, and by the Popes abode seuenty yeeres at Auigni∣on, and by meanes of a Schisme which happened in Italie after that the Popes were returned to Rome, it came to passe that in those Cities which were sub∣iect to the Church, especially in those of Romania, many potent Citizens, each in his owne Countrey, attained to souereigne power. The Bishops of Rome either persecuted them, or, not being able to ouercome them, gaue them these Cities, to bee held of them in Ʋassallage, or inuested other commanders in them. So the Cities of Romania began to haue particular Lords, by the name, for the most part, of Vicars of the Church. Thus Ferrara, first giuen by the Pope to Azo de Esti to be gouerned by him, was afterwards granted to him vnder the title of Vicarship. This familie was in processe of time exalted to more illustrious honours. Bolonia being thus possessed by Iohn Visconte Arch-bishop of Milan, was after giuen him by the Pope as a Ʋicarship of Rome. Vpon the same occasi∣ons there arose many particular Lords in many places of the Marquisat of An∣conia, of the Patrimonie of Saint Peter, and of Ʋmbria, now called the Duke∣dome of Spoleto: all which was done either against the Pope his will, or by his forced consent. The same variations being also in Lombardie, amongst the Cities of the Empire, it sometimes fell out that the Vicars of Romania, and of other Ecclesiasticall territories, withdrawing themselues openly from the Church, acknowledged to hold those Cities in Vassalage from the Emperours, and those who possessed Milan, Mantua, and other Imperiall places, were con∣tented to hold them from the Bishops of Rome. In these times Rome, though still named the Domaines of the Church, was gouerned by it selfe. When the Popes returned from Auignion into Italie, for a while they were obeyed as Lords: but the Romans soone after erected the magistracie of the Banderefi, and relapsed into their wonted contumacie. Hereupon the Popes, retaining but small authoritie, absented themselues wholly from thence vntill the Romanes, beeing fallen into great pouertie and grieuous disorders, by the absence of the Court, and the yeere 1400. approa∣ching, in which they hoped if the Pope were at Rome, there would be a great concourse of all Christendom, by reason of the Iubelie, they most humbly be∣sought Pope Boniface to returne to them, offering to put down the office of the Banderefi, and to yeeld him absolute obedience. Vpon these conditions hee returned to Rome, and, while the people were intent vpon their gaine, made himselfe absolute Lord of the Citie, and fortified and put a garrison in the Castle of S. Angelo. Those who succeeded vntill Pope Eugenius found ma∣ny difficulties; but then the souereigntie was so well established, that all his successors gouerned the Citie, euen at their owne pleasure. Being raised by these steps vnto earthly power, they laid a side by little and little the care of soules, and of diuine precepts: so that setting their affections wholly vpon earthly greatnesse, and vsing their spirituall authoritie only as an instrument of their temporall, they seemed rather to bee secular Princes then Priests. After this their care and businesse was no more sanctitie of life, increase of religion, loue and charitie towards their neigh∣bour, but armies, and wars against Christians, handling the sacrifices, euen with bloudie hands; but heaping vp of wealth; but new lawes, new arts, new snares to scrape monie from all parts. For this end they vsed their spirituall weapons without respect, and sould things both sacred and profane, without any shame at all. The Popes and the Court thus abound∣ing with wealth, there followed pompe, riot, dishonestie, lust, and abomi∣nable pleasures: no care of posteritie, no thought of maintayning the per∣petuall dignitie of the Papacie; but in place hereof succeeded ambitious and pestiferous desires to exalt their sonnes, nephewes, and kindred, not onely to immoderate riches, but to Principalities and to kingdoms; bestowing their dignities and benefices not vpon virtuous and well deseruing men, but ey∣ther selling them to those who would giue most, or misplacing them vpon ambitious, couetous, and impudently voluptuous persons. Hauing lost by this meanes that respect and reuerence which formerly the world did giue them, they did notwithstanding maintaine in part their authoritie by the powerfull name and maiestie of religion; and somewhat they were helped by the facultie which they haue in gratifiing of great Princes, and those who were potent about them, by bestowing some Enclesiasticall fauours and dignities vpon them. Hence it cometh to passe that they are in high respect amongst men; so that whosoeuer taketh armes against them is esteemed infamous for it, and findeth many oppositions by other Princes. Whatsoeuer hapneth, there is but smale gaine to bee made by striuing with them: For those that conquere them vse the victorie as the Popes will, who being conquered obtaine what conditions they please. Now because they haue a great desire to raise their neerest kinred from the state of priuat men to bee great Princes, oftentimes they haue beene, for very many years last past; the occasions and the instruments of raysing now wars and tumults in Italie. But to returne to our principall purpose, from which my most iust griefe for the publique losse hath transported mee further then the lawes of an historie doe well permit, let vs declare that the Cities of Romania being vexed, &c. A part of the historie of FRANCIS GVICCIARDINE stollen out of his tenth Booke. S aying, that the great oppression endured by the generous Romans, and that those spirits which conquered the world should become seruile, may in part bee excused in respect of former times. Such honor was then giuen to religion, and religion was so graced with miracles, and sanctified manners, that their ancesters, without any constraint of armes or violence, yeelded obedience to the gouernment of Ecclesiastiques, and willingly submitted their necks to the sweet yoke of Christian pietie. But now what necessitie, what virtue, what dignitie is there which can couer in any part the infamie and shame of this seruilitie? Is it integritie of life? holy examples giuen by these Priests, or any miracles done by them? what generation is there in the world more corrupt, or more defiled with brutish and debauched manners? It is miraculous that God, the fountaine of Iustice, hath so long indured such abominable wickednesse. Some peraduenture may say that this tyrannie is supported by prowesse of armes, or mens assiduous care and industrie for the preseruation of the Papall greatnesse. But what generation is there in the world more auerse from the studies of war, or more vnwilling to endure the labours belonging to it? more giuen ouer to idlenesse and plea∣sure? more negligent of the honor and profit of their successors. The principalitie of the Soldans of great Caire is the most like in all the world to this of the Bishops of Rome. For neither the dignitie of the Soldans, nor the honors of the Mammalukes are hereditarie, but, passing from one fa∣milie to another, doe sometimes fall vpon strangers. But the seruilitie of the Romans is more base then that of these Egyptians and Syrians. For the infamie of these is somwhat couered in that the Mammalukes are warlicke and valiant men, accustomed to labour, and wholy auerse from pleasures. But whom doe the Romanes serue? marrie idle and slouthfull persons, strangers, and such as many times are as base for their descent as for their maners. It is high time to awake out of this lethargie, and to remember that to be a Roman is a most glorious name when it is accompanied with virtue; and that their shame is doubled who haue forgotten the honor and renowne of their an∣cesters. They haue now a most fit oportunitie to free themselues. For when the Pope dieth the Cardinals are disunited, the Grandies are of diuers factions, Italie is full of armes and tumults, and the Papall tyrannie is now more odious to all Princes then euer it was before. In a Letter of Monsieur de LANSAC the French Ambassa∣dor, resident in the Councell of Trent, written to the King his Master. W Ee haue not as yet proposed the articles of Reformation, because we well perceiue that they will giue eare to nothing that may hinder the profit and authoritie of the Court of Rome. Besides, the Pope is so much master of this Councell, that his Pensioners, whatsoeuer the Emperors Ambassadors or wee doe remonstrate vnto them, will doe but what they list. In a Letter of Monsieur de PIBRAC, the French Ambassa∣dor in the said Councell, to the Queene mother. M Y Lords the Legates, together with the Italian Bishops which came from Rome, made a kind of Decree, that nothing should be This was done that no∣thing might be moued in the Councell to diminish the Popes greatnesse. proposed for the Fathers to consult of, but by the Legats onely, or, at the least, nothing but what pleased them. This we haue seene obserued euen to the shutting vp of the Councell. In another place of the same Letter. MAdam, that they, may the better keepe the power which they haue, to be the only men that may propose and put into consultation what plea∣seth them, they hould it for a matter alreadie determined that the Ambassa∣dors of Princes may not make any remonstrances in the assembly of the Pre∣lats, fearing perhaps that, if they were heard and vnderstood by the Fathers, they might yeeld to their demands, especially beeing reasonable. In a Letter of Queen Mother to Monsieur de LANSAC. I F the promises which the Legats doe make vnto you, and the opinion which I haue of their dignitie and integritie do compel mee to hope for some good from the Councell, on the other side that which I haue hitherto obserued concerning their man∣ner of proceeding quite contrarie to their words, makes mee feare that this whole Councell of ours is nothing but a faire appearance of flours, without any fruit or amendment at all. The King of France, in a Letter to the Lords du FERRIER and PYBRAC, his Ambassadors in the Councell. M Y Lords, as far as I perceiue by your Letters of the eleuenth of this moneth, I am quite out of all hope of that which I expected from the Councell, in case the Fathers doe proceed to determine of the These were Articles for the Reforma∣mation of Se∣cular Princes, which the Legats set on foote to hinder the proposing of the Articles for the reformation of the Ecclesiastiques. Articles which they haue been pleased to communicate vnto you. This would be to pare the nayles of Kings, and let their owne grow. &c. In a Letter to the King of France by the Lords du FERRIER, and de PYBRAC, his Ambassadors in the Councell Sep∣tember 25. 1563. O F an hundred and fiftie Prelats, which then were present in the Councell a whole hundred had A conspira∣cie in y e Coun∣cel to hinder the reforma∣tion of the Ec∣clesiastiques. conspired together, and subscribed (as the said Legats haue assured vs) not to vote any Article of the said reformation, vntill the Articles of Princes were proposed and giuen to the Fathers. This hath not onely beene done, but it hath been done more rigorously (contrarie to all law both diuine and humane) then at the first. &c. ANDREW DVDITHIVS, Bishop of Fiue Churches, in an Epistle to MAXIMILIAN 2. Emperour, in which he deliuereth his opinion about the ministring of the Cup to the Laitie, and the mariage of Priests. W Hat good could bee done in that Councell, in which the votes were not weighed, but numbred? If goodnesse of the cause, if reason had been the weapons to fight withall, though wee were but few, wee had vanquished a great armie of our enemies. But seing that number only came into the field, in which we were far inferiour to them, though our cause were good, wee could not possibly preuaile. The Pope had an hundred for one: and in case those had not been enough, he could haue created a thou∣sand more to haue helped at a need. We dayly saw hungrie and needie Bishops come to Trent, youths for the mostpart, which did but begin to haue beards, giuen ouer to luxurie and riot, hired only to giue their voice as the Pope pleased. They were both vnlearned and simple, yet fit for the purpose in regard of their impudent bouldnesse. When these were added to the Popes old flatterers, iniquitie triumphed, and it was impossible to determine of any thing but as they pleased, who thought it to be the highest point of their religion to maintaine the authoritie and luxurie of the Pope. There was a graue and learned man, who was not able to endure so great an indignitie: he was presently traduced as being no good Catholique, and was terrified threatned and persecuted, that he might approue things against his will in sum, matters were brought to that passe, by the iniquitie of those who game thither fitted and prepared, that the Councell seemed to consist not of Bishops, but of disguised maskers, not of men but of images, such as Deddas made, that mooued by nerues which were none of their owne. They were ing Bishops, who, as Country bagpipes, could not speake but as breath was put into them. The holy Ghost had nothing to doe in this assemblie: all the coun∣sels giuen there proceeded from humane policie, and tended onely to main∣taine the Popes immoderate and shamfull domination. Answeres were ex∣pected from thence, as from the of Dolphes and Dodona: the Holy Sp which, as they boast, doth gouerne their Councels, was sent from thence in a postilion's cloak-bag; which, in case of any inundations, could not come thi∣ther (a thing most ridiculous) vntill the waters were asswaged. So it came to passe that the Spirit was not vpon the waters, as it is in Genesis, but by the wa∣ters side. Oh monstrous extraordinarie madnesse. Nothing could bee ratified which the Bishops (as if they had beene the common people) did Decree vnlesse the Pope made himselfe the author of it. An Epistle written by IOHN IEWELL, Bishop of Sarum, vnto one Seign r SCIPIO, a Gentleman in Venice, in an∣swere of an expostulatory letter of his concerning the Councell of Trent. 1 S Ir, according to that intimate acquaintance, Which hath been betweene vs, euer since wee liued together at Padua, (you beeing imployed in the affaires of your Common-weale, l in my studies) you write vnto me familiarly, that your selfe, and many others there with you, wonder, that since a Generall Coun∣cell at Trent hath been summoned by the Pope, for the setling of Religion, and remoouing of Controuersies; and seeing alreadie all other Nations from all parts are there assembled; The Realme of England alone, hath neither sent a∣ny Ambassadours thither; nor by any message or letter excused their absence; but without any Councell, hath altered almost all the forme of the old ancient Religion; the former whereof, as you say, argues a proud stubborn∣nesse, the other a pernicious Schisme. For it is a superlatiue crime, for any man to decline the most Sacred Authoritie of the Pope of Rome; or, being cal∣led by him to a Councell, to withdraw himselfe. As for the Controuersies a∣bout Religion, that it is not lawfull to debate them other where then in such Assemblies; For there be the Patriarches and Bishops: There bee the learnedst men of all sorts; from their mouthes the trueth must be required: There bee the lights of each Church: There is the Holy Ghost: That all godly Princes, if any doubt had risen concerning Gods worship, still referred it to a publique consultation: That Moses, Ioshua, Dauid, Ezechias, Iosias, and other Iudges, Kings, Priests, did not aduise, concerning matters of Religion, elsewhere then in an assembly of Bishops: That Christ's Apostles, and the Holy Fathers held Councels: That by this meanes the Trueth displayed her beames: Heresies were subdued: so was Arrius vanquished, so Eunomius, so Eutiches, so Macedonius, so Pelagius, And that by the same meanes the present distractions of the world may be composed, and the breaches of the Church made vp again, if con∣tentions and factions layd aside, we would come to a Councell; without which nothing can lawfully be attempted in Religion. 2 This in effect was the summe of your Letter. I doe not now take vpon mee to answere you in the behalfe of the Realme of England, by what aduice ry thing hath beene done, neither doe I thinke that you expect it from mee, or desire it. The Counsels of Kings are hidden and secret, and so ought to bee. You know the old saying, nor euery where, nor to all, nor to all sorts of people: Yet ur old and intimate acquaintance (because I see you desire it so earnestly) I will briefly and freindly shewe you what I thinke, but, as hee sales , as farre as I Knowe, and am able; and I doubt not but that will satis∣fie you. 3 Wee wonder, say you, that no Ambassadours from England come to the Councell. I pray you Sir doe Englishmen onely not come to this Councell? Were you your selfe present at the Councell? Did you take a muster of them? Did you count them by the Poll? Did you see that all other nations were mett from all parts, except onely the English? If you haue such a mind to wonder, why doe not you wonder at this too? that neither the three memorable Patriarchs, of Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexandria, nor Presbiter Iohn, nor the Grecians, Armenians, Persians, Egyptians, Mores, Ethiopians, or Indians come to the Councell. For doe not many of these people beleeue in CHRIST? Haue they not Bishops? Are they not baptized in the name of CHRIST? Bee they not, Christians and so called? Or did there come Ambassadours from all these nations to the Councell? Or will you rather say that the Pope did not call them, or that your Ecclesiasticall Decrees take no hold of them? 4 But wee wonder more at this, that the Pope would afterwards call such men to a Councell, whom before hand hee had condemned for Hereticks, and openly pronounced them excommunicate, without hearing either them or their plea. For that men should bee first condemned and punished, and afterwards brought to their triall, is absurd, and, as we say, The cart before the horse. But I would faine bee resolued of this, whether the Popes meaning be, to aduise in the Councell concerning Religion with vs, whom he accounts Heretiques? or rather that wee should plead our cause at the Barre, and either change our opinion presently, or out of hand bee condemned againe. The former is without example, and denied heretofore by Iulius the third, to those of our side; The other is ridiculous; if hee thinke so; that the English will come to the Councell, onely to bee indited, and to pleade for themselues, espe∣cially before him, who long since is charged with most heynous crimes, not onely by our side, but also by their owne. 5 Now if England onely seeme to you thus stubborne, where then bee the Ambassadours of the King of Denmarke, of the Princes of Germanie, of the King of Sueden, of the Suitzers, of the Grisons, of the Hanse Townes, of the Realme of Scotland, of the Dukedome of Prussia? Seeing so many Christian Nations are wanting in your Councell, it is absurd to misse in your reckoning onely the English▪ But why doe I speake of these? The Pope himselfe comes not to his owne Councell; and why doe you not wonder at that also? For what a pride is this, for one man for his owne pleasure, to assemble together all Christian Kings, Princes, and Bishops, when hee listeth, and to require them to bee at his call, and himselfe not to come in their presence. Surely when the Apo∣stles summoned assemblies at Ierusalem, Peter the Apostle, of whose Sea, and Succession they brag, would not be absent. But, as I conceiue, Pius the fourth, the present Pope, remèmbreth what happened heretofore to Iohn the 22; that hee came not in a very happy houre to the Councell of Constance: for hee came Pope, but returned Cardinall. Therefore, since then, the Popes haue prouided for themselues in the rere, and kept home, and haue withstood all Councels, and free disputes. For aboue fourty yeeres since, when Doctor▪ Martin Lu∣ther was cursed by the Pope with Bell, Booke, and Candle, because he had begun to preach the Gospell, and to reforme Religion out of GOD's word, and had humbly requested, that his whole cause might bee referred to the cogni∣sance of a Generall Councell, hee could haue no audience. For Pope Leo the tenth did see well enough, if the matter should come to a Councell, that his owne state might come in danger, and that hee might perchance heare what he would not willingly. 6 Indeede the name of a Generall Councell carries a faire shewe, so it be assem∣bled as it ought, and (affections layde aside) all things bee referred to the rule of Gods word, and the trueth onely aymed at. But if Religion and god∣linesse bee openly beaten downe, if tyrannie and ambition bee established, if men studie faction, gluttonie, lust, there is nothing more pernicious for the Church of God. All this I haue spoken hitherto, as if this Councell, which you call so did subsist somwhere, and were indeed a Councell which I thinke absolutely to be none. Or if it be one, and subsist any where, sure it is an ob∣scure one, and kept very close. For though we are not very farre off, yet we can by no meanes learne, what is done there, what Bishops haue met, or ra∣ther indeed whether any at all are met. Nay besides, aboue twentie months since, when this Councell was first summoned by Pope Pius, the Emperour Ferdinand answered that though all other matters were accommodated, yet hee did much dislike the Place, which the Pope had made choice of for him∣selfe. For Trent, though a prety Citie, yet neither was commodiously enough seated for the receipt of so many Nations, nor able to receiue so great a mul∣titude of men, as were likely in reason to meete at a Generall Councell. The same answere was returned from other Christian Princes; and from some, much sharper. Therfore wee beleeued that all these things, together with the Councell it selfe, had beene vanished away into smoake. 7 But I pray you, who is he that hath summoned this Councell, and called the world together? You wil say, Pope Pius the fourth. And why he, rather then the Bishop of Toledo? For by what power, by what example of the Primitiue Church, by what right doth hee this? Did Peter, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, thus tosse and tumble the world with their Proclamations? This was alwayes whilest the Empire flourished, the proper right of the Emperours of Rome. But now, since the power of the Empire is lessened, and Kingdomes by succession share part of the Imperiall power, that power is communicated to Christian Kings and Prin∣ces. Search the Annals, lay together the memorials of all Antiquitie, you shall finde the ancientest Councels, the Nicene, the Ephesine, that of Chalcedon, that of Constantinople, to haue beene called by the Roman Emperours, Constan∣tine, Theodosius the first, Theodosius the second, Martian, not by the Popes of Rome. 8 Leo the Pope, a man otherwise louing enough to himselfe, and no way neglectfull of the authority of his Sea, did humbly beseech Mauritius the Em∣perour, that hee would summon a Councell to be held in Italie, as beeing the fit∣test place. All the Priests sayes hee, beseech your Clemencie, that you would command a Generall Councell to bee held within Italie. But the Emperour caused that Ceuncel to bee assembled, not in Italie, which the Pope earnestly laboured, but at Chal∣cedon, in Bithynia; to shew, that that was his right, and belonged to him onely. And when Ruffinus, in that bickering which hee had with Ierome, had alleadged a certaine Synod, Tell mee, sayes Ierome, what Emperour caused it to bee called. Ierome did not thinke the authoritie of a Generall Councell firme e∣nough, vnlesse an Emperour had called it. I demand not now, what Emperor hath commanded the Bishops to be called to Trent at this present: But with what Emperor did the Pope, that hath taken thus much to himselfe, aduise of holding the Councell, what Christian King or Prince did hee make priuy to his designe? To intrude vpon anothers right by fraude or force, and to vsurpe for his owne, what belongs to others, is iniurious dealing. But to abuse the Clemency of Princes, and to rule ouer them as his vassalls, is an egregious and an intollerable disgrace to them. But for vs, by our comply∣ing, to goe about to backe such an iniurie, and disgrace, were no lesse iniurie. Wherefore if wee should onely say thus much, that this Trent Councell of yours is not lawfully called, that Pope Pius hath done nothing rightly or orderly, no man could iustly find fault with our absence. 9 I passe ouer the wrongs, which the Popes of Rome haue done vs: That they haue as often as they pleased, armed our People against their Soueraigne: That they haue pulld the Scepters out of our Kings hands, and the Crownes from off their heades: That they would haue the Kingdome of England to bee theirs, and held in their name, and our Kings to Reigne by their fauour: That within these later yeares, they haue stirred vp against vs, somtimes the French, somtimes the Emperor. What the intentions of Pius himselfe haue beene towards vs, what hee hath done, what hee hath spoken, what hee hath practised, what hee hath threatened, t'is needlesse to rehearse: For his actions and his words are not so close, so concealed, but that the aime of both may be discouered. By what courses hee was made Pope, and by what steps hee mounted to so great a dignity, I say nothing. I doe not say, that he aspired to the Popedome by corrupting of Cardinals, buying of voices, by price and purchase, by vnderminings, and ambushes. I doe not say that late∣ly, beeing not able to quitt skores, hee cast Cardinall Caraffa into prison and there murthered him, by whose assistance he had compassed the rest of the Cardinals voyces, to whom for that seruice he owed a great summe of money. These, and diuers other things, I leaue to you, who both behold them at a neerer distance, and better vnderstand them. And can you wonder then, that wecome not to a man of Blood, one that purchases voyces, that denies to pay his debts, to a Simoniacal person, to an Heretique? Beleeue me, it is not the part of a wise man wilfully to runne into a place infected, and to consult of Religion with the enemies of Religion. My mother, sayes one, forbade mee the company of infamous persons. Iohn the Apostle durst not sit in the same Bath, nor wash with Olympius, lest he should bee strucke from heauen with the same thunder. I haue not sate, sayth Dauid, in the assembly of Vanitie, neither will I walke with the workers of iniquitie. 10 But admitte that this is the Popes proper right; let it bee in his power to call Councels, to gouerne the whole world: Let those things bee false and vaine, whatsoeuer wee haue spoken concerning the power of the Empe∣rour, and the right of Kings: Grant that Pope Pius is an honest man; that he was duely and lawfully made Pope; that he sought no mans life; that he did not kill Caraffa in prison: yet it is fit that Councels should be free, that euery man may be present that will, and those, with whose conuenience it stands not, may bee absent. And such was anciently the equitie and moderation of those better men. The Princes were not then called together in such a slauish manner, that if any one of them had stayed at home, or had not sent Ambassa∣dours to the Councell, presently euery eye was vpon him, euery finger poin∣ting at him. In the Nicen Councel, in the Ephesine, in that of Constantinople, what spie obserued who were absent? But there was neuer an Ambassadour then, neither from England, nor Scotland, nor Poland, nor Spaine, nor out of the two Pannonia's, nor out of Denmarke, nor out of all Germanie. See, reade, reexamine the Subscriptions, you shall finde it so, as I say. And why doe not you maruaile then, that the English came not to those Councels, beeing so full, so famous, so renowned, so frequented? Or that the Popes in those times were so patient, as not to condemne them of contumacie? But this tyran∣ny of the Popes was not yet growen vp; it was lawfull then for holy Bishops and Fathers, as it stood with their conuenience, to stay at home without pre∣iudice. The Apostle Paul would not put himselfe vpon the Councell at Ierusa∣lem, but rather appeal'd to Casar. Athanasius the Bishop, though the Empe∣rour summoned him to the Councell at Cesarea, yet hee would not come. The same man, in the Syrmian Councell, when he saw that the Arrians were like to preuaile, presently withdrew himselfe, and went his wayes: and the Westerne Bishops following his example, refused to come to that Councell. Iohn Chryso∣stome came not to the Arrian Councell, though the Emperour Constantius called him, both by letter, and also by message. At what time the Arrian Bishops assembled in Palestine, and drew with them the votes of the maior part, old Paphnutius and Maximus Bishop of Ierusalem, went out together out of the middest of their assembly. Bishop Cyril appealed from the Councell of the Patropassians. Paulinus Bishop of Triers would not come to the Councell of Millan, because that he saw, that by the fauor and power of the Emperor Constantius, all ranne of Auxentius the Arrians side. The Bishops that had met in a Councell at Constantinople, being called to a Councell at Rome, refused to come. Which notwithstanding turned not to their preiudice, though they were called by the Emperors letters. In those dayes the excuse seemed reasonable enough, that they were to intend the charge and reformation of their owne Churches. Though they sawe that the Arrians did play reakes in all Churches and that their presence would haue beene of great impor∣tance for the abating of their rage. 11 What if our Bishops should now giue the same answere, that they can spare no time from their sacred function; that they are wholly imployed in setting vp againe their owne Churches; that they cannot be absent, fiue, six, seuen yeares, especially there, where they should bee able to doe no good. For our Bishops are not so idle, as those at Rome that frolick it in their palaces, and daunce attendance vpon the Cardinalls, and hunt after liuings. Our Churches are so miserably wasted and ruined by them, that they cannot bee repaired in a small time, or with ordinarie diligence. But now wee see plainely that these men seeke to incroach vpon our times, that without any necessitie we might be drawen abroade and so disabled to aduance the Gos∣pell at home, and in the Councell be hindred by them. 12 For the Pope, that you may not bee mistaken, doeth but make a shewe of a Councell, and meanes it not, for thinke not that hee doth any thing sincerely or truely. Lewis the eleuenth was wont to say to Charles the eighth, that Hee that knowes not how to make shewes of what he meanes not, kens not Kings-craft: But, as the times goe now, he that knowes not how to make no shewe of what hee meanes, and to cloake his designes vnder a disguised countenance, is much more ignorant how to play the Pope. For that Sea is wholly supported with mere hypocrisie, which the lesse naturall strength it hath, so much the more colour it needes. For if the Popes thought a Generall Councell so effectuall for remouing of Schismes, why did they differre a thing so necessarie thus long? Why did they sit quiet thirty yeares together, and suffered Luthers Doctrine to take roote? Why did they not call a Councell, with the first? Why did they assemble the Trent Councell with such reluctancy and vnwillingnesse, more by the instigation of the Emperour Charles, then of their owne accord? And hauing beene at Trent well nigh tenne yeares, with all this deliberation why haue they done iust nothing? Why haue they left the matter vndone? Who hindred, who with stood them? Beleeue mee in this, Good Brother, the Popes are not in hand now to Keepe a solemne Councell, or to restore religion, which they make a mocke of. That which they intend, and seeke, and labour for, is to delude the minds of godly men, and the whole world with a pompous expectation of a Generall Councell. 13 They see that their wealth hath beene lessening now a pretty while, and declining: That their tricks doe not find the same credit now, as here∣tofore: That an incredible number of men euery day fall from them: That men doe not now runne to Rome in such troupes: That there is not now a dayes so high an estimation, or so deare a price giuen for indulgences, interdicts, blessings, absolutions, and empty Bulls: That their Mart of Ceremonies and Masses and all their whorish paintings are slighted: That a great part of their tiranny and pompe is shruncke: That their reuenewes are slenderer then they were wont to bee: That they and theirs are laughed at euery where, euen by very children: That their whole rest lies now at stake. And indeede it is no wonder if those things fall, which had no rootes to hold them. Our Sauiour IESVS CHRIST extinguished all those things, not by armes or force of men, but by the heauenly blast and breath of his mouth; but will consume and abolish them with the brightnesse of his comming. This is the force of Gods word; this is the power of the Gospell; these bee the weapons, by which is ouerthrowne euery fortification, which is raised against the knowledge of God. This doctrine shall bee preached through the whole world in despight of them all: the gates of Hell shall not preuaile against it. The merit-mon∣gers shopps waxe cold now at Rome; their wares, as if Porsenna 's goods were put to sale, are very lowe pric'd, and yet can scarce finde a chapman. The indulgence-broker trots vp and downe, and finds no fooles. This is it; Hence growes their griefe; This vexes the Popes. They see that this so great light broke foorth from one sparke: What is it like to doe now, when so many fires are kindled in all places of the world? And so many Christian Kings and Princes acknowledge and professe the Gospell? For they serue not CHRIST IESVS, but their Bellies. They say that Carneades the Philosopher, when hee was at Rome, and made that memorable speech a∣gainst Iustice; amongst other things he added this, that this vertue, if it were one, would bee lesse profitable to no kinde of men, then to the Romans: For they by force and robbery had subdued other mens dominions to them∣selues, and had compassed the Empire of the World by high iniustice. Now if they would at length obserue Iustice, they must restore all those things, which they possesse vniustly: They must returne to their shepheards hou∣ses, and their cold Cottages, which was all they had in the beginning. So verely these men, if they would deale plainely, and lay aside their disgui∣ses, and doe their duety, and render euery one his owne, they see they must come to their staffe and scrippe againe, to sobrietie and modestie, to the labours and function of the Gospell. For they haue heard Austin say, that, The name of a Bishop, is a name of worke, not of worship; and, That they are no Bishops that would haue the preeminence aboue others, but not be∣nefit them. And therefore they see, that it is lesse expedient for themselues, then for any sort of men, to haue the Gospell spread wider, and further pro∣pagated: for they cannot bee safe, if they will bee sound. Therefore now they raise tumults, and puzzle all, as Demetrius the Smith did of old, when hee saw that his hopes of gaine were cut. Now therefore Councels are sum∣moned, the Abbats and Bishops are called to make a partie. For this they thought the cunningest plot, to spinne out the time for some yeeres, to hold mens mindes in suspence with expectation: many things, as it vseth, might fall out in the meane time: Some Warre might be raised: One of these Princes might die: that this so sharpe edge of theirs for the Gospell, might in processe of time bee dulled: mens mindes might waxe coole: In the meane while, as one sayes, somewhat will be done I hope. 14 Long since, the Persians hauing beene vanquished and led in triumph, when as the Athenians had begun to repaire their walles, which the Persians had layd leuell with the ground; and the Lacedemonians had straitly interdi∣cted them, to the end that they might keep them the easier vnder their check: Themistocles the Athenian Generall, a wise man, seeing the safety of his Coun∣trey might be hazzarded, promised that he would come to Lacedemon to con∣fer with them about it. So, being vpon the way, to spend time, he faignes him∣selfe sicke, that hee might dwell the longer vpon his iourney. At length, beeing come to Lacedemon, hee began to make many cauils on set purpose: Somtimes the couenants did not please him: Somtimes hee demands time to aduise: Sometimes hee must waite for his fellowe Ambassadours, with∣out whom nothing could bee done: otherwise he must send Ambassadors to Athens. In the meane time, whilest he trifles, the Athenians had walled their City round; and, if any force were offered, were prouided of a defence. So these men, whilest they putt off from day to day, and will haue all referred to Councels; in the meane while they build vp their walls, whilst we sitt idle, looking after wee know not what; that at the last, when they haue made all safe, they may shutt vs out wholly, and neither Councell, may be held, nor any thing at all done. 15 For it is worth the paines to obserue their trickes, and fetches; How of∣ten Councels haue been summoned, and not met. How often a poore rumor hath dashed all their preparation, and all the expectation! How often haue the Fathers made a stand vpon the sudden in the middest of their iourney! How often haue the scarlet Counsailers, slipped home in the middest of the Councell, hauing done iust nothing; and haue reiourned the next Session till the ninth or tenth yeere following! How often haue they quarrelled with the ayre, the victuals, the place, the time! For the Pope onely assembles the Councels, and hee alone dismisseth them when hee lists. If any thing please him not, or the businesse beginne to goe awry, presently the solemne close of the Playes is heard, Valete, & Plaudite, Farewell, and clap your hands. A Councell is warn'd at Basil: They meete from all parts in great numbers: They fall earnestly vpon many matters: Eugenius the Pope is cast by all the voyces, as a Simoniacall and Schismaticall Person: Amideus, Duke of Sauoy is put in his place: Eugenius, as hee was to doe, takes this indignely, thinkes with himselfe, that this might bee a dangerous president for posteritie: That his power and strength was far aboue all Councels: That a Councel could not meet but by his command: nor determine of any thing, but what hee pleased: That it was an vngodly act, to inquire into his life in a Conuenticle of Bishops: Presently he cals backe the Councel to Ferrara in Italie; afterwards translates it to Florence. Why what doings is this, I pray? Did Eugenius thinke the climate would alter mens mindes, or that the Holy Ghost would giue discreeter an∣swers in Italie, then he had formerly in Germany? Nay, nay, in all those chan∣ges he sought not after CHRIST, but his own benefit. He saw that his enemy Sigismond the Emperor, did ouertoppe him in Germanie, both in power, and in fauour; And that those Fathers which had met at Basil, if they were re∣mooued out of those harsh and rough Countreys into Italie, they might (as trees when they are transplanted) bee made more mellow. For now adayes (mercifull God!) the intent or scope of Councels, is not to discouer trueth, or to confute falshood. For these later ages, this hath been the onely indea∣uour of the Popes, to establish the Romane Tyranny; to set warres on foote; to set Christian Princes together by the eares; to raise money, sometimes for the Holy Land, sometimes for the building of Saint Peters Church, sometimes for other vses; I know not what, or rather abuses; all which money was to be cast into some few bellies, in gluttonie, and lust. And this hath beene the onely cause or course of Councels for some ages last past. For of errours and abuses, as if there were none at all, nothing euer could bee handled. 16 Peter de Alliaco made great complaint in the Councel of Constance, concer∣ning the couetousnesse and pride of the Court of Rome, but what good did hee? Was there any part of their controuersie or pride restrained by the au∣thoritie of the Councel? The same man sayes, that Holy dayes, and the flocks of idle Monkes ought in his opinion to bee lessened: And another (in a certaine Worke intituled, Tripartite, and ioyned to the Lateran Councel) The whole world almost, sayes hee, speakes against it, and is scandalized at the infinite multitude of beggerly Friars. And the Fathers in the Councell of La∣teran, wee strictly commaund, say they, that for the future no man inuent a new religious order. Since that time what hath been done for Holy dayes. I know not: it is probable, that no abatement is made. But for the Orders of Monkes, they are infinitely multiplied. For the last Popes haue added Ie∣suites, Capuchins and Theatines; as if there had not beene yet enough of these slow-bellies. Iohn Gerson, Chancellour of Paris, exhibited in the Coun∣cell of Constance, seuentie fiue abuses in the Church of Rome, which hee did earnestly desire might bee reformed. But of so great a number, what one abuse did they take away? Iohn Picus Mirandula writes to Pope Leo, to abridge idle ceremonies, and to restraine the luxurie of Priests. The Bishops afterwards, in the Lateran Councell sate in great numbers, and moued much expectation. But what one ceremonie did they abate? what one Priests luxury or lewdnesse did they condemne. Mantuan the Poet complaines by name of the manners of the Church of Rome. Bernard the Abbot writes thus to Pope Eugenius: your Court receiues good men, but makes them not: lewde men thriue there, the good pine and fall away. And speaking of the woe∣full state of the Church in those dayes, From the sole of the foote saith he, to the crowne of the head, there is no health in her. And againe saies he, where is there one to preach the acceptable yeare of the Lord? Now a dayes, saith hee, they keepe not Christs spouse, but destroy her; They feede not the Lords flocke but slaughter and deuoure it. Pope Adrian the sixth, when hee sent his Legat into Germanie, confessed truely and ingenuously, that the state of the whole Clergie was most corrupt. All wee Prelates, saies hee, haue swerued euery one to his owne way, neither is there now any one that doeth good, no not one. Albertus Pighius confesses, that in the Masse it selfe, (which they would haue to bee most sacred, and in which alone they place the main of Christian Religion) are found errors and abuses. What needs more? I passe ouer other witnesses, for they are infinite. There were many Coun∣cels held after this; the Bishops were called together; the Synode of Basill was summoned, as they then made shewe, expresly for the reformation of the whole Clergie. But since that time, the errors haue beene increased in all places; nay the vices of the Priests themselues doubled. 17 The Cardinals chosen by Pope Paul the third, to consider of the State of the Church, made report, that there were many corruptions in it, especi∣ally in the manners of the Bishops and Clergie men. That the Bishops were idle; did not instruct the people, nor feede the flocke, nor looke to the Lords vineyard: that they liued in Princes Courts, and kept not home: That the Cardinals had somtimes three, somtimes fowre Bishoprickes in Commendam, not without great preiudice to the Church: for that those offices are not, as they say, compatible, or to bee held together. That the Couents ought to be cleane banished out of the Church. Since this, the Trent Councell hath beene held: But haue the Bishops since then begunne to feede the flock? Haue they left their nonresidence, and liuing in Princes Courts? Haue the Cardinalls left to be Bishops? Or is it prouided, that the Church sustaine no preiudice thereby? Hath the number of Couents beene abridged, or religion amongst them reformed? What neede then was there of calling together so many Bishops so farre off, or to aduise so many yeares in vaine of reforming the Church? This is iust the Pharises going about to repaire Gods Church. 18 They confesse errors and abuses: they call Councells, and pretend a zeale of Religion and Godlinesse: They promise their paines and indeauours; that they will ioyne with vs, to build vp againe, whatsoeuer is fallen downe. Iust so, as the enemies of Gods people sayd they would ioyne with Nehemias to build the Lords Temple. For they did not intend the building of the Lords Temple, but by all possible meanes to hinder it. They will be reconciled to vs, but so as Naas the tyrant would long agoe with the Iewes of Iabes, vpon no other conditions, but that wee must suffer our right eyes to bee plucked our; that is, that we should suffer our selues to be bereaued of Gods word, and the Gospell of our saluation. 19 For haue they any care of Religion? Care they for Gods Church, that care neither for Gods vengeance, nor the saluation of the people, nor any part of their owne duetie? Let Pan, say they, looke to his sheepe; they in the meane time, manage warres, hunt, fare deliciously; to say no worse of them, Im∣mortall God! who would beleeue that these men euer thinke of Gods Church, or Religion? What errors will these men euer take away or when? What light will they restore vnto vs? Whatsoeuer you say, though you carried the sunne it selfe in your hands, yet they will not see. Open errors they excuse as farre as they are able, and colour and smooth them, as anciently Symmachus or Porphyrie did the errors and fopperies of the Heathen: And indeede they are wholly sett vpon this, not to seeme to haue ledde Gods people astray, or at any time to haue erred themselues. Or if it come in their heads to amend any thing, which either they neuer doe, or very seldome and sparingly) as it is reported of Alexander and Emperour of Rome, that beeing not altogether auerse from the Christian Religion, he worshipped Christ and Orpheus in the same Chappell: and as in times past the ancient Samaritans did retaine the worshippe of the true God, and of Idoles both together.) So they will re∣ceiue perchance some part of the Gospell vpon this condition, that therewith they may admitt of superstitions, and old wifes tales: they receiue trueth, so that they may retaine falshood: they allowe of ours, so that they may not disallowe theire owne: And so they doe not take away but colour abuses and onely new plaister old pillars. 20 In this manner doe they reforme Gods Church; so be the Councell and Synodes kept: Trueth is not followed, but mens affections: The better part is mastred by the greater. Indeede the very name of a Generall Councell carries a glorious lustre: But yet oftentimes poison is carowsed out of a faire cuppe. For it is not enough for a few Bishops and Abbotts to haue met in one place; The virtue of a Councell consists not in Rochetts, and Skarletts; neither is euery Decree of a Councel presently to bee receiued for an Oracle. That was a Coun∣cell of which the Prophet Chap. 30. 3. Esay writes. 21 That was a Councell of which the Prophet Dauid speakes, The Kings of the earth set themselues, & the Rulers take counsell together against the Lord and against his anointed. That was a Councell which condemned the Sonne of God Christ Iesus to the Crosse. That was a Councel which was held at Carthage vnder Cyprian; in which it was Decreed that those, who had beene baptized by Hereticks, when they returned to the Church, ought to bee baptized againe. Which error could not bee afterwards repealed but so many Councels and writings of the Fathers. What needes many words? The Second Ephesine Councell openly tooke Eutyches his part, that the humane nature in Christ was turned into his diuinitie. The second Nicene Councell decreed flatt Idolatrie about adoration of Images. The Councel of Basil, as Albertus Pighius sayes, de∣creed against all antiquity, against nature, against reason, against the word of God. The Councell of Ariminum decreed for the Arrians most impi∣ously, that Christ was not God. Many other ensuing Councels, that of Smyrna, the Arrian, the Seleucian, the Syrmian did both condemne the Homousians, and also subscribe to the impietie of the Councell of Ariminum. What would you haue more? The Councell of Chalcedon it selfe, which was one of those foure that Gregorie compares with the fower Gospells, Pope Leo did not sticke to challenge it of vnaduisednesse. 21 Therefore we see Councels haue been often opposite one to another: And as Leo the Pope abrogated the Acts of Adrian, Stephanus of Formosus, Iohn of Stephanus; And as Sabinian the Pope commanded all Pope Gregories writings to bee burnt, as erronious and impious: So wee see oftentimes that a later Councell, hath repealed all the Decrees of a former. The Carthage Councell de∣creed, that the Bishop of Rome should not bee called either The High Priest, or The chiefe of Priests, or by any other the like name. But following Councels haue stiled him, not onely Chiefe Priest, but also Chiefe Bishop, and Head of the Catholique Church. The Eliberine Councell decreed that nothing should be painted on the wals of Churches, that ought of right to bee worshipped. The Councell of Constantinople decreed that Images were not to bee suffered in Christian Churches. On the other side, the second Nicen Councell, determi∣ned, that Images were not onely to bee placed in Churches, but also to bee wor∣shipped. The Lateran Councell vnder Pope Iulius the second, was summo∣ned for no other cause, but to repeale the Decrees of the Pisan Councell. So oftentimes the later Bishops oppose those that went before them, and Coun∣cels damme vp one anothers lights. For these men will not be tyed, no not to their owne Councels, but as far as they please, and is commodious for them, and wil bring grist to their Mill. The Basil Councel determined that a Coun∣cel of Bishops was aboue the Pope. But the Lateran Councel vnder Leo de∣creed, that the Pope was aboue the Councell. And the Pope does not onely beare himselfe so, but also commands him to be held for an heretike that shall thinke otherwise. But yet all the Bishops and Abbats in the Councell of Ba∣sil say thus, He that opposeth these truths is to be accounted an heretike. How wil you behaue your selfe, I beseech you! Whatsoeuer you say, or thinke, either the Pope or the Councell will esteeme you an heretique. All Popes, for some ages last past, haue opposed these trueths: therefore all Popes, that li∣ued in these ages, haue been Heretiques, in the iudgement of the Councel of Basil. The same Councell did with an vniforme consent remooue Pope Eugenius, a Simoniacal and Schismaticall person, and put Amideus in his place. But Eugenius vilifies the Councels Decree; and though hee were most Simo∣niacall and Schismaticall, yet he continued to bee the Successor of Peter, the Vicar of CHRIST, and Head of the whole Church of GOD. Hee retai∣ned his former dignitie in despight of all their teeth, and was magnificently carried, as before, vpon noble mens shoulders. Amideus, as one fallen from his horse, walked on foote like a simple man, and thought himselfe happie, that of a Pope he was made a Cardinall. The Councell of Trent comman∣ded that Bishops should teach the people, and that no one man should haue more then one Spirituall preferment at one time: But they, contrary to the Edict of their Councell, accumulate Benefices, and instruct not at all. So they make Lawes, but obey them not, but when they list. This is the e∣steeme they haue alwayes made of their owne Councels, and the Decrees thereof. 22 And why should wee hope for better successe at this present? With what expectation or hope can any one come to the Councell? Doe but thinke with your selfe what manner of men they bee, vpon whose fidelitie learning and iudgement, the weight of this whole Councell, the discussing of all questions, and the whole state of all things must lye and rest. They are called Abbots and Bishops, graue persons, and faire titles, men (as it is beleeued) of great importance for the gouernment of the Church of GOD. But take from these men their titles, the persons they beare, and their trap∣pings, there will nothing that belongeth to an Abbot or a Bishop remaine in them. For they are not ministers of CHRIST, dispensers of the mysteries of GOD; they apply not themselues to reading, or to preach the Gospell; they feede not the flocke, they till not the ground, they plant not the Lords Vineyard, nor kindle the fire, nor beare the Arke of the Lord, nor are the Ambassadours of CHRIST: they watch not, nor doe the worke of an E∣uangelist, nor performe the duety of their ministery: they intangle them∣selues with secular businesses; they hide the Lords treasure; they take away the keyes of the Kingdome of God; they goe not in themselues, nor suffer others; they beate their fellow seruants, they feede themselues, and not the flocke: they sleepe, snort, feast, and ryot: they are cloudes without water, starres without light, dumbe dogges, slow bellies; as Bernard sayth, not Prelates, but Pilats; not Doctours, but seducers; not Pastors, but impo∣sters: The seruants of CHRIST (saith hee) serue Antichrist. The Popes will allow none but these to haue place and suffrage in the Councell: The care and charge of Christ's Catholike Church must depend vpon their power and iudgement: Vpon none but such as these doth Pope Pius relie. But (good GOD) what manner of persons are they? They hold it ridiculous to aske that question. It is no matter (say they) how learned, or how reli∣gious they bee; what their aime is, or what they thinke: If they can sit vpon a Mule; if they can ride through the streetes with pompe, and with a noyse; if they can come into the Councell, and say nothing, it is sufficient. If you beleeue mee not, and thinke I speake in iest, heare what the facultie of Diuinitie, and the whole Sorbone, haue determined concerning this matter. That which our great masters affirme (say they) concerning the due assem∣bling of a Councell, is to bee vnderstood thus; that for the lawfull calling of a Councell it is sufficient, that the forme of Law be solemnely obserued. For if it should bee disputed, whether the Prelates there assembled haue a good intention; whether they bee learned, especially in the Scriptures, and are willing to obey wholesome doctrine, it would proue an infinite busi∣nesse. Those, forsooth, who fit mute, like the statues of Mercurie, not knowing what belongs to Religion, will determine well concerning all points of Religion, and, whatsoeuer they say, they cannot possibly erre. 23 These are obliged to the Pope, not through error and ignorance, but by oath and religion: So that although they should vnderstand the trueth, they cannot without periurie make profession of it, and are necessitated to breake faith, either with God or man. For this is the formal oath which they all take. I N. C. Bishop, will henceforward beare true faith to S. Peter, and to the holy A∣postolike Roman Church, to my Lord the Pope N. and his successors, which shall enter canonically. I will not be a meanes, either by word or deede, that he may loose, either life or member, or be taken prisoner: I will not reueale any counsell that hee shall impart vnto mee, either by letters or message, which may be any way dammageable to him: I will help to defend and main∣taine against all the world the Papacie of the Church of Rome, and the rules of the holy Fathers. In old time, when the Priests of Appollo Pytheus began to speake plainly in fauour of King Philip, many would merrily say, that Apollo began to Philippize. When we see that nothing is decreed in the Councell, but at the Popes pleasure, why may wee not say that the oracles of the Coun∣cels doe Tapize; that is, say nothing but what the Pope will. When Verres was charged with many crimes, of which in probabilitie he was guiltie, they say he was so wise, as not to commit his triall to any, but onely to some trusty persons of his owne traine. The Popes haue dealt more wisely: For they haue chosen such iudges, whom they know neither will (because it is their owne case, in regard they refer all to voluptuousnesse and gluttonie) nor can if they would (because they are sworne) decree any thing contrary to his will and pleasure. They set the holy Bible in the midst, as if they would doe nothing against it: they looke vpon it afarre off, and reade it not. In∣deede they bring a preiudicated opinion with them, not regarding what Christ hath said, but decreeing whatsoeuer they please. 24 Therefore that libertie which ought to be in all consultations, especially sa∣cred, and which is most proper to the Holy Ghost, and the modestie of Christi∣ans, is quite taken away. Paul saith, If any thing be reauealed to another that 1. Cor. 14 30. sitteth by, let the first hold his peace: But these men apprehend, imprison and burne whosoeuer dareth but whisper against them. Witnesse hereof the cruell death of two most holy and resolute men, Iohn Husse and Hierom of Prague, whom they put to death contrary to their safe conduct, & so brake their faith, both with God and man. So the wicked Prophet Zedekias, when he had put on iron hornes, strooke Micheas the Prophet of the Lord on the face, saying, how hath the spirit of God left me, and is come to thee? There∣fore these men alone domineere in Councels, all others being excluded. They alone giue voices, and make lawes; like vnto the Ephesians in times past: let no man (say they) liue here, who is wiser then the rest, except he haue a mind to be cast into banishment. They will not heare any of our men speak. In the last conuention of the Councel at Trent, tenne yeres since, the Ambassa∣dors of the Princes and free Cities of Germanie came thither with a purpose to be heard, but were absolutely refused. For the Bishops and Abbots an∣swered that they would not suffer their cause to haue a free hearing, nor suffer controuersies to be discussed out of the word of God: that our men were not to be heard at all except they would recant; which if they refused to doe, they should come into the Councell vpon none other condition but to heare the sentence of condemnation pronounced against them. For Iulius the third in his Bull of indiction of the Councell declared plainely that either they should change their opinions, or else should bee condemned for heretiques before they were heard. Pius the fourth who hath now a purpose to reassemble the Councell, hath alreadie preiudged for heretiques all those who haue left the Roman Church, that is to say, the greatest part of the Christian world, before they were euer either seene or heard. They say, and they say it often, that alreadie all is well with them, and that they will not alter one iot of their doctrine and Religion. Albertus Pighius saith, that without the authoritie of the Roman Church one ought not to beleeue the cleerest, and plainest Scripture. Is this to restore the Church to her inte∣gritie? Is this to seeke the trueth? Is this the libertie and moderation of Councels? 25 Though these things bee most vniust, and most different from the fa∣shion of ancient Councels and of modest men, yet this is more vniust, that whereas the world complaineth of the Papall pride and tyrannie, and doth beleeue that nothing can be amended in the Church of God vntill he be re∣duced into order, yet all things are referred vnto him, as vnto a most conscien∣cious pence maker and iudge. And vnto what a kind of man (good God) are they referred? I will not call him an enemie of the Trueth, ambitious, coue∣tous proud, intolerable, euen to his owne followers. But they would make iudge of all Religion him who commandeth that all his determinations shall bee of equall valew with those of Saint Peter himselfe, and sayth, that in case hee carrie a thousand soules with himselfe to Hell, yet no man ought to reprehend him for it: who auoucheth that he can make iniustice to bee iu∣stice: whom Camotensis affirmeth to haue corrupted the Scriptures, that he might haue fulnesse of power: and to conclude, whom his owne fami∣liars and followers (Ioachimus, Abbas Petrarch, Marsilius Patauinus, Lauren∣tius Ʋalla, Hieronymus Sauanorola) doe cleerely pronounce to bee The Anti∣christ. All is referred to the iudgement and will of this man alone; so that the same man is the partie arraigned, and the Iudge: the accusers are heard from an inferiour place, and the partie accused sits in his Tribunall, and pro∣nounceth the sentence concerning himselfe. These lawes, forsooth, so equall, and so reasonable, Pope Iulius hath giuen vs. No Councell (sayth he) is of any credit, nor euer wil be, vnlesse it be confirmed by the authority of the Church of Rome. Bonifacius 8. sayth, That no creature in the world can possibly be saued, except he bee subiect to the Romane Church. And Pope Pascal thus, As though, sayth hee, any Councels haue made lawes for the Church of Rome, when as all Councels doe subsist by it, and receiue their strength from it; and doe expresly except in all their Decrees the authoritie of the Bishop of Rome. Another sayth, That which the Pope approoueth or dis∣prooueth, wee ought to approoue or disprooue likewise. And againe, It is not lawfull for any man to disallow that which the Pope approoueth. I know not what Parasite it is who most shamelesly sayth, that though all the world should bee of one opinion against the Pope, yet it seemeth to mee that the Popes opinion must bee maintained. And another as impudently as hee, It is a kinde of sacriledge but to dispute of the Pope's fact, who though hee bee not alwayes a good man, yet must hee alwayes bee presu∣med to bee. Another yet more impudently sayth, The Pope's will is hea∣uenly; therefore in those things which hee willeth, his will standeth for reason; neither ought any man to say to him, why doe you so? To leaue many the like sayings, which are infinite, and to make an end, Pope Inno∣cent the ninth speakes most impudently of all; The Iudge will not bee iud∣ged, neither by the Emperour, nor by Kings, nor by the whole Clergie, nor by all the people of the world. O immortall God! how neere are they come to say thus; I will ascend vpon the North-pole, and I will be like to the most High. If the Popes say true, what neede wee a Councell? if they will hold a sincere and a free Councell, away with these wicked and vaine∣glorious lyes: Let them not onely not be practised, but let them euen bee rased out of all their Bookes, that all may not bee left to the will and pleasure of one man who is most iustly suspected. But the Popes, say they, cannot erre, and that the word of GOD is to bee regulated as they please: Before they enter into their place they sweare to maintaine certaine late Councels, which are most fowlly corrupted, and doe religiously promise that nothing shall bee changed. What maruaile then that no good comes of a Councell, if that errours and abuses are not taken away? that the Am∣bassadours of Princes are in vaine called thither from so many remote parts? Notwithstanding I heare that now there are some men, not ill affected, yet carelesse what they say, who, though they condemne the arrogancie and Persian pride of the Pope, and his euen Epicurean contempt of Religion, yet they desire that his authority should bee maintained: Though they some∣times confesse him to be Antichrist, yet beeing mounted into that chayre, they doubt not but that he is Vniuersall Bishop and Head of the whole Church of CHRIST. Here they triumph and please themselues, as if the Holy Ghost were affixed to the Pope's palace. Yet the saying is, The place doth not sanctifie the man, but the man the place. And Hierome, as hee is ci∣ted by them, saith, that, They are not sonnes of the Saints who hold their pla∣ces, but who imitate their deedes. Likewise Christ telleth vs, that the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chayre, but warneth vs not to allow of their au∣thoritie further then they speake out of the word of God. Augustine sayth, What sayd Christ but this; Heare the voyce of the Shepheard euen by hire∣lings? For by sitting in the chaire they teach the Law of God; therefore God doeth instruct vs by them. If they will teach ought of their owne, heare them not, doe it not. Likewise Paul saith, that Antichrist, that man of sinne, must fit in the Temple. Hierome sayth, Well; doest thou consider Peter? con∣sider Iudas also: doest thou allow of Stephen? marke also what Nicholas was. Ecclesiasticall dignity maketh not a Christian. Thus farre Hierome. It is re∣ported that Pope Marcellinus sacrificed to Idoles; that Pope Liberius was an Arrian; that Pope Iohn the 22 had an impious opinion concerning the im∣mortalitie of the soule; that Pope Iohn the 8. was a woman, that shee com∣mitted adultery during her Papacie, and going pompously in procession a∣bout the Citie, was deliuered of a childe, euen in the very sight of the Bishops and Cardinals. And Liranus affirmeth, that many popes haue turned infi∣dels. Wherefore we must not bee too confident of places, and successions, and vaine titles of dignities. Wicked Nero succeeded godly Metellus. An∣nas and Caiphas succeeded Aaron: and oftentimes Idoles are put in the place of GOD. 26 But what I pray you is this great power and authoritie, whereof they doe so insolently boast? whence comes it? From Heauen, or of men? Christ spake vnto Peter, say they; vpon this rocke I will build my Church; by which words, the Popes authoritie is confirmed. For the Church of Christ is placed in Peter, as in the foundation. But Christ gaue nothing to Peter by these words more then to the other Apostles: neither doth hee make mention of the Pope, or of Rome. Christ is that rocke; Christ is that founda∣tion. No man, saith Saint Paul, can lay another foundation then that which is alreadie laid, which is Christ Iesus. 27 These words, vpon this rock I will build my Church, Saint Augustine expoundeth thus: vpon this, saith he, which Peter confessed, saying, Thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God. It is not said thou art the rock, but thou art Peter: the rock was Christ. Saint Basill saith thus: vpon this rock, that is, vpon this faith I will build my Church. Origen, that most ancient Father, saith that euery disciple is a rocke, after that he hath drunke of that spirituall rock; and vpon such a rocke all the doctrine of the Church is buil∣ded. But if thou thinkest that the whole is built vpon Peter onely, what sayest thou of Iohn the sonne of thunder, and of each of the Apostles. For shall we be so bould as to say, the Gates of Hell shall not preuaile against Peter onely, and they shall preuaile against the rest of the Apostles; and against good men? Or shall wee not rather say, let that which is spoken (and the Gates of Hell shall not preuaile against him; and that other, vpon this rock I will build my Church) be true in euery one of those of whom it was spoken. Were the keyes of the kingdome giuen to Peter only, so that none of the other Saints might meddle with them. Then if this saying, (to thee I will giue the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen) be common to others also, why are not the other sayings so to? Saint Hilarie saith, There is but one happie rocke of faith, which Peter confessed with his mouth. And again he saith, Vpon this confession of Peter the Church is built: and a little after hee saith, This faith is the foundation of the Church. In like manner other Fathers, Hierom, Cyrill, Beda, say that the Church is built, not vpon Peter, but vpon his faith, that is, vpon Iesus Christ the sonne of God, whom Peter, by diuine inspiration, confessed. Peter (saith Augustine) taketh his name from the Rocke, not the Rocke from Peter; neither will I (sayth hee) build my selfe vpon thee, but I will build thee vpon mee. So also Nicholas Lira (though hee bee not alwayes a good author; for you know in what age hee liued) saw thus much: Vpon this Rocke, sayth hee, that is, vpon CHRIST. By this it appeareth, that the Church cannot relie wholly vpon any man by reason of any power, or Ecclesiasticall dignitie, because ma∣ny Popes are knowen to be Apostats, haue been Apostats. 28 Why then, wherein doeth this Papall authoritie consist? In teaching? They teach not at all. In administring the Sacraments? They administer them not. In feeding? Why they doe it not. Yet this is the power which CHRIST bestowed on his Apostles. Goe (saith he) into the whole world, and preach the Gospell: And afterward, Yee shall bee fishers of men. And, as my liuing Father sent mee, so send I you. But these men whither go they? what doe they teach, or preach, or fish for? From whence goe they, or by whom are they sent? This is not Apostolicall authoritie, but a proud into∣lerable domination, vsurped by force and tyranny. None of vs (saith Cypri∣an) calleth himselfe Bishop of Bishops, nor violently compelleth his Col∣leagues to any necessary obedience, sith euery Bishop may vse his libertie and power according to his owne discretion, without beeing iudged by any, seeing that hee himselfe iudgeth no man. Againe hee saith, The other A∣postles were that which Peter was, and had the same fellowship of honour, and power. Saint Hierome saith, the authoritie of the world is greater then that of one Citie. Why doe you extoll the custome of one Citie? Why doe you make a paucitie, whence pride began, to giue lawes to the Church? Wheresoeuer any Bishop is, whether at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at Constanti∣nople, or at Rhegium, hee is of the same desert and Priesthood. The strength of riches, or humblenesse of pouertie maketh a Bishop neither greater nor lesse. Gregorie sayth, Peter is the chiefe member in the bodie; Iohn, Andrew, Iames are Heads of particular people: yet all of them are members of the Church vnder one Head. Nay, the Saints before the Law, the Saints vnder the Law, the Saints vnder the Gospel, and all that make vp the bodie of the Lord are to bee accounted members, and none was euer willing to bee cal∣led Vniuersall. 29 This is that power which some doe so strenuously defend at this day, which, whatsoeuer they thinke of the Popes life and religion, they would haue to bee most religiously maintained, as if the Church could not subsist without it; or as if a Councell were no Councell except the Pope did will and command it to be so; or as if the whole world must needs be deceaued, if it should thinke otherwise. Wherefore now that you see that all things are most vniustly handled, that nothing is sincerely and fairely caried in Coun∣cels, you may not wonder that our men had rather tarry at home, then take so long, and so idle a iourney, in which they shall both lose their labour, and betray their cause. 30 You will say, it is not lawfull to make change in Religion without order from the Pope and the Councell. Yet the Popes haue changed almost the whole state of the Primitiue Church without any Councell at all. You vse a faire smooth speach, but it is to couer foule errours. The purpose is one∣ly to keepe mens minds in expectation, that being wearied with tedious de∣layes, they may at the last despaire of any good. For what? while the Pope assembleth a Councell, while the Bishops and Abbots returne home, will they haue GOD's people in the meane while, to bee deceiued, to erre, to mistake themselues, to bee ouerwhelmed with errours, and want of the knowledge of GOD, and so to bee carried to euerlasting destruction? Is it not lawfull for any of vs to beleeue in CHRIST, to professe the Gospel, to serue God aright, to flie superstition, and idolatrie, except they will be pleased to giue vs leaue? The state of God's children were most miserable, if, there being so many errors, so generally spread, so grosse, so blind, so foule, and so perspicuous and manifest, that euen our aduersaries themselues are not able to denie them, nothing could be done without the whole world should meet in a generall Councell; the expectation whereof is very vncertaine, and the euent much more. In times past, when the Persians inuaded Greece, and began to lay all waste, if then the Lacedemonians, whose virtue was then most eminent amongst the Grecians, whose help was requisite as soone as might be, had expected a more seasonable moone to make warre in (for it was an anci∣ent superstition, which proceeded from Lycurgus, not to goe forth to fight but in a full moone) their Countrie might haue beene spoiled whilst they deferred the time. They say, delay breeds danger. The safetie of God's Church is in question; the Deuill goeth about roaring like a Lion, seeking whom he may deuoure. Simple men are easily deceaued; and though they be often touched with a zeal towards God, yet they persecute the sonne of God before they be aware: And, as Nazianzen saith, when they purpose to fight for Christ, they fight against him: Nay the Bishops themselues, who ought to haue a care of these things, are (as though they were but Ghosts) carelesse of them: or, to speake truth, they increase the error, and make the mist that is in their Religion twice as great as it was. Must wee therefore sit idle, expecting how these Fathers will handle the matter? must wee hold our hands together and doe nothing. Nay, saith Cyprian, there is but one Bishoprique, of which euery one holdeth an intire part, whereof he is to giue account to the Lord. I will require, saith the Lord, their bloud at thy handes. If any shall put his hand to the plough and looke backe, and be sollicitous what others thinke, and expect the authoritie of a generall Coun∣cell, and hide the Lord's treasure, in the meane while, he shall here this, O euill and faithlesse seruant! take him away, and cast him into outward darke∣nesse. Suffer (saith Christ) the dead to burie their dead, but come thou and follow mee. In humane counsels, it is the part of a wise man to expect the iudgment and consent of men? but in matters diuine, Gods word is all in all: the which so soone as a godly man hath receiued, hee presently yeeldeth and submitteth himselfe; he is not wauering, not expecteth others. Hee vnder∣standeth that he is not bound to giue care to the Pope, or the Councell, but to the will of God, whose voice is to be obeyed, though all men say nay. The Prophet Elias presently obeyed God's command, though he thought he was alone; Abraham, being warned of God, went out of Chaldea; Lot went out of Sodome; the three Israelites made a publike confession of their Religion, and did publiquely detest Idolatry, without expecting a generall Councell. Goe (saith the Angel) out of the midst of her and partake not of her sinnes, lest you tast of her Plagues. Hee saith not, expect a Synode of Bishops. So God's trueth was first published, and so it is now to be restored. The Apostles first taught the Gospell without a publique Councell; in like manner the same Gospell may be restored againe without a publique Councell. If at the first, Christ and his Apostles would haue caried, and differred all vntill a generall Councell, when had their sound gone forth into all lands? how had the kingdome of heauen suffered violence? and how had the violent taken it by force? Where now would the Gospell, and the Church of God haue beene? As for our parts, we do not feare and flie, but desire and wish for a Councell, so that it bee freely ingenuous, and Christian; so that men doe meet as the Apostles did; so that Abbots and Bishops be freed from their oath by which they are bound to the Popes; so that, that whole conspiracie be dissolued; so that our men may be modestly and freely heard, and not condemned be∣fore they be heard; so that one man may, not haue power to ouerthrow whatsoeuer is done. But seeing it impossible (as the times now are) that this should be obteyned; and seeing that all absurd things, foolish, ridicu∣lous, superstitious, impious are defended most pertinaciously, and that for custome sake, because they haue beene once receiued, we haue thought it fit to prouide for our Churches by a nationall Councell. 31 For wee know that the spirit of God is tied neither to places, nor to num∣bers of men. Tel it to the Church, saith Christ: not to the whole Church spread ouer the world, but to a particular, which may easily meet in one place. Wheresoeuer, saith he, two or three shall bee, gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. When Paul would reforme the Churches of the Corinthians, and of the Galatians, he did not command them to expect a Generall Councell; but onely wrot vnto them, that what error soeuer or vice was amongst them, themselues should presently cutt it off. So in times past, when Bishops did sleepe, or intended by-matters, or did defile and pollute the Lords Temple, God did alwaies extraordinarily rayse vp some, men of great spirit and courage, who made all well and sound againe. 32 For our selues, wee haue done nothing but with very good reason; no∣thing but what wee sawe to bee lawfull, and to haue beene practised by the Fathers of the primitiue Church, without any reprehension at all. wher∣fore wee called a full Synod of Bishops, and, by common consent of all sorts, purged our Church, as it were Augeus his stable, of those excrements, which either the negligence, or the malice of men had brought in. wee haue restored all things, as much as possibly wee could, to the ancient puritie of the Apostolicall times, and the similitude of the primitiue Church. This was iustly in our power to doe, and because wee could doe it, wee did it boldly. 33 Here I thinke it fit that you should heare what Pope Gregory the first hath written concerning this matter; which pleaseth mee the more, because hee wrote it to Augustine, Bishop of the English, about the institutiō of the Church of England. Hee exhorteth him not to call a Councell, but to ordaine that which he himselfe in his own wisdome did thinke would most promote pie∣tie and religion. Your brotherhood, sayth hee, knoweth the Custome of the Romane Church, in which you haue been brought vp. It pleaseth mee to heare, that you haue beene carefull to make choyce of as many things as you can finde acceptable to GOD, either in the Church of Rome, France, or of any other, that you may bring them into the English Church, which is as yet but new in faith, and, as it were, but now to bee framed. For things are not to bee valewed because of the place where they are found, but places are to bee valewed for the things that are in them. 34 So the Fathers in the Councell of Constantinople write to Damasus Bishop of Rome, and to the other Westerne Bishops: You know, say they, that the old Decree, and definition of the Nicen fathers concerning the care of par∣ticular Churches, hath alwayes been in force, that the husbandmen of the Lord's vineyard in euery Prouince, taking their next bordering neighbours vnto them, if they please, should bestowe Ecclesiasticall honours vpon those whom they thinke will vse them well. The Bishops of Africa wrote thus to Celestinus Bishop of Rome: Let your Holinesse, as becommeth you, take away all wicked euasions of Priests, and inferiour Clergie-men, because none of the Fathers haue denied this to the Church of Africa. And the De∣crees of the Nicen Councell doe most plainely referre not onely meane Clergie men, but euen the Bishops themselues to their Metropolitans. For businesses are best ended in the places where they are, neither is the grace of the Holy Spirit wanting vnto any Prouince. Let this equitie be wisely obser∣ued, and constantly maintained by the Ministers of CHRIST. 35 Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome writeth to Lucius King of Britannie much better, and more appositely to our present purpose. You haue (saith he) desired, that wee should send you the lawes of the Romans, and of the Emperours, that you may make vse of them in the kingdome of Britannie. These lawes wee may abrogate when we will, but the lawes of God we cannot. You haue receiued (by God's mercie) into your kingdome of Britannie the law and faith of CHRIST; you haue there the Old and the New Testament: from them take, through the grace of God, lawes by a Councel of your owne king∣dome, and, God permitting you, instruct your kingdome of Britannie by them. For you are Gods Vicar in that kingdome; according to that of the Psalmist, The earth is the Lords. 36 What should I say more? Victor, Bishop of Rome held a prouinciall Synod at Rome: Iustinian the Emperor commandeth that Synods (if there were occasion) should be held in euery Prouince; protesting to punish them, if they did not doe it. Euery prouince (saith Hierom) hath peculiar maners, and rites, and con∣ceipts, which cannot be altered without a great deale of trouble. What should I repeat those old prouinciall Councels at Eliberis, Gangra, Laodicea, Ancyra, Antioch, Tyrus, Carthage, Mileuitum, Tholouse, & Burdeaux. This is no new inuen∣tion. The Church of God was so gouerned before the Fathers met in the Ni∣cen Councel: men did not presently run to a general Councel. Trophilus held a prouinciall Councel in Palestina; Palmas in Pontus; Irenaeus in France; Bacchylus in Achaia, Origen against Berillus in Arabia. I omit many other National Coun∣cels held in Africa, Asia, Graecia, Egypt without any order from the Bishop of Rome; which Councels were godly, Orthodox, and Christian. For Bishops in those times vpon the sudden, if any occasion had been offred, did prouide for the necessity of their Churches by a domesticall Councell, and somtimes cra∣ued ayd from their neighbor Bishops; so that they mutually helped one the other. Neither did Bishops onely beleeue, that the cause of Religion be∣longed to them, but euen Princes too. For to passe ouer Nabuchadnezar, who commanded vpon paine of death, that the name of the God of Israel should not be blasphemed; to omit Dauid, Solomon, Ezekias, Iosias, who partly built, partly purged the Temple of the Lord, Constantius the Emperour put downe Idolatrie without a Councell, and made a most seuere edict, that it should be capitall to sacrifice to Idols. Theodosius the Emperour caused the Temples of the heathen Gods to bee pul'd to the very ground. Iouinian, so soone as he was created Emperour, made his first law for the restoring of banished Christians. Iustinian the Emperour was wont to say, that hee had no lesse care of Christian Religion, then of his owne life. When Iosua was made ruler of the people, he presently receiued command concerning religion, and the worship of God. For Princes are nursing Eathers of the Church, and keepers of both tables. Neither is any greater cause that hath mooued God to erect politique States, then that alwaies there might bee some to maintaine and preserue Religion and pietie. 37 Princes therefore now a dayes doe more greiuously offend, who indeede are called Christians, but sit idly, follow their pleasures, and patiently suffer impious worships and contempt of God, leauing all vnto their Bishops, whom they know to make but a mocke of Religion: as if the care of the Church, and of God's people belonged not to them, or as if they were Pastors but of sheepe and oxen, as it were, to be carefull of their bodies, and neglect their soules. They remember not, that they are God's seruants, chosen of purpose to serue him. Ezekias went not into his owne house, before he saw God's Temple purified. King Dauid said, I will not giue any sleepe vnto mine eyes, nor suffer mine eye lids to slumber, vntill I haue found a place for the Lord, a tabernacle for the God of Iacob. O that Christian Princes would heare the voice of the Lord! Now, saith the Lord, vnderstand O yee Kings, and learne yee that bee iudges of the earth: I haue said yee are God's, that is, men chosen by God to honour his name. Thou, whom I haue raised out of the dust, and placed in the highest degree of dignitie and honour, and set thee ouer my people, when thou art so carefull to build and adorne thine owne house, doe but thinke with thy selfe how thou canst contemne mine house? Or how dost thou pray daily, that thy kingdome may be confirmed to thee and thy posteritie? Is it that my name may be contemned? That the Gospell of my CHRIST may bee put downe? That my seruants, for my sake, may bee slaine before thine eyes? That tyrannie may be further spread, my people alwaies deceiued and scandall confirmed by thee? Woe vnto him by whom scandal commeth: Woe also vnto him by whom it is confirmed. Thou abhor∣rest materiall blood: how much more the blood of soules? Thou remem∣brest what hapned to Antiochus, Herod and Iulian: I will giue thy kingdome to thine enemie, because thou hast sinned against me: I change times, and seasons: I put downe and raise vp Kings; that thou maiest vnderstand, that I am the most high; that I haue power ouer the kingdome of men, and giue it to whom I will: I bring low, and I exalt: I glorifie them that glorifie me, and put to shame those, that despise me. Epistola Reu. P. IOANNIS IVELLI, Episcopi Saris∣buriensis, ad virum nobilem, D. SCIPIONEM, Pa∣tricium Venetum. 1 S Cribis ad me familiariter pro ea consuetudine, quae inter nos summa semper fuit (ex eo vsque tempore, quo vnd viximus Patauiae, Tu in Reip. tuae tractatione occupatus, ego in studijs literarum) mirari te, tecum{que} alios istîc multos, cum hoc tempore Concilium generale com∣ponendae religionis, & cōtentionis tollendae causa Tridenti à Pontifice indictum sit, & eò iam reliquae omnes nationes vndique conuenerunt, solum Angliae regnum, nec Legatum eò aliquem misisse, nec absentiam suam per nuntios, aut liter as excusasse: sed sine consilio omnem prope rationem veteris, & avitae religionis immu∣tasse: quorum alterum superbae contumaciae videri ais, alterum perniciosi schismatis. Nefas enim esse, si quis sanctissimam authoritatem defugiat Rom. Pont. aut vocatus ab illo ad Concilium se subducat. Controuersias autem de religione non alibi, quam in huius∣modi conuentibus fas esse disceptari. Ibi enim esse Patriarchas & Episcopos; Ibi esse ex omni genere hominum viros doctissimos, ab illorum ore petendam esse veritatem; ibi esse lumina Ecclesiarum; ibi esse spiritum sanctum; Pios Principes semper omnes, si quid incidisset ambigui in cultu Dei, illud semper ad publicam consultationem retulisse. Mosen, Iosuam, Dauidem, Ezechiam, Iosiam, aliosque Iudices, Reges, Sacerdotes, de rebus diuinis non alibi, quàm in Episcoporum Concilio deliber asse; Apostolos Chri∣sti, pios{que} Patres inter se Concilia celebrasse; sic veritatem emicuisse; sic expugna∣tas esse haereses; sic Arrium, sic Eunomium, sic Eutychetem, sic Macedonium, sic Pe∣lagium succubuisse; sic hodie dissidia orbis terrarum componi, & ruinas Ecclesiae sarci∣ri posse, si positis contentionibus & studijs veniatur ad Concilium: sine Concilio au∣tem quicquam in religione tentari nefas esse. 2 Atque haec quidem ferè literarum tuarum summa fuit. Ego verò non id mihi nunc sumo, vt tibi pro regno Angliae, quo quidque consilio factum sit, quicquam re∣spondeam. Neque te id à me requirere, aut velle arbitror. Regum consilia recon∣dita & arcana sunt, & esse debent. Nosti illud, nec passim, nec omnibus, nec qui∣buslibet. Tamen pro nostra inter nos veteri & priuata consuetudine (quoniam te id video ita prolixè petere) quid mihi videatur, breuiter & amicè respondebo: sed ita, vt ait ille, quantum sciam poteroque, idque tibi non dubito fore satis. 3 Miramur, inquis, Legatos ex Anglia ad Concilium non venire. Obsecro te, An Angli soli ad Concilium non veniunt? an ergo tu Concilio interfuisti? an censum egi∣sti? an capita singula enumerasti? an videbas alias nationes vndique omnes conuenis∣se, praeter Anglos? Quod si tibi mirari tam cordi est, cur non miraris hoc quoque: aut tres illos memorabiles Patriarchas, Constantinopolitanum, Antiochenum, Alex∣andrinum, aut presbyterum Ioannem, aut Graecos, Armenios, Medos, Persas, Egyp∣tios, Mauritanos, Aethiopas, Indos ad Concilium non venire? An enim multi ex estis omnibus non credunt in Christum? non habent Episcopos? non baptizantur in no∣mine Christi? non sunt, appellantur{que} Christiani? An verò ab istis singulis nationibus venerunt Legati ad Concilium? An tu hoc potius dices, Papam illos non vocasse, aut ilios ecclesiasticis vestris sanctionibus non teneri? 4 Sed nos hoc miramur magis, Papam eos, quos inauditos, indicta causa, pro he∣reticis iam antea condemnauit, & publicè excommunicatos pronunciauit, eosdem postea vocare voluisse ad Concilium. Homines enim primum damnari at que affici supplicio, deinde eosdem vocari in iudicium absurdum est, & . Ʋerum hoc mihi velim responderi, vtrum id agit pontifex, vt nobiscum, quos habet pro haereticis, in Con∣cilio de Religione deliberet; an potius, vt nos ex inferiori loco causam dicamus, & vel statim mutemus sententiam, vel iterum è vestigio condemnemur? alterum nouum est, & prorsus nostrarum partium hominibus iam pridem à Iulio Papa tertio denegatum: alte∣rum ridiculum est, si id put at Anglos venturos esse ad Concilium, tantùm vt accusen∣tur & causam dicant, apud illum praesertim, qui iamdudum non tantum à nostris, sed etiam à suis grauissimis criminibus accusetur. 5 Quod si Anglia sola tibi adeo videtur esse contumax, vbi ergo sunt legati Regis Daniae, Principum Germaniae, Regis Suetiae, Heluetiorum, Rhetiorum, liberarum Ciuitatum, Regni Scotiae, Ducatus Prussiae? Cum in Concilio vestro tot desiderentur nationes Christianae, ineptum est Anglos solos numerare. Sed quid ego istos dico? Pon∣tifex ipse ad Concilium suum non venit, & cur tu hoc etiam non miraris? Quae e∣nim est ista superbia, vnum hominem animi causa, cum libet, conuocare omnes Re∣ges, Principes, Episcopos Christianos, eosque velle dicto esse audientes: ipsum solum in illorum conspectum non venire? Certè quum Apostoli agerent conuentus Hierosoly∣mis, Petrus Apostolus, de cuius isti sede & successione gloriantur, abesse noluit. Ve∣rùm opinor meminat Pius Papa quartus, is qui nunc Pontificatum obtinet, quid Io∣anni 22. olim acciderit: illum non satis auspicatò venisse ad Concilium Constantiense: venisse enim Papam & rediisse Cardinalem. Itaque ex eo tempore pontifices, caue∣runt sibi post principia, & se continuerunt domi, & omnibus Concilijs ac liberis discep∣tationibus obstiterunt. Nam ante annos quadraginta cum Doctor Martinus Lutherus omnibus Diris & fulminibus à pontifice peteretur, quod docere cepisset Euangelium, & ex verbo Dei religionem instauraret, & summissè petijsset, vt causa sua integra re∣ijceretur ad cognitionem Concilij generalis, audiri non potuit vllo modo. Leo enim de∣cimus Papa satis videbat, sires ad Concilium redijsset, suam etiam rem venire posse in periculum, & seipsum fortasse audire ea posse, quae nollet. 6 Pulchrum quidem est nomen Concilij generalis, modo ita, vt oportet, conuenia∣tur, & positis affectionibus omnia referantur ad praescriptum verbi Dei, & vni veri∣tati seruiatur. At si apertè religio, & pietas opprimatur, si tyrannis, & ambitio con∣firmetur, si factionibus, ventri, libidini studeatur, nihil potest cogitari Ecclesiae Dei perniciosius. Atque haec quidem hactenus ita dico, quasi Concilium istud, quod tu di∣cis, vsquam aut vllum sit: quod ego prorsus nullum esse arbitror. Aut si vspiam aut vllum est, certè obscurum & valde arcanum est. Nos enim quamuis non ita procul ab∣sumus, tamen quid agetur, qui Episcopi conuenerint, vel potius an vlli omnino con∣uenerint, scire adhuc nullo modo possumus. Immo etiam ante viginti menses, cum Concili∣um istud à Pontifice Pio primum indiceretur, Ferdinandus Imperator, respōdit quamuis aliaomnia conuenirent, locum tamen, quem Papa delegerat sibi magnopere displicere. Tridentum enim etsi bella sit Ciuitas, tamen nec satis opportunā esse tot gentibus, nec tan¦tam frequentiam hominum, quantum ad generale Concilium conuenire par sit, posse ca∣pere. Eadem fere ab alijs Principibus Christianis, à quibusdam etiam non paulo aspe∣riora respondebantur. Itaque nos ista omnia vnd cum Concilio in fumos abijsse cre∣debamus. 7 Sed obsecrote, quis ille tandem est, qui istud Concilium indixit, & orbem terrarum conuocauit? Pius, inquies, Papa quartus. Et cur ille potius quam Episcopus Tolleta∣nus? qua enim potestate, quo exemplo primitiuae Ecclesiae, quo iure haec facit? An ita Petrus, Linus, Cletus, Clemens, edictis suis orbem terrarum commouerunt? Fuit hoc semper, saluis rebus, ius Imperatorum Romanorum proprium: Nunc autem postquam imminutae sunt vires Imperij, & regna in partem Caesareae potestatis successerunt, ea potestas communicata est cum Principibus & Regibus Christianis. Scrutare annales, collige memorias vetustatis. Inuenies antiquissima Concilia, Nicenum, Ephesinum, Chal∣cedonense, Constantinopolitanum ab Imperatoribus Romanis, Constantino, Theodosio primo, Theodosio secundo, Martiano indictafuisse, non à Romanis Pontificibus. 8 Leo Pontifex, satis alioqui sui amans, & nulla in re negligens authoritatem sedis suae, Mauritium Imperatorem suppliciter orauit, vt Concilium indiceret intra Italiam: quod ille tum locus ei negotio conuenire maximè videretur. Supplicant, inquit, om∣nes Sacerdotes mansuetudini vestrae, vt generalem Synodum iubeatis intra Italiam celebrari. At Imperator Concilium illud non intra Italiam, quod Pontifex maximè contendebat, sed Chalcedonem in Bithyniam inssit conuocari: vt ostender et ius illud suum esse, & ad se vnum pertinere. Et cùm Ruffinus in illa concertatione, quam ha∣buit cum Hieronymo, allegasset Synodum, doce inquit Hieronymus quis Imperator cam iusserit conuocari. Non putabat D. Hieronymus satis firmam esse authoritatem Con∣cilij generalis, nisi illud Imperator coegisset. Ego verò non id quaero, quis Imperator Episcopos hoc tempore iusserit Tridentum euocari: sed Papa, qui tantum sibi sumpsit, quocum Imperatore de habendo Concilio deliberauerit, quem Regem aut Principem Christianum conscium fecerit voluntatis suae. In ius alterius per fraudem aut vim irrumpere, quódque alienum sit, id sibi tanquam suum vsurpare iniuri mest. Abuti au∣tem clementia Principum, illisque tanquam seruis suis imperare, insignis est & non fe∣renda contumelia. Nos autem obsequio nostro velle tantam iniuriam, & contumeliam confirmare, non minùs magna esset iniuria. Quare si hoc tantùm diceremus, Concilium istud vestrum Tridentinum non esse legitimè conuocatum, nihil à Papa Pio ritè atque ordine esse factum, nemo posset absentiam nostram satis iustè reprehendere. 9 Mitto quibus nos iniurijs à Romanis Pontificibus affecti simus. Illos quoties li∣buit, populum nostrum in Principem armauisse: Illos Regibus nostris sceptra de mani∣bus, & diadema de capite detraxisse: Illos Regnum Angliae suum esse, & suo nomine possideri, & Reges nostros suo beneficio regnare voluisse: Illos proximis istis annis mo∣dò Gallum in nos, modò Caesarem commouisse. Quid autem Pius iste de nobis consilij caeperit, quid egerit, quid dixerit, quid molitus, quid minatus sit, nihil opus est comme∣morare. Facta enim eius, dictá{que} non ita tectasunt, & recondita, quin intelligi vtcun{que} possit, quid velit. Quibus autem ille rationibus Pontifex factus fuerit, quibusque quasi gradibus ad illam tantam dignitatem ascenderit, nihil dico. Non dico illum cor∣ruptis Cardinalibus, emptis suffragijs, mercede ac pretio per cuniculos & insidias ad Pontificatum aspirasse. Non dico illum nuper admodum cum soluendo non esset, Car∣dinalem Caraffam, cuius ope reliquorum Cardinalium suffragia collegerat, cuique eo nomine debebat magnam vim auri, vinctum in carcere interfecisse. Ista, aliáque com∣plura vobis relinquo potiùs, qui ea & propiùs videtis & meliùs intelligitis. An ergo tu nos adhominem sanguinarium, ad mercatorem suffragiorum, ad aeris alieni negato∣rem, ad Simoniacum, ad haereticum miraris non venire? Non est prudentis (mihi crede) velle se conijcere in sedem pestilentiae, & cum hostibus Religionis velle de Religione con∣silium capere. Ad infames (inquit quidam) vetuit me mater accedere. Ioannes Apo∣stolus non est ausus in eodem balneo sedere, & vnà lauare cum Olympio, ne vnà cum illo fulmine de coelo feriretur. Non sedi, inquit Dauid, in consilio vanitatis, & cum ini∣qua agentibus non introibo. 10 Sed esto: sit hoc jus Papae proprium: possit conuocare Concilia: possit terrarum orbi imperare: sint ea falsa & vana quae diximus de potestate Caesaris & iure Regio: sit Pius Papa vir bonus, sit rectè, sit legitimè factus Pontifex: nullius vitam petiuerit; Caraffam in carcere non occiderit: tamen Concilia aequum est esse libera, vt adsit, qui velit, cui adesse non sit commodum, abesse liceat. Ea olim melioribus aequitas & mode∣ratio seruabatur. Non ita tum seruiliter cogebantur Principes, vt si quis fortè mansis∣set domi, aut Legatos ad Concilium non misisset, statim omnium digitis atque oculis nota∣retur. In Concilio Niceno, in Ephesino, in Constantinopolitano, in Chalcedonensi, quaeso te, quis explorator obseruauit, qui abessent? Atqui nullus tum adfuit Legatus, nec ex Anglia, nec è Scotia nec è Polonia, nec ex Hispania, nec è Pannonijs, nec è Dania, nec ex tota Germania. Ʋide, lege, recognosce subscriptiones: inuenies ita rem habere, vt dico. Et cur non miraris Anglos, tum ad illa Concilia ita plena, ita praeclara, ita celebria, ita frequentia, non venisse? Aut Episcopos Romanos ita tum fuisse patientes, vt illos non condemnarent contumaciae? Ʋerùm nondum creuerat ista Tyrannis Pontificia: fas tum erat Sanctis Episcopis & Patribus pro suo commodo sine fraude manere domi. Paulus Apostolus noluit sese dare in Concilium Hierosolymitanum, sed potiùs appella∣uit ad Caesarem. Athanasius Episcopus, quamuis vocaretur ab Imperatore ad con∣cilium Caesariense, tamen venire noluit. Idem in Concilio Syrmiano, cum rem videret in∣clinare ad Arrianos, statim subduxit se, atque abijt: eiúsque exemplum sequuti Episcopi Occidentis ad illud Concilium venire recusarunt. Iohannes Chrysostomus ad Concilium Arrianorum non accessit, quamuis ab Imperatore Constantio & literis & nuntijs voca∣retur. Cum Arrianorum Episcopi in Palestina conuenissent, & maximam partem suffragiorum secum traberent, Paphnutius senex, & Maximus Hierosolymorum Epi∣scopus vnà è medio conuentu discesserunt. Cyrillus Episcopus à Patropassianorū Concilio appellauit. Paulinus Episcopus Treuirensis venire noluit ad Concilium Mediolanense, quòd videret propter gratiam & potentiam Imperatoris Constantij, omnia iuere ad Auxentium Arrianum. Episcopi qui ad Concilium Constantinopolitanum conuenerant, ad Concilium Romanum, quò vocabantur, venire noluerunt. Quod tamen illis fraudi non fuit, quamuis Imperatoris literis vocarentur. Satis ea tum iusta excusa∣tio esse videbatur, quòd Ecclesiarum suarum curae, atque instaurationi studendum es∣set. Quamuis viderent Arrianos per omnes iam Ecclesias grasari, & ad minuendam illorum rabiem magnum pondus habituram esse praesentiam suam. 11 Quid si idem illud Episcopi nunc nostri responderent, non esse otium à sacro Mini∣sterio, sese prorsus occupatos esse in restituendis Ecclesijs suis: non posse abesse domo quinque, sex, septem annos, ibi praesertim, vbi nihil possint promouere? non enim ita otiosi sunt Episcopi nostri, vt sunt qui Romae delitiantur in palatijs, & sectantur Car∣dinales, & venantur sacerdotia. Ita enim miserè perditae sunt ab istis, atque e∣uersae Ecclesiae nostrae, vt nec paruo tempore, nec mediocri diligentia possint instaurari. Nunc autem apertè videmus obsideri ab istis nostra tempora, vt cùm minimè neces∣se sit, foras distrahamur, & nec domi propagare possimus Euangelium, & in Concilio ab ipsis impediamur. 12 Simulat enim Papa, ne nescias: non cogitat Concilium: neque enim tu illum quicquam putes sincerè, & verè agere. Qui nescit simulare (dicere solebat olim Rex Ludouicus vndecimus Carolo octauo) nescit regnare: multo verò magis, qui nescit dissimulare, & consilia sua vultu tegere, vt nunc quidem est, nescit agere Pontifi∣cem. Illa enim sedes tota merae nititur Hypocrisi: quae quo minùs habet natiui robo∣ris, eo pluribus coloribus opus habet. Nam si putabant Pontifices, tantam esse vim Concilij generalis ad tollenda Schismata, cur illi rem tam necessa iam tam diu di∣stulerunt? cur triginta totos annos quieuerunt, & Lutheri doctrinam radices agere pertulerunt? Cur Concilium non primo quoque tempore indixerunt? Cur Synodum Tridentinam reluctantes & inuiti, magis{que} Imperatoris Caroli impulsu, quàm sua voluntate conuocarunt? Cúmque Tridenti decem propè annos versarentur, cur tanta deliberatione nihil egerunt? cur rem infectam reliquerunt? Quis impediebat? quis obsta∣bat? Crede hoc mihi, mi frater, non agunt id nunc Pontifices, vt Concilium celebretur, aut Religio Dei restituatur, quam illi prorsus habent pro ludibrio. Id agunt, id quaerunt, id pugnant, vt magnifica expectatione Concilij generalis hominum piorum animos, atque orbem terrarum ludi ficentur. 13 Vident iamdudum imminui, & ruere opes suas: artes suas non esse nunc eodem loco, quo fuerunt olim: incredibilem numerum hominum in dies singulos à se dilabi: non esse nunc, qui tantâ frequentiâ currant Romam: non esse, qui Indulgentias, inter∣dictiones, benedictiones, absolutiones, & inanes bullas, aut tanti faciant, aut tanti emant. Ceremoniarum suarum, & Missarum nundinas, & omnem illum fucum meretricium, non magni fieri; magnam partem tyrannidis, & pompae suae concidisse: reditus suos angustiores nunc esse, quàm solebant; sese, suòsque rideri passim à pueris: omnino in discrimen venisse summam rerum. Nec mirum, si ea corruant, quae nullis radicibus sustinebantur. Extinxit illa omnia saluator noster IESVS CHRISTVS, non armis, aut vi militum, sed Coelesti impulsu, & spi∣ritu oris sui. consumet autem, atque abolebit claritate aduentus sui: Haec est vis verbi Dei, haec est potestas Euangelij, haec sunt arma, quibus euertitur omnis munitio, quae aedi∣ficata est aduersus cognitionem Dei. Praedicabitur haec doctrina, inuitis omnibus, per vniuersum orbem. Portae inferorum non preualebunt aduersus eam. Frigent nunc Romae tabernae meritoriae: illorum merces (quasi bona Porsennae vaenirent) vilissimo pretio proscribuntur. Et vix quisquam est, qui velit emere. Circuit mercator Indul∣gentiarius, & fatuos non inuenit. Hoc illud est, hinc illae lachrymae, haec res Pontifices malè habet. Vident hanc tantam lucem ex vna scintilla erupisse. Quid nunc futurum, postquam tot ignes vbique terrarum accensi sunt, & tot Reges & Principes Christi∣ani agnoscunt, & profitentur Euangelium? Non enim illi IESV CHRISTO ser∣uiunt, sed suo ventri. Aiunt Carneadem Philosophum, cum olim esset Romae, & me∣morabilem illam haberet orationem contra, Iustitiam, inter alia hoc etiam addidisse: Eam virtutem, si quidem ea virtus esset, nulli hominum generi minùs ex v∣su fore, quàm Romanis. Illos enim per vim, & latrocinium regna sibi aliena subegisse, pérque summam iniustitiam ad imperium orbis terrarum perue∣nisse. Quod si nunc tandem velint Iustitiam colere, restituenda esse illa om∣nia, quae iniustè teneant: ad casas pastoritias, & frigida tuguria, quae sola ha∣huerant ab initio, esse redeundum. Ita prorsus isti, si verè velint agere, & si∣mulationem ponere, & officium facere, & suum cuique reddere, vident sibi redeundum esse ad virgam & peram, ad sobrietatem, & modestiam, ad labores, ad munus Epi∣scopi. Audiuerunt enim Augustinum dicere, Episcopum nomen esse operis, non honoris: & illos non esse Episcopos, qui velint praeesse, & non prodesse. Itaque istud Euāgelium latiùs diffundi, & ad plures propagari, vident, nulli hominum generimi∣nùs expedire, quàm sibi: se enim saluos esse non posse, si sani esse velint. Ergo nunc tumultuantur, & turbant omnia, vt olim Demetrius faber, postquam vidit sibi perisse spem lucri. Ergo nunc Concilia indicuntur, & Abbates atque Episcopi ad partes aduocantur. Haec enim illis ratio visa est callidissima, vt tempus in aliquot annos protraberetur, vt hominum animi expectatione suspenderentur: multa, vt fit, posse interuenire: bellumposse excitari: aliquem ex istis principibus posse mori: istos tantos impetus ad Euangelium diuturnitate posse obtundi: languere posse hominum voluntates. Interea, inquit quidam, fiet aliquid, spero. 14 Olim cum (victis ac triumphatis Persis) Athenienses moenia sua, quae illi solo aequauerant, caepissent instaurare, & Lacedaemonij, quo magis baberent eos in potesta∣te, ne id facerent, magnopere edixissent: Themistocles dux Atheniensis, vir prudens, cum videret salutem patriae suae venire posse in periculum, pollicitus est sese venturum Lacedaemona, & deea re velle cum ipsis vnâ deliberare. Ille vbise dedisset in viam, quò tempus eximeret, primùm morbum simulauit, vt diutiùs haereret in itinere: Dein∣de cum venisset Lacedaemona, multa de industria frustrari coepit, moaò pacta non place∣re: modò deliberationem petere: modò socios legationis, sine quibus nihil agi posset, expectare: modò legatos Athenas mittere. Interea, dum ille cunctatur, Athenienses clauserant moenibus ciuitatem, & si vis fieret, sese parauerant ad defendendum. Ita isti, dum diem de die proferunt, & rem omnem referri volunt ad Concilia, aedificant interea sua moenia, nobis otiosis, & nescio quid expectantibus, vt ad extremum, con∣firmatis suis rationibus, nos prorsus excludant, & neque Concilium haberi, neque quicquam omnino agipossit. 15 Operaepretium enim est videre istorum artes, & stratagemata; quoties indicta Conci∣lia nō coiuerint quoties exiguus rumusculus vniuersum apparatum, & omnem expecta∣tionem disturbarit, quoties patres in medio itinere repentè substiterint: quoties purpura∣ti Amphictyones è medio conuentu, re infectâ, dilapsi sint domum, & proximum actum in nonum, decimum{que} annū distulerint? quoties Coelum, quoties annona, quoties locus, quoties tempus non placuerit? Pontifex enim solus conuocat Concilia, & solus dimittit, cùm vult. Si quid nō placuit, aut si res non rectè ire caepit, statim auditur: valete, & plaudite. Indicitur Concilium Basileam: conuenitur vndique magno numero, agitur seriò de rebus multis: Eugenius Papa vt Simoniacus & Schismaticus omnibus suffragijs con∣demnatur: in eius locum Amideus dux Sabaudiae surrogatur. Accipit id indignè, vt debuit, Eugenius: rem eam pessimi exempli esse ad posteros: potestatem, & vim suam longè esse super omnia Concilia: Non posse Concilium nec conuenire, nisi iussu suo: nec decernere quicquam, nisi quantum ipse velit. Impium esse in conuenticulo Episcoporum inquisitionem fieri de vita sua. Non mora, Con∣cilium Ferraram reuocat in Italiam, pòst idem transfert Florentiam. Quid hoc, quaeso, rei est? An putabat Eugenius Papa coelum animos mutare, aut Spiritum sanctum pru∣dentiùs in Italiaresponsurum esse, quàm antea responderat in Germania? Imò verò, ille tot illis mutationibus non Christum quaerebat, seà suum commodum. Ʋidebat in Germania Imperatorem Sigismundum inimicum suum, nimium & authoritate vale∣re & gratiâ. Et patres illos, qui Basileam conuenerant, si ex illis duris & asperis regionibus migrassent in Italiam (vt arbores, cùm transplantantur) fieri posse mitiores. Nam (ô Deum immortalem!) non id nunc agitur, aut quaeritur in Concilijs; aut vt ve∣ritas inueniatur, aut vt mendacia refutentur. Hoc solum semper fuit proximis istis saeculis studium Pontificum in Concilijs, vt Tyrannis Romana, constitueretur: vt Bella susciperentur: vt Principes Christiani inter se committerentur: vt pe∣cunia colligeretur, modò in terram sanctam, modò in fabricam Petri, modò in ne∣scio quos vsus, seu veriùs abusus alios: quae tota in paucos quosdam ventres, in luxum & libidinem conijceretur. Atque haec vnica fuit aliquot iam saecula ratio Concilio∣rum. Nam de erroribus & abusibus, quasi nulli essent, nihil vnquam agi po∣tuit. 16 Petrus Alliacensis in Constantiensi Concilio multùm questus est de auaritia, & insolentiâ curiae Romanae. At quid promouit? quae vnquam pars illorum auari∣tiae aut insolentiae Concilij authoritate repressa est? Idem ait festos dies, & otioso∣rum Monachorum greges sibi videri minuendos: & alius quispiam (in opere quodam, quod appellatur tripartitum, & adiunctum est ad Concilium Lateranum) totus, inquit, ferè mundus obloquitur, & scandalizatur de tanta multitudine religiosorum paupe∣rum. Et patres in Concilio Lateranensi, Firmiter, inquiunt, praecipimus, ne quis de caetero nouam religionem inueniat. Ex eo tempore quid de festis diebus factum sit, nescio: probabile tamen est, nihil esse imminutum: At Monacho∣rum ordines aucti etiam sunt in infinitum. Nam à proximis Pontificibus additi sunt Iesuitae, Cappuchini, Theatini: quasi pigrorum ventrum nondum etiam esset satis. Iohannes Gerson, Cancellarius Parisiensis, in Concilio Constantiensi obtulit patribus septuaginta quinque abusus in Ecclesia Romana, quos vehementer cupe∣ret emendatos. At ex tanto numero, quem illi vnum abusum vnquam sustulerunt? Ioannes Picus Mirandula scribit ad Leonem Papam, vt minuat inanes ceremo∣nias, & coerceat luxum sacerdotum. Sederunt postea Episcopi magna frequen∣tia, & magna expectatione in Concilio Laterano. At quam vnam ceremoniam im∣minuerunt, in quo vno sacerdote luxum & nequitiam damnauerunt? Mantuanus poëta queritur nominatim de moribus Ecclesiae Romanae: Bernardus Abbas ita scribit ad Eugenium Papam: Aula tua recipit bonos, non facit; mali ibi pro∣ficiunt, boni deficiunt. Et de miserabili statu Ecclesiae, qui tum erat; A planta, inquit, pedis vsque ad verticem capitis non est in ea sanitas. Et rursus, Vbi est, inquit, qui praedicet annum acceptabilem Domini? Non custodiunt, in∣quit, hoc tempore sponsam CHRISTI, sed perdunt: non pascunt gregem Domini, sed mactant, & deuorant. Adrianus Papa sextus, cum Legatum mit∣teret in Germaniam, ingenuè, & verè fassus est corruptissimum esse statum vni∣uersicleri. Omnes, inquit, nos Praelati Ecclesiastici declinauimus, vnusquis∣que in viam suam, nec est iam qui faciat bonum, non est vsque ad vnum. Albertus Pighius fatetur in ipsa Missa, quam illi sacrosanctam esse volunt, & in qua vna Cardinem religionis Christianae constituunt, abusus & errores inueniri. Quid plura? mitto alios testes; sunt enim infiniti. Habita sunt postea Concilia com∣plura, conuocati sunt Episcopi, Synodus Basiliensis indicta est nominatim, vti illi tum prae se ferebant, de reformatione totius Cleri: At ex eo tempore errores vbique aucti sunt, vitia etiam sacerdotum conduplicata sunt. 17 Cardinales à Paulo Papa tertio delecti ad considerandum statum Ecclesiae, renun∣tiarunt, multa esse in ea, & praesertim in Episcoporum & Clericorum mori∣bus vitiosa. Episcopos otiosos esse, non docere populum, non pascere gre∣gem, non curare Vineam: versari in aulis Principum, abesse domo: Car∣dinalibus Episcopatus, modo ternos, modò quaternos commendari, idque magno cum Ecclesiae detrimento fieri: illa enim officia non esse (vti loquun∣tur) compatibilia. Conuentuales ordines prorsus ex Ecclesia tollendos esse. Posteahabitum est Concilium Tridenti: sed an Episcopi coeperunt ex eo tempore pasce∣regregem? an desierunt, aut abesse domo, aut versari in aulis Principum? an Car∣dinales desierunt esse Episcopi? aut prospectum est, ne quid Ecclesia ex ea re detrimen∣ti caperet? an imminuti sunt ordines conuentuales? an religio apud eos est emendatior? quid ergo necesse fuit tot Episcopos tam procul conuocari, aut de emendanda Ecclesiatot annos frustra deliberari? hoc scilicet illud est, Pharisaeos restituere velle Templum Dei. 18 Fatentur errores & abusus: conuocant Concilia, simulant studium religionis & pietatis, pollicentur operam & industriam, quicquid collapsum est id omne se velle vnà nobiscum instaurare; sic scilicet, vt olim hostes populi Dei dicebant, se velle vnà cum Nehemia aedificare Templum Domini. Non enim illi id quaerebant, vt Templum Domini aedificarent, sed vt quàm maximè possent aedificationem impedirent. Redire vo∣lunt nobiscum in gratiam, sed ita, vt olim Naas tyrannus cum Iudaeis Iabensibus, non alia lege, quàm vt sinamus nobis exculpi dextros oculos: hoc est, vt verbum Dei, & Euangelium salutis nostrae nobis eripi patiamur. 19 An enim illis curae est religio: an illi curant Ecclesiam Dei; quibus nec Dei vin∣dicta, nec salus populi, nec vlla pars officij sui vnquam curae fuit? Pan, inquiunt, curet oues, ipsi interim belligerantur, venantur, obsonantur: vt ne quid dicam foedius. O Deum immortalem! quis istos putet vnquam de Ecclesia Dei, aut de religione cogita∣re! quando isti, aut quos errores vnquam tollent? quam lucem nobis restituent? quic∣quid dicas, etiamsi solem ipsum geras in manibus, tamen videre nolunt: manifestos er∣rores, quantum possunt, excusant, pingunt, comunt, vt olim Symmachus, aut Por∣phyrius errores, & ineptias Ethnicorum: omninóque id agunt, ne populum Dei in fraudem induxisse, néue quid ipsi vnquam errasse videantur. Aut si quid in animum inducunt emendare, quod aut nunquam, aut valdè rarò & perparcè faciunt; vt olim Alexandrum Imperatorem Romanum, quum non prorsus abhorreret à religione Chri∣stiana, aiunt, in eodem Sacrario, & Christum coluisse, & Orpheum: vtque ve∣teres olim Samaritani vnà & veri Dei cultum retinuerunt, & cultum Idolorum: ita illi, ea lege recipere volunt partem fortè aliquam Euangelij, vt vnà superstitiones & aniles errores admittant: ita recipiunt vera, vt falsa retineant: ita probant nostra, vt sua non improbent. Atque ita non tollunt abusus, sed colorant: & veteres colum∣nas nouo tantùm tectorio inducunt. 20 Ad hunc modum ab istis Ecclesia Dei emendatur, sic conuentus & Concilia celebrantur: veritati non seruitur, sed affectibus. Melior pars à maiori superatur. Pulchrum quidem & gloriosum est nomen ipsum Concilij generalis: sed ex pulchro ca∣lice saepe venenum propinatur. Non enim satis est Episcopos aliquot & Abbates v∣num in locum conuenisse: non in mitrâ, aut purpurâ sita est vis Concilij, nec quicquid Concilium decreuit, statim habendum est pro oraculo. Concilium erat, de quo Propheta Esaias scribit; Vae filijs defectoribus, dicit Dominus, qui cogunt Concilium, & non ex me: &, in te, inquit, Concilium, & dissipabitur. Concilium erat, de quo Propheta Dauid ita loquitur; Excitati sunt Reges terrae, & Principes conuenerunt in vnum aduersus Dominum, & aduersus Christum eius. Con∣cilium erat, quod filium Dei Iesum Christum damnauit ad crucem. Concilium erat, quod Carthagini celebratum est sub Cypriano, in quo decretum est, baptizatos ab hae∣reticis, quum redissent ad Ecclesiam, esse rebaptizandos: quem errorem oportuit po∣stea tot Concilijs, & patrum scriptis reuocari. Et quid multis opus est? Concilium Ephesinum secundum apertè fecit pro Eutycbete; humanam in Christo naturam conuer∣sam esse in diuinitatem: Concilium Nicenum secundum decreuit manifestam Idolo∣latriam de adoratione statuarum: Concilium Basiliense, vt Albertus Pighius ait, decreuit contra omnem antiquitatem, contra naturam, contra rationem, contra verbum Dei. Concilium Ariminense impiè decreuit pro Arrianis, Chri∣stum non esse Deum. Alia Concilia deinceps multa, Smyrnense, Aërium, Seleucianum, Syrmianum, & Homousianos condemnauerunt, & Ariminensis Concilij impietati sub∣scripserunt. Quid quaeris? ipsum etiam Concilium Chalcedonense, quod vnum erat ex illis quatuor, quae Gregorius cum quatuor Euangelijs comparauit, Leo Papa non du∣bitauit accusare temeritatis. 21 Itaque videmus, Concilia Concilijs saepe contraria extitisse: vtque Leo Pontifex acta sustulit Adriani, Stephanus Formosi, Ioannes Stephani: vt{que} Sabinianus Papa, Omnia scripta Gregorij Papae, vt peruersa & impia iussit comburi: ita videmus Concilium posterius saepe omnia superioris Concilij decreta sustulisse. Carthaginense Concilium decreuit, ne Romanus Episcopus appellaretur, aut summus sacerdos, aut princeps sacerdotum, aut aliud quippiam simile. At postera Concilia, illum non tantum summum sacerdotem, sed etiam summum Pontificem, & caput vniuer∣salis Ecclesiae appellauerunt. Eliberinum Conciliū decreuit, ne quid, quod colitur ius fásque esset, vt in templorum parietibus pingeretur. Concilium Constantino∣politanum decreuit, imagines non esse ferendas in Templis Christianorum. Contrà, Concilium Nicenum secundum, imagines in templis non tantum ponendas esse censuit, sed etiam adorandas. Lateranense Concilium sub Iulio Papasecundo, non alia causa indictum est, quam vt Pisani Concilij decreta rescinderet. Ita Episco∣pi saepè posteriores prioribus aduersantur, & Concilia alia aliorum luminibus ob∣struunt. Isti enim ne suis quidem Concilijs teneri volunt, nisi quantum placet, quan∣tumque commodum est, & facit . Basiliensè Concilium decreuit, Concili∣um Episcoporum esse supra Papam. At Concilium Lateranense sub Leone de∣creuit, Papam esse supra Concilium. Papa verò non solùm ita se gerit, sed etiam si quis contra sentiat, eum habere iubet pro haeretico. Atqui omnes Episcopi & Abbates in Concilio Basiliensi, si quis, inquiunt, istis veritatibus sese opponit, pro haeretico habendus est. Obsecrote, quid tu hîc facias? quicquid dicas aut sentias, vel Papa te, vel Concilium habebit pro haeretico. Omnes autem Papae, ali∣quot iam saeculis, sese istis Basiliensis Concilij veritatibus opposuerunt: ergo iudicio Basiliensis Concilij, aliquot iam saecula omnes Papae fuerunt haeretici. Idem Concilium omnibus suffragijs summouit Papam Eugenium, hominem Simoniacum, & schisma∣ticum, & illi successorem dedit Amideum. At Eugenius Papa Concilij decretum floc∣ci fecit, et quamuis maximè esset Simoniacus & Schismaticus, tamen non dèfijt esse suc∣cessor Petri, & Ʋicarius Christi, & caput vniuersae Ecclesiae Dei: & inuitis om∣nibus dignitatem prior em retinebat, vtque anteasolitus fuerat, in ceruicibus hominum nobilium sublimis magnificè ferebatur. Amideus autem homo simplex, quasi ex equo delapsus humi pedibus ambulabat, satisque si tus esse videbatur, quòd de Papa factus esset Cardinalis. Concilium proximum Tridentinunt dixit, vt Episcopi doce∣rent populum, neus quisquam vnus d o, plur d sacerdotia haberet eodem tempore: isti contra edictum Concilij sui cumulant sacerdotia, nibil docent. Ita scribunt leges, quibus ipsi teneri nolint, nisi quum lubet. Tantis semper secerunt Concilia, & decreta sua. 22 Nunc verò quid est, meliorem: qua enim gratia, qua expectatione, qua spe venitur in Concilium? Hoc enim tantum recum cogila, quinam tandem homines illi sint, quorum side, doctrina, iudicio, moles totius Concilij & omnium istarum quaestionum disceptatio, & summa rerum debeat? Abbates quidem appellantur, & Episcopi, graues personae, & pulchra nomina: vt{que} existi∣matur, magni instar momenti in administranda Ecclesia Dei. At si illis nomina tan∣tùm ea, & personam, & vestem tollas, nihil habent aliud nec Abbatis, nec Episcopi simile. Non enim sunt ministri Christi, non dispensatores mysteriorum Dei, non incum∣bunt lectioni, non docent Euangelium, non pascunt gregem, non colunt terram, non plantant vineam, non accendunt ignem, non portant arcam Domini, non obeunt le∣gationem pro Christo; non vigilant, non faciunt opus Euangelistae, non implent mini∣sterium suum: implicant se negotijs secularibus: abscondunt thesaurum Domini sui, auferunt Claues regni Dei; non ingrediuntur ipsi, nec alios ingredi patiuntur, pulsant conseruos suos, pascunt seipsos, gregem non pascunt: dormiunt, stertunt, conuiuan∣tur, luxuriantur: nubes sine aqua, stellae sine luce, canes muti, ventres pigri: vtque Bernardus ait, non Prelati, sed Pilati, non Doctores, sed Seductores, non Pa∣stores sed impostores, serui, inquit, Christi, seruiunt Antichristo, Istis solis Pontifices volunt locum esse, & suffragandi potestatem in Concilio: in istorum iudi∣cio ac potestate versari volunt curam, & procurationem vniuersae Ecclesiae Chri∣sti: istos nunc solos Pius Papa delegit ad spem suam. At quos (ô Deus bone,) homi∣nes, quales viros? quanquam, vt ipsi quidem putant, ridiculum est, velle hoc quaerere. Quàm enim docti, quámque pij sint, quid velint, quid sentiant, inquiunt, nihil re∣fert. Satis videlicet est, si sedere possint in mula, & magna pompa, & strepitu vehi per publicum, & venire in Concilium, & nihil dicere. Si mihi fortè non credis, ac me potiùs putas animi causâ ista fingere: audi ergo iudicium Honorarium, quid en dere sa∣crosancta facultas, & Sorbona tota decreuerit. Quod magistri, inquiunt, nostri, dicunt de legitima congregatione, notandum est ad hoc, vt Concilium legiti∣mè congregetur, sufficere quòd solemnitas, & forma iuris solemniter sit seruata. Quia si quis trahere vellet hoc in disputationem, vtrum Prelati, qui ibi sedent, habeant rectam intentionem, & vtrum sint docti, & vtrum habe∣ant scientiam sacrarun literarum, & animum obediendi sanae doctrinae, esset processus in infinitum. Isti videlicet, qui tanquam Mercuriales statuae muti sede∣ant, & quid fit religio prorsus nesciant, de vniuersa religione rectè & commodè respon∣debunt, & quicquid dicunt, errare non queunt. 23 Istos omnes Pontifex habet, non tantum errore & ignorantia, sed etiam iu∣reiurando, & religione obstrictos sibi: vt etiamsi rectè sentiant, tamen nisi peri ri esse velint, quod sentiunt pronuntiare, & veritatem palam profiteri, & praese serre non possint; prorsus, vt vel homine fides fallenda sit, vel Deo. Sic enim omnos in∣rant conceptis verbis. Ego N. Episcopus ab hac hora inantea fidelis ero san∣cto Petro, sancta que Apostolicae Romanae Ecclesiae, Domino Papae N. eiúsque successoribus Canonice intrantibus: Non ero, neque in con∣silio, neque in facto, vt vitam pendat, aut membrum, vel capiatur mala captione. Consilium, quod , aut per iteras, aut per Nuncium mani∣festabit, ad eius damnium nulli pand Papatum Romanae Ecclesiae, & regulas sanctorum patrum , & contra omnes homines▪ sacerdotes Apollinis apertè loqueren∣tur in gratiam Philippi Regis, erant qui facetè dicerent, Pythium caepisse Nos Papae, our non , Conciliorum Gracula id est, tantum dicere, quantum Pa∣pae velit. Prudenter olim Uerres, quem , quum multis criminibus non obscure teneretur, noluisse existimationem & suam committere▪ nisi hominibus bene fidis de grege, & cohertesua. Multo autem prudentius Pontifices, qui illos sibi i dices volunt, quos sciunt, nec venlle, quia turati sunt, quamuis , posse quicquiam statuere prater voluntatem suam. Collocant illi quidem in medio sacrae Biblia, quae specianteminùs, non legunt, quasi contra orum praescriptum nihil fa∣cturi. Re autem vera secum ipsi a ferunt praeiudicatam sententiam: nec attendunt quid Christus dieat, neo statuunt quicquam, nisi quod lubet. 24 Itaque libertai illa; quam oportuit esse in omnibus consultationibus, maxime verò de rebus sacris, quo{que} maxime conuenit Spiritus sancto, & modestie hominum Chri∣stianorum, prorsusism fr mrfio sublata est. Paulis ait, si alteri assidenti reuela∣tum 1. Cor. 14. 30. fuerit, prior aceat: isti vero comprehendi iubent, & in carcerem detrudi, & ig∣nilus mandari, si quicquam contrà multiat▪ Testis adhuc est crudelis interitus duorum sanctissimorum hominum, & fortistimorum virorum, Iohannis Hus, & Hie∣ronymi Pragen is; quos illi duos contra sidem publicam inter ecerunt, & fidem Deo, hominibusque . Sic impius propheta Zedechia , cum aptasset sibi corn impegit Micheae Prophētae Domini: & mene, inquit, reliquit Spi∣ritus Domini, & accessit ad Ionque nunc exclusis omnibus, soli regnant in Con∣cilijs, & soli obtinent suffragia, atque ita scribunt, & promalgant leges, vt Ephe∣sij, illi) hic viuat prudentior, nisi malit exul, at{que} extor∣ris viuere. Nostrorum enim isti hominum prorsus nominèm audire volunt. Ante 10. annos Concilio proximò Legati Principunt Germaniae▪ & liberar ∣tum, qui câcusâ , vt audirentur, ab omni colloqu & conuen . Episcopi , & Abbatos respondebant, nolle liberum causae cognitionem, neo ve t controuersias disceptari ex verbi Dei: nost autem homines nullo modo ess udiendos; nisi vellent recantare▪ quod si notent non alia lege venturos esse in Concillunt, quâm ut audirent suam. Num Iulius; in Brent illo su , quo , publice , ut aut sententiam, aut cuasâ in auditâ condemnarentur pro . pius antem Papa quartus is qui nunc instituit Concilium, reuocare▪ omnes cos, qui ab Ecclesiae Romanae author ∣cesserunt▪ id est, maximā partem orbis Christiani, neo visos vnquam, nec auditos iam an∣tea praeiudicio prohiereticis haberi iussit. Omnino, aiunt taque semper in omni sermo∣ne tactare solent, rectè habere sua omnia: s tantillum de doctri∣na & religione sua mutatum ▪ Albertus▪ Ecclesiae Romanae ait, portissimae quidem scripture credendum esse. Hoc est Ecclesiam in integram velle restituere▪ hoc est veritatem velle ▪ hac illa est libertas Con∣ciliorum, & moderatio . 25 omnia sint iniquissima & à ratione Conciliorum, & ab hominum modestorum deliberatione alientissim : tamen multo est , quòd de Pontificis Romani ambitione ac tyrann conqueratur, & de instaur, Dei , & nihil ag , nisi ide in ordinem loco haberi iubet, quo voces ipsius Petri: qui si mille animas abducat secum ad in∣feros, tamen negatse eâ ca â posse à quoquam reprehendi: qui ait, se ex iniustitia fa∣cere posse iustitiam: Quem Camotensis ait corrupisse scripturas, vt haberet pleni∣tudinem potestatis. Quid plura? quem ipsius contubernales & satellites, Ioachimus Abbas, Petrarcha, Marsilius Patauinus, Laurentius Valla, Hieronymus Sauanoro∣la non ambigue pronunciarunt esse Antichristum. Huius vnius iudicio ac voluntati omnia subijciunt, vt idem reus sit, idémque iudex: vt accusatores ex inferiori lo∣co audiantur, reus autemsedeat sublimis protribunalibus, & ipse de se pronuntiet. Has enim leges tam aequas, támque rationi consentientes scripsit nobis Papa Iulius. Nullum, inquit, ratum Concilium est, aut erit vnquam, quod Romanae Ec∣clesiae non fuerit authoritate fulcitum. Bonifacius octauus, omnem, ait, crea∣turam oportere subiectam esse Ecclesiae Romanae, idque de necessitate salu∣tis. Et Palchalis Papa, quasi inquit, Romanae Ecclesiae legem Concilia vlla praefixerint, cum omnia Concilia per Romanae Ecclesiae authoritatem, & facta sint, & robur acceperint, & in eorum statutis Romani Pontificis au∣thoritas patenter excipiatur. Et alius quispiam, quod Papa, inquit, approbat vel reprobat, nos approbare, vel reprobare debemus: Et quod Papa appro∣bat, non licet alij improbare. Et nescio quis parasitus, amissopudore, Etiamsi to∣tus mundus sententiet in aliquo contra Papam, tamen videtur quòd standum sir sententiae Papae. Et alius quispiam non minùs impudentèr; Sacrilegij, inquit, instar esset, disputare de facto Papae, qui tametsi non sit bonus, tamen sem∣per presumitur esse bonus. Et alius etiam impudentiùs, Papa, inquit, habet ce∣leste arbitrium: ergo in illis quoe vult, est illi pro ratione voluntas: nec est qui dicat illi curitafacis? Ʋtque alia complura, quae buc adduci possunt, sunt enim infinita, relinquam, & finem aliquando faciam; Innocentius Papa nonus, omnium impudentissime, Neque ab Augusto, inquit, neque à Regibus, neque ab vni∣uerso Clero, ne{que} à toto populo iudex rudicabitur. O Deum immortalem quan∣tiaum abest, vt hoc etiam dicant: Ascendam super Aquilonem, & ero similis altissimo? Si ista verasunt omnia, & Papae nihil mentui sunt, quid opus est Con∣cilio? Aut si Concilium fincerum & liberum habere volunt, vollantur ista omnia, vt improba & superba mendacia: nec tantum ex vsu & foro, verum etiam ex libris omnibus auferantur, ne summarerum in vnius hominis, eiúsque multis iustissimis de causis suspecti voluntate, ac libidine relinquatur. Atqui Pontifices aiunt, se er∣rare non posse, & ad praescriptumsuum exigendum esse verbum Dei. atque etiam antequam adeant ad dignitatem Pontificiam, iurantur in fidem recentium quo∣rundam Conciliorum quibus omnia foedum in modum sunt depranata, & sanctè pro∣mittunt se nolle quicquam immutari. Quare quid mirum est, si in Concilijs ni∣hil proficitur, si errores & abusus non tolluntur, si Legate Principum frustra tam pro∣cul ex omnibus terris conuocantur? Tamen audio esse quosdam hoc tempore homines, non malos, sed paxùm, quid dicans, attendentes: qui quamuis arrogantiam in Pontifi∣ce, & fastum Porsicum, & Epicur eum contemptum religionis damnent, tamen eius authoritatem saluam & incolumem esse vesint: Et quamijis cum interdum fateantur esse Antichristum, tamen eundem, post quam semel ascendit inillam sedem, non du∣bitent esse Vniuersalem Episcopum, & caput vniuersae Ecclesic Christi. Atque bîc itatriumphant, & sibi placent, ne si Spiritus sanctus affixus esset ad Molem, ∣ni. At non locus sanctificat hominem, inquiunt, sed homo locum. Et Hiero∣nymus, quemadmodum citatur ab ipsis Non filij, inquit, sanctorum sunt, qui te∣nent loca sanctorum: sed qui imitantur facta illorum. Alioqui CHRISTVS ait, in Cathedra Mosis sedisse scribas, & Phariseos: authoritatem autem il∣lorum monet tantisper esse agnoscendam, si respondeant ex verbo Dei. Quid aliud, inquit Augustinus, dixit Christus, nisi per mercenarios vocem pastoris audite? sedendo enim in Cathedra legem Dei docent; ergo per illos docet Deus. Sua verò si illi docerevelint, nolite audire, nolite facere. Paulus e∣tiam ait, Antichristum, hominem illum peccati sessurum esse in loco sancto. I∣taque Hieronymus rectè monet, Attendis, inquit Petrum, sed & Iudam conside∣ra: Stephanum suscipis, sed & Nicholaum respice. Non facit Ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum; Haec Hieronymus. Et certè aiunt Marcellinum Papam sacrificasse Idolis, Liberium Papam fuisse Arrianum: Ioannem Papam 22. impiè sensisse de immortalitate animarum: Ioannem Papam 8. fuisse foemi∣nam, & in Papatu incesta libidinecum adulteris concubuisse, & in lustranda ciuitate, in ipsa pompa, atque in oculis Episcoporum & Cardinalium pepe∣risse: Et Liranus ait, multos Pontifices Romanos à fide Christi defecisse. Qua∣re non nimiùm fidendum er at locis & successionibus, & inanibus titulis dignitatum. Impius Nero successit Metello pio. Annas & Caiphas successerunt Aaroni; & Ido∣lum saepe successit in locum Dei. 26 Sed quaenam, obsecro, est illa tanta vis & authoritas de qua istiitainsolenter glo∣riantur? aut vnde ad eos delata est? de coelo, an ex hominibus? Christus, inquiunt, ait Petro, super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: his verbis authori∣tatem Pontificiam confirmari. Ecclesiam enim Christi in Petro, tanquam in fundamento collocari. Atqui Christus his verbis nihil Petro dedit seorsim à caeteris Apostolis. Neque aut Pontificis mentionem vllam facit, aut vrbis Rome. Christus illa est petra, Christus est illud fundamentum. Nemo, inquit Paulus, potest aliud fundamentum ponere, quàm quod iam antea positumest, quod est Christus Iesus. 27 Et Augustinus, super hanc Petram, inquit; aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: su∣per hanc, inquit; intelligitur, quam confessus est Petrus, dicens, tu es Chri∣stus filius Dei viui. Non enim, inquit, dictum est, Tu es petra, sed tu es Pe∣trus; petra autem erat Christus. Et Diuus Basilius, super hanc Petram, hoc est, Tract. 1. in Matth. inquit, super hanc fidem aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Et antiquissimus pater Origines, Petra, inquit, est quisque discipulus Christi, ex quo biberunt de spiri∣tuali consequente Petra: Et super talem petram cōstruitur omnis Ecclesiasti∣ca doctrina. Quod si super vnum illum Petrum tantum existimas aedificari totam Ecclesiam, quid dicturus es de Ioanne filio Tonitrui, & Apostolorum vnoquoque? alio∣qui enim audebimus dicere, quòd aduersus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae sint portae in∣ferorum, aduersus caeteros Apostolos ac praefectos sint praeualiturae? ac non potiùs in omnibus & singulis eorum, de quibus dictum est, sit illud, quod dictum est, & portae inferotum non praeualebunt aduersus eam: & illud, super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiā¦meam? an verò soli Petro dantur à Christo claues regni Coelorum, nec alius beatorum quisquam eas accepturus est? quod si hoc dictum, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum, caeteris quo{que} commune est, cur non simul omnia & quaeprius dicta sunt, & quae sequuntur, ve∣li t ad Petrum dicta sunt omnium communia? Vna, inquit Helarius, est foelix fidei petra, quam ore suo Petrus confessus est. Et rursus, Super hanc, inquit, confessionem Petri aedificata est Ecclesia. Et non ita multò post, Haec inquit, fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est. Ad hunc modum alij etiam patres. Hieronymus, Cyrillus, Beda Ecclesiam exaedi∣ficatam aiunt, non in Petro, sed in fide Petri, hoc est, in Christo Iesu filio Dei, quem Petrus coelesti instinctu professus fuerat. Petrus, inquit Augustinus, à petra dictus est; non petra à Petro. Nec ego me, inquit, aedificabo super te, sed te aedificabo super me. Imò etiam Nicolaus Liranus, etsi non semper bonus author, scis enim in quae tempora inciderit eius aetas, tamen hoc rectè vidit, super hanc, inquit, petram, id est, super Christum. Ex quo non potest Ecclesia constare in aliquo homine, ratione potestatis, vel dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, quia multi Papae inuenti sunt Apostatae. 28 Quâ ergò in re sit a est ista authoritas Pontificia? In docendo? at nihil docent. In ministrando sacramenta? at non ministrant. In pascendo? at nihil pascunt. Atqui haec est illa potestas, quam Christus contulit in Apostolos. Ite, inquit, in vniuersum mundum, & praedicate Euangelium: &, posthac eritis piscatores hominum: &, sicut me mifit viuens Pater, ita ego mitto vos. Isti verò, quò eunt? quid docent? quid praedi∣cant? quid piscantur? vnde eunt? à quo mittuntur? Non est ista authoritas Apo∣stolica, sed superba & intolerabilis dominatio, per vim & tyrannidem vsurpata. Nemo nostrum, inquit Cyprianus, Episcopumse Episcoporum dicit, aut tyrannico ter∣rore collegas ad obsequendi necessitatem compellit; quando habeat omnis Episcopus prolicentia libertatis & potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam iudicari ab altero non possit, quum nec ipse possit, alterum iudicare. Et hoc, inquit, erant vtique caeteri Apostoli, quodfuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti & honoris, & potestatis. Et Di∣uus Hieronymus; Maior, inquit, est authoritas orbis, quam vrbis. Quid mihi profers vnius vrbis consuetudinem? quid paucitatem, de qua ortum est supercilium, in leges Ecclesiae vendicas? vbicunque fuerit episcopus, siue Romae, siue Eugubij, fiue Con∣stantinopoli, siue Rhegij, eiusdem est meriti, & eiusdem sacerdotij. Potentia diui∣tiarum, & paupertatis humilitas, superiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Et Gregorius, Petrus, inquit, praecipuum in corpore membrum, Ioannes, Andreas, Iaco∣bus particularium plebium capita: omnes tamen sub vno capite membra Ecclesiae sunt. Imò sancti ante legem, sancti sub lege, sancti in gratia, & omnes perficientes corpus Domini in membris sunt constituti, & nemo se vnquam vniuersalem dici voluit. 29 Haec illa est potestas, quam bodiè quidam ita strenuè defendunt, & quicquid de Pontificis vel vita, vel religione sentiant, tamen illam sacrosanctam & integram esse volunt, quasi sine ea Ecclesia Dei incolumis esse non possit: aut nisi Papa velit & iubeat, Concilium non sit Concilium; & si totus mundus contra sentiat, nihil sentiat. Quare cum videas haec omnia iniquissimè esse comparata, nihil hodiè in Concilijs sincerè & verè fieri, mirari non debes, si nostri homines, domi manere malint, quàm tam pro∣cul frustraproficisci, vbi & operam lusuri sint, & causam perdituri. 30 Sed iniussu Pontificis, inquies, & Concilij, nefas erat in religione voluisse quic∣quam immutare. Imò verò, Pontifices ipsi vniuersum prope statum primitiuae Ec∣clesiae sine vllo Concilio mutauerunt. Est quidem ista speciosa & pulchra oratio, sed erroribus foedissimis praetexitur. Morari enim tantùm volunt expectatione animos hominum; vt mor â ac taedio hebescere incipiant, & ad extremum spem abijciant. Quid enim? an dum Papa conuocet Concilium, & Abbates atque Episcopi domum redeant, volunt interea populum Dei falli, errare, decipi, circumfundi erroribus & ignoratione Dei, & abduci ad interitum sempiternum? non licet cuiquam nostrum credere in Chri∣stum, profiteri Euangelium, ritè & verè Deum colere, sugere superstitiones et cultus idolorum, nisi isti velint? miserabilis verò esset status Ecclesiae Dei, si in tot erroribus tam latè diffusis, tam crassis, tam coecis, tam foedis, tam perspicuis, et manifestis, vt eos ne aduersarij quidem nostri negare queant, nihil possit efsici sine concursu orbis ter∣rarum, et Concilio generali, eius praesertim, cuius et expectatio incerta sit, et exitus multo incertior. Quum Persaeolim in Graeciam irrupissent, et coepissent omniapopu∣lari, & Lacedaemonij, quorum virtus inter omnes tum Graecos eminebat, quó que o∣portuit primo quoque tempore procurrere, ad rem gerendam Lunam oportuniorem ex∣pectarum (erat enim ea inis tam inac a Lycurgoauita superstitio, ne proficiscerentur ad pagnam nisi inplenilumo) patriâ intorea dum illi cunctabantur diripi, & incendi po∣tuisset Portcululij inqutunt est in mora. Agitur salus Ecclesiae Dei, diabolusrugit vt Leo, & circuit & quaerit quem deuoret: homines simplices facilè trabuntur in fraudem, & quamuis saepe tanguntur zelo Dei, tamen imprudentes persequutur filium Dei vtqu Nazianzenus ait, Quum putent se pugnare pro Christo, pugnant saepe contra Christum. Episcopi autem, quious oportuit ista esse curae, aut ut inanes laruae om∣nia susque aeque ferunt: aut, ut quod res est dicam, augent etiam errorem & condu∣plicant caliginem. An ergo nos oportuit sedere otiosos, & huiusmodi patrum cognitio∣nem expectare, & manur comprimere, & nihil agere? Imò, inquit Cyprianica, vnus est Episcoputus, cuins a singulis in solidum pars tenetur, & certè pro sua cuique parte Domino redaendaest ratio. Sanguinem illorum, inquit Dominus, de manu tua re∣quiram. Quòd si quis admoueat manum ad stiuam, & respiciat àtergo, & sollicitus sit, quid alij sentiant, & expectet authoritatem Concilij generalis, & interea recondat thesaurum Dominisui, audiet, Serue male, & pexside: tollite illum, & abiicite inte∣nebras exteriores. Sinite, inquit Christus, mortuos sepelire mortuos suos. Tu veni & sequere me, veritas Dei non pendet ab hominibus. In humanis quidem Concilijs pru∣dentis est expectare iudicium & consensum hominum: In rebus autem diuinis vox Dei debet instar esse omnium: quam postquam mens pia semel accepit, statim cedit, & manus dat, non tergiuersatur, aut expectatalios Intelligitenim se non Pontisicis, aut Concilij arbitrio oportere credere, sed voluntati Dei: eius autem voci obtemperandum esse, inuitis omnibus. Propheta Elias Domino iubenti statim obsequutus est, etsi se credebat esse solum. Abrahamus monitu Dei migrauit è Chaldea. Lot egressus est è Sodomis. Tres illi Israelitae publicè ediderunt confessionem religionis suae, et publi∣cè aetestati sunt Idololatriam: nihil expectato generali Concilio. Exite, inquit An∣gelus, de medio eius, et nesitis participes peccatorum eius: néue accipiatis de plagis eius: Non dicit, expectare Synodum Episcoporum. Sic primùm publicata est veritas Dei, sic eadem nunc restituenda est. Sine publico Concilio Apostoli primùm docuerunt E∣uangelium. Sine publico Concilio idem potest postliminio reuocari. Quod si Christus ipse ab mitio, aut eius Apostoli cunctari voluissent, et rem omnem ad futurum Con∣cilium reiecissent, quando tandem exiuisset sonus illorum in omnem terram? quomodo vim pertulisset regnum coelorum, aut violenti in illud inuasissent? vbi nunc esset Euan∣gelium? vbi nunc esset Ecclesia Dei? Nos quidem non formidamus, aut fugimus, imò multo potiùs optamus et cupimus Concilium: modò liberum, modò ingenuum, modò Christianum, modò ad Apostolorum exemplar conueniatur, modò Abbates et Episcopi à religione iurisiurandi, quo nunc Romanis Pontificibus obstricti sunt, eximantur. mo∣dò vniuersa illa coniur atio dissoluatur: modò nostr arum partium homines modestè, ac li∣berè audiantur: modò ne inauditi condemnentur: modò ne quic quid agatur, vnus quis∣piam infirmare et rescindere possit omnia. At cum id his moribus et temporibus impe∣trari non posse, et omnia absurda, inepta, ridicula, superstitiosa, impia, tantùm quòd semel recepta essent, consuetudinis causâ pugnacissimè defendi videremus, proprium esse iudicauimus, vt municipali Concilio Ecclesijs nostris prospiceremus. 31 Scimus enim spiritum Dei nec lecis allignum esse, nec numeris hominum. Dic, in∣quit Christus, Ecclesiae: non sane Ʋniuersae, quae diffanditur in totum terrarum or∣bem, sed particulari, quae possit vnd aliquem in locum conuenire. Vbicunque, inquit, erunt duo, aut tres congregati in nomine meo, ibi sum ego in medio illorum. Sic Paulus, vt instauraret Ecclesias Corintbiorum & Galatarum, non iussit ex∣pectare generale Concilium: ad ipsos scripsit, vt quicquid esset erroris aut , id resecarent. Sic olim, cum Eoi copi dormirent atque aliud agerent, aut etiam contaminarent & polluerent templum Dei, temper Deus extraordinariâ ratione lios excitauit, magno viros spiritu, atque animo qui omnia in integrum restiterent. 32 Nos vero nhil temerè, nihil nisi summa cum ratione fecimus, nihil nisi quod videba is & semper licuisse fieri, & à sanctis patribus saepe sine vlla reprehensione fi e factum. Itaque convocatis Episcopis frequenti Synodo, communi consensu omnium ordinum, Ecclesiae sordes, quas vel incuria hominum, vel malitia infuderat, tanquam Augiae stabulum repurgavimus, & quantum assequi maximè potuimus, om∣nis ad pristinum nitotem, ad postolicorum temporum, & primitivae Ecclesiae similitudi∣nem rev c uimu. Idque & potuimus rectè facere, & quia potuimus fidenter secimus. 33 Libet hic audire, quia Gregorius Papa. 1. hac de re scripserit, quanquam magis libet, quò ille de Anglicarum Ecclesiarum institutione ad Anglorum Episcopum Augu∣stinum ea scripserit. Hortatur autem, non vt ad Concilium referat, sed vt ipse pro sua pradentia id instituat, quo videat pietatem maximè posse promoueri. Nouit, inquit, fraternitas tua Romanae Ecclesiae consuetudinem, in qua se meminit esse nutritum. Sed mihi placet, vt siue in Romana, siue Gallicorum, siue qualibet Ecclesia invenisti quod plus omnipotenti Deo possit placere, eligas solicitè, & in Anglorum Ecclesiam, quae adhuc in fide noua est, & inconstitutione, praecipua, quae de multis Ecclesus colligere poteris, infundas. Non enim pro locis res, sed pro rebus loca amanda sunt. 34 Ad eundem modum scribunt Patres in Concilio Constantinopolitano ad Damasum Episcopum vrbis Romae, & reliq os Episcopos Occidentis. De Cura, inquiunt, ad∣ministrationis singularum Ecclesiarum scitis veterem sanctionem & defini∣tionem Nicaenorum patrum semper invaluisse, vt in vnaquaque prouincia cultores, assumptis etiam, sivideatur, finitimis, conferant Ecclesiasticos hono∣res ijs, quo vtiliter gesturos esse confidunt. Et Aphricani Episcopi ad Cele∣stinum Romanum: Praesbyterorum, inquiunt, & sequentium. Clericorum im∣proba refugia, sicut te dignum est, repellat sanctitas tua. Quia & nulla patrum definitione hoc Ecclesiae denegatum est Aphricanae: & decreta Ni∣caena, siue inferioris gradus Clericos, siue ipsos Episcopos suis Metropolitanis apertissime commiserunt Prudentissimè enim iustissiméque quaeque negotia in suis locis, vbi orta sunt, esse finienda: nec vnicuique prouinciae grati∣am sancti spiritus defuturam. Quae aequitas à Christi sacerdotibus & pru∣denter videatur, & constanter retineatur. 35 Multo verò melius, & ad hanc rem, qua de nunc agimus, accommodatius E∣leutherius Episcopus Romanusad Lucium Regem Britanniae: Petiistis, inquit, à no∣bis leges Romanas, & Caesaris vobis transmitti, quibus in regno Britanniae vti voluistis. Leges Romanas, & Caesaris semper possumus reprobare: Legem Dei nequaquam. Suscepistis enim miseratione diuina in regno Britanniae le∣gem & fidem Christi: habetis penes vos in Regno vestro vtranque pagi∣nam. Ex illis Dei gratiâ per concilium regni vestri sume legem, & per illam Dei patientiâ poteritis vestrum Britanniae regnum instituere. Vicarius verò Dei est is in regno illo, iuxta Psalmistam: Domini est terra. Quid multis? Ʋictor Episcopus Romanus habuit Romae Synodum provincialem. Iustinianus Imperator mandat, si quid opus sit, in singulis provincijs habere Syno∣dos: Id ni fiat, se fore vltorem & vindicem. Vnaquae que, inquit Hieronymus, prou in∣cia haber mores & ritus & sensus fa∣cile non possis. La∣odicenum, Ancyranum Antiochenum, Turonense, Carthaginense, Mileuitanum, Toletanum, Burdeg lense; non est Ista noua ratio. Sic regebatur Ecclesia Dei antequam patres ad Nicenum Concilium conuenissent. Non enim statim decurrebatur ad Conciliū generale. Theophil habuit Conuentum provincidlem in Pa aestina: Plamas in Ponto: Irenaeus in Gallia: Bachylus in : Orige in Arabia. Mitto alia Concilia mu∣nicipalia quamplura, quae in Africa, Asia, Graecia, Aegypto, pia, orthodoxa, Christiana, miussu Pontificis Romani Episcopi onim tum pro renata vt quidque incidisset, statim domestico Concilio succurrebant Ecclesiis suis, & modò vicinorū Episcoporum fidem imploravant, modò oper as mutuas tradebant, & si quid opus esset sese vicissim vltro inva∣bant. Nec tantum Episcopi, sed principes etiam indicabant religionis causam ad suum offi∣cium pertinere. Nam vt mittam Nabuchadnezarem, qui capitale sancivit, si quis blasphe∣mâsset Deum Israel: aut Dauidem, Solomonem, Ezechiā, Iosiam, qui partim ex dificarunt, partim repurgarunt templum Dei: Constantinus Imperator sine Concilio suslultt e ltum ido∣lorum, & gravissimis verbis edixit, capitale fore, si quis Idolo sacrificasset. Theodosius Im∣perator solo aequari iussit templa deorum. Iovinianus Imperator, statim vbi esset renuncia∣tus, tulit primam legem dereducendis exulibus Christianis, Iustinianus Imperator dicere so∣lebat Religionem Christi non minùs sibi esse curae, quàm vitam suam. Iosua quum sactus esset Dux populi, statim accepit praecepta ae religione & de colendo Deo. Sunt enim Prin∣cipes nutritij Ecclesiae, & custodes vtriusque tabulae. Nec aliâ magis causâ Deus semper vo∣luit Politias existere, quam vt essent, qui religionem & pietatem incolumem conservarent. 37 Quo magis hodie grauiusque peccant multi Principes, qui appellantur quidem Christiani, qui sedent otiosi, & indulgent voluptatibus, & patienter ferunt impios cultus & contemp∣tum numinis, & haec omnia deuoluunt ad Episcopos, ad i os ipsos, quibus sciunt omnem re∣ligionem esse ludibrio: quasi cura Ecclesiarum & populi Dei ad ipsos nihil pertineat, aut ipsi tanquam pastores quidem sint armentarij, & corporum tantùm, ac non etiam anima um cu∣ram gerant. Non meminerunt se servos esse Dei, eâ causâ delectos, vt seruiant Domino. Eze∣chias rex non priùs ascendit in domum suam, quàm vidisset perpurgatum templum Dei. Et David rex, Non dabo, inquit, somnum oculis meis, nec patiar vt conniveant palpebrae meae, donec inveniam locum Domino, & Tabernaculum Deo Iacob. O si Principes Christiani audire vellent vocem Domini sui. Nunc reges intelligite, inquit Dominus, erudimini, qui iudicatis terrā. Ego, inquit, dixi, dij estis, hoc est, homines divi∣nitùs electi, quibus nomen meum esset curae. Cogita tu, quem ego desterquilinio excitaui, & in summo dignitatis & honoris gradu collocavi, & praefeci populo meo, cum ita studiosè aedi∣fices & ornes domum tuam, quo animo potes contemnere domum meam? Aut quomodo quotidie oras, vt regnum tuum tibi posteris{que} tuis confirmetur? An vt nomen meum semper afficiatur contumetia? vt evangeliam Christi mei extinguatur? vt servi mei meâ causâ, ante oculos tuos, te inspectante, tracidentur? vt tyrannis longiùs grassetur? vt populo meo semper imponatur? vt per te scandalum confirmetur? Ʋae illi per quem venit scandalum; vae etiam illi, per quem confirmatur scandalum. Horres sanguinem corporum, quanto magis horrere debes sanguinem animarum? Memineris quid acciderit Antiocho, Herodi, Iuliano: Ego regnum tuum transferam ad hostem tuum, quia peccasti adversum me: ego muto tempora & vices temporum: abijcioreges & instituo, vt intelligas me alūssimum esse, & vim habere in regno hominum, & illud dare cui volo: ego humilio, & ego exalto, ego glorificantes me, glorisico, & eos, qui me contemnunt, afficio contumeliâ. ANDREAS DVDITHIVS EPI∣SCOPVS QVINQVEECCLESIENSIS in Epistola ad Maximilianum II. Caesarem; vbi sententiam suam refert de Calice Laicis concedendo, & Sacerdotum coniugio. Q Vid profici potuit in eo Concilio, in quo numerarentur, non suis momentis ponderarentur sententiae? si caussa, si ratione pugnandum fuisset, si pauci quidam socij nobis adfuissent, vi∣ceramus, quamuis pauci magnas copias aduersariorum. Sed cum numerus tantùm prodiret in aciem, quo longè inferiores futuri fuissemus, in optima causa victores discedere non potuimus. Singulis nostrum centenos de suis Papa potuit opponere: ac, si centeni parum multi viderentur, repentè mille creare potuit, quos suis laborantibus subsidio mitteret. Itaque videre erat, quotidie famelicos & egentes Episcopos, exmaiori parte barbatulos adolescentes, luxúque perditos Tridentum volitare, conductos ad sententiam secundùm Papae voluntatem dicendam, indoctos illos quidem & stolidos, sed tamen impudentia & au∣dacia vtiles. Hi cum ad veteres adulatores Papae accesserant, tum verò victrix exultabat iniquitas, neque decerni iam quidquam potuit, nisi in eorum sen∣tentiam, qui Papae potentiam, luxúmque defendere, summam religionem arbitrabantur. Erat aliquis vir grauis & eruditus, qui tantam indignitatem ferre not poterat: hic, vt non bonus Catholicus, terrore, minis, ac insecta∣tione à Concilio ad probandum quae nollet, traducebatur. In summa, in eum statum res est adducta, istorum, qui illuc facti institutique venerant, impro∣bitate, non vt iam Episcoporum, sed laruarum, non hominum, sed simula∣crorum, quae neruis mouentur alienis, vt Daedali statuae fuisse perhibentur, Concilium illud videretur. Erant Episcopi illi conductitij plerique, vt vtres, rusticorum musicum instrumentum, quos, vt vocem mittant, inflare necesse est. Nil habuit cum illo conuentu S. Spiritus commereij, omnia erant hu∣mana consilia, quae in immodica, & sanè quàm pudenda Pontificum tuenda do∣minatione consumebantur. Illinc responsa, tanquam Delphis, aut Dodonâ ex∣pectabantur: illinc nimirum Spiritus ille S. quem suis Concilijs prae esse iactant, tabellarij manticis inclusus mittebatur: qui, quod admodum ridicu∣lum est, cum aliquando, vt fit, aquae pluuijs excrescebant, non ante aduolare poterat, quàm inundationes desedissent. Ita fiebat, vt Spiritus non super aquas, vt est in Genesi, sed secus aquas ferretur. O portentosam & singularem de∣mentiam! Ratum nihil esse poterat, quod Episcopi, tanquam plebs, sciscerent, nisi Papa autor fieret. AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF ALL THE Principall matters conteined in this Historie of the Councell of TRENT. A A Buses in the Church of Rome are collected, to be reformed. pag. 83, 84 Acclamations vsed in for∣mer Councels, and imita∣ted in Trent. 813 Adrian 6. is created Pope: is much feared for his seueritie. 19 Is learned in schoole-diuinitie: was borne in Vtrect: resolueth to reforme the Court of Rome. 20 Is disswaded from it. 23 He lamenteth because the Popes cannot doe good, though they desire it neuer so much. 24 Hee confesseth the abuses of the Clergie, not exempting the Apostolique Sea. 25 His death, and prayses, 30 Amante Seruita a Friar of Brescia concurreth in opinion with Luther concerning the Eu∣charist, and is silenced. 522 Ambassadors in Trent hold a consultation how to remedie the proceedings in Councell, and choose the French. Ambassador Lansac to speake for them. 570, 571 The Ambassadours in Trent did not sub∣scribe the Decrees when the Councell was en∣ded. 813 Andreas Vega, chiefe of the Franciscans, dis∣puteth, that the opinions of the Lutherans ought not to be condemned without declaring the opinion of the Catboliques. 179 Hee writeth against Soto. 216 Anna du Bourg is burned in France for reli∣gion; and his constance causeth a great in∣crease of the reformed religion. 419 Annats are spoken against by the Bishop of Nismes. 716 Appeales, and their originall. 334, 335 Apostolique Sea what it is. 321 Arch-Bishop of Collen is cited by the Empe∣rour to cleare himselfe of Lutheranisme ob∣iected gainst him. 124 and by the Pope at the same time. 125 Is sentenced by the Pope; but the sentence is not executed by the Emperor vntill certaine yeares after. 165 He is obeyed by his people. 189 is proceeded against by the Emperour, and Prince Adolphus put in his place. 259 Arch-bishp of Otranto opposeth the Cardinall of Loraine, and hath forty voyces at his com∣mand. 719 is reprehended by the Spanish Ambassadour for making priuate congregations, 759 Arch-bishop of Toledo is in the Inquisition of Spaine; his booke is examined in Councell, and approued. 750 Aremboldus is agent for the Popes sister, to vent her indulgences. 5 Augustan Confession whence it had the name; and when the first liberty to bepro∣fessed publiquely. 63 Auignion rebelleth against the Pope. 429, 430 B BAndo set forth by the Emperor against the Duke of Saxony, and the Landgraue of Hassia. 201 Baptisme discussed. 242 Whether that of Iohn be equall to Christs Baptisme. 243 Battaile of S. Quintin, in which the French King receiued a great ouerthrow. 406 Battaile in France betweene the Protestants and Papists, in which the Prince of Conde was taken prisoner, 647 Causeth much ioy in Trent. 649 Bauaria desireth libertie of religion. 397. 398 The Bauarian Ambassadour maketh a biting Oration in Councell against the corruptions of the Clergie. 527 A tumult is raised in Bauaria for the com∣munion of the Cup; and mariage of Priests. 716 Bessarion was created Cardinall, and wanted not much of being Pope. 75 Beza speaketh in the Colloquie of Poisi. 452, 453, 454. Birague the french Ambassadour commeth to Trent. 714 The Councels answere. 718 Hee parteth from Trent, & goeth to the Em∣perour: His negotiation. 720 Bishop of Bitonto maketh a foolish Oration when the Councell was opened. 132 is in danger to bee excommunicated in Rome for not paying his Pensionaries. 153 Bishops of Ficsole and Chiozza are complained of to the Pope by the Legats for speaking free∣ly in Councell. 167 Bishop of Vintimiglia is the Popes secret mini∣ster in Councell. 517 Bishops imployed in the Councell by Card. Simo∣neta to iest at others. 526 Bishops what qualities they ought to haue. 249 261. By what law Bishops are instituted, is not per∣mitted to be disputed in Councell. 589 Whether their degree be an order, 591 How they are superiour to Priests. 595. 596 Whether their institution be de iure diuino, or Pontificio 596, 597, 598, 599, 604, 636, 637. Laynez Generall of the Iesuites spendeth a whole congregation to shew that it is de iure Pontificio. 609, 610 The French Prelats would haue this question wholy omitted. 634 Bishops not made nor confirmed by the Pope. 635. Cannons of the Institution of Bishops are made in Rome, and brought to Trent. 657 The Decree of the Institution is made. 723 but deferred, for feare of making the Coun∣cell too long. 731, 732 A question is discussed in the Councell, whe∣ther the most worthy ought to be elected Bi∣shops. 725 The Spanish Prelats will not abandon their o∣pinion, that the institution of Bishops is de iure diuino, 735 But are perswaded to bee quiet. 737 Bull of Leo the tenth against Luther. 10, 11 A Bull of the conuocation of the Councell, to be in Mantua. 79 Another of the conuocation of the Councell to be helde in Trent, against which the Empe∣rour excepteth. 101 Bull of faculties for the Legats of the Councell of Trent. 112 Bull for the dissolution of the Councell. 112 Bull of the Translation if the Councell. 128 Bull of the Legation the Legats will not suffer to be read. 130 Bull of the translation of the Councell to Bolo∣nia. 266, 267, 268 Bul of the restitutiō of the Councel to Trent. 307 which the Emperour would haue to bee al∣tered. 307, 308 Bull of Pius 4 for the intimation of the Coun∣cell in Trent. 435 C. CAictan, the Popes Legat, in what sort hee treateth with Luther. 7 is blamed in Rome for vsing him basely. 8 Calistini in Bohemia. 2 Camillus Oliuus, Secretarie to the Card. of Mantua, is in disgrace with the Pope. 518 Campegio is sent Legat to the Diet in No∣remberg. 31 He maketh a little reformation of the clergie of Germanie. 32 Which is receiued by some few Princes. 33 Is made Legate againe. 52, 53 Is sent into England about the diuorce of Henry the eight, and recalled to gratifie the Emperour. 68 Canonicall bookes of the Scripture. 152, 153 Catherinus writeth against Soto, concerning the meaning of the councell in the point, De natura & gratia. 229 Caracter imprinted in the collation of the Sa∣craments, what it is. 239, 240 It is imprinted in the collation of Priesthood. 738 Card. Colonna is cited to Rome. 38 sacketh Rome. 41 is excommunicated, and appealeth to a Councell. 42 Cardinals imprisoned, mocked, and beaten in Rome 44 Cardinals created. 74, 272, 361, 396, 825 Cardinals are not contained within any generall termes of any law, if they be not particularly amed. 262 Card. Poole is made Legat for the Councell in Trent. 111 And after his returne from thence, is made one of the Deputies in Rome ouer the coun∣cell in Trent. 168 Is named to be Pope, but not elected for suspi∣cion of Lutheranisme. 298 Is made Legate for England by Pope Iulius the third. 384 Commeth to London with the crosse before him, and maketh an oration in the Parlia∣ment. 385 is depriued of his Legation of England by Paul the 4. 405 Cardinall Crescentius, the Legate in Councell, doteth. 375 Is caried to Verona, and there dieth. 377 Card. Morone was imprisoned, and ready to be sentenced for an hereticke by Paul. 4. 416 Is made prime President of the Councell by Pope Pius 4. and haue secret instructions. 688. his entry into Trent. 693 Is receiued in congregation. 694 His publicke negotiation with the Emp. 695 His priuat negotiation with the Empe. 705 Hee is taxed by his fellow Legats for taking too much vpon him. 724. Cardinall of Loraine speaketh in the Collo∣quie of Poisi. 453 Had a desire to be Patriarke of France 603 Entreth. Trent with many French Prelats. 624 Maketh an oration in Councell. 629 Goeth to Ispruc to consult with the Emperor about the affaires of the Councell. 664. 668 Writeth a consolatorie letter to his mother after the death of his brother, the Duke of Guise. 681 Goeth to Venice to put away griefe. 689 Is said to speake in Councell like a Lutherane. 704 Remitteth his rigor for matter of the Coun∣cell, by reason of the great change in France. 712 Is opposed by the Arch-bishop of Otranto. 719 Resolueth to giue the Pope all manner of sa∣tisfaction. 733 Is complained of by the Spanish Prelates. 743. 744 Excuseth his change of mind. 751 Commeth to Rome, where he is lodged in the Popes Palace, and visited by the Pope in person. 767 His negotiation. 768 He taxeth the French Ambassadors for pro∣testing in Trent. 778 Returneth to Trent, and hastneth the en∣ding of the Councell. 781 was the chiefe man to make and roare out the acclamations in the end of the Councell. 813 Is taxed in France at his returne. 818 His defence. 821 Cardinall of Ferrara is sent Legate into France, where he is ill intertained at the first. 455 He muketh acquaintance with the Hugo∣nots. 456 Hath a grant to exercise his faculties; which the Chancellor refuseth to subscribe. 458 Hee meeteth the Card, of Loraine in Asti of Piemont, to perswade him to fauour the Popes affaires in Councell. 700 But cannot effect anything. 711 Cardinall of Mantua, Legate in the Councell, is distasted by the Pope. 507 Is opposed by Cardinall Simoneta. 513 The dispatches are not addressed to him. 517 Is reconciled with Cardinall Simoneta. 54 writeth to the Pope that hee can dissemble no longer. 675 Hee dieth. 678 Cardinall of Burbon desireth a dispensation to marry. 668 But the French-men dare not propose it in Councell. 680 Cardinall Seripando, one of the Presidents, di∣eth. 687 Cardinall Nauaggero, the new President en∣treth Trent. 699 Cardinall Chastillion calleth himselfe Count of Beauuois, quitteth the Cap, mocketh the Pope and is depriued by him. 767 Catechisme is handled. 802 Ceremonies vsed in opening the Councell. 130 Charles the fisth Emperor is suspected by the Pope for his greatnesse. 35 Maketh two answeres to the two Briefes of the Pope. 39 writeth to the Cardinals. 40 Maketh shew of griefe for the Popes impri∣sonment, but keepeth him fast. 44 Is crowned in Bolonia. 52 Goeth to Rome; is proud of his victorie in Africa. 78 Is distasted with the Pope. 110 And reconciled againe, 111 Maketh the Pope afraid by residing at Is∣pruc, so neere the Councell. 355 Vseth meanes to make the Empire heredita∣rie; but is crossed by his Nephew Maximili∣an. 382 Quitteth the world. 404 Charles the ninth the French King, seemeth to fauour the Protestants. 449 Alieneth Ecclesiasticall goods without the Popes leaue. 712. 713 Wherewith his Holinesse is very angry. 713. 793 Church, what power it hath concerning the Sa∣craments. 669 Whether it can make mariages void. 756 Clement the seuenth Pope, thinketh a Councell to be dangerous when the Popes authoritie is in question. 34 Maketh a league with Francis the first, the French King, and inueigheth against the Emperour. 37 Hee was illegitimate, and created Pope by Simony. 42 Is taken prisoner 44 Escapeth out of the Castle in the habit of a Merchant. 45 Doeth suddenly recouer his greatnesse. 47 Disswadeth the Emperour from desiring a Councell 50 And perswadeth him to proceed seuerely a∣gainst the Lutherans. 51 Sheweth a desire to call a Councell, but mea∣neth to auoid it. 58 Is aliened from the Emperour, and ioyneth with France. 64 His death, vertues, and vices. 71 Colloquie betweene the Protestants and Pa∣pists. 56 Another in Aganoa. 92 In Wormes. 93 In Ratisbon. 95 And againe in Ratisbon. 126 Colloquie in Wormes of foure and twentie Doctors. 407 Of Poisi in France 451 Commendaes, what they are, is shewed by the Author in a large discourse. 500 Commenda of all the Benefices in the world, giuen by Clement the seuenth to his Ne∣phew Hippolitus Card. de Medici. 251 Communion of the cup denied by the Pope. 290 Treated of in France. 457 Demanded, and discussed in Rome. 458, 459, 519, 520, 522, 523, 526, 528, 529, 537, 556, 559, 560. Is denied in Councell by pluralitie of voices. 567 Concubines of Priests are of Ecclesiasticall iu∣risdiction. 82 Conclauists and their priuiledges, 554 Conference at Marpurg betweene Luther & Zuinglius. 49 Conference in Nizza betweene the Pope, French King, and King of Spaine. 85 Conference betweene the Pope and Emperour in Lucca. 100 And another in Busseto. 104 Confirmation, the Sacrament, is handled; and a question disputed whether Bishops be the onely ministers of it. 244 Confirmation of the Decrees of the Councell, whether it ought presently to be made by the Pope, is much disputed. 814, 815 &c. Conseruators are Iudges granted to some par∣ticular men by the Pope, to maintaine them in their pretended rights. 352, 353 Conspiracie in Genua of the Fieschi against the Dorij. 222 Conspiracie in France against King Francis the second. 421 Contarini is Legate for the Pope in Ratis∣bon. 94 Speaketh as ambiguously as an oracle: his exhortation to the Prelates. 96 Complaineth that his answere was mistaken. 97. Is suspected to be a Lutheran. 100 His death. 103 Continuation of the Councell is disliked by the Emperour and the French King, but approo∣ued by the King of Spaine. 441, 477, 506 The Pope resolueth the continuation shall bee declared, that the Councell may be dissolued, but dareth not stand to it. 511 Coronation of the Emperour in Bolonia. 49. 52 Councels for what causes they began to be cele∣brated. 2 Councell of Trent is opened by singing amasse of the holy Ghostonely. 116 Councels held by Secular Princes. 136 Councels doe deliberate of faith, not by di∣uine inspiration, but by humane disquisition. 230 The question, whether they haue greater authoritie then the Pope is forbid by the Le∣gates to be handled. 231 How the Spirit did worke in the Councell of Trent. 276 The Councell is remanded to Trent from Bolonia. 302, 303 Councels doe not binde by their decrees the Churches absent. 320 The Councell of Basil what authoritie it had. 566. The Councell of Constance is commen∣ded by the Generall of the Serui. 567 The Councell of Trent was assembled to re∣medy abuses, but was vsed to increase them, The State of it is quite altered. 782 The conclusion of it. 803 Count of Luna is receiued in congregation, and protesteth about his place. 707, 708 Creed established in the fourth Session. 147 D. DEcrees of Iustification. 223 And of Reformation. 226 Are censured in Germany. 227 A decree concerning the Sacraments. 263 Concerning Baptisme. 264 Concerning Confirmation. 264 A decree of Reformation. 264 A Decree concerning the Eucharist. 339 A decree of Reformation. 340 The decree (Proponentibus Legatis) is made, and contradicted. 469 The Spanish Ambassadour desireth it may be abrogated. 720 The Emperor disswadeth the King of Spaine from desiring the abrogation of it. 727 A decree of the institution of Bishops, and of Residence. 723 Another concerning Residence. 736 Concerning Priest-hood and the other Or∣ders. 738 Another concerning Order. 740, 741. A Decree of reformation. 787, 788 Another concerning Purgatory. 799 Decrees of the Councell of Trent must not haue any glosses or interpretations made vp∣on them, but all doubts must bee referred to the Pope. 817 Degradation of Prelats, and the lawes thereof. 336, 337 Denmark embraceth the reformed religion. 84 Deputies appointed in Rome ouer the Councell. 168, 256, 257 Diet of Wormes. 13 Of Noremberg. 24. Of Spira. 35, 36 Of Ausburg. 52. Of Aganoa. 92 Of Ratisbon. 94, 126, 183 Diets in Ausburg. 272, 292, 306, 388 Diocesan Counsels held in diuers Prouinces. 296, 297 Dispensations, whether they may be graunted without a lawfull cause. 253 What they are. 675 are maintained at large by Laynez, Generall of the Iesuits. 721 Whether they haue brought more aduantage or disprofit to the Sea of Rome. 791 Distributions called Canonicall, what they are. 495 The power of Bishops concerning them. 556 Diuorce is handled by Dominicus Soto. 670 and by Iohn Ramirez. 671 The Venetian Ambassadors desire that the Grecians within their dominions may bee permitted to put away their wiues for forni∣cation, because they haue alwaies done so. 755 Dominicans were emploied in Saxonie to vent Indulgences. 5 are opposite to the Franciscans in the point of the reall presence. 328 Duke of Saxonie, called Iohn Frederick, di∣sputeth whether hee may cary the sword be∣fore the Emperor, and stand at the Masse. 52 Hee publisheth a Manifest against the Em∣perour. 190 Who setteth forth a Bando against him. 201 Hee had equall authority with the Land∣graue of Hassia, which maketh them both vnfortunate. 204 Hee is taken in battell, and condemned to die. 270 But pardoned vpon very hard conditions. 270 Duke of Saxonie, called Maurice, created E∣lector by the Emperour Charles the 5. sen∣deth ambassadours to the Councell. 362 Who demand a safe-conduct. 363 One of them makth an Oration in Councell. 367 The Duke taketh Ispruc, scarreth Charles the Emperour very much, who setteth Iohn Frederick the deposed Duke at liberty. 378 Duke of Wittenberg sendeth ambassadours to the Councell, who present the Confession of their faith. 355 Hee sendeth order to them to proceed in their negotiation. 359 The Presidents will not suffer their confession to be disputed of in Councell. 359, 360 One of the Ambassadours maketh an oration in Councell. 369 Duke of Alua might haue taken Rome, but in¦stead of that goeth thither for absolution. 406 Duke of Sauoy taketh armes against the Pro∣testants of his valleys. 421 Is ouerthrowen by them, and maketh a peace. 446. Hath many Protestants within his territories. 710 Duke of Bauaria sendeth ambassadors to Rome for the Communion of the Cup. 646 And desireth that his Priests may marry. 679 E. ECchius opposeth Luther. 6 Ecclesiasticall goods are aliened in France without the Popes consent. 93 Ecolampadius dieth with sorrow for the death of his fellow Zuinglius. 60 Edict of Ausburg about religion. 57 Edict of the French King H y 2. concer∣ning religion. 297 Edict of Iuli made in France. 448 Edict of March made in France. 471 Edward 6. King of England, maketh a change in Religion. 295 He dieth. 283 Electors of Mentz and Triers, craue leaue to depart from the Councell. 362 And do depart. 374 And so doth the Elector of Collen, 374 Elizabeth obtaineth the crowne of England: the Pope refuseth to acknowledge her: she causeth a disputation to bee held in West∣minster in matter of religion. 411 She is inuited to the Councell in Trent. 436 But will not suffer the Popes Nuncio to come into England. 440 The Councell would haue proceeded against her; but is disswaded by the Emperor. 727 Episcopall iurisdiction is discoursed of by the Au∣thor. 330. 331. &c. Erasmus is condemned for his annotations vpon the New Testament, which are confirmed by Pope Leo the tenth. 473 Excommunication is denounced against all He∣retiques in generall onely, in the end of the Councell. 813 Exemptions what they are, is shewed in a large discourse made by the Author. 220 Exemption of Cathedrall Churches in Spaine from the iurisdiction of Bishops, raiseth a great stirre in the Councell. 797 F. FAber, sent to Zuric by the Bishop of Con∣stance, refuseth to dispute with Zuinglius. 17 Faction made in Councell by the Pope and Le∣gates. 142. 256 A faction betweene the Dominicans and Franciscans. 175. 229. 258 A faction made in Councell by the Pope. 463. 504. 580 The Papalins themselues did not like that the Pope should labour so openly to make a maior part. 585 A faction made by Cardinall Simoneta a∣bout the institution of Bishops. 607 Practises vsed by the Legates to perswade the Prelats. 621 A factious banquet made by the Arch-bishop of Otranto. 627 Cardinall Madruccio said openly there was a Councel within the Councel. 658. 659 Faith how many significations it hath. 194. 195 Ferdinand desireth to possesse Transiluania, and causeth the Bishop of Veradino to bee slaine: is absolued by the Pope. 373 Publisheth an Edict against innouation in Religion. 387 And a Catechisme. 387, 388 Is installed Emperor, and not acknowledged by Pope Paul the fourth, but after is acknow∣ledged by Pope Pius the fourth, vnto whom he rendreth obedience. 420 Goeth to Ispruc, that hee may bee neere the Councell. 649 Putteth in consultation seuenteene very im∣portant points, concerning the present Coun∣cell. 673 Writeth to the Legats and the Pope very effectually for a serious reformation. 682. 683. Giueth his word to Cardinall Morone to vse conniuencie hereafter for matters of the Councell. 705 His sudden sicknesse maketh the Fathers in Trent afraid. 779, 780 Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, is created Cardi∣nall for his great worth; and is beheaded 43. dayes after. 74 Florence becommeth free, and doth deface the Statues of Leo the tenth, and of Clement the seuenth. 44 Forme of proceeding in Councell. 344 Francis the first, the French King, is taken pri∣soner at Pauia. 35 It set at liberty, and absolued from his oath. 37 Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, dieth. 77 Francis of Toledo is Ambassador for the King of Spaine in Councell. 154 Perswaded that the reformation should be handled before the doctrine. 166 Francis the second, the French King, persecu∣teth the Protestants. 417, 418 He dieth. 436 Free will is discussed 208, 209, 210 French Ambassadour speaketh in Councel. 509 The French Ambassadours desire that their Prelats may be expected. 552 The French Ambassadour De Ferrieres maketh an oration. 631 And another. 666 Which vexeth the Fathers. 667 The French Ambassadours goe to Venice. 790 French petitions are written against in Rome. 674 The Pope resolueth not to consent to them. 690 French Prelates cited to Rome for Luthera∣nisme. 693 Sentence is pronounced against them, 790 They are defended by the King. 795 G. GEneua promoteth thereformed religionin France. 422 The Pope perswadeth the French King to make warre against that city. 423 George Fransperg, Generall of an army of Dutchmen, carrieth an halter towards Rome, to hang the Pope; but dieth before he commeth thither. 43 George Martinaccio, Bishop of Veredino, desireth to holde Transiluania in libertie; refuseth the offers of K. Ferdinand, and is slaine by his ministers. 873 Germanie is in the power of the Emperour, the two Protestant Heads beeing retired into their countreys. 221 Glosses are forbid to be made vpon the Decrees of the Councell of Trent. 813 Granuell publisheth a booke, to compose religion in Germanie. 95 He is sent to the Diet in Noremberg. 103 Groperus discourseth of Appeales. 334 Guise passeth into Italy with an army to assist the Pope. 404 Is defeated by the default of the Caraffi. 405 Is recalled by the French King. 406 The Guisards holde a parly in Germanie with the Duke of Wittenberg. 480 The Duke of Guise is slaine vnder Orlience by Iohn Poltrot, a priuat Gentleman. 681 His death maketh a great alteration in France. 682 H. HEnry 8. King of England, writeth against Luther, and gaineth the Title of Defen∣der of the Faith. 16 Marrieth Anne Bullen. 68 Withdraweth his obedience from the Pope, and denieth to pay the Peter pence. 69 Protesteth against the councel of Mantua. 83 And againe against the councell of Vincen∣tia. 85 is excommunicated by the Pope, and the reasons are declared. 86, 87 The excommunication was generally contem∣ned. 87 He maketh an Edict in matter of religion. 89 He dieth, and his death causeth much ioy in Rome and Trent. 260 Henry 2. the French King, maketh a solemne entry into France: proceedeth seuerely against the Protestants. 297, 298 Professeth extraordinary good will to Pope Iulius the 3. 305 Protecteth Parma against the Pope and the Emperour. 311 Protesteth against the councel of Trent. 315 319 Persecuteth the Protestants. 322 But afterwards vseth moderation. 407 Proceedeth against the Counsellors of Parlia∣ment in a Mercutiall. 414, 415 He dieth. 416 Hermit Friars were ordinarie publishers of In∣dulgences in Saxonie, but were excluded by Aremboldus. 5 Hierarohie of the Church, what it is. 589, 590, 591. The forme of Hierarchie in what it consi∣steth. 591, 592 it should rather be called Hierodoulia. 743 Hugonius a French Diuine, betrayeth his countrey-men in Councell. 632 but cannot endure the flattery of Laynez, the Iesuite, in maintaining the Popes authority. 722 Hugonots in France doe wax bold. 470 they haue 2150. Churches in France. 480 I. IEsuites will obserue no rule in Councell. 543 why their Generall is not in the Catalogue of the assistants in Councell. 554 Salmeron the Iesuite proceedeth by faction in matter of faith. 555 Laynez, Generall of the Iesuites, spendeth a whole congregation in a discourse concerning the Institution of Bishops. 609, 610, 611 His suffrage concerning dispensations. 721 Fauors done to him in Councel by the Legats. 721. 722 The Iesuites doe professe to liue by begging, but will not be bound to it. 799 They make vse of the negligence of the Fa∣thers in Councell, to raise their order to more greatnesse. 801 Images, and their doctrine. 806 Index is disputed on. 474, 475, 502 a Decree made concerning it. 480 Indulgences when they began to bring money to the Popes coffers. 4 a plenary Indulgence granted by Vrban the second, and Leo the tenth. 4 the profit of the Indulgences of Saxonie is granted to the Popes sister. 5 The doctrine of Indulgences was neuer well vnderstood before Luther wrote against them. 6 foure different opinions concerning them, and all Catholique. 22 The Councell dareth not handle Indulgences exactly. 801 The Decree concerning them. 812 an Indulgence granted by the Legates in Trent without authority. 113 In quisition brought into Naples. 271 and into the Low-Countreys. 300 the office of Inquisition is mainly promoted by Paul the fourth. 409 the Inquisition should haue beene brought into Milan: which causeth a great tumult there, and in the Councell. 757, 758 Intention of the Ministers to doe as the Church doeth, whether it be necessarie in Baptisme, and the other Sacraments. 240, 241, &c. Interim, or peace of religion, is made in Ger∣manie. 62 It displeaseth both Papists and Protestants. 294. Is abrogated. 379 Iohn Tancherel is condemned in France, for maintaining that the Pope may depose kings, 463, 464 Ireland is made a kingdome by Pope Paul the fourth, which title it had long before. 392 Ispruc is taken by the Protestants. 378 Iubile published in Rome. 130 And in Trent. 203 Another Iubile celebrated in Rome for ioy of the determination to celebrate the Coun∣cell 435 Iulius the 2. Pope was more a souldier then a Clergie man. 3 Iulius the 3 created Pope. 298 Is more inclined to pleasure then businesse: createth a yong Car. of vnknown parents. 299 Restoreth the Councell to Trent. 302, 303 Is aliened from the Emperour. 371 Suspendeth the Councell. 376 Maintaineth his reputation by the Patriarke of Armenia. 382, 383 Reioyceth for the restitution of the obedience of England: he dieth. 389 Iustice, by whom it is to be administred in Coun∣cell. 82 Iustification is discussed in many articles. 192 Which did trouble the Prelates and Diuines, because it was neuer well discussed by the Schoolemen. 194 K KIng of Denmarke embraceth the refor∣med religion. 84 King of Nauarre hath a guard set vpon him. 436 Is set at libertie, and gouerneth France. 437 Writeth to the Protestant Princes in Ger∣manie, that hee will preserue Religion in France. 480 Was slaine with a Bullet at the siege of Roan. 640 His death maketh a great alteration in France 641 Knights of Malta send an ambassadour to the Councell; who is receiued in Congregation, and maketh an Oration. 762 L. LAndgraue of Hassia preuenteth a diuision amongst the Reformatists in the Diet of Spira. 47 publisheth a Manifest against the Emp. 190 who setteth forth a Bando against him. 201 Landgraue and Saxon had equall authoritie in the warre against the Emperour, which was a great disaduantage to them. 204 He yeeldeth himselfe prisoner to the Empe∣rour. 270 is set at libertie 379 Lateran Councell what aduantage it brought to the Sea of Rome. 19 Latin translation of the Bible is discoursed of 155, 156, 157, &c. and is approued. 159 it is said that no errors of faith are in it. 161 Lawes of Popes are more strictly obserued then the lawes of God. 488 League between the Pope and the French King is confirmed by marriage. 67 betweene the Pope and the Emperour against the Protestants. 188 the League betweene Charles the Empe∣rour and Henry 8. King of England offen∣deth the Pope. 105 a league of all Catholiques against the Pro∣testants is treated by the Pope. 515 but cannot be effected. 516 a league betweene the Pope & the French K. against the Emp. confirmed by mariage. 252 another of the Protestants in Germany a∣gainst the Emperour. 312, 484 Legates in Trent desire to haue two sorts of let∣ters from the Pope and a cipher. 113 Leo 10, Pope his description. 3 Lewis 12. French King is excommunicated. 3 Libertie of Friars is held dangerous by the Le∣gates, and repressed. 228 a Friar of Brescia is disgraced for speaking of the Eucharist like Luther. 422 Libertie of the Councel violated by the Pope. 503 Libertie of the Councell is thought by the Speaker to be too great. 533 and by the French Ambassadours to bee none at all. 542 as also by the Spaniards. 551 The Presidents vse meanes to curbe the Spa∣nish Prelates. 620 the Cardinall of Loraine said openly the Councell was not free. 635 The Bishop of Veglia quitteth the Councell for feare. 644 the Prelates are terrified with the Popes au∣thoritie. 645 Martin Guzdalin, a Spaniard, complaineth that the Councell is not free. 661 and the Spanish Ambassadour doth the like: who is answered by Cardinall Morone. 754 Limbo is the place where children are, who die without Baptisme, before the vse of rea∣son. 178 Luther speaketh against Indulgences. 5 And against the Popes authoritie. 7 Appealeth to the Councell. 8. 12 Passeth to other points of doctrine. 9 Burneth the Popes Bull, and Decretals in Wittenberg. 12 Is called to the Diet of Wormes. 13 And an Edict is published against him after his departure. 15 Which was neuer executed by the Princes of the Empire. 26, 27, &c. His answere to Vergerius. 75 Hee dieth. 148 Diuers fables are raised of his death. 149 M. MAntua is chosen to hold the Councel in. 79 Wherewith the Duke is contented at the first, but repenteth afterwards. 82 Marcellus the Second created Pope. 389 Purposeth to make a seuere reformation of the Court and Clergie, and to erect a religious Order of an hundred persons. 390 Hee dieth, hauing sate but two and twentie dayes. 392 Marriage of Priests what inconuenience it bringeth. 460 Why it is forbid. 680 Matrimonie is proposed to bee disputed. 662, 665. The inconuenience of secret marriages. 665, 668, &c. Whether Priests may marry. 678, 679 A marriage is desired and sought by the King of Spaine betweene his sister, and his sonne Charles. 685 Marriage of children without consent of their parents is spoken against by the French ambassadours. 746, 747, 754 Marriage of Priests is promoted, and opposed in councell. 747 The abuses of matrimonie are discussed. 747, 748. A question discussed, whether one may be for∣ced to marry. 749, 750 Diuers opinions concerning clandestine mar∣riage. 782 The doctrine of Matrimony is decreed. 784 The reformation of the abuses of it is de∣creed. 784, 785 The impediments of Matrimony are decreed. 785. Mary obtaineth the Crowne of England. 383 Establisheth Popery. 384 Is married to King Philip. 385 Appointeth ambassadors to go to Rome. 386 Persecuteth the Protestants. 387 Her Ambassadours come to Rome. 391 Shee dieth. 411 Marquis of Brandenburg sendeth Ambassa∣dours to the Councell. 342 Masse is discussed. 542 they dispute to prooue it to be a sacrifice. 544, 545, &c. a Portugall Diuine saith it can be prooued by tradition only. 546. the doctrine of it. 573 the abuses of it. 574 Mattheo Langi, Archbishop of Salzburg, did not dislike the assertions of Luther, but scor∣neth that the world should bee reformed by a Monke. 55 Maxime in Councell about the maior part of voyces. 576 Maximilian the sonne of Ferdinand passeth by Trent. 360 promiseth the Protestants there to labor with his Vncle, the Emperour, that the Councell may be free. 361 is thought to be a Protestant. 426 which hee doeth not deny to the Popes ne∣phew. 429 is crowned King of Bohemia, and elected King of the Romans. 641 refuseth to promise obedience to the Pope. 723 Merits, whether they goe before grace, or follow. 198 N. NAples doth mutin, because of the Inquisi∣tion brought in, and is cherished by the Pope. 271 Nations, whether they ought to haue voyces in Councell, or particular persons. 137, 508 Nationall Councell is prepared in France. 314, 425. Number of the Prelates in the Councell of Trent. 317, 462 the number of those who subscribed the De∣crees of the Synod. 813 Nunnes which are called Penitenti, or Con∣uertite, haue beene Courtesans. 808 O. OAth prescribed to be taken by those who are to be admitted to Bishoprickes, Abbacies, Benefices, &c. 732. 733 Octauius Farnese cōducteth the Italian troops into Germany against the Protestants. 203 receiueth a French Garison into Parma. 311 Oration made in the Councell by the Bishop of Bitonto. 132 another made by the French Ambassadour, Guido Faber. 508 Displeaseth the Fathers. 509 And is answered. 511 An Oration made by the Bauarian Ambas∣sadour. 527 An Oration made in Councell for the Count of Luna. 709 Displeaseth all the Ambassadours. 710 Oration made by the French Ambassadour de Ferrieres against the reformation of Princes 771, 772, 773 Is answered. 775 Which causeth him to make an Apologie 775 Order is held to be a Sacrament, and is dis∣cussed. 586 Seauen orders, and all Sacraments. 587 How the holy Ghost is giuen in ordination. 592, 593 What ceremonies be necessary in conferring orders. 593 The number of orders, and their seuerall functions. 734 The Decree concerning them. 738 And the Anathematismes. 739 Ordination to the title of the Patrimonie is discoursed on by the Author. 490 Diuers opinions concerning it. 491 Orientall Christians. 572 P. PAlatine of Rhene speaketh brauely in the Diet. 14 Embraceth the reformed religion. 148, 398 Parishes how they came to be diuided. 498 Parma and Placentia are giuen by Pope Paul the 3. to his bastard sonne. 121 Whereat the Cardinals doe murmure. 128 Parma is restored to Duke Octauius by Pope Iulius the 3. 311 Pasquins made in Rome, against the Councell. 148. Patriarke of Armenia cōmeth to the Pope. 382 Paul the 3. created Pope. 71 His chiefest vertue was dissimulation. 71 Hee perswadeth the Cardinals to reforme themselues. 72 Laboureth to gaine Milan for his family. 104 Recalleth his forces out of Germanie, and is iealous of the Emperour by reason of his vi∣ctory. 222 Recalleth the whole businesse of Reformati∣on to himselfe; of which the Legats durst not make vse. 254 He dieth. 298 Paul the 4. receiueth the English Ambassa∣dours. 391 Commandeth the restitution of the Church goods in England, and the Peter pence. 392 Is proud and cholericke. 394 Createth Cardinals contrary to his oath. 396 Pretendeth to make peace betweene the Em∣perour, and French King, but intendeth no∣thing but warre. 401 Proceedeth against the Colonnesi. 402 Threatneth the Emperour and his sonne, and prouideth for warre. 403 Imprisoneth many great persons. ibid. Createth 10. Cardinals more. 404 Persecuteth his owne family, and instituteth a new gouernement in Rome. 408 He dieth; for which the Romans reioyce, and shew they did detest him 416 Peace concluded betweene the Pope and Empe∣rour. 46. is renewed. 64 a peace between the Emp. & French K. 109 Peace made betweene the French King and the Hugonots displeaseth the Pope. 693, 695. The conditions of it. 696. Peace is concluded betweene the Emperour and the Protestants. 378 a peace of religion is established in the Diet of Ausburg. 394 the peace of Cambray betweene the Kings of France and Spaine. 412 Penance and the Decree thereof. 346, 347, &c. The censure of the Decree. 357, 358 Petrus Aloisius, the Popes sonne, Duke of Pla∣centia, was murdered in his owne Palace. 273 Philip, King of Spaine, is in great perill at Sea in his iourney into Spaine. 417 He persecuteth the Protestants at his arri∣uall. ibid. is angry with the Pope for countenancing the King of Nauarre. 443 and with the French King, for making peace with the Húgonots. 701 Picards in Bohemia. 3 Pius the fourth is created Pope. 418 hastneth the Generall Councell in Trent for feare of a nationall in France. 425, 426 but doeth secretly crosse it. 427, 433 maketh leuies of souldiers. 551 Plotteth to make a maior part in Councell. 580 which the Papalins themselues said he did too openly. 585 is afraid to be accused of simonie. 628 complaineth that hee is suspected to hold the councell in seruitude. 595 giueth rewards to those that fauour him in councell. 660 resolueth to ioyne with the King of Spaine, and to neglect the Emperour and French King. 685 falleth very sicke; which causeth the Fathers to anticipate the Session, and precipitate the Councell. 802, 803, &c. Reserueth power to the Pope onely to inter∣prete, the Decrees of the Councell. 817, 818 Placentia is seised by the gouernour of Milan, the Duke being slaine. 273 and the restitution is demanded by the Pope. 287 Pluralitie of Benefices how it beganne, and the progresse of it. 250, 251, &c. A dispute by what law it is forbid. 253 Polonian Ambassadour maketh fiue demaunds in Rome all distastfull to the Pope. 399 Polonian Ambassadors come to Trent, and depart presently. 460, 463 Polonian Ambassador is receiued. 617 Polygamie how it was permitted. 671 Popes authority was reserued in Councell, by say∣ing, Sauing in all things the Popes au∣thoritie, but it is not suffered so to passe. 260 Popes lawes are more strictly obserued then the lawes of God. 488 Laynez saith the Pope is about the Coun∣cell. 613 Pope dying in time of the Councell, whether the successor ought to be created in Rome by the Cardinals, or in Trent by Nations. 627 The French opinion concerning the Popes au∣thoritie. 641, 661 How farre hee may dispence. 675 The Emperour is of opinion that the Councell is aboue the Pope. 683 But Pius the fourth goeth about to prooue the contrary by many quotations, which her sen∣deth to the Emperour 684 Which are examined by the Cardinall of Lo∣raine and the other French Prelates. 687 The Popes authoritie is much extolled by Laynez. 721 To the great distast of the Frenchmen, 722 The point concerning the Popes authoritie is deferred for feare of prolonging the Coun∣cell. 731, 732 The Decree is read for sauing the Popes au∣thoritie, which was neuer mentioned be∣fore. 812 The Popes authoritie whether it be necessary to confirme the Decrees of the Councell 812 Pope onely must interprete the Decrees of the Councell of Trent. 818 Portugal Ambassadour is receiued in Congre∣gation. 476 Preaching claymed by the Regulars, as belong∣ing to them; wich is denied by the Prelats. 161, 167 Precedence is claimed by Don Diego the Spa∣nish Ambassadour before the Cardinall of Trent. 114, 117 By the Duke of Florence before the Duke of Ferrara. 443 Princes of the blood in France haue prece∣dence of the Cardinals. 449 The Prelates in Trent differ about prece∣dence. 467 and so doe the Ambassadours of Portugal and Hungarie. 480 Likewise the Bauarian and Ʋenetian Am∣bassadors differ about precedence. 501 and so doe the French and Spanish Ambassa∣dors in Trent. 663 In Rome. 713 and againe in Trent. 727, 728, 729 Predestination is discussed. 210, 211, &c. Presidents, sent by the Pope, did neuer gouerne Councels before that of Constance. 137 They gaue auricular voyces in Trent. 616 Presidents named for the second reduction of the Councel in Trent. 310 For the third reduction. 444, 445 The Presidents onely doe giue audience to the Ambassadours. 553. Two new Presidents. 681 Presidents of Councels, what authority they haue. 707 Priesthood, and the decree concerning it. 738 The Anathematisme belonging to it. 739 Prince of Conde is imprisoned. 436 Prince of Orange marrieth a daughter of the Duke of Saxonie. 456 Proctors sent by the Vice-roy of Naples to giue voyce in Councel for all the Cleargie of that kingdome. 118 The Pope decreeth that none shall giue voyce by Proctor. 118 The Proctors of the Arch-bishop of Mentz are about to leaue the Councel. 122 Prohibition of Bookes is discoursed on by the au∣thor. 472 Protestants make a conditionall submission to the Councell. 274 A consultation how they are to be receiued in Councel. 367 Protestant Diuines of Wittenberge and Strasburg come to Trent. 374 Fifty thousand Protestants were executed in the Low-Countreys within a short space. 413 The Protestants assemble in Noremburg, and the Pope sendeth Nuncii vnto them 439 Protestations of Doctors, that they refer them∣selues to the Church, are but words of comple∣ment and of good manners. 249 Protestation of the Emperour against the Coun∣cell of Bolonia. 279, 280 Another Protestation in Rome before the Pope. 281 Which the Pope saith the ambassadour did make without commission from his master. 282 The ambassadour protesteth againe. 284 The French K. protesteth against the Coun∣cell in Trent 319 The intended protestation of the French am∣bassadour about precedence 730, 731 Prouerbe in Trent very blasphemous about the bringing of the holy Ghost from Rome. 497 Another prouerbe in Councell, Wee are fal∣len from the Spanish Scab to the French poxe. 640 A kinde of prouerbe made in France con∣cerning the authoritie of the Councell. 822 Purgatorie is spoken of. 799 Q. QVeene Mary, gouernesse of the low Coun∣treys, fauoureth the Protestants. 89 Queene mother of France refuseth a Spanish armie to assist her against the Hugonots. 648 Writeth to the Pope and Cardinall of Lo∣raine 712 Is complained of by the Pathers for being ru∣led by the Chastillons and other Hugo∣nots in France. 776 Queene of Scotland writeth to the Councell of Trent. 703 Queene of England should haue beene procee∣ded against in Councell, but the Emperour would not fuffer it. 727 Queene of Nauarre is cited to Rome for Lu∣theranisme. 780 And is defended by the French King. 794, 795 R. REformation made by Cardinall Campeg∣gio in the Diet of Noremberg. 32, 33, &c. A reformation made in Rome vnder Paul the third, was suppressed. 79 A reformation of the Court of Rome is set on foot and much discussed. 83, 84 The Emperour would haue Reformation han∣dled before Doctrine. 202 It is wholly recalled by the Pope to be hand∣led in Rome; but the Prelates will not yeeld 254, 255 A reformation of the Clergie published by the Emperour. 292 A reformation made in Councell is complai∣ned of by the Priests. 343 Another is made in Rome of small matters onely. 505 Twentie points of reformation are proposed by the Emperours Ambassadours. 513 Nine points of reformation. 532, 538 The chiefe points of reformation are omit∣ted. 568 Reformation is mainely promoted in Councell by the Imperialists and Spaniards. 588 The free speeches in Councell concerning re∣formation, doe trouble the Legats. 595, 600 The reformation of Princes how it began. 617 Articles of reformation proposed in Councell by the French-men. 650, 652 The Pope thinketh that a reformation will not reduce the heretickes. 700 A reformation of Cardinals is mainely pro∣moted, but vanisheth quickely. 726 A reformation proposed by the Imperialists. 751, 752 The reformation of Princes is deferred 760 An hundred Prelates doe combine to pro∣mote it. 766 It is declared at large. 769, 770 The Emperour distasteth it, and the French ambassadour de Ferrieres, maketh an orati∣on against it. 771, 772 The Decree of the generall reformation. 808, 809, &c. The reformation of Princes. 811, 812, &c. Regulars are complained of by the Prelats, and defend themselues. 169 They begin to mutine about their exempti∣ons. 761 Their reformation. 806 Religion is changed in England. 295, 384, 421 Religion is changed in Denmarke. 84 Religion is changed in the Palatinate. 148, 398 Religion is changed in Scotland 426, 451 Reputation is the chiefest ground of the Papall greatnesse. 29 Residence is treated of. 191, 216, 217, &c. Whether it be de iure diuino. 218, 219 The Cardinall of Monte will not suffer that question to be decided. 232 The question is set on foot againe. 486, 487, &c. It causeth great feare in Rome. 502 Is disputed on againe. 505, 510 The disputation of it is diuerted by the Le∣gates. 550 Residence is decreed. 723, 736 The reformation of it is decreed. 739 Richard of Vercelli dieth with griefe because he was in disgrace with the Legats for spea∣king freely in Councell. 566, 569 Rites of the Roman Church are diuers. 548 Rome is taken by the Colonnesi. 41 And by the Dutch-men, and Duke of Bor∣bon. 43 Rota in Rome (which is the greatest Court of iustice there) reiecteth a cause of the Bishop of Segouia assisting in Councel, for suspicion of heresie, because he did not second the Popes designes. 678 S. SAcraments in generall are handled. 234, 235, &c. How they doe containe and cause grace. 237 A decree of reformation is made concerning them. 245 and Anathematismes. 248 Safe-conduct is required by the Protestants to goe to the Councell. 316 The Contents of it. 341 It is disliked by the Protestants, 343, 344 The Councell refuseth to alter it. 369 Santa-Croce the Legate is threatned by the Emperour to bee cast into the riuer Adice. 202 Schisme in the Councell, some remaining in Trent, and others being gone to Bolonia. 269, 274 Scotland shaketh off obedience to the Pope. 426, 451 Session the first, held in Trent, Deocin. 13. an. 1545. 130 The second Ian. 7. 1546. 139 The third, Feb. 4. 1546. 147 The fourth, Apr. 8. 1546. 162 The fift, Iune 17. 1546. 184 The sixt, Ian. 13. 1547. 223 The seuenth, March 3. 1547. 263 The eight, March 11. 1547. 267 The ninth, and first in Bolonia Aprill 21. 1547 270 The tenth, and second in Bolonia Iune 11. 1547. 276 The eleuenth Session, and first in the second reduction in Trent May 1. 1551, 313 The twelfth and second in the second redu∣ction in Trent Sept. 1. 1551. 317 The thirteenth Session Oct. 11. 1551. 339 The fourteenth Nouemb. 25. 1551. 356 The fifteenth Ian. 25. 1552. 369 The sixteenth, which is the sixt and last vn∣der Pope Iulius the third April 28. 1552. 376 The seuenteenth, and first vnder Pope Pius the fourth Feb. 26. 1562. 469 The eighteenth, and second vnder Pius the fourth Feb. 26. 1562. 480 The nineteenth, May. 14. 1562 506 The twentieth Iune 4. 1562. 511 The one and twentieth Iul. 16. 1562. 539 The two and twentieth Sept. 17. 1562. 572 The three and twentieth Iul. 15. 1563. 737 The foure and twentieth Nouem. 11. 1563. 783 The fiue and twentieth and last of the Coun∣cell of Trent. December 3. and 4. 1563. 805 Session in the Councell of Trent had no reall difference from a generall congregation. 662 Siluester Prierias writeth against Luther. 6 Simoneta maketh a faction about the Institu∣tion of Bishops. 607 Simonie is discussed, with all doubts belonging to it. 398, 399, 492, &c. Simonie is laid to the charge of Pope Pius the fourth. 628 Smalcalda, in which there was a great assem∣bly of the Protestants. 77 Soto is suspected to bee a Lutheran. 178 writeth three bookes De natura & gratia, as a Commentarie vpon that Decree of the Councell; and is opposed by Andreas Vega. 216, 229 Being readie to die hee writeth a letter to the Pope concerning Conciliarie matters. 693 Subscription of the Decrees of the Councell. 813 Suisses are diuided in religion. 45 Make a league after the death of Zuinglius 60 are inuited to the Councell by the Pope. 164 are much fauored by Pope Iulius the third. 313 Supplication sent out of France into Spaine. 447 Suspension of the Councell is made for two years. 376, 377 But continueth ten yeares. 381 T THechel, a Dominican, writeth again Luther. 5 Title of the Councell is much questioned 134, 141, 142, 481. Titular Bishops spoken against and defended. 717 The Bishop of Conimbria speaketh against them. 735 Traditions are di oursed on. 151, 152, &c. Are made to e of equall authority with the Scriptur. 154 Translation of the Councell to Bolonia is resol∣ued on in Rome. 259 and executed in Trent. 266, 267, &c. The discussion of the cause thereof is referred to certaine delegates in Rome. 283 Treasure of the Church what it is. 6 Trent is named for the place to hold the Coun∣cell in: but the Protestants will not consent. 101 The Legates are recalled from Trent, be∣cause they were left alone. 104 and are sent thither againe. 111 The Councell of Trent is protested against by the Protestants. 126 It beginneth the 13. of December, Anno Dom. 1545, 129, 130 V. VErgerius is sent Nuncio to King Ferdi∣nand. 52 Is made Nuncio in the place of Hugo Ran∣gone, Bishop of Rheggio. 66 Is recalled out of Germanie. 72 and sent backe. 73 His negotiation. 74 Returneth to the Pope, and is rewarded. 78 Goeth to the Colloquie in Wormes vnder a false name. 93 Flyeth to the Councell for succour, and after quitteth both it and Italy. 154 Discouereth the plots of the Romanists to the Suisses and Grisons. 345 Writeth against the Bull of the intimation of the Councell. 436 Being in Valtellina, maketh obiections a∣gainst the Councel. 743 Vincentia is chosen to hold the Councell in. 84 Three Legats are sent thither. 85 The Councell is deferred. 86 and afterwards suspended during pleasure. 90 The Venetians will not suffer the Councell to be held in Vincentia. 100 Virgin Marie is exempted from sinne by the Franciscans. 175, 180 How she came to be worshipped. 181, 182 Vnction, and the doctrine of it. 350, 351 Vnction of Benefices was inuented to Palliate Pluralitie. 251 Vniuersities of Louaine & Collen condemne Luthers Bookes. 9 and so doth the Vniuersitie of Paris. 16 Voices in Councell to whom they belong by right. 62 How they haue beene giuen in Councell in all ages. 135 Whether they may be giuen by Proctors. 707 Vulgar tongue in the Church what inconueni∣ence it bringeth. 460 How it hath beene vsed in former times. 577, 578 W. WAldenses, or Albigenses in the Alpes. 3 are miserably slaine by the Frenchmen. 119 Obtaine a great victory against the Duke of Sauoy. 446 War betweene the Emperour, and the French King. 102 The Pope doth more intend the war against the Protestants, then the Councell. 144 Rumors of the Protestants armes causeth the Counsell to be suspended. 377 Warre in France betweene the Protestants and Papists. 647 Wolsey is delegated by the Pope to heare the cause of the diuorce of Henry the eight. 68 Workes of good men how they are to be valued. 196 Workes before grace. 198 Workes after grace. 199 Z. ZVinglius in Zuric opposeth the Pope, be∣ginning from the abuse of Indulgences preached by Friar Samson amongst the Suisses. 9 The Bishop of Constance writeth, and the Dominicans preach against him; by which meanes he is the more stirred vp. 16 His difference with Luther. 48 Is slaine in battaile. 59 Zuric maketh a Decree in fauour of the refor∣med religion. 17 FINIS. LONDON, ¶Printed by Bonham Norton, and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO DOM. M. DC. XXIX.