The philosophers banquet Newly furnished and decked forth with much variety of many severall dishes, that in the former service were neglected. Where now not only meats and drinks of all natures and kinds are serued in, but the natures and kinds of all disputed of. As further, dilated by table-conference, alteration and changes of states, diminution of the stature of man, barrennesse of the earth, with the effects and causes thereof, phisically and philosophically. Newly corrected and inlarged, to almost as much more. By W.B. Esquire. Mensa philosophica. English. The philosophers banquet Newly furnished and decked forth with much variety of many severall dishes, that in the former service were neglected. Where now not only meats and drinks of all natures and kinds are serued in, but the natures and kinds of all disputed of. As further, dilated by table-conference, alteration and changes of states, diminution of the stature of man, barrennesse of the earth, with the effects and causes thereof, phisically and philosophically. Newly corrected and inlarged, to almost as much more. By W.B. Esquire. Mensa philosophica. English. Scot, Michael, ca. 1175-ca. 1234, attributed name. Anguilbertus, Theobaldus, attributed name. The third edition. To the Reader. THe Back and Belly, two unsounded seas Oreslow al goodnesse of these later daies, The new Saints worship'd since the old went downe, In Church, in Court, in Citie, and in Towne: With such devotion, that men now attend Not houres appointed, but whole ages spend In these Idolatries rendring more due Then blindfold zeale e're tendred to the true. Sloth, Pride, and Pleasure cleave so neare the skin, They make each single birth a trebletwin: Incorporate so in body and in blood, To thousand vices, but small grains of good: Let but conceit thrast forth a strange attire In France, it sets three kingdomes straight a fire; Which leave not burning till they have ∣sted downe Lordships and patrimonies of renowne: Melted the earth, and Chimick't into gold, Done that which none e're did, but one wee hold Proceeded further in more strict degree, Conuerted Gold in't Gards of Gallentree: And still like Alchimists toyling the Stone, T ll gold, and silk, and earth and all is gone. Let but a Hellen of some meane degree, Of farre lesse beuty, more vnchast than shee, Inhabit wildernesses under ground, If shee be false and faire, she shall be found: Let Gluttony at howres neare so unmeet, Slighted all Circumstance weight by discreet, Whilst wary Cautions, with most strictest heed, Being all observ'd, are lesse oft then we need, Sit downe full charg'd to overcharge it more▪ A thousand dangers waiting at the doore: Yet notwithstanding all her fearefull guard There she arrives, and will not be debard: Let Bacchus keepe his Cyder in a cell, Resort shall croud him wheresve're he dwell Let him dig mountains, be they ne'r so high Vnto the roots where there soundations lye, And like to artfull Pioners worke deeper, To keepe their liquor stronger, cooler, sweeter; Industrious Porters, Coblers, Tinkers, Swaine, Will wind it vp with their eternall paines, With Wheeles and Buckets, wh ch not night nor day, Shall even rest going up or downe the way, Whilst paths vntraced, former steps vni rod, Become as Dunstable, more worne, more broad: But should an Angell to no other end But only this, from heauen to earth descend, To tell the world of sicknes in her health, T'informe her that shee's poore for all her wealth, To give new Rules, and contradict the old, Though ne'r so bad his Custome should be col , And though his doctrine should confute the crimes That have consum'd whole ages in their times Noth ng it were, his paines should bee re∣warded With crouds most strangely wondring, not regarded: Let Vertue courted in her best array, By learning with all titles that she may, Appeare so glorious, that the Suns bright eye Suffer ecclipse in her resemblancy: Vpon whose glorious person and attire, Heaven might looke gracious, and the earth admire Yet this sweet virgin vertue, learning art, Deck'd with the marrow of the world, & art Not not crept into in least particular sense, In skirts and Borders of small consequence But by some signe of man, and proofe of wit, When after many yeares o're-take not it; Yet after tedious houres, and toyled braines, Dayes, nights, & Books, Costs, thoughts and endlesse paines. It being arrested, and laid hold upon, At the whole suit of mankind should be none To joyne in action to maintaine a Tryall, In joynt approuement 'gainst so strong denyall He that could seite in likenesse of a face, Being well accoultred and set out to grace The meanest matter, thought e're bred in braine, It should be descanted and read againe. Making his comma's (in his portrait w fe) Some pretty nose, his per ods l ke to eyes: If that prevaile not, what would then be better To hang Bacchus clusters, sparkling ore each letter? Or both together, sure that would not misse, For they are twins, embrace, and love to k sse: And all our hot bloods, both with strength and might, Pursue them endlesly both day and night. Bidding vs crosse all Bookes and Lines deface, Blot out our Sentences, and give them place: And then successe our Labor shall attend, Crowning our undertakings with good end. These though wee know impossible to doe, To run with humor we jumpe neare unto. Placing some part of Venice in our booke, As of Geneva we have tane a nooke. Here's wicked women, as the one hath so; And here are vertues as the others show: Here are strong drinkes, your Beere, your Ale, your Wine, Your choyce of meats, your grosser and your fine: And widowes with their heapes of hoarded gold, That would beo Lad ed, though a month to hold: And here's good company, d scourse at will, Phylosophers, Physicians, arguing still: Sociates for every man, meanes for digestion; Can we want custome then, who makes a que∣stion? To the Iuditious Reader, and him that would buy this this Booke, thus further in the commendation and use thereof Good Reader, many things hath beene written by ma∣ny men, and the over cloying humor of this age hath so ouer∣burdened the world with mul∣tiplicity of al kinds, that searce there is one subject left, upon the head whereof a hundred haue not trampled over: a∣mongst which impartial hand∣ling, if it bee possible to say a∣ny one corner hath escaped this scrutenous search, and beene raked over with a ligh∣ter hand than other, I may say it is this, although not denying, but most parts hereof have beene formerly handled and drawne into large volumes, both to the tediousnesse and cost of the Reader and buyer, whereas in this they are effe∣ctually and briefly abridged, to be turned unto with facility and ease; diuers excellent additi∣ons of things very materiall and necessary, out of Albertus Magnus, Lemnius Scotus, and others, being in this second impression inserted, which in the former addition were neg∣lected, (although very perti∣nent to this purpose and argu∣ment) the which whosoever hath formerly bought and read in the infancy and imperfect∣nesse, shall not repent him to doe it againe in this maturity and penesse it is now growne unto. The use of this Booke is, to make a man able to judge of the disposition and state of his owne body, of the effects, na∣tures, and dispositions of those things wee daily feed our bo∣dies with. The next is, to giue vs a generall insight and briefe knowledge of Emperours and Kings, or men of greatest place and eminencie that are most notified in the world for vertue or vice. All these interlaced, with excellent positions, witty questions and answers upon divers and sundry argument , the perfect use and insight whereof, doth accomplish a man for discourse, behaviour and argument at the Table of our superiours: Written first by Michael Scotus in Latine, and for the benefit, good approba∣tion and like thereof, formerly done into English; and now thirdly published and augmen∣ted (being a booke of speciall notice in this kind) to as much more, by the same Author; W. B. Esquire. The Preface to the Matter. THat Health is abou Gold, and a sound bodie above infi∣nite Riches; is a Text of Truth, ap∣proved with most joyfull acknow∣ledgement, to their comforts that entirely possesse it, and know the worth by the use, not by the want: as doe those poore and life-weari d wretches, whose pleasures by sick∣nesses perplext, and dayes spunn out in griefe and misery by the contrary; yet what is this precious stone to the Dunghill-cocke, or the richest ifts of bodie or mind fortune, to him that is not Gemmarius; one that tru∣ly vnderstandeth their value, and va∣lueth them according to his under∣standing: The Crab, the Gangrene, or the Stone, that put the knife to in∣scition, or the sawe to abscition, and Traytor-like, racke the body with tortures, not inferiour to death: cry out in him that is patient of this mi∣sery: Happy man that art borne from these woes, that art free from these maladies. Cherish therfore that good which is so precious in life (thou that enjoyest it) which keepes off death, and sweetens all the affictions that oppose us in life, and abuse it not in Riots, in surf ts and disorders, things so apt to deprive it; the losse being so great, and the pleasures so small, and without which, all humane so∣lace is but sorrow; all rejoycing is but mourning, and life it selfe is but death. For to him that hath the high∣est titles, the largest honours, the fairest reuenues, nay, all the pleasures that the earth and Sea to boot can affoord; yet what are all these pre∣sent, where ne is wanting? Therefore to the preservation of that which is, and redeeming of that which hath beene, but is not, our Phy∣losophers propose certaine Rules and directions, for the ordering, reducing, and maintaining of mans body in health; which like a Clocke, by rea∣son of the many severall particles and connexions thereunto belonging is ever subject to diversion and error. For as Galen, the Light of Physicians writeth, of that little window, or light of Man, the delicacie where∣of, not the least creature, or attomic in the world, but by accident, may sore offend, yet that there are subje∣ctory and pertinent peremptory in∣firmities besides thereunto belonging ingendred, by Rheumes, Convulsi∣ons, and other operations of the brain, and strings thereunto officiall, 52. diseases: If then so many disastrous Planets reigne over one little mem∣ber, had it not need of sight and light to prevent them? And if to this one, so many to the whole body of man, how many are incident, and what cu∣riosity therefore is to be given to our steps, when without their limits they are so many enemies of Nature, rea∣dy to seize upon us? And which dis∣cipline and direction being observed we may lengthen out our dayes with joy and delight to the last period of their prefixment, when either sick∣nesse or casualty, one Accident or o∣ther shall fall upon us, to the accom∣plishment of that Sentence which was never yet frustrated by any, nor ever shall, whilest the foure indes blow one against another. For against that, here is no prevention, (Contra vim mortis, non esc medicam in her∣tis) although some, and no meane Clarks, have thought and written to the contrary, that Age might be kept backe, and sicknesse kept by, which if it may be for a time, wee conclude, it cannot be for ever. That Age may not be kept backe, though sometimes tardied in his speed. FRyer Bacon, a man of infinit lear∣ning, study, capabilitie and Art in his time, amongst many other his strange and impossible endevours, published a booke De retardanda Se∣necture; or the keeping backe of old age, the which whilst he himselfe in observing and prescribing the Rules, Orders, Observations, and Retarda∣dation thereof, grew old in the act, and himselfe was overtaken with age: Let the ayre in her wholsom∣mest kinde, with the most nicest ce∣remonies that Physicke or curiosity observed, Fennes and Marishes, and the low and unwholsome vapors of the earth unsuckt up thereby, the un∣savory breath whereof may breathe contagion into windowes: In stead thereof, brush over Rockes and Hils, and Fields and Fountaines, with the wholsommest perfumes that the best matters may give it to worke upon, bring health through the Crannies, and receptacles of our houses, and breathe it in at the nostrils of the most healthfull creature living; let him rise early, not walke late, be tempe∣rate in Dyet, moderate in exercise, wary in lust, cheerefull of disposition, sit not much, walke not sildome, sur∣fet never, know the disposition and state of his owne body, from the lar∣gest content, to the least particular: be a Physician himselfe, on himselfe; use the art and direction of all the world, and all the Colledges and Phy∣sicians therein: yet notwithstanding shall age creepe upon him, and bur∣den him with her weight, and the unnecessary luggage of her carriage, which is strength in peevishnesse, weaknesse in performances, will to desire, yet want to execute, as help∣lesly is daily experienced. For other∣wise, who would weare his head white, and his beard gray, his eyes hollow, and his eares deafe, blacke veines, and dry braines, a dropping nose, a wrinckled brow, shaking hands, and toothlesse gummes, feeble legs, and shrunke sinewes, that might ransome himselfe, either by paine or price. The old Courtier, inamored of his young mistris, sleighted more for his want, then his will, having some sparkes of heat, not yet extin∣guished by antiquity, would offer (if it might be) more then the portion of his supple hammes, to enjoy the one, but to obtaine the other: like∣wise the face once adorned with beauty, and more adored th n the Indian sunne, now crept into wrin∣kles, and folded up in the pleats of an∣tiquity, and more ecclipsed then the Sunne (for this I say) what paine or price so heavy, that these creatures of lightnesse would not undertake, but that this ceaselesse lackey to e∣ternity, trouped with Kings to his pages, never turnes backe to make amends in his regresse, for any injury hee effects in his progresse; which makes one complaine in a Sonnet to this effect as followeth. Could age like dayes as nights ensue, Each morning sresh her selfe renue: What Lady then at nights decay, But would i'th morne begin her day? For where's a face so much declinde, That beares not youthfull thoughts in minde? That often peepe with oylie eyes, Through doctor'd strange adulteries, Vpon the world in silke and Gold, That grieve to thinke they are so old: The Matrons in their rip st age, That should have wisdome as their Page, So much inclin'd to this Devotion, That to obtain't would give an Otian; Old age, bad cloat es, such griefe imparts, Th y break or wound al womens harts Therefore the Phylosophers, not to perswade impossibilities, would have no man thinke but they must be old; but would have no man old be∣fore hee be wise, yet somewhat to runne with the current of humour, have here added certaine linkes or lengthenings to these Summa Desi∣deria, and as much as may be done by art, or precept, laboured to keepe backe these aged wrinkles, that de∣prive our beauty and strength, and nip the flower of all worldly delight, and therefore doe here at their Ta∣bles, disccurse of Seriacum jocis, ac∣cording to the rules of wisedome, which saith, Mingle thy cares with joyes, and thy sorrowes with delight: crowne the morsels of thy labour with the height of thy contentment, and reserve some times for thy va∣cancie and freedome: For the bowe that is alwayes bent, must needs be weakened, and unapt for use. And where sorrow, griefe, and vexation, which sucke veines dry, and rowle up the countenance in wrinkles like a scrowle of scorched parchment, e∣ver lye tugging, what can be expe∣cted but the wast ruine, and deformi∣ty of the whole body? and therefore at thy Table, in thy Chamber, in thy places of rest and retirement, lay thy cares and affaires, and worldly thoughts aside, till time of conveni∣ent deliberation or prosecution re∣quire them. For as saith Macrobius, Moderate mirth at our tables, beauti∣fieth the body, enlightneth the mind, and causeth a good digestion in the stomacke, delighteth our selves and our company, and increaseth know∣ledge: and with his opinion likewise, it seemes altogether convenient and fitting, that our discourse at the table should either concerne the natures of those meats and drinkes wee furnish our tables with; or the natures and conditions of those that accompany us at our Tables, or ingenious positi∣ons and questions, to exercise our wits at our Tables, or of such pleasant conceits and jests as doe exhillerate our company, and cause mirth at our Tables. And therefore I have determined to call this present worke, The Phy∣losophers Banquet; dividing it into foure equall parts or Bookes, as the nature of the foure subjects wee chiefly handle, conveniently require. THE PHILOSOPHERS BANQVET. CHAP. I. Of MAN. I N the Creation of the World, and the ad∣mirable composition and frame thereof, with the diversityand distinction of all the creatures therein, and the severall formes, shapes, dispositions, and Na∣tures there of: although the least of them in co ation, may take us up with wonder and astonishment perpetually, yet to his Omnipotency and Power that created them, they were facile and easie: For he spake but the Word, and they were made; Fiat Lux, & facta est Lux: Let there be Light, and there was Light: and so of the rest. But when Man was to be made, as Lord and Ruler o∣ver all the rest, there was a conjun∣ction of the Trinity, and consultation of the God-head, about the produce∣ment of so excellent a creature: Fa∣ciamus, Let us make man according to our Image; Indue him with soule and bodie, capability, and reason, gi∣ving him dominion over the Fowles of the ayre, the Fishes of the Sea, and all the creatures of the Earth. Therfore Man thus highly honoured, thus deliberately made, endued with a forme so Angelicall, prerogatives so royall; Status corporis celsus, ere∣ctus in Coelum; a stature of body as∣cendant, and lifted up towards Hea∣ven: a minde so delate and ample, a∣ble to comprehend the height and depth of mysteries, asuring the World in a moment; yet not con∣tained in the world, as one writeth Mens D simulac very pithily of this speedy messen∣ger: She is sent as so one to China, as to Spain And thence returnes as so one as shee is sent: Shee measures with like length, and with like paine, An elme of silke, and heavens wide spreading tent. The contemplation whereof, made King David, being stirred up with the wonder and love of such a work∣man, to breake forth into this 138. Psalme of passion, I will magnifie thy Name, O Lord; how wonderfully am I made? All the workes of thy hands are wonderfull, as my souie hath ta∣sted, and knoweth right well; my mouth was not hid from thee, being made in darkenesse; How wonder∣fully was I fashioned in the wombe of my mother? Thine eyes saw me arude and indigested he aps, and all my mem∣bers to thee were as written in a booke, which afterwards were not perfitted, but in many dayes. And this little, concerning this little world, Man, especially for a draught of the out∣ward shape and lineaments: his ho∣nor, his excellency, his majesty, his discourse and reason, his beauty, his Angelicall faculties. Now let us a little Anatomise in our considerati∣on of the inward part of this work∣manship, and how each article and member in his function and office is mployed; in the which, the very tract of the feet, and print of the fin∣gers of that Divine worke-man, that thus wonderfully hath formed them, doth most evidently appeare; the which the more we meditate of, the more we shall admire. CHAP. II. A division of the body of Man, and of the use and office of the inward members thereof. Quest. HOw is Mans body di∣vided? Ans. Into two parts; Simple and Compound. Q. What are the parts simple? A. They are these, which being divided, doe notwithstanding keepe the name and Title still of the whole, whereof they were a part, as every peece of flesh, is flesh. Q. How many are the parts simple? A. Nine. (viz.) 1. Bones. 2. Ligaments. 3. Gristles. 4. Sinewes. 5. Pannicles. 6. Cords, or Filiaments. 7. Veines. 8. Arteries. 9. Flesh. Q. How may they severally bee di∣stinguished in their use? 1. Ans. First, Bones; the founda∣tion and frame of the body: Senselesse, Dry, Cold, and Earthly. 2. Secondly, the Lineaments are white fastenings, proceeding from the Bones, voyd of blood and sense. 3. Thirdly, the Gristles are a stay to the Bones, that they rub not over∣hardly one against the other, and more earthly, dry, and hard, then Li∣guaments, but not so much as the Bones. 4. Fourthly, the sinewes are a tough substance, proceeding from the braine, or marrow of the back-bone, and give sense and motion; which the former doe not, being altogether insensible. 5. The office of the Pannicles, which are little skinnes, made of si∣nues and liguaments, are to defend and keepe together the members, and to impart to many of them sense; he 3 first, e 3 prin∣ pal mem∣ rs of life first for∣ ed in the ombe. as to the Heart, Liver, Braine, Lungs, Splene, and Kidneys. 6. The Filiaments serve to draw nourishment, being as it were slender threeds, and some to retaine the same and expell what is superfluous. 7. The veines are thinne and slen∣der pipes, carrying the thicker blood into all the parts and members of the body, and have their beginning of the Liver. 8. The Arteries are Pipes of thick and strong skinne, which carry the vitall spirit throughout all the body, and proceed from the heart, they are also called Pulses: The Veines and Arteries are joyned together, to the intent the Arteries might receive Nourishment from the blood, and the blood in the veynes, warmth from the vitall spirits in the Arteries. 9. The Flesh is a substance made of thicke blood congealed, and is (as it were) the cloathing of the body. And so these are the parts, divisi∣ons, and offices of the members be∣longing to the body of Man, framed by the wonderfull composition, and providence of God. A comparisen of Mans age, to the foure seasons of the yeere. 1. First, his Infancy is compared to the Spring, because it is hot and moyst. 2. Secondly, his Adoloscency, or youth, to the Summer, because it is hot and dry. 3. Thirdly, his virility or man∣hood, to Autumne, cold and moyst. 4. Fourthly, his old Age to Win∣ter, being cold and dry. CHAP. III. How to chuse out a place fitting for the erecting of a convenient habitation for the Pleasure, Rest, and solace of Man, and the exercise of this his admirable composition and Fa∣cultie. FIrst, single out a convenient place or soyle, where you meane to e∣rect your Edifice or building, not farre distant from some running River, Fountaine, or other water, and bor∣dering neare some Thicket or Grove; or shadowed with Elmes, or other Trees, for they are a very delectable object to the Eye; for they many times besides, breake the heat of the Sunne, and the rage of the winds, and are convenient both for shelter and sight. And likewise as in these, so you must be regardfull, that the ayre wherein your scituation should be, be not corrupt and damped by the Exhalation of Fogges, and other va∣pours suckt up by the Sunne from Fennes and Marishes, and other low and rotten grounds there neare-unto neighbouring. For the ayre is a great preserver, or drawer-on of health or sicknesse, and hath a powerfull hand in the state of every mans bodie; and is the originall cause of many dange∣rous diseases, and much continued health. And for the Foundation thereof, it is necessary and convenient, that it be placed upon a dry and sandy ground, of some fit height and elevation, with the windowes towards the Sunne∣rising, except the prospect otherwise perswade you. All these things being thus consi∣dered and effected, compasse in a plot of ground convenient for a Gar∣den, which stored with variety of sweet hearbs and flowers, yeelds much content and profit, both for the pleasure and health of man. To the which, not impertinent, wrote that Doctor, who thus versified his Dire∣ction: Aer fit mundus, habitabili , c lumino∣sus, Infectus ne{que} sit, nec olens Foetore clo∣a . Which is thus Englished. A Builder that will follow wise direction, Must first foresee before his house he make, That the ayre be cleare, and free from all infection, And not annoy'd with stench of ditch or Lake. And as for the scituation to the former directions, I adde, that a care be had that the wayes be good, and faire; and that there bee convenient woods, waters, and such like; not be∣ing ore-topt with too high hils to hin∣der prospect, or to pen in too much heat, or cold; causing thereby too sudden changes: after this, for the building I thus advise briefly, Let it be rather usefull then sumptuous, like inchanted Castles built in the ayre; out of which Knights errant were wont to rescue captiu'd Ladies: thus furnished with a convenient seat and building, then let the studious of health be observant what meats and drinkes are most nutritiue, and what time most convenient to be taken as they hereafter follow. CHAP. IIII, Of the houres of Eating, and of the times appointed for that service: of which one saith: Horacibiest qvando stomachus desided rat escam. THat there are dietary times and houres appointed for mans Re∣past and Refection, as decency and order requires, is not unknowne un∣to any, yet we though allowing they may be observed at all times for civi∣lity and fashion, conclude, wee may not sometimes partake of them without satiety and danger. For con∣cerning our times of eating, Rasis saith, it is then most convenient to eat (not at the times appointed) un∣lesse it so happen that the substance and weight of our meats before ta∣ken are decocted and descended to the inferiour parts of the Belly; and those parts are become light and easie in themselves, in the which no ex∣tention or crudity remaineth: con∣venient exercise having proceeded thereupon. For indeed to prescribe against the strictnesse of rule, when∣soever the appetite best serves, then it is thought most wholesome and convenient to eat. For as saith Rasis, wee must be wary wee dull not the edge thereof by over-long fasting and breaking of houres, unlesse it prove false unto us, as it doth most usuall with Drunkards, and such like unor∣dered and ill Dieted persons: but af∣ter that a man of good observation and Dyet shall desire to eat, and the nourishment taken before was nei∣ther grosse nor much, and which hee finds now well digested, let him then Dyet himselfe an w without delay; for if he deferre so long that hee lose his appetite and stomacke which be∣fore served him well, then is hee ei∣ther to take the sirrup of violets, vi∣neger, or warme water, and then to keepe fasting, till by vomit his appe∣tite be renewed againe. And furthermore, it is to be obser∣ved, that every man take those meats that stand best with the state and dis∣position of his Body, and doe eat as often as before hee hath beene most accustomed unto; for use and custome being once associates of long familia∣rity, doe so incorporate and colleague withus, that they become part of our selves; unlesse hee haue growne upon an ill ordered custome, which is altogether to be taken heed of and avoyded, though not suddenly, as at once, yet by little and little; For, Consuetudo est altera natura; Cu∣stome is another Nature, and will not easily forsake us hastily: And for our times of repast, they should bee so ordered, that at least we should eat once in one day, and at most not a∣bove twice: or that which is more temperate, to eat thrice in two daies. For as it is good for them to eat twice in one day, that have weak and moist bodies, so it is hurtfull for them that have bodies fat and grosse; but to those that use much exercise or la∣bour, greater quantities, and grosser meats may be lesse offensive. But to other of studious, nicer, and sick∣lyer constitutions, & contrary dispo∣sitions, contrary observation is to be regarded. Averrois, the Comment r upon A∣vicens Canticles, saith, It is a more commendable manner to eat thrise in two dayes, then twice in one day: because it is thought, that the act di∣gestive is finished in the third dige∣stion, in 18 houres; for the which, when there shal be taken three meals in two dayes, the digestion shall bee perfected in this time throughout all the members, or very neare: where∣upon we conclude, that our repast is then to be taken, and our bodies fed, which is the peremptory rule not limited to time or order, either long or short, when a perfect digestion is made throughout the body of that taken before. Diogenes being asked what was the best dining time, answered, For a rich man when he could get a stomacke, and for a poore man when he could get meat. CHAP. V. Of the order of our eating and re∣fection. THe Reason oftentimes that ous digestion becommeth slow and evill, ariseth for the most part out of the diversity of meats of divers natures and qua∣lities, taken at once, without di∣stinction or order; preferring grosse before subtle, and light be∣fore heavy, and dry before moyst; and that we eat much, and exce d, when wee should take little, and forbeare; and because of the te∣dious delay, and long interposing betwixt the beginning and the en∣ding of our meales. And there∣fore to help digestion, hindered by these or any other occasion, it is prescribed, that our meat should be prepared and fitted according to the seasons of the yeare, and to the Temper of our bodies, (that is to say) hot in the winter, and cold in the summer; yet not in ex∣treames in either: For wee must abstaine from those Sorbilia, sup∣ping meats, but immediately re∣moved from the Fier, as from those that are so cold, that they are kept as under the snow, other Countries presidenting us in the example. Avicen in his Canticles saith, that in our meales and repastures, we should so farre become Physi∣cians over our owne bodies, as to mingle those that are moyst and soluble, with others that are stip∣tike and binding, so allaying the violence in both, by the mutuall moderation of eithers quality, that we may enioy the temperature of them, to our health and pleasure, by this mixitive application of vi∣ands sweet and delicious, with those that are tart and more eager; dry with moyst, and liquid with dry. And this our Commenter holds to bee both a precept and Cannon, in this golden rule or go∣vernment of dyet: being so ne∣cessarily required in the preserua∣tion of our health: and that all things should bee measured in quality, in quantity, in time and order, according to this meet and convenient direction, whereby our bodies may be preserved in health, which otherwise will fall upon disorder and ruine. A little pausing after withall, both for physicke and fashion, though a full stomacke would rise, and an empty would sit down: unto which, that Poet was witty that thus prettily compared Mar∣riage to a Feast: Marriage (saith hee) hath oft com∣pared bin To Publike Feasts, where meet a publike rout: Where those that are without, would faine goe in, And those that are within, would faine goe out. CHAP. VI. Of the natures and qualities of the most usuall meats and drinkes that are taken at our Tables, the more rarelier omitted. TO distinguish of the severall natures of all kindes of meats and drinkes, were, I take it, a worke to guild gold, though per∣adventure it might be satisfactory to some that have more wealth then health, and more curiosity then wisdome; for it hath beene a question disputable, whether there be any perfect health or no, but a dependance or neutrality be∣tweene sicknesse and health; like Hypocrates twins, alwayes toge∣ther: and siuce I know the grea∣test part of the world, rather takes care to compasse and possesse them, then like Physicall Natu∣ralists to picke holes in their whol∣somenesse: as if God, that made all things good, had made nothing perfectly wholesome. And first of Bread, the Staffe of life. Of all other kindes of Bread that are, Rasis saith, that bread that is made of wheat is most conveni∣ent for all men: because being well salted, leavened, and baked, it is found more subtile and dige∣stable, and more long r comfor∣teth the stomacke, th n bread of any other kinde. Averrois, upon Avicens Canti∣cles, gives a reason here of, saying, It is of better digestion, for the well sifting and seperatiou of it from the Branne, but it is fiower of digestion therefore, Branne being a sudden preparativ there∣unto. And that Bread is accoun∣ted the best, which is baked in a Furnace of Iron or Brasle, tempe∣rately salted, and leavened, and made light like a spunge. Rasis as afore, saith, that Bread unleavened, is hardly digested, and slowly departeth the stomack, causeth paine in the belly, a stop∣ping in the Liver, and the stone in Reines. Rasis further saith, that Barley bread is colder then Wheat, and of smaller nourish∣ment, Barley Bread. and ingenders windinesse and Choller, and other cold infir∣mities, hardening the belly, and binding it. Bread of all other graine, is ac∣cording to the nature of the grain. And Avicen further addeth, that no Bread is to be eaten, untill it be one night old. Bread is the staffe of Life, of all the rest. Fine Manchet is the whitest, and the best: Physicians, of all Breads, this Maxime hold, Too new, are neither wholesome, nor too old. CHAP. VII. Of Wine, and the qualities there∣of. VVIne, as saith Isacke, in his third bcoke of Dyets yeelds good nourishment, keepes the body in health: neither is there any meat or drinke found so comfortable unro it, for the na∣turall heat and familiarity it hath therewithall; exceedingly streng∣thening digestion, the heat there∣of being like unto our naturall heat; and therefore soone conver∣ted into pure and perfect blood: Moreover, it clarifies all thicke, grosle, and corrupt blood, and o∣pens and cleares the entrances and passages throughout the whole body; especially the Veines, for passage thereof: opening the stop∣pings likewise in the pores and pipes of the body, driving away the darke mists, fumes and follies begotten of sorrow betweene the fancy and the braine; strength∣ning all the members of the body, ch aring the heart, and making the minde forgetfull of sorrow; causing mirth, audacity, and sharp∣nesse of wit, inlightning the un∣derstanding: but all these with moderation, preserving somtimes even in extremities. And there∣fore (saith Salomon) Give strong drinke to him that is ready to pe∣rish; and therefore with these and the like arguments to be gi∣ven, we conclude in the genera∣lity, of the v rtue and praise thereof, That the use is excellent, the abuse set aside. Some ancient Writers have re∣ported, that the wine of great Tyria hath this effect, that it will heat cold bodies, and coole hot bodies; moysten dry, and dry up moyst: and oftentimes so, that the thirst is hereby more suppres∣sed then by any other thing. Rasis saith, that wine generally infla∣meth the Liver, and heateth the stomacke, yet prepareth a passage to our better digestions, increa∣sing blood, fattening the body, and augmenting naturall heat, and helping nature in her owne proper acts: strengthening digestion, ex∣pelling super uity of humours, with case and facility. Health and strength being encreased there∣by, and old Age retarded and kept backe: and last of all, comforting the heart, and chearing the coun∣tenance. But if it be taken super∣ uously, it hurteth the braine, dry∣eth the sinewes, sometimes cau∣sing Cramps, Appoplexies, and sudden death to ensue. And fur∣ther thus one writes thereof, 'Tis Wine a drooping, fainting hart doth cherish; And wisedome doth prescrib't to those that perish: It heats the blood, and elevates the braine; But yet to much thereof wee must refraine The wise mans cuppes not many ought to be, For Bacchus saith, I fill to them but three; What more they take, and doe not order keepe, Fighting, some madnes it procures, or sleepe. CHAP. VIII. Of Meath, and the properties thereof. DRinke made of Hony, accor∣ding to Rasis, is exceeding hot, and caus th a rednesse in the face, and is very hurtfull to those of hot complexions, but for those of phlegmatike more convenient: And therefore the Commenter upon Avicens Canticles, saith, that this Honey-water is better then wine to those of cold bodies, and weake sinewes. CHAP. IX. Of strong Ale. ALe (as saith Rasis) especially made of Barley, weakens the Nerues and sinewes, causeth dulnesse and head-ache, yet pro∣uoketh Vrine, and represseth the heat of Drunkennesse. That which is made of Wheat, mixed with Parsley and other hearbs, is adjudged best of all men, as that which is onely puft up with forcible ingredients, to shew a strength in weaknesse, wherein no vertue or goodnesse remaineth else, is accounted worst. Of which one writeth, Ate for antiquity may plead and stand Before the Conquest, conquering in this land: Beare that is younger brother o her age, Was then not borne, nor ripe to bee her page: In every pedling Village, Borough, Towne, Ale plaid at foot-ball, and tript all lads downe: And though shee's rivall'd now by Beere her mate, Most Doctors wait on her, that shewes her state. CHAP. X. Hereafter followeth a discourse of the natures of all kindes of flesh. FLesh (as saith Isacke) is of great nourishment, fatt ning the body, and making it strong and lusty; and those that use it conti∣nually, and in ample manner, are so replenished therewith, that they find a fulnesse of blood and strength in nature, and need often Phlebotomy, and especially the more, if they adde wine thereun∣to. Commonly all Flesh much heats, and therefore is not held convenient for those that have a∣gues or fulnesse of blood, or any other diseases that are nourished thereby. That flesh that is red without fatnesse, is of greater nou∣rishment than that which is fat; and engenders lesse superfluities, and more strengthens the sto∣macke: We divide all manner of Flesh into these two kinds, grosse and fine; those which are grosse, are convenient for men of labour and exercise: those which are more subtile and easie, to those of contrary dispositions, yet not ut∣terly abandoning the former, lest thereby they abandon their strength: to which effect one writeth merrily, and may bee thought on seriously, as followeth, Two men being once put to their choyce of meat, The one would grosse, the other fi∣ner eat: The one chose Beefe and Mutton for his share, The other Partridge, Plover, Pid∣geon, Stare; These and no other might they feed or take, For certaine yeares, and for expe∣rience sake: The time expir'd, they both were brought to view, To see of these, th' effects that would ensue: The first thus Dieted with homely fare, Was fat and frolicke, th' other leane and bare: And hee cry'd Beefe, still looking huge and big, Th' other weak & bare, exclaim'd on Pig And his wing'd dainties, whose sweet meat were sowre To him, eatvp ofthose he did devour CHAP. XI. Of wild flesh. EVery living creature general∣ly, according to Isacke, in his tstird booke of Dyets, is either wilde or tame; the flesh of all wilde Beasts is (for the most part) more dry, and of harder digestion, then of the tame, and yeelds a worse nourishment to the body, by reason of their much motion & labour, and heat of the ayre, and Sunne wherein they live without shelter or shade, by which they are so parched and dryed up, that they are scarce manducable; at least little nourishing, excepting onely the wilde Goat, whose na∣turall coldnesse and humidity, by heat and labour, is both allayed and tempered: as also through their much motion, and agitation, the sauour and ranknesse of their flesh is taken away; and so becoms a fit helpe to digestion. The flesh of all beasts that are tame, are ae∣qnivalent with this one of the wilde, and of greater nourishment then any other, by reason of their shadowed and temperate ayres, yet something grosse and hard of digestion they are, but the Male more light and easie then the Fe∣mole, being of more calidity and moystnesse, and therefore more laudable: But the gelded hold the meane betwixt both. CHAP. XII. Of Kiddes Flesh. KIddes flesh, according to ∣sacke, is very temperate, ha∣uing in it no admixture of evill, no separation of good, yet though it beget so temperate a blood, it is seldome without some apperti∣nent cause prescribed to men of labour, or grosse constitutions, which prosper better upon stron∣ger substances; but men of easier exercises and deuotions, a meat better than this is not to be found, being not so weake, but that it may well nourish the body; nor so strong as to fill it with repletion and grosse humours, but yeelding a well mixt blood and substance, betwixt grosse and subtile, be∣twixt hot and cold. And hee fur∣ther saith, that those that are milch are better then the other, both in nourishment, savour, and digestion; and breed better blood, for the milke betters the naturall humidity. CHHP. XIII. Of Lambes flesh. LAmbes flesh, according to I∣sacke, is not good, although sucking, by reason of the abun∣dance of humour, slyminesle, and Phlegme that it engenders, wher∣by being taken, it slippes out of the stomacke before it bee dige∣sted. Averrois is of opinion, it re∣ceives some better temper from the earth. CHAP. XIIII. Of Rammes-flesh. RAmmes-flesh, according to Rasis, is more grosser then Kidde, and doth more increase strength and humors, and in some degrees equals the Kidde; the younger are the best for food, but the old for the flocke: the flesh of either being well digested, yeelds much and good blood, but especi∣ally the Weather, or gelded, be∣cause the heat and moysture thereby is tempered, whereby they yeeld a good savour and tast: yet Galen exceedingly disables the Flesh of Rammes in every de∣gree, and commends the flesh of Calves. CHAP. XV. Of Calves flesh, and Oxe flesh. (vulgo) Beefe and Veale. CAlves-flesh, according to A∣verrois, is exceeding good and commendable, not having in it that Skinny coldnesse that Oxe flesh hath; and for the excellent taste and rellish it hath, come se∣cond to none; aequivalent herein with the Kidde, whom hitherto we have preferred before others; yet failing in other his vertues, engendring not so good humors. Bullockes- flesh, according to Bullockes flesh. Isacke, engendreth a grosle, thick, and melancholy blood, giving much nourishment to the body, yrt is hard of digestion, and slowly departeth the stomacke, dispear∣sing itselfe into all the members, and exceedingly stuffing the bel∣ly; so that if melancholike per∣sons shall much feede thereon, it will procure unto them the rising of the Spleene, Quartane Agues, Leprosies, Cancers, and many o∣ther diseases, according to the complexion; which whosoever experienceth shall finde most ge∣nerally true. CHAP. XVI. Of the divers kinds of Hogges∣flesh. HOgges-flesh (according to Avicen) is more naturall to the constitution of Man then ma∣ny other creatures, being more cold and moist, especially the tame and home-bred; but the wilde are contrary, being hot and dry, and of lesse nourishment. The best are not to be taken of∣ten, but sometimes, and the best parts thereof are those least ac∣counted of; as the feet, eares and cheekes: these being exceeding nourishable, and yeelding a good digestion; easing, and making so∣luble the belly, by reason of the much moisture and humidity they have yet provoking not vrine, as some hold the contrary, & to those of weake Dyets not so com∣mendable: the yong are the best, best nourish, and ingender best bloud. CHAP. XVII. Of Harts-flesh and Hares-flesh. HArts-flesh is melancholy and hard of digestion: the yong are best, the middle age not so good, the old worst of all, but the gelded-yong have a degree of goodnesse above the rest, because their heat and drinesse is best tem∣pered. Yet Avicen saith, notwith∣standing Thi Harts taile, so part is poyson. their grosenesse, they are swift of desention, and engender quartane Fevers. The utmost of the taile is poison. The Hare especially (saith I∣sacke) engenders melancholly blood, because the creature it selfe, and the flesh thereof are ex∣ceedingly melancholly. Yet I∣sacke Hares flesh. saith, The Flesh thereof be∣commeth something more ten∣der being hunted, and killed in chase. Therefore saith one. The Hare's a creature more de∣lighted in For sport and pleasure, then for flesh or skin. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Members of Beasts. THe Head is grosse and much nourishing, heats the body, and therefore is not to be eaten but in cold seasons; out of which unfit application is the Collicke often ingendred. Whereas taken in fit seasons, it much comforteth the blood, and augmenteth spern. But the braine therein being cold, Breeds a loathing, and hurts the stomacke, and is when to be ea∣ten, first of other meates, yet with regard, being good for those of hot complexions, as enemy to the contrary: those afflicted with a∣ny cold diseases. In some it strengthens nature, and mollifies the stomacke: in others, not de∣pending much upon the constitu∣tion. The Vdder is cold and grosse, The Ud∣der. and although it nourish much, yet is it slowly digested. The Liver is hot and moist, and hard of digestion, and slowly hath Lver. egression: yet I sacke saith, it in∣genders good blood: but the Li∣vers of those that give sucke are H rt best: yet the Liver of a Hen is bet∣ter then any other. The Heart is of a hard sub∣stance, slow of digesticn, but be∣ing well digested, nourisheth much. The Lungs are easie of dige∣stion, and quickly passe the sto∣make, Lungs. for the lightnesse and rare∣nesse of the substance. Tho Raines are illaudable in two things: One for the grosse∣nesse and hardnesse of the sub∣stance; Raines. the other, because it re∣ceives the nourishment from the fatnesse of the urine: whereby they engender grosie and thicke blood. Rasis saith, that red flesh with∣out fatnesse, engendreth a thicke blood, with few superfluities; but the fat nourisheth more, yet en∣genders a moyst blood sikewise, with more superfluity of humors, but of more nourishment. But that which is betwixt both, engenders a temperate blood, and is best. The Feet engenders a slymie Yeet. blood, yet the former are more light and hot: the hinder, more heavy and cold. CHAP. XIX. Of flesh in peeces. FLesh boyled in peeces (as saith Rasis) is the worse therefore, and nourisheth little, in respect of that which hath the true use, which is boyled whole: yet it is good for those that abound with raw humors, drying them vp, and being very assistfull that way. Flesh baked. Flesh that is baked, is grosse, and yeelds much nourishment, yet is hardly digested, unlesse it finde a strong hot stomacke, it bindeth the belly most properly, especially when no fat or oylie thing is eaten with it. Flesh boyled with pepper and egges, is ever hot, and therefore French mans diet best manducable in cold seasons; being a meat which strengthens the body, and nourisheth more than any other meat. Besides, it encreaseth sperme and blood, ma∣king the body strong, beautifull, and able, and inciting to lust: yet in some it breeds a loathing, heats and ingenders the stone. CHAP. XX. Of all kinds of Wild-Fowle. VVIlde-fowle (as saith I∣sacke) are generally mote light and subtile then others: All Fowle doe little nourish or streng∣then the body; yet the wild more than the tame, having both a ten∣derer skinne, and easier substance: the cause of their rerenesse is pro∣cured by their much motion, and drynesse of the ayre. The tame likewise in some per∣sons, ingenders good blood, and are more temperate in one degree then the other, by reason of their moderation of labour, and humi∣dity. Of all other Birds, the Stare is the most subtile, the young Par∣tridges, Chickens, the Pheasant and the Henne, and the young more light then the other, bree∣ding a better blood, and more strengthening the appetite: the male being best, by reason of the temperate fatnesse. But the best of all tame Fowle He es flesh. is Hens flesh, being an excellent preservative against the Leprosie: And it is said that the braine of the Hen augments the substance of the matter of the Braine, and sharpens the wit: which in this manner wee finde further com∣mended. The Hen of all Fowles is accoun∣ted best; In two things farre excelling all the rest: For first, to them that want or brain or wit, The Hennes braine doth augment both that and it. And in her body shee the Egge doth breed, The Yolke whereof turnes to much Blood and Seed. CHAP. XXI. Of the Henne. THe Henne (according to I∣sack,) is lesse humid then her Henne. Chicken, and therefore hardly to bee compared to the Chicken for temperatenesse in digestion: yet being well digested, yeelds better nourishment. Rasis saith, that the Stares flesh Star . of all other is best. The Quailes flesh next unto uaile. that, adiudged not over-hot in di∣gestion, because it engenders lit∣tle of superfluous humours. After Partridg these, the flesh of young Partrid∣ges, yet something grosser are they, they are stringent, yet of much nourishment. CHAP. XXII. Of young Pigeons. YOung are of a vehement heat, inflames the blood, and ingen∣der Pigeon . Fevers. Isacke saith, young Pigeons are very hot, copious, and moyst, wherefore yeeld grosse nourishment, which is witnessed by their tardinesse and slownesse of wing: but being fledged, and put to flight, become more light and easie of digestion; they are good for the Phlegmaticke, but hurtfull to the Chollericke. Duckes, saith Isacke, are worst of all Water-fowles: and their Duskes. flesh (as Rasis saith) engendreth much superfluities, and breeds a loathing in the stomacke, yeel∣ding little sustentation to the bo∣dy, and some are of a ranke sauor, which addes to their ill. CHAP. XXIII. What parts of Fowles are best. THe belly of all Fowles accor∣ding Belly. to Isacke, is griesly and hard of digestion, but being dige∣sted, yeelds much nourishment: yet of all other, the Gooses is best: for her store of moysture in her wings, after that the Chickens. And likewise the Lyuer, more nourishable then the other: yet the wing of every Fowle more commendable then both, because of the labour and motion thereof, whereby all superfluous humours are dissolved. The necke of the Goose and Necke. Hen, are better than those parts in any other fowle: likewise those that are cut, are better than the rest. Chickens are better then any other, because they yeeld better nourishment, and purer blood. Likewise commendable are the parts of Stares, Partridges, Hens, and Cockes. CHAP. XXIV. Of Egges, and the properties thereof. EGges, as Isacke aforesaith, yeeld much nourishment, be∣cause Egges. the whole substance there∣of, especially the yolke, for the vicinity it hath with mans nature, is easily thereunto conuerted. The Egges of Hennes and Par∣tridges, Partri g Egges, are better then any other: both which much augment sperm and incite to lust. After those the Duck-egge taketh place, al∣though Duck-egs it yeeld but euill nourish∣ment. But Goose-egges are loa∣thing; Goose-egs yeelding an evill taste and savour. The yolks of all Egges are hot, and easie of digestion, the white is cold and viscous, and not so easie. And concerning the yolke of the Egge, some writers are of Yolke. opinion that it converts into as White. much blood and nature, as it is in waight and quantity it selfe. Rasis saith, that Egges fryed hard, are hard of digestion, and Egges fryed. slowly depart the stomacke: but the soft are otherwayes, being ea∣sie and light; but those which are trembling, neither hard nor soft, are in the best measure handled. An Egge you well may take, and cracke, or cut, Though meat you doe forbeare, dreft by a slut. Or thus; An Egge, an Apple, and a Nut, May be eaten with a slut. CHAP. XXV. Of Milke. MIlke, saith Isacke, is a neare neighbour to blood. For it is nothing else but blood concocted in the vdders in the second course for it receiues the whitenesse and taste from thence. Rasis saith, that new milke is a neighbour to Temperatenesse; and although it be cold and moist, yet doth it fatten and strenthen the body, helpes those that are in Consumptions, restores the Lungs wasted, cures the dry Cough, and asswageth the heat of the Vrine: yeelds a good nourishment and moisture to dry bodies, and redu∣ceth the blood to a good temper; Likewise augmenteth sperme, yet the conversion thereof is swift, and therefore not to bee u∣sed of those that haue Feavers, nor of those that have any paine in the head, through any disease. Those that are troubled with Collickes, or any other the like, Cowes milke, Cowes milke of any other, is accounted most grosse, and is good for all those that would fat∣ten their bodies. Asses milke, for all those that Asses milk would macerate themselues, and make leane their bodies, being moyst, subtile, and piercing, and naturally good against the Con∣sumption of the Lungs. Goats milke, betwixt both these, Goats milke. holds a temper, but Sheeps milke above all other engendreth super∣fluities. Isacke saith, that milke being used of those that are in health, so Sheepes milke, not often in time, nor much in quantity, ingenders good blood, moystens the belly, helpes the brest, the Consumption of the Lungs, and the paine in the blad∣der, especially if it have lost the watrishnesse thereof, being com∣pounded and thickned with some other thing, as Rise, or such like. Rasis saith, that the milke of Butter helps the flux of the belly, Butter∣milke. the red choller, and those that have leane and weake bodies: And the better doth it those things, if some hot Iron shall be oftentimes quenched therein. Whey likewise hath his ver∣tue Whey. cleansing the Scab, the Iaun∣dise, and pushes of the skinne, and the red Choller, and cooleth the stomacke, heated by inflamation of Wines, or other hot drinks. Fresh-Butter, skinnes the raw∣nesse of the throat, destroies Ring∣wormes and Tetters, and abateth the rednesse of the face, taking a∣way the wheales and pimples thereon, and so cleareth the skin, and beautifieth the Complexion: yet doth it ascend the top of the stomacke, and there breeds a kind of loathing. Butter sod weakens the sto∣macke, but mollifies hard impo∣stumes; Butter Codde. and being applied in plai∣sters, helpes the byting of Vipers, or other venemous beasts: yet the continuall eating thereof, breeds Phlegmaticke diseases; yet not∣withstanding more soluble and nourishable it is and of greater vertue then many other things. CHAP. XXVI. Of Cheese. NEw Cheese is of nature cold and grosse, neither can be said to be simply good, being so cold and heavy of it selfe, but being old it varies therein according to the antiquity: that which is of a salt sharpe taste, is both hot and bur∣ning, causing thirst, drying-up the body, and little nourishing; yet that which is old and fresh, being taken in a small quantity after meat, closeth the mouth of the stomacke, taking away the sacie∣ty, fulnesse, and loathing from thence, which may be caused by excesse of sweet meat taken be∣fore. Isacke saith further, that Cheese for the most part is bad for the heavinesse, it over-loads the sto∣macke withall, and the hardnesse of digestion in it; and thereby the often users thereof are incident to the Chollicke and stone in the Reines, yet measurably taken, the lesse it offends; Of which one thus merrily jests: (Cheese, The Rich and Poore doe both eat Yet both alike not feed; The Rich man takes it for his tast, The poore man for his need. CHAP. XXVII. Of Fishes. FIshes (as saith Isacke) are ge∣nerally cold, and doe engen∣der Phlegme, and are fit and con∣venient to be eaten hot, and of those of dry complexions, and e∣specially in the Summer time, and in hot Countries: for very unfit they are for cold and moyst com∣plexions, especially, in cold sea∣sons and Countries. There are diuersity of Fishes, as Sea-fishes, and Riuer-fishes: The Sea-fishes are those that are Sea fishes River-fi∣shes. bred in the Sea, but those that are bred in the Banks, and stony and sandy places, are more subtile and laudable, and more easie of dige∣stion then other of the Sea-fishes are, and doe engender more and better blood, yet slowly passe out of the stomacke, by reason of their le e moysture. But Fishes of sweet-waters, are for the most part grosse and slymie and harder of Digestion; yet they more easily passe the stomacke; but though they are lesse nourish∣able then the Sea-Fish are, yet these are best, and thereby bette∣red, that are bred in running-wa∣ters, being stony at the bottome, and farre from the anncyance of Cities, or any other filth. But Fishes in abiding Ditches, and standing-waters, are worse then the rest, for the harshnesse of their taste, and hardnesse of Dige∣stion: and especially the worse, if they be farre from the Sea, or o∣ther Riuers, whereunto no Fresh∣waters have recourse. Rasis saith, that all Fishes are hard of digestion, staying long in the stomacke, causing drynesse and thirst; and from those that are fresh, is engendred a Phlegmati∣call blood, which doth breed an ill slyme in the body, out of which springs many infirmities. Therefore those Fishes are to be chosen and reputed best, whose substance is not slymie, nor very grosse, nor hath any euill smell, or d e soone putrifie; nor are such that remaine in Lakes & Marishes nor stinking-waters, nor standing∣pooles, or in a place where they have ill meat, nor those that re∣maine amongst weeds. Salt-Fishes are by no meanes to Salt-fishe be eaten, vnlesse at such a time as one would Physicke himselfe to vomit thereupon; If any man de∣sire them, let him take a small quantity thereof, and let him take it with some oylie or soluble meat. The River-Crabs, according to Auicen, are very good for those rabbes. that have weak bodies; and being eaten with Asses-milke, are good against the Consumption of the Lungs. Likewise the broth made thereof, will dissolue the hardest impostume ingendred in the body if it may have accesse thereunto. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Pulses. NExt are we to speak of some kinds of Pulses, and first of Rice. Rice: Isacke saith in his third booke of Dyets, thar Rice is dry in the fourth degree, and hot in the first; and being boyled with water, helpeth the chollicke, and being boyled with Almonds, be∣commeth soluble and laxative, nourishing well, begetting good blood, and augmenting sperme; and the water thereof taketh a∣way pimples from the face, and clarifies the skinne; but the Rind Rice-wa∣ter. or Pils thereof are reputed poyson as saith Avicen, yet being taken in drinke, doe extenuate paine in the mouth, and breake the impo∣stume upon the tongue. Beanes, according to Isacke, are Beane either greene or dry. The greene are cold and moyst in the first de∣gree, and nourish little, but beget grosse and raw humors, and cause a windinesse in the belly: but the old are cold and dry in the first de∣gree, and begets a windinesse and grosnesse in the uppermost part of the belly: from whence ariseth a fume that hurts the braine, where∣upon ensue idle Fancies and dreames; they are of much dige∣stion, but are retained long in the stomacke. The great white Beane being White Beanes not old, is the better; and being boyled with water, loseth much of his grosnesse and windinesse; especially if the first water shall be taken away, and a second added thereto, and so after well boyled, and eaten with Mints, Origan, Ci∣namon, and such like. And they that would be cleare of complexi∣on, and mundifie their skinne and bodies, let them use to wash them with the flower thereof. Rasis saith, that greene Beanes beget raw humours in the sto∣macke, A receit for women and procure Phlegme in the entrailes, and a windinesse in the guts. Lentils, according to Rasis, are cold and dry, and engender me∣lancholy L tils, blood, dry the body, dim the sight, and engender many o∣ther diseases, being often used. And Isacke further saith, that they fill the brainewith grosse and heavy fumes, from whence pro∣ceeds a paine in the Head, and fearefull dreames thereupon. Ciches (as saith Isacke) are Ciches. both white and blacke; the white are hot in the first degree, and moyst in the middle, and are hard to digest, causing inflamation and windinesse; insomuch that the flesh is extended and puffed up thereby: whence it comes, that the eaters thereos are of cleare skinne: For the Flesh being puf∣fed up, becomes thereby the more white and cleare. The blacke are hotter then the white, and lesse moyst; and helpe the opilation of the Liver, being boyled with Parsley, and Liquo∣rish, and the broth thereof drunk, increaseth milke and sperme, and provokes Vrine. Pease, as saith Arnold de Villa∣nova, in his Tract of the Govern∣ment Pease. of health, are of this nature; that if they are moystened with Ciches a whole Night in sweet∣water, and the day following boi∣led with two or three heats, and then strained, and being strained, kept, and at meat, being heat a∣gaine with a littlewhite-wine, and a little of the dust of Spike-nard and Saffron, and a little salt, and supped at the Table, or taken with a piece of bread, clenseth the veines of the Head, and the passa∣ges of the water: and the more efiectually doth it, being boyled with Parsley and Alisanders. But the vulgar are too much deceived, that thinke they should be softened againe in Lee, because by that second softening, all the thinne substance and appetite is added, which by the first mollify∣ing was separate and lost. CHAP. XXIX. Of Pot-hearbs. NOw according to our Me∣thod, are we to speake of Pot-hearbs, that their effects may be the better knowne. Garlicke, according to Rasis, is hot and dry, causing thirst, and provoking lust, expelling windi∣nesse, and heating the body; yet is not to be eaten of persons of hot complexions, neither in hot coun∣tryes, nor seasons. Galen calleth it the Countrey-mans Treakle; and the stench thereof, Beanes or Lentils being roasted and eaten after, will take away. Likewise▪ Rue being chewed, and a little of it swallowed into the throat, hath the same effect. Also worme∣wood, Mynts, or wild-mynts be∣ing chewed, and a little vinegar taken after them, are likewise adiuvant therein. The like doth the root of Beets, being eaten, as Pliny noteth: though the old verse seemeth to import other∣wise, which saith, If Leekes you like, but doe their smell disleeke, Eat Onyons, and you shall not smell the Leeke: If you of Onyons would the seem expell, Eat Garlicke, that shall drowne the Onions smell: But against Garlicks sauour, at a word, I know but one Receit, and that's [ ] Sorrell, according to Rasis, is Sorrell. hot and dry, and the vertues thereof are to binde the belly, sharpen the stomacke, helpe Red choller, and quench thirst. And Avicen saith, that the mouth be∣ing rubbed with the iuyce there∣of, is a present remedy for the Tooth-ache. Dyll, according to Isacke, in Dyll. his second booke, is hot and dry; and being taken in wine, dissolveth windinesse and Tumors, and the leaves thereof sod in oyle, have the like effect: And further, re∣fresh after labour, and provoke sleepe, as the seed being drunke doth Vrine; increasing milke, and clensing the belly from putrifacti∣on of humors. Auicen likewise noteth, that it causeth sleepe; and further, that it helpes the bulking in the sto∣macke, caused through the opera∣tion of meats: but the often ea∣ting thereof, weakens the sight, though it lengthens the shortnesse of the winde, caused through Phlegme, and stuffing in the Lungs. Likewise it expelleth wormes in the body, and helpeth a bad digestion. The Garden Lectuice (accor∣ding Lectuice. to Isacke) is better than any other hearbs, for the engendring of a good blood, and is the bet∣ter, not being washed in water; howsoever it is easie of Digesti∣on, a procurer of Vrine, and good against the red choller, cooles the boyling of the blood in the sto∣macke, causing sleepe, and aug∣menting sperme and milke. The Mynt (saith Isacke) is hot Mynts. and dry in the second degree; provokes an Appetite, takes away all putrifying humors, supples the Sharpn sse of the Tongue, being rubbed therewith, and the mouth being washed with the Decocti∣on thereof; and the powder of the dryed Mynt, is sweetened a∣gainst the putrifaction of the Gummes, and rottennesse of the Teeth. Cresses (saith Isacke) doth heat the stomacke and the Liver, mol∣lifie Cresses. the belly, provoke Lust, scowre the Lungs, helpe the shortnesse of winde, and theri∣sing of the spleene: and taken of women with child, doth cause ab∣ortions and untimely births. Poppey (saith Isadke) is white Poppey. Opium takē, cau∣seth sl e∣ping to death. and blacke; Of the blacke is made Opium, but the white is more laudable, and of better disposition: Of both which Dioscorides saith, that the eaters thereof shall be subject to much sleep and sorget∣fulnesse. Rasis saith, that the seed of the white Poppey is cold; and ea∣seth Whiee Poppoy. both the throat and the brest, and augmenteth sleepe. Alisanders, or wild Parsley, as saith Serapion, being made into Alisander a Plaister, and applyed unto either Pushes, Morphew, or Scab; doe cleanse it exceedingly. Likewise ease the paines of the Bladder, and the Reines, opening the pores of the body, and scouring the pas∣sages of the urine, and expelling fweat: Likewise cleanseth the Liuer, and dissolveth windynesse and chollicke. And further, Rasis saith, it is hot and dry, and although it much helpe the Appetite, yet causeth it head-ache, and other paines therein: whence proceeds fan∣tasies and ill dreames, much hur∣ting those that are troubled with heat, and therefore after it should be eaten Purslane and Endive, to ullay the heat thereof; yet being eaten raw, it cleares the conduits of the Lungs from grosse humors, opens the opilations of the Liver, & asswageth the pain in the throat Purslane, according to Rasis, doth quench the heat, drynesse, Purslane. and thirst in the body, bindeth the belly, and easeth the paine in the Teeth, and helpeth those that are troubled with the Fluxe, caused through rednesse of Choller: Like∣wise it diminisheth sperme. Avi∣cen saith, Let Warts be rubbed To take a∣waywarts therewith, and they are taken a∣way. The Raddish, saith Rasis, is hot and dry, and stayeth long in the Raddish aves. stomacke; withall, it diminisheth Phlegme, but elevates the meat to the mouth of the stomacke, and causeth vomiting: the leaves thereof further digestion, and help the Appetite, taken in a small quantity before meat. Isacke saith, being taken after meat, they allay the windinesse thereof, cau∣sing it to descend with the owne substance. Dioscorides saith, the Root be∣ing taken with salt, breeds store of milke, provokerh Vrine, and womens monthly Termes; and being put into a hollow Tooth, with a little Ginger, the Gumme being rubbed therwithall, it allaies the paine exceedingly. Rapes, according to Isacke, are Rapes. hot in the second degree, and moyst in the first, and of more nourishment then other herbs, yet are hard at first to digest: They do dillicate and mollifie the flesh, and prouoke lust, and aug∣ment sperme. Pliny saith, that the Rape being boyled and appli∣ed, drives the cold from the feet, and hath a marvellous vertue to inlighten the understanding. Rue, according to Isacke, helps the Digestion, and hath a vertue Rue. to expell all grosse and slymie hu∣mours, to dissolve windinesse in the stomacke, and moysten the belly. Avicen saith, that it takes away the smell of Garlicke and Onions, sharpens the sight, and abateth lust. Sage, according to Dioscorides, represseth the menstrues in wo∣men, Sage. causing abortions, and un∣timely births: and the leaves and branches thereof, being fryed, stay the itching or tickling of nature: The Iuyce of the leaves thereof, being rubbed upon haire of any colour, turneth it to blacke, like∣wise helpeth the byting of vene∣mous beasts. Spinage is good for the Lungs, Spinage. the Throat, and the Stomacke, making soluble the belly, and gi∣ving good nourishment. Sow-beard, or Mushrome, ac∣cording to Rasis, is cold and grosse, Mushrom and being taken raw, ingenders Phlegmes, the Chollicke, and windinesse in the guts: neither is it to be eaten but with hot saw∣ces, and meats, but the red is not to be eaten at all. Toad-stoole. The Toad-stoole is much worse then the Mushrome; for it hath choaked and killed many that have taken it; and the best that it doth, is but to breed Phlegme in the body in abundance. And these are signes of the deadly nature and disposition of it; the softnesse, slyminesse, and grosnesse: and which being cut in the middle, and but set out of hand, it doth instantly putrisie and corrupt. CHAP. XXX. Of Fruits. GAlen my Father, because he eat no Fruit in all his life, li∣ued long, and in health: whose example in his life, I imitated, but then being dead, my example lost, I began to eat fruits, whereupon insued unto me many infirmities: Afterwards I abstained from all greene fruits, and was free from many infirmities which before I was incident unto; and all indeed, unlesse a dayes Fever, or sudden passion, and my Friends which were counselled by me, and ab∣stained likewise, in their whole lives, were not troubled with ma∣ny diseases. Figges, according to Rasis, doe Figges. cleanse the Reines from the Gra∣vell and stone; but being new, they are windy, though otherwise they breed little of ill humour, especi∣ally if they finde the stomacke cleane: But if not, they putrifie Figsbreed Lice. therein, and corrupt, and the of∣ten eating thereofbreeds Lice. Datet are hot, and give a nou∣rishment to the body, thickning Dates. the grosse blood, and polluting it, especially if taken often at meat: likewise they hurt the Teeth, and increase Phlegme. Dioscorides saith, Dates are hot and moyst in the second degree, and easier digested then Figges, and more provoke Vrine, but those that use them, shall be inci∣dent to the swelling of the splene and Lyver. Grapes, as saith Rasis, being Grapes. ripe and sweet, are hot in them∣selves, yet of lesse heat then Dates, neither doe they cause opi∣lations as Dates doe: yet are they windy, and some degree more hurtfull; they fatten the body much, and cause erection of the yard; but those of the slenderest skinne, doe the soonest descend, and are lest windy. Those which are sowre and tart, are of lesse heat than the sweet; and these being washed in cold water, and eaten before meat, doe quench the heat in the stomacke and Ly∣ver. Bitter Grapes are cold and strin∣gent, Bitter Grapes. and represse the red choller and superfluity of blood: but those that are dry and temperate in heat and nourish well, make no opila∣tions as the Date doth, although they are stronger, and nourish more. Pomegranats, that are sweet, Pomegra∣nates. saith Rasis, in stead of cooling the body, ingender a heat and windi∣nesse therein: yet they supple the throat, as the sowre doe cause a sharpnesse and gnawing in the stomacke, and ingender wind in the Heart and Lyver; yet saith Avicen, they allay the red chol∣ler, and heat of the blood, represse Fevers, and vomiting. Isacke saith, that the P me∣granate apples are more usuali for Medicine, than meat, for they give but small nourishment: al∣though it be good, yet, saith he, they doe quench the sharpnesse of humors, comfort the stomacke, and the juyce thereof, being drop∣ped into the eyes of the sicke of Areceit for the Iaundise. the Iaundise, takes away the yel∣lown sse from thence. Citrons, saith Rasis, whether they be sweet or sowre, do streng∣then Citrons. the stomacke, but especially the sowre: They bind the belly, being taken before meat, but ta∣ken after, dissolve it; but the sowre are ever the most potent in the operation thereof. Peares, according to Galen, being taken before meat, do bind, Peares▪ but after meat are laxatiue. Isacke saith, that sweet Peares are tem∣perate, especially if they be eaten with the Toad-stoole, it takes a∣way the toughnesse, and makes them of a lighter digestion. The wild Apples, according Apples▪ to Rasis, as aforesaid, are cold; and the more sowre they are, the more stringent they be, much de∣riving their effects from thence; and withall, ingendring a slymie substance in the mouth of the sto∣macke. Avicen saith, that Sweet-Apples naturally do strengthen the heart; Sweet Apples. and baked, helpe the appetite but little, though some affirme the contrary: the daily eating thereof fils the veines with heat. Peaches, according to Avicen, Peaches. if they be ripe, are plersant in the stomacke, and cause an appetite to meat, and therefore are not to be eaten after other meat, but to goe before, and especially those meats that are dry, because other∣wise they corrupt the same: They are slow of digestion, and are not perfectly good, though of much nourishment. Isacke saith, that the great Peaches, (if they be ripe) doe mollifie and loosen the belly, but the unripe doe binde it. The les∣ser Peaches are good for the sto∣macke, and doe abstract from thence all satieties and loathing. Medlers, according to Isacke, are cold and dry in the first degree Medlers. strengthen the stomacke, and ex∣pell chollericke digestion, provo∣king vomits and urine: but those are most directory, that are taken before meat, and doe most com∣fort the stomack, least hurting the sinewes thereof; which if after∣wards they doe, Dioscorides saith, there are many that imagine they helpe the loathing of the stomack ing taken in the instaht thereof. Of Cytron-Apples, Avicen saith that the Rind thereof being held Cytron Apples. in the mouth, yeeldeth a good sa∣vour; the juyce thereof killeth Ring-wormes, the Decoction thereof causeth a good colour in the Face, and fattens the Bo∣dy. Mulberries ripe and sweet, ac∣cording Mulber∣ries. to Isacke, doe moysten the belly, and provoke Vrine, but soone depart the stomacke: but being taken fasting, in cold water, are very cooling, quench the thirst and extinguish heat. Plummes, saith Isacke, are of two sorts, white and red: The Plummes white are hard of digestion, and hurtfull to the stomacke; the red are moyst and soluble by nature, and much mollifie the belly, and helpe the red choller; yet being tak n often, hurt the stomacke; but before meat ever the lesse. Cherries, according to Isacke, are very convertible, but ingen∣der a Cherries. gross Phlegme and slymin s in the concave places of the Lyver and splene, and therefore often∣times ingender Fevers, and are bad all manner of wayes, but best if taken before meat: for other∣wise they swimme on the top of the stomacke being full, and there are soone turned into rottennesse. The Almond, according to Almonds. Rasis, is temperate and hot; and although it supples the throat, yet it is heavy to the stomacke, and there doth remaine long, opening the opilations of the splene, and allaying the heat of the urine, and being eaten with Sugar, doe in∣crease sperme. Garden-Parsley, saith Isacke, eaten, opens opilations, provokes Parsley. Vrine, binds the belly, hurts the diseased of the Falling-sicknesse, and is especially bad for women with child, breeding ulcers and Pushes upon the body thereof: neither can we commend the ver∣tue thereof to any, because it con∣tracts all the humours in euery member together in the stomock, whence proceeds vomiting, the Seed and branches, both provoke Vrine, yet the seed more then the branches. Orage or Attriplex, as saith Orage, or Artiplex Rasis, is cold and moyst, doth mol∣lifie the belly, and nourish well, and is good for those that have hot Lyvers: Yet Pliny saith, that by them many diseases are ingendred as wheales, and pushes, and such like. Red-Carrots, according to Ra∣sis, Red Car∣rots. are hot and windy, and hard of digestion, and doe adde a sharp∣nesse vnto the sperme; withall, provoking urine and lust, as beget∣ting ill blood and humours. Beets, according to Pliny, are Beets. of two kinds, white and blacke ▪ The blacke being sodden in wa∣ter, doe cure the Itch, and the juyce thereof doth helpe the gid∣dinesse in the Head, and allayes the singing in the Eares; and like∣wise as it provokes urine, and helpeth the paine in the Teeth, it stirreth lust, and excites: It is al∣wayes good against poyson. Borage, a cording to Constan∣tine, is hot and moyst in the first Borage. degree, and naturally purgeth the red choller, and easeth the Heart∣ache. The herbe eaten raw, ac∣cording to Platea, begets good blood. The stalke, as saith Rasis, ingenders the blacke choller, and begets fantasies and dreames, yet doth lenifie the breast, and throat, and aslwageth drunken∣nesse. The broth thereof drunke without the hearbe, loseth the belly, but the hearbe eaten with the broth, hindeth it, by the strange contrariety it hath: And therefore that the extremity may be tempered, let the first broth be cast away, and after boyle it, with something that is fat. Onyons, as saith Avicen, being Onyons. eaten with vinegar, doe neither coole nor heat, cause Thirst, nor suppresse it. For these vertues it is most commended, as saith Diossorides, that it helpeth the appatite being eaten, as the juyce thereof dropped into the nose, purgeth the Head. The juyce whereof, rubbed with vinegar up∣on the Face, taketh away spots: the much eating thereof molifieth the belly, and provoketh to sleepe. Gourds, saith Avicen, much prevaile against choller, yet are Gourds. hurtfull for mellancholy and phlegmatike persons, the juyce Receit for tooth-ach thereof held long in the mouth, as∣swageth Tooch-ache. Cummin is hot and dry, accor∣ding to Rasis, and much helpeth Cummi digestion, dissolveth windinesse; Taken with vinegar, stay the monthly termes of women, and being taken in drinke, or annoin∣ted thereon, stoppeth the blee∣ding of the nose, and often used, it causeth palenesse, and abateth colour: as the seed thereof being mingled with water or drinke, al∣layes the windinesse and griping of meats boyled with them, and being seuerally taken, kils worms in the maw. Fennell, as saith Isacke, and the seed thereof, augmenteth milke, Fennell. helpeth the opilation of the lyver, purgeth the raines, and bladder, and breaketh the stone, and is forcible against Quotidian-agues, and taken with meat, helpes the running of the eyes. Isope (as saith Rasis) is very hot, Isope. and being much eaten, dims the sight. Bitter-Almonds, according to Bieter Almonds'. Isacke, are hot and dry in the end of the second digestion, doe both extenuate and strengthen the stomacke, and dissolve all slymie and grosse humours: Likewise cleares the brest and the Lungs from Phlegme, and opens the opi∣lations of the Lyver and splene. Nuts, according to Rasis, doe Nuts. turne all chollericke thicke hu∣mours that they find in the sto∣macke, into choller it selfe; and doe cause an aching and giddinesse in the head; but that this hurtfull and ill nature may be taken from them (saith one) they ought to be layd a whole night in warme wa∣t r, and so to be cleansed and moi∣stened. Dioscorides saith, two Nuts, with two dry Figges, and twenty Rue leaves, with a graine of salt, Pr ser∣uatiue a∣gainst posson. being all beaten together, and ea∣ten fasting, make a speciall pre∣servative against all poyson. Filbers, according to Rasis, are lesse hot than small-nuts, but more Filberds. heavy; and they are vertuous in Medicine, against the prickings of Scorpions. Serapion saith, that Filberds being roasted, and eaten with a little Pepper, doe exsiccate and dry up Rhumes. Chesnuts, according to Constan∣tine, Chesnuts. are windy, and provoke lust, ye lding much nourishment, yet are hard of digestion, but being roasted (saith he) become more easie and behoveful, both in good∣nesse and taste. The Wall-nut (saith Isacke) is Walnut. unobedient to Digestion, and much hinders egestion, though it pro∣cure Vrine: and the cating there∣of (saith he) are commonly more for pleasure than profit, since they little nourish the body, but much offend it. CHHP. XXXI. Of sundry kinds of Spices. PEpper (according to Isacke) as aforesaid, well digesteth our Pèpper. meat, allaying the windinesse therein, yet being a spice very hot, much heats the stomacke and the Lyver, hurting those exceedingly that have hot bodies, especially much used in the summer. Ginger is hot and moyst, and a Ginger. Digester of meat likewise, and is good for those of cold Lyvers and stomacks, as otherwise much be∣neficiall to the body; besides, hel∣ping the Rhumes in the Eyes, like∣wise drying up al superfluous moi∣stures in the Head, the decayers both of memory and wit. Setwell, according to Avicen, Setwell. is the Triacle and Quintestence of all poyson, yet saith Constan∣tine, being well compounded, it dissolves all windinesse in the bo∣dy, and strengthens the stomacke, provokes an appetite, takes away the stinch of Garlicke, being put into the mouth: And Macrobius saith, it allayes the heat and infla∣mation of winds. Galingale (according to Rasis) resolves windinesse, breedeth a Galingala good smell in the mouth, pleaseth the stomacke, and is a Digester of meats. And Auicen saith fur∣ther, it asswageth the chollicke passion, provokes lust, and miti∣gates the paine in the reines. Cloves, according to Avicen, are hot and dry in the third degree, and well relish the body, sharpens Clou s. the sight, helps the paine in the stomacke and Lyver. Cynamon, according to Rasis, is hot and dry, and strengthens the stomacke and the Lyver, helpeth namen digestion, expels windinesse, ope∣neth opilations, provokes the Menstrues and urine. Saffron, according to Isacke, is hot and dry in the first degree, Saffron. strengthens the stomacke and Ly∣ver, and is good against the short∣nesse of the wind, and likewise for women làbouring with child. Rasis speaking of himselfe, saith; There was a woman in travell long, and could not be delivered, and I gave unto her 3. 1 of saf∣fron, and she was presently deli∣vered: and likewise of others have I often tryed it, and found it unfallible: And further in the A receit against drunken∣nesse. commendations thereof (saith he) it being put into a cup of wine, and drunken therein, much exhil∣lerateth the heat, and cheareth the countenance. Pliny, in his second booke saith, that he that first drinkes Saffron in the morning, may drinke all day after with what company soever, and never be offended therewith. Carawayes, according to Con∣stantine, Carawais are hot and dry in the third degree, and dissolve windi∣nesse, strengthen the stomack, and kill wormes in the belly, further digestion, and provoke urine. CHAP. XXXII. Of Sawces; as Mustard, Salt, Vi∣negar, Honey, and Oyle. MVstard is hot and dry, in the middle of the fourth degree: and thereby dryes up the Mustard moysture of the head and the sto∣macke: And some say, that being drunke in the Morning fasting, it cleares the humours of the head, and much helpeth the understan∣ding. Pliny saith in his second booke, being taken in Vinegar, it breaketh the stone. Salt, according to Rasis, is hot Salt. and dry, abstracting all hurtfull and moyst humours from our meats, relisheth the tast thereof, and sharpens the Appetite; but being over-much taken, dryes the body, and hardens the bloo , wea∣kens the sight, and dlminisheth Sperme, and breedeth the itch. Vinegar is cold and dry, and ma∣cerates Uinegar. the body, diminisheth strength, strengthens the blacke choller, and dryes up sperme, but weakens the red choller & blood, makes subtile, and piercing the meats wherewith it is mingled. Honey, as saith Isacke in his Honey. second booke, is hot and dry in the second degree, and through the pores of the body emptieth all ill humour, caused through any ind gestion or Distemperature thereof, and much cleanseth the veines, and therefore is good for those that are cold and moyst by nature, and especially for old men; but ill for those of hot bodies and complexions, because thereby it is changed into chollericke hu∣mors, especially by the heat of the blood. And further Avicen writes thereof, that being raw, it ingen∣ders windinesse in the stomacke, and a bitternesse in the brest, and a sharpnesse at the Heart, procu∣ring also vomits and egestions. The Oyle of Olives, (saith Oyle of Olives. Plynie in his fourth booke, descri∣bing the nature thereof,) is to soften the belly, cleare the Face, expell poyson from the Heart, al∣lay windinesse, helpe the Eye∣sight, asswage the paine of the head, and all burning Fevers. The Oyle of Nuts (saith Rasis) Oyle of Nuts. is very hot and binding, and accor∣ding to Avicen, helps the shin∣gles, S. Anthonies fire, and the Fi∣stula in the corners of the eyes. The Oyle of Almonds, accor∣ding to Rasis, is very temperate, O le of Almonds and easeth the brest and the Lungs of many infirmities, as also the Bladder and the Reines; yet breeds a loathing in the stomacke and slowly descendeth: Accor∣ding to Dioscorides, it taketh a∣way the spots in the Face, and healeth and closeth up all skarres, and grounds of wounds that usu∣ally remaine after the cure, helps the dimnesse of the Eyes, and takes away the scurfe from the Head. The Oyle of Poppey is ad∣judged to the nature of Poppey it selfe. Thus having discoursed of the nature and qualities of the most principall meats and drinkes usu∣all amongst us, we come now to set downe as a necessary addition to the first booke, a short directi∣on and rule for preservation and continuance of Health. Regimen Sanitatis. A Mans owne observation up∣on his owne body, experi∣mentally, what he findes good, or evill, is the best Physicke to pr ∣serve health; but it is a safer con∣clusion to say, This agreeth not well with mee, therefore I will leave it off: then, that I finde no offence in this, therefore I may continue it; for strength of na∣ture in youth passeth over many infirmities, that he must pay for hereafter in age. Discover and discerne the cre ∣ping on of old age, yeeld to it, and thinke not to doe as formerly thou hast, for Age will not bee kept off. Beware of sudden change, in a∣ny long accustomed point of Diet or health; and if necessity inforce it, fit thy selfe to it; for it is a secret both in Nature and State, That it is safer to change many things of lesse moment then one of more consequence. Examine thy custome of Dyer, Sleepe, Exercise, Apparell, and the like; and try in anything thou shalt judge hurtfull, to disconti∣nue it by degrees; but so, as if thou dost finde any inconvenience by the change, thou mayst return: For, it is hard to distinguish that which is generally held good and wholesome, from that which is good particularly, and fit onely for thine owne body. To be free minded, and cheare∣fully disposed at houres of meat, sleepe, and of exercise, is one of the best precepts of long lasting life. As for the passions and studies of the mind, avoyd envy, anxious feares, anger, fretting inwardly, subtle and knotty Inquisitions, sudden joyes, and exhilerations in excesse, sadnesse not communica∣ted. Entertaine hopes, mirth ra∣ther then joy, variety of delights, rather than surfet of some one wonder, and admiration: And therefore, Novelties and studies that fill the minde with splendid and illustrious object, as Histories, Fables, and contemplations of this Nature, are good. If you fly Physicke in health al∣together, it will be too strange for your body when you shall need it: if you make it too fami∣liar, it will worke no extraordina∣ry effect when sicknes commeth. I commend rather some dyet for certaine seasons, then frequent use of Physicke, except it be growne into a custome; for those dyets al∣ter the body more, and trouble it lesse. Despise no new accident in your body, but aske opinion of it, and that quickly. In sicknesse, respect health principally, and in health, action; for those that put their bodies to indure in health, may in most sicknesses, which are not very sharpe, be cured onely with di∣et and good keeping. Celsus could never have spo∣ken it as a Physician, had he not beene a wise man withall, when he giveth it for one of the greatest precepts of health and long life, That a man doe vary and enter∣change contraries; but with an inclination to the more benigne treame. Vse fasting and full eating, but rather full eating: watching and sleepe, but rather sleepe: fitting and exercise, but rather exercise, and the like: so shall Nature be cherished, and yet taught maste∣ries. Physicians are some of them so pleasing and conformable to the humour of the Patient, as they presse not the true cure of the disease: and some other are so regular in proceeding according to Art, as they respect not suffici∣ently the condition of the Patients Take one therefore of a middle temper; or if it may not be found in one man, conjoyne two of ei∣ther sort, and forget not to call aswell the best acquainted with your body, as the best reputed for his owne faculty. The Physicians further counsell. Principiis obsta sero medicina pa∣ratur, Cum ala per longas, invaluere moras. Englished. Delay not any knowne disease te long, Left thou grow weaker, and it grow more strong. Briefe, but excellent Rules for health. RAw fruits thy stomacke will annoy, Beware of drinking late, L ng watching with disorder'd houres Will soone impaire thy state. Impatience is no friend to health, A fretting irefull mood Will stirre the veines, and hurt the braines, And eke infect the blood. Eat seldome of the salt and sowr The windy roots eschew, The Lemm n and the Cowcumb Will make thy stomalke rue. The bale and bane of eyes & sight Is Venus, Wind and Fire: Oft looking downe doth burthe much, Cold water they desire, To rub, to kembe, to stretch thi armes, If fasting that thou be, To body, head, and splene also, Are wholesome things for thee Noone-sleeps, much sloath, and si ∣ting still, What breed they else but woe? Who ever saw a sloathfull man, A healthfull body show? To ache, to gout, to stone, to rhum To palsie, piles and all, A lazy body by desert, Continually is thr all. Vse Exercise in measure then, If sound thou wilt be still, But after sweat, beware of cold, For that will breed much ll. Ware how thou sit, or e on ground For that thy ioynts will lame: Thy body drawes soone from the earth, That will corrupt the same. Th' early morning mountain walks And eke the running streames, Refresh the wearied spirits of man, When Phoebus shews his beames. But 'war at night when dew is faln And Sun by course is set, Then noysome Ayre, e're thou be∣ware, Will soone thy Corps infect. A Pothecaries shop of Drugs, Let not thy stomacke be; Nor use no Physicke till tho need, Thy friend adviseth thee. Let seldome blood but when disease Or Plurisies doe call, But after fifty yeeres be past, Beware, bleed not at all. Eschew lewd lust, if thou be wise, Hot spice, and wine for beare; Fly sunfet, ryot, and xcesse, And eke l ng sweating, heare. Observe those Rules & Lessons wel, Keepe Necke and Feet from cold, So maist thou liue by naturs course Till yeares have mad thee old. And so endeth the first booke of The Philosephers Banquet; containing a Discourse of the Na∣tures, Vertues, and Dispositions of those things that are eaten and drunke at our Tables, as they are collected from the works of the most Famous and Learned Do∣ctors, both of ancient and modern times. THE SECOND BOOKE; OR, SECOND COVRSE at the Philosophers Binquet. PROEME. H Aving now dis∣coursed of the nature and ver∣tue of those things, which are usually ea∣ten and drun∣ken at our Tables; Next it re∣maineth that we proceed with the manners and conditions of those that may accompany us at our Tables: Of which Macrobius saith, that there is nothing more conjunctive or proper to wise∣dome, then the fitting of our speech to Time, and Place, and Persons, as occasion may call us. And therefore that the Pallat may bee the better seasoned with the variety and passages of our discourse from one thing to ano∣ther. Wee will beginne to discourse of Emperours, Kings, and Poten∣tates, applying the wise sayings, and constant resolutions, ever to our selves; and that in a double use: The one for our discourse and pleasure, which also manifests our industry and Reading; the o∣ther for our imitation and pra∣ctice, which likewise proclaimes our inclination and vertue, as well to prosecute, as know the steppes; the frugality of one, the parcimony of another, the Resolution of a third; (and as striving to eschew their vices,) so still making the best of every their good, the pat∣terne of our levell and ayme; and because our mindes aspire, and our inclinations are to discourse, and admire the Acts and Atchieve∣ments of our Superiours: there∣fore we will first commence with Emperours. CHAP. I. Of Emperours. SVetonius, in his booke of the twelve Caesars, thus writeth Iul. Caesar of Iulius Caesar, That hee was of Wine very sparing, as his very e∣nemies have not denyed; about his meat indifferent, as appeareth in his travell, where he came into an Inne to eat, and finding nothing but greene herbs and oyle, he fell to them, not disdainfully, when others neglected the same; to shew that he neither despised the simplicity of the man, nor the homelinesse of the cates. And thus further Suetonius addes, that he was of very small dyet for meat, and very sparing in wine: drinking neuer at Supper above thrice, as at no other time, but for necessity: And sometimes for his drinke would he take Bread sop∣ped into water, or the fruit or juyce of Cowcumbers, or of Apples. Haelimandus, of the Institution of Princes, saith further, that Iu∣lius Iullus Caesar. Caesar cast his Baker into pri∣son, because he made him better bread then the rest of his souldi∣ers: And concerning his resoluti∣on, the successe of his warres, and the dangers of his enterprises well witnesse the same. As that when upon a time being committed to the Sea, in a little bottome, and a great tempest; the Marriner hopelesse of helpe, as fearefull of danger, cryed out, We shall pe∣rish; Feare not (saith he) you car∣ry Caesar. And for his sobriety, it was so much, that when Pompo∣nius Caesar , vehi . Flaccus, and Piso, his two fa∣miliar Friends, had continued Banquetting two dayes, and one night, in the excesse and gluttony both of meats and drinkes, hee tooke from the one, the Province of Syria, whereof he was Gover∣nour; and from the other, the ste∣wardship of his house, for the hate he bare thereunto. It is alwayes set downe in the acts of the Romans, that Augustus Caesar was a man of small Dyet, Augustus Caesar. whom a little Bread, or a few small Fishes, or a few greene figs, or a little Cheese would suffice; and where it is further added, that he would feed in any place, or at any time when his stomacke best served him. Suctonius reporteth, that Tybe∣ ius Tyberius Ner . the Emperour was at first ve∣ry Regular and civill, tracing the steps of his father, but afterwards became so debauched, and exor∣bitant a person, so exceeding in drunkennesse and gluttony, that of Tyberius he was called Biberi∣us; of Claudius, Caldius; of Ne∣ro, Mero: and so proceeded from one bad, to another worse; that at last he might be superlative in e∣vill, eternally famous for his infa∣my. He caused the City of Rome to be set on fire in foure seuerall places at once, and whilst it bur∣ned, rejoycing in some sort with Heliogabulus, to be heire to him∣selfe; he played upon his Lute, reciting certaine verses out o Homer: Yet as if this were not enough (saith the same Author) that he might be unparalleld for ever, he afterwards caused the belly of his owne Mother to bee ripped, to see the place wherein he was bred, and once lay. He cau∣sed Senica his Schoole master to be set in warme bath, all his veines being cut, that he might bleed to death; as you may see in his Effi∣gies before his booke. Domitian the Emperour, excel∣ling in pride, amongst many other Domitian of his abominations, gave com∣mand to his Subjects to call him Saint ban ed to Pathmos god: In his time Saint Iohn was banished to Pathmos. This Emperour, for his cruelty afterwards, was murdered by his owne wife: an unnaturall death, for an abominable life. Hegysippus reporteth of Vitelli∣us the Emperour, in his fourth Vitellius the rour. booke of the destruction of Ieru∣salem, that when the City was besieged, and he enuiron'd round with his enemies, yet that still he continued in his riotous excesse of gluttony and drunkennesse, even to the very last houre, lest hee should lose the glory of his for∣mer shame; when in the end he was pulled from his Banquet, dragged into the very midst of the City, and there slaine; at once uing and bleeding, powring out his blood, and casting up his gall; which if he had long lived, what with his various luxury, and copi∣ous gluttony, he had wasted and consumed the whole Roman Em∣pire. To conclude, he was slaine when hee had reigned eight months, and five dayes, the price of which time, Rome hath long felt to lye heavy upon her. Of Adrian the Emperour, I find nothing greatly strange nor admi∣rable, Adrian. but that he was so excee∣dingly inclined to Dogges and Hunting, that he erected for his Spaniels and Grey-hounds, sepul∣chers and tombes wherein he bu∣ried them. He ended his life by bleeding at nose. CHAP. II. Of Kings. FRontins Stratagemater in his Alexan∣der. fourth booke, and third Chap∣ter, reporteth of Alexander the King, that in his journeying and travell, he would content himselfe with a little bread, or cold water. Againe, in his fourth booke, and seventh Chapter, hee reporteth, that in his tedious and hot jour∣nies, through the Desarts of Afri∣ca, being with his whole Army oppressed with thirst, yet when one of his souldiers brought him his helmet full of water, he pow∣red it forth in the sight of them all, to shew that hee would suffer and endure it for them. Heliman∣dus, as aforesaid, reporteth, that when Piso had invited Romulus to Romulus Supper, where noting his sobriety in refusing of Wines, said unto him, O Romulus▪ if all men would or could imitate thee in thy condition, Wine would be cheap: but it would be deare (saith hee) if every man might drink as free∣ly as I may: that is, if every man might drink as much as he would, for I have drunke as much as I could. Valerius reporteth in his fifth booke, and sixt Chapter, that A∣lexander the King, being driven on a time by Tempestin in the win∣ter Alexander. season, happened to come un∣to the house of an old Macedoni∣an souldier of his, who was now growne crooked, and furrowed with age, hauing taken his seat hard by the fire side; O saith he, behold the subduing power of age: This body have I knowne able to withstand the greatest violence of weathers, or persecutions that might fall upon man: These hands have beene able to weeld the sword, and could have made a way through the thickest, with their unresistable potency, and they are now palsied, and unable to gripe, scarce to lift food to the Head, (shall I live to be so?) The old man rising from his seat, to do his duty to the King, with his own hands he set him downe againe, full of compassion and commise∣ration. It was then no maruell if they counted it pleasure to serve so many yeares under such a Cap∣taine, whose care extended even to the meanest in his Campe, with as full regard as to himselfe. Pyrrhus the King, being at a certaine Banquet amongst the Ta∣rentines, K. , as he passed from thence through the streets, a drunken man lay fast asleepe in his way, whom by some he was instigated to punish, which he refused to doe; intending to use him other∣wise for his pleasure, and there∣fore commanded him to be taken up, and brought unto his Pallace, there layed on a bed of Downe, in a Chamber roofed with gold, and hangd with silke of costly co∣lours; when he should waken, his seruants to attend him, and invest him in rich Robes prepared for the purpose, with a Table furni∣shed with all varieties of dainties, or cates; as copiousn sse of wines, which was executed accordingly: when he, after his bestiall manner, having surfetted in excesse of meats, powred downe his cuppes in abundance, his servants still at∣tending and supplying their emp∣tinesse, yet making no answer to any thing he questioned, being so commanded, applied so long, un∣till at last hee fell againe fast a∣sleepe: which seeing, the King commanded him to be stript a∣gaine into his owne Ragges, and from thence carried to the place where before he lay, which was accordingly done. The next day, when he awaked againe, he reported that he had the most glorious dreame that ever deluded the sense of man, relating, as fantastically conceiving, what was substantially done, being sory that he ever waked againe; thin∣king it better (as he said) to be a sleeping King in conceit, than a waking beggar. By the which, the King thus morald, He was unfit to governe others, that could not gouerne himselfe. Pontus, King of India, as Quin∣tus Pontus, King of India. Curtius mentioneth, was of that resolution and valour, that when Alexander the Great, by whom he was afterwards subdu∣ed, came against him with a great and populous Army: One of his souldiers deserying them march∣ing a farre off, told the King that the pikes and launces of the ene∣my were so infinite in their num∣ber, that they darkened the Sun: who answered, The better for us, then we shall fight in the shade. And in the skirmi and joyning of the Battels afterwards, when K Pirr us pressing foremost himselfe, and in greatest danger, his Souldiers dropping downe at his heeles as they followed him, he turned a∣bout, and told them, You must not adventure so farre as I doe: Habent enim Principes peenlia quond Fori s am; For Kings hauce a certaine Lucke of their owne: though afterwards it fell out that he was slaine in that batteli himselfe. CHAP. III. Of Princes. PLutarch to Tyrianus, of the institution of Princes, saith, Plato affirmes, that when Gover∣nours oppresse their Subjects, it is as if the Head should oppresse the members of the Body, whereof it partakes it selfe. But when Sub∣jects oppresse their superiours, it is as if the Pupill should assault his Tutor, or should kill him with thatweapon he gives unto him for his owne def nce. Haelimandus, of the institution of Princes, saith, That Princes should be like Physicians, which never use sharpe medicines, but when the case is so desperate, that things of easier nature benifit not at all. Whereupon Lucius saith, that a Prince should be old in learning manners and wisdome: though otherwise young in yeares, as in vanities; and in many things should imitate the practice of the learned Physicians, which some∣times cure our diseases by the contraries of their accidents, as surfets by abstinence; abstinence by repletion; sometimes by cau∣terising and incision; otherwhile by unguents, and lenitive Appli∣cations; according to which, Plu∣tarch versifieth. Sit piger ad poenam Princeps, ad proemia velox, Et doleat quotiens cogitur esse ferex. Which is thus Englished: That Prince doth governe with most due regard, That slow doth punish, but doth swift reward. Of which mind was a vertuous Princesse in the land (and no Q. Eliz. doubt is a Prince at this day) who would oftentimes say in griefe of mind, and passion of spirit, when she was to signe any warrant for the Execution of any condemned offendor, Would God I could never have Written. Which well witnessed her to be, as our gracious King now is, K. Charls according to this Rule, Princep ad poenam piger, ad proemium velox. Aristotle in his third booke of Politiques, thus further writeth, concerning Princes: That Prince (saith he) that doth to his under∣standing and knowledge, beare rule over me and my subjects seemes to referre his governmen and theirs to the subjection God and his Lawes. But he ith to his natural man, beare over me, subjects himselfe to the dominion of a beast. For when Rage and Concupi∣scency beare rule in a Prince, himselfe (many times) as good men are slaine therewith: for which cause it is said, The under∣standing is a Law, setting the Ap∣petite aside. Vegetius de Remilitari, in his first booke and first Chapter, saith, that the Prince, of all others, should be learned and vertuous, upon whose good parts or defects, the eyes of whole kingdomes are fixed and bent, either to admire or dislike: and as he may doe most good with his learning and vertue, so most danger depends upon his ignorance and vice. For how can he give every man his owne, that wants this Rule and measure whereby to dis∣cerne it? And therefore saith Heliman∣ us, writing to the like rinces should wholly themselves to the study of Wise∣dome, and practise of Vertue. For as the least sparke or scruple of merit in them, is more spread and blowne by the breath of Rumor, then whole flames, whole ounces, in persons of lesser eminency. So likewise their errours and corruptions: To which effect these seeme to accord, as with their Author; The Crow doth bathe his cole-black wings in mire, And unperceiued flye with filth a∣way: But if the like the snow-white Swan desire, The staine upon her silver Down will stay. Poore groomes are sightlesse night, Kings glorious day. Gnats are unnoted wheresoe're they flye, But Eagles gaz'd upon with every Eye. And Princes are the Glasse, the Schoole, the Booke, Where Subjects eyes doe learne, doe read, doe looke. CHAP. IIII. Of the Bishops of the Gentiles. VAlerius in his fift booke, and Oratius Pulnellus fift Chapter, reporteth of one Oratius Pulnellus, a Gentile Bi∣shop, that had built and consecra∣ted a goodly and famous house to the honour of Iupiter; when in the pronunciation of their solemn Ceremonies, holding his hand upon a post, he heard that his son was slaine dead, yet notwithstan∣ding, as wholly possest with the zeale of his offering and devotion, never removed his hand from the post, nor changed his counte∣nance, nor cea ed from his exer∣cise; lest thereby he should passi∣nate in the nature of a father, then rdent in the duty of his calling. In like manner, Zenophon be∣ing to celebrate the sol mne sa∣crisice, Zenophon. and having finished it, newes was brought him that his eldest sonne was slaine in the warres: which hearing, immedi∣ately he takes the crowne from his head, and sets it by; then fur∣ther demanding how he dyed, it was told him, fighting valiantly: then tooke he the Crowne againe and put it on his head, more re∣joycing (as it seemed) at the he∣roicall valour and manhood of his scnne, then by his death discom∣forted, or perplext. Hieron. contra Iovinian, lib. 2. introduceth one Hoemon a Stoick, setting downe the liues and orders of the ancient Priests of Aegypt, that they alwayes remained in the Temple, all worldly cares and bu∣sinesses set aside, in contemplating the natures and causes of things, the motions of the Orbes of Pla∣nets, that they never married, or saw their Children or Kindred, from the time that they entred into that divine Order, they ab∣stained from all flesh and wines, especially to mortifie appetite and lust, which from thence chief∣ly ariseth; nay, so strict they were, they seldome eat Bread, yet the oyle of Olives they knew, yet frequented it sparingly. What should I speake of Fowles or flesh, when the Egge and the milke for their nearenesse to ei∣ther. Of which, one was (as they said) but a jelly of the Flesh, and the other blood, onely changed in colour: A Foot-stoole served them for a Pillo v for their heads: Bedding as coursely, as faring hardly. Aristotle, in his tenth booke of his pollitiques, writeth of the care of these Priests about their gods, and the curiosity of their Buil∣dings wherein they remained, their diligence and circumspecti∣ n, that nothing decayed that was about them, which was so much, that nothing could be more. Some were called Princely Priests, some Kingly, some provosts, and some Masters. Behold then, if the Bishops and Admoniti∣ . Priests of the Gentiles, were so austere in their Religion, of so great abstinence and sanctity in their kinds, what should be the de∣votion and fervency of Christians? not to come short of them that come short of heaven. CHAP. V. Of the true Nobleman. TVlly, that famous Orator, (whom the displesure of An∣tonius T lly by one of A . s. ul. diers for a ora∣ on made against him for his bere t both of head an hand, the publishers of so many famous workes,) in his booke D Senectute, reporteth of one Syre∣sius, a Noble-man of Athens, tha repr hended the Avarice, and pri∣vate respects of many great per∣sonages in that kingdome: still rging un o them, that no man was borne for himselfe, so much as for the good and profit of his Coun∣trey and others; and therefore concluded against them, that the rule, and sentence, and even na∣ture it selfe was pe verted in those which so much derogated from t ence. Cicïli s Baldus, in his Booke, De ag is Philosophi, reporteth of one mundas, who being raised by his ferts and valour, into pla∣ces of ho our and dignity, was up∣braided of some for his ignobility and basenesse of birth: who an∣swered? I rejoyce the more that I have Ingenui non rec pit . risen of my selfe, but they may grieve, and not the lesse, that they have fallen by their selves; both us being the authors of our owne honours, and dishonours. See fur∣ther (quoth he) how unjust you are, that being vicious of your selves, yet would attra t the ver∣tues of others in your behalfes: yet will not yeeld me the desert of mine owne. You enuy my honour, my labour, innocency, my dangers, because through these I have obtained it: I derive not my pedigree from farre, neither are my honours hereditary by suc∣cession. The Ensignes and badges ther of, are my quiver, my pike my helmet, and banner, wor e and borne, with the Characters and skars ins ulpt and carv up∣on my flesh in manly victories. To which purpose sait Iuve∣nall wit ily, Malo pater; I had rather thy Father were Thersites, thou his sonne being like to Achyl∣les, taking the armes of Vulcan, then Achylles thy father, thou but proving a faint-hearted Thersites. Albertus, upon the first booke of Ethicks, reporteth, that Dio∣clesian the Emperour that so well governed the Common-wealth▪ a f st was a shepheard, and ele∣cted even from the flocke. And therefore he is the truly generous man, saith Seneca, that is natural∣ly inclinde to vertue, not hee that is borne great without it. CHAP. VI. Of Souldiers. VAlerius in his third booke and second Chapter, rela th of a famous souldier of Augustus Cae∣sar's band, and one that had beene in many battailes against Antho∣ny, at last betrayed by a wile, was taken by his enemies, and sent to Anthony in Alexandria: where brought before this King, his ene∣my, he asked whose Souldier hee was now? whom this noble Cap∣tain answered, None but Caesars: then being asked what hee would doe to save his life, answered, That he would draw his sword; being asked if he would forsake his master Caesar, answered, he would dye thereon rather. The King noting his valour, constancy, and resolution, sent him backe a∣gaine ransomelesse and freed to his Master, wishing that all his Souldiers had the like resolution: so he saved his life, in seeking to lose it; whereas otherwise he had lost it, if he had sought to save it. Frontinus Strag. lib. 4. cap. 1. saith, that Flacco and Varrone, Consuls, were the first that dis∣posed of Souldiers; for before they were governed by Tribunes: Their Oath was, that they should never forsake their stations er Rankes, by diflike or feare, or any other occasion, unlesse by fetching of weapons, or pursuing the Ene∣mie, or for some cause to serve the City; yet not those but by per∣mission. Helimandus, as aforesaid, spea∣king of the resolution of Souldi∣ers in their times, thus commen∣d th them: Our Souldiers are so bent, that they goe as willingly to their Graues, as to their Beds: to the Field, as to a Feast: For in their Banquets they discourse of Armes; and in their Tents they discourse of Banquets: Death they feare not, Honour they seeke for. Vaierius saith, the first begin∣ning of warres was from the Ro∣mans; the motives thereof, am∣bition, largenesse of Empire, dis∣daine of corrivalry, avarice, con∣tempt, popularity; the decyding of these short Mono-sillables, Mine and Thine; These (saith he) and their regards, have layd a∣side softnesse ofraym nt, taught Smiths to become Taylors, cloa∣thed the backe in Iron and Steele; These have changed soft musicks into shrill sounds, devised those Artificial Thunder-claps that have cost so deare a price: These have ploughed the Seas, mangled the earth, and raked whole mi lions in their timelesse ashes: Vpon which light adventure, and easie expo∣sure of life, a learned Gentleman of our times, and not unfitly, draws an argument from thence of the S. L. D. Immortality of the soule: hereun∣to so vehemently inducing us, which if she were not as she is, (faith he) Immortall, We should not finde her halfe so brave and bold, To lead us to the Warres, and to the Seas; To make us suffer hunger, watch∣ings, cold, When shee might feed with plentie, rest with eas . And further, Although some things a change to see have sought, Yet never thing did long to turne to nought. Valerius writeth of a Souldier in his time, so cowardly, that to make himselfe unfit for the wars, maymed his hand by cutting off two of his fingers: which the Se∣nate and people understanding, seized upon his goods, and cast his body into perpetuall prison; that so he that would not adventure his life in the field valiantly, should certainely lose it in the dungill shamefully. CHAP. VII. Of Mustar-masters, or Electors of Souldiers. VEgetius saith, he would have none to the warres, but such as were resolute and valorous, carelesse of life, and fearelesse of death; or such as tooke pleasure therein: and withall, were inur'd to sorrow, travell, and labour. Of which, none (saith hee) having spirit, seemes more fit than the usticke fwaine, nurst up to labour and toyle, which to digge breath out of the earth, and bread out of the stones, hath indured the vio∣lence and persecution of the Ayre in the sundriest kinds of extremi∣ties, which knowes not what life escio quo∣modo nimis tem ti es quimi∣nus nouis is, that never tasted of delecacie in Dyet, the ease of rest, the plea∣sure of pleasures; that knowes not what it is to stretch his limbs upon beds of Downe, to Fare de∣liciously, to Cloath sumptuously; and in a word, which knowes no more of true life, then the beast in the Wildernesse: hee who stretcheth out his houres in stret∣ching forth his sinewes, constant to endure all labours: hee which beares off the heat, and beares out the cold: Such (saith he) stand in my Election. For heart and hand, valour and labour must conjoyne, and those where pollicy leadeth forth, suc∣cesse attends thereupon, as the ex∣amples of the Romans manifest: which no other way, but by the Discipline of their Camps, and ex∣ercise of their Armes, and reso∣lutenesse of their men, over-ranne the whole world. And as we of∣tentimes see an expert and sele∣cted band of men, though small in number, put a multitude undisci∣plined and ignorant to the slaugh∣ter. Frontinus in his fourth booke, and second chapter, relateth of A∣lexander, King of Macedon, sent out by Philip his father, with a small Army of expert Esquires, and Gentlemen, overcame many kingdomes, and slew infinite num∣bers of his enemies. And it was the saying of a worthy Captaine, and successefull in Armes, that he ever steeled the forefront of his army with men of highest spirit and resolution: alleaging that an Army of Lyons, led by a Hart as their Captaine, would be put to flight by an Army of Harts, led forth by a Lyon as their Governor: So much in such a kinde, is of force, an exemplary feare or va∣lour, as therupon oftentimes may depend the advantage or loste of a whole Army or victory: which if once lost, like a marriage ill made, undone for ever. CHAP. VIII. Of Philosophers and Orators. ARchiterentinus, lib. 6. repor∣teth of one Aristippus, a fa∣mous ippus, Philosopher, when being Ship-wracked on the Sea, with the rest of his company, the wa∣ters devouring all the Substance they had, themselves very hard∣ly escaping, were afterwards cast ashore on the Island of Rhodes, where finding some geometricall figures carved on the side of a tree Aristippus cryed out to his fel∣lowes with joy, Let us hope well, for I have traced out the footsteps of men: Afterwards going to the Towne of Rhodes, he there dispu∣ted in the Vniversities with the Philosophers, and the learned in Arts, of whom he was inriched of by many gifts, whereby he did not onely helpe himselfe, but also the rest of his fellowes, both with cloathing, and other necessaries of life. Now when they were to depart into their Countryes, they asked him what they should report at home? To whom he answered, That Possessions, Riches, and all outward things must give place to Liberall Sciences: for when these are throwne into the Sea, destroy∣ed by the sword, devoured by the enemy, subject to all kind of de∣vastation and ruine that remaines in the bosome, and will bring to the Grave; and nothing is our owne truly, that we may be dis∣possessed of. Plotynus, a famous Philosopher, was so addicted to the contemplation hereof, that he chose out a solitary seat for him∣selfe, seperate from the conuersa∣tion of men, despising all worldly Riches, sought after these true Riches indeed Aristotle, in his booke of the Se∣cret of Secrets, Asketh what so famoused and memorized the kingdomes of Greece, that their lives and Acts are so divulged tho∣roughout the whole world? but the diligence of the studious men, and honesty of the Wise-men, and the Liberality of the Rich men, and the love to Wisedome and knowledge, above al other things: Aulus Gellius? reporteth, a∣mongst many other famous deeds and excellent qualities of Philip the father of Alexander, King of Macedon; that he was carefull to have his sonne well instructed in learning and knowledge: And therefore sent him to Aristotle the Philosopher, for that purpose to be instructed and taught. CHAP. IX. Of Physicians. ISidorus saith, that the Art of Physicke first sound out by A pol o. Physicke was first invented and found out by Apollo, and practised amongst tste Graecians, yet after∣wards obscured and concealed; untill againe by Aesculapius his sonne it was revived and made manifest. For which presumption he was said to be slaine with a Thunderbolt, and so was the Art and Author destroyed at once: and from that time lay concealed for the space of 500. yeares, to the time of Anexersis, King of the Persians. At the end of which time, Hypocrates, the sonne of Aesculapius, reduced it to light: Since which time (saith one) it hath set up many, though over∣throwne more; beene Mid-wife to many a secret birth, and heard many a blushing confession. I ne∣ver read that it raised any since or before from death to life, but sure I am, since it hath transpor∣ted many from life to death: and Physicians hold that there is no health, but a neurrali∣ty between health and . so busie besides hath it beene, for the enlargement of her Empery, that it hath found a defect in all health, and quarrelled with the best of all meats, and drinkes, and exercises: Whereunto he seemed to consent, that thus merrily Mee∣ter'd: Who takes his meales by Physicall direction, Shall lose his health as well as his Complexion. 'Tis said, the poore mans labor is his Physicke; th rich mans Physicke is his labour. Valerius reporteth of Alexan∣der, King of Macedon, who sicke at Tharsus, had a potion tempe∣red, and giuen into his hand by one Philip, which was under him both an Earle and a Physician; when at the instant of his taking, came cau∣tionary Letters to the King to be∣ware of Philips potion, for that he was corrupted by Darius to poyson him: which having read, without further delay or demand, he drunke up his potion, and then shewed Philip his Letters. For which constant resolution and o∣pinion of his friend, he received an immortall reward from the gods, as a perpetuall love from his subjects. Though afterwards, as Quin∣tus Curtius writes, in his returne to Babylon, Dedicating some time to Banquetting and pleasure, solemnity, and triumph with his neighbour-Princes, and States, for Confirmation of Amity and League: which ended, as in re∣quitall of such kindnesse of his, a Physician of Thessaly (so preten∣ding) ordained another; To which the King was invited accordingly, with all his followers, though dearely to his cost: who even i the middest of his Banquet, and King Alex∣ander . depth of his Bowels, having re∣ceived his deadly potion, hee sud∣denly groned, as if he had beene stabbed with Ponyards, and so fell downe to the ground sicke, that never after rose with life. And thus the end of this Banquet, was the death of the King. The Author of this Treachery (though most by cunning sorrow, seeking to conceale it) was Anti∣pater, one of his Captaines, who succeeded him in his kingdome. And thus Alexander ended his life by poysoning, in the twelfth yeare of his reigne. CHAP. X. Of Young men. MAcrobius relateth of papy∣rius, a Boy that would of∣tentimes, come to the Court with his Father a Senator. Vpon a time returning home, his mother questioned him what his father had done there? The boy answered, hee must keepe counsell, or be excluded. where∣upon, like a Woman, the more denied, the , threatned to him with rods, or other∣wise him, unlesse he would it her. The Boy willing to satisfie his mothe yet to ke pe the counsell of h thef, told her sainedly, they were about a Decree in Court, that every husband should have two wives, or every wife two husbands, which the next sit∣ting was to determine. The mother thus possest by her sonne, immediately went and re∣lated it to the rest of the wives and Ladies of the City; who with an unamine consent (as a matter meerely concerning them all) came to the Court the next day; craving that it would please them to Decree, that every woman might haue two husbands, rather than euery husband two wiues laying the heaviest burden upo the ablest bearers, by their wisest discretions, The Senate wondering herea , (not knowing whence it procee∣ded) vntiil the boy told them what hee had passed to his mother the day before, in the importuni∣ty ofher unreasonable demands: which hearing, they commended his wit and discretion, gave him free admittance into the Court, but excluded all other of like yeares, as held not of his capa∣bility. Manlius Torquatus, at first was so dull and uncapable of under∣standing, that he was reputed and adjudged by his father, as one that would be unserviceable to him, and unprofitable to the Common∣wealth: and therefore sent him into the Countrey, to be trained up a domesticall life, severed from Court: who afterwards, became so pregnant and valorous, both in minde and body, that he delive∣red his Father, and the whole Country from ruine and danger. Fortune, it seemed, willing to ob∣seure his beginning, that his end and recovery might be the more glorious. Scipio Africanus, hee which seemed to bee borne with the whole consent of the gods, as the man, for a patterne of vertue a∣bove all other, yet in his youth was he accessary to the errour of his yeares, following the whole sway and stray of youth, on ly setting luxury aside: yet after∣wards, became a man of that Wis∣dome, Excellency, and Vertue, that he was the wonder and admi∣ration of his time. And therefore young yeares, though something they presage, yet they keepe not alwayes Leuell. For it is the Eue∣ning that crownes the Day some∣times, that the Moaning seemes not to point at. CHAP. XI. Of Old men. POmponius Trogus, lib. 2. rela∣teth, when Alexander went to the warres, he chose not the youngest men, not the strongest men, but Old men, and such hee termed the Fathers of Warre: Affirming in the choyce of these, he chose not as hee thought, bare Souldiers, but Masters of Armes, men of Experience. And there∣fore admitted no man Leader of a Company, that was not aged 60. No man Leader of a company o. And being so directed and furni∣shed with the experience of age, and Armes, he hopefully expected victory. Valerius writeth in histime, that youth gave so much reue∣rence unto Age, as ours to their naturall Fathers. And further, in commendation of Age, Iosephus in his Antiquities, saith, No man makes seruple of those things which are stamped with the seale , of Antiquity. So God hath gi∣ven a long life to Astronomy and Geometry, for the excellent uses they haue, which otherwise could not be obtained. We read in the Chronicles, a∣bout the yeare of our Lord, 1129. that Iohannes de Tempor us, who liued 60. yeeres after the death of Charles the great, whose Esquire he was, and aged at his death, so honoured for his Antiquity and Gravity, that hee was almost a∣mongst his people esteemed as a god: but now in these barren and declining times of ours, as our old men want their reverence, so are they shortned in their age; our young men soone ripe, conclude, our old men soone rotten. For as the earth decayes in her fert and power, not yeelding that vi∣gor, vertue, and strength that for∣merly it hath to plants, hearbs, and vegetables, depriuing us thereby of many of our former benefits of health: all conspiring our brevity and ruine. So likewise our statures, with their vertues, are suddenly shrunk up, and epitomised into lesser vo∣lumes, conclude a defection in all things, not to ransacke former Antiquities, hold we but equiuo∣lence with two or three hundred yeares passed: Then produce me such an Edward, as King Edward the third; the monument of K, Edw. 3. his sword at VVesim. Guy, E. of . Ch. Bron∣don. D. of suffulke. whose puissance yet remaines to this day: Such an Earle as Guy of Warwicke: Such a Duke as Charls Brandon: To which purpose hee well meditated, that thus pithily wrote to that effect. Where's n w the man that liues unto the Age, Methusa∣lem lived 936 yeares Fit to become Methusalem his Page? Alas, scarce live long enough to try Whether a new-made Clocke run right or lye. So short's our life, that every Pea∣sant strives In a torne house or field to have three lives: And as in lasting, so in le ngth is Man, Contracted to an inch, who was a span. For had a man at su in Forrests straid, Or ship-wrack'd on the Seas, one would have laid A wager, that an Elephant or Whale, That met him, would not hastily as∣saile A thing so equall to him: now, alas, The Pigmey's and the Fair es well may passe As credible, Mankinde decayes so soone, We are scarce our fathers shadowes cast at noone. And therefore with S. I. D. conclude. If Death destroy vs quite, we have great wrong, Since for our service all things else were wrought: That Dawes, and Trees, and Rocks should last so long, When at an instant wee must passe to nought. Lastly, to conclude, we read in the beginning of the Roman hy∣story, Romul s, the first founder of the City of Rome. that Romulus, that built the City of Rome, and called it after his owne name, chose to his Sena∣tors, an hundreth of the most grave in yeares and experience: by whose counsell he determined all things: which Senators for their Age and Gravity, hee called Fa∣thers. CHHP. XII. Of Cities, Merchants, and Mer∣chandises. A Ristotle, in his second booke of Politiques, saith; A City is a certaine unity of people, con∣gregated and gathered together for a mutuall comfort and society of life: which City must be fur∣nished with provision of Su ∣nance, with Arts Liberall and Me∣chanicall; for the State thereof consists upon many Supporters. Thirdly, it must containe Rewar∣ders of vertue, and punishers of vice. Fourthly, there must be a∣ bundance of Riches. Fifthly, (Divinorumturba) a convenient number of Divines: And if any of these want, it is not a perfect City. Likewise there must bee Civility and Concord: because, as saith Osorius, The wise Citi∣zens of Athens, made wise by their owne harmes, have found, that by Concord, small things have increased; as by Discord, great things have diminished to no∣thing. A certaine Phiiosopher upbrai∣ded by some with his poverty, and fruitlesnesse of his study, to shew (though he despised) yet that hee could, if he sought them, obtaine riches, foresaw by his Astronomy, a great scarcity of grapes would ensue the winter following, wher∣of as yet there was plenty: where∣fore hee bought of the Husband∣m n, unweeting hereof, at a rate exceeding smal, most of the grapes in Thyro and Myletus. Now when the time came that a fruitfull Vintage was expected, to supply their store againe, which f ll out otherwise; and many sought unto them for that which themselues were unfurnished of, he suddenly vented his much money together, he shew∣ed that it was easie for a Phyloso∣pher to become rich if he would, but these are not the riches they study for. In the like manner, wee read, how in the Siege of the Praene∣stines, that by reason of a Famine which there happened, a Mouse was sold for two hundred pence: For the punishment of whose Co∣vetousnesse, it pleased the gods, that the Extortor thereof dyed by Famine, that would not preserve another, but at so deare a rate. CHAP. XIII. Of Handy-crafts. ARistotle, in his booke of the Secret of Secrets, maketh mention of a King of the Indies, that had a Sonne, whom hee was most carefull to have instru ted and brought up in Learning and Arts; and to that end sent him farre and neare with great pompe and magnificence, as was fit for the Sonne of such a Father: But his diligence profited him no∣thing; for the Child could not bend to conforme himselfe to any thing, unlesse to some Mechani∣call Art or Profession: About which, the King being troubled in minde, called together all the Sages of his kingdome, and they all agreed in this opinion and con∣sent; That out of the wonderfull influence and operation of the Planets, the nature of the Childe was fashioned therunto, and could not be removed. Contrary hereunto, was there a certaine Weaver who begot a sonne, which by divers pr sage∣ments forefhewed that hee was like to grow up to some wise Counsellor or States-man in the Kingdome: which his parents not considering, would have often instructed in their owne Art, which he resused, as also divers o∣ther mechanicall professions, un∣to which by no meanes he could be induced or drawne, ever addi∣cting himselfe to the society of Philosophers, and other Learned men, as to the study of sundry Arts and Sciences, to understand the motions of the Orbs and Planets, the gouernment and affaires of Kingdomes and States, and such like: and in the end became a Counsellor to the King Augustus. Returning from the wars with victory, a poore man met and presented a Crow unto him, which he had taught to speak and salute the King, with Hasle Caesar, noble Conquerour. A second pre∣sented likewise a Parrat: A third, a Pye, and all saluted him in like manner, with Ave Caesar: which nov the King affecting well, received, and rewarded their Tu∣tors. This seeing, A poore Cob∣ler, as ambitious, as covetous as he rest, would needs take upon him to accomplish on a fourth Crow, which with the expence of much victuall and labour, was by no meanes capable as the rest: Therefore hee in despaire of suc∣cesse, would o tentimes say to his Wife, noting the unaptnesse of his Scholler, All our cost and labour is lost: Which words, with their often repetition, though not the other, shee learned to speake. Afterwards presenting her to the Emperour, as the rest, He answe∣red, Friend, I have at home salu∣ters enow of this kind already. The Crow being mindfull of her old garbe, presently replyed there un∣to, (All our cost and labor is lost,) Whereat Caesar laughing, com∣manded her to bee bought like∣wise. It is also read in the Chronicles, of the sonne of a certaine Carpen∣ter, which being unlearned, car∣ved these words upon a speare of his Fa hers, Dominabor a mari, ; admarae; I shall rule from Sea to Sea. The which words a Priest happened ro read, and hearing that the Boy was unlearned, coun∣selled his parents to send him to the Schoole, which they did, and hee afterwards became Pope of Rome. CHAP. XIIII. Of Rish men. FMilius Probus, in his booke de Duc bus extrans gentium, there mentioneth the sonne of an Athenian Prince, so Heroically minded in his warres and travels, that having in many places gar∣dens, and store-houses of provisi∣on, set over them no Keepers; that every one that would, might without interruption make use thereof at his pleasure. Besides which, he had many Foot-men la∣den with money, attending on his person where ever he came, that if any one wanted his helpe, hee might instantly supply them, lest by deferring hee should seeme to deny their requests. At Supper, it was his custome to send forth to the Market, and o∣ther open places, and Thorow∣fares, to cal thereunto all destitute and indigent persons as could bee found. And this hee omitted not every day; he made many rich, he buried many poore men at his cost, and ha h left to this day few Imitators behinde him. In like manner, wee read of Anectetus, King of Cecilia, that hee would say, a wise man would esteeme of Gold as Earth: For as the one covers him alive, so the other in∣closeth him dead; and that it was farre more excellent to be rich in vertue then in substance: who when hee supped in vessels of Earth, which he esteemed as his richest plate, would thus answer to those that should object it, I am King of Cicilia, and a potters sonne: Esteeme reverently of thy Fortune, who-ever thou art; and suddenly being made rich, be not suddenly made proud. Marcus Curius, a King of like humility, carelesse of outward pompe and ceremony, o affected poverty and low linesse, that when his Subjects mistaking the end of his thoughts, thinking to have elevated him vnto an higher pitch, sent him a great quantity of gold and silver, desiring him to mak use thereof: which he , saying; Tell the Samnites, their King had rather rul ouer rich men, than be a rich man: and tell withall, that Mar∣cus Curius can neither be conque∣red in warre, corrupted with mo∣ney, or subdued by affection: without wealth being rich, with∣out use, having money to attend him: For it is not the much ha∣ving, but the little desiring, that maketh thee truly rich. As our Authour to that effect well im∣plyes. That man that true content would finde, Unto his Fortune fits his mi de: But he that (good) doth ill impor∣tune, That to his mind would fit his For∣tune. CHAP. XV. Of Poore men: FRontinus, lib. 4. eap. 1. there mentioneth of one Scipio, a man of such willing poverty, that after his affaires and service, suc∣cessefully ended in Spaine, with the preservation of a whole Pro∣vince, he departed from thence in all his poverty; nor would accept or any recompence or reward for the same; nor had he that money left to give his Daughter in dow∣ry, which the Senate afterwards supplyed, with his unwillingnesse. Dioclesian the Emperour, that ex∣changed the government of a Kingdome, for the Tillage of a Garden, averred therein to have found more true delight and con∣tent, then in all the false-Face of outward Pompe and glory in the World besides, confirmes our late sentence, That though hee was poore in having little, yet he was rich in desiring nothing. Photian an Athenian, lived alwayes poore, though hemight have beene often inriched by honour and rewards presented unto him by the peo∣ple, which he ever refused; as that rich reward of Silver and Gold, sent to him by King Philip, with messengers exhorting him there∣unto; urging withall, that though peraduenture hee himselfe could not want it, yet for his sonnes, that he should accept it. To which hee answered, That if they shall be like to mee, this Earth alone shall suffice them; if otherwise, I will not with my Cost their Lux∣ury and Avarice should bee cheri∣shed. In like manner, when Gy∣ges, King of Lydia, puft up with youth, and strength, and riches, the whirlewinds of that vanity de∣manded of Apollo, an ancient Priest of his, if hee thought any man more happy than hee? who preferred unto him, as one well knowing these maskes of vanity, Aglans a poore Arcadian, but something more Aged: one so free from Covetousnesse, that hee never passed over his owne fields; so exempt from Gluttony, as mo∣derately contented with his owne store; from pride, as clothed with the Wooll of his owne flockes: where under his roofe of Thatch, with a small Retinue, (no vanities allure, no provocations incite, all which in thy glittering Pallaces, thronged with varieties of all kinds of objects, are resident,) where he drinkes his Cups with∣out feare, eats his morsels with∣out danger, breakes not his um∣bers with affrighting dreames, his braines with forraine and dome∣sticall cares, lives to himselfe and his meditation, which is truly to live and not languish, these hap∣pinesses attending his poverty and freedome, which thy bondaged Greatnesse is exempted from: and therefore more happy then thou. His being, as one well saith, That true life which is to live, To r st secure, not rise to grieve. CHAP. XVI. Of Hunters. EVsebius in his Chronologies, mentioneth of Philometer, King of Gothes, who expulsing certaine Women out of his Ar∣my, for their Adultery, wandring through the Woods, were by certaine Fawnes, or Wilde men, as is supposed, impregned, or got with childe, as Munks, and Fawns, & Divels, haue desired & accōpli∣shed the act with their kind, from whēce proceeded these deformed births of men. Eusta hius the Ty∣rant, Eu ach, Emp. in his hunting, had a vision of Christ upon the Crosse, appea∣ring unto himbetweene the horn of a Stagge; who immediately af∣ter, as the Chronicles mention, was baptized with his wife and family, as Christ had foretold him; and afterwards for the Name of Christ, sustained many af ictions, with his whole Family there∣fore. CHAP. XVII. Of Iudges. CAmbyses the King, as Valerius mentioneth, caused the skin Cambyses, King. of a certaine Iudge of his to bee pulled off; and his sonne to bee placed therein to give Iudgment; by which cruell and new kinde of punishment, hee so provided that none should afterwards bee cor∣rupted. Seleucas made a Law, that who∣soever Seleucas, should be taken in Adulte∣ry, should have both his eyes pul∣led out. Into which, it so unhap∣pily happened, that his owne son was the first that incurr'd the pe∣nalty thereof: for whom the whole City, in love to his Father, for the remitting of his punish∣ment became Mediators; which hee long withstood, till at last (as appeased with the prayers of the people in some measure) he loo∣ked thus mercifully upon his son, as to take from him but one of his eyes, and satisfie the rest with pul∣ling out another of his owne. So remaining a mercifull father, and a just Iudge: For as one saith Iustissime sequitur severitas Iudi∣ ubi procedit Iniquitas pecca ∣tis. In like manner, a certaine con∣stroversie arising betwixt Alexan∣der the King, and some of his soul∣diers; where, by a judgement in the Campe, the King was con∣demned: which he very willing∣ly accepted, and patiently under∣went, giving his Iudges thankes: whose fidelity he had tryed, in that they preferred Iustice before Greatnesse. Of whom thus adde, though my Author grudges, Many such Sons we have, but few such Iudges. CHAP. XVIII. Of Stewards, or Bailiffs of Lords. IOsephus recites of Tyberi the Emperour, that though he was wavering in many things, ye in this was he ever constant, the having once appointed Proçura∣tors over any of his Provinces, he seldome or never changed them, The reason where of he thus gave, being demanded, that it was to spare his poore, knowing that if he reserved them but for a while to that purpose, they would Ty∣rannize in their times with more bitternesse, which hee shewed by the example of one wounded, ly∣ing in the way, yet not removing a multitude of Flyes from his sore, which another comming by (imagining that he suffered them through weaknesse) drave away: To whom he answered, Thou hast done ill in so doing, because they were full of blood, and suckt but sparingly, wheras those that come fresh, wil sting me more grievous∣ly: Sic & novi Praefides & Balius. CHAP. XIX. Of Lawyers, or the Advocates of Judges. HElimandus, of the institution of Princes, there inferreth, Demosthenes demanding of Ari∣stiodes what Fee he had for plea∣ding his cause; who answered, a Talent. To whom Demosthenes replied, I had more for holding my peace: To which one allu∣deth well, that a Lawyers tongue is a precious peece; that's payd both for speech and silence, Vale∣rius reporteth of a certaine wo∣man (an Inne-keeper) who recei∣ved money into her custody from two of her Guests, with this Cau∣tion, that she should deliver it to neither alone, but to them both together. A certaine time after, comes the one to receive it, pre∣tending the other to be dead, and to take it away: shortly after comes the other to demand the same, in manner of the former, which the woman refused to de∣liver: hee called her before the Judge, for whom Demosthenes there pleaded, saying, The woman is here ready to discharge he rust, which without thy partner absent, she cannot doe, either by law or conscience: For as thou thy selfe confesseth, it was so de∣livered unto her, that shee should not deliver it to the one without the other, which thou peradven∣ture deceitfully claymest alone, So by this wisdome she acquitted her former folly; for the other having all, was never found by his fellow to demand in part. In like manner, a certaine old-Souldier, having a sute in Iudgement, asked Caesar to bee present in Court, to favour him: to whom Caesar gave a good Advocate: which seeing, hee thus bespake him: O Caesar! thou indangered in the Asian wars I fought no Advocate, but fought for thee my selfe, witnesse the skarres of these speaking wounds. Which Caesar so hearing, went forth, and came to Court in per∣son; not fearing so much to be ac∣counted proud, as to bed thought ungratefull. CHAP. XX. Of Friends, and true friendship. VAlerius, in his fourth booke, and fourth Chapter, relateth of Hamm n and Syncias, two Friends, so combined in League and Amity, that when Dyonifius the Tyrant would execute the one of them, who betwixt his sen∣tence and death, had obtained at his hands, that hee might visit his friends, and order his Estate, for whom the other was content to be ingaged: Now the day assigned being come, yet the party not re∣turning, every one condemned the folly of his Surety, though he nothing dismayed thereat, nor mi∣strusting the Loyalty of his Friend, which now at the very houre en∣joyned, contrary to the expectati∣on of all men, returned; preparing himselfe to dye; which the Ty∣rant here a amazed; as the rest, not onely acquitted from death, but withall, desired to bee admit∣ted as a third, into their bond and society. Tarquinius, for the ra∣vishment of Lucrece, being dri∣ven out of his Countrey, first cal∣led to minde the remembrance of his friends and foes, saying, he was most sorry therefore, that hee should never bee able to requite the one, nor reuenge the other. Seneca in his booke De Clemen∣tia, mentioneth one Arthesius, a Philosopher, that had a Friend both poore and sicke, yet one that through shamefastnesse concealed both; which this friendly Philo∣sopher noting, tooke a bagge of money and put it under his pillow, the other not knowing thereof, that unprofitable shamefastnesse set aside, it should rather bee thought hee had found what hee wanted, then received what hee required, from another. CHAP. XXI. Of Kins-folke. VAlerius in his first Booke, and first Chapter, setteth downe an ancient custome amongst the Heathen, once a yeare to cele∣brate a feast, to which were invi∣ted, nor any suffered to come, but the Kindred and Alliance of one generation, or stocke: where (a∣mongst themselves) a l Contro∣versies and wrongs whatsoever were decided and heard, to the perpetuall preservation of their a∣mity and friendship. In like manner, in his eighth booke, when Decius the Empe∣rour would have resigned to his sonne his Empereall Diad m, he refused it, saying, I feare, be∣ing made Emperour, I shal for∣get to be a Sonne: ther let my Father still governe with that, and let it be my part to submit my selfe to his government. A certaine woman condemned to death, was by the Praetor cast into Prison, by a murtherer there to be slaughtered: who touched (as it seemed) with some huma∣nity, deferring her present execu∣tion, thinking it better shee dyed by Famine than by his hand; and to that end suffered none to come to her, but her owne onely daugh∣ter; at whose arrivall, he searched that she brought unto her no food, or other manner of sustenance, Now many dayes being passed, and he wondring shee lived so long, at last found out that by the sucking of her Daughters brests, at her comming unto her, her life was prolonged and lengthened: which newes and strangenesse of fact, and naturall unnaturall pre∣servation, being certified to the Iudges, was not onely admired, but pittied, and she pardoned of her life. Now what doth not zeale undertake? or what so un∣accustomed, as the Mother to be nourished by the breasts of her Daughter? One would thinke this to be against the law of Na∣ture: but that indeed it is nature it selfe, that bindsvs to the love of our Parents. CHAP. XXII. Of good Women. A Good Woman must first of all despise vaine-glory and ostentation, the Ornaments of Pride, and bayts of luxury, and devote her selfe to the education of her Children, and wel ordering of her Family: after the example of C rnelia, the wife of Gracchus, who would say, A good Woman must rather strive to bee adorned with the inward beauty of the minde, wherewith God and good men may be affected, than with the outward Blush and Glosse of the body, whereby the divell and his saints may be allured; accor∣ding to the Poet: A Woman Faire and Chast, which no Dame can Esteeme, much easier found, then a good Man; Sets not her selfe to sale, nor seene would be; Rather her vertues flye abroad then shee. Valerius, in his fourth book , and fourth Chapter, relateth, how when the Lacedemonians were imprisoned by the Spartans, and there reserved in durance for ca∣pitall punishments, their wives of noble blood and spirit obtaining leave of their keepers to visit them, by changed attires set them at liberty, they themselves pos∣sessing their roomes, as willing to undergoe their punishments: and afterward of Noble resolutions admired and pardoned: admired for their love, pardoned for their Noble attempt, that held life in∣feriour to love. Seneca likewise in his sixt booke de Clement. there mentioneth, how when Augustus the Empe∣rour was debating with himselfe how hee might be best revenged of one that had plotted his death, asked counsell of his wife, who thus advised him; Doe (quoth she) as the Physicians doe, who when usuall remedies profit not, assay the contrary: so thou having not prevailed by seuerity, assaie what may be done by clemency. Which saying he so well liked of, that he imbraced it, and after winked at the fault, to punish it upon this resolution: This fact will onely make thee lov'd for feare, But happy Mo∣narchs still are fear'd for love. CHAP. XXIII. Of Wicked Women. AFter the death of Ninus, Ninus, Ki g of Assri. some sup∣pose the builder of Ninivy. King of Assiria, Semiramis his wife succeeded in his stead, suppressing 24. yeares that king∣dome with slaughter, incest, and luxury: this woman burning in lust, and thirsting after blood, a∣mongst many of her incestuous acts and slaughters, when she had tyred others, and wearied her selfe, she committed incest with her ownesonne, as wickedly con∣ceived, as shamefully brought forth: and seeking to cover her private ignominy with a generall wickednesse and refuge, shee or∣dained, that betweene parents and children no reverence nor ceremony was to be used; that marriage should bee unnecessary, for that every one should take whom he best liked, freely to use or dismisse at his pleasure. The wi e of Scylla was openly unchast: Pompey the Great, Conquerour of the whole world, had a woman Pompey. Scylla. Cato. infected with that sinne. Cato the Censor, had a wife but of meane birth, yet incontinent and proud, which no man would have thought could happen to Cato. Agrippa writeth of one Messe∣lina, a woman so incontinent, that shee prostituted her selfe in 24. houres, to 22. severall men at the common Stewes: at last wasted in body, but not satissied in minde, she returned. Iustine likewise mentioneth, how Grippus, the sonne of De∣metrius, having with great dan∣ger & perill delivered & freed his Country & kingdome, & escaped dangers abroad, was sought to be in trapped by his mother at home; who for her ambition and unnatu∣rall desire to reigne, had most un∣womanly, for that end prepared a cup of poyson to present him in recompence of all his travels; as having likewise, in his absence, made away his brother; which Grippus suspecting, distrusting the impiety of his mother, comman∣ded her to drinke, which she not refusing, dranke, and was poy∣soned. CHAP. XXIV. Of Married Women. Ivli the wife of Pompey the Great, and daughter of Caesar, when she beheld her husband re∣turne from the field with his gar∣ments all besmeared with blood, such an instant terror possest her, that shee presently fell in labour, and was untimely delivered of her conception, with her griefe and sorrow. and the losse of the whole world, When Hamelius was upbraided of some women that hee kissed, for his stinking breath, he asked his wife why she told him not of it. She answered, I should so have done, but that I imagined all mens breath of that favour: therefore it was very like her mouth ne're came so neare a∣ny other as to discerne it. En ylia the wife of Africanus, was of so great charity and pati∣ence, that when shee knew her husband had offended with her maid, yet she contained her selfe beyond measure unto him, both in fidelity and love; not answering his expectation with fury or fro∣ ardnesle, but jealous to wrong so great a husband as Affricanus, either in word or action; as fur∣ther, not to shew her selfe hate∣full where her husband had loved: after his death shee gave her in marriage, and continued faithfull to the end. When Sulpitia was with-held by her mother Maria, est she should follow her husband Lentulus being banished into Ita∣lie, notwithstanding she could not be retained, but that shee got out in an unusuall attire with two of her maids, and two servants, and came unto him secretly, refusing not to banish her selfe, to enjoy his presence, without which, where-ever, she lived in banish∣ment. CHAP. XXV. Of good Widdowes. MAcrobius saith, that the word Vidua a Widdow, comes of Divisa: or as one would more properly say, a viro divisa, divided, or divided from a man. Amongst the ancient women of elder times that were contented with single marriages, it was their glory to bee honoured with the crowne of chastity, but the expe∣rience of many marriages hath much increased the suspition of intemperance and inconstancy. The daughter of Marcus Cato, when she had bewailed the death of her husband a month together, the longest date of our times: she was asked of some of her friends which day should have her last teare, shee answered, the day of her death. Truly intending what the Trag. Q. but fainedly spoke, In second husband let mee bee ac∣curst; None weds the second but who kils the first: A second time I kill my husband dead, When second husband kisses mee in bed. And when some of her kins∣folkes perswaded her to marry a other husband, in regard shee was young and beautifull; she utterly denyed, saying, If I should meet with a good husband as I had be∣fore, I shall ever feare to lose him: If I shall meet with a bad one, what need I such a sorrow after such a griefe. In like manner, Portia was perswaded, after the death of her husband, to marry a∣gaine, she answered, A happy and chaste Matron never marries but once. In like manner, Valeria having lost her husband, would marry no other; and being asked her reason, answered, that her husband lived alwayes to her. In like manner, of Arthemesia, the wife of Mausoll, King of Carnith, that amongst many of her com∣mendations The Tomb of Mauso this is a principall, That after the death of her hus∣band, she still remembred him as if alive, and built for his honour and memory a Sepulcher of won∣drous beauty and cost, the like whereof was not to be found: of which woman my Authour thus comparatively concludeth: Such wives, their living husbands did not wrong, That after death remembred them so long. What our short mourning Widdowi us'd to doe, That so soone marry, and forget them too, I can but ghesse; but sure it may be told, That love was ne're much hot, that's so soone cold. CHAP. XXVI. Of Virgins. HIeron. contr. Iovin. in his booke so called, there men∣tioneth what honour and respect the ancient Romans ever attribu∣ted to their Virgins. In that their Consuls and Emperours, such that triumphed in state after their vi∣ctories, yeelded as every degre and dignity, reverence to them. Nyeanor having atchieved th victory of Thebes, was so over∣come with the love of a captive Virgine, whose nuptiall volunta∣ry imbraces he so desired, which of few would have beene refused, though in her found no admission; which forced him to complaine, that hee found more captivity in the eyes of such a Virgin, then in the strength of a kingdome, when hee, her lover and a King, wept and lamented over her selfe∣slaughtered body. Turcya, a Vestall Virgin, defa∣med with the losse of her Virgi∣nity, in manifestation of her inno∣cency, tooke a Riddle, beseeching the goddesse, that if shee touched her sacrifices with a chast hand, to make it possible that shee might fetch water out of Tyber with that sieve, and carry it to her house, which was effected accor∣dingly, and she cleared of her sus∣pition. Claudia, a Vestall Virgin, had in suspition likewise of dishonor, Aug. de ci dei, lib. 10. having fastened an Image in the house of Mars, neare unto Tyber, to prove her chastity, with her girdle she drew a ship that many milions of men could not remove from the place. Likewise Augu∣stine in his 39. booke, speaking of an ancient custome the Romans had to this purpose, which was to bury alive the corrupted Priests of their Vestall goddesse. The end of the second Booke. THE THIRD BOOKE; OR, THIRD COVRSE serued up to the Table at the Philosophers Banquet. PREFACE. H Aving spoken of the manners and conditions of those that wee may ac∣company at our Tables: Now thirdly, it remaines that we briefly propose certaine Table questions, with their resolutions, for the exercise and search of our wits, which many times imploy∣ing our mindes hereto, keepes in those things which otherwise the heat of our bloods, and aptnesse of our natures, so fraught, are apt to lavish against our selves. For when men well haue fed, and blood is warme, Then are they most improvident of harme. And therefore are such passi∣ons to be brideled with a preme∣ditated instruction, lest they after∣wards redound to our detriment and losse. To that end I have here thought it necessary to set downe certaine easie questions and answers, pertinent to such time and place, supposing nothing can bee more pleasant or profita∣ble, either to our selves or o∣thers, then the delight and re∣creation that may arise from thence. Question 1. Whether Ayre be more necessary t life then meat? FIrst it is demanded, whether Ayre be more necessary to life then meat? to the which is an∣swered meat, because that is sup∣posed most necessary to the body that restores her defect, or makes a member, or part of a member. Now meat is of this nature, ac∣cording to Avicen, and therefore most necessary. Yet Constantine Contra▪ is of the contrary opinion, that faith, Ayre is more necessary thereto than meat; For life con∣sisting in naturall heat, because na∣turali heat is the fountaine of life, therefore that which tempers na∣turall heat, is the most necessary▪ now ayre drawne in by the breath is of this kinde. And therefore those that come newly from pri∣son, or from any other place de∣prived of this benefit, first desire a fresh ayre, and afterwards meat and drinke. To conclude, life con∣sists Conclu∣sion. strongly in both, in the one by restauration of members lost, and consideration of members had; and thus farre the first very pow∣erfully intends. But the nutriment of naturall heat, that is the origl∣nall of life, immediately is caused from the quality of the ay e, and therefore the ayre, because it im∣mediately respecteth life, we con∣clude is the more necessary, and predominant to the conservation of life. Quest. 2. Whetber be more necessary to life, Meat or Drinke? SEcondly, it is demanded whe∣ther to life be more necessary, Pro. meat or drinke? To which it is answered, that meat; (although drinke be the more desired) be∣cause that is most necessary that restores the members, than that which but convayes the meat, and disperceth it in the body; but meat is ordained to restore the members, drinke but for the di∣lation of that meat through the members, Ergo, &c. But that drinke is both more, and more earnestly desired then meat, the reason is, because drinke cooles the burning of the naturall heat, and therefore is more necessary to life then meat, as the ayre. Drink hath these two properties; Cont. the one, that it dispearseth the meat to the members, and there∣in meat is more necessary than drinke. But secondly, drinke mi∣tigates and tempers the naturall Cont. heat, and so conserves it, which otherwise would dry the body, and cause death, and therefore is more necessary to the body then meat: by which conclusion, any creature lives longer without meat then without drinke. Quest. 3, Whether euill meat, or evill ayre hurt the body more? THirdly, it is demanded, whe∣ther evill ayre, or evill meat hurt the body more? It is answe∣red simply, that evill ayre; first, Pro. because it more hurts the heart the fountaine of life and heat. Se∣condly, because it changeth more often, and cannot bee shunned. Thirdly, because it more suddenly affecteth: and these three man∣ner of wayes, evill ayre hurteth more than evill meat: yet not∣withstanding Cont. some hold the con∣trary, that evill meats are more nocent, because they remaine lon∣ger in the body, and cleave faster to the members, and therefore hurt most, having so much time and meanes thereunto. Quest. 4. Whether fleepe or meat be more ne∣cessary to the Body. FOurthly, It is demanded whe∣ther sleepe or meat bee more necessary to the body? to the which is answered, That the body is more decayed by the loste o meat than sleepe. The reason is, that sleep restoreth not the decay of nature, neither removeth the action of naturall heat from the moist substance, the wasting wher∣of causeth death as meat doth, and therefore is the more necessary, as likewise, because there are in man three vertues, life, nature, and soule, and the soule's not suppli d as the other two, and ther fore that nutriment that answers the vertues vitall and naturall, is more generall than that which only an∣swers ther vertue ani all. Quest. 5. Whether out of all meats be en∣gendred good Blood? FIfthly, it is demanded, whe∣ther out of ill meat may bee engendred good blood? which is answered according to Haly, that there may: the reason wher of is thus given, Because good Meat may be ill digested, and so an ill Blood proc ed thereupon; as con∣trarily, ill meat may be well Di∣gested, and so from thence a good Blood be ingendred: For wee must observe, that in every meat there is a double nature: which vpon the strength of the appetite furthered by digestion, is either convertible to good or bad blood. Quest. 6. Whether wee may walke, or sleepe presently after meat? NExt is demanded, whether after meat we may presently walke? To the which is answe∣red, that there is a double kinde of motion: the one where of may be termed labour, which is not here prescribed for wholesome or laudable. The other kinde of mo∣tion, an easie passing and stirring of the body: and hereby the meats are depressed to the bot∣tome of the stomacke, and a more easie, laudable, and absolute dige∣stion caused thereupon; and this manner of walking is commen∣ded. Next is demanded, whether after meat, immediate sleepe may be tollerated? To which is an∣swered, that the Stomacke being full, desireth a more open action and vent; which sleepe ensuing hereupon sealeth up, thereby cau∣sing an inordinate heat in the sto∣ acke, whereby the meats be∣come crusted and baked, as bread in an Oven, over-heat without vent, wher upon nsue Rhumes, and other diseases in the head: and therefore sleepe is to be prolon∣ged after meat, for our better Di∣gestion and health. Quest. 7, 8, 9. 7. Why in omitting our houre ac∣customed, we lose our Appe∣tite? 8. Whether after meat the Body be more hot, or before? 9. Whether Fasting more hurt the Chollericke or Phlegmaticke? 7. FIrst, it is demanded, how the Appetite becomes lost, in o∣mitting the usuall houre of our custome? To which it is answe∣red, the stomacke being empty of former matter to worke upon, at∣tracts the ill humours from every part of the body, and of them doth it feed, and is fantastically satis∣fied, and desireth no more: where∣fore wee are taught in this case to drinke a draught of warme water, and so renue our Appetite againe by vomit. 8. Next is demanded, whether before or after meat the body be more hot? To which is answe∣red, that it is very apparant, the Body to be more hot after meats than before, both in quantity and quality, acçording to Galen, in his Booke De summa Medicina: where hee affirmeth it trebly in∣creased, as may bee experienced by the application of a moyst skin to the stomocke, both before and after Meat; as by Physicke, or o∣therwise. Though some are of o∣pinion, that a coldnesse after meat betokeneth better health. 9. Next is demanded, whether fasting more hurteth the Cholle∣ricke or Phlegmaticke m n? To which is answered, the chollerick; because the heat is more strong in the chollericke stomacke, than in the phlegmaticke, and therefore wasts and desires more: Besides, phlegme may be converted into blood, but choller not: and so the phlegmaticke man hath within him matter for blood, by which his appetite may be the better su∣stained, but the chollericke not: and therefore in him is the hardli∣er endured. Quest. 10, 11, 12. 10. Whether the strong or the weakest stomacke endures the longest fast? 11. Whether those of small Dyet, longer sustaine hunger, than those of more ample? 12. Why those that eat most gree∣dily, are soonest satisfied? 10. NExt is demanded, whe∣ther the strong or the weake stomacke indures the lon∣gest Fast? To the which is answe∣red, that the strong: which al∣though it more desire, and receive, yet that it can the longer abstaine and forbeare, as the weake the contrary, though little desiring, yet often needing. 11. Next is demanded, whe∣ther those accustomed to eat much, can longer forbeare food, then those of more sparing Diets? To which it is answered, that they may: because of the abundance of former Repletion, whereby their greater heat is diminished, which therewith diminisheth the appetite, and therefore can endure the longest fast, and so of the con∣trary. 12. Next is demanded, why those that eat most greedily, are soonest satisfied? To which is an∣swered, that in their greedinesse (and often gaping) they sucke in much ayre, which filleth tue veins and so taketh away the stomacke. Quest. 13, 14. 13. Why wee can containe hotter meats in our mouthes, then wee can hold in our hands? 14. Why if the hungry drink, their hunger is allayed: but if the thirstie eat, their thirst is not sa∣tisfied? 13. FIrst is demanded, why we can contain hotter meats in our mouthes, then in our hands? To the which is answered, that the inward heat within the body is the most perpetuall and vehe∣ment: and therefore whatsoever tward heat presented thereun∣ o, is weakened by the greater co tained within: as the heat of the Fire is abated by the beames of the Sunne; which is the reason that we doe not instantly swallow downe whatsoever hot meats we receive in our mouthes, but by some breath and pawsing dismisse them. So invocating as it were a Moderator thereto, but the hand unassi ted with any such vertue, is therefore inferior hereto. 14. Next is demanded, why if the hungry drinke, their hunger is abated, but if the thirsty eat, their thirst is not satisfied? To the which is answered, That Drinke being taken, immediately runnes into all the parts of the body, and so filleth the veines; but meat being more grosser, hath not that sudden aspersion, and therefore wanteth that certaine effect. But it suckes up all humour and moy∣sture that it findes in the way, and therefore the more augmenteth thirst. Quest. 15, 16. 15. Wheth r those that fast long, endure more bu ger or thirst? 16. Why wee a more delight when our thi st is suppressed by Drinke, then when our hun∣ger is satisfied by Meat? 15. NExt is demanded, whe∣ther the fasting do more thirst then hunger? To the which is answered so, and as natural heat continually worketh upon the hu∣mors of the body, for their nou∣rishment is ever in agitation, as is experienced upon Children, which in their young yeares through their vehement heat doe eat more and more often, then the more a∣ged: and as contrarily in old men we see that they more easily en∣dure fasting, through the defect of their Naturall heat, then Chil∣dren: and as likewise we see in men of middle age, their naturall heat stirred up with any exercise, more strongly desire meat then otherwise they should. There∣fore we conclude, this heat being alwayes in operation and desire, and drive the proper temperer thereof, is therefore much more earnestly desired, as necessarily re∣quired, then meat; for as former∣ly the ordinary fast of the body, desireth her sustenance (which is meat) so this extraordinary heat thereof, the more delayed, the more exceedingly vehement, and therefore the more desireth to be tempered; which so effected, p r∣swades the body with greater pa∣tience to expect the solidity of her repast. 16. Next is demanded, why the body is more delighted, when the Thirst is taken away by drink, then when our hunger is suppres∣sed by meat? Whereto wee an∣swer, that Drinke is of a more de∣late and piercing quality: at once spreading it selfe into the body and stomacke, making in all parts a joynt and sensible delight? wh ∣as the meat is slowly dispersed, and therefore the thereof much diminished. Quest. 17. 17. Whether those that have hot stomack's are satisfied with lit∣tle drinke? NExt is demanded, whether those that much thirst through the drynesse of their sto∣mackes, are satisfied with little Drinke? To which is answered, (according to Galen) that they are: the reason whereof may bee thus given, That when all the Members doe equally partake, the Stomacke is then of least Capa∣city, because every member su∣staineth her owne want. But when the stomacke it selfe is one∣ly dry, although it thirst excee∣dingly, yet is it satisfied with lit∣tle Drinke, because the quantity thereof is but small, contained in it selfe, whereas for the most part the lesse sensible thirst dis∣persed throughout the Body, though of lesse incitement, yet of more acceptance and receit, though continuing therewith lon∣ger satisfied, then the mouth of the Stomacke onely, which is quickely dry, and quickly moy∣stened. Quest. 18. 18. Whether water doe more allay the thirst then wine? NExt is demanded, whether Water more quencheth the thirst then Wine? To the which is answered, according to Galen, Thirst is ingendred two manner of wayes: the one by fasting, the other, out of heat and drynesse of the heart. Now that which is cau∣sed through the emptinesse of the members, is most extinguished by Wine, whieh is both thereto as meat and drinke: and therefore onely naturall to extinguish the same. But that Thirst arising out of the heat and drynesse of the heart is of twofold: The one, having his beginning meerely out of Heat, which is allayed by some thing cold, as Vinegar, &c. The other caused out of drinesse, and that is quenched by things that are moyst. In like manner, that chirst which is caused out of heat, is of three-fold: the one arising from the stomacke, the other from the lungs, the third from parts more remote. That which ariseth from the lungs, is supprest by the attraction of a cold ayre. That which ariseth from the sto∣macke, and other parts neare ad∣joyning, by cold water. But that which proceeds from members more remote, is extinguished by water likewise: but having some∣thing that is subtile mixed there∣withall, to make it more p ne∣trate, of which natur is Vinegar: for water of it selfe is slow in a∣ction, and therefore hath need of some commixion, subtile in his owne kind; and therefore let Vi∣negar be added thereunto. Quest. 19. 19. VVhy those of moyft stomackes that desire little, yet are capable of much Drinke? NExt is demanded, why the moyst stomacke, though it little desire, yet is capable of much drinke? To the which is answered, that by reason of the humour and moysture it hath, it is stretched like unto the belly, und therefore is of larger capacity then otherwayes the dry: and therefore the Scythians, English, Why the Dane, utchman, and d nkmore then the Spaniards Dutch, Polanders, and Danes drinke much byreason of the moi∣sture of their stomackes, and the capacity thereof: whereas in Spaine and other hot Countreyes, contrariwise they drinke often, but little, by reason of the heat of their stomackes, which through much drynesse is hardned, and of little receit. Quest. 20, VVhy Agues, and other sicknesses, s metimes are done away by things hurtfull, and contrary, as Beefe, Eeles, &c. TO the which is answered: that Nature so violently ouer∣burdened, more earnestly labou∣reth to unload it selfe, which som∣times it doth, and prosperously, as otherwhile the raw cold. CHAP. I. Of things hurtfull after Meat. 1. AMongst those things that are hurtfull after Meat, it is first demanded, From whence ariseth the eructation or belching of the Stomacke? To the which is answered (according to Galen) that the bitternesse and belching thereof, is principally caused by the shutting up of the heat in the body, and straightning of the nar∣row passages that should bring in the Ayre to coole it, whereby it is the more increased, which of it selfe is the originall ground of all bitternesse in the Stomacke, and the more especially so, if begin∣ning to Digest it, it be afterwards hindered by excluding this cold. 2. Secondly, it is demanded, why presently after our meats re∣ceived, this bitternesse is not felt in the Stomacke? To the which is answered, that meats newly re∣ceived, some little time doe re∣maine in the stomacke, in their owne nature, as if they were without us: and therefore as yet cannot this bitternesse be ingen∣dred by them. But when as the naturall heat beginneth to digest, and is by some accident or other hindered, whereupon followeth an indigestion: from whence a∣riseth this bitternesse, and there∣fore is not presently perceived. 3. Thirdly, it is demanded why this bitternesse more often hap∣peneth to them that sleepe, then to those that wake? To which is answered, That by sleepe the sto∣macke is closed up; that the meats received cannot descend into the bottome thereof, where the Di∣gestion is made, but remaine in the upper part; where swimming, they putrifie and corrupt, and cause a windinesse and belching therein, which otherwayes would be avoyded. 4. Why Wine being hot in na∣ture, should not produce diseases of like kinde, but contrary, such as are cold? To the which is an∣swered, that Wine causeth not the disease, unlesse by over-char∣ging the braine and nerves; but repletions follow indigestions, and indigestions cause cold diseases: and therefore Wine produceth no other but cold diseases. 5. Next is demanded whether sicke persons may eat much, as they were accustomed when they were well? It is answered there∣to, that Custome is another Na∣ture; and therefore he which hath accustomed to eat much in Health, must have some relation thereto in his sicknesse, eating oftner (ac∣cording to Rasis) then he which in health was but of spare Diet. 6. Next is demanded whether for sicke persons, having lately re∣covered their health, bread or flesh be more convenient? To the which we answer with Rasis, that flesh: and because amongst all o∣ther meats Hogges-flesh is most nourishing, therefore that flesh is Hogs-flesh of al other most nou∣rishing, most convenient for them, being most easie of Digestion. 7. Next is demanded whether flesh or bread be most convenient to those that are troubled with Agues? It is answered, that two things are to be respected there∣in: first, flesh is of an easie dige∣stion, and therefore thought more convenient: fecondly, Bread is easie conversion, and therefore more convenient then Flesh, and because flesh by the fatnesse, doth more easily inflame. 8. Next is demanded whether Flesh or Wine are to be prefer∣red to those that have newly re∣covered their Healths? To the which is answered, that Flesh; and therfore the vulgar are much deceived that thinke Wine, be∣cause amongst all other things it is the most easie converted into blood, spirituall and naturall heat, and therefore to be taken after Flesh. 10. Next is demanded whether he that is lately recovered from his sicknesse, must for some cer∣taine dayes observe theOrder and Diet that he used in his sicknesse, or not? To the which is answe∣red, that so; and that for three reasons: First, for the weaknesse of Nature, Secondly, for the not breach of Custome. Thirdly, for the imbecility d state of his bo∣dy, after his si knesse, and this reason alone is sufficient: because from we are not to make ure, but by little and th refore we conclude t e ment or Government whic as used in sicknesse, is to be for a time in Health, and n t presently to be forsaken or left off. CHHP. II. Questions of Bread. FIrst, It is demanded why Bread of Wheat doth more nourish than of Barley? To the which is answered, according to Aristotle in his Problemes, because of the moderate viscosity and moysture, most requisite therein, for the better conglutination and fastning thereof to the body, which the other wanting, is not therefore held so convenient. 2. Next is demanded where∣fore bread that is stale, is either more whiter than that which is new? To the which we answer, the cause of the blacknesse is the water therein, which in bread that is stale is dried up, and therefore the more white. 3. Next is demanded why bread unsalted is more heavy than that which is salted? To the which it is answered, that salt dryeth up the moysture therein, for which reason likewise it becommeth more light and white. 4. Next is demanded why bread of Wheat becommeth not hard, being old, as other bread doth? To the which is answered, that the Wheat hath in it a certaine sweet and humane moysture, which is as it were the life there∣of, that suffereth it not to be hard∣ed 5. Wherefore Bread that is made of new corne, is no so good as that which is made of the old; the reason is, that new graine hath in it too great a moysture and wa∣trishnesse than is commendable, and therefore Bread made there∣of is not so good as of the old. CHAP. III. Questions of Wine. Whether it be Physieal to be drunk once a month with wine. 1. FIrst, it is demanded whe∣ther, according to Avi∣een in his Canticles, and Rasis like∣wise, it be physicall to be drunke with Wine once a month? To the which is answered, with the Commenter upon the Canticles, that their opinion is erroneous which so affirme: for although Wine, according to Galen, is the most agreeable to mans nature, in respect of the naturall heat, and nearnesse it hath with our bloods, being in degree thereto, as Oyle to the light or fire: yet as much and superf s Oyle puts out the fire and light, o much wine our natura heat; and as it is more a∣greeable to our natures being thinn and cleare, so notwithstan∣ding, it is more hurtfull to the ani∣mall and sensible heat, and the or∣gans thereof; that is, to the braine and sinewes: and therefore Galen concludeth, that water is better than wine, especially for those that have weake nerves. 2. Next is demanded why chil∣dren being hot in nature, are not lovers of Wine, but old men? To the which is answered, that old men are hot and dry, but children hot and moyst. 3. Next is demanded what hu∣mour is most ingendred of wine, whether Phlegme or blood? To the which is answered, that be∣cause wine breeds cold diseases, as formerly we have proved, therefore doth it more ingender phlegmaticall humours than any other; and the renson is, because when much Wine is taken, it is not fully digested, and whatsoever remaines in the body indigested, is converted into phlegme, and therefore of wine, by reason of the often exceeding therein, is more ingendred than of any other thing. But wine being moderate∣ly taken, is more converted into blood than phlegme. 4. Next is demanded why strong wine comforteth the sto∣macke, and hurteth the braine; but weake wine effecteth the contrary? It is answered, the sto∣macke doth digest, and digestion commeth of heat, therefore it seemeth to helpe the stomacke in digestion, because it addeth to the heat, which the weaker doth not. But wine the stronger it is, from it doe the more vapours arise into the head, and so much more hur∣teth the braine. 5. Next is demanded whether wine or meat are the greatest comforters of naturall heat? To the which is answered, according to Isacke, that wine: and the rea∣son is, because it more easily and swiftly converteth into naturall∣heat, and doth more strengthen than meats doe. But meat, being couerted, is of longer durance, and greater restauration. 6. Next is demanded whether if wine be to be given to one that is weake, new or old be the more commended? To the which we answer, against the opinion of the vulgar, that in this case the new is better than the old: and the reason is, because Wine, by how much more it is new, by so much lesse it inflameth, and there∣fore in this respect better than the old. 7. Next is demanded why Wine purged from his lees, is of greater strength and force, but lesse lasting? It is answered, be∣cause relying upon no other E∣lement, it is every way expo∣sed to ruine; for the Lees by su∣staining and nourishing, is as it were the root. 8. Lastly, it is demanded whe∣ther Wine hurt the braine? To the which is answered, according to Isacke, that it doth: and Galen likewise affirmeth the same, though it strengtheneth the sto∣macke (when first received) and heat the blood, yet through the vapour it hurts the braine, especi∣ally by replenishing them, but the veines in drinking it. CHAP. IIII. Questions of Flesh. 1. NExt is demanded whe∣ther Flesh rosted or boy∣led be more moyst? To the which is answered the rosted, that by the heat of the fire is hardned and rosted on the outward parts, whereby the humidity and moy∣sture is shut up and retained with∣in, that it cannot goe forth. But in that which is boyled, the outmost parts become softned and tender by the moderate heat of the li∣quor, that the moysture therein hath the freer vent and issue forth, and therefore meats rosted, al∣though they seeme more dryer without, yet within they are more moyst, and the boyled more dry. 2. Next is demanded why the Moóne-light doth more putrifie flesh that is killed, than the heat of the Sunne? It is answered, that there can be no putrifaction unlesse heat and moysture con∣joyne together. Now the putri∣faction of Cattell is nothing ell than a certaine defluxion lying h in the body, converting the soli∣dity of flesh into humour; for heat is it be temperate and meane, nou∣risheth humours; otherwise more violent, it extenuateth and dryeth them up: therefore of such flesh, the Sunne as it is more hotter, ex∣tracteth all the moysture, and so dryeth them up, and corrup eth them. But the Moone-light, in which there is no manifest heat, but a kind of luke-warme influ∣ence increasing the humour, doth the more and more suddenly the same. CHAP. V. Qu stions of Egges. 1. COncerning Egges, it is firs demanded whether the yolke or the white be of more heat? It is answered, that amongst all the humours of the body, the blood is the hottest, yet most tem∣perate in heat: and therefore that which comes nearest to the nature of blood, is nearest of the quality, of which is the yolke, and therfore the more hotter. 2. Next it is demanded, why the yolke being put into water, immediately descends to the bot∣tome, but the white contrariwise swimmes on the top? It is answe∣red, that the white of the Egge is siymy and viscous, and cleaves unto that whereunto it is put, and therefore put into water, swims on the top; but the yolke descends with its owne weight. 3. Next is demanded why Egges in birds are of a more harder shell than those of Fishes? To the which is answered, that Fishes ex∣pose their Egges in watry and moyst places, and therefore need but soft shels. But fals contrari∣wise in more hard and dangerous places, as upon Rockes, and Hils, and such like; and therefore na∣ture hath more warily provided for them, and for their withstan∣ding hurt and danger, untill their young ones come to perfection. 4. Next is demanded, why Egges in birds are of greater quantities, though fewer in num∣ber than those of Fishes? To the which is answered, that Birds are of greater heat than Fishes, which is the cause of the great∣nesse of their Egges; but the mul∣titude out of the matter which is the principle of division, and therefore because Fowles have more heat than Fishes, therefore the Egges are greater in substance but few in number; and so contra∣riwise of Fishes. 5. Next is demanded, why Egges in Birds are of divers co∣lours, and those of Fishes not? It is answered, because the heat in Birds is more strong, which doth separate those things which are of adverse nature, as the yolke from the white, &c. but in Fishes the heat is more weake; and ther∣fore cannot separate. 6. Next is demanded why the Egges of Fishes are round, and the Egges of Fowles are of a longer figure? It is answered, that heat moves to his centor, especially to a piramidall figure, as appeares in a flame of fire that ever ascends upward, & ends stil in a point. And therefore because heat is more strong in Fowles than in Fishes, the Egges of Fowles are longer, the Fishes more round, because their heat being weak, dispearseth it selfe thereinto. 7. Next is demanded why some Egges cracke in the fire, and o∣th rs not? It is answered, that those most cracke in the fire which are of most windinesse, from the which when the shell is broken in the fire, out comes the wind with violence and noyse, and this most happens when the out∣ward heat is strong; whereupon if the Egge of any Fowle be put into such a fire, the shell is quickly broken, and the windinesse comes out with great violence and noyse which yet it doth n t, if the heat or fire be but small. But in Egges of Fishes, here is proportionably the great windinesse, and there∣for they cracke much in the fire, as we have experience by the Her∣ring, &c. CHAP. VI. Of Fishes. 1. FIrst, it is demanded whe∣ther Fishes eat their owne spawne or not? It is answered, that they doe. First, because they are greedy and ravenous through the coldnesse of their stomackes: and next, because they are dull of sense, and discerne not betwixt their owne and others, and there∣fore most greedily devoure their owne with others. 2. Next is demanded whether Fishes chew their meat? It is an∣swered, not: the reason is, First, because if they should chew it, they should superfluously swallow the water, to the suffocation of themselves: Secondly, because they are gluttenous, and doe t greedily, they swallow it whole undivided. 3. Thirdly, it is demanded why raine is convenient to Fishes, and hurtfull to Birds? It is answered, that to Fishes raine-water is very convenient, because it washeth in the sweet of the soyle, which be∣ing mingled in the waters, the Fi∣shes much feed upon, & grow fat. But Birds are of another nature, living in the ayre, and supporting their bodies by the wing, which hereby their feathers being fast∣ned together, their flight is hin∣dred, and th ir use and living ta∣ken away, and therfore more hurt∣full for them than Fishes? CHAP. VII. Hereafter followeth the Resolution of certaine mixt questions. 1. FIrst, it is demanded why the Gout happeneth to them most commonly that eat many kinds of pulses. It is answe∣red out of Galen, because they are hard and windy, and not easily di∣gested, by reason of which indi∣gestion egme the origi∣nall of the gout. they are turned into Phlegme from whence the gout most usually hath her originall. 2. N xt is demanded, why Beanes being that they are windy by decoction, lose not their win∣dinesse as Barley doth? To which is answered, that Beanes are of nature more windy than Barley, and because they are of a more grosse and compact substance, therefore more hardly altered, than Barley which is more thinne and easie. Wherefore saith Isacke, according to Galen, by decocting of Beanes we lose not their win∣dinesse, but by strong seething, we something diminish it. 3. Next is demanded why the eating of Figges breedeth Lice? Why the ea ng of figs breed Lice. To the which is answered, that al∣though figges of themselves soone putrifie and corrupt, yet have they a property to present all in∣ward corrupt humours they find in the body, to the uppermost part of the skinne; and out of such hu∣mors are Lice ingendred, although otherwise sometimes by sweaty and unshifted linnen betweene the skinne and that alone, as the two parents without any other materials ingendred; to which ef∣fect one merrily jesteth upon a lousie shifter in this Epigram, as followeth: By want of shift, since Lice at first are bred, And after by the same increas'd and fed: I cannot see why Crambo should have many, Since that is sure he shifts as much as any. Yet Auicen thus farre commen∣deth figges, that they cause a good colour in the face, by driving the blood to the outermost part of the skinne. 4. Next is demanded, why wine being drunke after any rot∣ten fruit tasteth bitter? To the which is answered, that from the fruit is derived a certaine bitter∣nesse which remaineth upon the tongue, which being mixed with Wine maketh it of a bitter tast. Next is demanded whether new Hony be better than old? To the which is answered, that it is other∣wise with Hony than with Wine, because the newest Hony and the oldest Wine is ever the best: and the reason is, because the nature of Wine is moyst, but the nature of Hony dry: the experience whereof may be taken in medi∣cine, where those having dry bo∣dies are moystned with Wine, as those that are moyst and phleg∣maticke are dryed with Honey. 5. Next is demanded why oyle in the top, wine in the middle, and hony in the bottome is ever best to begin with the last first? It is answered, because that honey which is best, is waightier than the other, and so sinketh downe to the bottome, and therefore in a vessell of honey, that in the bot∣tome To chuse Honey. is ever the best. 6. But in a vessell of wine the middle, because the bottome thereof is thickned with Lees, and the top is troubled with ayre; whereupon the husbandmen knowing it not sufficient to keep it in a close house, mine and digge deepe to lay it in the ground, so to remove it from the ayre as much as they can, by which it is so manifestly hurt, that it is scarce conserved in a vessell halfe full; and therefore that in the middle removed from these inconveni∣ences is the best. 7. But that oyle which remai∣neth in the top of the vessell, or in a vessell halfe full, is both the best, and bettered thereby, be∣cause the ayre entring into it, dries up the vacuous and superfluous humour wherein it lyes, so ma∣king it both of better taste and quality. 8. Next is demanded, why oyle sometimes is frozen, but wine more seldome? it is answered, that in oile there is a cause of con∣gelation being glutenous and thicke, which in wine there is not being of a more liquid and strong vertue. 9. Next is demanded, why Vinegar being that it is most cold, is never frozen, seeing that the coldest things are most apt there∣unto? It is answered, because Vi∣negar is the most liquid amongst all other humours, and the most piercing and tart, which like the sea being alwayes respersed with his owne bitternesse, doth never freeze. Next is demanded why pepper and mustard doe gnaw the out∣ward skin, and hurt the stomacke? To the which is answered, being opposed unto the outward skin, it worketh thereupon in his full vertue and nature, which is to corrode and gnaw; but being de∣scended into the stomacke, the force thereof is abated through the quality and nature thereof, and so ceaseth in that effect. Of the dangerous, Clymactericall yeares and dayes of a Mans life. EVery seventh yeare through∣out a mans whole life, is a Dangeru yeares of a mans life. Clymactericall and dangerous yeare; likewise the 9. and 63. yeare, which old men uery hardly escape. There are likewise in the yeare three dangerous Mundayes to be∣ginne Three dan∣gerous mundays. any businesse, to fall sicke, or undertake any journey: viz. The first Munday in Aprill, which day Cain was borne, and his brother Abel slaine. Second Munday in August, which day Sodom and Gomorah were destroyed. The last Munday of December, which day Indas was borne that betrayed Christ. Of the Excellencie, Vertue, and nature of Stones. THe Turcoyse-stone, if the Turcoyse stone. wearer of it bee not well, changeth his colour, and looketh pale and dimme, but increaseth to his perfectnesse as he recovereth to his health, with which our Poet thus accordeth in his comparison, As a compassionate Turcoyse that doth tell, By looking pale, the wearer is not well. Many other precious Iemmes there are that lose their vertue and splendor, worne upon the fir∣ger of any polluted person, and therefore lewd and uncleane li∣vers, such as defile their bodies with women, never adorne them∣selves with these dissenting Iew∣els, which would blush at their shame, and bettay their suburbs, A rich investure, saith one, they are, but of small use in our dayes, hardly meeting with a finger that spoyles them not. Like wise that there is both ex∣cellent beauty and vertue in these as in other of that kind, may ap∣peare in the care which Moses had to ad rne the vesture of the high Priest with 12. Iems, which also Ezechiel, and S. Iohn in his Apoca∣lips have remembred, in which there were not onely beauty and colour, but marvellous effect. In the end of August, the Moone increasing, there is found in the Swallowes belly a stone of excel∣lent vertue for the cure of the Swallowe stone. falling sicknesse, and which drives up the thin and glutinous humors whereupon it is chiefely ingen∣dred. There is likewise found in the head of an old Toad, a stone very Toad-stone. precious against all inflamations and swellings, as bytings of vene∣mous beasts, poysonings, and such like. Likewise there is sometimes found in the head of a Carpe, a Carpe∣stone. stone that stancheth all bleeding at the nose. A Direction for Study and Art, delivered by a Gentleman to his Sonnes, for their securer election and choyce, wherewithall, shew∣ing briefly his opinion what studies are most painefull, yet least pr fita∣ble; what, contrariwise, of most worth to be imbraced, or vanity to be re∣jected. FIrst for Divinity, the highest, Diuinity. best, and primary election in the world, though it be not thy profession, let it be thy study, knowing that if ignorance of the lawes of a temporall King, cannot excuse; how much more in this superiour degree and offence shall it be nullified; and because all o∣ther art and study in the world is vaine, that is not by some relation intended to this knowledge and practice. Secondly for Law; if thou wouldest be soone rich, soone Law. practise, so shall other mens dis∣sentionsbe the cause of thy peace, and thou shalt be like a Chyrur∣gions instrument: the breath which every man spends in vaine, shall not passe from thee without value; nay, as it shall be thy profit to speake, so shall it be thy gaines to keepe silence; and for the cal∣ling, it may be honest, so thy con∣science therein be just. For Physicke, I know not how Physicke. the practice should be bad, since the ayme thereof is so good; for health being a Iewell to every man, which when it is to be bought at the hands of the Phy∣cian, may bee valued accor∣dingly. For Astrology, and the over∣tedious observation and judge∣ment of the starres, taken from Agrology. the vanity of the Chaldeans, who were beleeved of their imperites, that by the influence of Planets, and secret relations therein, they were as Gods Privy-Counsellors, solely to discerne and prognosti∣cate the events and destinies that should befall them, throughout the whole course of their lives: the folly of which men the Pro∣phet Esay thus mocketh, Let the Esay 10. Wise man, and Sages of heaven, with their observations, predictions and knowledge, stand forth, and save there. And likewise Jeremy in another place, Feare not the predictions by the heavens, because the lawes of the people are vaine; or their demonstrations, because they are deceitfull: which words yet condemne not altogether the use of Astrology, which hath some end and profit, but condem∣neth those professors which make vaine ostentation to the people, of certainties, by uncertainties. Next unto this is the vanity of Chyromancers, which by taking Chypoman∣ y. their direction from the lines of the hands, doe exceedingly trifle and deceive, running into signifi∣cant errors, by the unsignificant traces thereof, to which small cre∣dit is to be given. Like unto these, or if other more Alchumy. vaine, are Alchymists, which pro∣fessing to turne their brasse into silver, or their silver into gold, turn all into vapour, which turneth to nothing; this hath the fairest aime, but the rarest hit of all other; the greatest hope, but the smallest comfort in the way; insom ch, that I had rather misse the one, than sorrow in the other. Nygromancy is an Art by which Nigrom ∣cy. the bodies, or rather the sem∣blance of those in their graves are raised up and questioned, as we read Phytonissa to have done, by a fained and deceitfull representa∣tion of the body of Samuel, to gra∣tifie Saul the King. Kings 1. 2 Like unto these are Hydroman∣cy and Pyromancy, which worke Hy roman∣cy. Pyromancy∣ugury. by the water and the fire. Like∣wise Augury or divination by birds, by their singing, chirping, or such like. Hereafter follow some few receits of Albertus Magnus, and our former Author. To powre scalding Oyle, or melting Lead into the hand, and not be burned therewith. ANnoynt the palme of your hand with the Iuyce of Mal∣lowes, or Mercury, and you may doe it for a space, but not long, be∣ing two of the hottest liquors that are, into which if you put but Tin or Lead, they presently melt; which water or any other liquor besides effecteth. To keepe Inke from freezing. PVt three or foure drops of A∣qua vita into the Standish, and the Inke will not freeze, though the weather be never so hard. Of the strange effects wrought by some members of the Owle. TAke the heart of an Owle, and his right foot, and put it upon one that sleepeth, and he shall reveale unto thee whatsoe∣ver he hath done, or whatsoever he knowes, that thou shalt aske him, and this hath beene experi∣enced of late time. Of the Want or the Mole. THe Want or the Mole is a creature of strange effect, as the Philosopher conceives, who being put into the neast of any Bird, can never bring forth her young; as also the water wherein she is decocted, being rubbed up∣on any thing, AA. that was blacke immediately changeth it into white. Of the strange effects of some parts of the Black-bird. IF the quils of her right wing be taken and hung up in a house by a red thred, no creature can sleepe in that honse untill they are taken downe; and if the head thereof be put upon any one that sleepeth, they shall reveale unto thee all their secrets with a loud voyce, as hath beene experi∣enced. Away to make Doves increase and multiply. AUicen saith, that Aristotle was of opinion, that if the milke of a woman twice married over, put into a vessell of glasle, and either buried or hung up in the dore where the Pigions fly out and in, they would keepe to∣gether, and increase to infinite numbers. To untye a knot without touching. GOe into a Wood, and find where a Pye hath builded her nest, and hath young ones, and tye some string round about the hole where she goeth in; the which when she shall perceive, she immediately flyes for a cer∣taine herbe which she puts to the knot, which presently breaketh it; then falleth the hearb downe, which thou mayst take up and re∣serve to such a purpose. Hereafter followeth a Divine and Philosophicall conference be∣tweene some Fathers of the Church, and some Philosophers of Nature, proposing and pro∣pounding Pious, Learned, sharp and pleasant Aenigmaes, abstra∣cted out of many and sundry Authors, as well sacred as pro∣phane; which marvellously make to comprise wisdome, and nouri∣shing of liberall wits, to the in∣forming of the Judgement, and to the delight of all lovers of knowledge. Propositions follow. Q. IN what part of a mans body is his heart? A. That Anatomists will tell us, and also the Scriptures will direct us, that both the heart of the wise man, and of the foole, is in the center or middle of the brost: but the Scripture yet fur∣ther saith, that the heart of a wise man is in his right hand, but the heart of a foole in his left. Q. How doth the old Testament and new begin? A. Both from Adam; the one from the first Adam; the second from the second Adam, descri∣bing his generation: I onely ad∣mire the power of that God, which besides, above, against na∣ture, effects whatsoever he plea∣seth. Q. From whence is the name Cardinall derived? A. Of Cardus for a hinge; for even as a doore turnes upon his hinges, so doth the Church of Rome upon these hinges the Car∣dinals, and by their counsell and direction is governed: Of which one writes in imitation of Virgil, Qui Bauium non odit, amet tua Carmina meui? Qui satanam non odit, amet tua dogmata Papa, Who in mercy hath no hope, Let him love thy Dogmaes, Pope. Q. The Devill of old was said to have two daughters, Cove∣ ousnesse, and Luxury; and he married the one to the Iewes, and the other to the Heathen; and now of their off-springs all Nati∣ons and sorts of people are affi∣anced. Q. Why in times past did the an∣tient build their Sepulchers by the highway-side? A. To admonish all men of death. Diogenes hearing of the death of a great rich miserable man, saith, he hath not lived his owne life, but hath left it unto others. Uir, Conjux, Genetrix, natus, fra∣terque, sororque, Hic duo sint, quamv is nomina plu∣racarent; Error enim sceleri, causam dedit, iscia nupsit, Illi quem peperit, filid mista pa∣tri. Husband, wife, mother, sonne, and sister both, And brother, this paire make, by plighting troth, at unawares. It is said a certain woman which error married her sonne. Q. Why in old time was there so few, or almost no Monuments e∣rected for the dead, and now so many? A. Men desired to live by their vertue and good workes, and they speake the good mans praise; for God hath so pronounced, The memoriall of the Iust shall be bles∣sed, but the memory of the wic∣ked shall rot: and likewise those that haue done well, are with∣out doubt with God, and seeke not glory on earth, having bles∣sednesse at the head of the foun∣taine. Many faire Monuments now inclose not onely rotten bones, but unworthy bones and ashes. Many a faire Tombe stands like a bad cause made good by the guilded varnish of words and fri nds. Q. Of the prodigius wife of Lot her Sepulcher and change, what sayest thou? A The Statuary, or Pillar of Salt into which Lots wife was turned, was, according as Alcinus the Poet saith, such an one that you scarce know it from glasse, or stone, or mettall, but by the sal∣tish tast. At this time and accident what did Lot her husband, as one questioneth; which is thus an∣swered by the Poet: Hoc valdè hic miram, quod Lot non flectitur ipsam, Nec sociam sequitur, primo con∣stantior Adam; Quamquamid credomag is factum quia visa referre, I am nequit elinguis, qua si comper∣ta referret: Forsan et in similes, ausis temeraria traxit, Credulo & imposuit, virgo prima∣na marito. Englished: Many hereat admire, he did no slacke His forward pace, nor ever loo∣ked backe: He was more staid than Adam, that did eat Because his wife commended him the meat: So he escap'd the Iudgement, and knew none, Because he held his way, and jour∣neyed on. Q. What body was that that had a portable Sepulcher? A. Ionas in the Whales belly. Q. What was Absolons Sepul∣cher? A. This degenerate sonne of a good father was hung up in the ayre, and covered over with stones for the memoriall of so un∣naturall a patricide. Q. How would Socrates, dying, be buried? A. Quoth he, bury mee after the easiest and cheapest way. And concerning sumptuous tombs and monuments, erected commonly in our dayes, one asketh the que∣stion why we so exceed therein, seeing those men that talked with God, would be buried but in caves; and they wanted not wealth, for they were rich men, as Abra∣ham, Isacke, and the like. Q. What thing was that which was brought forth in the world, liv'd in the world, sinn'd not in the world, spake in the world, died in the world, and yet shall never bee partaker of the world to come? A. Balaams Asse. Q. When is it that the dead bu∣rie the dead? A. Then when those impious dead in sinne, bury the dead in body. Q. Why is it not read in holy Scripture, nor am ng the Fathers, nor any Ecclesiastical writers, that the devill ever swore? A. That impure spirit wants a soule, and so hath nothing to sweare by, so cannot tye himselfe to any promises, being the father of lyes, and a manslayer from the beginning. Christ hath sworne many times which is King of kings, and of truth the Truth, and a most faithfull keeper of his pro∣mise, of which no word shall fall to the ground; therefore happy we whose good he hath sworne; and wretched we if we beleeve not this truth it selfe, having bound it with an oath: The devill promiseth many things, but per∣formes none; and Christ promi∣seth nothing but it is as good as done; therefore I will r ly on the on the one, and not credit the o∣ther with the smallest beleefe. Q. Doth the Devill know our thoughts or no? A. Not, but by conjecture; for God onely is the searcher of the heart: the Devill reads it by observation, and can pierce no deeper. He is the subtle Serpent, and therefore we are fore warned to stop evill motions in the begin∣ning: for as a Serpent if he one get in his head will easily wind in his whole body; so we are coun∣sell'd, principi s ebsta, keepe out the head. Q. What is the reason that of later times, Divels, and visions, and apparitions, and such like, have not beene so frequent as in former times? A. Since the light of the Go∣spell came into the world, these Diabolicall delusions, and workes of darknesse haue with-drawne themselves, which in times of Po∣pery and Ignorance were more frequent as the Oracles at the comming of Christ were. Q. Iobs substance was much in Camels, a great and knot backed beast, and yet it is said, this Camel with as much ease shall goe through the eye of an needle, as a rich man to enter into heauen: now what is the nature of this Camell? A. Stories mention, that they are of a gentle and towardly dispo∣sition, and knowing their owne height, will stoope downe to re∣ceive a burden, and then they will erect themselves and passe along; if they find themselves over-bur∣dened, they will either lye downe or cast it off; and therefore noting too much, so hardly rich men shall be saved that doe not, over-laden with temporall riches and secu∣rity, cast them off to lighten them in their journey to heaven: The Camell is a beast very strong, and very fierce in his venery; it drinks but once in foure daies, then mud∣ding the water. Of this Beast thus the Poet: En citius tenuis, per acus transire foramen, Deform is poterant inania membr Cameli. To thred the postern of a Needles eye, Is such an Art no wisedome can descry; And yet the Scripture saith, with as much ease A rich man may be sav'd, as one doe these. But this is meant of unpenitent rich men, that heape Pelion on Ossa, and so overburdened thinke to creepe through the narrow gate as strait to such as the Needle eye to the Camell. Q. Are the Starres, r the Sun living creatures, as some have thought? A. They are not, though Origen seemes to intimate so much, be∣cause the Starres are commanded to keepe their course; and in Iudg. the Starres in their cours s fought against Cysera; and in Ieremy the Sunn is termed the Queene of heaven: And in the Psalmes, It commeth forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoyceth as a Gyant to runne his course: And in Job, the Stars are thought to be capable of virtue and vice, because there it is said, The stars were not pure in his fight; yet all these approve not against our first negatiue. Q Which is the swiftest starre of all other? A. Phosphorus, or the morning starre, or Euening starre, being both one; for that riseth first in the morning, and setteth last in the Evening: this great Planet, of some called Venus, sometimes goes before the Sunne, and some∣times followes the Sunne; she is called the wife of the Sunne, be∣cause she is up after his setting, and rising; last up, like a good wife, looking that all things be in safety after her husband is in bed, and first of al rising in the morning Q. Why doe we not see the stars in the day time, in regard they al∣wayes shine? A. Because they are darken d by the greater light of the Sunne. Q. What statre was that that led the wise men unto Christ? A. It was no ordinary Starre, nor one that was made at the Cre∣ation of the other; but extraordi∣nary for this especiall occasion; and it differed from other starres in brightnesse, motion, and scitua∣tion of place; for it was placed in the Firmament of heaven, the o∣ther in a higher Orbe, this in an inferiour region of the Ayre: And when the Wise-men came to Bethlem, it went and stood o∣uer the house, that these Magi might know it, being instructed of God in their owne Ant, for they were Astronomers. Q. What Art is that that every man is most apt to credit, there be∣ing no greater danger in any lye? A. Physicke and Physicians, that make use of all the most vil∣dest things that be, as Scorpions, Toads, Serpents, and the like, and these will tell thee there is no∣thing so abject, so small, or base, or hurtfull, that this Art will not turne to some good use; for God never made the most beautifull thing in the world, simply for view, and love; nor the most de∣formed, for hate; but all for use, though all things are not knowne, nor all virtues of all that are knowne; that was for Salomons wisdome to have undertaken to decipher. Q. What was the wise mans an∣swer to an ignorant Physician that told his friend he was growne old? A. Because I use not many Phy∣sicians; which implies, nor much Physicke. Saith another old man, These hoary plumes, like mosse upon an Oke, By seeing much, yet suffering more, I tooke. Long have I seene the worlds un∣certaine change; Ioy moves not me, Affliction is not strange. One having spent much money upon the Physicians, and being ne∣ver the better, was perswaded by a godly friend, that if he had gi∣ven that money to the poore, the true Physician, Christ, would have cured him. On a time it was disputed at Pope Alexanders Table, whether it were better for the Common∣wealth to have many Physicians, or none at all: some affirmed they were not to be tolerated in Coun∣trey, for Rome was 60. yeares without, and neuer better health than at that time; (saith the Pope) and if Physicians had not beene, the world would scarce have con∣tained her people by this time. A worthy saying of the Pope; if they send bodies to the grave, he & his soules to Purgatory, nay hell. Q. To whom is life very long, or very short? A. Life to them that doe no∣thing, very long; but to them that are ever doing, very short: Ars longa, vita brevis. Q. Who is the best treasurer of his owne goods, according to the di∣vine Poet? A. He that layes up treasure in heaven. Aedifica in patria, Bore s ubi nul∣lus & imber, Conde ubi nec furto, deripiu tur opes; Hospititum est tellus, coelum patria nostrum, Et Regnum, et certe, quis{que} paran∣tur opes. Lay up thy Treasure, to secure thy feare, In Heaven, where all is sure is trusted there. Q. Who was hee that bult the first City? A. Cain; and that out of his feare to preserve himselfe from his enemies, the name thereof was Hanoh; and beside this, there is no other City named before the flood, Gen. 4. 7. Q. Which is held to be the grea∣test City at this day in the world? A. Quinsay, as Histories re∣port; of which, wondrous things are delivered; it containes in it 1200. Towers and Turrets, and so many sumptuous Stone-bridges; numberlesse numbers of men, Citizens and strangers: as who doth not likewise admire at Ni∣niuey, which was three dayes journey from gate to gate. Q. What is the greatest preser∣ver of friendship? A. Nothing is more amiable, nor more conjunctive, than the likenesse of good affection and manners, according to the Poet: Haec res & jung it, junctos, et seruat amicos. Q. Who is that at ence loves and hates, flyes and lowes, threats and intr ats, is d ry nd plea d, would and , at once sad and thing. A. This an hardly be resolv d, unless another Delius shew it; yet thus i explibate it in a word: It is meant of Love and Lovers, for it is a kinde of phrenzy, and they are for the time possest with a short madnesse; for Amare & supere vix dijs conceditur. It is a question of Salomon, Pro. 6. whether a man can hide fire in his bosome, and not be burnt? now there is a second question, whether Love or Fire burne hot∣ter; now the fire must have fuell neere, but the fire of Love burnes at a greater distance. Q. What are held the most n ∣cessary things of a mans life? A. Wee desire many things yet we brought nothing into the world, nor we shall carry nothing out; at death each man layes by his load; for the world had bi beggard long agoe, if rich men could have carried their substance with them. In the mean time, if we have but water, fire, Iron, Salt, Bread, Milke, Honey, Wine, and Oyle, House to cover my head, Garments to cover my nakednesse, Current mundus, forwe have all and enough. Q. What is the Physicians best rule for health? A. Temperance, avoyding sa∣tiety and fulnesle. A certaine wise King, Cyrus by name, (as stories mention) never sate downe without a stomacke, nor never rose without an empti∣nesse: So Galen, Asclepiades, Bar∣tholus, all these, and many other, that tooke their dyet by weight, whereas some other gluttons fur∣nished their Tables by Alphabet; those were such as the French Proverbe saith, Dig their graves with their teeth. Q. How many diseases (as Deaths Harbingers) belong to the body of man, as is supposed? A. There a so many they are hardly to be numbred: some Phy∣sicians thinke there are two thou∣sand; and certainely there is no member in a mans body, that is not diversly a icted; and now of late yeares, divers new diseases are sprung up that are without names; Diseases increase, and Plants and Herbs decay and lose their operations, which bring death so neare us, he continually lookes in at our windowes; and the longer our life is, the more numerous are our sinnes, even whole Miriades: and at last comes death, and with a little pin bores through our wall of health, so fare∣well man. Constantius, our noble Coun∣triman, and Emperour, more ful∣ler of heroicall vertue than feare of death, being sicke, and deman∣ding lus Physicians counsell, was resolved, that a hath of Infants blood would cure him, answered, I had rather be continually sicke, or presently dye, then with He∣rods cruelty preserve one life with so many deaths, or a cure worse than the disease. A fellow having his legge to be cut off, in the thought of his mi∣sery cried out and said to that skil, that death loves not Chyrur∣gery. Vah non est tanto digna dolery sa∣lus. The Pope is called Summus; that is, the highest; because he is suprajus, contrajus, & extrajus: because he is aboue Law, against Law, and without Law. A Cardinall for his exceeding great pride being rebuked by a King of France, who told one that the Apostles in their times were more humble and plaine, answe∣red nothing thereto, but told the King, Kings in ancient times were Heardsm n and Shepherds. A great man demanded of the Pope, for the pompe of his Church why he did not create more new Cardinals; that (quoth he) wil∣lingly I would doe, if I could cre∣ate a new world, for this is too lit∣tle for those that are already: Tres su t convive, Germanus, Flander, & Anglus, Dic quis edat melius, quis meliusve bibat: Non comedes Germane, bibis tu non bibes Anglus, Sed Comedis Comedis Flandre bi∣bis{que} bene. Three feasts there are, you hardly can match such, Betwixt the English, German, and the Dutch: Now of these three, which are they of the rest, That eat and drinke, or drinke and eat the best? Thou German for thy drink claim thou thy share, Thou English, for thy trencher take thou care; Then Dutchman out of both take thou thy fare. Q. Whether doe Cups of silver, or Cups of glasse sooner quench the thirst? A. Cups of Glasse: for Cups of silver doe a little allay it for the time, but that thirst is incurable; for crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Q. What was Socrates excuse for his frugall fare to his wife? A. If they be our friends, here is enough; if they be not, here is to much. A certaine drunken man called Sobriety the beasts vertue, and would be opposite so much, that he made himselfe a beast. Q. What makes the Terrestri∣all Globe? A. The earth and the water makes this one globe, according to the Poet: Terra atque vnda, Globum faci∣unt quis crederet unum, Scilicet haec semper manat, at ill manet. The earth and water, though they rest and move, Are married in one globe by pow∣erfull Iove. Q. What is the world for her in∣stability compared unto? A. To the wheele which ever turns round of which one writes, Vtrota voluitur indi{que} pingitur ut rota mundus; Quippe volubilis, et variabilis as ruibundus. Another of the world. In mundo nihil constat, in orbe vertitur orbis, Quid mirum? recti qued sit in orbe nihil. Even as a wheele is turned on his pinne, The world so in the world, and all therein. Q. How much distance doe A∣stronemers reck n from the center of the earth, to the spheare of the moone, and to the fixed stars? A. To the Moone 16340. to the spheare of the fixed Starres, 17269660. But this question is more deepe than can be truly re∣solved by me or any other. Syra∣eides denyes the height of heaven can be measured by any: so saith another wise man, the height of heaven, the depth of the earth, and the heart of Kings are unde∣menfitive. It is God that measures the hea∣vens with his spanne, weighs the mountaines and hils in a ballance, and gathers the waters into his fist, Esay 40. 12. 22. Tis he onely that knowes these obscurities, the heights above, and the bottomes below; where fadome line could never sound the depth. Hesiodus triflingly saith, if a line were let downe from heaven, in ton dayes it would not come to the earth: but these, as inscrutable, we leave, though it argues our ignorance in our owne dwelling. Q. Whether was Peter ever at Rome? A. This question hath bred much controve sie: but we deny that Peter was ever there, but Si∣mon hath, and many other Simo∣niacks. Q. What may covetous Patrons be likened unto? A. To the Deuils Factors, that buy and sell livings as men buy and sell horses in a Faire, a faire Chapmandise; and these care not so a man have Entia, whether he have Scientia or no, or Conscien∣tia or no; because they make ac∣count that silver is better than Latine. Q. What doth David under∣stand by a dead dogge, and a flea? A. In these words he doth up∣braid Saul of cruelty, that he him∣selfe being a Prince, should so fiercely seeke revenge of one so lowly in his owne eyes, as to com∣pare himselfe to a dead dogge, which other dogs will not bite, and to a Flea which wee trample under foot. Every man is tender of him∣selfe, and therefore we write our evil deeds, and other menswrongs we doe, in the dust; but our good workes, and our wrongs, in mar∣ble: according to the Poet: Pulvere quiledit, scribit, sed mar∣more laesus. Q. What weapons are those that are both the Instruments of warre and peace? A. The Sword and the Mattock as it is in the holy Writ, Swords are turned into Mattocks, &c. Q. Is it just to hate the person for his vices sake, or to loue the vi∣ces for the persons sake? A. It is a fault in either; for thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart: we must love the per∣son, and hate the vice. Diogenes seeing a fellow beg∣ging for his living, said, well done friend, thou labourest that thou mayst not labour. Q. What are those two great inventions in the world, invented and found out about 150. yeares agoe, and both by a Fryar named Sivart? A. Printing and Gunnes: of which one writes, Printing and Gunnes are both but late inventions Quicknesse of worke is either their intentions: Since whether they haue wrought more harme or good; They have brocht such doctrines, let so many blood: Is yet un∣judg'd. Honest a siquid feceris cum maxi∣mis laboribus, Cedentibus laboribus, Dulcis ma∣nebit gloria: Sui turpe quid comiseris cum gau∣dij amplissimis, Abibit omni gaudium turpi ma∣nente infamia. He that with labour vertue doth attaine, The labour's past, but the vertue doth remaine: But if with infamy thou pleasure buy, The pleasure passeth, though the shame ne're dye. Few words, but full of sense, which ought to be written upon e∣very ones dore, carved upon th ir posts, printed upon their hearts, and expressed in their lives. What difference betweene the rich man and the foole, both dye alike: and betweene the Ashes of Vashty the most beautifull Queene that ever was, and the blackest Aegyptian bond-woman? No distinction can be made, as not for beauty, so not for wisdome: but put them both naked into an unknowne Countrey, and then the difference shall be easily dis∣cerned: For a wise man is more precious than riches, and nothing is worthy his comparison: length of dayes is in his right hand, and in his left glory and riches. Pontanus relates of a Traveller that said he had beene at Bonouia, but said he had not met with one living wise man, but many dead ones, and those tyed in chaynes, meaning Bookes. Q. Whether is Wisedome or Riches more precious? A. Wisdome; and that have divers wise men chosen before Riches: as Salom n chose Wis∣dome, and not Riches: Moses forsooke Pharaohs Court, Dio∣genes the Court of Alexander to onverse with Philosophers: and what doth it profit a foole to have wealth, when it cannot buy Wis∣dome, Q. What is the mind and study of the slothfull man? A. Saint Bede will answer, the slothfull will and will not: he would reigne with God, but not labour with God: they like the reward when it is promised, but not the worke when it is to bee done: but they must know, Qui non laborabit in hoc seculo, non manducabit in futuro: and it is la∣bour that nourisheth the most ge∣nerous minds. Q. What is the most troublesome idlenesse? A. Divers jesting at supper, amongst other questions, this was propounded: one was of one opi∣nion, and another of another, but Publius said, the gout in the feet. This tale was moralized upon by certaine labouring, but igno∣rant people, that thought the Ma∣gistrate and the Minister lived in too much ease, and too much ho∣nour, and with too little paines, when their labor, as they thought, was too great, their profit and e∣steeme too little: To this a com∣parison was made on a time, when silly sheepe could speake; and then at such a time it was the sheepe said to her master, I mar∣vell much, that we receiving no∣thing of thee, but are forced to seeke our livings out of the earth, from whom yet thou takest wooll and Cheese, and Lambes, yet thy dogge that brings thee none of these profits, he is fed with bread from thine owne hand. But then it is said, that the dogge thus re∣plied, And worthily I receive my allowance, for I am he that keepe and preserve you, lest theeves steale you, or wolves devoure you, whose custody if I neglect, you cannot eat one morsell securely: The sheepe hearing this, was con∣tent with every lot, and ever since, being so conui ted, have held their peace. Extant to this there is another story, how on a time the members complained a∣gainst the belly, how it was idle, and did nothing, but devoured their labours; and how every member tooke paines, and they were all weary, and would conti∣nue their exercise no longer for this idle member: this done, the belly debarr'd from her wonted allowance, imparted no strength to the hand, the legge grew fee∣ble and could not walke, and the whole body could not support it selfe for feebl nesse: which seene and perceived, a Parliament was called, and every officer put to his former taske, and all became as before. Q. Of sleepe what doe the Phi∣losophers averre? A. That it is the Porch be∣tweene life and death: that death is a long sleepe, and sleepe a short death; that it is natures sithe that cuts away halfe our life. Of Dreames. One dreamed that hee should not beleeve dreames, because they are for the most part false: if hee did beleeve them, then it followes that hee should not be∣leeve them: if he did not beleeve them, then it followes that hee should have beleeved them, be∣cause they were dreames and false, their contrary being true. Q. Is that compact lawfull or possible amongst the living, that the first dead should come backe to his fellow and bring newes of the state of the other world? A. It is neither lawfull not possible, though such fables be or∣dinary in Popery; and so Baroni∣us stories it, that Marcellus Ficy∣nus, returned backe according to his compact, to reveale what hee had seene: but we are taught o∣therwise in holy Writ, where the rich man would have sent Lazarus to have forewarned his brethren, but could not. Q. What is thought of Pylats wives dreame, that had truth with it? A. Many have severall opi∣nions thereof: some thinke it was the devils suggestion to hinder mans redemption: other, that she was a godly matron, and saw his Innocency, which God would have at all times to appeare: and if it had beene of Satan, it migh more haue advantaged his pur∣pose to have dealt with the hig Priests, and the rest of his ene∣mies: but the reason of this w the providence of God so to ma∣nifest his innocency. Q. What foure small creatures are those on the earth, which f their wisdome are preferred before men? A. 1. Formica a ferendis mi∣cis: The Ant so called of carrvin of crumbs, which for their wise∣dome are termed a people, an that they provide their meat in summer, and fearing tempests, la∣bour by Mooneshine. 2. The Conies, a people like∣wise not strong, but they make their houses in the Rocke. 3. The Locusts have no King, yet they goe forth in swarmes. 4. The Spider that weaveth the web that is in palaces of kings, thas no mortall man can imitate, and all this but a net for flyes; yet marke with what curiosity shee disposeth her threds. Pallas me docuit, texendinosse la∣borem, Nulla mihi manus est, pedibus ta∣men omnia fiunt. Of this one writes, where God is present, the weakest Spiders weo is a Castle: where absent, the strongest Castle is but a Spiders web: As these presage death, and so labour to prevent it, so the Squirrell presaging stormes, turnes the little window in her draw, e∣ver fromwards it, Q. What creature of all other is the most profitable to man, in whom is nothing but good? A. The sheepe, our founder, content with her owne coat and colour, though by vs her allusion varied many wayes, and changed into many colours: of which one writes, Quid meruistioves, placidum pe∣cus, inque tuendo Natum homines? pleno quae fertis in ubere nectar, Mollia quae nobis vestras velamina lanas Prabetis, vitaque magis quam morte juvatis. Englished. This gentle Creature, of all good things full, That feeds us with her flesh, clothes us with wooll, Liues with us as friend, why should the knife After so many takings, take her life? Q. What Creatur s of all other love their young most? A. The Asse and the Ape: the Asle will passe through a thousand obstacles to come to her young, yea, even through fire: the Ape killeth his young with too much dandling: to these may be like∣wise added the Turtle and the Storke. Q. In what things are many men Imitators of Apes? A. In following the follies and vices of other men, rather than their vertues: like sheepe, one going before, all the rest fol∣lowing after, though into danger. Q. What is the most inhumane thing, and reckoned as prime a∣m ngst other vices? A. Ingratitude; which the ve∣ry beasts scorne to repay, as you may read more at large in Aulus Gellius, of the old Lion that had the thorne in his foot, when An∣troclus comming, by signes that he made to him perceiued it, and ventured to pull it out; which done, the Lion not onely did him no hurt himselfe, but protected him from all others, and ever after acknowledged his kindnesle. Q. Whether are their greater creatures on the earth, or in the Sea: Solo aut Salo? A. There is nothing, as some Writers affirme, that is on the Land, but the same is in the S a; but bigger creatures are in the Sea, than on the Land: the Behe∣moth is a beast like many beasts, which for his hugenesse is said to drinke up Iordan, upon whom scale is so fastned to scale, she can hardly be pierced: this beast is thought to be either the Whale or the Crocodile, more largely spo∣ken of in Iob: The Elephant, a creature of the land, of incompa∣rable bignesse & strength, amongst other not to be paralleld, so like∣wise divers other: but here I meane not pursue this story, else might I draw out my discourse somewhat longer, in parallelling the Creatures of the Sea and the Land, as Plutarch doth his Greeks and Romans, but those you may read more at large in Aristotle, Gesner, and others. The King of beasts is the Lion, and his terrour consists most in the eye, and in his roaring: Whereupon it is, The Lion roares, and who is not asraid? Amos 3. 8. And it fills all other beasts with such terror, that those that by their swistnesse can escape betake them to their heeles. Q. What is the most envious creature against man, and what the most louing? A. The Wolfe and the Dogge; Albertus Magnus writes, that he had a Dogge that would hold a Candle all supper time: and the love of this Creature is so great, that some that have had their ma∣sters slaine, and buried, would not remove from the place, till they were starved away; and after they have noted the murderer, and discovered him by their strange seizing on him, and would not be beaten off till the matter by this strangenesse hath beene discove∣red and found out. Betweene the Wolfe and Lambe there is such an Anpithathy in nature, that being dead, and theis skinnes made into Tabers, the sheepes skinne will not sound till the other be remo∣ved away. Q. What little Serpent is that against whose sting and poyson there is no remedy. A. The Aspicke, whose stroke is mortall: Cleopatra, that sump∣tuous Queene of Aegypt, being desirous to dye, to prevent Caesars purpose in her owne disgrace, would be stung to death by these Serpents; and to that end, a Coun∣trey man brought her two cove∣red over with greene leaves in a Basket, and so had accesse through Caesars. Watchmen: when after shee was strucke, dressed her selfe in all her richest robes, and so went and layd her selfe upon her bed, and dyed, her wayting Gen∣tle woman sitting at her feet; for which Caesar was much grieved, intending her spoyle should have graced his triumphs throughout Rome: The story is more at large in Daniels Hystorie, and in many other Authors that write of this woman. Plynie writeth of this Serpent, that it hath some sense, or rather affection, and if it con∣ceive a wrong, will find out the party, and approach unto him tho∣roughout all dangers. Q. What little Creatures are those, that for workemanship excel, and with their workmanship cloath man? A. The Silke-worme, that out of her owne bowels weaves a bottome, n which they involve themselves, and inclose them∣selves in death: to whose Art, Courts, and your costliest Gallants are indebted for their silke: and whose choycest colours, yet after their costliest dyes, may be mat∣ched by the Butterfly, as Stelia saith, even the freshest colours in the Court of Spaine: for he that dresseth this Worme to match the Courts bravery, cloathes the Lil∣lies of the field to match Salomons Royalty: yea, and your Gallants of these times, and the most cost∣ly, such as hang whole Lordships on their backes, whole Manors on their legges, are not cloathed like one of these: and yet for all this, Nudus ut interram venit, sic n∣dus abibit?. There is extant of Constantius our former Author, and noble Em∣perour, that in his time he set out a Proclamation, but farre from his intention, yet to this purpose, that all Christians should depart his Court, or forsake their Religion, and none but licentious and irreli∣gious Courtiers should inhabit: Vpon this, many grounded Chri∣stians contemning such honours sayd them downe and departed; which the Emperor seeing would forsake all rather than God, re∣cald them backe, and set them in chiefe places, banishing the rest; for, saith he, how will they be loy∣all to mee, that are not true to so good a master as God. Q. Is faith to be kept with an Enemy? A. It is: for we are not so much to weigh to whom we have sworne, as by whom wee have sworne; and hee that beleeveth thee swaring by the name of God, and hath beene deceived, is more faithfull than thou that so hast de∣ceived him. A deceptation betweene an Ide , and a wise man out of Petrarch. Orator. I know my selfe to be a wise man. Ideot. Learned, it may be tho wilt say; Learned there are some, though but few, but wise men al∣most none: some are learned by Art, but fooles by nature: for it is one thing to speake wisely, ano∣ther thing to live wisely, another thing to be thought a wise man, but the greatest thing to be a wise man: and there is some that say, there is not a wise man, which whether that bee true or false, I will not dispute. Orat. The Hebrewes say, their Salomon was a wise man, and yet his wisdome was ecclipsed by his number of Wives and Concu∣bines that drew him to Idolatry. O, but the Romans had wise men, Loelius and Cato; and Greece it selfe, while it flourished, had seven Wise men, but now they com∣mon in all societies. Id. Yea, such are now accoun∣ted wise in all societies, that creepe upon their bellies with the Serpent, and licke up the worldly dust: and he that brings most ho∣ney to his hive, hee is accounted the most wise; but it is in the worlds reckoning, not in truths iudgement, and so I leave them to their wisdome: But to decy∣pher a wise man, I have heard him to be the chiefe, that in every acti∣on can counsell himselfe wisely. Secondly, He that can obey a wise mans counsell; Wise men were never more scarce than in this particular time of noted wise men, for then wisdome had left the earth, which now so abounds in every place. Q. What labour of all other, is the most sweetest to remember? A. Iucundi acti labores: labors past are pleasant, especially the la∣bours of an industrious youth, re∣counted in the goodnesse of a knowing age: therefore, saith one, Tolerate laborem for san et haec o∣lim memonisse iuvabit. Q. Amongst this Dispute of Philosophers, one demanded what was Philosophy? A. It was resolved to bee that which was a cure for all diseases, both in body and minde; to be that which teacheth a man to bee good for goodnesse sake, and not for feare or compulsion: and that was the summe and substance of all Philosophy, which so many large volumes can but anatomize, and is here comprized in two words. Sustinendo, et Abstinen∣do: that by the one we be not too much dejected, nor by the other too much puffed up: an answer worthy of Apollo and the Muses. And to this purpose saith another, it consists faerendo et spaerendo. Q. What is the wisest of all things? A. Th es Milesius answered, Time; for it finds out, teacheth and altereth all things. But one of Pythagoras Schollers of late time said the contrary, and that it was the most rude and unknowing, and the master of all ignorance: for with his owne long waste, it wrapt all things in ignorance. Times office, saith one, is To shew the Beldam daughters of her daughters, To make the child a man, the man a child, To slay the Tyger, that doth live by slaughter, To tame the Vnicorne, and beasts most wild: To fill with worme-holes stately Monuments, To feed Oblivion with decay of things, To blot old books, alter their con∣tents, To plucke the quils from ancient Ravens wings: To spoyle Antiquities of hammerd steele, And turne the giddy round of For∣tunes wheele. Q. How are mettals to bee knowne, and how is a mans heart to be discovered? A. Aera puto nosci tinitu vt pectora verbis, Sic est nam ; id sunt utraque qua∣le sonunt. For words and mettals is one touchstone found, And that's the eare, for both are knowne by th' sound. Q. How many are mentioned in Scripture to have beene raised from death to life? A. Eight: 1. The widdowes sonne of Screpta, by Elias: 2. the sonne of another widow, by Eli∣zeus: 3. one buried in Elizeus Sepulcher: 4. Iayrus daughter: 5. the sonne of another widdow in Naim, Luk. 7. 15. 6. Lazarus by Christ: 7. Tabitha by Peter: 8. Eutichus by Paul, Act. 20. 22. So onely eight persons preserved in the Arke. Q. How many steps hath the Courtiers ladder? A. There is no man riseth but by more steps than one: but there is only one to come downe, or ra∣ther a downeright precipitation: It is, saith one, the Stepmother of vertue, and the purgatory of rich men. Therefore let him that feares the headlong comming downe, feare the steepy going up: for, Plures beavit Aula, plures per∣didit, et quos beauit perdidit. And as another saith, Qui Iacet in Plano, non habet vn∣de cadat. I call heare to witnesse the most fortunate of Courtiers, the slippe∣rinesse of this footing: Seianus with Tyberius, Clito with Alex∣ander the Great, Philotas, and o∣thers Histories are ful of these ex∣amples: therefore he that is wise with Demosthenes, let him say, Tanti poenitere non aemum: for, Tutius in caula blanda quam vi∣vitur aula: Aula vale, caula sim magis ipse comes. The Countrey hall more freely yeelds a life Of quiet peace, not mixt with Courtly strife: Court therefore fare thou well, I know this true, The Country I embrace, so Court adue. Q. Why then should one come to the Court, and conuerse with great ones? A. A young Divine commen∣ded the faith of the Divels; for, saith he, they beleeve and trem∣ble: So, heare what Courts speake, but with a kinde of terrour; and come to Court, as a man would come to the fire; where if hee come too neare, he shall be burnt: if he keepe too farre off, he shall be a cold. Medium tenuisse beatum. Q. What thing is that which for the brittlenesse is compared unto a mans life? A. A Glasse, which though no∣thing is more brittle, with safe keeping may be preserved long: but bee wee never such wary Py∣lots, we dash this fraile vessell, for all our care, against one Rocke or other; it comes unprevented for all our care, nay, undeserved, if we respect onely disorder, even as the Poet thus more fully expres∣seth it: Mane virens flos est, cinis est sub vespere vita, Fide, cinis rursus, flos gener sus erit. I'th morne a flowre, at night cut downe and shore, Yet faith shall one day this dead flowre restore. Q. What is that short, more short, most short? Ver breve, flos brevior, vita bre∣vissima: At bene si morimur, vita paerennis erit. Englished. The spring is short, a flower more short, mans life most short of all: Yet a good life shall peece out death, no death shall be at all. What better than life? A good fame: what better than good fame? A mind conscious of Inno∣cence: what better than that? To dye well. To live to the world is death; but to Christ, life. Of sudden feares, they are more said to colour the haires, than age; as is experienced by Mariners: Rebus in aduersis, venit acclerata accelerata senectus. Q. What is that that takes away teeth, and addeth wrinkles, and turnes our gold of youth, into the dust of age, and so changeth us, as if we were old new ones? Non habitus, non ipse color, non gressus eunt is, Non species eadem, quae fuit ante manet. Englished: Not habit, colour, forme, ought we enjoy, But he is chang'd worse, better to destroy. An old man said, hee carried a great load, for he bore 80 yeares, and all the troubles these had be∣got. Another old man said, before Age I cared how to live well, in age how to dye well. Old men, they say, carry their feet in their hands, and their teeth in their poc∣kets: that is, a Staffe and a Knife. Q Who are those in holy Scrip∣ture that are called childr n of an hundred yeares old? A. Those that have runne over many yeares from their birth, yet never entred into the schoole of wisdome, feare of God, or divine knowledge: old in years, but yong in knowledge. Q. Are there not some men that spend their lives altogether in va∣nity? A. A many that when they are going out of the world, know not wherefore they came; being like to him that hath sayled upon the sea, but hath more beene tossed hither and thither than gone for∣ward to arrive at his wished port: of such a man one may say, This man hath not sailed much, but beene tossed long: so hee that lives long, and profits nothing in goodnesse, may not be said to have lived a long life, but to have beene here long. If life is to be desired of a wise man, it should bee for no other cause then to effect some thing worthy of life, and that might profit himselfe and others, which having done, hee hath lived e∣nough, having fulfilled the office of an honest man: Of which one thus instanceth it of Cicero; If thou respect the applause of the people, whensoever thou dyest, thou hast lived but a little: if what thou hast done, thou hast lived e∣nough: if the injuries of Fortune, and the present state, th u hast li∣ved too long: if the memory of thy workes, thou shalt live for e∣ver. A good man thus having finished his course, may then say, Sufficit Iehovah tolle animam meam hospita terra vale. Q. What is that, the more you take from it, the more it is increa∣sed, and the more you adde to it, the more it is diminished? A. Many sticke hereat, and de∣ny that any such thing can be, but wee finde it to bee a hole in a Cloth. Q. Whether did mans nature infect mans person, or mans person infect nature? A. The first man did infect nature, but now nature infects man-kinde, the whole lumpe be∣ing poysoned. Q. What is the chiefest and greatest sinne of all other? A. There is no sinne greater than the sinne of Infidelity, to be∣leeve that any truly repented of, is greater than can be forgiuen, ac∣cording to the Poet: Non crimen maius, quam crimen dicere maius, At solui possit, sanguine Christe tuo. Englished: No crime so great, whilst here on earth we live, As to despaire God cannot mercy give. This was the despairing speech of Cain; but Saint Austine an∣swers, Th yest, Cain; for the mercy of God is greater than all the sinnes in the world. Q. On what day was Marriage instituted? A. There are that doe imagine on the eighth or ninth day from the Creation; and so it appeares by Saint Austin and Danaeus dispu∣ting thereupon: as whether Adam knew his wife before his fall, and he answers affirmatiuely; but yet so that Eve denyes to have con∣ceiued at that time, or before his fall, that being an effect of the pu∣nishment. Q. What River was that in Pa∣lestina, that slowed all the six dayes, and on the seventh was dry? A. The River of Sambatia, from whence it tooke the name: Oadmirable of the Law, which in ancient time it held; but now the Priesthood, and the Law being changed, it keepes not his course. This River flowed all the week with such violence, that his tor∣rent would carry with it mighty stones, yet on the Sabbath would be dry. Q. Since all water sinkes down∣ward, how doth the water in foun∣taines spring upwards? A. It is compelled by a fiery spirit that drives it upwards, but after it falls into his owne course. Q. What water was that, that was the Index either of Innocencie or offence? A. The water that the woman suspected of Adultery, after cer∣taine Ceremonies by the Priest done, should take and drinke, and it should, if shee were guilty, turne into bitternesse, with which her belly should swell, and her thigh rot, Num. 5. 27. Q. What is the figure of the water? A. The figure of the water is round, and every drop affects ro∣tundity, as you may perceive: likewise water powred into a pot will bee alwayes highest in the middle; and though removed, it will be so still; and that is the rea∣son that if you behold a ship from the shore, after a while you lose the sight. Expound me this verse, St sera aquis constans, reserat quam lignea clavis, Venator capitur, libera casse fera est. I thus untwist this knot. Sera was the red Sea, clavis lig∣nea, Moses staffe; Venator, or the hunter Pharaoh, to whom the Sea opening, rashly entred in, when the waters closing upon all his Army, drowned it: fera, or the wild beasts, were the people of Israel, which went over dry foot. To this miraculous overthrow may the Spanish Navy have some parallell; for upon the Otian ne∣ver floted such another, thinking, like Pharaoh, to have eaten up our Israel: In number so many, in strength so powerfull, in the yeare 1588. the day of Saint Iames the patron for Spaine, and stiled for Assurance, the Invincible Na∣vy; and yet as this by this mira∣culous hand discomfited, and what had the poore English done to deserve this? Quid meus Ae∣neas in te committere tantum? Q. What waters doe we accou the best? A. 1. Waters of Baptisme, which are signes and seales of our justifying faith. 2. Waters of Teares that wee shed for our sinnes. 3. From youth corrected, which promise amendment. 4. Water of the Mill whereby our bread is prepared. But one to this merrily added, that is the most pleasant that is brought forth to wash hands at dinner and supper. Q. What is the Summum bo∣num, or chiefe felicitie of the world? A. Some of the Philosophers, and Heathens, thought it consisted in health, some in wealth, some in strength, some in riches, some in beauty, and the like, but these groped hood-winck'd: but wee have better learned this Summúm Bonum, saith Saint Bernard: De∣vote, O Lord, my soule to thee, let it be chained to thy love, let it breath and gaspe after thee, onely desiring thee, let it have nothing sweet but to speake of thee, to heare of thee, and thy memory and glory, often to record and re∣member what my God would give mee; let him take them all away, so hee give mee himselfe. Whatsoever other opinions there are, they are vaine and frivolous; and he drawes water into a sieve, and torments himselfe with vaine cogitations, that delights himselfe in the Creature, but ascends not to the Creator, to whom all other Iucundity compared, is bitter∣nesse; all sweet things, sowre; all joy, griefe; all mirth, sadnesse; all pleasure, madnesse: therefore hee is too covetous whom this chiefe good sufficeth not. Vt fugiam omne scaelus, et amem super omnia numen, Da mihi frena timor, da mihi cal∣car amor. Englished. To drive me forward, and to pull me backe, To every vertue that I may ad∣here, Give mee thy spurre of love, thy bit of feare. Christ is our mouth by whom we speake to the father, our eye by whom wee see the father, our right hand by whom wee offer to the father. Q. There are some that are there where they are not yet, and live not where they are: and who are those? A. Saint Chrysostome affirmes this of the Godly, that live upon the earth, but have their conver∣sation in heaven In medio consistit virtus. It was truly said, when Christ was crucified betweene two theeves, If ever goodnesse were in the midst of evill, then it was: to which purpose is here inserted a rare and admirable picture of the passion, Ecce crucili affixum qui cuncta, mouente mouentur, Cuius cuncta bibunt sontibus, ecce silit: Qui fab icat brutis, auibus{que} seda∣lia pendens, Nil sua quo ceruix sustineatur ha∣bet. Est nudus largitor opum, spetiosior astris, Liuit et est justus victima pro sce∣lere: Qui dat sceptra gerit de sentibus ecce coronam; Latrones inter gloria summa pro∣bro est: Qui{que} refrigerium est, ipse est so∣laminis expers, Et vitae Dominus, mortuus ipse ja∣cet: Haec dixisse velim, sed tu memor esto tota{que} Tanta, tui causa sustinuisse Deum, Englished: Behold the mover of all motion stayd, The fount that all refresh'd, stopt and decayd: He that made beasts and birds to runne and flye, Hath scarce a place where's wea∣ry head may lye: The master of all wealth, and each mans store, Himselfe is naked, and in all things poore: He that gives Crownes and Scep∣ters, nothing scornes Himselfe to weare a piercing Crowne of Thornes. A certaine Gentleman abroad at Supper, at the closure thereof, put an Apple into his pocket; saith another standing by, Sir, why are you carefull for to morrow, for of all the yeares that I have lived, I was never yet assured of a mor∣row: so likewise said another in∣uited to a morrowes feast, If you will any thing with me now, I am ready; but of all my life long, I have not yet beene assured of a morrow: To the former question the first Gentleman answered, therefore I put up this apple, that I may not care for to morrow, for nature is content with little: O from how few shall you heare this confession, that of all their life long they haue not had a morrow. Q. Whether death is more to be seared, the corporall, or the eter∣nall? A. The Eternall, Saint Austen shall answer thee: that death which men feare most, is but the seperation of the soule from the body, when it would willingly stay in; but the second death, which men feare not, is the seperation of the soule from God: The first death takes the soule out of the body, when it would willingly stay in; the second keepes the soule in the body, when it would wil∣lingly depart. Q. How many are the messen∣gers of death? A. Three: Casualty, Infirmity, and old Age: the first shewes death lying in ambush: the se∣cond, appearing: the last, present: we dye not, for the most part, al∣together, but by degrees; and as wee increase in dayes, so our life decreaseth: first, we lose Infan∣cy, then child-hood, then youth, even till we have lost all the time that we have passed to yesterday, and the very time wee now live wee spend on till death: we passe by the Temple of faith and piety, to the Temple of glory and perpe∣tuall happinesse, where those e∣verlasting rewards are so great they cannot be measured, so ma∣ny they cannot be numbred, so co∣pious they cannot be terminated, so precious they cannot bee va∣lued. Iulius 2. Pope (as stories men∣tion) being dead, came to heaven gates, and there knocked with authority; Saint Peter being an∣gry, asked who so importunately knocked: this Pope answered, It is I, open quickly: Who art thou, quoth Saint Peter? Iulius the Pope, replyed he: What hast thou to doe heare with heaven, that hast so oft sold it? no man accounts that his owne, which he hath sold: and so was he shut out, and wor∣thily; for all they say they have Navis, Terrae, & clavis Coeli. One demanded of Eucritus the Philosopher, whether hee had ra∣ther bee S crates or Croesus? Quoth he, Croesus while I live, but Socrates when I dye. Q. Whether is it better to envy, or to be envied? A. To be envied: for hee that is envied, is alwayes the happier man. Q. Whether is the shining of the Moone cold or hot? A. It is cold, which doth some∣thing allay the heat that the beames of the Sunne hath made in his passed progresse. Q. It is vouched before in this discourse, that there is nothing so deformed nor contemptible on earth, that hath not in it some kinde of good: to what use serveth the Scerpion, the Toad, the Serpent, and such like? A. Of the Scorpion is made an excellent salve against all swel∣lings, and of Serpents and Toads is made an excellent powder a∣gainst the stone, and to provokeu∣rine. For nought sovile that on the earth doth ltve, But to the earth some special good doth give. &c. Platos counsell to young men which hee would have to imitate the Ivie, being weake of them∣selves, to get a prop to support them. Q. Upon the birth of children, whether have parents more cause ofjoy, or griefe? A. This is resolved upon, that with children a fountaine of teares spring up to the parents: for if you compare them to a nurserie, of some you shall late gather fruit, of others never: If good, feare lest they continve not: if evill, lasting sorrow, in the inte rim uncertaine joyes, but certaine cares. Q. What is the chiefe of all meats, and what the chiefe of all savces? A. Bread of all meats: for whe∣ther we eat it by it selfe, or conti∣nually with other meats, yet we are never weary of it, being the staffe of life, and signe in the Sa∣crament. And of all sauces, I say not hunger, but Salt is a principall, a sauce that the diveil for his re∣lish doth abhorre; for Salt is an embleme of eternity and immor∣tality, being not onely able to pre∣serue it selfe from rottennesse and corruption, but all other things; and therefore Salt by the com∣mand of God himself was to have a principall place on the Table a∣ id the sacrifices. Q. What is the meaning of th phrase of Plantus M non unifid Antro, the Mouse trusts not to one hole? A. It admonisheth us to have more friends than one, more strings to our bow than one. Hee that fames hims lfe to be a friend in words, and is not so indeed; he that hath Ave in his mouth, but hath ve and Cave in his heart, is worse than one that coynes false money, worse than Ieabor, nay, worse than Iudas that kist and kild. Q. What is a mind full of cares resembled unto? A. To wormes and rottennesse amongst the bones; and therefore Damacles, amid all his dainties, could take no delight, because his mind was troubled at the Sword that hung over his head by a slen∣der haire. Q. What is the only great secu∣rity in the world, and meanes to prevent feare? A. To feare nothing but God; for he that feares not him, feares every thing; and hee that feares him, needs to feare nothing else, for his feare excludes all other. Q. What is the most excellent action of the hands? A. Their Elevation in prayer, Innocent hands and a pure heart. Q. Spots of Infamy, can they be washt out? A. They are scarce purged off with Niter, therefore take heed of their stampe: guilty Pylate may wash his hands, but not cleare his Conscience. A certaine workman had pictu∣red Uenus sleeping, with this in∣scription, O traveller, passe by and awake not the goddesse; for if shee open her windowes, shut up thine: For as the Poet advis th, Cum vultu pungit, cum verbis dul∣citur vngit, Affectum fingit, complexu pectora stringit; Sires procedit, animam cum cor∣pore ledit. He that but looks, his journy doth begin, He that but likes, is stept a stept more in; Who so inchaind his pace doth forward bend, He hath enioy'd, and is at's jour∣neyes end. Q. Which of all Hercules la∣bours was his hardest to overcome? A. Love. Q. How many sorts of creatures hath Ged made? A. Three: one not covered with flesh: the second, covered with flesh, but dyes not with the flesh: the third is covered with flesh, but dyes with the flesh: of these: the first are Angels; the second, men; the third, bruit beasts. Sum decor in manibus, sustento se∣nem rego gr ssus, Sum terror canibus, gest at pro duce f ssus. Englished. I am the old mans leg, the weake mans stay, I am his weapon, and his guide by th' way. Q What are the Countrymans prognostication of the Raine-bow? A. 1. It is observable that it changeth to what colour a man conceiveth; and if it bee red like to an Oke, or fire, or blood, it prognosticates a fruitfull Vintage; if of yellow colour, like to the Corne-fields, it presageth a plenti∣full haruest: thirdly, if it bee of a greene colour, plenty of Oyle: and see the Bow, saith the Wise∣man, and blesse him that made it so faire and spatious, and in such variety, in that blessed Covenant: One saith, the Raine-bow is to be reckoned among one of the great wonders of nature. Q. Of what thing may the course of the Sunne admonish vs? A. The course and progression os the Gospell, which came first out of the East, that is, from Iudaea; from thence into the South, into Graecia; from thence into the West, which is this last angle of the world, that is, Germany and England, and so it hath finished his course; and because the Eve∣ning is now come, Lord stay with vs. And this splendant rising of the Sunne is not seene to all Na∣tions at one instant, but first to the Persians, then to the Greekes, and Italians, and the more Easterne Countries; last to the Spaniards and English. At the Passion, two Sunnes were ecclipsed at once; the Sunne of the Element was ecclipsed for the Sonne of heaven, the Rockes cleft for their Spirituall Rocke; the graves opened, and the dead rose, for him that was free among the dead: God so shut up the eye of the Sunne, that darkenesse was upon the earth at middle of the day, against all naturall causes, God commanded the Sunne that it should not shine, and it vaild him in darknesse. Lucian the Martyr saith, hee will bring the Sunne for a witnesse against this wicked∣nesse. Hereupon the Chaldean Astronomers amazed, after they had heard and seene such an un∣wonted spectacle, as the Sunne to goe ten degrees backe, came to Ierusalem to enquire thereafter, as did the wise men at the birth of Christ, to know the reason of the Starre: the complaint of the Sunne, according to our Po t: Heu mihi cum vasti peragro latis∣sima mundi, Maenia, quam sa cti est portio par∣ua gragis: Tota Asia in tenebris versatur, et Africa caeca est; Tot magnus olim qua paeperere vi∣ros: Vix nunc extromis Europe infinibus haeret, Grex pius et raram, sentit egenus opem, &c. Alexan. Mag. said, the world was not capable of two Sunnes, nor one kingdome of two Empe∣rours. Sol Angvis et Annius, et superad∣dita norma: Quid usquam? Est rerum his vitam tribuunt, a ∣gent{que} tributam. Quidnam illud esse putas? Res una in Pelago, et telluris om∣nibus oris, Nascitur ac oriens est maxima de∣ficiens{que} In medio vita minimum quam porta vigore. This is a shadow, which is lon∣gest at his beginning, shortest in his middle, and longest at his end. Tunc Sol decedens crescentes du∣plicat vmbris. Q. What is meant to measure our owne shadow? A. To measure our owne sha∣dow is to teach us no other thing then not to be puft up with prid , with any successe, or honour, see∣ing the shadow no more honours the body, then before in his length. Q. What is the fairest object to behold? A. A certaine King of the E∣gyptians, being asked what was the most beautifull thing to looke upon, answered, The Light; the companion, wife, and danghter of the Sunne: yea, tis true, that God is light, and darkenesse is irksome to all men: and that appeares by our owne experience, as also by the words of old Toby the blinde, Pleasant is the light, and delecta∣ble, with our eyes to behold the Sunne, which though the swiftest of all things, yet no man can per∣ceive his motion, nor would so thinke, but that wee fee it remo∣ved from the East unto the West, about the earth, being yet bigger than the earth 166 times. Q. In what part of the earth, if letters be written in the dust, doe they longest abide? A. On the top of Olympus, a Mountaine in Macedonia, where no wind blowes, nor raine falls, for it exceeds in height all this hu∣mid region of the Ayre where, Birds live: and there bee those yeare by yeare to goe up to Sa∣crifice, and what writing, or what∣soever they leave, they finde it untoucht or unshaken; which could not be if wind or raine fell or blew upon that place: rud yet this Mountaine, in the universall Deluge, was ouerflowne. What is this, Torqueo torquentes, sed nullum torqueo sponte, Ladere nec quemquam volo, in prius ipse reatum, Contrahat et veridem studeat de∣cerpere caulam: Fervi amor hominis, turgescunt membranocentis. This is meant of a Nettle. Q. Magnates and Magnetes, similitudes in names, what conso∣nancie is betweene them in na∣ture? A. Thus much: for as the one drawes gold unto it, so doth the other Iron, according to the P t Cuncta trahunt ad s Magnates Aurea sicut: Ad se Magnetes, ferria cuncta tra∣hunt. Englished: The Rich man is a Loadstone that drawes gold, As the other Iron, but more stronglier hold. Q. What now are these times termed? A. Not the Iron-age, as some now mis-construe it, but the gol∣den age, for new all things are put to sale, according to the Poet: Aur ea nunc vero sunt secula plu∣rimis auro, Uenit honos, auro conciliatur a∣mor: Omnia auro sunt venalia, auro fi∣des, auro vis, auro leges. The golden age this may be right∣ly told, For every thing is set to sale for gold. Q. What is a thing very strange in these times? A. A closed hand and open Iustice. Q. What is the dearest losse of all other? A. Time: according to the Poet, Art comes so slow, and life so fast doth flye; we learne so lit∣tle, and forget so much: of which saith one, we have not avery short time, but we lose a great deale of it; wee doe not receiue a very short life, but we make it so: we are prodigals, as he that thus com∣playned in his more serious cogi∣tation: of which saith one, Audivi Iuvenem premeret quem serior aetas, Merentem tacitos, preteri sse die Q. What saith Saint Bernard of time? A. He saith, wee should more remember to thinke on God, than to breath: and hee saith fur∣ther, that all time, wherein God hath not beene remembred in, is lost. To this further addes Tully, Correct what is past, governe well the present, and prouide for the future: If thou sleepe, awake: if thou stand, enter: if thou enter, runne: if thou runnest, flye. Q. What is the best part of the day for stud? A. Aurora Musis amica: and David himselfe teacheth the same same thing, My voyce shalt thou heare betimes in the day, early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee. Q. Why is the morning colder then the evening? A. Because it more partakes of midnights cold, but the evening of mid-dayes heat. Q. What was Iulius Caesars di∣stribution of time, Alex. magnus Iu∣lianus, and one Alphred a King of the Brittaines, being compelled to spend most part of the day in war∣like affaires, they divided the night into three parts; one part for rest, the second for ordering of publike affaires, and the third part for stu∣dy: but there are some that want time, and some others that have too much, how may that be? A. The industrious want time, and the idle are oppressed with time. these spur a forward horse, whiles the other strive to raine him in. Q. Whether is more cleare the night or the day? A. The night with the Moone and all her Starres, is farre more darke then the day with her one light, according as saith the Poet: Sit nox eentoculo quamvis oculati∣or Argo, Plus vno cernit lumine, luscadies. Though the night have many eies yet all this light Equals not day, nor th' twentieth part so bright. An aged man being asked how old he was, answered, the yeares I had, are gone, therefore I am not farre from my rising, nor my set: Istud patet, hoc latet, the one is knowne, the other hid: take away what is past, and sever that uncertaine, that is to come, from thy life, and O how ltttle re∣maines! Temporibus in puncto, fugientis pe deo nec nam, Quod nondum est, nec quod iam fuit ante meum. Q. What creature of all other is thought to be the wisest, and yet in many things is more foolish than the bruit creatures? A. Man: for the Fox being forewarned will come no more into the trap, the Wolfe no mo into the ditch, the Dogge unto the staffe, but man will runne an hun∣dred times into the selfe same folly. Q. Who is hee that is set forth to us in holy Writ, of whose begin∣ning nor end, neither father nor mother, nor Ancestour is described, nor end? A. Melchisedeck, that King, and Prophet, and type of God. Q. Why did not God at one in∣stant create all the men that ever should be in the world, as hee did the whole number of Angels? A. It pleased his Wisdome, in succession of time, by course of generation, mankinde should bee daily multiplied, and subjected under sinne. Anaxagoras the Philosopher be∣ing asked to what end hee wa borne, answered, to behold this goodly frame of the world, and all the wonders there of: but withall he should have knowne this, Quid mentem transisse polo, quid profuit altum Erexisse caput, pecudum si more perirent, Q. What riches are those that cannot be exhausted? A. Good turnes; for these, with bestowing, doe increase; and by scattering abroad, are gathered together: if thou keepe them, thou hast them not; if thou distri∣bute, thou losest them not. One saith, the pinch of pover∣ty is great, but more the burden of riches ill gotten, according as the Poet wittily writes: Aeris scruus, eris site species tra∣hat aeris ceri cur haeres, cras aeris non eris haeres. Q. If there were a voyce given to wealth and riches, what doest thou thinke they would speake. A. If Goods, of which thy house is full, could speake, they would an∣swer thee, As thou wouldest have us to be goods to thee, so we would have a good master: or they woud whisper their chiefe Lord against thee, as thus: Behold, thou hast given our master so much wealth, and he is evill, what doth it pro∣fit him to have all, that hath not thee. Q. What foure things were those that the ancient heathen were wont sweare by, because they found nothing more perfect then this number foure, for there are (say they) foure elements, fire, ayre, water, and earth: foure sea∣sons of the yeere, Spring, Summer, Autumne and Winter: foure qua∣lities of all things, Hot, Cold, Moyst, and Dry: foure compasles of Heaven, East, West, North and South. Q. Whether of these two is more foolish, Croesus that cast his money into the Sea, in contempt, or Midas that out of covetousnesse wisht all that he touchtmight turn to gold, and so as the Poets faine, his meat was turned into gold and choaked him: but the meane is e∣ver safest, as both these extreames foolish. Severus the Emperour being ready to dye, sight out, and said, I have beene all things, and now no∣thing profits me. Another thus admonisheth his worldly friend, saying, O vaine man! why doest thou trouble thy selfe in seeking after goods of bo∣dy or goods of minde, love that one good, in whom are all goods. Q. Who is the most industrious mam that Stories make mention of? A. Hippias Eleus, who as he had a generall insight in all learning, yet was not ther with so fully con∣tent, but he was seene in the more meaner sciences, that not the ring on his finger but hee made it him∣selfe, as also his owne cloathes, and what ever he used, but hee is ac∣counted the true wise man that learnes from every man, hee the strong man that masters his owne affections: hee the true rich man, that rejoyceth in his owne store; which is the levell many misse, which makes their life miserable, according as a learned writer thus delivers it: The aged man that coffers up his gold, Is plagu'd with cramps, and gouts, and painfull fits, And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold, But like stil pining Tantalus, he sits Having no other pleasure of game, Then torment that it cannot cure his paine. So then he hath it when he cannot use it, And leaves it to be mastred by his yong, Who in their pride doe presently abuse it: Their Father was too weake and they too strong To hold this blessed, cursed fortune long. Q. Two fathers and two sonnes had beene a hunting and catcht three haires, and every one had one, and how could that be? A. It is said of the grandfather, the father and the sonne, which are out two seeming three, the father being both sonne and father. Musica damnoru guomodo sehabet thus by which it is unpleasant, and so it sounds. Utinam montes nos obruerent Repleta enim malis est anima nostra, Miserabiles factisumus, Faciem enim nostrum operuit caligo, Sol autem justiti ae nunquam c∣rietur nobis, La Lassatis it aque nobis nulla da∣tur requies. Englished. O would the hils might fall on us, For we are fild with griefe, And miserable is our case, Of sinners being chiefe: For we of comfort are depriv'd, And bard of all reliefe. Q. Why doe tho e that carrie bur hens for the most part sing? A. Because the sence being de∣lighted with the mirth, is the lesse capable of her sorrow. Q. May it be that stollen plea∣sures should be thought more sweet then an honest fruition in lawfull marriage? A. We desire forbidden things, and that is the preversenesse of our fiesh, that will not be brideled with no lawfull bounds, and wee see by experience that many men that have at home beautiful wives neglect their own better, and pray upon others more deformed. For Vertue as it never will bee mou'd, though lewdnesse court it in the shape of heaven; So Lust, though to a radiant Angell linckt, will sort it selfein a terrestrial bed, and prey on garbige. Q. Be there more faiths or Re∣ligions in the world than were of antient? A. To answer with Moses, here wee may enter into a Cloud of darkenesse, unlesse wee follow the thrid of Christ to guide us out of our blinde steps, wee lose our selves in this labyrinth: for ac∣cording to our Author, Ie. Oudo∣neus, Plurima apud veteres fidei, nec nulla fiderum, Mentio, priscorum, nam fuit vna fides. Of Faith, the Antients knew no more than one: Is any now hath many, hee hath none, But the world is now divided into foure parts, and foure faiths possesse the same: to wit, Iudaisme, Christianity, Mahu∣matisme, and Paganisme: and out of all these generals, are sprung many new branches, but stand thou by the way side, and aske of the old way, and walke in that, and thou shalt find rest. Q. Is it in mans power to make gods? A. The antient and vaine Gentiles thought it lawfull for them so to doe, but the more wise laughed at their folly: so likewise doe now the more fond Papists, which arrogantly professe, and proudly glory, Qui creauit me, dedit mihi creare se, as saith our pleasant Poet; the Priest is high r than the King, more hap∣py than Angels: this is not to de∣mand if the Potter can make a pot, but to demand of the pot if it can make a Potter. As ridiculous was this, that Alexander the Great should, denying his descent, call his mothers chastity into question, and procure letters from the Grae∣cians, that in their decretall they should instile him god. So Herod would haue his words rev renced as the words of God, but the suc∣cesse of this was miserable, for his belly was eaten out with wormes. Q. How many were thought to be the Heathen gods? A. The Poet will tell you: Inno, Vesta, Minerua, Coeres, Di∣ana, Venus, Mars, Mercurius, Iovis, Neptunus, Vul∣canus Apollo. Besides many other inferior gods, as Virtumnus, Pomanae, Flora, Cu∣mina, Priapus, with as many more as were crochets in Idle braines: an hundred gods more than worlds Q. What thinkest of Fortune, that imputative goddesse? A. Fortune, as the chiefest, was adored of the Antients, to whom was attributed the orde∣ring of all humane affaires, whose power the Poet thus extols: Fartunamultis, dat nulli satis; Si Fortuna volat fies de Consule Rhetor, Aut de Rhetore Consull. No foe to Fortune, no friend to Faith, No wealth to wit, the Wise man saith. Apelles being asked why he pi∣ctured Fortune sitting, answered, because shee knew not how to stand in any place: but wee know this, Fortune and Chance are all guided by the hand of providence Q. What are the seven wonders of the world? A. These are reckoned a∣mongst antient Writers, though some vary in their relation: 1. The Pyramides of Nile, which were 50. cubits high, in thicknesse 40. the compasse about twelve Ger∣man miles. 2. The Tower of Pha∣raoh. 3. The walls of Babylon. 4. The Temple of Diana of E∣phesus. 5. The Tombe of Mau∣soll. 6. The Colossus of the Sun, 70. Cubits high. 7. The Image of the Olympian Jupiter. To this hath beene added the golden Co∣lossus, erected by the Babylonians 60. Cubits high, and the breadth of 60. Cubits, the greatest that e∣ver was amongst the Pagans, and the most magnificent, and almost beyond beleefe: Our fayrest workes and wonders, compared to the fabricke of this universe, are but like mole-hils, amid the worke of Ants. Q. When was the beginning of time? A. Plato saith, when the world was made, and at the end of the same it shall cease to bee: in the meane time it consists of foure parts, as if it walked upon foure legges, Spring, Summer, Autumne and Winter: of which one writes, Poma dat Autumnus formosa cst messibus estas, Ver praebet flores, Igne levatu hiems. Englished: Autumne brings fruits, and Sum∣mer ripes the corne, The Spring brings flowers, in win∣ter cold is borne: This with lesse sufferance wee beare off all harme, By keeping houses close and fires warme. Q. What part of tbe yeere is it that more feeds the eye than the belly. A. The Spring: but Summer and Autumne both. Q. What dead thing is that bu∣ries the quicke, so to keepe it alive nd preserve it. A. Ashes, wherein fire is ra∣ked up. Cauis Plin. Secundus the Wri∣ter of his naturall Hystorie, prying too neare to see and finde out the cause of the continuall burning of the mountaine Veshnvius, was himselfe choaked with fuliginous Ashes, and sulphurous vapours, in the yeare of his age, 56. Anno Christi, 82. Q. What Bird of all other is the hugest? A. The Strutiocamelus, which are found in Affrica of the big∣nesse of a man on horsebacke, and whose egges are a Talent weight. Q. What Bird of all other is the most just, and the most godly? A. The Storke: for she brings up her young with some kind of Iustice, and shee is sayd to off r up the first of her young to God, by casting the first out of her nest: shee is a great destroyer of Ser∣pents, and therefore in Thessaly it is as much danger to kill one of these Birds, as to kill a man. Q. May it be by any Art that a Chicken may be hatched without sitting upon? A. There bee some that have effected it by laying an egge in the sand, or covering it over with warme dust in the Sunne, as like∣wise this thing is usually done in other Countreyes, by their skill; that is, by keeping alwayes to it a certaine temperate heat. Symonides being asked how long he had lived, answered, a little time, but many yeares. Another being asked, answered, hee had beene borne but a yeare, but that beene oftentimes doubled. Q. What is he that is said to till another mans ground, and leave his owne barren? A. The Adulterer: Theoginis thus expounds it: Est invisa mihi mulier vaga, iners∣que m. ritus; Aiterius fundum quis{que} arare cu∣pit. That Husband is no husband, but a Drone, That tills anothers ground, and not his owne. A Spirituall description of seed∣time and baruest. Saith a Father, When we con∣ceive good desires, wee cast our seed into the earth; when we be∣ginne good workes, it springs up; when we come to the perfection of good workes, we come to eare; when wee are accustomed there∣in, then we are corne in the eare. I cannot yet make an end, for I have oft wondred that from the smallest seeds, for the most part, should spring the greatest trees; where in that smalenesse, so great a wonder should lye hid, where the root, where the barke, where the bowes, where the fruit, didst thou perceive any thing in the seed when it was cast into the earth? Is it not then as possible from the hand of that power, to re-unite us againe, being once something, as to make this great Tree cut of almost nothing: Vni∣sts Deus ambo semel, Deus ambo reum, Hujus ego vivus, mortnus, huius ero. Q. Were there Vines before the flood? A. There were not, but im∣mediately after: and the first In∣venter and planter, was Noah; and he was the first that tasted the strength thereof in the effect: God in this creature, no doubt, ordaining a singular benefit for the comfort of man: of whose first invention the Poets haue fabled many things; the vertues of it is to comfort drooping spirits, pro∣cure sleepe, and cause forgetful∣nesse of evill: and therefore saith Salomon, Giue strong drinke to him that is ready to perish: It is the preserver of health, by com∣forting the naturall heat: It tem∣pereth chollericke humours, and moderately taken, rejoyceth the spirits: and it much commends the gooduesse of God, that out of such a dry and fraile plant, so ma∣ny precious vertues should accrew to man; but by the abuse, all these vertues are made vices: for God was the Author of the Wine, but the Divell of drunkennesse. Q. What is the reason that in our Grandfathers dayes, and fa∣thers likewise, there were fewer Vineyards, as many yet living can testifie, and yet Wine and all things cheaper? A. Because Drunkennesse and Gluttony was lesse common in those dayes than now in ours. Of Wine one thus further, Vina parant animos, faciunt{que} co∣loribus aptis: Cont. Vina parant Asinos, faciunt{que} fu∣roribus aptis. Q. What is the greatest wonder in a man? A. His Conscicnce, which cannot be removed; for his heart may bee sooner pulled out of his belly than his Conscience, being of it selfe a thousand witnesses, as God himselfe a thousand Consci∣ences, which at the last day will be in every one of us, guilty, the Iudge, the tortor, the prison, to judge, to accuse, condemne, or acquit. An evill Conscience, saith one, is like a short bed, wherein let a man turne which way hee will, hee can finde no ease. Nero having slaine his mother, was con∣tinually tormented in minde, and that the first beginning of his ter∣tor. Richard the third of England, had such apparitions and terrors in his Conscience, after his mur∣ders, that he could not finde a mi∣nutes rest: A man may sooner sleepe on the top of the mast in a storme, than lodge in quiet with this unruly Chamber-fellow, it be∣ing to many the Hell before Hell. Saith the Wise-man, A mans Conscience will tell him more then seuen Watchmen on the top of a Tower: and it is that from whence all the beames of Reason flow. Erasmus saith, as the Sunne is to the world, that is reason in man: for if the Sunne be clouded, there is darkenesse; so if Reason be ecclipsed, notwithstanding the other senses, we differ little from bruit beasts. I remember I haue heard thee speake before that the earth doth wax old, doth it now worke the same effect upon mans body, as in former ages? and so Virgil de∣scribes men of his time long a∣goe, Qualianunc hominis prodierit cor∣poratellus. And so likewise Homer, as oft as he recites this clause, saith, Vt nunc homines sunt; remembring the former times, their length of dayes, greatnesse of stature, and the like: as one to that purpose seemes to imply: When as the Age was long, the size was great, Mans growth consest, and recom∣penc'd his meat: But now our longest times decay so soone, We are scarce our fathersshadows cast at noone. Q. What is the reason that in the holy toogue all the names of God end in the plurall termination, al∣though they are joyned in the singu∣lar verbe? A. This is a mystery, and so it is found every where, except in that one name of his Essence, le∣hovah, and this is the reason that the Hebrewes giue, because the Es∣sence is one, though the persons three. Certaine Divine flowers of Saint Bernard. Behold, Lord (saith Saint Ber∣nard) I doe not give what thanks I should, but what I can, which hast given me an Essence; and a∣bove that, a vegetive life; and a∣boue that, a sensitive; and aboue that, an intellectiue; and above that, a saving faith, which is the soule of my soule, and the reason of my reason: Lord, saith Saint Bernard, that thou hast made me, I owe my selfe to thy love, I owe all mee, and so much more then my selfe, by how much thou art greater than I, for whom thou ga∣vest thy selfe. The kingdome of God, concedi∣tur, promittitur, ostenditur, preci∣pitur; conceditur in predestinatio∣ne, promittitur invocatione, osten∣ditur in Iustificatione, precipitur in Glorificatione. The kingdome of God is yeelded, promised, shewen perceived; it is yeelded in prede∣stination, promised in Vocation, shewen in Iustification, received in Glorification. Q: Whether are the positive, or the privative blessings of God more? A. The privative blessing of God are no lesse, if not more; and yet there is few that takes notice thereon, as that we are not blind, nor dumbe, nor deafe, that wee live not in continuall darkenesse, &c. His positive blessings are life, cloathing, health, and such like: of which there is neither number nor end of either. Q. The Sea is an Element of wonders, are there Syrens or Mar∣maids therein? A. Syrens of ancient times were wont to be called the won∣ders of the Sea, and the monsters therein; partly having a body of Fish, and the upper part flesh, and faced like a Virgin, singing sweet∣ly, but deceitfully, thereby to cir∣cumvent and endanger the wan∣dring passengers: By this deceit would our Ancestors note unto us the danger of pleasure: and yet there are that earnestly affirme, that there are such things in re∣rum natura. Saint Hierom mora∣liseth, that hastening towards our Countrey, wee must avoyd this Syren in what kind soever she al∣lures passing by, with a setled re∣solution, that this inchantment pierce not our stopped eares. Saith a Father, every Creature speakes unto us with three voy∣ces: 1 Voyce receive a benefit, 2. pay thy benevolence. 3. Avoid punishment. The heaven saith, I give thee lightin the day, that thou maist worke: saith darkenesse, I spread my Curtaine in the night, that thou mayst rest. The Ayre saith, I nourish thee with breath: all kind of Fowles, I keepe at thy command: the water saith, I give thee drinke, I purge away all un∣cleannesse, and I preserve all my Elementary creatures to thy use, from the smallest minnum, to the mighty Whale. The earth saith, I beare thee, I nourish thee with bread and wine; I fill thy Table with all sorts of Creatures, and fruits. The second is a voyce of admonition, in which the world saith, See man how he loved thee, which made me for thee; I serve thee as thou servest him which made both mee and thee. The third voyce, the voyce of threat∣ning, where the fire saith, thou shalt be burnt by me: the water saith, thou shalt bee drowned by me: the earth saith, thou shalt be swallowed by mee, as some have beene: and if thou lay by thy obe∣dience to him, wee put off all sub∣jection to thee. Theresore, saith Saint Gregory, all Creatures call upon man to serve him, because hee is the summe and epitome of all, and that doe and pay thy due homage, and all creatures shall willingly o∣bey thee. Q. What is the Soule? A. It is a spirituall and reall substance created by God to en∣liven the body; and by how much the heaven is more glorious then the earth, by so much doth the beauty of the soule excell the bo∣dy; the immediate descent being from God, and not from the bo∣dy: for the Wise-man saith, Si cum corpore oritur, cum corpore moritur: If it had his beginning from the body, then the bodies end would determine that, but af∣ter the soule once lives, it never dyes, it dwels in the body, and go∣vernes it, as the Pylot in the Ship, directing it from haven to haven: the Soule is all this while impriso∣ned in the body, and yet to it some bodies are pallaces to others streightned prisons: according as one writes one, She who's saire body no such pri∣son was, But that a Soule might well bee be pleas'd to passe An age in her. And so further speaking of the freedome of the Soule in death, saith then, Think that a rusty peece dischargd is flowne In sunder, and the bullet is his owne. Q. Wherefore is the Soule of man called the Lanthorne of God? A. For the Light that is infu∣sed into it by God, in whom all the Divine faculties dwell, and there∣fore for the most part is put for the whole man: for, mens cuius{que} es est quisque. Of secret writings. The Ephesians, Act. 19. 19. had certaine writing and magicall notes, which they used in every place, and alwayes came away vi∣ctors: It was the Ephesians that used curious and unlawfull Arts, which when Saint Paul heard of them, and to that end wrote bit∣terly against them, they gathered their bookes together, and in open view burned them, which in esti∣mation were worth fifty thou∣sand peeces of silver. Suetonius reports, in the lives of the twelve Coesars, Eoi∣stles of his to be so obscure and se∣cret, that they could not bee read but by former Intelligence, for one letter went in the roome of another, as D for A, and so of the rest. Q. What is the most faithfull messenger, and yet carries with it both reoson and speech? A. An Epistle or Letter: of which one writes, Discere fit charum, quamvis primo sit amarum. But it Letters of secrecie shall be intercepted, then to prevent that, Pliny writes of an herbe cal∣led Goats Lettuice, which with the milke thereof writing on any ground-worke, or paper, and dust strewed afterward on, and dryed, may be perfectly read. Likewise to write with new milke, is a safe way, and deceives the eyes, putting but a little cole∣dust upon it, and then what could not be seene before, is apparantly read. Likewise to write with the juyce of an Onion, being wet, may be perfectly read, and not be∣fore discerned: and this was pra∣ctised by one of the gunpowder∣Traytors out of the Tower, in a letter written to Garnet: the let∣ter was common, for the body of it that was ordinary complement, but the margents contained the mysterie so discouer ed and found out. Q. What is that, the more feet it hath, the slower it goes; the few∣er, the more upright, and swist it walkes about the world, and hath twice ten hornes? A. A man not yet come to his Staffe. Q. Whether is it better to bee sprung from good parents, or to bee good in enes selfe? A. To bee good, and not to live by anothers blood, or fame. according to the Poet: Miserum est aliena incumbere fama. To live by others breath, I hold a sickly state, And if I were to chuse a wife, I such a choyce would hate As had not many living goods for me to tast and see, But onely such as now are dead in th' ancient pedigree. Q. What doe we most love, and best esteeme? A. Those things we hardest at∣chieue: according to the Poet: Quod venit exfacili, faciles seg∣nes{que} tenemur: Quod spes, quodque metu torsit ha∣bare juvat. Englished: But light wee reckon that wee slightly gaine, Valuing the subject as it costs us paine. Q. What small garment is that which is made of cheape wooll, and yet of most incomparable price? A. The Episcopall Robe, which was used to be given gratis from the Antients, and of it selfe is of small value, yet now with the inchanted Roses, the Agnus Deies the Apostolicall breves, the exor∣cises, swords, and woodden cros∣ses, it costs many thousands before it sits on the Popes backe. The Pope saith, that for Lay∣ickes to read the Scriptures in a knowne tongue, is to set pearles before Swine. Q. What was the most mon∣strous Embassage that hath beene heard of? A. An Embassage came to Rome by three Embassadours, the one whereof was troubled with the Gout, the other with wounds in his head, and the third with tremor in the heart: which Cato observing, said to the Senate laughing, Here is an Embassage come without head, or heart, or feet. Q. Why hath God given us two of all members of the body? A. That if by any accident the one faile, it may bee supplyed by the others helpe, and therefore wee haue two hands, two legges, two feet, two eares, two eyes, but but one Soule, to shew the in∣comparable value thereof, that it is more worth then all the world: for what shall a man giue for the ransome thereof. Q. Whether is the lighter plague, that of the Sword or of the tongue? A. That of the Sword, for that onely wounds the body, but this the soule: the tongue is, many times, accessory to murder, stirres that fire, that nought but blood can quench. Saint Bernard saith, the detractors tongue is a three∣fold lance, that at one blow wounds three, the speaker, hea∣rer, and him that is detracted: further hee saith, the Detractor hath the Divell in his tongue, the hearer in his eare, the consenter in his heart: it is sayd, betweene the heart and the tongue there should bee a marriage; for it is Uerbum in c rde, before it bee Uerbum in ore: and those words that are spoken by the tongue, without the consent of the heart, are said to be conceived in Adul∣tery. Q. Whether is our Country, or our parents to be more honoured? A. It is the answer of a Wise∣man, that our Countrey; that our Countrey was before our parents, and therefore first to be honoured. Q. May it be one Ship should compasse the whole world? A. That with wonder have our eies beheld in our noble Coun∣tryman Drake: and so hath the sound of the Gospell gone over the whole world, so that now we beleeve the end of the world not to be farre off. he number of 40 is a time re∣ keable in holy Scriptures for penitency and affliction: for 40 dayes Christ fasted for our sinnes, 40 yeares wandred the people in the wildernesse, 40 dayes had the Ninivites to repent, 40 dayes continued the waters of the flood, &c. Q. Doth money make a rich man? A. It doth not, but the con∣trary; for that is never too little, that is enough; and there is never enough where there is not con∣tent, though too much; for our happinesse or infelicity is of our owne making. Q. When doe enemies profit us, and friends hurt us? A. That is done so when as an enemy justly reprehends us, it pro∣fits; but when a friend falsly prai∣seth us, it hurts us. Q. Of what Nations consisted the foure Empires? Assirij primiregnarunt, postea P Post Persas Graeci, Germani dominantur. Englished: The Assirian first, the Persian then began; The Graecian next, the German now the man. Q. Of what estates consists the Columnes of the Roman Empire? A. Of 4 Dukes, 4 Marquesses, 4 Landgraves, 4 Burgraves, 4 Earles, 4 Barons, 4 young Lords, 4 Knights, 4 Citizens, 4 Pages, 4 Clownes. Q. What was the Answer of that cowardly fugitive? A. That he had rather laugh in health after his flight, then be praised, being dead, after the bat∣tell: one said, for his enemies flight he would make him a silver bridege. Q. Whether is it more easie to judge betweene enemies or friends? A. Bias was used to say, that hee had rather judge betweene Enemies; for betweene friends he should get an enemy, but be∣tweene enemies, a friend. Q. Where is it that no man is counted evill, but bee that doth no evill? A. In the company of the wic∣ked, theeves, robbers, and the like. Q. Who are those that live and speake after their death? A. Learned and godly Writers, as the Poet will tell you: Vivere post obitum doctos vis nosse viator, Quod legis ecce loquor, vox tua nam{que} mea est. Know that our Learned Writers dead and gone, They have two liues, where other have but one. Q. What is the true use of all learning? A. To make a ladder to mount thee up to heaven: for otherwise, if a man had all Sciences, ad un∣guem, all Languages ad verbum; if a man had all the learning in Plutarchs Volumnes, if these gifts and knowledges to himselfe did not teach him to bee more than a man, to reach nearer to heaven, all these were but common be∣nefits. Aristotle being about to dye, certaine of his Disciples standing about him, thus commended his soule, Now hee that receives the soules of all Philosophers, receiue thine. Severus the Emperour, a∣bout to dye, said, I haue beene all things, and now shall be nothing. Q. Who was hee, that the same, moment he was buried, was againe revived, and came forth of his grave? A. A certaine man buried in that Tombe where the Prophet was, touched but his bones, and was revived thereby, 2 King. 3. 21. Eccles. 48. 2. A wonderfull Epitaph set up, in Bononia apud Spingeides, or Spinx in which, according to the opinion of learned men, there lyes more wisdome then is compiled in ma∣ny bookes: and so it followes, Aelia Lelia Crispis, neither man nor woman, nor Androgina neither mayd, nor young man, nor old woman, neither chast nor harlot, but all, was taken away, neither by hunger, nor sword, nor poyson, nor fire, nor plague, but by all; and hee is neither in hea∣ven, nor the waters, nor the earth, but every where. Lucius Agatho Priscius, nei∣ther husband nor lover, neither necessary nor deseruing, neither laughing nor weeping, neither Mountaine nor Pyramid, nor Se∣pulcher, but all, knows and knows not who put her there: eos qui vo∣let consulat, for none but Oedipus can this interpret. Q. Doth. education alter na∣ture, or not? A. It doth, as it was sufficient∣ly experimented by Lycurgus two dogges, the one sprung from a good breed, and hunters kind, the other from a worse race, but bet∣ter brought up and exercised in hunting, whilst the other was brought up at home, and pampe∣red in idlenesse: now after this, threre is a game set before them out of the Forrest, and a service of meat; this houshold-dogge he forsakes the game, and falls to his porridge, the other, he beares all over to follow the game: and herein is the difference of Educa∣tion tryed, as may well appeare to be a new nature: likewise this is found true in the practice upon better subjects. Cleanthes being asked the dif∣ference betweene Logicke and Rhethoricke, first hee shewed his clouched hand, and then by and by his open hand. Stobeus sayth, Deliver not in many words a little, but in few words much. Ernesius counsell to his sriend. Take heed thou requirest not great things in thy suit, lest hee to whom thou suest may doe it, but with some vexation to himselfe; or if he deny it with sorrow. Q. What is that which though contained in a small circuit, yet with her voracity, keepeth, snatch∣eth, and devoures all things? A. The stomacke, which if it wants naturall food, cuts sharper than a Razor, will breake stone∣walls, will compell a man to eat Cats, Dogges, Leather, or the most vildest things that are, as hath beene experienced in divers siedges and famines, where a mouse hath beene sold at weight of silver. Q. Amongst Saint Pauls many and Divine Epictles, which doe you account the most excellent? A. Holy, and lively, and hea∣venly are all; for he learned wise∣dome out of the third heavens: but yet to mee, of all the other, those which he wrote, being in bonds, to the Ephesians, to Ti∣m thy, to the Col ssians; like that Noble Souldier that maintained Christs cause the more valiant be∣fore his Enemies, and in the midst of them, so did this Christian Champion: So hee begate One∣simus in bonds; for though hee was captive, the word of God was free: for hee reserved both a liberall tongue, and a plentifull stile. Q. What is the most guilty part of Time? A. Opportunity: which if neglected, maketh the best thing unrespected, according to the Poet: Like to a poore man so befrien∣ded, Or Summers Chimneys, Winter ended; Or like to Souldiers, warres being done, Or like to Dogges, their races runne, Or like to beauty wrinkled old, Or like a secret knowne, and told, So Time of all the dearest cost, Not taken by the fore-top, lost. And for the guilt, anotherthus, O Opportunity, thy guilt is great, 'Tis thou that executes the Tray∣tors treason, Thou setst the Wolfe, where hee the Lambe may get, Whoeuer plots the finne, thou points the season: And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him, Sits sinne to seize the soules that wander by him. Thou mak'st the Vestal violate her oath, Thou blow'st the fire when tem∣perance is thaw'd, Thou smotherest honesty, thou murderest truth, Thou foule abettor, thou notori∣ous band: And to expresse thy nature here in briefe, Thy honey turnes to gall, thy joy to griefe. When wilt thou be the humble suppliants friend, And bring him where his cause may be obtain'd; When wilt thou sort an howre great strife to end, Or free the soule that wretched∣nesse hath chain'd, Give Physicke to the sicke, ease to the pain'd? The poore, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out to thee, But they ne're meet with Oppor∣tunitie, &c. Q. Why is the earth barren of grasse, where richest Mines of gold and silver lye under buried? A. Because wise Nature hath lock'd up and covered deep those mettalls which shee fore-saw should herafter trouble the world, and made the Carpet that cove∣reth them, as barren as the brest of some of these unprofitable rich Iaylors. Q. What was Diogenes reason herefore he counselled his friend not to lend money? A. Because, saith hee, if thou lend, thou shalt not receive again; if thou doe, not so soone; if so soone, not so good; if so good, then thou losest a friend: To this pur∣pose agrees the old saying, I once had mony and a friend, And joy'd them both together, I lent my mony to my friend At need to doe him pleasure: His need supplied, hee sleighted mine, And did not backe repay The money at his pointed time, And at my fixed day. I sought my money of my friend He paid it backe in hate; My money had I lost, my friend, And now repent too late. FINIS.