The Belgicke pismire stinging the slothfull sleeper, and avvaking the diligent to fast, watch, pray; and worke out their owne temporall and eternall salvation with feare and trembling. Scott, Thomas, 1580?-1626. The Belgicke pismire stinging the slothfull sleeper, and avvaking the diligent to fast, watch, pray; and worke out their owne temporall and eternall salvation with feare and trembling. Scott, Thomas, 1580?-1626. Errata. Folio 20. line 8. for thee, reade her. Fol. 22. lin. 3. for stigmatickes, stigmaticke. Fol. 39. lin. 18. for destroyed, decayed. Fol. 40. lin. 3. for required, requires. Fol. 85. lin. 2. for haue, had. Fol. 90. lin. 15. for satfaction, satisfaction. Fol. 90. lin. 27. for offoord, affoord. Fol. 92. lin. 11. for meekings, meetings. To the true-hearted British Readers. DEare Christian Country-men ; I send out this Trea∣tise, in this doubtfull and dangerous time, not only to shew you the necessarie dependancie betwixt our Kingdome of Great Brittaine and the vnited Provinces, but also to comfort & strengthen you against all feares, that are or may be interjected, by the subtil∣tie and malice of our Adversaries, or our owne mis∣conceite or diffidence. For I do not finde the Enemie more busily practising to discourage vs, and to raise false fires to affright vs, then vvee our selues (as Me∣lancholy persons vse) apt to misconster all things, and to imagine the worst, vpon the sight of euery shadow. And yet I must confesse, that, as there are many of those who labour to effect a division betwixt vs, and to this end, reviue old grudges, and provoke new quarrels; so the common current seemes to runne a contrarie course to that vvhich it had wont, (as tides have their ebbes) and the generall disposition of most men is wa∣vering, as persons light of loue, who desire to shift their old approued friends for fresh Suiters, and prefer the change of an adulterous bed before the married. But I take this to be but a fit or throw of passion, which vvilbe easily cast off, vvith more hate and loathing, then it is now hotly pursued vvith longing, when some discontents are setled, and men on both sides are come to themselues againe. And for the State it selfe (I meane that maine Axeltree vvhereon our Kingdome turnes) I do assure my selfe, it is the same it was, firme∣ly grounded on former principles extracted from expe∣rience on both sides; and that wee only move, vvhilst it remaines constant, though wee imagine otherwise; as simple passengers sayling swiftly by the Conti∣nent, suppose the trees, steeples, towers, and rockes to goe backward. Thus wee are distracted & affrighted with our owne shadowes; ignorance makes vs Infidels: and vvhilst vvee see the face, but vnderstand not the intention and scope of some passages of State, vve and our friends waxe suspicious of each other; and that suspicion raiseth many rumors; and those rumors, though false, may beget and nourish a true and dangerous hate betwixt vs. My owne Countri-men haue tongues laxatiue e∣nough, and Strangers are in their vvordes, as in di∣verse other things, libertines. That vvhich I write may helpe to make both sides more confident of each o∣thers loue, more retentiue and sparing of their cen∣sures; at least it shall haue that effect in me, till I be∣hold the yssue, vvhich I hope vvill be happie. The bell is rung out, and I heare the sound and re∣port it gives on both sides. Vpon the States side, men feare the passages and cariages of all things in England ; and for this, are liberall and free in their discourses, making the feare greater then the cause requires. On the contrarie side, they are doubtfull or rather desperate, and therefore prosecute his Majestie with all kind of calumny. Pictures and Pasquills are day by day there vented thicke and threefold one vpon the necke of ano∣ther, vvherein not only the King of Bohemia and the Prince of Orange, but our King also is basely traduced and abused. This comforts me, and assures me they per∣secute none of their owne, and therefore hold his Majestie to be an enemie. Let this assure vs, that he is the same vve vvould haue him, howsoever for some respects of State, he seemes, (to weake eyes who behold things aloofe off) to be otherwise inclined. But, for my owne part, I comfort my selfe especially, and desire you would be comforted against all these suspicions, feares, and jealousies, out of two considerations; the good∣nesse and mercie of our God, and the vvisedome and policie of our King. First, let vs consider wee haue a good and gracious God watching over vs, who vvill not suffer his Truth to be extinguished, but as he hath hitherto miraculous∣ly preserved it, so still he will continue to do the same. And though, for our abuse and contempt of the Gospel (together vvith our barrennesse in good, Psal. 89.32.33. our fruitfulnesse in euill) he visite our transgressions with the rod, yet will he not vtterly take his mercie from vs, nor suf∣fer his truth to faile. Let vs then rest in peace; Psal. 121.4. for hee that keepeth vs doth neither slumber nor sleepe. And let the re∣membrance of those many former deliverances, which he hath wrought for vs, after an extraordinary and mi∣raculous manner, assure vs of the like fatherly care and protection still, if wee faint not, 1. Sa. 17.34 35, 36, 37. but faithfully and constantly depend vpon his mercifull promise. Secondly, consider the vvisedome of our Prince, which is so renowned, as for it he is gladly admitted a generall Arbitrator in forraine parts to determine con∣troversies of State. Let this comfort vs, and assure vs, that God hath not given Him so much light for no∣thing, much lesse for evill. Let vs thinke, that since He was intertained with so much love, and so great signes of joy into this Kingdome, and hath beene served since with so much obedience, (farre more then a father could expect from his children) that Hee will so much seeme to neglect his owne honour and safety, or our lives and liberties, as to leave vs in the hands of our e∣nemies, or abase vs in the eyes of other Nations, to leade vs, or suffer vs to bee led into temporall or spiri∣tuall captivity. Let vs thinke also he cannot forget ei∣ther 88. or the Powder-plot, (though now perhaps, it be vnseasonable to remember them) nor yet the many at∣tempts and practises against His person, Crowne, Dig∣nitie, and the Truth he professeth: nor that God will suffer him to sleepe securely in the armes of such, as He knowes watch onely for oportunity to destroy Him and His. Thinke also, that Nature will reviue and worke in Him, though it seemes to lye in a trance for the present time: and that He cannot but see, that it is impossible to love the Root, and hate the Branches; or to love the Fruit and Branches, and hate the Roote. Our love to his Royall Progenie must needes assure our love to Him; and the hate of others to Them, assure their inward hate against Him. And for such as per∣swade otherwise, that our love to the Kings Children, and hate to the adverse party, proceedes either out of discontent, or a Puritanicall humour in vs leading to disloyalty, Psal. 7.16. Let their lyes turne vpon their owne pates ; and let evill happen to them that thinke evill, and that would poyson and pervert all good purposes with practise. And though the subtill Enemies labour to breed je∣lousies betwixt Him and His, knowing it to be for their advantage, and the onely way to blemish the Gospel, and discredit good men, by breeding this suspicion, which may estrange and alienate the heart of the Prince from his people, and friends from each other; yet thinke it cannot sinke into his Majesties brest, that such servants, such subjects; Professors of the Gospel, should intend the least hurt to him, who is the Defender of their Faith. It is for Heathens, Turkes, Papists, to become Assassinates, Parricides, and bloody Traitors; and it is for Tyrants a∣mongst these, to suspect their friends, brethren, and chil∣dren, and therefore to cut them off at the motion of their Flatterers, Bashawes, Iesuites, and other tame tren∣cher-Traytors. Good Princes, who are fathers of the Common-wealth, cannot do thus, will not doe thus; whilst in themselves they see no cause of their subjects hate; or if they see any, can finde a readier way by a∣mendment, to remove the cause, and prevent the mis∣chiefe, then by seconding one evill with another, to in∣danger the overthrow of all, and to make the disease desperate, by endevouring a contrarie cure; or the flame rise higher, by casting in fresh fuell, or quenching it with oyle. Thinke also it is our Enemies plot, to stirre vp our heady and hastie humors, and to cause the Prince to dis∣content his best and truest subjects; and, if it were possi∣ble, by all meanes to provoke them to impatience and resistance, that so themselves might be armed in His co∣lourable defence, and have occasion also to bring in other borrowed Ayde vnder the same pretence, but with assurance of His and all our ruines in the yssue; as hath ever happened to that vnfortunate State where they haue become Sticklers. But thinke his Majestie cannot but see this aswell as vvee and much better; and therefore be you quiet, that their intents and projects may be frustrate. Finally, thinke now your King is making of his owne Monument, vvriting his owne Chronicle ; both which are raised and composed by deedes, and not wordes: and assure your selves, Hee that can speake and write so wel, will never so farre contradict his owne vvordes with repugnant actions, as thereby to race his Armes, to staine the honour he was borne vnto, and vvhich hee hath made good and bettered hitherto, by high and holy enterprizes of act and admonition against Rome : but thinke therefore, that all this time, Hee is acting his part in the eye of the whole vvorld; that he is working his Master-piece in the publique market, and trying his exact skill in King-craft vvith the grea∣test State and Statists in Christendome; that is, vvith Rome, Spaine, Austria, Italy, Machiauel, and the extracted strength and quintessence of all these, the Iesuites. And therefore thinke, howsoever for the present he carries himselfe, and seemes to be led by some of that side, yet in the end, the Lyon may awake, breake loose and teare his keeper; or else leade, vvhilst he seemes to be led; and then the vvorld shall see, that neither the opinion of his sinceritie in the Truth, nor of his vn∣matchable wisedome and policie, were vaine mista∣kings, but that our harmelesse David can vse honest Hushai to ouerthrow their craftie Achitophel. Then the Church shall triumph and be comforted, the Common-wealth flourish, His honor shal be eternized; neither shall you repent of your patience, nor I of my perswasion to this end; vvherein I rest, vvith an assu∣rance of Gods mercy herein, and that wee shall see our desire vpon our Enemies. To the half-hearted English-Spanish Reader: DEsiring him, if he finds me too tart in his taste a∣gainst that Nation, and (as he thinks) too much to neglect their honors in some passages, that he would consider there are three things mouing me to this; any of which when they come in my vvay; may force me to strike them vvith my tongue, since I cannot reach them vvith my hand. 2. The first is the Libertie of the Gospel, to vvhose free passage they are open and profest enemies, altering Religion for the worst where they conquer, taking part vvith the Serpent against the Seed of the woman, and desiring to bee knowne Catholique persecutors of all true Christians. 2. The second is the Libertie of life, that by the be∣nefit of nature each Nation hath and seekes to preserue vnder their owne rules; vvhich likewise the Spaniard labors to take from humane societie, and to prescribe Lawes to all Christendome. Which ambitious mood hath possest them euer since that Catholique title was confer'd vpon them by that Sea, Luke. 4.6. vvho next and imme∣diatly vnder Satan, hath the disposition of all the King∣domes of the Earth at his pleasure. 3. The third is the bloody, inhumane, and vnchri∣stian dealing vvith the Kings Children, even when they pretend to desire affinitie vvith that House, and that dallying about restitution of wrongs, tossing the ball from one to another; and laughing in their sleeues, that their dissimulation hath deluded our plaine mea∣ning, and possest them of so rich a Country, vvhich is a fit roade to invade all Christendome. For now they haue a high vvay, or thorow-fare to convey their Ar∣mies commodiously from Flanders to Austria all the way in their owne Command. But vvhome have they not thus delt vvithall for their owne advantages, if former presidents could make men beware of their courses? I do protest, sauing these quarrels, I beare nor spleene nor malice to any Spaniard living, much lesse to the Nation, whome (these things excepted) I honor as be∣fits me: but when any of these considerations come crosse my thoughts, they stir vp a salt humor, vvhich fals from my eyes into my inke, and turnes it more blacke and bitter, and more sharpe vvithall then the Gall and Coperas vvhich gaue it the first tincture; and this makes my stile harsh, when I touch vpō that string. No other good can cause me to forget these euils, or perswade me to take those for my friends who are ene∣mies to these, or affoord them good words, who loade these vvith opprobrious scoffes and open injuries. In∣justice in them begets indignation in others, and no man that doth euill, can euer hope to heare well from any but Cowards, or flatrerers. To the indifferent Dutch Readers. I Assure them and all the world, these three considerations aforementioned, worke contrarie effects in me towards them. I loue them first for Religions sake, they being a hiding place for the pore persecuted members of Christ hunted out of Bohe∣mia, the Palatinate, and other distressed Countries. Second∣ly, being become a Bulwarke for the libertie of all Christen∣dome at this present. Thirdly, being a happie Sanctuarie for the Kings Children, when very few Christian Princes durst professe themselues their friends. Men may say, their owne respects worke these effects, and I willingly grant, that perhaps, they are involved together. And what Nation is there, or what State; nay, what man, that in all friendship lookes not inward and homeward with one eye? when I thinke vpon these things, I cannot but loue them, and speake well of them; nor can particular injuries (which may be raised from their and our enemies, intermixt with them, Ios. 23.13. as pricks in their sides and thornes in their eyes ) nor generall wrongs in any other kinde though profest and ju∣stified, worke me so much to hate and diuision, (though they may tempt me shrewdly) as these to loue and vnion. Yet because I praise this Belgicke friend, as I thinke, wor∣thily in the body of the booke, I must in the Preface admonish him of such faults as I heare or see, that he may mend them (if there be cause) in the beginning, and so be truly worthy of those praises I giue him, and thinke he deserues in the course of this Treatise. He is a foole that cannot see his friends faults as∣well as his perfections; and he is a flatterer that (if he sees them) will not be his friends glasse for amendement to dresse him to Glorie and perfection. Let him neuer take me for a friend, that loves not this plainenesse: if for this he proues my foe, I haue lost nothing, but saued much I might haue lost, had I ventured any thing in so light, weake, and vnbalast a bot∣tome. 1. First therefore they say, Children are not generally there well educated, hauing too much libertie allowed them, so that they soone learne to forget that duty to their Parents, which they were neuer taught to remember. 2. Secondly, they say, frugality makes men neglect pietie, 1. Tim. 6.5.6. Mar. 11.15 and the gaine of vngodlinesse makes marchandize of godli∣nesse; so that buyers and sellers, and spirituall theeues possesse the temple; I meane the labor proper to sixe dayes, makes a sacrilegious vsurpation and horrible profanation of that Rest proper to the Seuenth; Exod. 20.9.10. and many for feare of see∣ming Iewes, become Gentiles. 3. Thirdly, they say, the reuerend Ministers are respected but not rewarded according to their labors and merits. The oxe is muzled, & in the meane time the Asse and Mule eate vp his provender in prodigality, ryot, and euery excesse. 1. Cor. 9.9.10. 4. Fourthly, your profest Enemies taxe you with vnthanke∣fulnes, and make this a just motiue to prouoke his Majestie to leaue you. They chalenge you of ingratitude to his Majesty, to the Bri∣tish Nation, to the Souldier. I know not whether these be truthes or slaunders, I tell you what I heare and reade in their writings. If they say true, amend it, if they come neere the truth, Ingratum dixetis, & omnia dixeris. Senec. avoyd so monstrous a shadow as ingratitude: remember how much English blood hath beene spilt to saue yours; this cannot be recompenced without extraordinarie respects; for Mony payes some, Honor others, Love all. Nor is there a Na∣tion whose loue hath beene, or is more vsefull to your State, nor that is more worthie of it then the British. You neither disho∣nor, disprofit or weaken your selues by this admittance and conjunction, but should euery way reape advantage by it. Now thus you haue heard what others thinke and say, for my owne opinion, if you thinke it woorth any thing, you may reade it in that which followeth. THE BELGICKE PISMIRE. PROV. 6.6. Go to the Pismire, O Sluggard, Behold her wayes and be wise. M An vvas not created to idle∣nesse, nor to any base or vile imploy∣ment: but enioyned labour to preserue by industrie vvhat God himselfe had created. Adam in his integritie should haue wrought, but vvithout vvearinesse; as the Angels now take pleasure in the diligent discharge of their of∣fices. In idlenesse man seemes to be like Satan; in acti∣on like God, his servant, his substitute, his coadjutor; for it is said, Genesis. 2.15. after the Creation of all things: Then the Lord tooke the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, that he might dresse it and keepe it : God made it, he must dresse it and keepe it; therefore he must vvorke. And to this end, that man might not performe actions casually or by contingency, but legal∣ly according to a rule, God hath giuen him both bodily strength to till the ground, and reason also to doe it seasonably. Yea he hath skill to direct the Creatures subjected to his gouernment, in their voluntarie obe∣dience, and to make them seruiceable helpes, to the speedy accomplishment of his honest desires. Thus assoone as he saw them, Gen. 2.19, 20. euen at the first sight, by the intellectuall facultie, he discerned their powers and vertues, and to what imployment they vvere apt; and was able to giue them names, properly expressing their natures. But such was the precipitation of his fall, as therby he did not only lose his dignitie and wisdome, and equall himselfe with the beastes his naturall sub∣jects, but cast himselfe vnder the basest creatures, as Samson, buried vnder the ruines of that house, which his owne hands pulled downe vpon his owne head: or rather, as when things are turned topsie-turvie, the highest becomes lowest; even so heere, man the most excellent creature is cast vnder all; the higher his stan∣ding, the greater his ruine, the more noble his nature, the more base his declension. All that he can now doe (neither can he doe that of himselfe by nature, but by grace infused) is by degrees to remoue the waight from himselfe, piece after piece, and from the backe of one creature, to clime vp on another, and so to looke towards God, and towards Paradise, from whence he was excluded for sinne. Eccl. 40.1. He is prest downe to the earth and loaden with many difficulties, weakned with many infirmities, and yet hath this addition cast vpon him as a curse, euen now when he is least able to helpe himselfe, In the sweat of thy browes thou shalt eate thy bread. Before thou wert to labour, O man, yet then thou didest it willingly without paine, without wearinesse, with pleasure and delight; the Earth answered thy ex∣pectation, and preuented thy desires with overflowing fecunditie; Now thou must labour by necessitie, by compulsion, in anguish and sorrow of spirit, in toyle and sweat of bodie; and when all is done, thy hopes shalbe frustrated; the earth (like an euill debtor) will not pay the due vse, but (like a cousening companion) run away with the principall: Nay (like an vngratefull wretch, like thy selfe, and worse it cannot bee, worse I cannot say) shall in stead of flowers bring forth weeds; in stead of corne, Cockle; in stead of Roses to refresh thee, thornes to pricke thee, to crowne thee with curses (as thou crownest thy Saviour) and in stead of Manna to feed thee, it shal bring forth thistles to choke thee. If thou labourest not, thou canst not eate, sterue thou must of necessitie; and if thou labourest, death comes to thee that way also; yea oftentimes thou doest kill thy selfe with toyling. And yet O happie punish∣ment! O mercy in the middest of miserie! O blessed curse, that leades thee the right and only way to happi∣nesse! for except thou labourest heere, thou canst not liue heere: and this doth teach thee, that except thou labourest spiritually and workest the workes of grace, thou shalt not liue eternally the life of glorie. In vvor∣king thou maist obteyne, but thou doest not yet me∣rit, thy daily bread; thou beggest it, thou hast it by gift, by Gods blessing: And this will teach thee, that if all thy sweat be not able to purchase a crum of bread, all thy holinesse cannot merit Heauen; worke yet thou must, first to shew thy penitencie, and how well thou wouldest behaue thy selfe, if now thou wert in posses∣sion of Paradise, as thou hast beene: secondly, to shew thy obedience to that commandement of his which thou hast broken, when it vvas in thy power to keepe it: thirdly, to shew thy faith in the assurance of that promise, which he that made neuer fayles to per∣forme: fourthly, to shew thy thankefulnesse to that God, who notwithstanding thy sinne, hath not done execution vpon thee, but left thee meanes to liue heere, and to assure a better life hereafter, then that vvhich thou hast lost. If thou diest not temporally, thou canst not liue eternally: O therfore happie transgression, which procurest this blessed curse! O happie sinne, that art incountred with so much grace! O joyfull and plea∣sant miserie, that hast mette vvith such abundant and ouerflowing mercie! Consider Paradise was not thine by nature, but grace at the first; God made thee with∣out, he brought thee thither, he put thee into possessi∣on, vpon condition of thy good behauiour; thou didst forfeit thy right by ill desert, which at first was giuen thee freely without desert; thou canst much lesse lay claime to it now by merit, or hope to get it againe that way, since grace brought thee in at the first, and the same grace only can and will bring thee in againe, if thou wilt worke; for in the sweat of thy browes thou shalt eate both thy temporall and spirituall bread. Now if thou hast forgotten how to worke, (O thou great gouernor of all creatures, thou man, that wert made their schoole∣master to teach them their lessons) doe not thinke scorne to refresh thy memorie by their examples, but now humble thy selfe to be taught of them: (as doating fathers of their obedient children) behold, the holy Ghost sends thee to learne of a most contemptible crea∣ture, a worme, a pismire; Goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her waies and be wise ; Goe, for thou hast a body and legs; Consider, for thou hast a soule and reason; Goe and consider, vse both, joyne both in this busi∣nesse, stirre vp the faculties of the foule and body, that thou maist attaine by industrie, that which this silly worme retaines by nature, and learne to be wise for thy selfe; seasonably wise; wise to sobrietie, procuring thy selfe timely sufficiencie, both for this life and a better. The wordes are exhortatorie; wherein wee behold, 1. the Admonitor, 2. the Admonished, 3. the Admoni∣tion. 1. The Admonitor is Salomon, 1. a King, 2. a Preacher, 3. the Preacher, 1. A king, and therefore deseruing reue∣rence and attention, for the dignitie of his person: for counsell partakes authoritie with the person that giues it, and is respected or sleighted accordingly; Eccl. 13.24▪ When the rich man speakes (saith Siracides) euery one holdeth his tongue, and looke what he saith, they praise it vnto the clouds: but if a poore man speake, they say, what fellow is this? Eccl. 9, 16. and Salomon saith: The wisdome of the poore is despised, and his words are not heard. Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis ; whether he speake or no, they will doe as he doth. And there∣fore it is enough for such persons, with Gideon to say, Looke on mee and doe as you see mee doe. Iudg. 7.17. But besides the dignitie and authoritie annexed to his person, and the force and sway of his example, he hath likwise power to compell and command, and therefore speakes in the imparatiue moode, Vade, Go to the Pismire, O sluggard ; who dares but goe, when Salomon the king commands him? And yet if you had rather vnderstand this as an advise and counsell, then as a law or command, (be∣cause vvisdome perswades, but layes not violent hands vpon man to compell him to benefit himselfe against his will) then heare the Preacher perswading, since you will not heare the King commanding, and goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her wayes and be wise. 2▪ A Preacher, & therefore deserving reverence & atten∣tion, that being a King he would descend to take paines to instruct his people, by way of exhortation as a Prea∣cher, Ioan. 21.19 was admirable; they should doe ill not to hearken and obey such a Pastor. This is , to feed and rule indeed, not as the Pope doth, but as Christ did. Art thou not ashamed (O Antichrist) whilst Salomon pain∣fully and carefully acts the Princes part, and the Pa∣stors part, ruling and teaching his people aright, that thou whose profession it is to teach and to preach, doest scorne to be Christs Vicar as he was a Prophet, and wilt vsurpe authoritie to be his Vicar as he was a king only? Art thou not ashamed to say that Salomon is damned notwithstanding his diligent discharge of his duty, and thou art saued? nay, hast the power of Salvation in thine owne hand, whilest thou neglectest thine? And are ye not ashamed, O all yee Wolues in sheepes cloathing, to neglect the flocke, ouer which the Holy Ghost hath made you ouerseers, to become Courtiers, and leaue the care of the Church to others? Pro. 27.23. whilst you heare Salomon say, Be diligent to know the state of your flocks, and take heed to the herds : And whilst you see him leaue the Court, and apply himselfe like a Preacher, to instruct his people in all necessarie knowledge? Eccles. 12.9.10. The more wise the Preacher was, the more he taught the people knowledge, and caused them to heare, and searched forth and prepared many parables: The Preacher sought to finde out pleasant wordes, and an vpright writing, euen the wordes of truth. But the lesse you teach the people, the more wise you thinke your selues; and the more you know, the lesse ye labour to profit other men, especially the people. You studie indeed to finde out pleasant wordes and parables, as Apothecaries, picke sallads euery Spring; These you vent once euery yeere, out of the hearing of your owne Cures; the Court only must pertake your parables, which are farre more precious (if rare things be so) then euer was Salomons. But Salomon heere applyes his wisedome to countrie capacities, he speakes and sings in their key; 1. Reg. 4▪34. therefore he deserues serious attention, and he had it. 3. The Preacher by way of excellencie; for so he be∣ginnes his booke called Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. The words of the Preacher the sonne of David the King : and af∣ter in the 12 verse, I the Preacher haue beene king ouer Israel in Ierusalem, and I haue giuen my heart to find out wisdome, by all things that are done vnder the Sunne. As if he should say, I lay by my Prerogatiue royall, my scepter, my crowne, my sword: I betake mee to my booke, to my penne, to my prayers, to fitte my selfe to teach you. I haue beene king; that office and dignitie I lay off; I am the Prea∣cher; and that I may be a profitable one, I haue giuen my heart to studie and contemplation, to finde out wisedome by all the creatures, to instruct man (the chiefe commander and king of all creatures) to make my subjects wise, that euery man may be a king to him∣selfe. For as the vegetables are nourished by the Ele∣ments, and things inanimate, and the sensitiue, by the things vegetatiue: so reasonable man doth not only receiue corporall nourishment, but spirituall in∣struction, from the sensible creatures. And therefore Salomon takes paines in these; so that he spake three thou∣sand Prouerbs: and his Songs were a thousand and fiue: 1, King▪ 4.32, 33, 34. Sapient. 7.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And he spake of trees, from the Cedar tree that is in Libanon, euen to the hyssope that springeth out of the wall: hee spake also of beastes, and of fowles, and of creeping things, and of fishes: And there came of all people to heare Salomon from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdome. So he had a continuall auditorie, and he deserued it; he tooke paines to speake pleasantly, but his principall ayme was to speake profitably: for he knew, that which pleaseth not somthing, Eccl. 12, 10 profits nothing ; & therfore he would not preach extempore, but he sought to find out pleasant words, and an vpright writing, Sapien. 7, 7. Sapie. 8, 21. euen the wordes of truth: and he found what he sought, whilst he sought it as he should, from a right person, and in a right manner; from the right person, he sought it of God; It is no shame for a king to seeke there. Sap. 7, 7. Wherfore I prayed, and vnderstanding was giuen mee; I called, and the spirit of Wisdome came vnto me▪ In a right manner, by prayer; by prayer on his knees, to honour God publiquely. Kings cannot honor them∣selues by any meanes more, then by honouring God after this manner, by an humble, holy, and reuerend de∣portment in publique worship. Thus his example teacheth vs as well as his wordes; and he is a Preacher, and the Preacher, the most excellent Preacher, in thus seeking, in thus finding, and in thus teaching vs to seeke vvhat wee vvant, that wee may finde, whilst wee seeke as wee should, as he did. The Preacher, and such a one as did not think him∣selfe wise enough to gouerne the whole world, like a Catholike King, to rule the whole Church like an Vni∣versall Bishop, or to rule his owne kingdome, for all his wisdom, without wise Councelors: but acknowled∣ged himselfe too weake to gouerne a kingdome lesse then Spaine, 1. Reg. 3, 9. lesse then Italy ; and therefore he saith hum∣bly vnto God, Giue vnto thy servant an vnderstanding heart, to iudge this people, that I may discerne betweene good and badde: for who is able to Iudge this mightie people? O ignorant Salomon, art not thou able? knowst not thou who is able? I can resolue thee; S t . Peters Successor can∣not only rule that people, but all the people of the world. And yet he is no Preacher, and yet he sits still in one place, and yet he labours not to find out plea∣sant words, and an vpright writing, and the words of truth, as Salomon the Preacher did. The Preacher, who speaking thus humbly to God, had the honour to heare God speaking to him, in this gracious manner: Because thou hast asked this thing, 1. Reg. 3▪ 11, 12, 13. and hast not asked for thy selfe long life, neither hast asked riches for thy selfe, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies, but hast asked for thy selfe vnderstanding to heare Iudgement: Behold, I haue done according to thy words; Lo, I haue giuen thee a wise and vnderstanding heart, so that there hath beene none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall arise the like vnto thee. I doubt not, had the Bishop of Rome beene licensed to aske, as Salomon was, he would haue desired long life, that his Cardinals might not poyson him in hope to succeed; or riches, that he need not begge Peter -pence through the world; or the life of his enemies, that he need not send Iesuits to murther them, or Iudasses to blow them vp. Therefore he misseth of what he would wish, and pretends to haue; whilest Salomon had what hee desired, and more too; for God saith, I haue also giuen thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches and honour, so that among the kings there shalbe none like vnto thee in all thy daies : None like him for honour and wealth: heare therefore Salomon the king; none like him in wis∣dome; heare therefore Salomon the Preacher; for he is best able to informe you, and comes neerest vnto that perfection of wisdome, wherein Adam was created; he discernes the natures of plants, birds, beasts, and fishes; he takes paines to extract observations from them for thy instruction; wrong not thy selfe therefore so much, as to lose this oportunitie of bettering thy knowledge: heare what he saith, obey what he bids, goe whether he commands thee; Goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her wayes and bee wise. 2. The admonished; that is, the Sluggard : he is the person to whom Salomon saith, Goe to the Pismire. The Sluggard, what's he? surely he is a longer that is neuer satisfied. Pro. 13.4. Pro. 14, 23 The Sluggard lusteth, but his soule hath nought : He is a prater that neuer doth any thing. In all labour there is abundance, but the talke of the lips bringeth only want: He is alieni avidus, Pro. 21, 25 26. sui profusus; The Sluggard coueteth euer∣more greedily, but the righteous giueth and spareth not. He is a moouer vvithout proficiencie; As the doore turneth vpon the hinges, Pro. 26, 14. so doth a slothfull man vpon his bedde. He is a niggardly prodigall; niggardly of his paines, and pro∣digall of his time. Pro. 18, 9. He that is slothfull at his worke, is euen the brother of him that is a great waster. He is a couragi∣ous coward; a coward, for hee dares not goe out, but saith, Pro. 22.13 a lyon is in the way I shalbe slaine in the street: and yet couragious; for whilst he will not goe out for feare the Lyon should eate him, he remaines within, folds vp his armes, Eccl. 4, 5. keepes his knife in the sheath, and eates vp his owne flesh : Hee is a vvise foole; wise in his owne conceipt, a foole in Salomons. Pro. 26, 16. The Sluggard is wiser in his owne conceipt, then seuen men that can render a reason. And therefore there is more hope of a foole then of him. He is a resolute wauerer, Pro. 13, 4. a constant changeling: vult & non vult, (saith the vulgar.) By this description of Salomons we see, he is a longing, prating, prodigall, cowardly, slow, self-con∣ceipted, certaine vncertaine foole, who sleepes a∣way his time, and thinks all men are borne to worke, that he might play; conceipt hath dam'd vp his eares; for he thinks himselfe wiser then seuen men that can render a reason : and therefore will not heare, or will not be∣leeue, or will not obey the doctrine that is taught; his owne opinion is still wisest and truest, his owne vvay is still best and rightest, he hateth to be reformed, and doth sooth vp him selfe in folly, opposing all that can be said, vvith a silent and self-wil'd obstinacie and con∣tempt, sleeping out his life in solitarie retirement, and brutish sensualitie, as if a Lethargie had seised vpon him, and bound vp his cold braine in forgetfulnesse both of himselfe and of God also. He is socors, that is, sine corde ; for he hath a head and wit enough, but he wants a heart, affection, courage, constancie to doe what he knowes. He is Piger, that is pede aeger : he lackes a foote to conuey him to any honest and honourable vndertaking. The Ambassage of Sparta vvas without head or foote; this man (if hee be worthy to be called a man) hath neither heart nor foote: but rockt asleepe in desperate securitie, with a lullabie of peace and safe∣tie, hee derides all happie admonition, and shutting his eyes against the knowledge of danger, he cares not who kils him, so hee sees not his death. O Incredulitie, the wit of fooles: The Cowards castle, and the Sluggards cradle! How easie 'tis to be an Infidell? To this man it is that Salomon the Preacher lifts vp his voyce like a trumpet, and rowseth him vp from that sleeping-stoole of his, with this acclamation, O Sluggard Goe to the Pismire, consider her waies, and be wise. 3. The Admonition: Goe to the Pismire, consider her wayes and be wise: Here wee finde three things advised: 1. An action, Goe to the Pismire. 2. A Consultation; Consider her wayes. 3. A Conclusion or profitable extraction from the consultation; and be wise. 1. In the action, there is terminus à quo implyed, and terminus ad quem expressed: first, goe from thy bedde, where thou sleepest in securitie; goe from thy selfe-conceited opinion and imagination; goe from thy sensuall pleasures, thy bewitching pastims, thy brutish passions, thy beastly companions; goe from thy custo∣marie coldnesse and stupiditie; go from thy fearefull cowardise and infidelitie; goe from thy blinde and su∣perstitious folly, wherin thou art mis-led, brought vp, and rockt a sleepe, as in a cradle, supposing there is no∣thing good, but that vvhich thou knowest, no house commodious but thine owne, no ayre to liue in, but vvhere thou breathest, no life like that vvhich thou leadest in darknesse and ignorance. O Sluggard, goe from all those thoughts, and goe to the Pismire ; goe in thy body, exercise that; for surfets are bred for lacke of exercise, and thy body so weakned and made vnfit for any imployment; Nay, that wherein thou placest thy chiefe felicitie (vvhich is sleepe) vvould bee sweeter to thee, if thou vvouldest take paines to exercise thy selfe vvith labour; Eccl. 5, 12. For the sleepe of him that trauelleth is sweete whether he eate litle or much; but the satiety of the rich will not suffer him to sleepe. Exercitium dicitur sanum, eo quod conseruat sanitatem; It is compounded of ex and arceo, because it driues out all diseases; and an army is termed Exercitus, quod exercitando fit melior, because it is much bettered by exercise; This the Romans knew well, and therefore vvere not only carefull to exercise their owne persons and the people at home, but their ar∣mies abroad; and to that end, in the time of truce or cessation of Armes, did euer imploy them in making of cawseys, or vvalles, or draines, or fortifications, or such like profitable vvorkes; knowing well, that as vva∣ter corrupts and stinks by standing still, but is preserued by agitation, so the bodies and mindes of men are cor∣rupted by sloth, and inabled and preserued by action; Go therfore, O Sluggard, goe to the Pismire, if it vvere for nothing else, but to exercise thy body and preserue it from diseases. Dost thou not see, (if thou hast so much heart to looke vp, or so much vvit as to consider) dost thou not see (I say) what we vvere in England when wee vsed ex∣ercises, especially shooting, running, wrastling, and the like strennous and manly sportes? how able, how strong, how actiue, how healthfull, how honorably esteemed of our friends, how terrible to our enemies? And seest thou not since wee left those, (I know not vpon what peaceable and politique pretences) how our bodies are generally weakned; our manners corrupted, our healths impayred, and our estates wasted in drun∣kennesse, glutionie, lecherie and pride? yea, how are wee contemned and sleighted, and counted the off∣scouring of all Nations? O Sluggard, goe therfore to the Pismire, consider her waies, and be wise. But if thou thinkst it too much toyle to go personally to the place to behold and see the manner of the Pis∣mires working, and the course she takes in ordering of her affaires (though this vvould helpe and aduance the busines in hand very much, and make things clea∣rer to thy conception) yet goe in thy conceit, goe in thy imagination, goe in thy minde; that is, call to re∣membrance vvhat thou hast seene, and read, and heard of that litle creature; compare thy selfe and her toge∣ther, thy vvit and hers, thy strength and hers, thy na∣ture and hers, thy wayes and hers; then consider of it ad∣visedly, Iudg. 19.30. and after giue sentence, and speake what thou thinkest. 2. The consultation: Consider her wayes. Consideration is a serious examination of any businesse, with the causes, effects, beginning, continuance, and issue thereof. It is a reflection of the minde vpon it selfe, from some wor∣thy object; a rumination of the judgement, ponde∣ring, and reuoluing some matter in hand, vntill the same be perfectly digested, setled, and disposed by rea∣son: The lacke of this, is that vvhich vvholly keepes men in sloth, and so in all sinne and ignorance, vvhilst they doe not consider either the reward of glorie, vvhich they loose by omission of good and vertuous actions, or the punishment of shame, and eternal paine, which they procure to themselues by sinne and sloth∣fulnesse. Ier. 12, 17. Desolati∣one desola∣ta est om∣nis terra, quia nullus est qui re∣cogitet corde: so reades the vulgar. And this is that vvhich the Prophet alledgeth, as a cause of all miserie happening to the Iewes. All the land is fallen into vtter desolation, because no man setteth his heart to consider it; Now the Sluggard cannot doe this; for he is Socors, sine corde, that is, as vvee may interpret it, vvithout consideration, or defectiue in that facultie. Although euery man therefore, at the first sight, thinkes consideration to be no great vvorke, but that the weakest may wel effect it, yet the wise (vvho better consider the matter, and who truly can only consider vvell) know, that it is a difficult vvorke, to contract the whole power of the soule to one narrow point, and to hold it there firme, stable, and vnmoued, vntill from thence a resolution or certaine conclusion be wrought out and effected. This cannot be done vvithout labour and practise, euen vvhen the mind is most able, and the faculties at best command: But vvhere the mind is vn∣steddy, and the imagination stirring, or the memorie too slacke, the judgement cannot certainly, and to good purpose consider, as it should or vvould, if these vvere obedient. As we see a burning-glasse held firme, contracts and gathers the vnited beames of the Sunne, and so sets the object on fire: but if either the glasse moue, or the object moue, it loseth the force, at least fayles in the effect. This likewise wee may see most cleerely in persons, vvhose braines (as they say) are crackt and distracted, how they flicker and flit in their discourse, as the phantasie shifts and wanders to and fro; so that they can hardly bring either their vvords to a perfect period, or driue their purposes to any determination, because of this defect. They may be witty, cannot be wise: and neuer did Age so abound with such brittle spirits as this of ours. And to this end, I remember a vvitty mad-woman (who found her owne disease, and by long experience tooke notice of her owne imbecility) tolde a friend of hers, vvho demanded, in vvhat part she found the in∣terruptions of her discourse, since for the present shee seemed very sober and composed, as shee had wont to be: O my good friend (quoth shee) I am for flashes, but I cannot Thinke: that is, shee could not ponder, and deliberately consider of this or that thing, as shee had formerly done. We see therefore, the lacke of con∣sideration; I meane, of the power to consider, is an in¦clination to madnesse; and the lacke of indeuor, where the power is present, is an inclination to folly; and the lacke of execution and action, vvhere invention and deliberation haue gone before, is not onely an inclina∣tion, but an absolute consummation of slouth and co∣wardise. In vvhich sense Salomon saith, O mad-man, or O foole, or O Sluggard, or O coward, (chuse you which) Goe to the Pismire, consider her wayes, and be wise : that is, Cease to be mad, and become sober; cease to be foo∣lish, and become vvise; cease to be a Sluggard, and be∣come diligent; cease to be fearefull, and become coura∣gious and actiue: vvhich cannot be, except you consi∣der; that is, invent, consult, execute, accomplish the vvorkes which are proper to your vocation, wisely and couragiously. Consider her wayes: 1. First, consider her in nature, Physically: 2. Secondly, consider her in moralitie, or the Ethickes: Thirdly, consider her as a Statist, in the Politickes: Shee will affoord you lessons euery vvay; and you vvill thinke her the more vvorthy of your paines, the more paines you take in considering of her vvoorth. 1. Consider her in the Physicks: Her structure is admirable, who can anatomize her? vvho can distinct∣ly judge of her parts, and describe her members? vvho can sufficiently admire the Wisedome of her Maker, vvhilst he loseth himselfe, and all the vvit he hath, in contemplation of so small a creature? As a face, or o∣ther piece drawne in the smallest forme, oftentimes commendeth the Painter better, then in a faire and large Table: euen so in this little creature, the admi∣rable skill of the Creator is discerned, as well as in Le∣viathan or Behemoth, the Whale or Elephant: Eccl. 42, 22 O how de∣lectable are the workes of God, (saith Siracides) and to bee considered euen to the sparkes of fire! The wisest amongst the Grecians or Romans haue not thought their time mis-spent in the consideration of this little creature; Arist. lib, 9. Hist. Ani∣mal. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 30. whom they haue honoured in their Histories with the title of Ciuility ; an attribute vvhich those two imperious Nations would vouchsafe to none but their owne people. Salomon seemes to ioyne vvith these, or rather they with him, Pro. 30, 25. vvhen hee cals them a weake, but a wise people. No creature subjected to man did euer obtaine this title, which is proper to man, but onely the Pismire, and the Bee ; but these haue wonne it by their vertues, and man is constrained to acknow∣ledge how much they resemble him, nay, how farre they exceed him in these particulars: 1. First, they are ciuill and sociable, they cohabite and converse, as the most ciuill Nations vse. They haue a kinde of Faire, Market, or meeting-place, vvhere they trade and traffique neighbour with neighbour: so that you may obserue the pathes and high-wayes be∣twixt one nest and another, is track't and beaten plaine with their little feet: yea, treading vpon rockes, they haue left the visible prints of their diligent and com∣mon commerce behinde them, to the amazement of sluggish beholders. 2. Secondly, their proportionable strength, bettered by industrie and exercise, is seene in the great burthens which they carry; great, if we compare them with the porters themselues. 3. Thirdly, their prouidence and wisedome is ap∣parant, in laying in Summer-store against winter; in losing no time, but taking oportunity of seasonable weather, and for feare of the woorst, working in Haruest by Moone-light: In diuiding their meate at the mouth of their Caue, if it be too great to carry in whole: in conditing and preseruing their food from growing in the earth, which mans wisedome cannot doe: and to this end bringing it foorth to dry in the Sunne or winde, if it hath by chance taken wet. 4. Fourthly and lastly, in the solemne and louing buriall of their dead; which no creature but Man and these doe carefully and decently performe. These are the observations of Aristotle and Pliny, nei∣ther need any man bee ashamed of such Tutors, such schoole-fellowes. Dost thou therefore desire health, and to shunne sicknes? Either a foole or a Physitian. Goe then to the Pismire, consider her vvayes and be vvise; If thou beest not a foole, shee vvill teach thee to be a Physitian to thy selfe. Shee vvill learne thee both to be stirring betimes, and to be neuer idle, but euer exercised: Diluculo surgere saluberimum est. The desire of the slothfull (saith Salomon) slayeth him, Pro. 21, 25. for his hands refuse to worke. Eccl. 4, 5. and, The foole foldeth vp his hands, and eateth vp his owne flesh ; that is, he kils himselfe vvith slothfulnesse, whilst he prouides not against it, and breeds the scurvie, gowt, stone, and other diseases, for lacke of exercise, as rust eates vp the steele vvhich is not vsed: Eccl. 31, 22. Therfore follow the counsell of Siracides; My sonne heare mee, and dispise mee not, and at the last thou shalt finde as I haue told thee: in all thy workes bee quicke, so shall there no sicknesse come vnto thee. But if thou vvilt not be ruled, Eccl. 38, 15 then there is a curse that followes thee; He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hands of the Phy∣sitian. Or dost thou desire learning and knowledge? Goe then also to the Pismire, consider her wayes, and be wise. Au∣rora Musis amica ; vvhosoeuer doth great things beginnes betimes. The first part of the day, the morning, is best for studie; and so is the first part of thy life, thy youth: the impression is then easily made, and vvhat is then gotten, may easily be retained if good; can hardly be lost, if euill. Either thou must rise early, or run apace being late vp, if thou intendest to make any proficien∣cie in the Arts: Beleeue not me, who bewaile mine owne losses in this kinde too late, and am driuen there∣fore to many hard shifts to hide my ignorance from the derision of boyes; vvho am often forced to trauell for that vvhich children know: (and vvho is hee that can goe step by step all day vvith a childe and not be vvearie?) but beleeue them vvhich tooke time at the best aduantage, and therfore obtayned the excellen∣cie of knowledge: Heare Salomon therefore and his se∣cond Siracides; Pro. 17, 16. Wherfore is there a price in the hands of the foole to get wisdome, and he hath no heart? Get Learning with a great summe of money, for by her ye possesse much gold. Eccl. 51, 18 But how can shee be compassed? very easily in youth, very hardly in age. Wisdome (saith Salomon) shineth and neuer fa∣deth away, and is easily seene of them that loue her, and found of such as seeke her. She preventeth them that desire her, Sap. 6, 12. that shee may shew her selfe vnto them: who so awaketh to her be∣times, shall haue no great trauell; for he shall finde her sitting at her doores; To thinke vpon her then is perfect vnderstan∣ding, and who so watcheth for her, shalbe soone without care. But perhaps thou art foolish, and therfore art afraid to seeke, because thou fearest thou shalt not finde: yet be not discouraged, but therfore seeke, because thou art foolish, thou hast the more need of her instruction. And seeke diligently; for if thou seekest her, shee vvill seeke and finde thee; let that incourage thy diligence, thy studie; Shee knowes thy vvayes, and vvhere thou goest alone, sadly thinking of her, and seeking to finde thee with the expence of much Oyle; shee would finde thee sooner, but then thou vvouldst judge her scarce worth finding. Sap. 6, 16. Heare Salomon vvhat he saith to this; She goeth about seeking such as are meet for her, and sheweth herselfe cheerfully vnto them in the wayes, and meeteth them in euery thought: for the most true desire of discipline is her beginning, and the eare of discipline, is loue; and loue is the keeping of her lawes; and the keeping of her lawes, is the assu∣rance of immortalitie; and immortalitie, maketh vs neere vnto God. Heare likewise vvhat Siracides saith to this point: Eccl. 4, 11. Wisdome exalteth her children, and receiueth them that seeke, and will goe before them in the way of righteous∣nes: he that loueth her, loueth life; and they that seek life in the morning, shall haue ioy. First, shee will walke with him by crooked wayes, and bring him vnto feare, and dread, and torment him with her discipline, vntill shee haue tried his soule, and haue prooued his iudgement. Then will shee returne the straight way vnto him, and comfort him, and shew him her secrets, and heape vpon him the treasures of knowledge, and vnderstanding, Sap. 1, 4. and righteousnes. But if he goe wrong, shee will forsake him, and giue him ouer into the hands of his destruction. Pro. 7, 6. Thus vvee see, as the idle youth wandering vp and downe the street, seeking satisfaction for his lust, meetes the Harlot seeking him as busily; vvho im∣braceth and kisseth him, and inviteth him vvith flat∣tering blandishments, till shee draw him to her lure; (as an oxe that goeth to the slaughter, and as a foole to the flockes for correction, till a dart strike thorow his liuer, Pro. 6.17. as a bird hasteth to the snare, not knowing that he is in danger, but thinking stoine waters to be sweet, and bread eaten in corners to be pleasant, because both are easily gotten without ordinarie labour, whilst the diuell is the broker and the bawd:) So on the contrarie part, vvisdome and knowledge goeth vp and downe the street, seeking to meete vvith all that seeke after her; yea, shee cries and proclaimes aloud, that shee is ready to instruct all that vvill attend and heare her. Nor need wee be discouraged because vvee are simple, for shee is wise; and if vvee know not where to finde her, yet we are assured shee knoweth vvhere to finde vs. And obserue, that Salomon saith, Pro. 8. Shee seekes vs in the streets, and in euery place ; that is, a man that will dili∣gently giue himselfe to obseruations, and to lay vp lessons for his owne instruction and information, may finde some remar∣kable point of wisedome in euery thing he sees: in euery act he doth, or sees done; whilst the foolish and idle-braind idiots, who giue themselues ouer to the vaine fashions, and childish or wo∣manish curiosities of the time, doe passe by the most serious pas∣sages, with a slight neglect or contempt of their worthinesse. Therfore it is that Salomon saith to such, Goe to the Pis∣mire, O Sluggard, consider her waies, and be wise. Consider how much wit is conteyned in that litle body, vvhose members cannot be distinguished by the most curious, sharpe, and inquisitiue eye. And let this teach thee, that thy reasonable Part is spirituall, and vvould be as vvise as now it is, though it had as litle a bodie to inhabit as the Pismires, nay, though it had no body at all. It is not the strength, the beautie, greatnesse, or gracefulnesse of the body, that addes to the minde. The excellencie of the soule is seene in high and vertuous actions, which oftener proceed from stigmatick weake and dry bodies, (vvho follow their aymes vvith diligence, and industrie) then in the most excellent formes, vvho re∣lying and presuming too much on their naturall abili∣ties, neglect the meanes to better themselues by artifi∣ciall exercise. Goe therefore, O Sluggard, goe to the Pismire, consider her wayes, and be wise. 2. Secondly, consider her vvayes morally, (for sloth is a vice, diligence a vertue) and see vvhat thou canst learne from her in these respects, for the inriching of thy minde, the bettering of thy manners, the honouring of thy profession. Sloth is a sinne; nay, it is the roote of all sinne, the mother-sinne. For sinne hath no existence in nature, but is a priuation of grace, a depravation of action; so that in the alteration and change from right to vvrong, there must needes bee a residence in sloth. Surely had Adam beene diligently imployed in his vo∣cation, the entrance and acquaintance of Sathan had not beene so easie, and open, as idlenesse and securitie made it. The contrarie to this then, is, That Diligence is a vertue, and the very roote of all vertue. Wee see man vvas first created to action, and enjoyned it; wee see, he had his very beeing from action; Gen. 1, 26. where wee finde con∣sultation about the creation of his bodie, and the infu∣sion of a spirit, and this afterward performed by God accordingly. And then presently after followes his imployment, as soone as he had life; yea before life, God provideth a world of creatures for him to take charge of, and a garden to dresse and keepe, that he might want no vvorke, but as soone as he vvas made, fall to action, to vvhich he vvas made, that therein he might resemble his Maker, and be a liuing image of his, and no dead Idoll; for though it be true in some sense that Lucan saith: —Quid quaerimus vltra? Iupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moueris, &c. yet man is more expresly the image of God, then any other humane creature, in respect that he is not only actiue, but hath reason to guide, order, and marshall his acti∣ons aright. Now yet amongst men, the diligent man seemes only to be the image of God, the Sluggard seemes in comparison to be but his idoll. An idoll (saith the Apostle) is nothing in the World, that is, 1. Cor, 4, 8. a thing either to no purpose, or to evill. So a Sluggard doth nothing in the World, or if he busie himselfe in any thing, it is in some idle or superfluous imployment, Psal. 115, 4 5. or vvorse, in doing some mischiefe. An idoll hath eyes and sees not, eares and heares not, a mouth and speakes not; feete▪ and he doth not travell; and such a golden Calfe or silver idoll, is a mightie Sluggard, Sap. 13, 15.16. who vseth not those partes of bodie, minde, and authority that God hath giuen him to the right end vvhereunto they vvere giuen him, that is, to Gods glorie, his owne in∣formation, and the good of humane societie and com∣munitie. Thus if vvee looke into mans first being and creation, or to his progresse and course afterward, vvee shall see, vvhilst he vvilled freely nothing but vvhat vvas good, he did diligently vvhatsoeuer vvas good: but so soone as he declined from action to ease, and be∣gun to giue way to a contrarie suggestion, he fell first from diligence into sloth, and from sloth into other actuall sinnes; and from sinne, into death and destru∣ction, the conclusion of all. Eccl. 42, 22 23, and 43, 10. Psal. 19, 1, 2 3▪ 4, 5, 6. We see all the creatures of God how diligently they discharge those duties, vvhereunto they were created: among others, the glorious Sunne (who is diligent in his constant and annuall course) vvill not onely teach vs by example, to be like glorious in diligence, but also lend vs light, to see the like diligence in all the creatures of God, euen in this little Pismire, vvhich creeping vp∣on the ground, can hardly bee discerned through her smalnesse, vvithout good heed taken, and great dili∣gence vsed. Yet since to her Salomon directeth vs for an example of diligence, let vs learne of her to know, that the Church hath a Summer, vvhen wise men gather in∣struction, to arme them against persecution, the Win∣ter of the Church: That likewise euery man hath his Summer, that is, the day of peace and prosperity, when it is fit he gather provision for the Winter of aduersitie, affliction, temptation, triall: To this end beginne to store thy selfe betimes; for man can hardly conquer and subdue his passions and affections, and the filthy in∣clination of his nature to sinne, when custome hath taught them to get head and waxe wilde: But in youth they are easily broken, and made tame, otherwise the weaker and older we grow, the stronger they grow: and great reason for this, because they spring first from weaknesse, they increase afterwards by reason of our vveaknesse, and they continue and feed vpon our weak∣nesse. Needes therefore must vve waxe weaker and vveaker, vvhilst they vvaxe stronger and stronger, as the worme in wood, or the Moth in wooll, till they haue vtterly vvasted the thing that bred and nourished them. Thirdly, consider her vvaies in the Politickes, Eccl. 42.24 Contraria Contrarijs magis elu∣cescunt. Arist. de Cael. & Mund. that is, as a good Commonwealths-man; for it seemes this is the naturall and proper drift of the place, as the two next verses immediatly following doe manifestly de∣clare; vvherein the providence of the Pismire is illustra∣ted by foure notes of observation: 1. First, what shee doth, is freely of herselfe vvithout coaction, or instruction, having no guide, governour, nor ruler: how much more then ought man to do the like, hauing a Preacher to instruct him, a King to go∣verne him, and all the creatures to admonish him of his dutie? 2. Secondly, knowing the ordinary meanes to pre∣serue life is food, and that the ordinarie season to lay in this provision, is the time of Summer: Shee both fore∣casts vvhere best to provide herselfe, and then diligent∣ly takes the oportunitie of the time for the best advan∣tage. For shee knowes, Winter may bee long, hard, sharpe, and tedious, and therefore shee layes in good store aforehand, that if shee should be besieged by frost and snow, yet shee might feele no scarcitie. 3. Thirdly, from hence and other places may bee collected this point of vvisedome besides in her, that shee doth not onely and barely know this by a naked speculation; but considering it aright, shee puts it in practise, and makes vse of euery occasion, for the full and finall accomplishment of her purposes. 4. Fourthly and lastly, because shee is but weake of herselfe, shee vnites herselfe vvith others, making her Nest a perfect plat forme of a Commonwealth, as knowing herselfe by this confederacie, to be safer from forraine invasion, and that to dwell together in com∣munity, as it were in a citie, is farre more commodious, then to inhabit a solitarie mansion, vvhere there is nei∣ther helpe in time of necessitie, nor comfort in time of doubt, nor societie in time of pleasure. These things she doth, I say, of her selfe, without a Tutor, or a head and gouernour, to binde her vvith others in a strict league of amitie; and herein shee becomes a Tutor to man, and makes Reason a Scholer to Sense; laying the per∣fect plat-form of a Common-vvealth, Pro. 30.25 which fooles ad∣mire, cowards and sluggards maligne, wise men imitate, no man exceedes. And if vvee looke into the Societie of man, wee shall finde, the greatest felicity to be in such places, and among such people, as are ordered according to this president; That is, vvhere there is most diligence vsed, and vvhere sloth is most carefully avoided: for it stands vvith reason, that vvhere many joyne in an or∣derly and vnanimous consent and combination, the successe must needes be there prosperous and happie: But vvhere as some draw backe and stand still, vvhilst others draw forward and proceed, they doe not only disorder and distract the diligent, but increase their burden, and make the draught heauier to such as la∣bour. Thus in Armies, a few Cowards may occasion the losse of all, and a few valiant persons resolutely knit in one fortune and ingagement, may discomfite a multi∣tude of negligent persons. Sloth is the Nurserie of eue∣ry evill in a Common-wealth, scarcitie, famine, begge∣rie, the everie, sedition, disobedience, and finally, the ruine and dissolution of the whole bodie and frame of the State ariseth from thence. It is written of the Malabars in the East Indies, that their Noble-men called Nagros, weare long railes on their handes; to shew, that they are Gentlemen, and no workers; for to worke they are ashamed; others must worke for them, and they were borne to no end in the world, but to liue and eate, and drinke, and waste the good creatures of God, and so to doe mis∣chiefe till they die; wherein they seeme to resemble Swine, who are neuer either pleasant or profitable, till they be seene in a dish. Wee see all the beasts and birdes of prey, are not so sociable or vsefull to man, as those that labour diligently for their liuings with man. There is more vse of the Horse, then of the Lyon; of the Oxe, then of the Beare; of the sheepe, then of the Wolfe; of the innocent Dove, then of the rauenous Kyte, Buzzard, or Hawke; though many men rather de∣light to associate themselues with these then with those, to shew the lazie disposition of their base, barbarous, and tyrannous natures; and how much these incline to the execrable example of Cain, or the new-found Cani∣bals, the sonnes of cursed Cham. I need not trauell farre for examples in this kinde; the Monopolists and Improuers of our Land, and the irreligious Impropriators, who prey vpon Church and State, are of this Order; yea all our private Wealth swarmes with these Monsters, and their breede is from the lazie scumme of counterfeit Gentilitie, who bearing those Armes idlely, which their dili∣gent Predecessours haue purchased as badges of some honorable atchieuement, doe thereby disgrace their Originals, as if they were priuiledged to be vicious by the redundancy of their predecessors vertues. Arist. de Anim. li. 1. But as it is true that the Philosopher saith, Nobile est quod ex bono procedit genere : so it is a true which he likewise saith, Generosum est, quod non à natura sua degenerauit: these therefore either being base in their Originals, or dege∣nerating from the nobilitie and vertue of their Ance∣stors, become of Common-wealths-men, common-woes-men, and study to doe such acts, and invent such projects, as may vndo the publique for their priuate and inordinate desires. Yea, the example of these so corrupts the State, and so ouerspreades the face and body thereof, like a Canker or Tetter-worme, as it hath wel-nigh eaten out the valiant race of the ancient English yeomandrie, which was one of the chiefe glories of our Nation, and the principal base and foundation of the Common-wealth, at least of the strength and libertie thereof. Not that heereby I intend to disparage the Nobilitie, (which is supplementum, or complementum, as the other is firmamen∣tum Reipublicae ) but rather to preserue it intire from mix∣ture and coagulation, and to let all men see that the roote of euery commendable vocation is diligence; and to be without a vocation cannot subsist with true Nobility. For all the honors & priviledges of the anciēt Nobilitie, were granted vpon this ground, that they had worthily acted something for the generall benefit of many: yea Principalitie it selfe springs from this low, but fruitefull root. So that as Primum ens consideratum in Metaphysica, Arist. Pol. li. 1. Eccl. 31.9. est illud quod prius est nobilitate & caritate: Sic in Physica, sic in Politica, &c. And therefore virtus & ma∣litia determinant nobiles & ignobiles, servos & liberos: ac∣cording to that vvhich Siracides saith: Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, and hath not gone after gold, nor hoped in mony and treasures. Who is he? and wee will com∣mend him: for wonderfull things hath he done amongst his peo∣ple; Who hath beene tried hereby and found perfit? Let him bee an example of glorie. Who might offend, and hath not of∣fended, or might doe euill and hath not done it? Therefore shall his goodnesse bee established, and the Congregation shall proclaime his loue and charitie. And after, spea∣king of Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaak, and Iacob, the ancient Worthies, and of their workes of wisdome, he saith, All these were honorable men in their generations, and were well reported of in their times▪ There are of them that haue left a name behinde them, so that their praise shalbe spoken of. There are some also which haue no memorie, and are perished, as though they had neuer beene and are become as though they had neuer beene borne, and their children after them. Thus if vve looke into Antiquitie amongst the Eth∣nickes, euen vnto those that canonized, or rather dei∣fied their Princes, vve shall finde, that vvhen the de∣sire of dominion began to disturbe the vvhole World, and brake out into open hostility and invasion, the di∣ligent and industrious persons vvere forced, for their owne safety, to elect out some of the strongest from the rest, to be their guard from forraine assaults: And to these they gaue both titles and priviledges, to incou∣rage their diligent attention on their offices; yea and after death did so farre celebrate their happy memo∣ries, as the Ages following (ignorant of the true cause) made them gods, and gaue them diuine honour; espe∣cially the Poets, vvhich vvere the Chroniclers of those times. Thus it appeares, that Nobility vvas first from Office, not from nature, among the Heathen: and for the Iewes, Siracides speakes of the Iudges vvho gover∣ned the State, and defended them from forraine tyran∣ny: Let (saith he) their bones flourish out of their place, and their names by succession, remaine to them that are most fa∣mous of their children. So not the eldest sonne, but the most vertuous and actiue, is the heyre of his fathers ho∣nors, though the other be of his fathers titles and lands. Thus vvhether vve looke on the roote or branches, vvee shall finde Nobilitie to spring from action, and to die by idlenesse: so that it is true vvhich the Philoso∣pher saith; Arist. Rhet lib. 1. Honor est benefacti & operationis signum. Now for any man therefore to purchase honour vvithout some vvorthy action fore-going; or for any man to conferre this vvithout merit concurring, is not truely to be Noble, but the idol of Nobility: and such Parch∣ment honour, (as One vvell calls it) is nothing but as a licence to be idle, or to begge withall, because they put it to no better vse. Hist. of the world lib. 3 fol. 15.3. Great and worthy actions (as the same Author saith) are the right children of honourable persons, who liue not so much in the yssue of their bodies, or in the name and title of their fore-fathers Nobilitie, as in the yssue of their mindes, their good deeds, and the good name those good deedes haue gotten them. Eccl. 33, 21. Therefore saith Siracides, Let all thy workes be excellent, that thine honour be neuer stayned. The vvorkes that Nobility is originally tyed vnto, are actes of bountie, justice, charity, piety, loyalty, and prudence; to watch and warde, and study, and counsell, for the Common-wealth; foreseeing that they doe no injury to it themselues, nor suffer it, through their slouth and negligence, and cowardise, to receiue prejudice from others. For a Noble man therefore to be a Monopo∣list, or a racker of Rents, or a corrupt taker of bribes, or a protector of wicked persons, or to busie or employ himselfe in priuate vvorkes, as common persons doe, is to deny his owne office and calling, honour and bee∣ing. For such are the guard, the sentinell, the watch, the perdu for the Common-wealth; great reason they should therefore stand together, and defend the State with their goods and bodies, from an invasive vvarre, and not invade it themselues by force or fraude, as if they were open enemies It is therefore farre vnfit for true Nobility to be educated in an idle course of life, and trayned vp onely to hunt, or hawke, or dance, or drinke, or court, or play, (the ordinary exercises of these degenerate times) when the contrary is injoyned them; as if it vvere expressed in their Patents, vnder the for∣feiture of their honours. So that they ought to study, and take care by all meanes, to inable themselues for the generall service of the State in publique imploy∣ments, to vvhich end they vvere first created men, and after by men like themselues, adorned vvith honoura∣ble attributes, vvhich are the badges and attendants of honorable actions. It is vvell therefore, vvhere the children of the No∣bility are trayned vp in counsell and military affaires: where they seeke the warres, and places of action as their proper Academies; and doe not thinke them∣selues accomplished, till they are able both to advise, and execute in matters of State. But on the contrary side, where the Nobility liue idly, acquainting them∣selues with all effeminate fashions, and mollifying plea∣sures; where in stead of good bookes and examples, (the true mirrors of the mind) they dresse themselues in no other inward habit of vertue, then such as the eye of their Mistresses judgeth fit: vvhere no other counsell is called for, but the Page, the Foot-boy, and the Coach-man: no other action exercised, but Court-warres; no other armour vsed, but what the Taylor and Sempster put on; no other enemy seene, but what the Stage presents; and no other end pro∣pounded to honour, then the pursuit of ease and plea∣sure: Where the Yeomandry (to bee lightned of the heavy burthen that presseth them, by exactions and projects) are content to part with their estates, to pur∣chase themselues those lazie and idle attributes of ho∣nour: And the Merchant, Mechanicke, and Husband∣man, cousen each other interchangeably; and all for their private gaine, prey vpon the Common-wealth, there must needes desolation and dissolution follow. I haue seene in Scotland the miserable Cottages of the poore Hindes; and I wondered a while at the cause, imputing it either to the barrennesse of the soyle, or the lazie disposition of the Commons: But when I looked vp higher, and inquired diligently into the true cause; I found the Land fertile, the poore men painfull, but the Lordly owner is in all the fault; who desirous to liue at Court (not for action, but idle∣nesse) must raise his Rents to the extreamest racke; yea pull one piece from another with violent torture to this end. And that he may doe this the better, he ne∣uer lets out Lease but from yeare to yeare; and he that giues most is the next new Farmer for my next new master. I say for my next new master, because of late the ancient Owner, by this idle course hath learned to out-law himselfe of all; so that the diligent trades∣man eates out the lazie Lord: and as the Poet sings of Troy, jam seges est vbi Troja fuit, so may I say of these, the Taylor hath taken measure of many faire Mannors, and survayed them by the Yardwand; making that the Iacobs-staffe to leuell the Nobilitie: vvho being carefull to dresse themselues superfluously braue, care not for their Countrie, but make that naked and ragged; and the poore Tenant vncertaine to stay longer then his yeare, is loth to build a nest for another bird: and so the Land is impouerished, and polled, and euery thing exposed to waste. But this is not all the mischiefe, for the poore Tenant vndone also by this hard Farme, and outed of all, (hauing notvvithstanding his paines and prouidence, eaten vp his horse and cowes, and vvhole estate) now fals either to theft or beggerie; in vvhich lazie kinde of life, hee soone findes such sweetnesse, as hee wonders not now, that his Land-lord loued his ease so well, since he sees by experience, that prouerbe to bee true which saith; Well fare nothing once in the yeare ; for such as haue nothing are without care or feare, and may sit still when others must looke out. You may as well reclaime him from this course, as you could be∣fore his Landlord from that cursed crueltie and exacti∣on, whereby he first fleade his Tenant, and after stript himselfe, and puld his owne estate (in the just judge∣ment of God) ouer his owne eares. Now he fills the Common-wealth with beggars of his owne breed (as lowsy persons their next neighbors with vermine) and meeting with many like himselfe, bound vp together in one fortune and condition, he becomes with them a dangerous body, fit for any desperate attempt either of theft, ryot, or rebellion; as waters falling from a steepe hill raise a floud in the next valley. And thus whereas they were profitable and diligent members, the idle∣nesse and sloth of other men hath made them superflu∣ous excrements to be cut off or purged out; for feare of farther infection. And vvhilst I speake of Scotland, be∣cause it is there a generall practise, I except not England, as if this sinne were a stranger in any part of Brittaine : For though I must confesse it is not so vniversall a cu∣stome with vs, both in regard of some long Leases yet vnexpired, and of some good men yet left, vvho beare the honorable Characters of their Ancestors, and in re∣gard of the Yeomandrie (who are not yet wholly ex∣tinguished, and vvho are the only men that support the liberty of the State, and make it still retaine some resemblance of the ancient countenance) yet it hath gotten such footing, that euen good men (thinking they may doe vvith their owne what they lift) forget that they are Gods stewards, to doe good with their goods; and that they are trusted with such an estate, for the benefite of more then themselues, for which they must giue an accompt: but supposing themselues to liue in this world as in a market, imagine there is nothing else for them to doe, Sap. 15.12. but to buy and sell, and that the only end of their creation and being was to gather riches, by all meanes possible. And looke now from the Noble-man, or from the Pope himselfe, (if wee count him the highest) through euery office, trade, or profession, to him that holdes the plough, if this be not the common practise and course of life, as if the very end of each mans beeing were to inrich himselfe by the losse of others, yea by the losse of all; and the more he doth thus, the more wise he is thought to bee, and the more worthy of pre∣ferment; and if he doth otherwise, he is esteemed but a simple fellow, vnfit for any imployment. To instance this in two or three particular professions at home, looke vpon the Lawyers, and see who it is amongst them, that refuseth to plead against truth and innocen∣cy, for falsehood and treason, if he may haue his Fee? Looke vpon the Clergie, if there bee not a D. Shaw, ready to justifie any action or opinion which should be borne out with the strength and authoritie of the time, and to proue it Canonicall and Orthodoxe, for the hope of preferment. Looke into the Countrie, if the greedy Farmer doe not ingrosse three or foure seuerall Farmes, which had wont to maintaine as many fami∣lies; whilest, beeing vnable to stocke all of them, or to follow all of them being stockt, he beggars hereby him∣self, the poore, his Land-lord, and the Commonwealth; And though this be contrarie to the Law of the Land, and to all conscience, yet in hope of priuate gaine he vvill doe it to the publique losse. Looke into all Offi∣ces either of the Church or Common-wealth, if this abuse be not general: so that the places which had wont to maintaine, and imploy three or foure able men, are now ingrost by one that perhaps vnderstands nothing in them, but must execute by deputy; nay, perhaps this one ignorant man ingrosseth two or three of these, to the generall detriment and discouragement of all. And whereas heereto-fore able men both in state and otherwise, where chosen to high and honorable places, who would neither giue bribes to come in, nor neede take any beeing in: Now others are imployed too of∣ten, vvho must bribe to come in, and must needs take bribes to recouer their expences, and to maintaine their estates, being once come in. Would to God there were an Act made, that whosoeuer should seeke directly or indirectly, by himselfe or friends, by mony or other∣wise, any office in Church or Common-wealth, till he were thereunto freely called and invited by such as had lawful power, might thereby be disabled to enter, and be cast out, vpon proofe, beeing entred. Then men would labour to make themselues fit, and that might truly be termed a Calling, vvhich now is nothing but an intrusion, vsurpation, or purchase. Thus the studie of priuacie disturbes and ouerthrowes all blessed commu∣nitie; and turnes the blessings of God into curses: for if God send plenty, the poore Farmer cannot liue, things are so cheape; that all the increase he hath cannot pay his Landlords Rent, it is set so high, and proportio∣ned to the greatest increase, and to the greatest price: And the Land-lord can abate nothing of his Rent, ha∣ving set his apparell, dyet, and other expences at the highest pitch; If he should abate of his Rent, hee must then abate of these also: Which neither his wife, nor his childe, nor himselfe will admit: Nay rather let the poore statue, let the Common-wealth decay, and the whole runne to ruine, then they reforme any of their sinnes, or forbeare any of their superfluities. Thus therefore whereas wee had wont to pray for peace and plenty, whilest charitie dwelt amongst vs, now both rich and poore must pray for warre, scarcitie, and fa∣mine, else one man cannot liue by another. This is the effect of priuacie, whilst euery man cares onely for himselfe, and neglects the Common-wealth: but this is contrarie to the practice of the Pismire, vvho like a good Common-wealths man, gathers for him∣selfe and others in communitie. And therfore Salomon sends vs to learne there a lesson of true policy and wis∣dome to doe the like: Goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, (saith he) consider her wayes, and be wise : that is, prouide for others aswell as for thy selfe, prouide for thy selfe vvith respect to all: To doe otherwise, is to play the foole; thus to doe, is to be truly wise. 3. The Conclusion or extraction remaines, which is, to be wise : For that is the end or scope of all; the thing wherein wee truly resemble the Angels, and excell the beastes. As one saith very well, that Reading makes a full man, writing a perfect man, and speaking a ready man : Eccl. 38.24 so say I heere: consider the Pismire as a Naturalist, it vvill make thee a great scholler; consider her as a Moralist, Eccl. 39.1. it vvill make thee a good and diligent man; Consider her as a Politician, it vvill make thee a good Citizen, Eccl. 39.4. a good Common-wealths-man. To be a great Scholer, a great Philosopher, to bee seene in the hidden secrets of Nature, to haue the Arts ad vnguem, the Languages ad verbum, yea to know as much in all as Aristotle ; or more then so, as much as Sa∣lomon did, is not yet to arriue at this point, to be wise. To vnderstand the whole body of Divinity, to re∣solve all the knotty controversies that are in the world, or may be imagined, to confute all the falshoods, to confirme all the truths that are proposed and opposed, to know as much as Salomon did; and more, as much as Sathan doth, is not yet to arriue at this point, to be wise. To be a great and perfect Politician, diving into those arcana Imperij that are sealed vp in silence; to bee acquainted with all forraine Countries and Customes, to know the natures of all people, and to be able to car∣rie a sweet hand, vvherewith to manage them easily and naturally: to haue a wit apt and ready for all times and turnes; fitting all persons, places, and occasions: to haue Giges Ring, to see all, yet bee vnseene: Mydas eares, to heare all, euen the vvhispering of the reedes: Argus eyes, to see all: Briarius hands; a finger in every corner of the vvorld: to dissemble more artificially then Ma∣chiauell, more naturally then Lewis the eleventh: to ex∣ceed Achitophel in crafty hypocrisie, to equall Hushai or Salomon in warrantable, honest, and necessarie policie, is not yet to arriue at this point, to be wise. For he that will be vvise, must not onely labour for vvisedome, (that is, to get the Theory or bare Speculation thereof as it is a Science) but vvhen he hath gotten that, he must labour with wisedome also, or else hee can ef∣fect nothing: that is, he must shew his vvisedome in action: for virtus in actione consist it. Wisedome is not gi∣uen that vve should sit still and sleepe with it, or play or dally with it, as with a pleasant companion, but to direct vs in vertuous vndertakings. There needes no vvisedome to sleepe, to bee silent, or to be idle; the foole can doe all these as well as Salo∣mon : But to vvatch vvhen others sleepe, and to that purpose that others may sleepe the safer; to worke when others play, and to that end, that the idlenesse of one may not be prejudiciall to many, to all: to speake when others will not, cannot, dare not; and so to speake, that others may be informed, awaked, edified, warned, in∣structed, and made wiser: this requires wisedome, this is to be wise : that is, diligent, discreet, and couragious. The idle and secure people vvere drowned in the ge∣nerall Deluge: there needed no great wisedome to doe as they did. A foole can sit still, and laugh, and sing, till the water stop his vvinde, and he be drowned; and so can a drunkard, or a mad-man: but to obey the voyce of God, to vvarne and admonish others, to build the Arke, to prouide for the creatures, as a master for his seruants, to enter into and stay in the Arke, till the ful∣nesse of time appointed by God was accomplished; this required wisedome, this vvas to be truly vvise: Sap. 10.4. as Salo∣mon saith, Wisedome when the earth was overflowne, preser∣ved it againe, governing the just man by a little wood. To vvaste and impoverish a plentifull Estate like a Prodigall, to sucke the life-bloud out of the Common-wealth, thereby to deject the spirits of men with their fortunes, and so subjugate them vnder the yoke of sla∣verie, to draw all the juyce and marrow from the veines and bones of a people, requires no great wit to bring about: We see Claudius the dullard, Nero the Mounti∣banke, Caligula the debosht drunkard, (that had neither wit nor honestie) could doe this as well and as readily, as Tiberius, that had wit without honestie: But to fill the veines of a destroyed estate, to inrich a Common-wealth, to restore libertie, and to rule by vertuous Lawes: this requires wisdome, and this is to be thus wise. For the wealth of a State, stands not altogether in the wealth of one man: The Prince may be rich, and the State poore; but if the State be rich, the Prince must needs be rich also; his wealth consisting in his subjects loue: And what he is, compared with his owne, is not respected; but what he is, compared to his neighbours, enemies, or Confederates abroad: nor is it worth thought what he hath alone in particular, but what he enjoyes in the generall, as a Prince in his peoples af∣fections. To commit Idolatrie, (as all the World did) to call that vniversall, common, and catholique confusion, Gen. 1.13. and .12.1. Vnitie ; to runne a whoring after our owne imaginati∣ons, or the blinde obedience of our blinde leaders, re∣quire no great light of wisdome, but what the fire of our owne lust affoordeth. But (to doe as Abraham did) to come out of Idolatrie, to leaue his parents and natiue Countrie; to deny our predecessors, and our selues also inticing vs to Idolatrie, this requires true wisdome, that is, to be thus wise. Gen. 19.16. To eate, drinke, daunce; and rise vp to play with the Sodomites; to abuse our bodies worse then beasts in sinnes not to be named, there needs no other wisdome then to follow the sway of our owne corrupt concupi∣scence; Sap. 10.6.7 a beast can do this (but that he hath more vvit then to doe it) vvith asmuch diligence as man; But to liue soberly and chastly in this filthy place; to make heere a couenant with our eyes, Iob. 3.1. and eares, and tongue, and heart, Iam. 3.6. that one should not set the other on fire; to leaue this polluted place, not to looke backe, or touch a ragge stayned with the flesh, but with diligence to flee from Sodome to Zoar, Iude. 23. this requires wisdome, and this is to be thus wise. This wisdome heere spoken of, is requisite in euery worke wee take in hand: It lifteth vp the head of him that is low, and maketh him sit among great men, and it satisfieth the desire of all men liuing: yea saith Salo∣mon, Pro. 22.29 A diligent man in his businesse standeth before kings, &c. Nor can this vvisedome bee attayned without much diligence: for though God fils the heart of euery expert workman vvith wisdome, making him natural∣ly apt to climbe towards some perfection, yet he hath appointed labour as the meanes of attayning this ex∣cellencie; insomuch as wee see such as exceed others in dili∣gence, exceed also commonly in the degrees of perfec∣tion, all those that are lesse diligent & attentiue at their workes, and therefore it is said, Exod. 31.2 3.4. that God filld the heart of Bezaleel the sonne of Vry the sonne of Hurr with the spirit of wisdome and vnderstanding, to finde out curious workes. So God giues him vvisedome to seeke and to finde out, but if he seeke not he cannot finde; for labor is the meanes God hath appointed to this end, and Bezaleel is not borne a perfect workeman, neither hath he his art alto∣gether by infusion, but by instruction, and experience, and practice; nor yet by these (which are second causes and meanes) without Gods blessing, which is the first and principall. And doubtlesse though he would neuer haue sought to excell in his art except he had beene wise, (which wisdome was a speciall gift of God exciting him to seeke, & directing him to finde what he sought) yet he is not termed wise till he hath attained a kinde of perfection in his art, by diligence and industrie; but then beeing (as wee say) his crafts-master, he is said to be w se, because then his vvisdome, beeing drawne into action, is made visible, and sensible, and profitable, which before seemed to be idle. And thus likewise in the building of the Tabernacle, Exod. 35. wisedome is attributed to those women who did spinne and worke with their hands, for the full and perfect furnishing of that holy place with rich and decent ornaments. As if they were only wise which wrought, and the idle Gossips were only fooles. And perhaps it is for this that Salomon cals the Spider a wise creature, Pro. 30.28. because shee layes hold with her hands in kings palaces: As if God set her vpon purpose there, by spinning to admonish idle Ladies of their duties: who (alasse) are growne so foolish, as they scorne, or haue forgot to spinne with the Spider, whilst yet of her they haue learned to ensnare Butterflies, and to poy∣son them; yea to hang their copwebs in euery corner of the Court, though much of it be built with Irish Oake. Pro. 31.17. The vertuous woman (saith Salomon) ouersees the wayes of her husband : she doth not ouer-rule them as a Lady, and mistris, according to the new English fa∣shion, but she ouer-lookes and reviewes them as a good helper, to make all sure, that there may be no ouer∣sights; and shee eates not the bread of idlenes ; (that bread of idlenesse which is the common Diet bread of these daies) what therefore shall her reward be? Truly that which shee hath deserued, a double portion; honor, and maintainance. Pro. 31.31. Giue her (saith he) the fruit of her hands, and let her owne workes praise her in the gates: since shee hath wrought shee shall eate, since she hath spunne she shall be clothed; and shee is cloathed with her owne web, her owne workes praise her in the gates. All the world sees vvhat shee vveares is her owne, God hath giuen her a wise heart & diligent hand, so that shee can both couer her owne nakednesse, and helpe to couer the naked∣nesse of her husband, children, and houshold also. Such Clothes are farre more rich then cloth of gold; and this is praise enough for her, and shame enough for others, whose heads haue not wit enough, nor he∣arts vvill enough, nor hands art enough, to couer their owne sinne, their owne shame, their owne naked∣nesse. O Ladies blush for shame, (if your sophisticate and adulterate beauties, in compounding vvhereof you only vse diligence, vvill suffer you to blush) blush I say, vvhilst you eate the bread of Idlenesse, and toote in euery basket like Flyes, for the first blossomes, to sati∣ate your longing and lusting pallats, that vvould de∣voure all the increase & store of nature at a mouthful; blush, wihilst you are clothed with the forraine labours of the silly Silke-worme; neglecting in the meane time, the more commodious clothing of your Countriman the Sheepe, vvhose fleece, with artificiall fingers, might be made fit to be vvorne, both in the heate of Summer, and in the colde of Winter. Blush therfore at your apish pride, and idle luxurie; or, if you cannot blush, tremble, least vvith that lady of Hierusalem, those sinnes be repaid vvith a seuere judgement; vvhilst yee are for∣ced to eate, first the flesh of your Children, and after that your owne flesh, if the hungrie Souldiers spare you so long, as judging your painted carkeises too much in∣fected and sufetted for their diets. But if you feare, and desire to avoide this curse, heare and follow Salomons advice in this place; for to you he speakes as vvell as to your Tenants and seruants, vvhilst he saith, Goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, consider her wayes, and be wise. Now, since vvisdome is so requisite for the life of man, as that vvithout it a man is vvorse then a Pismire ; and, since vvee see to be vvise, is not only to know by speculation, nor only to goe and to consider, but also to resolue, to practise, and to execute what vvee know, and haue considered, let vs vse diligence in considerati∣on: and first and specially let vs consider vvho is the au∣thor and giuer of diligence and vvisdome; Eccl. 51.19 (for to finde out that is none of the least parts of vvhat vvee seeke) and let vs seeke her as Salomon did, Sap, 8.22. that vvee may so finde her as hee did. I haue loued wisdome and sought her from my youth, I desired to marrie her, such loue had I vnto her: Neuerthelesse, when I perceiued I could not injoy her, except God gaue her, Sap. 7.7. (and that vvas a point of vvisedome also, to know whose gift it was) I went vnto the Lord, and be∣sought him with my whole heart, and sayd, &c. See then the effect of this: I prayed, and vnderstanding was given mee; I called, and the spirit of Wisedome came vpon me. Eccl. 51.14.15▪ When I was young (saith Siracides) or euer I went abroad, I desired wisedome openly in my prayer; I prayed for her before the Temple, and sought after her vnto farre Countries. Hee travelled into forraine Lands, not onely for his private pleasure or profit, to attaine the Languages, or learne fashions, or by way of merchandize to enrich himselfe, (vvhich are the ends proposed and pursued by all our moderne Travellers) but for the publique, that hee might returne able to serue the Commonwealth, and bring home some knowledge with him, to enrich, a∣dorne, or reforme the State vvherein he vvas borne. Thus divers of the Heathen Philosophers did the like, vvhilest either beeing banished their Countries, or making a voluntarie travell, they observed whatsoe∣ver they saw might bee beneficiall to their Countries, and brought it home vvith them for the generall pro∣fit of all. Thus did Lycurgus, Pythagoras, Solon, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca ; and before all these, Moses, that mirror of Magistrates; who beeing forced to flie from his native soyle, in forty yeeres space had time to re∣examine, and purge the Arts hee had learnt in Egypt, and by forraine conference, and divers severall chan∣ges of fortune, to extract principles of vvisedome and experience for future times. For assuredly hee that ne∣ver met crosses or troubles, be his nature never so preg∣nant, can be but a foole, in comparison of vvhat hee might be, or in comparison of others. But the best Master is he that hath served the best Pilot, he that hath beene shipwrackt; the best Governour, hee that hath obeyed; and the best teacher, he that hath erred. Eccl. 25.6. Assu∣redly the Crowne of old men, (especially of Princes) is to haue much experience, and the feare of God is their glorie. Cast your eyes backe to Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, David ▪ and all the servants of God, and marke how they were fitted for their vocations, & put to many hard schooles to learne vvisedome: yea Salomon himselfe, into whom God infused a plentifull portion of vvisedome, did not∣withstanding increase and perfect the same by experi∣ence. So that though in his other words and writings he excell other men, yet in his Ecclesiastes, (vvhich is a survey, a review, a censure of all, both of his life, his vvords, and vvorkes, and vvritten in age after all this addition of experience) he therein excels himselfe. Consider in our owne dayes vvhat difference there hath beene betwixt Princes and great persons, vvho haue never felt or feared the change of their Estates, and others who haue beene persecuted from their Cradles, and so forced to beware of their seeming friends, aswell as of their profest enemies. Consider if ever Age affoorded such three Contem∣poraries, as Elizabeth then of England, Henry the fourth of France, and Iames our present King and Soveraigne. The first and last persecuted from their Cradles, be∣came thereby wise aboue their fellowes; and the one did till her last, and the other doth continue a Defender of the Faith, in spite of Hell, whose gates could never prevaile (though set vvide open) to touch a hayre of their heads. The other, wise and valiant, lost the true vse of both with His Faith; when feare and humane frailty, for politicke respects, caused him to admit Their entrance into his State, vvho never left vvorking till they cast him out: He by Gods just judgement beeing made an example to vvarne other Princes, whilest hee would not take example by the like fall of His Prede∣cessours. A naturall foole cannot bee made vvise by experi∣ence, nor any other man vvithout it. What knowledge hath he (saith Siracides) that is not tried? A man that is in∣structed vnderstandeth much; Eccl. 34.9.10.11.12. and hee that hath good experi∣ence, can talke of wisedome. He that hath no experience, know∣eth little; and he that erreth is full of craft. When I wandered to and fro, I saw many things, and my vnderstanding is greater then I can expresse: I was oftentimes in danger of death, yet I was delivered because of these things: that is, by experience of the like former evils. And vvhen all is done, if men hide vp vvhat they know, they may well flatter themselues vvith an opini∣on of vvisedome, of reservednesse, of privacie, content∣ment, modestie, and I wot not what flourishes: and o∣thers may perhaps soothe them in the same follies, and perswade them, that their cuts cover their pride, sloth, and nakednesse: but except vvee draw out, what wee haue drunke in, for generall vse, vve are Sluggards, and vnprofitable servants: To vvhich end a Philosopher said to a silent observer of other mens mirth and free speech at a Feast: If thou beest a foole, thou doest the part of a wise man to hold thy peace; but if thou beest wise, then doest thou the part of a Foole to bee silent: For wisedome that is hid, and treasure that is hoorded vp, Eccl. 20, 29.30. saith Siracides, what profit is in them both? Better is hee that keepeth his ignorance secret, then a man that hideth his wisedome. But some object, that to vtter all and draw our selues dry, is the next vvay to be contemned: Common things are cast away, and emptie vessels haue the low∣dest sound. I answere, it is no matter, therefore I vvas filld to be emptied, my praise is not expected from men, but from God. What skils it, vvhether my soule departs vvith many concealements, (which might haue bette∣red others had they beene left behinde) or haue freely discharged herselfe of all her lading, of all shee knowes? The latter is farre the better, I am the lesse cumbred vvith accompt, and I shalbe the more filled vvith fresh glorie and knowledge: Do thou thy dutie betimes, Eccl. 52.30 and God will giue you a reward at his time. All that I haue said is to this end, to leade you by the hand, to the Pismire of the vnited Prouinces, that con∣sidering her wayes and course aright, (which I purpose to lay downe with as much perspicuity as I can to the meanest capacity) vvee may by her example, and Salo∣mons instruction, grow vviser then vve are, though vve fall short of vvhat we ought to be. Wee haue gone to Beelzebub the god of Flies, to the Indians, Turkes, and other Heathens, for Drugs to poy∣son our bodies, vnder colour of purging and clensing them; for infinite vanities to discouer our corruptions, vnder pretence of hiding them. And thus for lacke of consideration, haue made all these things so necessarie to vs, as if vvithout them vvee could not live: So that had not Columbus happely found out the new world in time, there must needes haue beene an end of the old vvorld long before this time. We haue gone to the Cantharides of Italy, and lear∣ned there to provoke lust, vnder colour of quenching it, To vitiate virginitie vnder the colour of professing Chastitie; To poyson, vnder colour of preseruing or curing, To be jealous ouer all but our owne lives; To plot and practise vvith hell, for the obteyning of earth; To be frugall of our vices, and prodigall of our ho∣nours; To waste our estates in a retired kind of base∣nesse, where sensualitie may be close and secure; To feede our selues, and to starue all others; To be vvorse then beasts, and to make Saints of the Sodomites And thus for lacke of consideration, haue made our selues Politicke, Machiavelian, Atheisticall fooles. Wee haue gone to the Silkeworme, and learned there to vvaste and spin out our owne bowels, to make our backes brave; To consume all in flourishes, Ban∣quets, Maskes, Revels, and merriments, vvhilest our brethren in one faith, goe fasting in sackcloth, are be∣sieged with dangers, threatned with Massacres, and sit mourning and vveeping by the waters of Babylon: And thus for lacke of consideration, vvee haue made our selues fantastique, dissolute, deboshed, prophane, pro∣digall and ridiculous fooles. Wee haue gone to Abaddon the King of Locusts, and from that infernall pit of falshood, brought smoky su∣perstitions, to darken our vnderstandings in discerning spirituall things, and old wives fables, and lying Le∣gends, to fright children, and infatuate men of more yeeres then discretion: And thus for lacke of due con∣sideration haue lost our first love, and made our selues blinde, senselesse, blockish, idle, and idolatrous fooles. Wee haue gone to the Waspe and Hornet, which infect and sting all Christendome, and vvith them haue taken so deepe a draught of the cup which the Whore holds in her hands for all Nations to drinke of; The brimme whereof shee hath cunningly hunnied with faire pre∣tences of seeming pietie, devotion, charitie, chastitie, vvilfull povertie, obedience, vnitie, vniversalitie, and spiced with glorious titles of the Catholique Church; as now wee are growen giddie and drunken, vnsensi∣ble of our owne nakednes, and vnwilling to heare of it, and vnable to hide it; And thus for lacke of considera∣tion wee haue made our selues vniuersall fooles. Let vs now at the last (if it be not too late) goe with the Sluggard, to the Pismire of the vnited Provinces, and considering her waies, learne to be wise. Neither need wee be ashamed of such Tutors, vvho come of the same race originally that vvee doe, as our speech witnesseth, which varieth more in pronuntia∣tion then in the elementarie foundation, as M. Verste∣gan, an able and indifferent Iudge in this case, decla∣reth. Besides, they are such vvhose natures and man∣ners we better agree with, then with any other Nation: having euer found them plaine, but sure friends, both in these latter times, when Spaine would haue swallow∣ed vs, and before that for many hundred yeeres con∣tinuance, as the constant Leagues betwixt them and vs manifestly proveth. Consider at this present, if they be not friends to vs and our friends; and foes to our foes▪ if wee dare trust any but them, if they trust any like vs; if Nature hath not bound vs together in necessarie bands of Friendship; and God by miracle first made vs meanes to preserue them, that they might now be a blocke in the way to such as would devoure vs vvith greedinesse. If this bee not so, why did not the King of Bohemia resort to Spaine, with whom wee haue out∣ward peace, as to a sure prop at neede? Or why doth he now stay and remaine with them, or at least leaue his dearest Iewell there, whilest his owne Countrie is pos∣sessed and guarded by those trustie Spanish friends? A friend loueth at all times, Pro. 17.17. and a brother is for the time of necessitie. O Spaine therefore, shew thy selfe a brother, or let the Illustrious Lords the States, be knowen and ac∣counted as they are, honorable, and religious friends! But I haue forgot my selfe; passion hath transported mee, I must leave these Elephants, and returne to the Pis∣mire. Deare Countrimen, reade with patience that which followes, and consider it advisedly. The contents are a briefe collection of such good Customes and Orders, as are established and practised amongst this diligent and happie people; some of which I could wish transla∣ted into our Common-wealth. Many of them are knowen to diuers of our Countrie-men before; some of them put in practise in some places already, but not vniversally knowen or practised as I vvish they were. I may misse to mention many, I may mention some a∣misse: I may hap to set downe some, that I might well omit, being neither proper nor profitable to vs. Many others could haue done better; none did it; I haue done my good will; and vvhere you like what I propound, apply it, follow it, and you satisfie my private, whilest you profit the publique. Goe now to the Pismire, O Slug∣gard, consider her waies, and be wise. Now, that vvee may view all as in a Map or Lants∣kip with the best advantage, wee must consider, that this State hath two great Enemies, the one by Land, the other by Water, which they by their wisdome turne to be profitable friends; as vvisemen make greatest bene∣fit of their greatest adversaries. The first of these is the State of Spaine ; the other is the Sea ; the first vnites them, the other inricheth them; the manner how, I will as∣well as I may briefly and plainly deliuer. The first, seeking to cast vpon them that heavy yoke which they haue shaken from their shoulders, doth by that meanes force them to stand close together in their owne defence, and by a firme confederacie, to consoli∣date their seuerall and distinct parts in a whole and in∣tire bodie, who otherwise vvould fall asunder, by divi∣sion and contradiction vpon euery slight occasion, vvhilst it might bee said on them as it vvas of Israel, Then there was no King in Israel, but euery man did what seemed good in his owne eyes. I must confesse, wishing them wel, (as I do, and as he must needs do, that vvisheth vvell to the present Church and State of England ) I should reioyce to see, (in stead of that monstrous head too big for the body, vvhich hath cut it selfe off, by breaking asunder the fundamentall Lawes and Liberties of the State, those Ligaments that tye members politique together ) I should reioyce (I say) to see some prevention invented against Change and dis-Vni∣on, though vvith as much caution and limitation, as the Venetians vse in the election of their Dukes. And in the meane time, I vvish them a safe Warre vnder so stayed and advised a Chiefe, rather then an vnsafe peace; which, bringing in corruption, would soone open a doore to the Conqueror. For, as the state of things now standeth, behold what profit they make by the vvarres, vvhich the peace vvould lose them. 1. First, it increaseth their Shipping, causing them labour to exceed their Adversary by Sea, as farre as Hee exceedeth them by Land: Which truly, I thinke, they have accomplished, so that whilst hee assaults them at home, he findes them threatning vvorse vvarres to him in both the Indies, and blocking vp every Haven of His with their Men of warre. And this oddes they haue of him in these vvarres, that (besides their selfe-sufficien∣cie, and the privie contribution and aide of their friends and confederates, vvhich tremble vnder the formida∣ble growth of the Spanish Greatnesse, and seeke to hin∣der it this way) if His Indies furnish him vvith meanes to assault, the same Indies furnish them vvith meanes to defend: and I doubt not, but in time the vvarre that now infesteth all Europe, vvill be remooved farther off into Asia, Africa, or America : and that Hee, vvho now is the common assaylant, will be driven in all those parts of the vvorld to be the Defendant, and to vvrite Ne plus vltra in Christendome. As for the multitude of their Shippes it is such, that vvhilst I consider it, mee thinkes it probable, that as many of them inhabite the Sea, as the Land. Of this I am assured, that divers families haue no houses but their Ships and Boates, in vvhich they were borne, brought vp, and doe liue after a commodious and cleanly manner: And as they vvere borne, so intend to dye free-men; insomuch, as if Spaine should justle them out of the Land, they are resolved to people the Sea, and rather commit themselves, with Noah, to the mercy of the vvaues, vnder Gods protection, then bee subjected to men, whom they haue found lesse merci∣full in their powers, and more boundlesse and vast in their desires, then the Ocean. And yet this diligence of theirs, in winning much Land from the Seas vsurpation; and this providence of theirs, in making shift to live with their Families at Sea in Ships and Boates, and Samoreuses, vvhen their Goshen will not affoord that numerous people house∣roome: and that generositie and nobility of their na∣tures, in struggling for their auncient and native free∣dome, against so potent an Adversary, (a vertue that hath beene hereditary, and long since observed by Ta∣citus in these warlike Batavians ) are now all turned to vices by Envy ; Tacit. Annal. lib. 2. cap. 10. who can see nothing good in this peo∣ple, nor any thing evill in their Adversaries. It is more just for Spayne to supplant them, then for them to sup∣plant fishes; and that which doth commend them, that they can liue any where, must so disgrace them, as they may be thought vnworthy to liue any where. But let Envie still rayle freely, vvhilst these enjoy their free∣dome; and may they still want domesticke necessaries, whilst this want necessitates their diligence, and occa∣sioneth the encrease of their strength by Sea. As their shipping, so their Excise payes a great part of the warre, and returnes that money vvhich they dis∣burse to the souldier home againe. As vvee see the Sunne exhales vapours from the Sea; these, botteled vp in cloudes, fall downe in showers, and refresh the earth, and so by riuers and draynes, as by veines, passe into the sea againe, from vvhence they arose. And this is to be seene, especially in the Excise of Wine and Beere where euery Hereticke and Schismaticke, that loues his liquor though he hates the State; and euery drunkard and debosht person, who being first a slaue to sottishnesse, cares not to whom else he becomes a slaue, are made by this secret and insensible meanes to contribute towards the vvarres; yea and the carelesse and improuident souldier, who spends his intertaine∣ment idely, and selleth (as it were) his blood for drinke, and his flesh for bread, is, as if he were a vo∣luntary, and serued at his owne charge: for euery pay∣day, he payes backe his meanes to the Sutler, and he to the common purse. Now as they pay Excise generally vpon all Beere, so especially a great Excise vpon forreigne Wine and Beere. 1. First because, though they cannot altogether keepe it out, for that it should hinder their trading, yet that this may bee a meanes to restraine and limit the excesse thereof, being but for matter of pleasure, not necessitie. 2. Secondly, by this meanes their owne Beere and Barly is vented at good rates, which if ours were gene∣rally and freely admitted, would scarce be vendible; and so men are excited and incouraged to sow, mault, brew, and to seeke to supply the Common-wealth vvithin it selfe, vvithout borrowing abroad. And vvhilst I consider this, I can but sometime vvonder (perhaps in my ignorance) at our restraints about the out-lading of Corne and Beere, euen vvhen there is no dear h but plenty, if men vvere forced to bring out their store. Assuredly if in the time of scar∣city, vvhen God seemes to call vs to fasting and humili∣ation, (as at this present) fasting vvere enjoyned and strictly obserued, and the Alehouses daily and duly visi∣ted for auoyding of idlenes, drunkennesse and excessiue ryot, there needed no other prouision against fa∣mine. But this is the plague, these Statutes being penall are beg'd aforehand, or left to the pursuite of beggars and base Promoters, who compound the forfeiture and coosen the Lawe; or committed to the ouersight of such as are Ingrossers themselues, vvho desire to haue all things deere, that they may vent their owne com∣modities at the best rate, and so grow rich, though the Common-wealth waxe poore. 3. Thirdly from this Excise of forraine Beere and other commodities the State makes more gaine to∣wards the maintenance of the vvarres and other pub∣lique vvorkes, then all the rest that deale in them. For in Beere especially they double the price, and haue clearely as much for the Excise as the Merchant paid to the Bruer. Now in this they do the parts of prouident fathers, vvho seeing their prodigall children waste their portions, they vnderhand lend money, vvhich their children know not of, and so preserue their Lands from sale, and their pawnes from forfeiture, returning them againe vvhen the haue more vvit to keepe them and vse them. And in my conceit this vvere a good Toile to take out frugall Foxes, and a sure trap for our negligent drun∣kards and prodigall heires; vvho being only niggardly in publique vvorks where they should freely giue, vvill grutch to disburse six pence towardes the maintenance of the Minister, and reliefe of the poore, or twelue pence towardes a Subsedy for defence of the State, or for the Kings and kingdomes honour, vvhen they will at that very time, willingly spend ten times so much in ryot and excesse, neuer feeling or complaining of the matter, though they continued this course euery day, and cannot by perswasions of reason, or the force and authoritie of the lawes of God or man, be diuerted and drawne from it: such a basenesse there is in man, such a dull and beastly sottishnesse in nature, to contrary Religion and reason, especially being seconded in any euill by company, and confirmed therein by custome, past reclaiming. Now if the vnited Provinces had peace vvith Spaine, as other Countries haue, or vvere in subjection to Spaine, as not onely the Spanyards, but some of their owne infected members, and some others perhaps of Ours, inconsiderately (as I suppose) seeme to desire: then neither should they be secure of their owne lives, estates, and liberties, nor their neighbors safe by them. For assuredly, howsoever men flatter themselves, as the Catholike King would be King of all Catholike sub∣jects, so most of thē seeme to desire him for their head: But should they be so vnhappy as to haue their desires, what were they but slaves? since vvhere the Spaniard comes, he sets himselfe downe like an absolute and ty∣rannicall Lord, silencing all Lawes but his owne, vvhich are as those of the Medes and Persians ; yea as those of Draco written in blood. Never did the Lurdanes more Lord it in England, then they vvhere they con∣quer, or be let in vpon any tearmes: tell me Naples, Mi∣lan, Antwerpe, if this be not true. And though Religion be made the stalking-horse to infatuate and bewitch the mindes of men, and make them betray themselues and their Countries to slaverie; yet the Larke beeing dared, and the Woodcocke in the Net, that maske is cast away, and there is as much trust to their promises, as to the Moores their Kinsmen and late Countrimen. So that because of this feare, as long as the contrariety of Religion lasteth, the innocent party cannot be safe vvithout armour, nor secure then. Shew mee in any part of Christendome, vvhere any person professing the reformed Religion hath beene spared, vvere hee friend, neighbour, or kinsman, if That side had strength enough to reach his throat: and notwithstanding our advantages let slip in mercy, and none of them pursued bloudily, how haue they in all places, by all meanes waded in bloud vp to the chinne, for the accomplish∣ment of their designes? And this will continue as long as Antichrist raignes; for the Wolfe is bloudy, and the Lambe simple; his Fleece warme, and his Bloud and Flesh sweet. But if the peaceable Gospel had free pas∣sage and free operation, then indeed there were not on∣ly hope, but security, that wee should liue in peace one by another, and that the strength and riches of one King, should not be terrible to another; vvhilst God would teach every one to be contented with their own, to attend with conscience the charge they haue in hand, the peaceable governement of the States com∣mitted to them, and as brothers to joyne their powers against the common enemie of the Christian Religion ; not so much seeking his subversion as conversion; nor am∣bitiously thirsting after the enlargement of their owne Kingdomes, as piously desiring the enlargement of Christes Kingdome. For as a covetous rich man, if he seriously thought to vvhat end his goods vvere giuen him, and what a strict account he must make for them, would not so greedily hunt after his owne hurt and others losse: so assuredly, if ambitious Princes did vvell consider their charge, and conscionably study vpon the workes and duties of their Callings, (knowing, that as the people are giuen to be their seruants, so they interchange∣ably are giuen to serue the people, Antigonus Rex Ma∣ced. dixit, Regnum esse splen∣didam ser∣vitutem. that all may serue God ) they vvould not with so much hate and hazard of God and man, of soule and body, of their Kingdomes heere on earth, and the Kingdome of heauen, expose their subjects liues to certaine ruine, for the accomplish∣ment of their inordinate and importunate desires (es∣pecially Christian against Christian, brother against bro∣thes) neither would they vsurpe such a tyrannicall and heathenish authority ouer their flockes, as with the Great Turke to make their owne wils, limits, and lawes to the wils of all other men; Hoc est deglubere pecus, & non tondere. But as the Pope, that spirituall Tyrant, that Anti∣christ, hath gotten Church-Courtiers to vphold his Re∣galtie, with impudent foreheades and artificiall false∣hoods; so, these haue gotten Court Clergie-men to be∣come their Champions ; who, being full of winde them∣selues, haue blowne these bladders with flatterie and forgerie, euen to forget their owne vanitie, to which they are subject, and to which they shalbe subjected in the end: whilst they imagine all other men to be made for their pleasures; and their wils to be a more just law to their subjects then Gods Law is or can be to them. Well might they bee admonished by our Souereigne, who is able to be Tutor to them all, more dearely to prise the liues of their subjects, and not to seeke quarrels to enlarge their Dominions, and to embroile all Christendom, that they might fish for aduantages, but rather to ouersee all in∣juries, 2. Sam. 10. but such as would startle Dauid himselfe, kno∣wing well, though warres be begun for the pleasure of Princes, the subjects bloud must determine the contro∣uersie, and be powred out, as a sacrifice to appease the Furies. To returne to my purpose; If the vnited Prouinces had peace vvith Spaine, then they must trade, as others doe, at the appointment of Spaine ; vvho hauing once the East and West Indies in possession, vvould force all Eu∣rope to be their Retailers, and that vpon most servile and vnequall conditions. and so to take all commodities of them at the second hand, and to vent them for their profit only. Whereby, hauing before the Indies, those fountains of gold and siluer in their power, they would also this way ingrosse all the wealth of Christendome into their coffers, and thereby inable and arme them∣selues to accomplish that vniversall Dominion they ayme at. For vvhat should let them, vvhilst they had the sinewes of warre at command, and felt themselues strong enough to rush into the battell when they plea∣sed, and so to surprise others vnprovided and vna∣wares? whereas now the vnited Provinces meete with much of their Marchandize at an indifferent rate, and sometime exchange Leade and Iron for Gold ; not admitting them to be Masters of the whole world by the Popes Donation, hauing as good a title as they had, whilst they haue a sword and power to make good their title, as they did and doe. Why should it be justice in them to take from the Indies and inthrall them in seruitude, and in∣justice in others, to take againe from them, and to re∣deeme their owne liberties? Especially when all the gold they fetch from India, is but to make chaines and fetters to captiuate Christendome, and all free Nations? Let others looke on and be laughed at, vvhilst these share the world; or stand by and giue ayme, vvhilst these win the prize; or helpe to hold vp others, till their owne time comes for correction; the vnited Pro∣vinces vvill not lose their parts neither in the old nor new vvorld: for vvhich (besides their owne gaine and glory) all Christendome is beholden to them, vvhilst both they oppose this Monarch, and hinder his mon∣strous and prodigious growth in the Indies, and also re∣straine him from ouerflowing all Europe vvith an vni∣versall Deluge, as otherwise he vvould do. Againe, if the Vnited Provinces vvere all one vvith Spaine, or vassals to it, then vvere their conjunction much more terrible: for hauing before the greatest Land force of any Potentate in Christendome, if to this there vvere added their strength at sea, vvherein they exceede all Christian States but our owne, who then could vvithstand him? for, if he frighted vs, euen at Sea, in 88. vvhen vvee had these to helpe vs, to guard our Coasts, and to keepe backe, and diuert the Prince of Parma from his intended attempts, what then would he do hauing these to helpe him, and vvhen he should finde not only the Hauens of Dunkerke, Newport, Ostend, Sluce, but all the Coasts of Zeeland and Holland, as so many mouthes, open to assault and devoure vs at an instant; and oportune to land fresh forces and supplies of all kindes at pleasure? This truth Escouedo, Secretary to D. Iohn of Austria, saw long since, and at this day the Spa∣niard sees it too vvell; and therefore labours more for these Countries then for the Indies ; nay, he wasteth and imployes vvillingly all his Indian treasure about the fetching in of these; because he sees it to be more for his profit, at least more conducing to the direct end of his aymes, to haue these then those. For doubtlesse, if he vvere once absolute Master of this vvise and diligent people, he vvould soone bee Master of all Europe be∣sides. Since, besides the conveniencie of Situtation, their industrie is able to effect any difficult vvorke, vvhich others thinke invincible: so that wee see them powerfull and prosperous euen in all actions they vn∣dertake by Sea or Land; and that they carry any enter∣prize through, though it bee against Himselfe, the most powerfull and politique Enemy in Christendome. Most powerfull I call him in regard of his Indies; most politique, in regard of his Iesuites ; and an Enemy I call and count him in regard of Religion; wee beeing for Christ, and hee for Antichrist. Thus had he these Countries joyned to those Hee possesseth together with those that are Clients, subjects, or vassals to the House of Austria, Germany vvere wholly possessed, open roades by Sea and Land made to the conquest of Denmarke and Sweden; Fraunce vvere be∣sieged and girt about, England either subjected or blockt vp, and shut out of the vvorld, and all Chri∣stendome in daunger of a violent and sodaine surprise by Sea and Land. It concernes all these therefore to looke about them, especially the petty Princes of Ger∣manie, except they intend to hold their Crownes at the courtesie of Spaine, and become fellow vassals vvith the rest of Europe, to the Catholique Sea and Scepter at once, as they haue dishonorab y suffered their neigh∣bours to be by dis-union. Whereas the vnited Prouinces, Concordiâ res parvae crescunt. making good their words with actions answerable, keepe their owne, and get ground of the Spaniard, euen where he assaults, and do honorably extend their helpe to other Princes, euen vvhen the vvarre knockes at their owne doores for entrance, and when all corners of the Land may heare the roaring of the enemies Cannon, vvith contempt. So that all Europe besides is the more secure by reason these States and their Countries are imbroyled, and they againe inrich themselues by that vvhich impouerish the English and all other Nations, (for which partly they may thanke the warres) I meane by the East- Indian Voyages, wherein they haue these aduantages, vvhich (I suppose) others want. 1. First, they goe with lesse charge then others both for men and victualls. Their ships requiring fewer per∣sons to man them, and their men lesse victuall and courser to keepe them, then ours. Besides, many of them are venturers, and so sharers in the gaine: And therefore wilbe content to liue vvith little, to indure all difficulties, to vvorke out all hazards with pati∣ence, and bee good husbands for the generall, whilst they know the profit redounds to their particulars. 2. Secondly, they carry out no coyne from their owne State, but vvhat they bring in of others; their owne being kept base (perhaps for these purposes) so that they furnish themselues elswhere, and weaken not the wealth and common stocke vvhich is currant in the State. 3. Thirdly they vent the commodities which they bring from thence, for the most part in other places, and returne either mony, or other more necessarie supplies, in stead of the lesse necessarie, vvhich they carry out. 4. Fourthly, they make (as I haue before noted) an easie exchange, not trading vpon so strict conditions as wee doe, but as freely as the Spaniard doth vvith them and others; and so oftentimes meete their commodities halfe way, and barter powder and shot, for Pepper, Cloues, and other spices. 5. Fiftly, They haue a large territorie and ample command in the East- Indies, from whence they haue expelled the Spaniard and Portugall by force, and so haue farre better oportunity & conveniencie to trade there, then any other Nation whatsoever; nay, they are able to lade themselues from their owne Lands. Yea, it is in∣credible what strength they haue in those parts both of men, Forts, and Confederates; and what a circuit of ground they command, whereupon those rich com∣modities are growing: All which they haue wonne with their industrie, wisedome, and valour, from this Enemy of theirs, having crackt his credit there amongst the Infidels, as they hope to do heere also amongst true beleevers. Neither hath He hope either there or here, ever to recover what Hee hath lost both in reputation and Rent, except Hee can worke a division amongst themselves, or at least betwixt them and vs: which therefore to effect, He turnes every stone, and tryes all conclusions Policie can invent. But I trust, even Those of theirs that are most interested in the quarrels of the Church at home, and those of ours who are most interested in the Ea∣sterne quarrels, see the yssue of these differences too well, to giue scope to their affections so farre, as thereby to be made instruments to repossesse the Spanyard either here or there in the ground he hath lost. Since what they at home helpe to give the Spaniard, they take from their owne Libertie, and what we take, or helpe to take from the Hollander to giue to that State, is to take from our selves, to giue to our enemies, vvhilst we weaken our best friends, and make the generall enemy of Chri∣stendome strong, for our owne certaine ruine amongst others. As for the terrible grouth of the Hollander, vvhich some seeme to startle at, it cannot fright vs; since their principall strength is at sea, and so obnoxious to many vnauoydeable dangers in their trade, except they hold good correspondencie with vs. For our very Coast vvilbe euer able to command them, and hold them in awe, and they must resolue either in stormes to ride out all hazards, & fight against winde, tide, rocks, sands, and all other casualties, or to submit themselues to the mercie of our harbours. And in calmes or fayre wea∣ther they must passe euery flie-bore, at least euery Fleet they send out and receiue home, with a guard suffi∣cient to keepe vs vnder hatches; otherwise wee shall be sure to gaine more by their voyages, then they them∣selues that are the venturers. Now how impossible it is for that State o preuent these disasters of theirs, and aduantages of ours, is apparent to any man that obser∣ueth the situation of their Coast and ours. Thus therefore whether they trade as Marchants or men of warre, and vvhether they labour to increase their Estate at home or abroad, or to hold their owne already acquired, our friendship is so absolutely neces∣sarie, as they can doe nothing vvithout it, nor stir out vvithout leaue. So that God hath bound vs together by an vndissolueable band of necessitie; and it vvere well therefore that our hearts aswell as our Lands, and our trades in all other places, aswell as at home, vvere so vnited. Now if I may haue licence after so many judi∣cious persons that haue handled our trade in the East- Indies to and fro, and grounded their reasons vpon ex∣perience, to cast in my conjectures, I would say, the cause wee thriue not in that voyage, is: 1. First, because of our great charge; for our ships re∣quire more Mariners then theirs, and the most that goe haue small or no ventures, Great men being all the sharers: and those that go meerely as seruants, besides that they are not so carefull of the maine aduenture as they should bee, and would if they were owners, wilbe well payde and full fed notwithstanding howsoever the Voyage fals out. 2. Secondly, our ships carry out much siluer, some by permission, more by stealth; and this is sure, no∣thing weakens a State so much as transportation of coyne. Let other things be transporred out of the Land, or bee deare or cheape within the Land, all is one; this or that man may bee the richer or poorer, the State is the same still. But vvhere mony is exhausted, and the returne doth not countervaile the out-going, there the State decayes by degrees. As for example, if our Cloth, Corne, Beere, Saffron, Tinne, Hides, and the like, will pay for our Silkes, Wine, Spice, Tobacco, &c. wee may still liue, though wee liue poorely (as luxurious bodies, vvho haue good stomackes to supply and renue their decayed strength and vvearied spirits) but if we waste more one way, then the other vvill countervaile, whilst wee haue no other commings in of Bullion from the Indies, as Spaine hath and wee wont to haue, our King∣dome must needes decay and fall into pouertie, wan∣ting monie, which is properly the wealth and strength of a State: Euen as wee see naturall bodies, when they are libidinous, fall into consumptions, because their ex∣pences exceede their revenues and commings in. 3. Thirdly, wee may obserue our waste, and so our weakenes in this kinde, vvhen wee spend in England more wine, velvets, Silks, gold and silver, in Laces, Im∣broderie, Guilding; more Sugar, Tobacco, Drugs and Spices, then they do perhaps, in the places from whence wee fetch them, and where Nature hath made some of them necessarie nourishments: so that our owne ships are not sufficient to furnish vs, but others also vent much of these their vanities vpon our Coast. Thus per∣haps this or that man may be the richer by this Trade, but I cannot conceive how the publike purse is filled with Bullion, or the Commonwealth advanced, but ra∣ther much impoverished, and miserably weakned by it. As for such as say, The Kings Custome is the greater, and shipping increased by it, I can conceive no proba∣bility in either, but conjecture, that stocke which is there wasted, and worne out with vse, would in both these respects, be more beneficiall, were it any other-where, or any otherwise employed. 4. Fourthly, we are tyed to such hard conditions, as must needes bee a venter indeed, if wee profit by the Voyage: For if we be strong, we must not touch, with∣out Spaine seales the Warrant; and if we be weake, wee become a prey to them, or any other more potent. Thus vve are sent out as sheepe among Wolves, and like Doves among Kites; and if vve stirre any of these contrary to expresse order, that Iustice, which would moderate all commerce amongst Christians, in an even and equall Balance, makes a president of his owne, and mues vs vp at our returne. 5. Fiftly and lastly, vve haue no Land, or a very lit∣tle in those Parts, and so not the like meanes from our owne annuall crops to lade our owne ships, or the like liberty and oportunity to furnish our selves by trading vvith those severall Nations, as they have. But now if it vvere possible to vnite our Trades there, and to bring both Nations into one Corporation, it would be a meanes to strengthen and assure both parts here and there, and to enrich both parts without feare of any third, or falling out amongst our selves. For I verily beleeve, that that disgust betwixt the two Nations in the East- Indies, vvas not sent thither vvithout a Romish practise: nor can I beleeve, that those many delayes and dallyings since vsed in the composi∣tion of those grievances, and in not satisfying His Ma∣jesties just demands, proceeded altogether from free and loyall thoughts to their owne State, but had the corrupt mixture of Spanish Lees in the bottome. Which may teach vs to be more charitable, then to censure the vvhole Nation for the practise of some few: since wee may consider, this State is compounded of members diversly affected; and that the good and honest people doe suffer in our sufferings, vvhilst they see the others offer vs injurie, vpon purpose to make vs breake off, for the benefit of their Grand Signior. Thus we have seene a glimpse of that profit, vvhich the vnited Provinces make of their Land-enemy: their other Enemy is the Water both salt and fresh; of this likewise they make a profitable friend, as I vvill labour briefly to manifest. The Sea lyes continually raging vpon their Coasts in such a manner, as if it would hourely eate them vp, and swallow all at a mouthfull. It over-lookes them, and they seeme to lye vnder it: yet they keepe out this strong enemy at the armes end by art and industrie, ha∣ving nothing but rampiers and fortifications of Sand to oppose it. To make these strong therefore, and to vnite them that they may not be blown away with the violence of euery stormy vvinde, it is incredible what paines they take, setting a kind of long grasse vpon the same barren Sands, as curiously and carefully, as wee set flowres and hearbes in our gardens: which grasse once getting roote, bindes the earth together, that the winde cannot readily come to blow it away, and tea∣cheth them by the like combination to turne their weakenesse into the like strength. Now this were no∣thing, if they had but a little banke to keepe, but consi∣dering what a large Coast they are to guard and make good in this manner, (vvanting our naturall vvalles of rocke) it is a miracle that they should haue so much courage as to vndertake it, and so much constancie as to pursue it, and so much cunning as to effect it. I make no question if some Nations, vvho beare their heades aloft, had the like worke in hand, they would either neuer attempt it, or faint and giue ouer in the midst; & rather vvith the Heluetians, Caes. Com. seeke new Countries to in∣habite, then be at such a continuall cost and care to de∣fend their owne against two such enemies at once: when these notwithstanding, do not only keepe their ground, but as they haue dealt vvith Spaine for his in∣trusion vpon their ancient Liberties, Rights, and Pri∣viledges, so heere they haue wonne vpon the Ocean, and recovered a great part from the Seas vsurpation; part whereof, hauing neither sand not other soyle to helpe them, they defend with stupendious heapes of stone, vvhich, vvith incredible cost, they fetch from their neighbor Princes, euen in places farre remote, for monie; and with a continuall supply of these from time to time, keepe out the entrance of so furious an adver∣sary. The assault and battery vvhich the Sea makes in this one place that I haue seene, is about an English mile long or more, vvhich they defend and maintaine with huge piles of timber (brought likewise from fo∣reigne parts) inter-lined vvith those heapes of stone fore-mentioned about the bredth of two or three acres all that vvay: otherwise the Sea vvould breake in ouer all, and soone determine the controuersie betwixt them and Spaine, taking possession of all from both of them by force. Thus wee see how this people maintaine their owne, both against the King of Spaine and the Ocean, by helpes which they fetch from forraine Nations; vvhilst both ther souldiers, wherewith they oppose the Spaniard, are principally strangers, and the very walles and bankes, vvhereby they hold out the Sea are like∣wise forraine, and far-fetcht. And this is none of the least part of the Pismires wisedome and diligence: to which Salomon sends vs for imitation, whilst he saith, Goe to the Pismire, O Sluggard, Consider her wayes, and be wise. Now as they haue this open and able enemie, the Ocean, besieging them almost about, & assaulting them without continually; so haue they vvithin the factious fresh-waters, that vvill keepe vvithin no bankes (like Schismatickes, without the salt of sobriety and discreti∣on) ouerflowing them at certaine seasons. Insomuch as their soyle seemes a spunge in Summer, and a stan∣ding Meare in Winter; for then, almost, all the face of the Continent is vnder vvater. But see what profit they make of this Adversarie, whilst cutting large passages from place to place with incredible cost, these waters worke for them continually as faithfull seruants, con∣veying their carriages by this meanes, to and fro, in a cheape, easie, and safe manner. And such vse doubtlesse do they make of the seuerall sects and Religions, by necessitie tollerated amongst them, to helpe to carry the generall charge and burthen of the Common∣wealth, with the greater ease and assurance. Nay not only the water, but the winde also is their journeyman, and labors continually for them by Mils and other Engines; some pumping and forcing the wa∣ters out of their surrounded pastures; some pressing oyles, others beating flaxe, hempe, copper; some grin∣ding corne, others spice; some making paper, others sawing timber; and briefly, neither man, woman, or child, neither sea nor land, neither water nor winde suffered to be idle, but wheresoever it blowes, it blowes good to some of them. And it is remarkable & wonder∣full, that though there be many of these Mils in every towne, yet none of them lacke worke, but haue asmuch to do as they can turne their hands to attend. But whilst wee consider the harmony of the vvhole, together with the necessarie dependancie of one part with and vpon another, wee readily see, that these Mils helpe to imploy their ships, and their ships them interchan∣geably; So that vvhereas one saith vvittily but not well, How all the elements conspire there together to be naught, to shew their dislike of the naughty people, I may truly say, All the naughty Elements are forced there to do good, to shew the vertue and diligence of the good people, who conspire together in honest la∣bor and artificiall industrie. And this is one of the cau∣ses they can do things they vndertake, at cheaper rates then many vvith vs, because they make the artificiall Engine to worke for them, vvhich vvith the easie at∣tendance of one or two dispatcheth the businesse, per∣haps, of twenty. Thus as Sertorius taught his weake souldier to pull off the horse tayle, haire after haire, which a stronger could not moue together all at once, so these make their strong vvits supply the defect of weake handes, and with the helpe of Pallas or Mercurie, effect that vvhich Briarius would wonder at. By this meanes an infinite number of people are imployd in Shippes, Samoreuses, Hoyes, Skutes, and Botes, to car∣ry and recarry commodities, to fish, fowle, and trade from towne to towne. So that, though it be hard (as I haue sayd) to determine vvhether the Land or Sea be most inhabited by this Nation; yet it is very proba∣ble, and I verily beleeue, that if their Land feedes one, and inricheth one, the vvater feedes two, and inricheth ten for that one. And so excellently haue they contri∣ved these channels, as they serue not only for necessa∣rie draines to their grounds, and for highwayes in transporting their goods commodiously from place to place, but for ornaments also to beautifie aswell as in∣rich their Townes, vvhere the Ships and Botes passe vp and downe through their streetes, and loade and vn∣loade, take in, and deliuer wares at their doores; the ri∣vers being walled on both sides with faire houses, and the bankes set orderly and pleasantly with trees in most places as you passe the common streetes of greatest dealing and stirring. Thus trade they within land amongst themselues, to the exceeding pleasure and profit of all, and abroad at Sea by the East and West Indian Voyages, by their fish∣ings for Whale, Cod, Sturgeon, Herring, and the like, they imploy a world of Shippes and men, and by this meanes are not only able to maintaine the vvarres, but to helpe their neighbors also with Men and money: and notwithstanding all this, to build and plant vvith such cost and curiositie, as if they meant not to lose the possession, or did it for the vse of other men, especially their good friends the Spaniards. Nay rather they seeme to build thus richly and gorgeously vpon purpose, as if they intended by that meanes to intice the couetous and ambitious Spaniards to assault them; and yet with∣all to assure the Assaylants of their resolution, to stand out to the last man; and that they take not such paines for the pleasure of any other, but themselues and their owne children, especially not for their Enemies, whom they rather contemne then feare, as these evidences manifest. Now as wee passe along, it vvill not be amisse to speake a word of their buildings, which are faire, large, vniforme, all of brick, edged with marble or free-stone. No cost is spared either to adorne them vvithout or vvithin, or to adapt them to the owners vse. Many of their houses are paved with blacke and white Marble, and curiously fronted and in-layd vvith diuerse rich pieces. Yea the paving of their streetes is such, being much of it bricke laid edge-wise, as doth vvitnesse the generall vvillingnesse of their hearts to advance any publique worke either for necessarie vse or ornament: vvherein they are a people beyond comparison forward and liberall, so that all common vvorkes of whatsoeuer kinde, are vvith great zeale and diligence performed on all hands, and that they may be vvell and substantially effected and maintayned, no cost is thought too much at any hand. I tell not any of these nigh and notable thinges, as vvonders farre off, but to make this vvonder the more notable, that being so neere and so vvell knowne by many, they are followed by so few, nay scarce imitated by any. Their planting is likewise remarkeable, vvhere not only the seuerall Citties and townes haue large, faire, and pleasant vvalkes, set vvith trees after an exact, artificiall, and beautifull manner, and so kept and pre∣serued vvith great care and cost (as the private Gardens of great Persons vvith vs, or as Morefields of late, in imi∣tation of these) but also the very hedge rowes are so fenced, and orderly disposed, and the high-wayes so planted, as a man vvould thinke he still trauelled through private vvalkes, not publique roades, and thorow-fares. One reason of this may bee, because through all these Countries there are either none or very few Commons. Those that are, being very small, are thus imployd for matter of ornament, vvhere the common person is not suffered (as vvith vs) to spoile all at his pleasure, to cut downe vvhat his predecessors planted; but all is pre∣serued by generall consent. Which I know not whether to attribute to the good disposition of the people, and their care of posteritie, or to the vvisedome and dili∣gence of the Magistrates, executing good Lawes strictly and impartially vvhich tend and respect publique vtili∣ty; or to the people and Magistrates joyntly concurring and consenting in one for the common good. And that I haue some reason for this doubt, consi∣der that vvith vs there is more good ground wasted (to passe by Forrests, Chases and Parkes, matters of meere pleasure, or more pleasure then profit,) and not to mention Commons which lye dry Winter and Sum∣mer) in fennes and surrounded grounds, then is con∣tained in all the Lowe-Countries ; in all the Low-Countries, I say, where meanes for the maintenance of all these wars, and works, and buildings, and wonders before mentio∣ned, and after to be mentioned is found out. And these fennes or Commons of ours (vvhatsoeuer other shew they make to the ignorant and vnexperienced at first sight) serue for nothing but to breed idle persons, va∣gabonds, theeues, and beggars: For either, being such, they resort to those places as to their harboroughs and couerts, or comming thither able and honest men, are soone made such: First, by the charge of the poore, vvhich they finde there, to vvhom they are forced to contribute by the Law. Secondly, by the wasted soyle, promising fairely in the Spring, but deceiuing their ex∣pectation in Winter, the time of most need. Thirdly, by the conversation of their neighbors, corrupting one the other by idle example. Fourthly, by the oportunity of places out of the vvay, and so out of the eye of the Law and Magistrate, and giuing shelter to all disor∣ders. So that in England generally, vvhere you finde the largest Commons, there you may finde these miserable enormities. Neither will the people learne better either by reason or experience, so hath superstition wedded them to the errors of their Ancestors in euery re∣spect. But in these Countries either through the lacke of Commons, the diligence of the Magistrate, or the good disposition of the people, it is farre otherwise, vvhere there are none or very few beggars, except neere the Court, and those mostly of other Nations. For in∣deed euery man vvorkes, and depends vpon himselfe (vvith Gods blessing) for his sustenance; thinking it a shame, that two hands should not feede one mouth, and clothe one backe: None but the aged or impotent with them will aske any thing, and they very seldome; and that rather by presenting themselues as objects of compassion to the passenger, then by verball sollicitati∣on. And this is so vvell knowne, as families falling into decay, haue died through penurie, rather then they vvould make others acquainted vvith their vvants. Which obstinacie or pride of theirs I praise not, but set the same downe only to shew the generositie and free∣dome of their natures vvhich abhorres dependancie. To preuent this inconvenience, the charitable State is forced, vvhere the like suspicion is had of vvant, to search the houses of such, and to contribute towards their necessities, by a kind of silent and close compulsi∣on. Yea there is often found, that diuers of these haue beene releeued by mony cast into their houses, and that in large summes by liberall hands, vvhilst the per∣sons haue kept themselues secret, as doubting the re∣jection or returne at least of their free benevolences, if the receivers had knowne vvhere to make restitution. And now indeed I must confesse, though their cha∣rities be not so full of ostentation, nor spent in that sort, that wee (by the example of our forefathers) be∣stow ours; that is, at the doore, (vvhich course I con∣demne not, but vvish continued, in regard of the aged and impotent persons, and in regard of the couetous, vvho take an easie excuse to be vncharitable, and vvill neither giue priuately nor publiquely; and in regard of the vain-glorious, Tit. 3.14. who will giue there publiquely or no vvhere) yet it is more properly, and I thinke, more profi∣tably bestowed by them then by vs. For vvith vs (as good Customes may be corrupted) this Doore-dole (as I may call it) rather makes rogues and vagabonds, then releeues aged and impotent persons. So that, as the Abbies, and other like houses, hauing in their handes the liuings of many poore people, (whose superstitious forefathers gave so much to the Church, as they left nothing for their children) might vvell releeue at their doores such, as vnder the colour of deuotion and long pray∣ers, Luc. 20.47 they had before rob'd and disinherited: so doubt∣lesse many vvith vs, hauing before fed themselues full vvith the sweat of other mens browes, euen to glut∣tonie, drunkennesse, and surfetting, may releeue vvith their scraps, crummes, bones, and broken beere, the necessities of such, as they, or their predecessors, haue before vndone and made beggers, either by some hard Farme, or by vsurie, or some craftie bargaine, or by suites and molestations, or some other the like cruell exaction. But these on the other side giue little at the doore (except to the impotent, or to children) but their charities are more properly and profitably pla∣ced, vz. 1. First, in putting out poore children apprentises, vvhich haue their trades taught them freely, and their meate and drinke they duly receiue at the houses of the better sort from day to day by turnes, during their ap∣prentiships: Where notwithstanding they are not suf∣fered to hang idlely from their worke, and to loyter away the time, but fed, dispatched, and sent away pre∣sently. The like to this, or rather better, vvas that act for binding out apprentises with vs even to husband∣men in the Country, vvhich vvas hotly pursued a∣vvhile by some good Patriots vvith happy successe; but this soone met discouragements, as many other good things doe, vvhich are executed vvith more heate then constancie. 2. Secondly, their charities are seene in their Almes∣houses for the aged people of both sexes, seuerally by themselues; vvhose Roomes are kept, and they tended, both in a necessary and neate manner; insomuch, as a man comming into one of those houses (as every towne hath one of them at the least, very large and faire, vvith gardens and all other necessaries for the de∣light and recreation of wearie age) he would judge them to be built only for shew and brauerie: Yea, euery seuerall chamber or Cell is so adorned and fur∣nished, as it vvould not only content the dweller, but delight the beholder also: And a stranger would rather judge them the habitations of rich Marchants, then of poore decrepide and decayed persons. I know no Nation exceedes vs in these kinds of vvorkes, especially since the Reformation of Religion, and that the Gospell came to bee freely preached a∣mongst vs, so that (to the honour of God and His cause be it spoken) our thankefulnesse hath beene more fruite∣full, then our Adversaries merit : but these of ours are the charitable actions of particular persons, so that one place hath (perhaps) superfluitie of provision, having many Almes-houses, and another lackes necessarie sup∣plies, having none: vvhereas in the vnited Prouinces these houses are maintained at the publike charge of the State or the Cities; and so every place is alike suffi∣ciently provided for according to an even and equall proportion. 3. Thirdly, their Wase-houses for poore Orphans are ordinarie in every Towne, vvhere great numbers of children of both Sexes, are educated, (as in Christs-church Hospitall in London ) and some of them taught Trades, others trayned vp in Learning, and every one employed according as they are inclined and found ca∣pable; and then sent out to serue in the Church or Commonwealth, vvhen they are fitted for that pur∣pose. The women have choice to goe or stay at pleasure: but if they marry, then are they dismissed from thence, yet not empty handed, but so provided as may serue to set vp young beginners, lest they should seeme onely to marry, as vvith vs they vse to doe too often, to fill the Commonwealth with idle beggars. 4. Fourthly, their Guest-houses for the sicke are ge∣nerall in all places, and well provided of all necessaries as the other before-mentioned. There the sicke finde cleane linnen, good beds and fires, attendance, meate, drinke, Phisicke, Chyrurgerie, and whatsoever may helpe toward his recovery at the common charge of the State. So that be he a native or a stranger, an inhabi∣tant or hired souldier, or any other person, if hee bee poore and sicke, hee is admitted and provided for, till God dispose of him, either to health or death. Inso∣much as vve shall not see in an Age, a poore man or a childe lye sicke groning in the streetes, nor a distressed woman there travelling in child-bed, in the eye of mer∣cilesse passengers; as it fals out too often with vs, more I must confesse, out of foolish pitie, for lacke of execu∣ting good Lawes for their timely employment, and for prevention of idlenesse, then for lacke of charitable hearts to relieve their necessities once decayed. 5. Fiftly, their Bedlams and Dul-houses for distra∣cted people, and their Houses of correction or Tucht-houses, for idle people that will follow no certaine nor setled course of life, nor betake themselves to any vo∣cation, are as ordinarie and generall in every place as any of the rest afore-mentioned: and all meanes vsed to reclayme the first to their wits, the other to their ho∣nesties. Neither are any of these houses left to the cor∣rupt and covetous abuse of any one man, but their Rents, disbursements, vsages, and orders, are duly and often visited and examined by the Magistrates & Prea∣chers, and an open eare affoorded to all complaints, with a speedy reformation of all injuries and abuses en∣joyned. 6. Sixtly, their Lumbards or Loane-houses, are prin∣cipally for the benefit of the poore, where Brokers are not suffered to take fifty, or one hundred in the hun∣dred, and ratably in lesse summes even to sixe pence, to the grinding of the faces of poore men, the discourage∣ment of labourers, the maintenance, enticement, nay, enforcement and provocation of theevery; but the poore may vpon pawnes supply his owne necessity at easie rates of fiue or sixe pounds in the hundred, and haue reasonable time of redemption allowed. Thus first they wisely prouide to keepe men from vvant, by imployment, and then prouide to supply their wants, if age, sicknes, infirmitie, or casualtie cast them into pouertie, by vnavoydable necessitie. And all these vvith many other charges domesticke and forraine, may the more easily be sustained, whilst the people are naturally or customarily frugall, and bound to be so, if not by Lawes, (as wee are to no pur∣pose) yet at least by the example of their Predecessors dead▪ and Superiors liuing, as I would to God wee were. This frugality of theirs appeares in three respects; in their feeding, and cloathing, and calling: or in their diet, apparell, and titles. 1, First, their diet is but homely, euery day is not a feasting day, but they know God made a Sea aswell as a Land, and appointed there should be Fasts aswell as Feasts. Yea, their whole life seemes nothing but a fast from superfluity, if vvee compare it vvith our owne, ex∣cept their excesse in drinke, which is the only staine of their Nation: Neither is this so much as Rumour makes it seeme; for euen in this vice I feare wee exceede them; at least I am sure, if they spend more time in drinking then we doe, wee spend more drinke then they vse to doe in the like time. As for their feastes, if any excesse be among them, it is there to be found, and that rather in their long sittings, then costly surfers: for these their meetings seeme meerely to be loue-feastes, and to be made more for societie and neighbourhood, then for the delicacie of the Cates▪ which are neither various nor chargeable. They travell not over Sea and Land for dainties, nei∣ther need they travell farre for Cookes; their owne serue their turne, and fit their stomachs and Pallates better, then either the luxurious Italian, or ryotous French. Salt is their principall spice, and they trauell to the Indies rather for vs then for themselues: since if they spend one pound of those Drugges, wee, for that one, (I beleeue) spend one hundred. And the same may be said of Sugar and other compositions for sauces, which they bring to vs, as to Gluttons, vvhilst, like sober and temperate persons, they abstaine themselues from the excessive vse of those vnwholesome prouo∣cations. 2. Secondly, as their diet is moderate, where all ex∣cesse and waste is avoyded, so are they modest in their apparell, shewing themselues constant to their country fashion, and decently cloathed euery man according to his ranke and state. The Lawes neede not limit them, vvhilst Reason is their Law; and they are asha∣med go to in such apparell, as we shame to be without. I meane, as with vs the only glory is to be gay, and the greatest shame to be vnder-clad or euen-clad to our Callings: so vvith them the greatest shame is to be gaudy, and the greatest glory to be decently and mo∣destly attired, equall to their abilities, or rather vnder then aboue it: But now the light example of the French, seconded by our more sutable conversation, hath be∣gun to taint them by degrees vvith euery excesse, espe∣cially in apparell; and if the prouident Magistrate looke not to it betimes, the vnbrideled and licencious youth vvill, in this respect, vndo the publique, and weaue fet∣ters of silke for their owne feete, which their plaine and wise forefathers (in imitation of the renowned Spartans ) broke asunder by industrie, and kept broken by frugality and contented rusticitie. Assuredly the cu∣customary subjection to any of these vices effeminates the heart of man, and prepares a State fit and supple for any other subjection, how base, dejected, or dishono∣rable soever it bee. 3. Thirdly, as their diets and clothes are meane, so are they generally contented with the estates and titles of their Ancestors, not vainely or ambitiously hunting after the badges of Gentilitie or Nobilitie, and vndoing themselues to purchase either. For they thinke it a madnesse to clip their vvings, thereby to impe out their traines, to lessen their meanes for the increase of their charge, and to sell their Landes to buy titles. Much better is it (say they) to be Earle of Holland in possession, then titular King of Ierusalem. And by this contentment they enjoy themselues in a retired priuacie, vvhilst the Common-wealth enjoyes them as able to serue her in all respects publiquely, as if they had stiles answerable to their deservings. By this meanes also they are not charged with such pompe & furniture either of clothes, stuffe, Plate, and attendants, as such a state would require, nor are they forced, for the suckling and satis∣fying of these Calues, to draw milke from the Com∣mon-wealth till bloud follow, as they must do, should they heighten their station. I dare say, that their moderation in these three res∣pects, is none of the least meanes that they are so well able to goe through with all other difficulties; whereas with vs the contrarie affection in these particulars, vvorkes the contrarie effects, being the three principall causes of our generall want. 1. First for diet, it is vvonderfull, that the Belly and Backe of England, like Bel and the Dragon, by Luxurie and Pride should devoure all Gods blessings which both by Sea, and Land it selfe aboundantly brings forth; and vvhich, if men and not beastes had the dis∣posing of it, vvere able plentifully to helpe others: when as wee, not therewith contented, as if it vvere some barraine part of the world, and not one of the fruitfullest, doe call for supplies out of Ireland, and Scot∣land also, (especially of Beefe and Mutton) when no Land in Christendome is better furnished of those so∣lid and substantiall prouisions then our owne. But those brethren of ours both in Ireland and Scotland are content with dried fish, barly-broth, milke, whay, cruds, shamrocks, long-woorts, rootes, and the like, vvhilst they furnish vs vvith their flesh which they finde so vendible in our Markets. One of the causes of this may bee the idle waste of our young store, euen then when they are new falne frō the dam. What droves of Calues, Lambs, Rabets, and yong Fowle, with fish, fruit, and abundance of other vi∣ands, are daily devoured in one City of London, before they come to maturitie, and that for the satisfaction of euery prodigall youth, and luxurious Dame? 2. Secondly, for apparell, besides that no mans me∣mory can thinke vpon all the our-landish toyes, which are howrely brought in, and made necessarie to vs, by the change of so many new fashions that haue floated amongst vs in their seasons) the principall clothing vsed amongst vs, is both forraine and beyond the abi∣lity of the vvearer, if either his estate and calling, or the Lawes of the Land were looked vpon vvith respect. But wee are more led in these things by the example of our present superiors, then the Lawes of our wiser pre∣decessors. It vvere braverie therefore indeed worthy of a Courtier, knowing others would imitate and fol∣low him in the heade of the fashion, to adorne himselfe vvith domestique ornaments, banishing those Dorres and Butterflies from his eares and elbowes who durst buzze about him contrarie perswasions; and whilst hee seeth the Italian, French and Spaniard come in silkes, to incounter these with scarlet cloth; those English bra∣ueries, as our Ancestors had vvont, and our vviser neigbors vse to doe. What aduantage hath an imbrode∣red coate, of a plaine modest habit, in treatie or coun∣sell? Only this, that the more sober person knowes there may be a sudden sharpnesse of vvit, or a reserved formality, no soliditie, where there is so much vanitie. And now, I pray, vvhen Gallants know that this is the generall opinion of the vvorld, and their outward ha∣bits is one of the principall marks whereby men guesse at the inward, vvhat haue they gotten by their affected brauerie? nay how much rather, if they be vvise, haue they lost, to buy the opinion of folly at so deare a rate? doubtles, if in these kindes wee could be so happily vvise, as to moderate our selues either by Lawes or ex∣ample, vvee should soone abate much of our neigh∣bors pride, vvho for lacke of vent for their vanities vvould be forced to spend them within themselues; and so our broad-clothes vvould in short time fret out their silkes and veluets, and vvee should learne by the frugall example of the wise Pismire, to make profit of them, as they now make profit of vs. The like may be said of that ambitious disposition or humor of ours to hunt after titles, as if the Calen∣ture of Spaine had infected our more temperate climate, and so intoxicated our judgements, that like persons giddy vvith high climbing, or high looking, vvee ha forgot our owne standing, insomuch as the Yeomandrie aspires to Gentilitie, the Gentilitie to Nobilitie, the Nobili∣tie to Principalitie ; Euery one vvith Lucifer saying, Esai. 14.14 Ero si∣milis altissimo. And thus confusion mixeth all, and marres all. There are Lawes to preuent all these disorders, and to keepe every man in his rancke: But they lye dead, vvhilst these vices often liue in the persons that should execute them. So that the offence is lawfull, the lawe is sinfull; vice hath gotten the vpper-hand of vertue, and the Law now either serues to no end, or only serues to shew vs our trangressions, and how apt vvee are to do vvhatsoeuer Iustice prohibits, though therein wee contradict both the will of God and the King. Would God that heereafter whosoeuer durst presume to beg the penaltie of a Statute ordayned for preuenting or remouing these and the like common annoyances, thereby to make the Lawe voide for his priuate bene∣fite, (despensing vvith a generall offence done to the Common-wealth) might be counted a traytor (as truly he is no better) and so punished for his treason, that others might heare, and feare, and doe no more so. Deu. 17.13. I might adde fitly in this place the severitie of the Magistrates in the vnited Provinces, in taking all mulcts of this kinde where the transgression is common, and imploying such forfeitures to the generall good of the State, making with the blood of one Scorpion, an Antidote a∣gainst the poyson of others : Likewise I might speake of their Mercy in that vvhich concernes life, insomuch as, though fellony be death by their Lawe, yet few die for the first offence, but haue two or three admoniti∣ons by whipping, and branding, before they be cut off as dead members. But indeed their generall diligence so takes them vp, and prouides so vvell for their im∣ployment, as there are very few theeves amongst them, in comparison of other Countries where idlenesse is more permitted. I must likewise tell you, how not only Robbery, but euen that close kinde of theft, vsurie, vvhich eats vp all trading, and picks the pocket of euery profession, is no free-denizen in their Land, but a meere stranger or sojourner, and that a very poore one: And how by this meanes Land is bought and sold at good rates, and the stocke of euery man kept stirring in some kinde or o∣ther; which quickens the Common-vvealth, and keepes the backe of the Marchant from breaking. And I could wish, by the way, with all my heart, that it vvere banished England also, or at least muzled for bi∣ting so deepe: Or, if neither of these, yet that the bandes and assurances might be publiquely recorded, and a part of the interest kept backe to the vse of his Majestie and the Church, towards the redeeming of Impropriations. And great reason for this, since now, offending against God and the King, they pay no∣thing of their increase to either; but by this meanes might be restrained, or at least constrained to do his Majestie service, and to recover to the Church their ancient right; vvhich to performe, I doubt not, from the tenths of the vse-money in England, a summe suf∣ficient might speedily be raised. I might likewise shew their equity, not onely in de∣ciding controversies, and cutting off delayes in Lawe with expedition, but also in providing for the poore Debtor, who hath not to pay his Creditor. For if it ap∣peare, that either fire, sea, suretiship, trust, or some such crosse, or (as we say) casualty, hath impoverished him; and that his wants arise not either from prodiga∣lity, or slouth, or some personall defect in his Calling, he shalbe inabled and set vp againe; at least, if hee be cast into prison, the mercilesse man, who with vs sayth, He will make Dice of his bones, shall be forced to keepe him there at his owne charge. And so it is, if the suite smell of vexation in the Plaintife, or if the Defendant ought and be able, but fraudulently denies, or delayes to satisfie the Plaintife, a quicke and speedy tryall mani∣festeth the truth, and cuts off those demurres, vvhich vvith vs had vvont to occasion greater losse of time and money, then the losse of the debt, or thing in question could haue beene to either party, at first without suite: though now to the honour of the Clergie, Conscience begins to finde the right end, to vnwinde that infinite bottome of controversies, which the confused variety of opinions had made in the determination of Right and Wrong. Yet whether that course of theirs, where the imprisoned lyes at the charge of the Actor, vvould doe well or no with vs, I doubt; though there, I am as∣sured, it neither makes any man the lesse wary of his estate, or the lesse carefull to pay his debts; neither is dealing any thing the more dead; every man so honest∣ly and directly aymes to doe what he is able for the ge∣nerall satisfaction of all; so that few repent of any trust they have affoorded others. I might here also observe amongst them, Com lib. 8. cap. 12. that which Comines observes of the Venetians, that vpon every ex∣traordinary occasion, vvhen they are to consult about any speciall point of State, or execute any thing consul∣ted of, vvhich concernes the publike safety, they begin at God, and appoint certain Bid-dayes, as they call them, or dayes of Fasting and prayer, to implore the direction and assistance of God in the prospering of their enter∣prizes. Com. lib. 8. cap. 12. And as Comines, vpon that occasion, both pray∣seth the Venetians, and pronounceth them blessed; so doubtlesse may I say of this people, that they prosper the better in all their vndertakings and attempts, for this their solemne, devout, and pious proceeding. Whereas we passe by these, and the like passages with∣out observation, and haue lost a Prince of excellent hope, and haue had the Daughter of our KING, great vvith childe, Mat. 24.19 20. 1. Sam. 26.20. Reuel. 12.1 2, 3, 4.6. and in the depth of Winter, a state and season vnfit for flight, and by our Saviours direction to be prayed against ; vnmercifully hunted vp and downe like a Partridge, or like that woman in the Revelation, pursued by the Dragon, from the heaven of a Kingdome and Principalitie, through the wildernesse of many woes and miseries, with infinite other difficulties and barbarous indignities, impossible to be proffered or forced vpon Ladies by generous spirits, and impossible to be borne and overcome, but by an invin∣cible spirit: and haue seene a Palatinate spoyled, the chiefe City (a Sanctuary for the persecuted members of Christ; a Seminary of piety heretofore) stormed, taken, possessed, and made a Cage for vncleane birds: yea, all the rest blockt vp and besieged beyond hope of reco∣very; The Church also amongst the Grisons, and in France oppressed and persecuted; and yet for all this haue not fasted a meale, shed a teare, let flie a publike sigh, or generall grone, abated any of our pompe or pride, for these afflictions and humiliations? but rather, like corrupted flesh, swel'd higher for these strokes; or as senslesse limbes, haue not felt the cauterizing and cut∣ting off our owne members. Nay, 88. and the Powder-plot are forgotten, or we haue forgotten to giue thanks for those deliverances; or whether we may praise God for them or no, I know not, but I am sure of this, that we doe not. Perhaps this may bee the peoples fault, who are so farre from observing extraordinary and religious Fasts, as they will not obey the Magistrate commanding or∣dinary and civill Fasts for politicke respects. Perhaps it may be the Priests, Ioel. 1.14. who should observe when God calleth vs to fasting, and then to admonish the Magistrate, and blow the trumpet to excite the people to mourning. Perhaps the fault may be generall, Peace and Plenty having rockt vs asleepe with a continuall feast of sixty and foure yeeres long, so that now vve haue forgot to fast, or haue bodies vnapt for that exercise. But where∣soever the fault is, I wish it were mended. I should conclude all with a touch of their Councel, and politique Government in point of State, but that the businesse is too deepe and private for my inquisi∣tion: Onely I observe a generall freedome permitted and vsed, where generall actions which concerne all, and are maintained by all, are generally debated, argued, fifted and censured by all men without contradiction. And this (I thinke) to the end either that Rumour ha∣ving scope enough to play in, may die without an Ec∣cho, or that so the best and worst may bee seene or heard, and all danger and advantages discovered which are subject to the common eye. But after all this, the resolution and conclusion is silent and sodaine, vvhilst they giue all men libertie to informe, they themselues only direct and dispose of the businesse: for they seeke not the satisfaction of their owne vvils so much, as the generall satisfaction of all, vvhere it may be with the good of all. And vvhilst men doe no hurt vvith their hands, they permit them freely to do all the good they can with their tongues, without feare of punishment. No man doth any thing, vvhich he is ashamed to heare of; or if he doth euill (as all men may erre) desi∣reth to heare of it by any meanes, that so he may the better and sooner know how to amend it. It is the in∣solent and obstinate which hideth his faultes, and stops the mouth of truth by violence; the penitent con∣fesseth his error, because he intends to giue sat faction. And now I haue showne you but a glimpse or sha∣dow of the true state of those Countries, what need wee seeke for Plato his communitie, or Sir Thomas More his Vtopia, when the realitie of their wishes and best con∣ceptions are brought into action; and the best of what they fancied might bee, is heere seene truly to bee, af∣ter a most exact and corrected Copie? And this is enough to make all vvisemen well affectioned toward the people, vvhich I wish with all my heart, that so our association might be firme, our imitation safe. What shall we need to trauell to such places for fashi∣ons, as foord nothing but vvhat wise men and good men shun? Let vs rather flocke thither where all things abound, vvhich wisemen and good men seeke: Fidelity in bargaines and contracts, wisedome in counsell, strength in warre, brotherly loue and assurance, modesty and frugalitie ▪ and that I may say all in a vvord, Pietie, and Religion. For that which I heare some whisper in scorne a∣gainst this Encomium of their pietie, as if there were no∣thing lesse cared for then Religion amongst them, vvhere all Religions are tollerated, is easily cleered to an indifferent and vnderstanding Iudge: considering, First, that they are in warre, and must for that cause hold good quarter vvith all, both in regard of their owne infected members, vvhose corruption might otherwise be vvrought vpon to breake out, as also in regard the burthen of the vvarre requires many able supporters, who must bee wooed and bribed with pri∣vate libertie, to defend the publique; and oftentimes wee see Iudas carries the purse, and the most able are not alwayes the best affected. Secondly, where the gold and riches of Infidels are imployd to invade the State, they thinke it lawfull to vse the gold of Iewes, Turks, and Heretikes to defend themselues vvithall. But if any object, the Enemy takes the Infidels gold by com∣pulsion vvithout contract, and therefore his act is lawfull: these say, They doe it vvithout compulsion, with the consent and good liking of the Iew, and there∣fore they hould their course more justifiable. Thirdly and lastly, they are a Common-wealth, and so want that absolute power ouer their members, vvhich Monarchies haue and may vse; and therefore are forced sometimes to vvinke at singular Mischiefes, for the avoyding of vniversall Inconveniences. Neither are they apt or desi∣rous to presse the conscience too strictly, since God him∣selfe saues no man against his will. But as I much lament that the wine of giddie Schisme should dis-mantle the Christian Common-wealth, to the scandall of Iewes and Turkes, and derision of Atheists, vvishing vvith all my heart it were otherwise: so with∣all I vvish, since such a happinesse as vniversall Peace cannot be hoped for, till it please God to effect it by miracle, that in the meane time there were an equall toleration of Religion thorow all Christendome; with provision, that none but one Religion should be profes∣sed, and publiquely preached in one place, though others might there liue safely and freely vvithout im∣peachment of their consciences, persons, or goods; so they neither made attempt of violent mutation, nor had publique mee ings, or harbored such teachers as were contrary in opinion to the Church and State wherein they lived. And (if it be lawfull for silly subjects, vvho stand a∣loofe off to prie into the sacred Arke of their Sove∣raignes intent, and so to guesse at their hidden purpo∣ses) I verily beleeve, that this, or something like it, is that which his Majestie aymes at, if he could effect it as well in Italy, France, and Spaine, as he would vpon those or better tearmes, willingly grant it in England. Other∣wise hee sees it would be prejudiciall and disadvantage∣ous to the Truth, to permit a tolleration only in England, except he could likewise establish it vniversally. But then it were to be hoped, that Truth would get ground of falshood by familiaritie; and that civill communion would prepare the mind for spirituall, and not suffer such an aversenesse to continue amongst vs, as is now generally professed, when Christians hold each other in vvorse account then Turkes. Insomuch as some men say, and it seemes not without some reason, that they had rather liue vnder the Turke, then vnder the King of Spaine. For the Turke vvill permit them the free exer∣cise of their religion, at least the libertie of conscience; but the Inquisition of Spaine tyes all men in a Tyranni∣call manner to be slaues to Rome, and forceth them with tortures to renounce their Faith, doing violence to the vvill of man, which they themselues hold to be free, euen vvhilst they punish the person and will for being so. And assuredly therefore, as religious pretences and a strict observance of the Romish Faith, haue much advanced the Spanish Conquests one way, amongst fooles that wilbe easily misled with flourishes: so the pressing of the Inquisition vpon conquered Countries hath hindered his Conquests in other partes amongst wise and free Nations, vvho can looke into those dou∣ble drifts of policie. And this discoverie hath saved Christendome from that Catholique subjection, at which that State hath mainely aymed, euer since it ac∣quired the ambitious title from that Citty and Sea, Apoc. 18.12 12, 13. where the Mart of such royall Marchandize is kept. For wee see, whilst the Turke holds all men shalbe saved in their severall Religions, so they be constant to them, these hold all Christians to be Hereticks, that ad∣here not in all points to their opinions though never so absurd, abhor'd, and contradictorie to the revealed vvill of God. And, these supposed Heretickes, they pursue with the vtmost violence, malicious hearts can expresse by cruell actions, Pro. 12. . vsing them worse then a righte∣ous man would vse his beast, vvhich he knowes is his fel∣low-creature: When these, forgetting all respect to Man the true image of God, as themselues are, do prefer dead idols of their owne invention before him; Yea, and thinke there is a sufficient cause to destroy him, if he will not, vvith them, dishonour the Image of God vvhich he beares by subjecting it to one of their dead statues, the vvorke of their owne hand. This asperitie must be removed on both sides by lenitives; which cannot bee till the rigorous Inquisition be abolished, and greater freedome giuen to Christians to converse, and a better and more charitable conceit wrought and ad∣mitted on both sides of each other. For then there might be hope of a generall Counsell, where all might freely and without perill or prejudice speake, vvhich is the only absolute Phisicke for this Maladie. But if this meeting might not yet bee vniversall, in regard of that imperiousnesse which Antichrist chalen∣geth, and exerciseth over the vvhole Church, vvhich vvill be hardly layd downe without blowes and bloud; then, at least, vvould such an vnanimity and consent might be wrought amongst the Reformed Churches by a generall meeting, as leaving every Church free to their owne formes; might binde vs together against the com∣mon Enemies, in such a firme, sure, fundamentall, and brotherly vnity, for poynt of Faith, as a Ceremony or shadow, or a singular conceit, or an opinion about the skirt or hemme of Christs garment, should not be able to shake or separate the Communion, or to justle vs from each other at such a distance. But vvhither am I travel'd beyond the vvisedome of the Pismire, out of her element? Zeale hath transpor∣ted me, and (I hope) that zeale which is according vnto knowledge. Paul may be thought mad, Festus is so: Hee cannot be besides himselfe, who is not besides the truth. As for those which say, This course of connivencie vvould breed Atheists, Libertines, Free-guests, and luke-warme persons, (for I count them all one in effect:) I answere, Simo Magus vvill be such, though he be Si∣mon Peters disciple, heare him preach daily, and see him doe miracles. Nor can persecution so well distinguish truth and falshood, as prosperity: Act. 5.38.39. Mat. 13.30. It is Gamaliels counsell and sentence; Let them alone; for if their counsell be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of God, ye cannot over∣throw it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. And now to returne to my purpose, and to demon∣strate all that I have sayd in praise of this people, that my Countrymen may not passe the seas, or travell farre for a proofe, let them looke into Master Camden in his Britania, in the title of Pembroke-shire, Camd. Brit. in Pemp. Speed. H. 3. and also into Ma∣ster Speeds Chronicle concerning little England beyond Wales, inhabited by the Dutch-men in the time of Henry the 3. and see what they say, both for the just praise of that people, for our and their consanguinity; and for a briefe, yet full confirmation of all that I haue said, more largely and loosely. Or let every Reader take a neerer course, and looke home to the next great Towne inhabited by the Dutch in our Land▪ and consider in vvhat state such places were at their first arrivall, and how they have increased in wealth, people, beauty, order, and trading, since their admission and entertainment there, and (I beleeve) he will be of my mind. To instance one place for all amongst many that I know, looke vpon the City of Norwiche, which may be a mirror to all the Kingdome besides; and that partly I might say, principally by their meanes. The order and good governement of the Magistrates, the diligence of the Citizens, their quicke trading, vvhereby they set many on worke within ten or twelue miles round a∣bout the Citie, is notable and admirable. This is prin∣cipally occasioned by the example of the Dutch, as also by a kinde of vertuous emulation, to which the English are excited by their diligence. And this, though it move envie in the baser and slouthfuller sort, vvho are loth to see others live by them, and say they are preju∣diced by the cheape sale of such wares as the Strangers worke: yet others of better mind and metall, are in∣couraged by this, and provoked to fare hard, to be fru∣gall, to worke early and late, that they may sell as cheape, and make as good worke as the Stranger. Many necessarie trades they haue brought in a∣mongst vs, whereby our owne materials, and our men are joyntly well imployed: they haue beene the In∣venters of many profitable Engines both for peace and warre: Travellers by Sea and Land are beholden to their labors; and for the belly, they haue taught vs by rootes, fruite, and the Garden crop, to spare much flesh and Corne, if vvee were as wise and willing to vse them as they doe. This doubtlesse is a good preventi∣on for dearth and scarcitie, and I would it vvere made more generall in our Land, that so wee need not spend all our flesh vvithin our selues, at least not borrow of others, who haue farre more need of their owne then wee. There was once a course taken by the Iudges to settle and reward such planters and Gardiners at the publique charge in euery place; but being only pro∣pounded, and never farther enquired after, it vani∣shed, and died assoone as it vvas conceived, before it could conceiue and bring forth a yeeres increase. I might heere also shew you, how, notwithstanding their numbers, and that they all, or the greatest part live vpon their handie-labour, yet they are not bur∣thensome to the places where they are sea ed, but ra∣ther every vvay helpfull vnto them. None of them beg of vs, their owne poore they sustaine within them∣selves, (though they finde vs willing to helpe them) and in all respects shame the slothful, cheare vp the diligent, and satisfie the vvise and well-minded. So that vvee may evidently see, as Egipt vvas blessed both for Io∣sephs sake, and in hauing him an instructer, to teach them to prouide wisely in a plentifull season against a famine; so are wee happy, in hauing these men with vs as examples of imitation, and blessed also by God for their sakes. Wherfeore to shut vp all in a word: Since God hath giuen vs one originall, not only from Adam or Noah, or Iaphet, but in a farre neerer line to be derived from our first arrivall in England, and so fitted our natures and manners together, that (except some small differences which vvill be betwixt Nation and Nation, euen by the different temperature of the soyle and ayre, or other naturall accidents, as betwixt brother and brother in a house) vvee agree well, and seeme as if wee were one people. Since it hath pleased God so to place vs vpon earth, that one may conveniently helpe another in spite of the interposition or opposition of any third. Since they may serue as necessarie venters of our Com∣modities, and wee as able Suppliers of their necessities. Since God hath made both of vs strong in shipping, so that joyning in one as wee had wont, no Prince is able to touch either of vs, but vvee remaine Masters at Sea; and that the only vvay to conquer vs both, is to dis-vnite and divide vs. Since wee have held a league inviolable for many hundred yeeres (a matter of such moment, as France and Scotland would not be disjoynd in this respect, notwith∣standing the accesse, addition, and vnion of England ) and haue interchangeably assisted and seconded each other in vvarres, and haue done and received more curtesies to and againe of each other, then of all Christendome besides: witnesse our Chronicles of old, the late sea-fight in 88. as also the acknowledgement of that gratefull Queene of glorious memorie, Elizabeth, in her Letter to the Lord of Davenvord, Admirall of Holland, August. 14. 1598. in these vvords amongst many others: The loue and diligence which my Lords the States haue vsed in this action, doth witnesse vnto vs, That the sincere affection wee haue euer borne to the vnited Provinces, and benefites bestowed vpon them, haue not beene ill imployed, &c. And a little after in the same Letter; Moreouer your zeale and affection to vs-ward, doth increase our debt towards you▪ the knowledgement whereof is so deepely imprinted in our heart, as wee thought good by these Letters to make some part of sa∣tisfaction, the which wee intreate you to impart to the whole companie of our friends vnder your command; letting them vnderstand beside, that they may be well assured, that as here∣tofore wee haue giuen sufficient testimonie of our sincere af∣fection towards their Countrie, we are now by their valour and merit more incited, to augment and increase our loue in euery part, as it becommeth a Princesse, who acknowledgeth the vertue and desert of so worthy a Nation as yours; and so wee will continue your very good friend, &c. Thus this good Queene a vvorthy witnesse beyond all exception, &c. Since also God hath honored our Nation to be the principall instrumentes of their present libertie, and of all the happie benefits that thereby they enjoy; let vs not seeme to neglect our owne honor vvhich depends vpon the preservation of their estate as our owne crea∣ture. And lastly, to make these motives more strong, and without which all the former and much more were nothing. Since God hath made vs Professors of one true and re∣formed Religion, vvherein they may chalenge properly to be Defenders of the Faith, and to belong to the chiefe Defender of the Faith as well as wee; let vs joyne together in one as brethren, and let not the malice of Sathan, the Policie of Antichrist, the treason and quar∣rels of the World, the exorcismes and charmes of Iesu∣ites, with any other Spanish Court Holy-water, divide vs, distract vs, or discourage vs; but rather obseruing all these traines wisely, and viewing the end and scope of their enterprizes, let vs weave our selves more closely together, and tye our selues inseparably in a true-loues knot, that Alexander of Rome may neither vnty nor cut a∣sunder. And for such as are contrarie minded for other si∣nister respects, vvhat shew soever they carrie, I feare they neither vvish well to the present Church and State in either Land: vvherefore I woud they would follow Salomons direction in this place, since they sleight mine, and goe to the Pismire, and learne of her to be wiser, lest the yssue prove them to be none of the true Honorers of God or the King. An Apologue for an Epilogue. THe Lyon slept securely, whilst the Hunters were pitch∣ing Toyles round about him. A Pismire perceived the danger, and stung the Lyon to wake him, with Tandem resurges: He furiously start vp, and would wreake his an∣ger on the presumptuous Pismire, that durst be so bold and bu∣sie to disturbe his rest. To whom the Pismire cryed, My Lord, first looke about you. Hee did so, and spyed the Snares of the Hunters; escaped, and gave the Pismire thanks, saying; Quos perdere vult Iupiter, hos dementat; Quos tueri vult, suscitat. Psal. 141.5, 6.9, 10. Incline not my heart to any evill thing, to practise wicked workes with men that worke iniquitie, and let me not eate of their delicates. Let the righteous smite mee, it shalbe a kind∣nesse: and let him reprove me, it shall bee an excellent oyle, which shall not breake my head, &c. Keepe me from the snare which they have layd for me, and the grinnes of the workers of iniquitie. Let the wicked fall into their owne nets, whilst that I withall escape. Psal. 20.9. Save Lord; let the King heare vs when we call. Amen. FINIS.