


A FRIEND OF NAVIGATJON.

CHAP. I. Of the Cosm^graphicall discription of the World.
THat which the onely wise God made f^^ mans behoofe, euen all the world of nothing, Genesis the first, is said to be round by all moderne Writers: it is proued by reason, and the holy Scripture saith it, Psal. 98. It was diuided in two parts by the same God, the part seene, and the part vnseene: But by faith search the Scriptures, there is the part and vse in this our Christian Nauigation discouered.
The part seene is well defined to bee a Booke, In which wee may see and learns to praise God in his workes. And is said to bee of two parts, Celestiall, and Elementall: In the Celestiall part may be considered the Arts, as Musicke, the harmony of the Spheres: of Soule and Body, for whose health Phisicke is next, in which we consider that Miraculous Medicine of preseruing life, be it Philosopher stone, Salt, Virgin-earth, or other denomination, or Mathematicall, as the knowledge of Points, Lines, Circles, Signes, Constelations, Planets, and their Influence and power ouer bodies Elementall.
It may be said and that by good reason, I should begin at the Centor of the Earth, and so consider of the things contained therein,
 with the Sea, The face of the Earth and Sea, and the things thereon; The Aire couering the other two, and the Fire inclosing them all, making one round body of these Elementall parts, being as a Centor to the rest, and so p^^^e vpwards vnto the first m^^^er, shewing the relation and agreement they haue together, I liuing now nearer the Centor of the Earth (as it is obserued) by many thousand miles. But if I end my worke so high may bee proud (as some are) or dazelled in the Celestiall brightnesse, being mortall, be cast downe with Pl^^^^.
In the name of God therefore, and in his feare, I will begin with the first mouer, which going with great violence, turneth the whole frame of the heauen within it, round in 24. houres, from East to West: Which heauen is said to haue no impression in it, being almost invisible, yet carrying the light and darknesse, making differ^nce of time in daies and nights, according to the difference of Longitude and Latitude of places on Earth.
In it are all the circles and points in the whole fabricke of the world said to be described, their plaines defending and meeting in the Centor of the Earth, or on their other Centors.
The two principall points, are the two poles of the world, the North pole eliuated with vs heere at London 51. degrees, 30. or there about; and the South pole is right opposite to it. Therefore depressed iust as much (vnder the horizon of which I will speake anon.) These (...) points are fixed fast and vnmoueable, betweene which and through the Centor of the Earth, there passeth* right line, which is called the Axe-tree of the world on which it turneth.
Now we must consider both this right line, and all other right lines, cords, signes, great circles and paralels, to be diuided into 360. degrees, each degree subdiuided into 60. minutes, each minute into 60. Seconds, each Second in 60. thirds, etc. as the case may require.
The Herman is a great circle, whose Centor is in the middest of the Earth, and his plaine reacheth not onely to the face of the Earth, diuiding the vpper part from the lower, the day from the nights ^ut through the Or^e^ of the planits and fixed starres, euen to the first mouer. This circle hath two poles, one is called Zon^th,
 and is right ouer our head, from the which if a right line passe through the Center of the Earth, touching the concaue superficies of the first Mouer, it pointeth out the other Pole, called Mador. In this Circle we count the Amplitude of the Sunne or Starres; and the Point of the Compasse or Wind. All the Circles called Azimuthes, crosse the Horizon at Rectangles and passe through the Poles thereof: His Parallels are Circle^ of Altitude, in which are obserued the position of the Planets and fixed Starres aboue the Earth, at all howres of the day or night: Or Circles of Depresion diuiding the length of twilight.
The Equator is a great Circle, deuiding the World into two equall parts, the North part and the South: His parallels sets out the Latitude of places on Earth, and declination in the Heauens. All the Meridians doe crosse the Equator at Rectangles and go through the Poles of the World. On this is counted the Longitude of places on the Earth or Sea: For euerie 4 of equall time made by the equall motion of the Equator doth make 1 degree. And 7 deg. 30 min. of Longitude, either East or West, doth cause ^ houre difference in time of day or night, and they that dwell 15, or 30 deg. East haue it 12 or 11 a clocke, when we haue it 10 or 11, and those that dwell so much West of vs, haue it 10 or 11 when it is midnight with vs. These that dwell at the East part of our Horison haue it noone when it is but 6 in the morning with vs, and when it is noone with vs, it is 6 at night with them, but with them in the West part of our Horizon it is 6 in the morning. Our Antipodes haue it ^oo^e when it is midnight with vs, and when it is Summer with vs, it is Winter with them.
All other Circles not yet named are likewise supposed to bee in the first Heauen, as in the rest of the inferior Orbes of which we suppose 11 after Maginus. And to good purpose: For the Lord of Heauen and Earth hath so layd the Foundations of the Earth that they cannot be moued, Ps. 14.2. Though Co^^^^^ to bring some good purpose about hath imagined so.
Let the tenth Heauen be (if you please) the Wa^ers aboue the Firmament, for ther are so, Gen. 1.6, 7.



CHAP. II. Of the measure of the heauens
THe Zodiaque is a great broad circle crosing the heauens, like a b^n^^^re or girdle, of 12d. broad at the ^east; in the midest ^hereof is a little circle called the ecliptique line, which crosseth the Equator at two opposit points, swar^eth from it 23d. 30. at the least, as I ha^e ^ound by obseruation this present yeare 1627. So the poles of the Ecliptique are distant from the poles of the world 23d. 30. by reason of his obliquitie: Betweene which poles there passeth a right liue or Axetree on which the second ^ouer or tenth heauen is carried in his owne motion (contrary to the first) from West to East, and is most slowe, making his reuolution in 3434 yeares, and 10. daies.
The third mouer or ninth heauen, hath his two poles in the two po^^ts of the equator and ecliptique, and his motion is from North to South: making his reuolution in 1717. yeares and 5 daies. But it will be sufficient for our necessary vse here to obserue the motion of the 8. Sphere, wherein are all the Celestiall bodies of the fixed Starres placed: whose motion is from West to East, (some say but one degree in 100. yeare. But the Planets mone in their Or^es (...), as (...) in 30. yeare, @ Iupiter in 12. yeares, @ Mars in 2. yeare, ^ Sol in one yeare, @ Venus and @ Mercury like @, Luna @ in a month from West to East.
Diuers learned Mathematicions haue set downe the magnitude of the Starres to be farre bigger then the earth: making 6. differences in bignesse be sides du^ke and obscure. The Planets also are said to be of (...) bignesses and distances. The Orbe of @ is (...) miles, and his distance from @ 78721 (...) The Orbe of @ 189^^54^ m. His distance to @ 78721. m. That of ^ 2630^800. m. his distance from @ 15725. m. @ 343996 4/^. m. His distance from @ 23437 @ m. The Orbe of @ 3274494 6/12. Her distance from @ 12812. m. @ Orbe 253372 ^/^. m. His difference from @ 12812, The @ to be in bignes 105222 ^/11. her distance from the earth 15750. m. @ his bignesse compared to the Earth i^ as 95. to 1. and his distance to the Firmament
 2^0445. m. (...) his magnitude to the Earth is a^ (...) 91. to ^. And @ as ^. to 1. And the distant from the Fir^^ment to the Earth 35 846 3@. m.
It hath appeared manifestly that both by Sea and Land, who so trauaileth 60. miles on a great Circle, altereth a degr^e in his Trauaile: which taketh 360. times tho number of the whole circle, maketh 21600. miles the conpasse of the whole Earthland Sea. The Diameter then will be 6872 ^/11. the semyd^amiter 3436 4/1^ m. which maketh the firmament to be from the Center of the Earth 361899^ ^/^. Therefore it seemeth there is something to worke vpon to measure these things by.
Likewise I may say, considering that from the earth to the Moone is 15750. miles, and the @ is the lowest Planet. Therefore the two vppermost elements of Ayre and Fire are both together 15750 mi. in thicknesse: Againe, because the hill Atlas is said to reach to the midle region of the ayre, that hill (which I take to be Teneriffe) may easily be measured, and so the measure of all the rest is had.
The motion of the Eclipticke causeth other foure circles to be described, two are described of the motion of the Poles therof, being distant from the ^^^es of the world 23. degrees 30. min. making two round circles about them: that next the North pole is called the circle Articke, the other is called the circle Antarticke. The other two are described by the motion of the tow. Tropicall points of the eclipticke, that on the North side of the equanox is called the tropicke of Cancer, the other is called the tropicke of Capricorne. The Zodiacke is diuided in 12. equall parts, beginning at the one intersection of the same with the equanoctiall circle, and so going round: And these are called the 12. signes of the Zodiacke, for as much as they extend them to the full breadth of the Zodiacke, and are the cause thereof.
There are two other circles also of speciall vse in this Art, one is the Equinoctiall colure, the other is the Solititiall colure: These two are great circles, the first parteth the Equator and Zodiacke euen, so as the North signes are from the South signes parted by the first point of the first signe, and the first point of
 the sca^outh signe: and these signes are called Aries @, and Libra @, beginning the Spring and Autumne, the other passeth by the two tropicall points of Cancer @, and Capricorne @, making the beginning of Summer and winter; both passing through the poles of the world, parting the Zodiacke in foure equall parts, and the equator also with all his paralels.
The first point of @, beginneth the Spring: that is, when the Sunne in his motion commeth first to that point, and going through three signes @, Taurus @, Gemini @: then comming to the first point of @, beginneth the Summer: and passing through other three signes @ Leo @, Virgo @, so commeth to Libra @, Scorpio @, Sagitarius @, to the first point of @: beginneth the winter, from thence through @, Aquarius @, Pisses @ making the whole yeares reuolution. And these 12. signes are called Constellations, and there are other Constellations, some North, some South, in which is had a number of Starres bearing names, according to their nature: and these constellations beare rule ouer diuers Regions, Countries and Cities.
Now we may passe the Orbes of the other superior Planets, and onely note their friendly aspect as we passe by them: And consider the @ motion with the @ for the Eclipses of vse, for finding of longitude on earth or Sea. Her monthly motion, full change and quarters, for the ebbing and flowing of the waters, spring and nepe tides: her aspect with the planets, good or euill, for Physicke: Her place in the Zodiacke, for bloud letting either for Man or Beast.


C^AP. III. Of the Elements.
FIre is the most noble and superiour of all the Elements, pure, subtle, most spirituall, putting heat into all substances, lightsome, hauing motion Lionous, choloricke. Ayre is diuided into three Regions, that next the Fire is most hot, that in the middle most cold, vnto the which some hill tops doe clime, as hath been seene, the lowest is that in which wee liue, the Clouds and the
 Fowles doe flye, which God of his mercy make wholesome vnto vs. God said let the waters vnder heauen be gathered into one place, and let the dry land appeare, Gen. 1.9. And God called the dry land Earth, and the gathering together of the waters, he (euen God) called Sea, ver. 10. Sea, which together with the earth make one huge massiue body, round, as may be proued by the artificall Globe,: but most truely by a perfect Artsman, who vsing his skill in his Trauell, both by Sea and Land, is able to salue such small irrigularities, as high tydes, lowe ebbes, high Mountaines lowe Vallies: For experience is the mother of Acts, and th^^^ (...) partly conceiue in this (I hauing a brother in Saint Christophers Isle of the West Indies, who hath sent me Letters from Meri^rs Hope there) I went to Gresham Colledge in London of purpose to looke on the biggest Terrestriall Globe they had, and found such an Ile to lye in some 16. deg. of North Latitude, and in 321 deg. of longitude, or there about: But there I could finde neither Cape, nor Bay, Port nor Hauen; therefore no vniuersall Map will serue that turne: And Master @, being there with mee at that time, made a doubt, saying: How know I that Saint Christophers Ile lyeth there except I had seene it, or know some body that had bin there? meaning no doubt some Arts-man, who (I confesse) may not onely obserue the longitude and latitude; but may also set out the Capes and Bayes, Ports, Bounds, Riuers, and giue the dimention of the superficis.
Of the innumerable multitude of creatures in the Sea, and of her riches, I will not speake; but the artificiall making and vse of Shipping therein is admirable, as may appeare in the whole Art of Nauigation: A wonderfull secret thereof is the variation of the compasse; a cause thereof is imagined to be the hollownesse of the Earth or depth of the Sea, and for that nature abhorring emptinesse, the excellent vertue of the Load-stone doth alwayes draw towards it in all places, where the needle being touched therewith shall draw most neere; but I thinke it is a speciall gift of God, sent for mans vse, but farre aboue his knowledge. Sea and earth are diuided as the heauens: the beginning of the Equator or first Meridian being with Saint Michael and Saint Maries Iles, the circle of the equator passing by
 Saint Thomas Ile, Abasa^^^, the famous Ile of Sa^^^ta, B^rni^, Pap^os, New Guinny, G^na^^s, and fo round, from Meridian to Meridian Eastward we count Longitude on any paralell: but Latitude is counted from the Equator towards the Poles of the World on the Meridian or colure. The Paralels sets out the Zones and Climates.
Of creatures without life, or such as are in the earth onely, are Gold, Siluer, precious Stones, Minerals, Mettals. But the Bodies which shall one day rise againe, are chiefely to be considered. Of Creatures with life, some are fixed, as Plants, Hearbes, Flowers, Spices, Trees, bearing fruit, without fruit. Gen. 2.19. Out of the ground God formed beasts and fowles: and in another place it is said All flesh is grasse. Therefore of mouing things some are in the Earth, as Wormes, Serpents, Moles, Co^^e^: some in the Ayre, as Fowles: in the Water, as Fishes. Monsters on the face of the earth, as all manner of Beasts and Cattell wilde and tame. The most excellent thing made is man (a shame for him to become so wicked) Being wonderfully made, Psal. 139. an epitomy of the whole World; to seeke and set forth Gods glory: surely flesh and bloud cannot set forth his glory, whose workes doe amaze the sences of the most learned. Therefore be not proud O ye learned, nor vaineglorious O ye wise; but seeke and set forth Gods glory, that the vnwise and vnlearned, may see, marke, and learne: and be incouraged O thou that art ignorant (of which I am chiefe) to see the workes of the Lord in heauen and in earth, and his wonders in the deepe Sea, Ps. 107.


CAHP. IIII. The gound of the Art, the Instrument, Astronomycall propositions, with the Geographicall and Hidrographicall description of the Earth and Sea.
REason doth teach, and this 36. yeares experience I haue had, that to the gaining of these knowledges, quantitie is to bee considered, either Geometrically or Arithmetically, or most vsually of both together. Arithmeticke is the Art of numbering, and
 euery number is expressed by certaine Characters, figures, and Ciphers, as: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0. or: 2^. 3d. 30. 50. 20l: {powerof3}+ {powerof2}+ {powerof1}=to {powerof5}-n. But the figures and Ciphers whether they be abstract or contract, haue a double signification to expresse them, which is called their numeration, Psal. 90. ver. 12. O Lord, teach vs so to number our daies, that we may apply our hearts vnto wisedome. Figures do either signifie themselues onely, as 1. is one, 2. is two, etc. or are valued according to their place: Position of this kinde is knowne as men read the Hebrew tongue. This Art giueth the numerall solution in all dementions, and hath these kindes: Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, Diuision; and these all haue a diuers property in their vse, either in working proportion, or otherwise. Another Arithmatique there is (not of numbers) but of parts of number, hauing like species, properties and passions, and fetch either their beginning from vnity, but with a difference, for as number increaseth in multitude Infinitly: so doe Fractions decreaseth infinitly but most commonly, as in this worke, they are compound: for if I take in account of Time, Motion, Measure, Signes, Degrees, Minut^, Seconds, etc. As in reckoning of the @ place, Thus: suppose the @ in the day of @ to be in the first degree of @; and a^ 20. daies old, I would know her place; say if the @ go in one day 12. degrees from the @, and the @ goe each day one degree, Therefore the @ goes in 20. dayes 260d. which diuided by 30d. giueth 8^: 20d. where ^. is the number 20, the Fraction, and his place the 20d. of Sagitarius: But where deg. are taken for numbers, there Minuts, Seconds, Thirds, are Fractions: as 15d. to an houre 4. to a degree, or 20d. is as much as one houre 20: or 20d. 50. 30. is as much as 1250 miles @: and generally all circles and paralels, are numbered with these kinde of Astronomicall Fractions or numbers.
Geometry giueth a punctuall termination to all dementions, either in length, bredth, or thicknesse: which number many times cannot doe; as in diuiding a line by extreame and meane proportion. But number and parts do helpe Geometry to expresse the quantitie, bee it in length, bredth, or thicknesse. Linne^^^mall as angles right lined, of Sphericall: and may serue to tel some distance
(...)
 Instruments necessary in any worke, are of necessity, and to this worke which conteineth so many Arts, it may be obiected that one poore though of a good capassity shall be neuer able to attaine. Say not so man, for the best instrument in any worke is a willing minde: Againe, shall I be ashamed to indeuour to doe well, because some more learned then I, will despise my simplicity and weakenesse in knowledge? No sure, the vertuous will commend it, God bee thanked there are as many good Instruments as Arts, let euery man bee content with such as hee hath, and God no doubt will blesse the good indeauours of the godly honest. 2s. 6d. on a paire of Compasses, and two pence on a straight ruler is not much: with these thou maiest beginne in spending some spare houres time to worke thus: first make a circle, diuid it in 360. parts, or @ into 90, and besides abundance of necessary conclusions, which the malicious ignorant will not beleeue, these following are not the least, and are most meet to be knowne: Radius or any signe, cord, arke, Tangent, Secant, great circle, parralell: example: I did take the @ height, May the 26. 1627. and so found his declination 22d. 30. North, his place being in 15d @. right assention, 61d. 30. difference assentionall 28d. 15. height of the North pole 51d. 30. Amplitude 37d. 30 North. oblique assention 33d. 15.: semydiurnall arke 118d. 15. semynocturnall arke 61d. 45. his course from rising to his setting, 15 houres 40. length of twilight 8 houres 14. length of the night darke 0. houre. Likewise about December the 12. 1627. @ place 0 @ merid height 15d. declination 23d. 30. South, amplitude 40d. 30. south, right assention 270d. oblique assencion 298. deg. 30, difference assencional 28. d. 30. Likewise may the fourth 1629. suppose the sonnes place which is his longitude, found by the rules before going to be 53. d. or the 23. of @. in the latitude of 51. deg. 30. min. his merid. height is found by these rules to be 55. deg. declination 18. deg. north, amplitude 28. north, right assention 50. deg. oblique 27. deg. difference assentionall 23. deg. semydiurnall arke 7. hou. 32. min. semynocturnall arke 4. hou. 28. min. length of twilight 2. hou. 4. min. from noone to euening shut in 9. hou. 33. min. length of the day 19. hou. 6. min. night darke 4. hou. 54. min. Son rise at 4. hou. 28. m.
 setteth at 7 hou. and 32. min. Sun aboue the Horizon 1^ hou. 4 min. vnder the Horizon 8 hou. 56 min.
And here remember, that, The workes of the Lord ^p g^^^^ sought out of all them that haue pleasure therein. Ps. 111.2. The mercifull and gracious Lord hath so done his maruilous workes, that they ought to be had in remembrance, v. 4. The Lord is high aboue the Heauens, Ps. 113.4. Who is like the Lord our God, that hath his dwelling so high, and y^^ humbleth himselfe to behold the things that are in Heauen and in Earth, v. 5. He taketh the simple out of the ^^st. v. 6. The Heauens declare the glorie of God, and the Fir^^^^^^ sheweth his handiworke, Ps. 19.1. As Arcturius Orio^ pleades the hiden Chambers of the South, the great Lauiathan that mo^eth in the water, but beyond all our Redemption in Christ, God commanded Noah to build an Arke, and to build Shiping were but vaine except God blesse it and bee the Sea-mans guide. Say then, is it not a great blessing we receiue from him in guiding our Ships and Selues both by Sea and Land with such excellent Rules of Art: Surely the learned in the Geographicall, Hidrographicall and Nauticall Sciences must needs confesse it, especially those that trauell.
Neither need any be so sottish as to thinke it a shame to spend ten min. of his idle time euerie day to some such good purpose, which may add him more comfort perhaps in distresse, then all the friends in the world besides. By the Seale made on a straight Ruler and Compasses distance is had easily without measuring to them, for make a Circle and diuide it in foure equall parts with straight lines ouer the Centor, then diuide @ in two equall parts, and ech of them in 3 then againe these subdiuision^ in 3 and lastly those into 5, so is one quarter of the Circle diuided into 90 deg. by the same reason you may diuide a right line as your Ruler into Foots, ech Foot into Inches or Tenths, ech 10 into ^^ 3. 4. 5. 7. 11. 12. 16. 20 parts or what you please, and then begin to worke thus, Imagin to stand on some Hill as at High (...) from thence to all the highest Hilles round about you cast your eye, and by your Circle diuided you may take the quantitie of the Angle from your eye to the two next Hilles from you and neerest one to another. Suppose that Shutors Hill and ^urfleet
 Hill doe make an Angle of 1/^ of the quadrant or 30 deg. Or Harrow Hill and Saint Albones make an Angle of 40 deg. and the distance between High-gate and Shuters Hill to be 10 mil. more or lesse, and from High-gate to Harrow 12 mil. you shall goe to Shuters Hill and obserue the Angle between High-gate and Purfleet, be it right or oblique, acut or obtuse make 2 lines, whereof one to be laid downe by the Scale on your Ruler of the iust distance between your 2 first stations, at the one end make the first Angle, at the other end make the other looking one towards the other, and the two lines continued will point you our Purfleet, doe so by the other and it will point you out Saint Albones, then by your Scale you may know their distance, hauing them distances you may easily find all the distances and angles of position or situation of all the Hilles, Townes, Riuers, Borders, in any one Countie, and from thence ye may doe the like by the rest, and so take a true su^^eigh of a Kingdome, and of all the Iles, and Rockes in the Sea, and Kingdomes adioyning, as Scotland with his Iles, and ouer the Sea, as Ireland with his Iles, likewise from Douer to Callice, and so take the Countrey and Kingdome of France, with his Riuers, Iles, Rockes, and euerie remarkeable thing that commeth in view of your eye.
But note, that if you measure such great distances, you must haue regard to Longitude and Latitude, for if you shall measure from France to Spaine, Portugale, and so ouer the mouth of the St^i^^ of Guib^ater into Barbarie, Guiny, by the Coast of Saint Thomas Ile, Monomotapa, Cape Good-hope, the Coast of Saint Latence, Mosamque, Prester Iohn, the head of the ancient Riuer Nilus, the Arabian, Iudean, Notalia, Grecian, Italian Countreys, so come to Germany, Polonia, and all those North parts to the Pole if you can, or to Sweden, Moscouia, and the North part of Tartaria, and th^^ way discou^r all the North parts round about the Pole, and so if you can come into North America, if not, then come ouer Land neere the Caspian Sea, Parthia, Persia, Ormuse, Gus^^^ Goa, Cochin, and all the Iles to the South thereof, the Gulph of Bengala, Malaca, Sumatra, the Strait of Sunda, Iaua maior, Iaua minor, new Ginny, Papoos, Hiland, Timor, so to Beach, and to the discouerie of the parts of Maletor Kingdome
 to the South Pole if you can, or by the Moluce^e, Bernie, Ca^^bia, Cochin China, Iapan China, to Cathay, from thence East a little North to the Straits of Annian, and so into the most Westerly parts of North America, Portray all that new world, to be short, come by the Gulph of Mexico down to the Strait of Land called Noua Hispaniola to Peru, goe ouer the ^trait of Ma^^^nica and discouer all the vnknowne Land round about the South Pole.
Which thing may be done by Gods permission no doubt, and when thou hast done this most truly, with all the Coasts of the Seas, thou wilt say the circompherence of the Sea is also had^ True, yet neuerthelesse ye shall neuer be able to lay the true semetry of both Earth and Sea on a plaine superficies by this way.
The like may you proue by the Hidrographicall discription of the Sea, by the common Sea Card. And here note, that this may serue likewise to proue that the Earth and Sea make one round Body.


CHAP. V. Of certaine considerations to be remembred, briefly set downe.
AS I conceiue, there are these three things to be considered, without which fayling cannot be performed. The first, is an exact obseruation of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. The second, is the perfect finding out of the vari^tion of the Compasse. Lastly, a true reckoning of the Ships way. These all doe helps one another, and should be precisely had. Againe, the Earth and Sea making one round Body, we may consider that to sayle between 2 places, may be either by a Par^a^ll, a Rui^^, or a gr^^^ Circle, as ye may perceiue by the artificiall Globe. Therefore if ye can draw some blanke Charts to carrie with you in your voyages, such whose Meridians and Parralels beare such proportion one to the other in ech Latitude, as those in the Globe, you shall doe well.
In the Globe you may perceiue the degrees in the Equator to agree and be equall with the degrees in the Meridian. Now the
 degrees in the Meridians (...) where equal, but the degrees in the Parralels to the Equator are lesse and lesse, so that a degree of Longitude in the 60 deg. of Latitude is but @ of that degree of Longitude in the Equator, and as the whole signe is to the number of parts in a degree of Longitude at the Equator, so is the fight of the complement of any Latitude to a fourth number (by the rule of proportion of geometricall demostration) which number tels you how many parts of a degree of the Equator serueth a degree of Longitude in that Latitude, but in a plaine Card where the Meridians are all Parralels, there because the degrees of Longitude in ech Latitude are equall, you must increase the degrees of the Meridian in ech Latitude in such proportion as is aboue said, which is easie to be done with the Scale on your Ruler.
This to looke on to the eye will be strange, and to such as loue to st^oke to their old errors, in the plaine Card they will thinke it cleane against reason, but let such describe some portion of the world in it, they may compare it with a Globe, and see it beare a true semetry, but in their plaine Card it will appeare monstrous. Here is now a view of the world from Centor to Circomference, Here is an entrance to the meanes of obtaining to some abilitie in the vse and practise thereof: But aboue all and in all things giue vnto the Lord the glorie due vnto his name, Ps. 29.2. And this indeed is the verie thing wherein we ought to reioyce, and for which God made vs, namely, to seeke his glorie, which is wonderfully seen: and for forth in the frame of the World, but most mightily in the part vns^^^ but by Faith, with which eye thou must looke into Heauen by viewing here on Earth Gods holy Word, and hearkening with the eare of Faith, to the Ministers of his Word, who doe breake the Bread of Life vnto the faith (...) ^^reable virgins strong meat vnto men, and (...) vnto babes, so shalt thou be the better able to worship the Lord in the beautie of his holinesse, Ps. 19.2.
It appeareth, G^^. 1.14. that God made the Lights in the Firmament to diuide the day from the night, and to be for signes and seasons, dayes and yeeres. And v. 15. to giue light vpon the Earth, according to the roundnesse of the Earth, and motion of
 the @ the light and darkenesse doe differ, for the Sunnes body being bigger then the body of the Earth, maketh that the Sunne being at the Equator, although from Sunne rysing to Sunne setting be iust 12 howres, yet the light will appeare from breake of day to euening shut in 14 h. 24 m. and the darkenesse will continue 9 h. 36 m. Now if two men be one vnder the North Pole, another vnder the South Pole, they shall both see the Sunne in their Horizon, if the @ decline towards the North, he will rise aboue the Horizon to him in the North, but to him in the South the @ setteth and when the @ is in the tropicke of @ it is noone with him in the North, but with him in the South it is midnight (and contra.) By this it appeareth the time betweene Sunne rising and Sunne set to either of them is about 436. houres, on ^/^ yeere, sauing that the Lords louing kindnesse hath been of old, Psa 5, 6 to this Christian part of the world, in placing the Suns Apoge in this part, by which we receiue a double benefit, the one of light so much the longer by the Sunnes slow motion, the other, that when the Sun is come so neere our Zeneth, it hath pleased God to draw it vp neerer Heauen and further from the Earth, that we be not burned with his heat, as it is written, The Sunne shall not burne thee by day, nor the Moone by night, Ps. 121.6. Et (...) in the South part of the World among the Heathen that know not God. But in the Poles the twilight lasteth so long as the Sun is within 18 deg. of the Horizon, which is about the first of May, so the darke night lasteth 1968 h. and the twilight is about 1200 h. that is 50 dayes with vs. From these two differences in a right Spheare you may make to your selfe a Theoricke of the oblique by considering the difference of light betweene any number of degrees from the Equator to the Poles as you please, or after this example: I did obserue the height of the Sunne this yeere 1627, and found him to be more then 62 deg. in Meridian height, proues that the Sun hath more then a ^ deg. 30 min. declination, or else the Poles eleuation to be lesse then 51 d. 30 m. here at London, which the learned haue likewise proued in the^^ most exact obseruations, but for the lesse learned, and the honest Sea-mans vse, the declination of 23 d. 30 m. will make no (...). Now that in a Countrey of knowne Latitude you may fin^lly
 the height of the Sun his Azimuth and declination in any Longitude, by which you may find the variation of your Compasse at all houres of the day, or by the day of the month the Suns Meridian height being giuen, is had the Latitude of the place, or height of the Pole, then the amplitude or azimuth as before, and to speake truly, these prepositions depend on one another, and what is said of the Sun, may likewise be done by the Stars being knowne, their Longitude, Latitude, and Declination being likewise had.
If any man shall say, I haue discouered my wants herein, he saith truly, if my malice my good will, let him know I care not, if any man will further my willing mind, to him I will send this Boaste for Patronage, and for euer pray for him, if any fleare and scoffe at mee, it were much better for his Soule that he were at prayers, and leaue scoffing. Euerie good man may if please him, amend this, and so further me. If no ignorant man will profit by it, yet let such as are honestly minded, suffer this to liue with me, because all that I haue, or can doe, is but to imploy my time in such meane knowledge as I haue, to Gods glorie, and the benefit of my Countrey. Wherein if knowledge and a purse did agree with heart and good will, I would striue with the best Subiect. In the meane time I will striue to doe my best, as my dutie doth bind me.


CHAP. VI. Of Shipping and going out of the Harbor.
THese things afore spoken of, are most vsefull, and now I hold it a good method to examine your Ship whether shee be for your turne or not, in all things well appointed for the Sea, if new, how well built, and strong, and how well fitted in her ge^re, if old, whether she be able to indure the surging waues of the Sea, to goe another voyage, and likewise for her burthen, proportioned according to the businesse ye vse her for. But if ye wi^^ build a new Ship in any proportion assigned, ye shall iudge (...) better how to haue it done, by learning so much in Arithmeticke,
 as to be able to extract the Square and Rube root, then may you doe after this example next following, or otherwise at your pleasure. Let the proportion be as two to one, and suppose you haue a Ship of 100 tun, in all things so well framed, that thou doest desire to haue one of 200 tun, and like to the other to do this, first take the measures of your first Ship, which suppose to be these, the Keele 44 foot, at the Beame 20 foot, in Houle 9, foot, her Rake afore 13 foot, after 7 foot, here is giuen sixe numbers, and the proportion assigned, and seeing the proportion is to be doubled, therfore take ech number and cube it, then double that cube number, and extract the cube root of that number, and you shall find the second Ship must haue in Keele 55@ foot neere, and Beame 25 and about @, in Houle 11@, Rake afore 16^, after almost 9, and her burthen will be 200 tun, or this may be found by that excellent Instrument of the memorable Mast. Edmund Gu^^^r, lately set forth by him in his life-time, and is called a Sector, his proportionall Ruler and Crosse-staffe is well knowne to bee an excellent Instrument for these purposes following, and also for many other, Take in equall parts of the Sector 44, and fit it ouer in the Cubes at 44, the Sector so resting, take with your Compasses the distance ouer in 88 of the Cubes, and apply it to the equall parts, giueth 55@, as before, do so by the rest, and you shall find the like numbers.
But say it be demanded to haue her of any other proportion, namely, as 20 to 15, or 4 to 3, take the measures of the first, an before, and cube them, then say, if 15 giue such a Cube, what Cube shall 20 giue, it will giue a number, whose Cube root in the number sought. But by the Sector take the numbers (...) etc. in equall parts, and fit them ouer in 15 of the Cubes, then take the distance ouer in 20 of the same lines, and that applyed to the equall parts, giueth the number sought.
And now being fitted with a Ship for thy purpose and hauing launched, and going downe the Riuer take heed to the set of (...) Tyde, not onely for running fowle of other craft, but least ye bring your selfe on ground on a Lee shore, on a Shelfe, Sand, or Shole, as Barking shelfe, a Shole against Grayes, Blacke shelfe, the Piles below Tilberie, Milton shore, or in a darke night gape
 for a sho^e, and thinke to gaine the point, but run your Ship cleane out of the Thames as I see one had done, the 18 Decemb. 1627, and layd her on the March below Greene-hiue in Kent. Going out or in any Riuer whatsoeuer, note what marke yee see with the opening of any Point, as Yoke on a Wall, Tree, House, Hill, Wood, Wind-mill, Steeple, Castle, or Towne, and learne to describe the Semetry of it, and note it in a Booke, remembring to sound the depth, and note it likewise, and what grounds for ancoring good or bad, with the swiftnesse and indraft or outlet of the waters, ye may also describe the windings thereof by the Compasse, with the lengths and breadths on a Paper, and be sure to note the magniticall Azimuth, for your variations, be it of the Sonne or Starres, which to be able to do, learne so much in Geometry, as to be able to describe the Spheare in plaine, and to know the vse of the Globes, or at least to vse your plaine Scale, and keep your trauice on your Card, and a Iournall or daies Book, and know both in Riuer and at Sea, thou must make vse of these two Globes, namely, the Scriptures where the good shine like Starres, and Christ Iesus is the true Load-stone.

CAHP. VII. Of the Iournall, obseruation, and proiection.VVHen you are come into the Sea, begin your Iournall on this wife: In the Name of God, Amen. The daies Booke for the Voyage intended, for Saint Christophers, and C^^^e de Mine. The 24 of May wee came out of Portsmouth, and ^^cored in Stokes Bay. The 25 wee weighed, and with a g^^e Basterly. The 26 we put thorough the Needles. The 27 wee put in at Dartmo^th, the wind South South West, verie fo^^e. And you may make a ^alender after such like order a^ this.
(...)

heare though I haue set but some dayes of the mouth: yet I meane you should set downe each day, and in the last space to note each dayes variation, and which Pole is eliuated in the end, say: This 31. of Iuly, saying on an east winde by Gods protection, we had sight of Matalena, and at noone our latitude found by the Sunne pearing thorow the Vane of your Instrument 15. de. 3. mi. and by the North Starre the next morning the like: so at noone the South East part of Matalena South, and the Meridian distance from the Lizard 1009 leagues, and diference of longitude 57. de. and dominico South end 58. de. and in your way note thus, for example in a booke by it selfe: May the 24. from the 23. at noone, from South to East 10. de. 17. mi. latitude 23. de. 18. mi. @. magnitude, Azimuth 130. de. 5. mi. True Azimuth 117. de. 12. mi. the variation 12. de. 53. mi. as in chap. 4. and set downe whatsoeuer is remarkable in your way, as well in the Sea as else for example being in the Latitude of 46. S. the body of the Iles of Babe North East, 7 leagues being to the North of the Maine shole that lyeth in mid way betweene Mintain and Iles Babe the West Land of Babe Iles North West @. North 5. leagues from the South Ile of Babe towards the East by North. 20. leagues in Latitude 20. is a dry shole that hath to the W. N. W. of it a shole or Ledge that is 3. leagues off. Also from the dry shole is on to the N. E. and from the dry shole another to the E. S. E. from the dry shole the pike of Pasamond Hill 31. de. Mag. E. to N. 42. miles, which I found by obseruation: for being 6. miles from shole, my Angle of shole and Hill 85. de. and the Angle from shole to hill and Ship 87 de. from Hill to Shole and Ship 8. de. by which the distance was found, and the Hill appeared thus.
And for the soundings doe thus, Aprill 29. euening Bautum hill 17. de. 2. mi. from S. to W. 14. fatham Poloubaus and neare point 26. from S. to W. 14. fatham, at the same time A. N.E. by ^. 3. leagues. 4. fatham.
And now left any should say I haue prescribed many things to others, and can doe nothing my selfe; I will make an euident and plaine demonstration of most of these things, wherein I shall make more easie the booke of M. Thom^s Addison, sometime of Ratcliffe* in his life time a good Sea-man, and Mr. of the Ship called the




 Palsgraue, bound to the East-Indies in the yeere 1624. where he dyed before he had diuulged them: his widdow not knowing what to doe in the matter, and I hearing of the same, did purchase the said bookes at my owne charge: Thinking it but my duty to quicken and raise vnto life for the benifit of my Country-men, according to the minde and intent of the Author, that which would haue dyed, or at lest was like to haue dyed in the shell.
First, the^efore as I haue spoken of the cirkles of the m^tteriall Spheare and Globe, so I would haue vnderstand them, though they be described in plano after this manner. This discription is common: but I haue described the parralell lines with prickes, the horison and cirkle of depression with blacke, the almacanter with the other parralells are red, the sigments within are to shew the houre lines as that which croseth the equator as it were at r^ct Angles: that which croseth the horizon: likewise to shew the Azimuth and that which croseth the Ecliptike to shew the Longitude and Latitude in the Heauens, and though there 3. inscribed sigments be somthing hard to doe by Geometricall demonstration, and for so much as they are of singular vse: Therefore when thou wilt finde the true Azimuth, Longitude, or houre on a parralell; Take thy Sector (see chap. 6.) and open it to the distance of the Semidiameter of that parralell in the totall Sine, then take the distance in the Sine giuen, and apply it in the paralell from the centor it sheweth the true place.
Now I haue giuen a rule before for finding the Sunnes place in the Zodiack, see chap. 4. which we will for examples sake suppose to be the 30. day Aprill 1629. which is by the Tables of Origanus 19 de. 21. m. 2. se. of @. and by my rule iust 19. de. the point in this demonstration for that place is at B. and this point is found by the cirkle deuided as is before spoken of, chap. 4. by taking fromward the poies of the Zodiack, the Sunnes Longitude in degrees, which in this example is 49. de. hauing the day of the month, and the @. place found, the rest followeth most easily: For a parralell drawne to the equator thorow the point at B. sheweth the declination at C. from A. right Ascencion B. C. Amplitude A. D. Meridian height F. H. the difference Ascencionall C. D. and all the rest followeth, and are measured by degrees on the limbe. By the same I may say
 if the declination be giuen, as from A. in the Centor, to C. the @ parralell, which by Origanus for the 30. day of Aprill 1629. ^^ 17. de. 46. m^. and by this it is 17. de. 30. which is but little lesse; and that was by the neglect of the minute in the Sunnes Longitude.
I will giue one demonstration more, and that shall suffise for this paper, for my purpose is to include all this worke within these few sheets.
This proiection is of that chapter the 4. May the 4. 1629. @. place the 23. d. 12. m. 41. se. @. Origanus Tables, declination 18. d. 32. mi. N. @. Longi. 53. de. 12. mi. 41. se. but by this proiection, Suns place 23. de. and A. C. declination 18. de. 30. mi. Longitude 53. de. and at B. from A. A. D. the Amplitude ^8. de. E. F. the Meridian height 55. de. B. C. right Ascencion 50. de. C. D. difference Ascencionall 23. de. 0. mi. B. G. Obligue Ascencion 27 de. o. mi. D. E. semydiurnall arke 7. ho 32. mi. D. E. semynocturnall arke 4. ho. 28. D. H. length of twilight 2. ho. 4. mi. H. E. time from noone to euening shut is 9. ho. 33. mi. that double is the length of the day. 19. ho. 6. mi. This last taken from 24. leaueth the length of the night darke 4. ho. 54. mi. Sun riseth at D. 4. ho. 28. mi. seteth at 7. ho. 32. mi. Time from rising to setting 15. ho. 4. from Sun setting, to his rising 8. ho. 56. mi. Height of the Pole N. R. 51. de. 30. mi. Though many more propositions may be wrought by this kinde of proiection, yet to make some good vse of this marke, the last which is the height of the Pole found, so that if ye doe but remember the day of the month; which you must needs doe by your Kalender in the beginning of this chap. or his declination: take his amplitude Azimuth, or Meridionall height, hauing with you your Compasses: Compasse, crostafe, Sea-quadrant, Card, and some good Tables of the fixed Starres, that yee may vse them for obseruation in the night: and by all meanes I would haue you get the reconing of your Ships way by that excellent way of Mr. Addisons of the (...) glasse, the Log-line, and also by what true way soeuer the experienced Sea-man can bring to light; and then may you cast vp your Trauerse by that excellent way of the Arithmeticall Nauigation, by your Card and Trauerse bord, and by this Kalender, whose vse is this; Iune the 23. being in Latitude 48. de. 14. found by obseruation, we failed vntill the 24. noone that is
 24. ^^. there is the month, day, houre, in the 2 first columes vpon a course of 33. de. from S. to W. 20. leagues, the winde being N. N. E. all this is in the 3. next columes: the Latitude then obserued to be 47. de. 25. mi. Longitude in miles 88. from Lizard west and the variation 12. de. 53. ^^. depth 90. fatham, (if it were sound so) and these in the 2. last columes, and from Iuly the 19 in Latitude 17. de. 40. mi. to Iuly the 21. noone, that is 48. ho. we sayled on a course of 18. de. from W. to S. 74. leagues. The winde being at E. N E. which brought vs into the Latitude of 16. de. 35. mi. and into Longitude 1834. miles: or 611 1/^. leagues W. from Lizard vad 10. de. 0. mi. Depths 60. fatham, S. W. 7. leagues a Rock, and S. by W. land thus. Note that if you get your height and course exactly, it will correct your way, height and way will correct your course: course and way will correct your height: but striue to doe all as exact as posible you can, to doe which, note what followeth.


Propositions of Nauigation, Arethmetically, Geometrically, and Instrumentally shewed. Chap. 8.

1. To finde the leagues run on any course, the difference of Latitude and course being giuen.
 AS the sine of the course from the parralell is to the miles in difference of Latitude: so is the totall sine to the leagues run.
 As the Tangent of the course, from the parralell is to the miles in a degree of Latitude; so is the Secant of the course to the way.
 As the totall sine is to the miles in the difference of Latitude; so is the Secant of the course, from the Meridian to the miles run.
 As the sine of the course from the Meridian is to the miles in difference of Latitude; so is the Tangent of the course from Meridian to the way.
 Let the Logarithme of the course from the parralell be taken out of the Logarithme of miles in difference of Latitude, the remainder is the Logarithme of the miles in way.
 Instrumentally by the Sector, take in the equall parts the miles
 in difference of Latitude and set it ouer in the equall fine^ of the course from the parralell, the Sector so opened, take the distance ouer in the totall signe and that distance applyed to the equall parts giueth the miles of way run.


2 The difference of Latitude and Longitude giuen to finde the leagues run.
SQuare both sides, then ad the 2. squares together and extract  the square roote is the miles in way run.
Looke which is the greater side, either the Lat. or the Lo^,This also giueth the Rombe. and  take his Log. out of the Log. of the lesser side, the remainder giueth the two acute Angles, then let the Log. of either of them be taken out of the Log of the side opposit: the remainder is the Log. of way I shew not how it giueth the Angles but leaue thee to inquire.
Open the Sector to a rectangle: then take the miles in Longitude  and set it on one side, the Sector from the Centor in equall parts, and the miles in Latitude on the other side: then take the distance ouer with a paire of Compasses, and apply that distance to the equall parts, giueth the number of miles in way.


3 To finde the difference of Longitude, the course and difference of Latitude being giuen.
AS the sum of the course from the parralell is to the difference  in Latitude, so is the fine of the course from the Meridian to the difference in Longitude.
As the totall sine is to the difference in Latitude: so is the Tangent  of the course from the Meridean to the Longitude.
As the Tangent of the course, from the parralell to the miles in  Latitude: so is the totall sine to the miles in Longitude.
As the Secant of the course from the parralell is to the difference  of Latitude: so is the Secant of the course from the Meridian to the Longitude sought.
Take the Logarithme difference of the Angle from the Meridian  out of the Logaritme of the difference of Latitude in miles the remainder is the logaritme of Longitude in miles.
Take the number of equall parts (in the Sector) which are the  difference of Latitude, and fit that distance ouer in the liues of sines
 of course from the patrid all, and the i^strument opened to that widnesse: the distance ouer in the sine of the course from the Meridian: that distance applyed to the equall parts, sheweth the Longitude in miles.


4 To finde how many miles off the equator or Meridian is a degree of Longitude in any parralell of Latitude.
 AS the totall sine is to the miles in a degree of the equator: so is the sine of the compleme^t of Latitude to the miles sought.
 As the Tangent of the Latitude is to a degree in the Meridian: so is the line of the Latitude to the miles sought.
 As the Secant of the L^^^tude is to the miles in the equator or Meridian: so is the totall sine to the miles sought
 As the Secant of the complement of Latitude is to the miles of Meridian: so is the Tangent of the complement of Latitude to the miles, answering a degree.
 Let the logarithme of the complement of Latitude be added to the logarithme of miles in a meridians degree; the totall is the logarithme of miles sought.
 Instrumentally, take the number of equall parts in a degree of the Meridian or equator by the Sector, and fit them ouer in the sines totall: then take the distance ouer in the sines of the complement of Latitude, and apply that to the equall parts, sheweth the miles that make a degre of Longitude in that parralell.


5 To finde the Longitude answering to a Meridian distance in any parralell of Latitude.
 AS the sine of the complement of Latitude is to the Meridian distance: so is the totall sine to the Longitude.
 As the sine of the Latitude is to the Meridian distance: so is the Tangent of the Latitude to the Longitude.
 As the totall sine to the Meridian distance: so is the Secant of Latitude to the Longitude.

As the Tangent of the complement to the Meridian distance: so  is the Secant of the complement to the Longitude.
Let the Logarithme of the complement be taken out of the Logarithme  of Meridian distance, the remainder is Logarithme of Longitude.
Take from the scale of equall parts in the Sector the Meridian  distance; and fit with your Compasses in the sines of the Latitudes complement: then the distance taken betweene 90. and 90. applyed to the same scale, giueth the Longitude.


6 To finde the signe of any Arke in any parralell.
AS the totall sine is to the complement: so is the sine giuen  in the great Cirkle to the sine in the Latitude.
As the Tangent of Latitude to the sine of Latitude: so is the sine of the Arke in the great Diameter to the sine of the Arke in the lesser.
As the Secant of Latitude to the totall sine: so is the sine in the  greater, to the sine in the lesser Semy diametor.
As the Secant of the complement is to the Tangent thereof: so is  the sine in the greater to the sine in the lesser.This reduceth Longitud miles into degr:
Ad to the Logarithme of the Arke giuen, the Logarithme of the complement of Latitude, the totall is the Logarithme of sine demanded.  
By the Sector let the distance from the Centor to the Arke giuen be put ouer in 90. and 90. then the distance betweene the sines of  the complement of Latitude, applyed from the Centor, giueth the Arke whose sine is the demanded.


7 By a sine giuen in a parralell, to finde the Arke.
AS the sine of the complement of the Latitude is to the sine giuen* so is the totall sine to the sine of the Arke.  
As the sine of the parralell is to the sine giuen: so is the Tangent of the parralell to the sine of the Arke sought.  
As the totall sine is to the sine giuen; so is the Secant of parralell  to the sine of the Arke sought.
As the Tangent of the complement is to the sine giuen: so is the  Tangent thereof to the sine of the Arke sought.

 Out of the Logarithme of the sine giuen, ^^ke the Logarithme of the complement of L^^i: the rest is the Logarithme of the sine.
 By Instrument let the distance of the signe giuen be taken from the Centor and fitted in the sine of the complement of Latitude;It reduceth Meridian degrees in to Longitude. then the distance betweene 90. and 90. being set from the Centor sheweth the Arke.


8 To finde how many miles on Earth or Sea serueth to a minute of time in the Heauen, in any parralell of Latitude.
AS the totall sine is to 15. mile, which serueth a minute of time  vnder the equator: so is the sine of the complement of Latitude to the number sought.
 As the Tangent of the Lati^^^e is to the miles in the equator: so is the sine of the Latitude to the miles sought.
 As the Secant of the Latitude is to the miles in a minute at the equator: so is the totall sine to the miles in a minute of that parralell.
 As the Secant of the complement of Latitude, is to the miles in the equator: so is the Tangent thereof to the miles in a minute of that parralell.
 Add the Logarithme of the 15. miles, to the Logarithme of the complement of Latitude, the summe is the Logarithme of the miles in that parralell.
 By the Instrument or Sector, take 15. the miles that serue in the equator to a minute of time out of the equall parts, and fit it ouer in the totall sines: then the distance ouer in the sine of the complement of Latitude applied to the equall parts, sheweth the miles to a minute in that parralell.
 This chapter ha^ shewed how to finde the leagues run in any course, or the Ships way, and to finde the difference of Longitude, with things thereto pertaining, the next sheweh.



Chapter the 9.
9 To finde the course the way and difference of Latitude giuen. AS the miles in way (or run) is to the totall sine: so is the miles in difference of Latitude to the course (or run) his sine from
(...)

As the miles in difference of latit. to the totall sine, so the  miles in way to the seca. of course from meridian.
As the difference of latitude to the way, so the totall sine to  the secant of course from meridian.
Square both difference of latitude and way, then subtract  the lesser out of the greater, out of the remainder,This gives the longitude. extract the square roote, then as that roote to the totall sine, so the difference of latitude to tangent of course from paralell.
Let the logarithme of way be taken out of the logarithme  of difference of latitude, the remainder is logarithme of course from paralell.
Take the equall parts in way, and fit over in the totall sine,  then take the difference of latitude, and fit over in equall sines, giues the course from paralell.


10. To find the course, the way, and longitude given.
AS the way to the totall sine, so the longitude to course  from the meridian.
As the longitude to the totall sine, so the way to the secant  of course from paralell.
As the longitude to the way, so the totall sine to the secant  of course from paralell.
Square both longitude and way, then subtract the lesser out  of the greater, out of the remainder extract the square roote,This gives the latitude. then as that roote to the totall sine, so the longitude to the tangent of course from the meridian.
Let the logarithme of way be taken out of the logarithme  of difference of longitude, the remainder is logarithme of course from the meridian.
Let the equall parts in way be fitted over in the totall sine,  then the long^fitted over in equall sines, gives the course from the meridian.


11. To find the course, the longitude and latitude g^uen.
AS the @ of the 2 sides added, is to the difference of each  side, so the tangent of @ the 2 unknowne angles, to the tangent of an arke, which being added to, or taken from @ the 2 vnknowne angles, gives the course.
Take the logarithme of the greater side, out of the logarithme 
 of the lesser, the remainder is logarithme of the angle opposite to the lesser side.
Open the sector to a rectangle, and take the longitude and latitude, and fit them on 2 sides from the center; and from those 2 extensions take the distance with a paire of compasses, and fit it over in the totall sine; Then take the longitude, and fit over in equall sines, gives the course from the meridian, but the latitude so fitted giues the course from paralell.


12. To find the latitude, the course and way giuen.
 AS the totall sine to the way, so the sine of course from paralell to the latitude sought.
 As the secant of course from paralell to the way, so the tangent of the same to the difference of latitude.
 As the secant of course from the meridian, to the way, so the totall sine to the difference of latitude.
 As the tangent of course from the meridian, to the way, so the sine of the same course to the difference of latitude.
 Adde the logarithme of way to the logarithme of course from paralell, the totall is the logarithme of difference of latitude.
 Take the miles in way, and fit over in the totall sine, then the distance over in the sine of course from paralell, giues the miles in difference of latitude.
I haue shewed already, chap. 7. how the distance from Paramont hill was found; And as I conceiue, it is easie to finde the distance of places, if you doe but know the vse of my Table of sines, tangents and secants, proviso, note that the 3 angles of any right-lined triangle is equall to 2 rectangles or 180 degrees.
For commonly at sea, you must obserue the land, shore, or whatsoever it is you would know the distance from, what angle it maketh with your course; as admit 40 degrees, then reckon your ships way, suppose 1000 fathome, and then observe againe, let your second angle be 100 degrees, then adde 100 deg: and 40 degr: which subtract from 180 degr: remainder 40 degr: for the third angle; then haue you 3 angles and one side given, by which meanes the other 2 sides are easily had, and consequently the distance.

Now if the young beginner be troubled to finde the sine of an angle, so big as 100 degr: let him note what the Table saith; subtract 90 degr: from 100 degr: the remainder 10 degr: subtract from 90 degr: rests So degr: or subtract 100 degr: from 180 degr: rests 80 degr: whose sine in my table is 985; the other two angles being 40 degr: and 40 degr: their sines are 643 and 643, and the distance 1000 fathome: Now to fetch the distance from shore say, as 643 the sine of 40 degr: at c, found as before, to 1000 fathome, the distance from a to b, the a places of observation, so 984 the sine of 80 degr: in the lesser quadrant, or 100 degr: in the great, (which is all one) to the distance from a to c 1531 ^6^/61^ fathome. Another example. 996 sine of 84 degr: 50. 985 sine of 80 de. 262 sine of 15 d: 10. Let your first observation be at b 80 degr: the second at d 84 degr: 50, and by your reckoning the distance 254 fathome; now it is easy by the former rule to find the angle at c 15 degr: 10: then say if 262 giue 254, what giues 985, facit c d 954 110/^^^: And as 262 to 254, so 996 to the distance b c. So that it is all one whether the angles be right, or obtuce, or acute, if they be all acute, there is no more to doe but take the sines out of my table as in the figure K, and no more, if one be a rectangle, then the other 2 are acute, but if an angle be obtuce, as in the figure L, the angle at b 100 degr: doe by that angle whatsoever it be, as in the first example; here because the angles at a and c are equall, therefore the distance from b to c is 1000 fathome.
But by the second example, it is but 965 77/^^^, therefore the angle at d was not truly taken; for what 965 77/^^^ is in proportion to 1000, so is the angle at d to the true angle: which must needs be more then 84 degr: 50, and the angle at c lesse then 15 degr: 10 and consequently the side c d is more then 954 120/^^^. And further you may note, if you have observed so well that the angles be truly taken, then have you not reckoned your ships way truly; and so you may see that one of these doth correct the other, as in the end of the 7 chapter.
And you may fetch a distance by Geometricall protraction, as in chap. 4. suppose you would know the distance from c
 and b to f, in the figure m, first having drawne the angle b e f, then reckon your ships way from ^ to b ^00 fathome, and having laid downe so much by your scale and compasses, (see pag. 12) you shall obserue to lay the line ^ b right in the course your ship went, with b next your eye, and e towards the place of your first observation; then from b draw another line to f, and that line will intersect with the line a f at f, and then you may measure the distance; as in this example b f is 100 fathom, and e f is 140 fathom.
The next thing that will trouble the young beginner, is the propositions in these 8 and 9 chapters, which are most easily performed, because the demonstration is so plaine.
First therfore as in all plain triangles, the sides are in proportion one to another, as the subtences of the angles opposite, or as the sines of the angles opposite to those sides. Example in the inscribed triangle: A the angle at b is in proportion to the side c d or arke c g d, as the angle c to the side b d, or arke b d e, and so is the angle d to the side b c, or arke b f c.
So note that in all rectangled right-lined triangles, the two containing sides of the rectangle stand perpendicular one upon the end of another: Therefore if you put the least side for radius or totall sine, as in the figure b, the other side will be the tangent, and the subtending side of the rectangle will be the secant; or if you put the greater side for radius, the least will be the tangent, and the subtence the secant, or you may put the subtence for radius, as in the figure c is done.
It is manifest then that any side may be put for the totall sine: First, if you put the subtending side for radius, as in the figure d, let a b be part of a meridian, and a c part of a paralell; then is the angle at b the course from the meridian, and the angle at c is the course from paralell.
Then if the difference of latitude a b, and course, that is the angle at b or c be given, you may finde the leagues runne, or distance b c, as in the first resolution Arithmeticall.
Or if you put the longer side a b for radius, then say as the totall sine a b to the difference of latitude a b, so the secant b c of course, b from the meridian, to the distance b c; if you put
 the least side for radius, say as the tangent a b of course c from paralell, to a b the difference of latitude, so b c the secant of the same course, to b c the distance. Let this su^^ice for the first proposition chap. 8.
But if you demaund the difference of longitude, the latitude and course being given, you may doe it by the first or second example Arithmeticall in this chapter. page 29; or if you put the longer side b c for radius, say, as the course c to a b, so the course b to a c the longitude: but if you put the side a b for radius, say, as the totall sine to the difference of latitude, so the tangent a c to the difference of longitude: if the least side be put for radius, say, as the tangent a b to the difference of latitude, so the totall sine to the difference of longitude. And this sufficeth for the Geometricall demonstrotion of the third proposition, chap. 8.
And now you see how the proportionall numbers doe arise, it is easie to take them out of the Table, and worke them Arithmetically; and what is said of these propositions may be said of all the rest by the very same reason; except the second proposition chap. 8, and the 11 proposition in this chapter page 27: the first of these is done as in Earlid 1.47. or thus Arithmetically.
Let the line a be 3 leagues of longitude and the line b 4 leagues of latitude, first multiply 3 (...) 3, it is 9, and 4 into 4 is 16, which added is 25, the square roote is 5, for 5 times 5 is 25, and this is equall to the line c, the shippes way.
The Geometricall demonstration is this, set the line a perpendicular vpon the line b, as in the figure f, then draw the line c, and it is 5 the shippes way.
There is another way of demonstration, by adding the sides of the squares into one; also if the way and longitude had beene given, to subtract the one out of the other Geometrically, the remainder is the difference of latitude: if the way and latitude had beene given, then the side of the remainder is the difference of longitude, Euclid 1.47. theor. 33. 6.31. theor. 21.
The next should be of the 11 proposition, but I suppose he


 that understands that is more than an ignorant man, therefore whosoever will learne that, with the extraction of the square and cube roote, or any thing else that is in my booke, or any of those things that I have set out in any of my bills; let them come to my dwelling, and I will satisfie their demaund so farre forth as God shall inable mee: where youth may bee taught, dieted and lodged for reasonable consideration.



CHAP. X. Of the motion of the Moone, and comming into the Harbour.
I Might here have added many and manifold propositions, and chiefly those which doe concerne the great circle distance betweene any two places howsoever scituate; but I will first see thy kinde acceptance of this: which if you receive thankfully, I shall be ready to shew thee many more to thy great satisfaction, with the Geometricall demonstration, which I have gathered into a booke in Folio.
And now I will finish this worke with the Moones motion; supposing you are come in sight of your wished port in safety: which I doe heartily wish to all honest Seamen of my Country, that travell the seas to good ends.
And admit you are in a strange coast, you may the better come to finde the time of a full sea, at a spring tide, to bring your good shippe over a barre or shole: so I shall end my worke where Mr. Addison began his: then having read this, you may reade his which is hereto joyned; giving you to understand, if you learne well these propositions of mine, they will make even the hardest things in his booke easy for thy understanding.

Let the full sea at your place of being be at a S Moone on the day of conjunction as at a, and the Sunne going in 4 degrees, as from a to c, the Moone removing in the meane time 48 degrees from the Sunne, as to d, doth make 3 houres 12 minutes after noone for the time of high water; and in 16 dayes more the Sunne going from c to e, that is ^0 degrees from a: in the meane time the Moone going from d to f, that is 260 degrees from a, which maketh 17 houres 20 minutes, then substract 12 houres 0 minutes from 17 houres 20 minutes, the remainder 5 houres 20 minutes; out of which take 1 houre 20 minutes for the time of the Sunnes motion in 20 dayes, remainder 4 a clocke for the true time of full sea the Moone being 20 dayes olde; if you perceive not the reason hereof inquire futher, and so you may examine the truth hereof.
Therefore to the ignorant and honest Seaman I say, joyne these things in practise with those things thy Master doth teach thee at sea: And to those things you learne at sea by experience joyne the practise of the things taught in this booke, and you shall be able in short time, through Gods grace, no doubt, to take charge thy selfe to thy great commendations.
To conclude, you may doe most of the things taught in this booke as afore spoken of chapter the 4, with rular and compasses; which if you practise and make your selfe able to performe, (wishing to every good man that is willing to follow these rules, that I were at his elbow to make him a more plaine demonstration) he shall be able in a short time, to doe such service, which without those will not be performed in ten times so much time.
And so I pray thee to accept of this my labour, for unto such as are ignorant and honest, that would learne, onely doe I write this booke: And be sure to reade it all before you judge, so shall you see that such a thing there is, then reade it over againe, and you shall see what manne^ of thing it is, so you may judge of the good will of the Authour, and reade it over the third time to thy singular profit.

As in Ecclesiasticus chapter the 22. verse ^3, it i^ (...) neighbour, so I say to thee of thy friend to Navigation; (...)
Be faithfull to him in his poverty, that you may rejoyce with him in his prosperity, abide stedfast with him in the time of his trouble, that you may be heire with him in (this his little book) his heritage: for a meane estate is not alwayes to be contemned, nor the rich that is foolish to be had in admiration.
Now I besech Almighty God of his mercy in Christ Iesus, that wee may so profit in Christs schoole, that wee may bee able thereby to passe the waves of this sea of glasse, that we may all arrive at the haven of eternall happinesse. Amen.

FINIS.


