A sea grammar vvith the plaine exposition of Smiths Accidence for young sea-men, enlarged. Diuided into fifteene chapters: what they are you may partly conceiue by the contents. Written by Captaine Iohn Smith, sometimes gouernour of Virginia, and admirall of Nevv-England. Sea-mans grammar Smith, John, 1580-1631. A sea grammar vvith the plaine exposition of Smiths Accidence for young sea-men, enlarged. Diuided into fifteene chapters: what they are you may partly conceiue by the contents. Written by Captaine Iohn Smith, sometimes gouernour of Virginia, and admirall of Nevv-England. Sea-mans grammar Smith, John, 1580-1631. Smith, John, 1580-1631. Sea-mans grammar. TO THE READER AND ALL WORTHY AD∣uenturers by Sea, and well wishers to NAVIGATION. Honest Readers, I F my desire to doe good hath trans∣ported mee beyond my selfe, I intreat you excuse me, and take for requitall this rude bundle of many ages obseruations; al∣though they be not so punctually compiled as I could wish, and it may bee you expect; At this present I cannot much amend them; if any will bestow that paines, I shall thinke him my friend, and honour his endeuours. In the interim ac∣cept them as they are, and ponder errours in the balance of good will, Your friend, IOHN SMITH. TO HIS WELL DESER∣uing friend Captaine IOHN SMITH. REader within this little worke thou hast The view of things present, to come, and past, Of consequence and benefit to such As know but little, thinking they know much; And in thy quiet chamber safely read, Th'experience of the liuing and the dead, Who with great paine and perill oft haue tride When they on angry Neptunes backe did ride. He hauing with his Trident strucke the maine, To hoise them vp and throw them downe againe Deare friend I'le cease and leaue it to thy Booke. To praise thy labour. Reader ouer-looke. Edw. Ingham. To the much deseruing Captaine, Iohn Smith. I Hate to flatter thee, but in my heart I honour thy faire worth and high desert; And thus much I must say, thy merits claime Much praise & honor, both from Truth & Fame. What Iudge so 're thy Actions ouer-looke, Thou need'st not feare a triall by thy Booke. Geor. Bucke. TO HIS VVORTHILY deseruing friend Captaine IOHN SMITH. THe Lighter Hippias of Troy disclos'd, Germans in India Cannowes now in trade, The Barge by graue Amocles was compos'd, The Argozees first the Illyrians made, The Galley I son built that Graecian sparke, The Cyprians first did crosse the Seas with Barke. The Keele by the Phaenician first was nam'd, The Tyrrhens first made anchors, Plateans oares; The Rhodians for the Brigandine are fam'd, Cyrenians found the Craer, and Creet adores Daedal{us} for Masts, and Saile-yards; Typhis wise (With triple honour) did the sterne deuise. The Tackle famous Anacharsis wrought, Noble Pyseus did the Stem first frame, To light the Copians first the Rudder brought, Young Icarus for Sailes acquir'd great fame, Thou, with the best of these mai'st glory share, That hast deuis'd, compil'd a worke so rare. For what long trauels obseruations true On Seas, (where waues doe seeme to wash the skies) Haue made thee know, thou (willing) do'st vnscrew To those that want like knowledge; each man cries Liue worthy Smith; England for this endeuour Will (if not stupid) giue thee thanks for euer. Nicolas Burley. In laudem Nobilissimi viri Johannis Smith. MOney, the worlds soule, that both formes and fames her, Is her bad Genius to, it damnes, and shames her. If merit and desert were truly weighed In Iustice Scales, not all by money swey'd; Smith should not want reward, with many moe, Whom sad obliuion now doth ouer-flow. For now no good things gotten without money, Except tis got, as Beares from thornes licke honey, With danger to themselues. For poore mens words Are wind, and aire: Great mens are pickes, and swords▪ Greatnesse more safe may act lust, theft, or treason; Than poore Iohn Smith or I may steale two peason, Or drinke a harmelesse cup, to chase away Sad cares and griefes that haunt vs euery day. Who saw thy Virgin limbd by thee so truly, Would sweare thou hadst beene one that sawest her newly, One of her latest louers. But to tell The truth, I thinke they know her not so well. And this Sea Grammar learn'd long since by thee, Thou now hast form'd so artificiallie, That many abeardlesse boy, and Artlesse foole, Preferr'd before thee, may come to thy schoole. Iohn Hagthorpe. TO HIS FRIEND Captaine Smith, on his GRAMMAR. MV h traueld Captaine, I haue heard thy worth By Indians, in America set forth: Mee silence best seemes to keepe, and then Thy better praise be sung by better men, Who feele thy vertues worthinesse: Who can Deriue thy words, is more Grammarian, Than Camden, Clenard, Ramus, Lilly were; Here's language would haue non-plust Scaliger. These and thy trauels may in time be seene By those which stand at Helme, and prime ones beene. Edw. Iorden. In Authorem. EAch Science termes of Art hath where withall To expresse themselues, calld Technologicall. Technologicall, a Greeke word compounded of two Greeke words, , signifies words of Art. Logicke doth teach what Pradicables bee, Genus and Species, Pr. 5. Genus. Species. Diffe ētia Propriam. Accidens. with the other three. Philosophie, purblind in the first Creation, Talks of first Matters forme, and void Priuation. Geographie teaches how for to define Tropicks, Meridians, and the Aequators line. So words of Art belong to Nauigation And ships, which here from thee receiue translation; That now th' vntraueld land-man may with ease Here know the language both of ships and Seas. I haue no Art of words due praise to impart To thee that thus expound'st these words of Art. W. S. In Authorem. THou which in Sea-learning would'st Clerk commence, First learne to reade, and after reade to learne, For words to sound, and not to know their sense, Is for to saile a ship without a Sterne. By this Sea Grammar thou mayst distinguish And vnderstand the Lattine by the English. Here mayst thou learne the names of all ships geere, And with their names, their natures, and their vse; To hoise the Sailes, and at the Helme to steere; To know each Shroud, each Rope, each Knot, each Noose, And by their names to call them euery one, 'Tis such a Booke as may be call'd Such none. And yet a Smith thereof the Authour is, And from his Forge alone we haue the same, Who, for his skill in such a worke as this, Doth farre excell all others of his name: He's neither Lock-Smith, Gold-Smith, nor Black-Smith, But (to giue him his right name) he's Iack-Smith. S.S. A Sea Grammar. Chap. I. Of Dockes, and their definitions. A Docke is a great pit or pond, A dry Docke. or creeke by a harbour side, made conuenient to worke in, with two great floud-gates built so strong and close, that the Docke may be dry till the ship be built or repaired, and then being opened, let in the water to float and lanch her; and this is called a dry Docke. A wet Docke. A wet Docke is any place, where you may hale in a ship into the oze out of the tides way, where shee may docke her selfe. A Cradle. A cradel is a frame of timber, made along a ship, or the side of a gally by her billidge, for the more ease and safty in lanching, much vsed in Turkie, Spaine, and Italy. The stockes. And the stockes are certaine framed posts, much of the same nature vpon the shore to build a Pinnace, a Catch, a Frigot, or Boat, &c. To those Dockes for building belongs their wood-yards, with saw-pits, and all sorts of timber; but the masts and yards are chained together in some great water to keepe them from rotting, A Crab. and in season; Also a crab is necessary, which is an engine of wood of three clawes, placed on the ground in the nature of a Capsterne, for the lanching of ships, or hea∣uing them into the Docke. CHAP. II. How to build a ship with the definitions of all the principall names of euery part of her prin∣cipall timbers, also how they are fixed one to another, and the reasons of their vse. T He first and lowest timber in a ship is the keele, The Keele. to which is fastened all the rest; this is a great tree or more, hewen to the propor∣tion of her burden, laid by a right line in the bottome of the docke, or stockes. At the one end is skarfed into it, The Stem. the Stem, which is a great timber wrought compassing, and all the butt-ends of the planks forwards are fixed to it. The Sterne. The Sterne post is ano∣ther great timber, which is let into the keele at the other end somewhat sloping, The fashion pee∣ces. & from it doth rise the two fashion pee∣ces, like a paire of great hornes, to those are fastened all the plankes that reach to the after end of the ship, but before you vse any plankes, The Rungs. they lay the Rungs, called floore tim∣bers, or ground timbers, thwart the keele; thorow those you cut your Limberholes to bring the water to the well for the pumpe, The Limberholes the vse of them is when the ship is built to draw in them a long haire rope, by pulling it from sterne to stem, to scowre them, and keepe them cleane from choaking. The Floore. Those ground timbers doe giue the floore of the ship, being straight, sauing at the ends they begin to compasse, and there they are called the Rungheads, Rungheads. and doth direct the Sweepe or Mould of the Foot-hookes and Nauell tim∣bers, Sweepe. Mould. Skarfing. for there doth begin the compasse and bearing of the ship, those are skarfed into the ground timbers, which is one peece of wood let into another, or so much wood cut away from the one as from the other, for when any of those timbers are not long enough of themselues, they are skar∣fed in this manner, to make two or three as one: those next the keele are called the ground Foot-hookes, Foot-hookes. Keeleson. the other the vpper Foot-hookes; but first lay your keele∣son ouer your floore timbers, which is another long tree like the keele, and this lying within as the other without, must be fast bound together with strong iron bolts thorow the timber and all, and on those are all the vpper workes raised, when the Foot-hookes are skarfed, as is said, and well bolted, when they are planked vp to the Orlop they make the ships Howle, and those timbers in generall are called the ships ribs, Howle. Ribs. Sleepers. because they represent the carkasse of any thing hath ribs. The sleepers run before and after on each side the keeleson, on the floore well bolted to the Foot-hookes, which being thus bound doe strengthen each other. Spurkits. The Spurkits are the spaces betwixt the timbers a∣longst the ship side in all parts, but them in Howle below the Sleepers, are broad boords, which they take vp to cleare the Spurkits, if any thing get betwixt the tim∣bers. The Garbord is the first planke next the keele on the out∣side, The Garbord. Garbord strake. Rising timbers. the Garbord strake is the first seame next the keele, your rising timbers are the hookes, or ground timbers and foot-hookes placed on the keele, and as they rise by little and little, so doth the run of the ship from the floore, The Run. which is that part of the ship vnder water which comes narrower by degrees from the floore timbers along to the sterne post, called the ships way aftward, for according to her run she will steare well or ill, by reason of the quicknesse or slow∣nesse of the water comming to the rudder: now all those plankes vnder water, Plankes. as they rise and are ioyned one end to another, the fore end is called the Butt-end in all ships, Butt-ends. b t in great ships they are commonly most carefully bolted, for if one of those ends should spring, or giue way it would be a great troublesome danger to stop such a leake, the other parts of those plankes are made fast wich good Treenailes and Trunnions of well seasoned timber, Treenailes. Tiunnions. thorow the timbers or ribs, but those plankes that are fastened into the ships stem are called whoodings. Whoodings. The gathering of those workes vpon the ships quarter vnder water is called the Tucke, The Tucke. if it lie too low it makes her haue a fat quarter, and hinders the quicke passage of the water to the rudder; if too high she must be laid out in that part, else she will want bearing for her after workes. The Transome is a timber lies thwart the sterne, Transome. betwixt the two fashion peeces, and doth lay out the breadth of the ship at the buttockes, Buttocks. which is her breadth from the Tucke vp∣wards, and according there to her breadth or narrow∣nesse, we say she hath a narrow or broad buttocke, the fa∣shion peeces, before spoke of, are the two outmost timbers, on either side the sterne, excepting the counters. Rake. The Hull. The ships Rake is so much of her hull as hangs ouer both ends of the keele, so much as is forward is said, she rakes so much for∣ward, and so in like manner aftward: by the hull is meant, the full bulke or body of a ship without masts or any rig∣ging from the stem to the sterne: The Rake forward is neere halfe the length of the keele, and for the Rake aftward about the forepart of her Rake forward, but the fore Rake is that which giues the ship good way, and makes her keep a good wind, but if she haue not a full Bow, it will make her pitch her head much into the Sea, if but a small Rake forward, the sea will meet her so fast vpon the Bowes, she will make small way, and if her sterne be vpright as it were, she is called Bluffe, Bluffe. Bluffeheaded. Billage. or Bluffe-headed. A ships Billage is the breadth of the floore when she doth lie aground, & Billage water is that which cannot come to the pumpe, we say also she is bilged, when she strikes on a rocke, an anchors flooke or any thing that breakes her plankes or timbers, to spring a leake. When you haue berthed or brought her vp to the planks, Plankes. which are those thicke timbers which goeth fore and aft on each side, whereon doth lie the beames of the first Orlop, Beames. Orlop. which is the first floore to support the plankes doth couer the Howle, those are great crosse timbers, that keepes the ship sides asunder, the maine beame is euer next the maine mast, where is the ships greatest breadth, the rest from this is called the first, second, third, fourth, &c. forward or aft∣ward beames. Great ships haue a tier of beames vnder the Orlop whereon lies no decke, and great posts and binders called Riders frō them to the keele in howle only to streng∣then all. Riders. But the beames of the Orlop is to be bound at each end with sufficient Knees, Knees. which is a crooked peece of wood bowed like a knee, that bindes the beames and foot-hookes, being bolted together, some stand right vp and downe, some a long the ship, and are vsed about all the deckes, some sawed or hewed to that proportion, but them which grow naturally to that fashion are the best. Lay the Orlop with good planke according to her pro∣portion▪ so leuell as may be is the best in a man of Warre, Ports. because all the Ports may be of such equall height, so that euery peece may serue any Port, Beds. without making any beds or platformes to raise them, but first bring vp your worke as before to the second decke or Orlop, and by the way you may cut your number of port holes according to the great∣nesse of your ship; Ringbolts. by them fasten your Ringbolts for the tackles of your Ordnances, you vse Ringbolts also for brin∣ging the plankes and wail s to the ship side, Set bolts. and Set bolts for forcing the workes and plankes together, Clinch bolts. Clinch bolts are clinched with a riueting hammer for drawing out. But Rag bolts are so iaggered that they cannot be drawne out. Rag bolts. Fore locke bolts hath an eye at the end, Fore locke bolts. whereinto a fore locke of iron is driuen to keepe it from starting backe. Fend bolts. Fend bolts are beat into the outside of a ship with the long head to saue her sides from galling against other ships, Driue bolts. Driue bolts is a long piece of iron to driue out a treenaile, or any such thing, besides diuers others so vsefull that without them and long iron spikes and nailes, She was built of Cedar. nothing can be well done; yet I haue knowne a ship built, hath sailed to and a∣gaine ouer the maine Ocean, which had not so much as a naile of iron in her but onely one bolt in her keele. Clamps. Now your risings are aboue the first Orlop as the Clamps are vnder it, which is long thicke plankes like them, fore and aft on both sides, vnder the ends of the Beames and timbers of the second Decke or Orlop, or the third Decke or Orlop, or the third Decke which is neuer called by the name of Orlop, Decks. A halfe Decke. A quarter Decke. A Flush Decke. and yet they are all but Decks; also the halfe Decke and quarter Decke, whereon the beames, and timbers beare are called risings. A Flush Decke is when from stem to sterne, it lies vpon a right line fore and aft which is the best for a man of Warre, both for the men to helpe and succour one another, as for the vsing of their armes, or remounting any dismounted peece, because all the Ports on that Decke are on equall height, which can∣not be without beds and much trouble, A cambered Decke. To sinke a Deck. To raise a Deck. where the Decke doth camber or lie compassing. To sinke a Decke is to lay it lower, to raise a Decke to put it higher, but haue a care you so cut your Port holes, one peece lie not right ouer a∣nother for the better bringing them to your marke. The halfe Decke is from the maine mast to the steareage, & the quarter Decke from that to the Masters Cabin called the round house, w ch is the vtmost of all, but you must vn∣derstand all those workes are brought vp together, as neere equally as may bee from bend to bend, Bend, or waile. or waile to waile, which are the outmost timbers on the ship sides, and are the chiefe strength of her sides, to which the foot-hookes, beames, Chaine waile. & knees, are bolted, and are called the first, second, and third Bend; but the chaine waile is a broad timber set out amongst them, a little aboue where the chaines and shrouds are fastened together to spread the shrouds the wider the better to succour the masts. Thus the sides and Deckes are wrought till you come at the Gunwaile, Gun waile. which is the vpmost waile goeth about the vpmost strake or or seame of the vpmost Decke about the ships waste, and the ships quarter is from the maine mast aftward. The ships quar∣ters. Culuertailed. Carlings. Culuertailed is letting one timber into another in such sort that they cannot slip out, as the Carling ends are fixed in the beames, and Carlings are certaine timbers lieth along the ship from beame to beame, on those the led∣ges doerest whereunto the plankes of the Deckes are faste∣ned. Carling knees. The Carling knees are also timbers comes thwart the ship from the sides of the Hatches way, betwixt the two masts, and beares vp the Decke on both sides, and on their ends lieth the commings of the hatches, Commings. which are those timbers and plankes which beares them vp higher than the Deckes, to keepe the water from running downe at the hat∣ches; also they fit Loopholes in them for the close fights, Loopholes. and they are likewise a great ease for men to stand vpright if the Deckes below. Hatches way. The Hatches way is when they are open where the goods are lowered that way right downe into the howle, and the hatches are like trap doores in the middest of the Deckes, before the maine mast, by certaine rings, to take vp or lay downe at your pleasure. A scuttle-hatch is a little hatch doth couer a little square hole we call the Scuttle, A Scuttle. where but one man alone can goe downe into the ship, there are in diuers places of the ship whereby men passe from Decke to Decke, and there is also small Scuttles grated, to giue light to them betwixt Deckes, and for the smoke of Ordnances to passe away by. The Ramshead is a great blocke wherein is three shiuers into which are passed the halyards, Ramshead. and at the end of it in a hole is reued the ties, and this is onely belonging to the fore and and maine halyards; to this belong the fore Knight, The fore Knight. and the maine Knight, The main Knight vpon the second Decke fast bolted to the Beames. They are two short thicke peeces of wood, commonly carued with the head of a man vpon them, in those are foure shiuers apeece, three for the halyards and one for the top rope to run in, and Kneuels are small pieces of wood nailed to the inside of the ship, Kneuels. to belay the sheats and rackes vnto. Capstaine. The Capstaine is a great peece of wood stands vpright vpon the Decke, abaft the maine mast, the foot standing in a step vpon the lower decke, and is in the nature of a win∣dis, to winde, or weigh vp the anchors, sailes, top masts, ordnances, or any thing it is framed in diuers squares, with holes thorow them, Capstaine bars. thorow which you put your Capstaine barres, for as many men as can stand at them to thrust it a∣bout, and is called manning the Capstaine. The maine body of it is called the Spindle. The Spindle. Whelps. The Whelps are short peeces of wood made fast to it, to keepe the Cable from comming too high in the turning about; Paul. The Paul is a short piece of iron made fast to the Deck, resting vpon the whelps to keepe the Capstaine from recoiling which is dangerous, but in great ships they haue two, the other standing in the same manner betwixt the fore mast and the maine, to heaue vpon the Ieare rope, Ieare Capstaine. and is called the Ieare Capstaine, to straine any rope, or hold off by, when we way Anchor, to heaue a head, or vpon the violl, which is when an Anchor is in stiffe ground wee cannot weigh it, or the Sea goeth so high the maine Capstaine cannot purchase in the Cable, then we take a Hawser opening one end, and so puts into it Nippers some seuen or eight sadome distant from each other wherewith wee binde the Hawser to the Cable, and so brings it to the Ieare Capstaine to heaue vpon it, and this will purchase more than the maine Capstaine can. The violl. The violl is fastened together at both ends with an eye or two, with a wall knot and seased together. A windas. A windas is a square peece of timber, like a Role before the fore Castle in small ships, and forced about with handspikes for the same vse as is the Capstaine. The Pumpe. What are the parts of a pumpe you may see in euery place, The Brake. the handle we call the brake, the pumpes can, is a great can we power water into pumps to make it pumpe. The Can. The Daile. The daile is a trough wherein the water doth runne ouer the Deckes; Chained Pumps. But in great ships they vse chained pumps which will goe with more ease, and deliuer more water. A Bur Pump. The Dutch men vse a Burre pumpe by the ship side, wherein is onely a long staffe with a Burre at the end, like a Gunners spunge, to pumpe vp the Billage water that by rea∣son of the bredth of the ships floore cannot come to the well: In pumping they vse to take spels, that is, fresh men to releeue them, and count how many strokes they pumpe each watch, whereby they know if the ship be stanch, or thite, or how her leakes increase. The Pumpe sucks, The Pumpe sucks is when the wa∣ter being out, it drawes vp nothing but froth and winde. They haue also a little Pumpe made of a Cane, a little peece of hollow wood or Latten like an Elder gun, A beare Pumpe. to pumpe the Beere or Water out of the Caske, for at Sea wee vse no Taps, and then staue the Caske to make more roome, and packeth the Pipe-staues or boords vp as close as may be in other Caske till they vse them. The Skuppers are little holes close to all the Decks tho∣row the Ships sides, The Skuppers. whereat the water doth runne out when you pumpe or wash the Decks; Skupper-lea∣thers. the Skupper-leathers are nailed ouer those holes vpon the lower Decke to keepe out the Sea from comming in, yet giue they way for it to runne out: Skupper-nailes. Skupper nailes are little short ones with broad heads, made purposely to naile the Skupper-leathers, The Waist. and the cotes of Masts and Pumps. The Waist is that part of the Ship betwixt the maine Mast and the fore-castle, and the Waist boords are set vp in the Ships waist, Waist boords. betwixt the Gun-waile and the waist trees, Waist trees. but they are most vsed in Boats, set vp alongst their sides to keepe the Sea from breaking in. There are vsually three Ladders in a Ship; The entering Ladder. the entering Ladder is in the Waist, made formally of wood, and ano∣ther out of the Gallery made of Ropes to goe into the boat by in foule weather, Gallery Ladder. and the third at the Beak-head, made fast ouer the Boulspret to get vpon it, Boultspret Lad∣der. onely vsed in great Ships. It were not amisse now to remember the Fore-castle, The Fore-castle. being as vsefull a place as the rest, this is the forepart of the Ship aboue the Decks ouer the Bow; Bow. there is a broad Bow & a narrow Bow, so called according to the broadnes or the thinnesse: the Bow is the broadest part of the Ship before, compassing the Stem to the Loufe, Loufe. which reacheth so farre as the Bulk-head of the Fore-castle extendeth. Against the Bow is the first breach of the Sea, if the Bow be too broad, she will seldome carry a Bone in her mouth or cut a feather, Cut a feather. that is, to make a fome before her: where a well bowed Ship so swiftly presseth the water, as that it foameth, and in the darke night sparkleth like fire. If the Bow bee too narrow, as before is said, she pitcheth her head into the Sea, so that the meane is the best if her after way be answerable. The Hauses are those great round holes before, Hauses. vnder the Beak-head, where commonly is vsed the Cables when you come to an Anchor, the bold or high Hause is the best, for when they lie low in any great sea, they will take in very much water, the which to keepe out, they build a circle of planke either abaft or before the maine Mast called the Manger: Manger. and a Hause-plug at Sea, now the Fore-castle doth couer all those being built vp like a halfe decke, to which is fixed the Beake-head, Prow. and the Prow is the Decke abaft the Fore-castle, whereon lyeth the Prow peeces. The Beak-head. The Beak-head is without the ship before the fore Ca∣stle, supported by the maine knee, fastened into the stem, all painted and carued as the sterne, and of great vse, as well for the grace and countenance of the ship, as a place for men to ease themselues in. To it is fastened the coller of the maine stay, and the fore tacks there brought aboord; also the standing for rigging and trimming the spretesaile geare, Combe. vnder the midest of it is the Combe, which is a little peece of wood with two holes in it to bring the fore tacks aboord. Bits. The Bits are two great peeces of timber, and the Crospeece goeth thorow them, Crospeece. they are ordinarily placed abaft the Manger in the ships loose, to belay the Cable thereto when you ride at Anchor: Their lower parts are fastened to the Riders, but the middle part in great ships are bolted to two great beames crosse to the Bowes, and yet in extraordinary stormes we are glad to make fast the Cable to the maine M st for strengthning of the Bits and safety of the Bowes, which haue in great stormes beene torne from the ships. Dauid. The Dauid is a short peece of timber, at the end whereof in a notch they hang a blocke in a strap called the Fish-block, Fish-block. by which they hale vp the flook of the Anchor to the Ships bow, Cat. it is put out betwixt the Cat and the Loufe, and to be remoued when you please. The Cat is also a short peece of timber aloft right ouer the Hawse; in the end it hath two shiuers in a bloc e, wherein is reeued a Rope, to which is fastned a great hooke of Iron, to trice vp the Anchor from the Hawse to the top of the fore-castle. A Bulks head is like a seeling or a wall of boords thwart the Ship, as the Gunroome, the great Cabin, the bread roome, A Bulkes head. the quarter Decke, or any other such diuision: but them which doth make close the fore-castle, and the halfe Decke, the Mariners call the Cubbridge heads, Cubbridge head. wherein are placed murtherers, and abaft Falcons, Falconets, or Rabinits to cleare the Decks fore and aft so well as vpon the ships sides, to defend the ship and offend an enemy. Sockets. Sockets are the holes wherein the pintels of the murderers or fowlers goe into. The hollow arching betwixt the lower part of the Gallery and the Transome, is called the lower Counter; Low Counter. Vpper Counter. the vpper Counter is from the Gallery to the arch of the round house, Brackets. and the Brackets are little carued knees to support the Galleries. The Stearage roome, is before the great Cabin, The Stearage. Great Cabin. where he that steareth the Ship doth alwaies stand, before him is a square box nailed together with woodden pinnes, called a Bittacle, because iron nailes would attract the Compasse; Bittacle. this is built so close, The Compasse. that the Lampe or Candle only shew∣eth light to the stearage, and in it alwaies stands the Com∣passe, which euery one knowes is a round box, and in the midst of the bottome a sharpe pin called a Center whereon the Fly doth play, which is a round peece of pace-boord, with a small wyer vnder it touched with the Load-stone, in the midst of it is a little brasse Cap that doth keepe it leuell vpon the Center. On the vpper part is painted 32. points of the Compasse couered with glasse to keepe it from dust, breaking, or the wind; this Box doth hang in two or three brasse circles, so fixed they giue such way to the mouing of the Ship that still the Box will stand steady: there is also a darke Compasse, A darke Com∣passe. A Compasse for Variation. and a Compasse for the variation, yet they are but as the other, onely the darke Compasse hath the points blacke and white, and the other onely touched for the true North and South. Vpon the Bittacle is also the Trauas, The Trauas. which is a little round boord full of holes vpon lines like the Compasse, vpon which by the remouing of a little sticke they keepe an account, how many glasses (which are but halfe houres) they steare vpon euery point. The Whip-staffe is that peece of wood like a strong staffe the Stearsman or Helmesman hath alwaies in his hand, The Whip-staffe go∣ing thorow the Rowle, The Rowle. and then made fast to the Tiller with a Ring. The Tiller. The Tiller is a strong peece of wood made fast to the Rudder, Rudder. which is a great timber somewhat like a Planke, made according to the burthen of the ship, and hung at the sterne vpon hookes and hinges, Pintels. Gudgions or Rudder-Irons. The Gun-roome. they call Pintels and Gudgions, or Rudder-irons. The Tiller playeth in the Gun-roome ouer the Ordnances by the Whip-staffe; whereby the Rudder is so turned to and fro as the Helmesman plea∣seth, and the Cat holes are ouer the Ports, Catholes. right with the Capstaine as they can, to heaue the Ship a sterne by a Cable or a Hauser called a sterne-fast. On each side the Stearage roome are diuers Cabins, as also in the great Cabin, the quarter Decke, and the round house, with many conue∣nient seates or Lockers to put any thing in, Lockers. as in little Cupberts. The bread-roome. The Bread-roome is commonly vnder the Gun-roome, well dried or plated. The Cook-roome where they dresse their victuall may bee placed in diuers places of the Ship, Cooke-roome. as sometimes in the Hould, but that oft spoileth the victu∣all by reason of the heat, but commonly in Merchantmen it is in the Fore-castle, especially being contriued in For∣naces; besides in a chase their Sterne is that part of the ship they most vse in fight, but in a man of warre they fight most with their Prow, and it is very troublesome to the vse of his Ordnance, and very dangerous lying ouer the Pow∣der-roome, some doe place it ouer the Hatches way, but that as the Stewards roome are euer to be contriued according to the Ships imploiment, &c. Calking. Calking is beating Okum into euery seame or betwixt planke and planke, Okum. and Okum is old Ropes torne in peeces like Towze Match, or Hurds of Flax, which being close beat into euery seame with a calking Iron and a Maller, Calking-Iron. which is a hammer of wood and an iron chissell, Paying. being well payed ouer with hot pitch, doth make her more thight than it is possible; by ioy∣ning Planke to Planke. Grauing is onely vnder water, Grauing. a white mix ure of Tallow, Sope and Brimstone; or Train∣oile, Rosin, and Brimstone boiled together, is the best to preserue her calking and make her glib or slippery to passe the water; and when it is decayed by weeds, or Barnacles, Barnacles, or Wormes. which is a kinde of fish like a long red worme, will eat tho∣row all the Plankes if she be not sheathed, which is as casing the Hull vnder water with Tar, and Haire, close couered ouer with thin boords fast nailed to the Hull, which though the Worme pierce, Brooming or Breaming. shee cannot endure the Tar. Breaming her, is but washing or burning of all the filth with reeds or broome, either in a dry dock or vpon her Careene, which is, Careene. to make her so light as you may bring her to lye on the one side so much as may be in the calmest water you can, but take head you ouerset her not; and this is the best way to Breame Ships of great burthen, or liose haue but 4. sharpe Flores for feare of brusing or ouersetting. Parsling. Parsling is most vsed vpon the Decks and halfe Decks; which is, to take a list of Canuas so long as the seame is you would parsell, being first well calked, then powre hot pitch vpon it, and it will keepe out the water from passing the seames. There remaines nothing now as I can remember to the building the Hull of a Ship, nor the definition of her most proper tearmes, but onely s eling the Cabins and such other parts as you please, and to bind an end with all things fitting for the Sea, as you may reade in the Couenants betwixt the Car∣penter and the Owner, which are thus. Notes for a Co∣uenant betweene the Carpenter and the Owner. If you would haue a Ship built of 400. Tuns, she requires a planke of 4. inches: if 300. Tuns, 3. inches: small Ships 2. inches, but none lesse. For clamps, middle bands and slee∣pers, they be all of six inch planke for binding within. The rest for the sparring vp of the workes of square three inch planke. Lay the beames of the Orlope, if she be 400. Tuns at ten foot deepe in howle, and all the beames to be bound with two knees at each end, and a stardard knee at euery beames end vpon the Orlope, all the Orlope to be laid with square three inch planke, and all the plankes to be treenai∣led to the beames. Six foot would be betweene the beames of the Deck and Orlope, and ten ports on each side vpon the lower Orlope, all the binding betweene them should bee with three inch or two inch planke, and the vpper Decke should bee laid with so many beames as are fitting with knees to bind them; laying that Decke with spruce Deale of thirty foot long, the sap cut off, and two inches thicke, for it is better than any other. Then for the Captaines Cabben or great Cabben, the Stearage, the halfe Decke, the Round house, the Fore-castle, and to binde an end with the Capsterne and all things fit∣ting for the Sea, the Smiths worke, the caruing, ioyning, and painting excepted, are the principall things I remem∣ber to be obserued, for a Charter-party betwixt the Mer∣chant, the Master, and the Owner, you haue Presidents of all sorts in most Scriueners shops. CHAP. III. How to proportion the Masts and Yards for a Ship, by her Beame and Keele. W Hen a ship is built, she should be masted, A Ship ouer∣masted. wherein is a great deale of experience to be vsed so well as art; for if you ouer∣mast her, either in length or bignesse, she will lie too much downe by a wind, and labour too much a hull, and that is called a Taunt-mast, but if either too small or too short, Taunt-masted. she is vnder masted or low masted, Vnder-masted. and cannot beare so great a saile as should giue her her true way. For a man of warre, a well ordered Taunt-mast is best, but for a long voyage, a short Mast will beare more Canuasse, and is lesse subiect to beare by the boord: Their Rules are diuers, because no Artist can build a Ship so truly to proportion, neither set her Masts, but by the triall of her condition, they may bee impayred or amended: suppose a Ship of 300. An example. Tunnes be 29. foot at the Beame, if her maine Mast be 24. inches dia∣meter, the length of it must be 24. yards, for euery inch in thicknesse is allowed a yard in length, and the fore Mast 22. inches in thicknesse, must bee 22. yards in length; your Bowle spret both in length and thicknesse must bee equall to the ore Mast, the Misen 17. yards in length, and 17. inches diameter. But the Rule most vsed is to take the ⅘ parts of the bredth of the Ship, and multiply that by three, The rule most vsed. will giue you so many foot as your maine Mast should bee in length, the bignesse or thicknesse will beare it also, allowing an inch for a yard; but if it be a made Mast, A made Mast, or an arme Mast. that is greater than one Tree, it must be more: for example, suppose the Ships bredth 30. foot, foure fifts of 30. foot are 24. foot, so you finde the maine Mast must be 24. yards long, for euery yard is 3. foot and 24. inches thorow, allowing an inch to euery yard. The fore Mast is to be in length ⅘ of the maine Mast, which will be 20. yards wanting one ⅘ part of a yard, and 20. inches thorow. The Boulspret must euer bee equall with the fore Mast. The misen Mast halfe the length of the maine Mast, which will be 12. yards long, and 12. inches diameter. Now as you take the proportion of the Masts from the Beame or bredth of the Ships, so doe you the length of the yards from the Keele. The Steps. These Masts haue each their steps in the Ship, and their partners at euery Decke where thorow they passe to the Keele, Partners. being strong timbers bolted to the Beams in circling the Masts, to keep them steady in their steps fast wedged for rowling; yet some ships will not saile so wel as when it doth play a little, but that is very dangerous in foule weather. Their Cotes are p eces of torred Canuas, Cotes. Tarpawling. or a Tarpawling put about them and the Rudder to keepe the water out. At the top of the fore Mast and maine Mast are spliced cheeks, Cheeks. or thicke clamps of wood, thorow which are in each two holes called the Hounds, The Hounds. wherein the Tyes doe runne to hoise the yards, but the top Mast hath but one hole or hound, The Cap. and one tye. Euery Mast also hath a Cap if a top; which is a peece of square timber with a round hole in it to receiue the top Masts or Flag-staffe, to keepe them steady and strong, left they be borne by the boord in a stiffe gale. The Crosse-trees are also at the head of the Masts, Cross-trees. one let into another crosse, Tressel-trees. and strongly bolted with the Tressell trees, to keepe vp the top Masts which are fastened in them, and those are at the tops of each Mast; all the Masts stand vpright but the Boulspret which lyeth along ouer the Beak-head, and that timber it resteth on is called the Pillow. Pillow. An example of the Yards by the Keele. Now for the yards, suppose the ship be 76. foot at the Keele, her maine yard must be 21. yards in length, and in thicknesse but 17. inches. The fore Yard 19. yards long, and 15. inches diameter or thick. The spret-saile Yard 16. yards long, and but nine inches thicke, and your Misen-yard so long as the Mast, the top yards beares halfe pro∣portion to the maine, and fore yard, and the top gallants, the halfe to them, but this rule is not absolute; for if your Masts be taunt, your yards must be the shorter; if a low Mast, the longer, but this is supposed the best. To haue the maine Yard parts of her Keele in length: the top Yard ¾ of the maine Yard, and the maine Yard for bignesse ¾ parts of an inch, for a yard in length. The length of the fore Yard of the maine Yard; the Crosse acke Yard and Spretsaile Yard to be of a length; but you must allow the Misen Yard and Spretsaile Yard ½ inch of thicknesse to a yard in length. But to giue a true Arithmeticall and Geometricall proportion for the building of all sorts of Ships, were they all built af∣ter one mould, as also of their Masts, Yards, Cables, Cor∣dage, and Sailes, were all the stuffe of like goodnesse, a me∣thodicall rule as you see might bee proiected: but their lengths, bredths, depths, rakes and burthens are so varia∣ble and different, that nothing but experience can possibly teach it. CHAP. IIII. The names of all the Masts, Tops, and Yards be∣longing to a Ship. T He Boul-spret, the Spretsaile yard, the Spretsaile top-mast; the Spretsaile top saile yard; the fore Mast, the fore yard, the fore top-mast, the fore top-saile yard, the fore top gallant Mast, the fore top gallant saile yard, Cores, Would∣ings, Gromits, and, Staples for all yards. The maine Mast, the maine Yard, the Maine Top. The maine top Mast; the maine top-saile Yard. The top gallant Mast, the maine top gallant saile Yard. The Trucke is a square peece of wood at the top wherein you put the Flag-staffe. The Misen, the Misen Yard, the Misen top mast, the Misen top saile yard. The Crosse Iacke. In great ships they haue two Misens, the latter is called the Bonauenture Mi∣sen. A Iury Mast, that is, when a Mast is borne by the boord, with Yards, Roofes, Trees, or what they can, spli∣ced or fished together they make a Iury-mast, woulding or binding them with ropes fast triced together with hand∣spikes, as they vse to would or binde any Mast or Yard. CHAP. V. How all the Tackling and Rigging of a Ship is made fast one to another, with their names, and the reasons of their vse. Riggage or Cor∣dage. T He rigging a Ship, is all the Ropes or Cordage belonging to the Masts and Yards; A Mast well rig∣ged. A Yard well rig∣ged. and it is proper to say, The Mast is well rigged, or the Yard is well rig∣ged, that is, when all the Ropes are well sised to a true proportion of her bur∣then. We say also, when they are too many or too great, Ouer rigged. shee is ouer-rigged, and doth much wrong a Ship in her sailing; for a small waight aloft, is much more in that nature than a much greater below, and the more vpright any Ship goeth, the better she saileth. All Masts haue staies except one. A Coller. A Lannier. All the Masts, Top-masts, and Flag-staues haue staies, excepting the Spret saile-top Mast, the Maine Masts stay is made fast by a Lannier to a Coller, which is a great Rope that comes about the head and Boulspret, the other end to the head of the maine Mast. The maine top-Masts stay is fastened to the head of the fore Mast by a strop and a dead mans eye. Dead mens eyes. The maine top-gallant Masts stay in like manner to the head of the fore top-Mast. The fore Masts and stayes belonging to them in like manner are fastened to the Boul∣spret, and Spretsaile top-Mast, and those staies doe helpe to stay the Boulspret. The Misen staies doe come to the maine Mast, and the Misen top-Mast staies to the shrouds with Crowes-feet: Crowes-feet. the vse of those staies are to keepe the Masts from falling aftwards, or too much forwards. Those Lanniers are many small Ropes recued into the dead mens eyes of all shrouds, either to slaken them or set them taught; also all the staies haue their blocks, and dead mens eyes haue Lanniers. Dead mens eyes are blocks, some small, some great, with many holes but no shiuers, the Crowes-feet re ∣ued horow them are a many of small lines, sometimes 6.8. or 10. but of small vse more than for fashion to make the Ship shew full of small Ropes. Blocks or Pullies are thick peeces of wood hauing shiuers in them, Blocks or Pullies. Shiuers. which is a little Wheele fixed in the middest with a Cocke or Pin, A Cocke. some are Brasse, but the most of Wood, whereon all the run∣ning Ropes doe runne, some are little, some great, Running ropes. with 3.4. or 5. shiuers in them, and are called by the names of the Ropes whereto they serue. There are also double blocks, Double blocks. that where there is vse of much strength will purchase with much ease, but not so fast as the other, and when wee hale any Tackle or Haleyard to which two blocks doe belong, when they meet, we call that blocke and blocke. Block and block. The Shrouds are great Ropes which goe vp either sides of all Masts. All Masts haue Shrouds, &c. The Misen maine Mast fore Mast shrouds haue as their lower ends dead mens eyes seased into them, and are set vp taught by Lanniers to the chaines; at the other end, ouer the heads of those Masts are pendants, for Tackels and Swifters vnder them. The top-Masts shrouds in like manner are fastened with Lanniers and dead mens eyes to the Puttocks or plats of iron belonging to them, aloft ouer the head of the Mast as the other: Chaines. and the Chaines are strong plates of iron fast bolted into the Ships side by the Chaine-waile. When the Shrouds are too stiffe, we say, ease them, To Ease. Taught. when too slacke, we say, set Taught the Shrouds, but the Boulspret hath no Shrouds, and all those small ropes doe crosse the Shrouds like steps are called Ratlings. Ratlings. Puttocks. The Puttocks goe from the Shrouds of the fore Mast, maine Mast or Misen, to goe off from the Shrouds into the Top, Cap, or Bowle, which is a round thing at the head of ei∣ther Mast for men to stand in, for when the Shrouds come neere the top of the Mast, they fall in so much, that without the Puttocks you could not get into the Top, and in a man∣ner they are a kinde of a Shroud. Pendants. A Pendant is a short rope made fast at one end to the head of the Mast or the Yards arme, hauing at the other end a blocke with a shiuer to reeue some running rope in, as the Pendants of the backe staies and Tackles hang a little downe on the in∣side of the Shrouds: all Yards-armes haue them but the Misen, into which the Braces are reeued, and also there are Pendants or Streamers hang from the yards armes, made of Taffa y, or coloured flanell cloth to beautifie the Ship onely: Parrels. Parrels are little round Balls called Trucks, and lit∣tle peeces of wood called ribs, Ribs. and ropes which doe in∣circle the Masts, and so made fast to the Yards, that the Yards may slip vp and downe easily vpon the Masts, and with the helpe of the Brest-rope doth keepe the Yard close to the Mast. Brest-ropes. Standing ropes. The standing ropes are the shrouds and staies, because they are not remoued, except it be to be eased or set taughter. The Tackles or ropes runne in three parts, The Tackles are of diuers sorts, &c. hauing a Pendant with a blocke at the one end, and a blocke with a hooke at the other, to heaue any thing in or out of the ship; they are of diuers sorts, as the Botes tackles made fast the one to the fore shrouds, the other to the maine, to hoise the Bote in or out: also the tackles that keepe firme the Masts from straying. The Gunners tackles for haling in or out the Ordnances: but the winding tackle is the greatest, which is a great double blocke with three shiuers to the end of a small Cable about the head of the Mast, and serueth as a Pendant. To which is made fast a Guy, A Guy. which is a rope brought to it from the fore mast, to keepe the weight vpon it steady, or from swinging to and againe▪ Into the blocke is reeued a hawser, which is also reeued thorow ano∣ther double blocke, hauing a strop at the end of it; which put thorow the eye of the slings is locked into it with a fid, and so hoise the goods in or out by the helpe of the Snap-blocke. Cat harpings are small ropes runne in little blockes from one side of the ship to the other, Cat harpings. neere the vpper decke to keepe the shrouds tight for the more safety of the mast from rowling. The Halyards belong to all masts, Halyards. for by them wee hoise the yards to their height, The Ties. and the Ties are the ropes by which the yards doe hang, and doe carry vp the yards when wee straine the Halyards; the maine yard and fore yard ties are first reeued thorow the Rams head, then thorow the Hounds, with a turne in the eye of the slings which are made fast to the yard; the missen yard and top yard haue but single Ties, that is, one doth but run in one part, but the Spretsaile yard hath none, for it is made fast with a paire of slings to the boltspret. A Horse. A Horse is a rope made fast to the fore mast shrouds, and the Spretsaile sheats, to keepe those sheats cleare of the anchor flookes. To sling is to make fast any caske, yard, ordnances, To Sling. Slings. or the like in a paire of Slings, and Slings are made of a rope spliced at either end into it selfe with one eye at either end, so long as to bee sufficient to receiue the caske, the middle part of the rope also they seaze together, and so maketh ano∣ther eye to hitch the hooke of the tackle, another sort are made much longer for the hoising of ordnances, another is a chaine of iron to Sling or binde the yards fast aloft to the crossetre s in a ight, left the ties should bee cut, and so the mast must fall. Canhookes. The Canhookes are two hookes fastened to the end of a rope with a noose, like this the Brewers vse to g or carry their barrels on, and those serue also to take in or out hog heads, or any other commodities. A Parbunkell. A Parbunkel is two ropes that haue at each end a noose or lumpe that being crossed, you may set any vessell that hath but one head vp∣on them, bringing but the loopes ouer the vpper end of the caske, fix but the tackle to them, and then the vessel will stand strait in the middest to heaue out, or take in without spilling. Puddings. Puddings are ropes nailed round to the yards armes close to the end, a pretty distance one from another, to saue the Robbins from galling vpon the yards, or to serue the anchors ring to saue the clinch of the cable from gal∣ling. Robbins. And the Robbins are little lines reeued into the eylet holes of the saile vnder the head ropes, to make fast the saile to the yard, for in stead of tying, sea men alwayes say, Headlines. make fast. Head lines, are the ropes that make all the sailes fast to the yard. Furling lines. Furling lines are small lines made fast to the top saile, top gallant saile, A smiting line. and the missen yards armes. The missen hath but one called the smiting line, the other on each side one, and by these we farthell or binde vp the sailes. Brales. The Brales are small ropes reeued thorow Blockes seased on each side the ties, and come down before the saile, and at the very skirt are fastened to the Creengles, with them we furle or farthell our sailes acrosse, and they belong onely to the two cour∣ses and the missen: to hale vp the Brales, or brale vp the saile, Creengles. is all one; Creengles are little ropes spliced into the Bolt-ropes of all sailes belonging to the maine and fore mast, to which the bolings bridles are made fast, and to hold by when we shake off a Bonnet. Bolt ropes. Boltropes is that rope is sowed about euery saile, soft and gently twisted, for the better sowing and handling the sailes. Bunt lines. Bunt lines is but a small rope made fast to the middest of the Boltrope to a creengle reeued thorow a small blocke which is seased to the yard, to trice or draw vp the Bunt of the saile, Clew Garnet. when you farthell or make it vp. The Clew gar∣net is a rope made fast to the clew of the saile, and from thence runnes in a blocke seased to the middle of the yard, which in furling doth hale vp the clew of the saile close to the middle of the yard, Clew line. and the clew line is the same to the top s iles top gallant and spret sailes, as the Clew garnet is to the maine and foresailes. The Clew of a saile is the lowest corner next the Sheat and Tackes, A Clew. and stretcheth somewhat goaring or sloping from the square of the saile, and according to the Goaring she is said to spread a great or a little clew. Goaring. Tackes. Tackes are great ropes which hauing a wall-knot at one end seased into the clew of the saile, and so ree∣ued first thorow the chestres, and then commeth in at a hole in the ships sides, this doth carry forward the clew of the saile to make it stand close by a wind. Sheats. The Sheats are bent to the clews of all sailes, in the low sailes they hale aft the clew of the sailes, but in top sailes they serue to hale them home, that is, to bring the clew close to the yards arme. The Braces belong to all yards but the missen, euery yard hath two reeued at their ends thorow two pendants, Braces. and those are to square the yards, or trauasse them as you please. The Boling is made fast to the leech of the saile about the middest to make it stand the sharper or closer by a wind, Boling. it is fastened by two, three, or foure ropes like a crows foot to as many parts of the saile which is called the Boling bri∣dles, Boling bridles. onely the missen Boling is fastened to the lower end of the yard, this rope belongs to all sailes except the Spret∣saile, and Spret-saile Top-saile, which not hauing any place to hale it forward by, they cannot vse those sailes by a wind: sharp the maine Boling is to hall it taught: Sharp the Bo∣ling. Ch cke the Boling. Lee fanng. hale vp the Boling is to pull it harder forward on: checke or ease the Boling is to let it be more slicke. Lee fanngs is a rope reeued into the creengles of the cour∣ses, when wee would hale in the bottome of the saile, to lash on a bonnet or take in the saile; Reeuing. and Reeuing is but draw∣ing a rope thorow a blocke or oylet to runne vp and down. Leech lines. Leech lines are small ropes made fast to the Leech of the top-sailes, for they belong to no other; and are reeued into a blocke at the yard close by the top-saile ties, to hale in the Leech of the saile when you take them in. Leech of a saile. The Leech of a saile is the outward side of a skirt of a saile, from the earing to the clew; Earings. and the Earing is that part of the bunt rope which at all the foure corners of the saile is left open as it were a ring. The two vpmost parts are put ouer the ends of the yards armes, and so made fast to the yards, and the lowermost are seased or Bent to the sheats, Bent. and tackes into the clew. Lifts. The Lifts are two ropes which belong to all yards armes, to top the yards; that is, to make them hang higher or lower at your pleasure. But the top-saile Lifts doe serue for sheats to the top gallant yards, the haling them is called the Topping the Lifts, Topping the Lifts. Legs. as top a starboard, or top a port. Legs. Legs are small ropes put thorow the bolt ropes of the maine and fore saile, neere to a foot in length, spliced each end into the other in the leech of the saile, hauing a little eye whereunto the martnets are fastened by two hitches, Martnet. and the end seased into the standing parts of the martners, which are also small lines like crow feet reeued thorow a blocke at the top mast head, and so comes downe by the mast to the decke; but the top-saile martnets are made fast to the head of the top gallant mast, and commeth but to the top, where it is haled and called the top marnets, they serue to bring that part of the leech next the yards arme vp close to the yard, Latchets. Latchets are small lines sowed in the Bonnets and Drablers like loops to lash or make fast the Bonnet to the course, Lashing. The Loose hook. or the course to the Drabler, which we call lashing the Bonnet to the course, or the Drabler to the Bonnet. The Loose hooke is a tackle with two hookes, one to hitch into a chingle of the maine, or fore saile, in the bolt rope in the leech of the saile by the cl w, Bouse. and the other to strap spliced to the chestres to bouse or pull downe the saile to succour the tackes in a stiffe gale of wind, A Bonnet. A Drabler. A Course. or take off or put on a Bonnet or a Drabler, which are two short sailes to take off or put to the fore course or the maine, which is the fore saile, or maine saile. A Knaue-line. The Knaue-line is a rope hath one end fastened to the crosse trees, and so comes downe by the ties to the R ms head, to which is seased a small peece of wood some two foot long with a hole in the end, whereunto the line is ree∣ued, and brought to the ships side, and h led taught to the Railes to keepe the ties and Halyards from turning about one another when they are new. Knettels are two rope yarnes twisted together, and a knot at each end, Knettels. whereun∣to to sease a blocke, a rope, or the like. Rope yarnes. Rope yarnes are the yarnes of any rope vntwisted, they serue to sarue small ropes, or make Sinnet, Mats, Plats, or Caburnes, and make vp the sailes at the yards armes. Sinnet is a string made of rope yarne commonly of two, foure, six, Sinnet. eight or nine strings platted in three parts, which being beat flat they vse it to sarue ropes or Mats. That which we call a Panch, are broad clouts, Mats or Panch. wo∣uen of Thrums and Sinnet together, to saue things from galling about the maine and fore yards at the ties, and also from the masts, and vpon the Boltspret, Louse, Beake∣head or Gunwaile to saue the clewes of the sailes from gal∣ling or fretting. Caburne. Caburne is a small line made of spun yarne to make a bend of two Cables, or to sease the Tackels, Seasing. or the like. Seasing is to binde fast any ropes together, with some small rope yarne. Marline is any line, to a blocke, or any tackell, Pendant, Garnet, or the like. There is also a rope by which the Boat doth ride by the ships side, Seasen. Sarue or Siruis. w ch we cal a Seasen. To sarue any rope with plats or Sinnet, is but to lay Sinnet, Spun yarne, Rope yarne, or a peece of Canuas vpon the rope, and then rowle it fast to keepe the rope from galling about the shrowds at the head of the masts, the Cable in the Hawse, the flooke of the Anchor, Spunyarne. the Boat rope or any thing. Spunyarne is nothing but rope yarne made small at the ends, Caskets. and so spun one to another so long as you will with a winch. Also Caskets are but small ropes of Sinnet made fast to the gromits or rings vpon the yards, the longest are in the midst of the yards betwixt the ties, and are called the brest Caskets, hanging on each side the yard in small lengths, only to binde vp the saile when it is furled. Marling is a small line of vntwisted hemp, Marling. very pliant and well tarred, to sease the ends of Ropes from raueling out, or the sides of the blockes at their arses, or if the saile r ntout of the Boltrope, they will make it fast with marlin till they haue leisure to mend it. Marling spike. The marling spike, is but a small peece of iron to splice ropes together, or open the bolt rope when you sew the saile. Splicing. Splicing is so to let one ropes end into another they shall be as fitme as if they were but one rope, A round Splice. A cut Splice. and this is called a round Splice; but the cut Splice is to let one into another with as much distance as you will, and yet bee strong, and vndoe when you will. Now to make an end of this discourse with a knot, A Knot. you are to know, A Wall knot. Sea-men vse three, the first is called the Wall knot, which is a round knob, so made with the strouds or layes of a rope, it cannot slip; the Sheates, Takes, and Stoppers vse this knot. A Boling knot. The Boling knot is also so firmely made and fastened by the bridles into the creengles of the sailes, they will breake, or the saile split before it will slip. The last is the Shepshanke, which is a knot they cast vpon a Runner or Tackle when it is too long to take in the goods, Sheepshanks Knot. and by this knot they can shorten a rope without cutting it, as much as they lift, and presently vndoe it againe, and yet neuer the worse. CHAP. VI. What doth belong to the Boats and Skiffe with the definition of all those thirteene Ropes which are onely properly called Ropes belonging to a ship and the Boat and their vse. O F Boats there are diuers sorts, but those be¦longing to ships, A long Boat. are called either the long Boat or ships Boat, which should bee able to weigh her sheat anchor, those will liue in any reasonable sea, especially the long Boat; A Shallop. A Skiffe. great ships haue also other small Boats called Shallops and Skiffes, which are with more ease and lesse trouble rowed to and againe vpon any small occasion. To a Boat belongs a mast and saile, a stay sheat & Halyard, Rudder & Rudder irons, as to a ship, also in any discouery they vse a Tarpawling, Tarpawling. Bailes. which ia a good peece of Canuas washed ouer with Tar, to couer the Bailes or hoopes ouer the sterne of their Boat, where they lodge in an harbor which is that you call a Tilt couered with wad∣mall in your Wherries; or else an Awning, Awning. which is but the bo s saile, or some peece of an old saile brought ouer the yard and stay, and boumed out with the boat hooke, so spread ouer their heads, which is also much vsed, as well a shore as in a ship, especially in hot countreys to keepe men from the extremity of heat or wet which is very oft infecti∣ous. Thoughts are the sea s whereon the Rowers fit; Thoughts. Thowles. and Thowles small pins put into little holes in the Gunwaile or vpon the Boats side, against which they beare the oares when they row, they haue also a Daued, and also in long Boats a windlesse to weigh the anchor by, which is with more ease than the ship can. The two arching timbers a∣gainst the Boat head are called Carlings. Man the Boat is to put a Gang of men, which is a company into her, A Gang. they are commonly called the Coxswaine Gang who hath the charge of her. Free the Boat is to baile or cast out the wa∣ter. Free or Baile. Trim the Boat is to keepe her stright. Trim Boat. Winde Boat. Hold water. Forbeare. A Spell. Winde the Boat is to bring her head the other way. Hold water is to stay her. Forbeare is to hold still any oare you are cōmanded, or on the broad, or whole side. A fresh Spell is to releeue the Rowers with another Gang, giue the Boat more way for a dram of the bottell, who saies Amends, one and all, Vea, vea, vea, Vea, vea, vea. vea, vea, that is, they pull all strongly together. The Entering rope is tied by the ships side, The Entering rope. to hold by as you goe vp the Entering ladder, cleats, or wailes. The Bucket rope that is tied to the Bucket by which you hale and draw water vp by the ships side. Bucket rope. The Bolt ropes are those wherein the sailes are sowed. Bolt ropes. The Port ropes hale vp the Ports of the Ordnances. Port ropes. The Ieare rope is a peece of a hawser made fast to the eare rope. maine yard, another to the fore yard close to the ties, ree∣ued thorow a blocke which is seased close to the top, and to comes downe by the mast, and is reeued thorow another blocke at the bottome of the mast close by the decke; great ships haue on each side the ties one, but small ships none: the vse is to helpe to hoise vp the yard to succour the ties, which though they breake yet they would hold vp the mast. Preuenter rope. The Preuenter rope is a little one seased crosse ouer the ies, that if one part of them should breake, yet the other should not runne thorow the Rams head to indanger the yard. Top ropes. The Top ropes are those wherewith we set or strike the maine or fore Top masts, it is reeued thorow a great blocke seased vnder the Cap, reeued thorow the heele of the Top mast thwart ships, and then made fast to a ring with a clinch on the other side the Cap, the other part comes downe by the ties, reeued into the Knights, and so brought to the Capstaine when they set the Top masts. Keele ropes. The Keele rope, you haue read in the building, is of haire in the Keele to scower the Limber holes. Rudder rope. The Rudder rope is reeued thorow the stem post, and go∣eth thorow the head of the Rudder, and then both ends spliced together, serues to saue the Rudder if it should bee strucke off the irons. Cat rope. The Cat rope is to hale vp the Cat. Boy rope. The Boy rope is that which is tied to the boy by the one end, and the anchors flooke by the other. Boat rope. The Boat rope is that which the ship doth tow her Boat by, at her sterne. Ghest rope. Shearing. The Ghest rope is added to the Boat rope when shee is towed at the ships sterne, to keepe her from shearing, that is, from swinging to and againe; for in a stiffe gale she will make such yawes, and haue such girds, it would indanger her to bee torne in peeces, Swifting. but that they vse to swift her, that is, to incircle the Gunwaile with a good rope, and to that make fast the Ghest rope. Chap. VII. The names of all sorts of Anchors, Cables, and Sailes, and how they beare their propor∣tions, with their vse. Also how the Ord∣nances should bee placed, and the goods stowed in a ship. T He proper tearmes belonging to Anchors are many: the least are called Kedgers, A Kedger. to vse in calme weather in a slow streame, or to kedg vp and downe a narrow Riuer, which is when they feare the winde or tide may driue them on shore; they row by her with an Anchor in a boat, and in the middest of the streame, or where they finde most fit if the Ship come too neere the shore, and so by a Hawser winde her head about, then waigh it againe till the like occasion, and this is ked∣ging. There is also a streame Anchor not much bigger, Streame An∣chor. The first. Second. Third Anchor. Sheat Anchor. to stemme in easie stream or tide. Then there is the first, second, and third Anchor, yet all such as a Ship in faire weather may ride by, and are called Bow Anchors. The greatest is the sheat Anchor, and neuer vsed but in great necessity. They are commonly made according to the burthen of the Ship by proportion, for that the sheat Anchor of a small ship will not serue for a Kedger to a great ship. An Anchors shanke. Flook. Shoulder. Beame or Nut. Eye. Ring. Stocke. Also it bea∣reth a proportion in it selfe, as the one flooke, which is that doth sticke in the ground, is but the third part of the shanke in length; at the head of the Shanke there is a hole called an Eye, and in it a Ring, wherein is the Nut to which there is fast fixed a Stocke of wood crossing the Flookes, and the length is taken from the length of the Shanke. These differ not in shape but in waight, from two hundred, to three or foure thousand waight. Grapells, or Graplings, are the least of all, and haue foure flookes but no stock; for a boat to ride by, or to throw into a ship in a fight, to pull downe the gratings or hold fast. A Cable, the first, second, and third. The Cables also carry a proportion to the Anchors, but if it be not three stroud, it is accounted but a Hawser, yet a great ships Hawser may be a Cable to the sheat Anchor for a small ship: and there is the first, second, and third Cable, besides the Sheat Anchor Cable. Sheat Anchor Cable. Keckell. If the Cable bee well made, we say it is well laid. To keckell or sarue the Cable, as is said, is but to bind some old clouts to keepe it from galling in the Hawse or Ring. Splice. Splice a Cable, is to fasten two ends together, that it may be double in length, to make the Ship ride with more ease, A shot of Cable. Quoile. A Fake. Pay. Pay cheape. and is called a shot of Cable. Quoile a Cable, is to lay it vp in a round Ring; or fake one aboue another. Pay more Cable, is when you carry an Anchor out in the boat to turne ouer. Pay cheap, is when you ouer set it, or turnes it ouer boord faster. Veere more Cable, End for end. is when you ride at Anchor. And end for end is when the Cable runneth cleere out of the Hawse, or any Rope out of his shiuer. A Bight. A Bight is to hold by any part of a coile, A Bitter. that is, the vpmost fake. A Bitter is but the turne of a Cable about the Bits, and veare it out by little and little. And the Bitters end is that part of the Cable doth stay within boord. A Bitters end. Gert. Gert, is when the Cable is so taught that vp∣on the turning of a tide, a Ship cannot goe ouer it. To bend. To bend the Cable to the Anchor, is to make it fast to the Ring; Vnbend. vnbend the Cable, is but to take it away, which we vsually doe when we are at Sea, and to tie two ropes or Cables together is called bending. Bending. Hitch. Hitch, is to catch hold of any thing with a rope to hold it fast, or with a hooke, as hitch the fish-hooke to the Anchors flooke, Fenders. Iunkes. or the Tackles into the Garnets of the Slings. Fenders are peeces of old Hawsers called Iunkes hung ouer the ship sides to keepe them from brusing. In boats they vse poles or boat∣hooks to fend off the boat from brusing. Brest fast. A Brest-fast is a rope which is fastened to some part of the Ship forward on, to hold her head to a wharfe or any thing, Stern fast. and a Sterne-fast is the same in the Sterne. The vse for the Hawser is to warp the Ship by, which is laying out an Anchor, and winde her vp to it by a Capsterne. Rousing. Rousing is but pulling the slack∣nesse of any Cables with mens hands into the Ship. Shank-panter. The Shank painter is a short chaine fastend vnder the fore masts shrouds with a bolt to the ships sides, and at the other end a rope to make fast the Anchor to the Bow. Stop. To stop is when you come to an Anchor, and veares out your Cable, but by degrees till the Ship ride well, then they say stop the Ship. To those Cables and Anchors belongs short peeces of wood called Boyes, Boyes. or close hooped barrels like Tan∣kards as is said, but much shorter, to shew you the Anchor and helpe to waigh it, there is another sort of Cans called Can Boyes much greater, Can Boyes. mored vpon shoules to giue Mar∣riners warning of the dangers. The maine saile and the fore saile is called the fore course, Sailes. Maine Saile. Fore Saile. Maine course. Fore course. Bonits. Drablers. and the maine course or a paire of courses. Bonits and Dra∣blers are commonly one third part a peece to the saile they belong vnto in depth, but their proportion is vncertaine; for some will make the maine saile so deepe, that with a shallow bonet they will cloath all the Mast without a Dra∣bler, but without bonets we call them but courses; we say, lash on the bonet to the course, because it is made fast with La chets into the eylot holes of the saile, Maine top Saile. Fore top Saile. Top gallant Sailes. Studding Sailes. as the Drabler is to it, and vsed as the wind permits. There is also your maine top-saile, and fore top-saile, with their top-gallant sailes, and in a faire gaile your studding sailes, which are bolts of Canuasse, or any cloth that will hold wind, wee ex end alongst the side of the maine saile, and boomes i out with a boome or long pole, which we vse also sometimes to the clew of the maine saile, fore saile, and spret saile, Misen. Misen top Saile. Spret saile. Spretsaile top. Saile. Drift Saile. when you goe before the wind or quartering, else not. Your Miszen, and Miszen top-saile, your Spret and Spret top-saile, as the rest, take all their names of their yards. A Drift saile is onely vsed vnder water, veared out right a head by sheats, to keepe the Ships head right vpon the Sea in a storme, or when a ship driues too fast in a current. Netting Saile. A Netting saile is onely a saile laid ouer the Netting, Nettings. which is small ropes from the top of the fore castle to the Poope, stretched vpon the ledges from the Waist-trees to the Rouse-trees, Waist-trees. Rouse-trees. which are onely small Timbers to beare vp the Gratings from the halfe Decke to the fore-castle, Stantions. Gratings. supported by Stantions that rest vpon the halfe Decke; and this Netting or Grating, which is but the like made of wood, you may set vp or take downe when you please, and is called the close fights fore and aft. Head Sailes. Now the vse of those sailes is thus, all head Sailes which are those belonging to the fore Mast and Boltsprer, doe keepe the Ship from the wind or to fall off. After Sailes. All after sailes, that is, all the sailes belonging to the maine Mast and Miszen keepes her to wind ward, therefore few ships will steare vpon quarter winds with one saile, but must haue one after saile, and one head saile. The sailes are cut in proportion as the Masts and Yards are in bredth and length, but the Spret-saile is parts the depth of the fore saile, and the Miszen by the Leech twise so deepe as the Mast is long from the Decke to the Hounds. Leech. The Leech of a saile is the outward side or skirt of the saile from the earing to the clew, the middle betwixt which wee account the Leech. The Clew. The Clew is the lower corner of a Saile, to which you make fast your Sheats and Tacks, or that which comes goring out from the square of the saile, Goring. for a square saile hath no Clew, but the mainesaile must bee cut goring, be∣cause the Tacks will come closer aboord, and so cause the saile to hold more wind; now when the Saile is large and hath a good Clew, we say she spreds a large Clew, or spreds much Canuas. In making those sailes they vse two sorts of seames downe the Sailes, which doth sow the bredth of the Canuas together, A Monke seame. A Round seame. the one we call a Munke seame, which is flat, the other a round seame, which is so called because it is round. The Ship being thus prouided, there wants yet her Ordnances, which should be in greatnesse according to her building in strength and burthen, but the greatest com∣monly lieth lowest, which we call the lower tier, if she bee furnished fore and aft. Likewise the second Tier, A Tier. Third. Second. Halfe a Tier. and the third, which are the smallest. The fore-Castle and the halfe Decke being also furnished, wee account halfe a Tier. Sowage or to stow, Stowage. To Stow. Ballast. is to put the goods in Howle in order. The most ponderous next the Ballast, which is next the Keelson to keepe her stiffe in the Sea. Balast is either Grauell, Stones, or Lead, but that which is driest, heauiest, and lies closest is best. To finde a leake, Trench the Bal∣last. Shout. they trench the Ballast, that is, to diuide it. The Ballast wil sometimes shoot, that is, run from one side to another, and so will Corne and Salt, if you make not Pouches or Bulk-heads, which when the Ship doth heeld is very dangerous to ouer et or turne the Keele vpwards. For Caske that is so stowed, tier aboue tier with Ballast, and canting Coines, Canting Coines. which are little short peeces of wood or Billets cut with a sharpe ridge or edge to lye betwixt the Caske; Standing Coines. To beare. and standing Coines are Billets or Pipe-staues, to make them they cannot giue way nor stirre. The ship will beare much, that is, carry much Ordnance or goods, or beare much saile; and when you let any thing downe into the Howle, lowering it by degrees, they say, Amaine; and being downe, Strike. CHAP. VIII. The charge and duty of the Captaine of a ship, and euery Office and Officer in a man of Warre. The Captaines charge. T He Captaines charge is to command all, and tell the Master to what Port hee will goe, or to what Height; In a fight he is to giue direction for the managing thereof, and the Master is to see the cunning of the ship, and trimming of the sailes. The Master and his Mates. The Master and his Mates are to di∣rect the course, command all the Sailers, for stearing, trim∣ming, and sailing the ship; his Mates are only his seconds, allowed sometimes for the two mid ships men, that ought to take charge of the first prise. The Pilot. The Pilot when they make land doth take the charge of the ship till he bring her to harbour. The Chirurgion and his Mate. The Chirurgion is to be exempted from all duty, but to attend the sicke, and cure the wounded: and good care would be had he haue a certificate from Barber Chirurgions Hall of his sufficiency, and also that his chest be well fur∣nished both for Physicke and Chirurgery, and so neare as may be proper for that clime you goe for, which neglect hath beene the losse of many a mans life. The Cape-mer∣chant or Purser. The Cape-merchant or Purser hath the charge of all the Ca ragasoune or merchandize, and doth keepe an account of all that is receiued, or deliuered, but a man of Warre hath onely a Purser. The Gunner with his Mate, and quarter Gunners. The Master Gunner hath the charge of the ordnance, and shot, powder, match, ladles, spunges, wormes, car∣trages, armes and fire-workes; and the rest of the Gunners, or quarter Gunners to receiue their charge from him accor∣ding to directions, and to giue an account of their store. The Carpenter and his Mate, is to haue the nailes, clin∣ches, The Carpenter and his Mate. rooue and clinch nailes, spikes, plates, rudder irons, pumpe nailes, skupper nailes and leather, sawes, files, hat∣chets and such like, and euer ready for calking, breaming, stopping leakes, fishing, or splicing the mafts or yards as occasion requireth, and to giue an account of his store. The Boatswaine is to haue the charge of all the cordage, The Boatswaine and his Mate. tackling, sailes, fids and marling spikes, needles, twine, saile-cloth, and rigging the ship, his Mate the command of the long boat, for the setting forth of anchors, weigh∣ing or fetching home an anchor, warping, towing, or mo∣ring, and to giue an account of his store. The Trumpeter is alwayes to attend the Captaines com∣mand, The Trumpeter. and to sound either at his going a shore, or com∣ming aboord, at the entertainment of strangers, also when you hale a ship, when you charge, boord, or enter; and the poope is his place to stand or sit vpon, if there bee a noise, they are to attend him, if there be not, euery one hee doth teach to beare a part, the Captaine is to incourage him, by increasing his shares, or pay, and giue the master Trumpe∣ter a reward. The Marshall is to punish offenders, The Marshall. and to see iustice ex∣ecuted according to directions; as ducking at the yards arme, haling vnder the keele, bound to the capsterne, or maine mast with a basket of shot about his necke, setting in the bilbowes, and to pay the Cobtie or the Morioune; but the boyes the Boatswaine is to see euery Munday at the chest, to say their compasse, and receiue their punishment for all their weekes offences, which done, they are to haue a quarter can of beere, and a basket of bread, but if the Boatswaine eat or drinke before hee catch them, they are free. The Corporall is to see the setting and releeuing the watch, The Corporall. and see all the souldiers and sailers keepe their armes cleane, neat, and yare and teach them their vse. The Steward & his Mate. The Steward is to deliuer out the victuals according to the Captaines directions, and messe them foure, fiue, or six, as there is occasion. The quarter Masters. The quarter Masters haue the charge of the howle, for stowing, romaging, and trimming the ship in the hold, and of their squadrons for the watch, and for fishing to haue a Sayne, a fisgig, a harpin yron, and fish hookes, for Porgos, Bonetos, Dolphins, or Dorados, and rayling lines for Mackrels. The Cooper and his Mate. The Cooper is to looke to the caske, hoopes and twigs, to staue or repaire the buckets, baricos, cans, steepe tubs, runlets, hogsheads, pipes, buts, &c. for wine, beare, sider, beuerage, fresh water, or any liquor. The Coxswaine and his Mate. The Coxswaine is to haue a choise Gang to attend the skiffe to goe to and againe as occasion commandeth. The Cooke and his Mate. The Cooke is to dresse and deliuer out the victuall, hee hath his store of quarter cans, small cans, platters, spoones, lanthornes, &c. and is to giue his account of the remain∣der. The Swabber. The Swabber is to wash and keepe cleane the ship and maps. The Lyar. The Liar is to hold his place but for a weeke, and hee that is first taken with a lie, euery Munday is so proclaimed at the maine mast by a generall cry, a Liar, a Liar, a Liar, hee is vnder the Swabber, and onely to keepe cleane the beake head, and chaines. The Sailers. The Sailers are the ancient men for hoising the sailes, get∣ting the tacks aboord, haling the bowlings, and stearing the ship. The Younkers. The Younkers are the young men called sore-mast men, to take in the top-sailes, or top and yard, for surling the sailes, or slinging the yards, bousing or rising, and take their turnes at helme. The Lieutenant his place. The Lieutenant is to associate the Captaine, and in his absence to execute his place, hee is to see the Marshall and Corporall doe their duties, and assist them in instructing the souldiers, and in a fight the fore-castle is his place to make good, as the Captaine doth the halfe decke, and the quarter Masters, or Masters Mate the mid ships, and in a States man of Warre, he is allowed as necessary as a Lieute∣nant on shore. CHAP. IX. Proper Sea tearmes for diuiding the company at Sea, and stearing, sayling, or moring a Ship in faire weather, or in a storme. I T is to bee supposed by this the Ship is victualled and manned, the voiage de∣termined, Steep Tubs. the steepe Tubs in the chains to shift their Beefe, Porke, or Fish in salt water, till the salt be out though not the saltnesse, and all things else ready to set saile; but before wee goe any further, for the better vnderstanding the rest, a few words for stea∣ring and cunning the Ship would not bee amisse. Then know, Star-boord is the right hand, Lar-boord the left; Starboord. Larboord. Cunning. Stearing. Mid-ships. Port. Starboord the Helme, is to put the Helme a Starboord, then the ship will goe to the Larboord. Right your Helme, that is, to keepe it in the mid ships, or right vp. Port, that is, to put the Helme to Larboord, and the Ship will goe to the Starboord, for the Ship will euer goe contrary to the Helme. Now by a quarter wind, they will say aloofe, or keepe your loofe, keepe her to it, A loofe. Keep your loofe. War no more. No neare. Ease. Steady. haue a care of your Lee-latch. Touch the wind, and warre no more, is no more but to bid him at the Helme to keepe her so neere the wind as may be; no neere, ease the Helme, or beare vp, is to let her fall to Lee-ward. Steady, that is, to keepe her right vpon that point you steare by; Yare. be yare at the Helme, or a fresh man to the Helme. But he that keepes the Ship most from yawing doth commonly vse the lest moti∣on with the Helme, and those steare the best. The Master and company being aboord, he commands them to get the sailes to the yards, Geare. and about your geare or worke on all hands, stretch forward your maine Halliards, hoise your Sailes halfe mast high. Predy. Predy, or make ready to set saile, crosse your yards, bring your Cable to the Cap∣sterne, Boatswaine setch an Anchor aboord, breake ground or weigh Anchor. Heaue a head, men into the Tops, men vpon the yards; A Pike. come, is the Anchor a pike, that is, to heaue the Hawse of the ship right ouer the Anchor, what is the Anchor away? Tally. Yea, yea. Let fall your fore-saile. Tally, that is, hale off the Sheats; who is at the Helme there, coile your Cables in small fakes, hale the Cat, a Bitter, belay, loose fast your Anchor with your shank-painter, stow the Boat, set the land, how it beares by the Compasse that we may the better know thereby to keep our account and direct our course, let fall your maine saile, euery man say his priuate prayer for a boone voyage, out with your spret saile, on with your bonits & Drablers, steare steady & keep your course, so, you go wel. How they diuide the company at sea, and set, and rule the watch. When this is done, the Captaine or Master commands the Boatswaine to call vp the company; the Master being chiefe of the Starboord watch doth call one, and his right hand Mate on the Larboord doth call another, and so for∣ward till they be diuided in two parts, then each man is to chuse his Mate, Consort, or Comrade, and then deuide them into squadrons according to your number and bur∣then of your ship as you see occasion; these are to take their turnes at the Helme, trim sailes, pumpe, and doe all duties each halfe, or each squadron for eight Glasses or foure houres which is a watch, but care would bee had that there be not two Comrades vpon one watch because they may haue the more roome in their Cabbins to rest. And as the Captaine and masters Mates, Gunners, Carpenters, Quar∣termasters, Trumpeters, &c. are to be abast the Mast, so the Boatswaine, and all the Yonkers or common Sailers vnder his command is to be before the Mast. The next is, to messe them foure to a messe, and then giue euery messe a quarter Can of beere and a basket of bread to stay their stomacks till the Kettle be boiled, that they may first goe to prayer, then to supper, and at six a clocke sing a Psalme, say a Prayer, and the Master with his side begins the watch, then all the rest may doe what they will till midnight; and then his Mate with his Larboord men with a Psalme and a Prayer re∣leeues them till foure in the morning, and so from eight to twelue each other, except some flaw of winde come, some storme or gust, or some accident that requires the helpe of all hands, which commonly after such good cheere in most voyages doth happen. For now the wind veeres, that is, The wind veeres. it doth shift from point to point, get your Starboord tacks aboord, Tally. and tally or hale off your Lee-Sheats. The Ship will not wayer, settle your maine Topsaile, veere a fadome of your sheat. The wind comes faire againe and a fresh gale, Flowne. hale vp the slatch of the Lee-boling. By Slatch is meant the middle part of any rope hangs ouer boord. Veere more sheat, or a flowne sheat, that is, when they are not haled home to the blocke. Fly. But when we say, let fly the sheats, then they let go amaine, which commonly is in some gust, A paire of cour∣ses. lest they spend their top∣sailes, or if her quicke side lie in the water, ouerset the ship. A flowne sheat is when shee goes before the wind, or be∣twixt a paire of sheats, or all sailes drawing. But the wind shrinkes, that is, when you must take in the Spretsaile, and get the tacks aboord, hale close the maine Boling, that is, when your Tacks are close aboord. If you would saile against the wind or keepe your owne, that is, not to fall to lee-ward or goe backe againe, by halling off close your Bolings, you set your sailes so sharp as you can to lie close by a wind, thwarting it a league or two, or more or lesse, as you see cause, first on the one boord then on the other; this we call boording or beating it vp vpon a tacke in the winds eye, or bolting to and againe; but the longer your boords are, the more you worke or gather into the wind. If a sudden flaw of wind should surprise you, when you would lower a yard so fast as you can, they call A maine ; but a crosse saile cannot come neerer the wind than six points, but a Caruell whose sailes stand like a paire of Tailers sheeres, will goe much neerer. How to handle a ship in a storme. It ouer-casts we shall haue wind, fowle weather, settell your top sailes, take in the spret-saile, in with your top∣sailes, lower the fore-saile, tallow vnder the parrels, brade vp close all them sailes, lash sure the ordnance, strike your top-masts to the cap, make it sure with your sheeps feet. A storme, Try. let vs lie at Trie with our maine course, that is, to hale the tacke aboord, the sheat close aft, the boling set vp, and the helme tied close aboord. When that will not serue then Try the mizen, if that split, or the storme grow so great she cannot beare it; Hall. then hull, which is to beare no saile, but to strike a hull is when they would lie obscurely in the Sea, or stay for some consort, lash sure the helme a lee, Vnder the Sea. and so a good ship will lie at ease vnder the Sea as wee terme it. Weather coile. If shee will weather coile, and lay her head the other way without loosing a saile, that must bee done by bearing vp the Helme, and then she will driue nothing so farre to Leeward. They call it hulling also in a calme swel∣ling Sea, which is commonly before a storme, when they strike their sailes left she should beat them in peeces against the mast by Rowling. Rowling. Labour. We say a ship doth Labour much when she doth rowle much any way; but if she will neither Try nor Hull, Spoone. Then Spoone, that is, put her right before the wind, this way although shee will rowle more than the o∣ther, yet if she be weake it will not straine her any thing so much in the Trough of the Sea, Trough. which is the distance betwixt two waues or Billowes. If none of this will doe well, then she is in danger to founder, Founder. if not sinke. Foundering is when she will neither veere nor steare, the Sea will so ouer rake her, except you free out the water, she will lie like a log, and so consequently sinke. To spend a mast. To spend a mast or yard, is when they are broke by fowle weather, Spring a mast. and to spring a mast is when it is cracked in any place. In this extremity he that doth cun the ship cannot haue too much iudgement, A Yoke. nor experience to try her drift, or how she capes, which are two tearmes also vsed in the trials of the running or setting of currants. A yoke is when the Sea is so rough as that men cannot gouern the Helme with their hands, & then they sease a block to the Helme on each side at the end, & reeuiug two fals thorow them like Gunners Tac∣kles brings them to the ships side, and so some being at the one side of the Tackle, some at the other, they steare her with much more ease than they can with a single rope with a double Turne about the Helme. When the storme is past, though the wind may alter three or foure points of the compasse, or more, yet the Sea for a good time will goe the same way; then if your course be right against it, you shall meet it right a head, so we call it a head Sea. Sometimes when there is but little wind, A head Sea. there will come a contrary Sea, and presently the winde after it, wherby we may iudge that from whence it came was much winde, for commonly before any great storme the Sea will come that way. Now if the ship may runne on shore in ose or mud she may escape, or Billage on a rocke, or Ancors flooke, repaire her leake, but if she split or sinke, shee is a wracke. But seeing the storme decreaseth, let vs trie if she will endure the Hullocke of a Saile, Hullocke. which sometimes is a peece of the mizen saile or some other little saile, part opned to keepe her head to the sea, but if yet shee would weather coile, wee will loose a Hullocke of her fore-saile, and put the Helme a weather, and it will bring her head where her sterne is; courage my hearts. It cleares vp, set your fore-saile; Now it is faire weather, Lardge. Laske. out with all your sailes, goe lardge or laske, that is, when we haue a fresh gale, or faire wind, and all sailes drawing. But for more haste vnparrell the mizen yard and lanch it, and the saile ouer her Lee quarter, and fit Giues at the further end to keepe the yard steady, and with a Boome boome it out; this we call a Goose-wing. Goosewing. Who is at Helme there? Sirra you must be amongst the Points; Well Master the Channell is broad enough; Yet you cannot steare be∣twixt a paire of sheats; Those are words of mockery betwixt the Cunner and the Stearesman. But to proceed, Get your Larboord Tackes aboord, hale off your star∣boord sheats, keepe your coarse vpon the point you are di∣rected, Port, he will lay her by the lee; the staies, or backe staies, that is, when all the sailes flutter in the winde, and are not kept full, that is full of wind, they fall vpon the masts and shrowds, so that the ship goes a drift vpon her broad side, fill the sailes, keepe full, full and by. Make ready to Tacke about, is but for euery man to stand to handle the sailes and ropes they must hale, Tacke about is to beare vp the helme, and that brings her to stay all her sailes lying flat against the shrowds, then as she turnes wee say shee is payed, then let rise your Lee tacks and hale off your sheats, and trim all your sailes as they were before, which is cast of that Boling which was the weather boling, and hale vp taught the other. So all your Sheats, Brases, and Tackes are trimmed by a winde as before. To belay, is to make fast the ropes in their proper places. Round in. Round in, is when the wind larges, let rise the maine tacke and fore tacke, and hale aft the fore sheat to the cats head, and the maine sheat to the cubbridge head, this is Rounding in, or rounding aft the saile; Rounding aft. Pasarado. the sheats being there they hale them downe to keepe them firme from flying vp with a Pasarado, which is any rope wherewith wee hale downe the sheats, blockes of the maine or fore saile, when they are haled aft the clew of the maine saile to the Cubbridge head of the maine mast, and the clew of the fore saile to the Cat head; Doe this when the ships goes large. Obserue. Obserue the height, that is, at twelue a clocke to take the height of the Sunne, or in the night the North star, or in the forenoone and afternoone, if you misse these by finding the Azimuth end Alnicanter. Dead water. Dead water is the Eddie water followes the sterne of the ship, not passing a∣way so quickly as that slides by her sides. The Wake. The wake of a ship is the smooth water a sterne shewing the way shee hath gone in the sea, by this we iudge what way she doth make, for if the wake be right a sterne, we know she makes good her way forwards; but if to Lee-ward a point or two, wee then thinke to the Lee-ward of her course, but shee is a nimble ship that in turning or tacking about will not fall to thee Lee-ward of her wake when shee hath weathered it. Disimbogue is to passe some narrow strait or currant into the maine Ocean, out of some great Gulfe or Bay. Disimbogue. A Drift. A Drift is any thing floating in the sea that is of wood. Rockweed. Rockweed doth grow by the shore, and is a signe of land, yet it is oft found farre in the Sea. Lay the ship by the Lee to trie the Dipsie line, Dipsie line. which is a small line some hundred and fif∣ty fadome long, with a long plummet at the end, made hol∣low, wherein is put tallow, that will bring vp any grauell; w ch is first marked at twenty fadome, and after increased by tens to the end; and those distinguished by so many small knots vpon each little string that is fixed at the marke thorow the strouds or middest of the line, shewing it is so many times ten fadome deepe, Plummet. where the plummet doth rest from drawing the line out of your hand; this is onely vsed in deepe water when we thinke we approach the shore, for in the maine sea at 300. fadomes we finde no bottome. Bring the ship to rights, that is, againe vnder saile as she was, some vse a Log line, Log line. and a minute glasse to know what way shee makes, but that is so vncertaine, it is not worth the la∣bour to trie it. One to the top to looke out for land, Land to. Kenning. To lay a land. the man cries out Land to; which is iust so farre as a kenning, or a man may discouer, descrie, or see the land. And to lay a land is to saile from it iust so farre as you can see it. Good land fall. A good Land fall is when we fall iust with our reckoning, if otherwise a bad Land fall; but howeuer how it beares, Bad land fall. A head land. A Point. Land marke. To ai e a land. To make land. A Reach. set it by the com∣passe, and bend your Cables to the Anchors. A Head land, or a Point of land doth lie further cut at sea than the rest. A Land marke, is any Mountaine, Rocke, Church, Wind∣mill or the like, that the Pilot can know by comparing one by another how they beare by the compasse. A Reach is the distance of two points so farre as you can see them in a right line, as White Hall and London Bride, or White Hall and the end of Lambeth towards Chelsey. Fetch the Sounding line, Sounding line. this is bigger than the Dipsie-line, and is marked at two fadome next the lead with a peece of blacke leather, at three fadome the like, but slit; at 5. fadome with a peece of white cloth, at 7. fadome with a peece of red in a peece of white leather, at 15. with a white cloth, &c. The sounding lead is six or seuen pound weight, The Lead. and neere a foot long, he that doth heaue this lead stands by the horse, or in the chaines, and doth sing fadome by the marke 5. c. and a shaftment lesse, 4.0. this is to finde where the ship may saile by the depth of the water. Fowle water. Fowle water is when she comes into shallow water where shee raises the sand or ose with her way yet not touch the ground, but shee can∣not feele her helme so well as in deepe water. When a ship sailes with a large wind towards the land, or a faire wind into a harbour, Beare in. we say she beares in with the land or harbour. And when she would not come neere the land, but goeth more Roome-way than her couse, wee say she beares off; Beare off. but a ship boord, beare off is vsed to euery thing you would thrust from you. Beare vp. Hold off. Beare vp is to bring the ship to goe large or before the wind. To Hold off is when we heaue the Cable at the Capsterne, if it be great and stiffe, or slimie with ose, Surges. it surges or slips backe vnlesse they keep it close to the whelps, and then they either hold it fast with nippers, or brings it to the I care Capsterne, and this is called Holding off. As you approach the store, shorten your sailes, when you are in harbour take in your sailes, and come to an anchor, wherein much iudgement is required. Neale to. To know well the soundings, if it be Nealed to, that is, deepe water close aboord the shore, or shallow, or if the Leevnder the weather shore, or the lee shore be sandy, clay, osie, or fowle and rockie ground, but the Lee shore all men would shun that can auoid it. A Roade. Offing. Or a Roade which is an open place neere the shore. Or the Offing which is the open Sea from the shore, or the middest of any great streame is cal∣led the Offing. Land locke, Land locked. is when the land is round about you. Now the ship is said to Ride, To Ride. so long as the Anchors doe hold and comes not home. Ride a great Roade. To Ride a great roade is when the winde hath much power. They will strike their top masts, and the yards alongst ships, and the deeper the water is, it requires more Cable; when wee haue rid in any di∣stresse wee say wee haue rid hawse full, Ride a stresse. Ride betwixt. because the water broke into the hawses. To ride betwixt wind and tide, is when the wind & tide are contrary & of equall power, Wind and tide. w ch will make her rowle extremely, yet not straine much the ca∣ble. To Ride thwart is to ride with her side to the tide, Ride thwart tide. and then she neuer straines it. Ride a pike. To ride a pike is to pike your yards when you ride amongst many ships. Ride crosse. To ride acrosse is to hoise the maine and fore yards to the hounds, and top∣ped alike. When the water is gone and the ships lies dry, we say she is Sewed; if her head but lie dry, Sewed. she is Sewed a head; but if she cannot all lie dry, she cannot Sew there. Sew. Water borne is when there is no more water than will iust beare her from the ground. Water borne. Water line. The water line is to that Bend or place she should swim in when she is loaded. Lastly, To More. to More a ship is to lay out her anchors as is most fit for her to ride by, and the wayes are diuers; as first, to More a faire Berth from any annoiance. More crosse. To More a crosse is to lay one anchor to one side of the streame, and the other to the other right against one another, and so they Beare equally ebbe and flood. More alongst. To More alongst is to lay an an∣chor amidst the streame ahead, and another asterne, when you feare driuing a shore. Water shot. Water shot is to more quartering betwixt both nether crosse, nor alongst the ride. In an o∣pen rode they will more that way they thinke the wind will come the most to hurt them. More Prouiso. To more a Prouiso, is to haue one anchor in the riuer, and a hawser a shore, which is mored with her head a shore; otherwise two cables is the least, and foure cables the best to more by. CHAP. X. Proper tearmes for the Winds , Ebbes, Floods, and Eddies, with their definitions, and an estimate of the depth of the Sea, by the height of the Hils and the largenesse of the Earth. A Calme. A Breze. W Hen there is not a breath of wind stirring, it is a calme or a starke calme. A Breze is a wind blowes out of the Sea, and com∣monly in faire weather beginneth about nine in the morning, and lasteth till neere night; so likewise all the night it is from the shore which is called a Turnado, or a Sea-turne, but this is but vpon such coasts where it bloweth thus most certainly, except it be a storme, or very fowle wea∣ther, as in Barbaria, Aegypt, and the most of the Leuant. We haue such Brezes in most hot countreys in Sum∣mer, but they are very vncertaine. A fresh gale. A fresh Gale is that doth presently blow after a calme, when the wind beginneth to quicken or blow. A Loome gale. A faire Loome Gale is the best to saile in, because the Sea goeth not high, and we beare out all our sailes. A stiffe Gale is so much wind as our top-sailes can endure to beare. Eddie wind. An Eddie wind is checked by the saile, a mountaine, turning, or any such thing that makes it re∣turne backe againe. It ouer blowes. It ouer blowes when we can beare no top-sailes. A Gust. A flaw of wind is a Gust which is very violent vpon a sudden, A Spout. but quickly endeth. A Spout in the West Indies commonly falleth in those Gusts, which is, as it were, a small riuer falling entirely from the clouds, like out of our water Spouts, which make the Sea where it falleth rebound in flashes exceeding high. Whirle winds runneth round, A whirle wind. and bloweth diuers wayes at once. A Storme. A storme is knowne to e∣uery one not to bee much lesse than a tempest, A Tempest. that will blow downe houses, and trees vp by the roots. A Mounsoune. A Moun∣soune is a constant wind in the East Indies, that bloweth al∣wayes three moneths together one way, and the next three moneths the contrary way. A Hericano. A Hericano is so violent in the West Indies, it will continue three, foure, or fiue weekes, but they haue it not past once in fiue, six, or seuen yeeres; but then it is with such extremity that the Sea flies like raine, and the waues so high, they ouer flow the low grounds by the Sea, in so much, that ships haue been driuen ouer tops of high trees there growing, many leagues into the land, and there left, as was Captaine Francis Nelson an Englishman, and an excellent Sea-man for one. We say a calme sea, or Becalmed, Becalmed. when it is so smooth the ship moues very little, and the men leap ouer boord to swim. A Rough Sea is when the waues grow high. A Rough Sea. An ouergrowne Sea. Surges. The Rut of the Sea. The Roaring of the Sea. Floods & ebbes. An ouer∣growne Sea when the surges and billowes goe highest. The Rut of the sea where it doth dash against anything. And the Roaring of the Sea is most commonly obserued a shore, a little before a storme or after a storme. Flood is when the water beginneth to rise, which is young flood as we call it, then quarter flood, halfe flood, full Sea, still water, or high water. So when it Ebbes, quarter ebbe, halfe ebbe, three quarter ebbe, low water, or dead low water euery one doth know; and also that as at a spring tide the Sea or water is at the highest, so at a Neape tide it is at the lowest. This word Tide, is common both to Flood and Ebbe; for you say as well tide of ebbe, as tide of flood, A Tide of ebbe. A Tide of flood. A windward Tide A Lee-ward tide. or a windward Tide when the Tide runnes against the streame, as a Lee-warde Tide, that is, when the wind and the Tide goeth both one way, which makes the water as smooth as the other rough. To Tide ouer to a place, To Tide ouer. is to goe ouer with the Tide of ebbe or flood, and stop the con∣trary by anchoring till the next Tide, thus you may worke against the wind if it ouer blow not. A Tide gate. A Tide gate is where the tide runneth strongest. Tide and halfe Tide. It flowes Tide and halfe Tide, that is, it will be halfe flood by the shore, before it begin to flow in the channell; for although the Tide of flood run aloft, yet the Tide of ebbe runnes close by the ground. An Eddie tide is where the water doth runne backe contra∣ry to the tide, Eddie Tide. that is, when some headland or great point in a Riuer hindereth the free passage of the streame, that causeth the water on the other side the point to turne round by the shore as in a circle, till it fall into the tide againe. As touching the reasons of ebbes and floods, and to know how far it is to the bottome of the deepest place of the Sea, I will not take vpon me to discourse of; as knowing the same to be the secrets of God vnreuealed to man: only I will set downe a Philosophicall speculation of diuers mens opini∣ons touching the depth of the Sea; which I hope will not be thought much impertinent to the subiect of this booke by the iudicious Reader. The height of mountaines per∣pendicular. Fabianus in Plinis, and Cleomides conceiued the depth of the Sea to be fifteene furlongs, that is, a mile and parts, Plutarch compared it equall to the highest mountaines, Scallinger and others conceited the hils farre surpassed the deepnesse of the Sea, and that in few places it is more than a hundered paces in depth, it may bee hee meant in some narrow Seas, but in the maine Ocean experi∣ence hath taught vs it is much more than twice so much, for I haue founded 300. fadome, yet found no ground. Eratosthenes in Theon that great Mathematitian writeth the highest mountain perpendicular is but ten furlongs, that is, one mile and a quarter. Also Dicaearcus affirmeth this to be the height of the hill P lius in Thessalia, but Xenagoras in Plutarch obserued the height of Olimpus in the same region to be twenty paces more, which is 1270. paces, but surely all those meane onely those mountaines in or about Greece where they liued and were best acquainted; but how these may compare with the Alps in Asia, Atlas in Africa, Cau∣casus in India, the Andes in Peru, and diuers others hath not yet beene examined. But whatsoeuer the hils may be aboue the superficies of the earth, The height of the hils compared with the superfi∣cies of the earth and depth of the Sea. many hold opinion the Sea is much deeper, who suppose that the earth at the first framing was in the superficies regular and sphericall, as the holy Scriptures di∣rects vs to beleeue; because the water couered and com∣passed all the face of the earth, also that the face of the earth was equall to that of the Sea. Damascen noteth, that the vneuennesse and irregularity which now is seene in the earths superficies, was caused by taking some parts out of the vpper face of the earth in sundry places to make it more hollow, and lay them in other places to make it more con∣uex, or by raising vp some part and depressing others to make roome and receit for the Sea, that mutation being wrought by the power of the word of the Lord, Let the waters be gathered into one place that the dry land may ap∣peare. As for Aquinas, Dionysius, Catharianus, and some Diuines that conceited there was no mutation, but a vio∣lent accumulation of the waters, or heaping them vp on high is vnreasonable; because it is against nature, that wa∣ter being a flexible and a ponderous body, so to consist and stay it selfe, and not fall to the lower parts about it; where in nature there is nothing to hinder it, or, if it be restrained supernaturally by the hand and bridle of Almighty God, lest it should ouer-whelme and drowne all the land, it must follow, that God euen in the very institution of na∣ture imposed a perpetuall violence vpon nature. And this with all, that at the Deluge there was no necessity to breake vp the springs of the deepe and to open the cattaracts of Heauen, and powre downe water continually so many daies and nights together, seeing the only with-drawing of that hand, or letting goe of that bridle which restraineth the water would presently haue ouerwhelmed all. How all the hils and dry land a∣boue the superfi∣cies of the Sea hath made roome for the Sea, therefore they are in equall height & depth. But both by Scriptures, the experience of Nauigators, and reason in making estimation of the depth of the Sea, reckon not onely the height of the hils aboue the common superficies of the earth, but the height of all the dry land aboue the superficies of the Sea, because the whole masse of earth that now appeareth aboue the waters, being taken as it were out of the places which the waters now possesse, must be equall to the place out of which it was taken; so consequently it seemeth, that the height or eleuation of the one should answer the descending or depth of the other; and therefore in estimating the depth of the Sea, wee consi∣der not onely the erection of the hils aboue the ordinary land, but the aduantage of the dry land aboue the Sea; which latter, I meane the height of the ordinary maine land, excluding the hils, which properly answer the extra∣ordinary deepes and whirle-pooles in the Sea. The rest is held more in large Continents aboue the Sea, than that of the hils is aboue the land. That there is small difference betwixt the springs first ri∣sing out of the earth, and their falling into the Sea. For that the plain face of the dry land is not leuel, or equal∣ly distant from the Center, but hath a great descent towards the Sea, and a rising towards the mid-land parts, although it appeare not plainly to the eye, yet to reason it is most ma∣nifest; because we find that part of the earth the Sea couereth descendeth lower and lower towards the Sea. For the Sea, which touching the vpper face of it, is knowne by nature to be leuell and euenly distant from the center, is obserued to wax deeper & deeper the further one saileth from the shore cowards the maine Ocean: euen so in that part which is vn∣touered, the streamings of Riuers on all sides from the mid∣land parts towards the Sea, sliding from the higher to the lower declareth so much, whose courses are some 1000. or 2000. miles, in which declination, Pliny in his deriuation of water requireth one cubit of declining in 240. foot of proceeding. But Columella, Viturnius, Paladius, and others, in their conduction of waters require somewhat lesse; namely, that in the proceeding of 200. foot forward, there should bee allowed one foot of descending downeward, which yet in the course of 1000. miles, as Danubius, Vol∣gha, or Indus, &c. haue so much or more, which will make fiue miles of descent in perpendicular account, and in the course of 2000. or more, as Nilus, Niger, and the Ri∣uer of the Amazons haue 10. miles or more of the like descent. These are not taken as rules of necessity, The determina∣tion of these questions. as though water could not runne without that aduantage, for that respect the conueyers of waters in these times content themselues with one inch in 600. foot, as Philander and Viturnius ob∣serued, but is rather vnder a rule of commodity for expe∣dition and wholsomnesse of water so conueyed, left re∣sting too long in pipes it should contract some vnwhol∣some condition, or else through the slacknesse of motion, or long closenesse, or banishment from the aire, gather some aptnesse and disposition to putr fie. Although I say, such excesse of aduantage as in the artificiall conueyance of waters the forenamed Authors require, be not of necessity exacted in the naturall deriuation of them, yet certaine it is, that the descent of riuers being continually and their courselong, and in many places swift, and in some places headlong and furious; Note the diffe∣rence betwixt the springs of the riuers. and their falling into the Sea is not great. the differences of height or aduan∣tage cannot be great betwixt the springs of the riuers and their out lets, betwixt the first rising out of the earth and their falling into the Sea: vnto which declinity of land see∣ing the deepenesse of the Sea in proportion answer as I before declared, and not onely to the height of the hils: it is concluded, that the deepenesse to bee much more than the Philosophers commonly reputed: and although the deepnesse of the Sardinian Sea, which Aristotle saith, was the deepest of the Mediterranean, recorded by Posidonius in Strabo, to haue beene found but 1000. fadome, which is but a mile and a fifth part, and the greatest bredth not past 600. miles: then seeing if in so narrow a Sea it be so deepe, what may we esteeme the maine Ocean to be, that in many places is fiue times so broad, seeing the broader the Seas are, if they be intire and free from Ilands, they are an∣swerably obserued to be the deeper. If you desire any fur∣ther satisfaction, reade the first part of Purchas his Pilgri∣mage, where you may reade how to find all those Authors at large. Now because he hath taken neere 100. times as much from me, I haue made bold to borrow this from him, seeing he hath founded such deepe waters for this our Ship to faile in, being a Gentleman whose person I loued, and whose memory and vertues I will euer honour. CHAP. XI. Proper Sea tearmes belonging to the good or bad condition of Ships, how to finde them and amend them. A Ship that will try hull, and ride well at Anchor, A wholsome ship. we call a wholsome Ship. A long Ship that drawes much water will doe all this, but if she draw much water and be short, she may hull well, but nei∣ther try nor ride well; if she draw little water and belong, she may try and ride well, An vnwholsome Ship. but neuer hull well, which is called an vnwholsome ship. Howsing a Ship. The howsing in of a Ship is when shee is past the bredth of her bearing she is brought in narrow to her vp∣per workes: it is certaine this makes her wholsome in the Sea without rowling, because the weight of her Ordnance doth counterpoise her bredth vnder water, but it is not so good in a man of warre, because it taketh away a great deale of her roome, nor will her tacks euer so well come aboord as if she were laid out aloft and not flaring, Flaring. which is when she is a little howsing in, neere the water, and then the vpper worke doth hang ouer againe, and is laid out broder aloft, this makes a Ship more roomy aloft for men to vse their armes in, but Sir Walter Rawleighs proportion, which is to be proportionally wrought to her other worke is the best, because the counter poise on each side doth make her swimme perpendicular or straight, and consequently steady, which is the best. If a ship be narrow, and her bearing either not laid out enough or too low, then you must make her broader and her bearing the higher by ripping off the plankes two or three strakes vnder water and as much aboue, and put other Timbers vpon the first, and then put on the plankes vpon those Timbers, this will make her beare a better saile, but it is a hindrance to her sailing, this is to be done when a Ship is cranke-sided and will beare no saile, Cranke side. and is called Furring. Note also, Furring. that when a Ship hath a deepe Keele it doth keepe her from rowling. If she be floty and her keele shallow, put on another keele vnder the first to make it dee∣per, for it will make her hold more in the water, this wee call a false Keele. A false Keele. Gripe. Likewise if her stem be too flat to make her cut water the better, and not gripe, which is when shee will not keepe a winde well; fix another stem before it, A false stem. and that is called a false stem, which will make her rid more way and beare a better saile. The runne. Also the Run of a ship is as much to be regarded, for if it be too short and too ull be∣low, the water comes but slowly to the Rudder because the force of it is broken by her bredth, and then to put a false stem post to lengthen her is the next remedy, but to leng∣then her is better; for when a Ship comes off handsomly by degrees, and her Tuck doth not lye too low, which will hinder the water from comming swiftly to the Rudder, makes her she cannot steare well, and they are called as they are, a good runne or a bad. A good runne. A bad runne. When a Ship hath lost a peece of her Keele, and that we cannot come well to mend it, you much patch a new peece vnto it, and bind it with a stirrop, A Sirrup. which is an iron comes round about it and the Keele vp to the other side of the Ship, whereto it is strongly nailed with Spikes. Her Rake also may be a defect, Her Rake. which is so much of the Hull, as by a perpendicular line the end of the Keele is from the setting on of the stem, so much as it with∣out that forward on, and in like manner the setting in of her stem Post. Your French men giues great Rakes for∣wards on, which makes her giue good way and keepe a good wind, but if she haue not a full bow she will pitch her head extremely in the Sea. If shee haue but a small Rake, she is so blusse that the Seas meets her so suddenly vpon the Bowes shee cannot cut the water much, but the longer a ship is, the fuller should be her Bow, but the meane is the best. Loome. The looming of a ship is her prospectiue, that is, as she doth shew great or little: Her water draught is so many foot as she goes in the water, but the Ships that drawes most water are commonly the most wholsome, but the least draught goes best but rolls most, and we say a Ship doth heeld on Starboord or Larboord, Heeld. that is, to that side shee doth leane most. Ouerset. Ouerthrow. To ouerset or ouerthrow a ship, is by bearing too much saile you bring her Keele vpwards, or on shore ouerthrow her by grounding her, so that she falls vpon one side; and we say a Ship is walt when shee is not stiffe, Wale. and hath not Ballast enough in her to keepe her stiffe. Wall reared. And wall reared when she is right built vp, after shee comes to her bearing it makes her ill shapen and vnseemely, but it giues her within much roome, and she is very wholsome, if her bea∣ring be well laid out. The Masting of a Ship is much to be considered, and will much cause her to saile well or ill, as I haue related in the masting a Ship. Iron sicke. Iron sicke, is when the Bolts, Spikes, or Nailes are so eaten with rust they stand hollow in the plankes, and so makes her leake, the which to preuent, they vse to put lead ouer all the bolt heads vn∣der water. Trim. Lastly, the trimming of a ship doth much a∣mend or impaire her sailing, and so alter her condition. To finde her trim, that is, how she will saile best; is by try∣ing her sailing with another Ship so many glasses, trim∣med a head and so many a sterne, and so many vpon an euen Keele, also the casing of her Masts and Shrouds, for some ships will saile much better when they are stacke than when they are taught. CHAP. XII. Considerations for a Sea Captaine in the choise of his Ship, and in placing his Ordnance. In giuing Chase, Boording, and entering a man of warre like himselfe, or a defending Mer∣chant man. I N Land seruice we call a man of warre a Souldier either on foot or horse, How to chuse a Ship fit to make a man of wane. and at Sea a Ship, which if she be not as well built, conditioned, and prouided, as neere fitting such an imploiment as may be, she may proue (either) as a horseman that knoweth not how to hold his raines, keepe his seat in his saddle and stirrops, carry his bo∣dy, nor how to helpe his horse with leg and spur in a curuet, gallop, or stop; or as an excellent horsemen that knoweth all this, mounted vpon a Iade that will doe nothing, which were he mounted according to his experience, hee would doe more with that one, than halfe a dozen of the other though as well prouided as himselfe. But I confesse, euery horseman cānot mount himself alike, neither euery Seaman ship himselfe as he would, I meane not for outward orna∣ment, which the better they are, the lesse to be disliked; for there cannot be a brauer sight than a ship in her brauery, but of a competent sufficiency as the businesse requireth. But were I to chuse a ship for my self, I would haue her saile well, yet strongly built, her decks flush and flat, and so roomy that men might passe with ease; her Bow and chase so Gally-like contriued, should beare as many Ordnances as with conue∣niency she could, for that alwaies commeth most to fight, and so stiffe, she should beare a stiffe saile and beare out her lower tier in any reasonable weather, neither should her Gunroome be vnprouided: not manned like a Merchant-man, which if they be double manned, that is, to haue twise so many men as would saile her, they think it is too many in regard of the charge, yet to speake true, there is few Mer∣chant Ships in the world doth any way exceed ours. And those men they entertaine in good voiages haue such good pay, and such acquaintance one with another in shipping themselues, that thirty or forty of them would trouble a man of warre with three or foure times their number man∣ned with prest men, being halfe of them scarce hale Bou∣lings. Yea, and many times a Pirat who are commonly the best manned, but they fight only for wealth, not for ho∣nour nor reuenge, except they bee extremely constrained. But such a Ship as I haue spoken of well manned with ra∣ther too many than too few, with all sufficient Officers; Shot, Powder, Victuall, and all their appurtenances, in my opinion might well passe muster for a man of warre. His reward that first discries a Ship, or enters a prize. Now being at Sea, the tops are seldome without one or other to looke out for purchase, because hee that first dis∣cries a saile, if she proue prize, is to haue a good sute of A∣parell, or so much money as is set downe by order for his reward, as also he that doth first enter a Ship there is a cer∣taine reward allowed him; when wee see a Ship alter her course, and vseth all the meanes she can to fetch you vp, you are the chase, and hee the chaser. In giuing chase or chasing, or to escape being chased, there is required an in∣finite iudgement and experience, for there is no rule for it; but the shortest way to fetch vp your chase is the best. How to giue chase, and escape the chaser. If you bee too lee-ward, get all your Tacks aboord, and shape your course as he doth to meet him at the neerest angle you can, then he must either alter his course and Tacke as you Tacke as neere the wind as he can lye to keepe his owne till night, and then strike a Hull that you may not descry him by his sailes, or doe his best to lose you in the darke; for looke how much he falls to lee-ward, hee falls so much in your way. If he be right ahead of you, that is called a sterne chase, if you weather him, for euery man in chasing doth seeke to get the weather, because you cannot boord him except you weather him, he will laske, or goe large, if you gather on him that way, hee will trie you before the wind, th if your ordnance cannot reach him, if he can out-strip you he is gone: But suppose you are to wind-ward, if hee clap close by a wind, and there goes ahead sea, and yours a lee-ward ship, if you doe the like your ship will so beat a∣gainst the Sea, she will make no way; therefore you must goe a little more large though you chase vnder his lee till you can run ahead. Boord and Boord is when two ships lie together side by side, but hee that knoweth how to defend himselfe, Boord & boord. and worke well, will so cun his ship, as force you to enter vpon his quarter, which is the highest part of the ship, and but the mizen shrouds to enter by; from whence he may do you much hurt with little danger, except you fire him, which a Pirat will neuer doe, neither sinke you if he can chuse, except you be able to force him to defend himselfe. But in a Sea fight wee call Boording, in Boording where wee can, the greatest aduantage for your Ordnance is to boord him thwart the hawse, because you may vse all the ordnance you haue on one side, and she onely them in her prow; but the best and safest boording for entring is on the bow, Boording & en∣tering a ship. but you must be carefull to cleare the decks with burning grana∣dos, fire-pots, poutches of powder, Powder chests. to which giue fire by a Gunpodwer match, to preuent traines to the powder chest, w ch are long boards ioyned like a triangle with diuers broad ledges on either side, wherein lieth as many peeble stones or beatch as can there lie, those being fired will make all cleare before them. Besides in an extremity a man would rather blow vp the quarter decke, halfe decke, fore castle, or any thing, than bee taken by him he knowes a mor∣tall enemy, and commonly there is more men lost in ente∣ring, if the chase stand to her defence, in an instant, than in a long fight boord and boord, if she be prouided of her close fights: I confesse, the charging vpon trenches, and the entrances of a breach in a rampire are attempts as despe∣rate as a man would thinke could be performed, but he that hath tried himselfe as oft in the entring a resisting ship as I haue done both them & the other, he would surely confesse there is no such dangerous seruice ashore, as a resolued reso∣lute fight at sea. A ships close fights, are smal ledges of wood laid crosse one another like the grates of iron in a prisons win∣dow, betwixt the maine mast, and the fore mast, & are called gratings, or nettings as is said, which are made of small ropes, much in like manner couered with a saile, the which to vndoe is to heaue a kedger, or fix a grapling into them, tied in a rope, but a chaine of iron is better, and shearing off will teare it in peeces if the rope and anchor hold, some haue vsed sheare hookes, which are hookes like sickels fixed in the ends of the yards armes, that if a ship vnder saile come to boord her, those sheares will cut her shrouds, and spoile her tackling, but they are so subiect to breake their owne yards, and cut all the ropes comes from the top-sailes, they are out of request. To conclude, if a ship bee open, presently to boord her is the best way to take her. But if you see your chase strip himselfe into fighting sailes, Euident signes that a chase will fight. that is to put out his colours in the poope, his flag in the maine top, his streamers or pendants as the ends of his yards armes, furle his spret-saile, pike his mizen, and sling his maine yard, prouide your selfe to fight. Now because I would not bee tedious in describing a fight at Sea, I haue troubled you with this short preamble that you may the plainlier vnderstand it. CHAP. XIII. How to manage a fight at Sea , with the proper tearmes in a fight largely expressed, and the ordering of a Nauy at Sea. F Or this master peece of this worke, I con∣fesse I might doe better to leaue it to euery particular mans conceit as it is, or those of longer practice or more experience, yet because I haue seene many bookes of the Art of Warre by land, Many bookes of the Art of War for the land, none for the sea. and neuer any for the Sea, seeing all men so silent in this most difficult ser∣uice, and there are so many young Captaines, and others that desire to be Captains, who know very little, or nothing at all to any purpose, for their better vnderstanding I haue proceeded thus farre; now for this that followes, what I haue seene, done, and conceiued by my small experience, I referre me to their friendly constructions, and well adui∣sed considerations. A saile, how beares she or stands shee, to wind-ward or lee-ward, set him by the Compasse; he stands right ahead, or on the weather-Bow, or lee-Bow, let flie your colours if you haue a consort, else not. Out with all your sailes, a steady man to the helme, sit close to keepe her steady, giue him chase or fetch him vp; hee holds his owne, no, To giue chase. we gather on him. Captaine, out oes his flag and pendants, also his waste clothes and top armings, Wast clothes. Top armings. which is a long red cloth a∣bout three quarters of a yard broad, edged on each side with Calico or white linnen cloth, that goeth round about the ship on the out sides of all her vpper workes fore and aft, and before the cubbridge heads, also about the fore and maine tops, as well for the countenance and grace of the ship, as to couer the men for being seene, hee furles and slings his maine yard, in goes his spret-saile. Thus they vse to strip themselues into their short sailes, Fighting sailes. To hale a ship. or figting sailes, which is onely the fore saile, the maine and fore top sailes, because the rest should not be fired nor spoiled; besides they would be troublesome to handle, hinder our sights and the vsing our armes; he makes ready his close fights fore and aft. How to begin a fight. Master how stands the chase? Right on head I say; Well we shall reatch him by and by; What's all ready, Yea, yea, euery man to his charge, dowse your top-saile to salute him for the Sea, hale him with a noise of trumpets; Whence is your ship? Of Spaine ; Whence is yours? Of England ; Are you a Merchant, or a man of War? We are of the Sea; He waues vs to lee-ward with his drawne sword, cals amaine for the King of Spaine, and springs his loufe, giue him a chase peece with your broad side, and run a good berth ahead of him; Done, done, We haue the wind of him, and he tackes about, tacke you about also and keepe your loufe, be yare at the helme, edge in with him, giue him a volley of small shot, also your prow and broad side as before, and keepe your loufe; Hee payes vs shot for shot; Well, wee shall require him; What are you ready againe, Yea, yea. Try him once more as before, Done, done; Keepe your loufe and loge your ordnance againe; Is all ready? Yea, yea; edge in in with him againe, begin with your bow peeces, proceed with your broad side, & let her fall off with the wind, to giue her also your full chase, your weather broad side, and bring her round that the sterne may also discharge, and your tackes close aboord againe; Done, done, the wind veeres, the Sea goes too high to boord her, and wee are shot thorow and thorow, and betweene wind a d water. Try the pump, beare vp the helme, Master let vs breathe and refresh a lit∣tle, and sling a man ouer boord to stop the leakes; that is, to trusse him vp about the middle in a peece of canuas, How to sling a man ouer boord. and a rope to keepe him from sinking, and his armes at liberty, with a malet in the one hand, & a plug lapped in Okum, and well farred in a tarpawling clout in the other, which he will quickly beat into the hole or holes the bullets made; What cheere mates, is all well? All well, all well, all well; Then make ready to beare vp with him againe, and with∣all your great and small shot charge him, and in the smoke boord him thwart the hawse, on the bow, mid ships, or rather then faile, on his quarter, or make fast your grap∣lings if you can to his close fights and sheare off. Captaine we are fowle on each other, and the ship is on fire, cut any thing to get cleare, and smother the fire with wet cloathes. In such a case they will presently be such friends, as to help one the other all they can to get cleare, lest they both should burne together and sinke; and if they be generous, the fire quenched, drinke kindely one to another; heaue their cans ouer boord, and then begin againe as before. Well Master, the day is spent, the night drawes on, A consultation & direction in a sea fight, & how they bury their dead. let vs consult. Chirurgion looke to the wounded, and winde vp the slaine, with each a weight or bullet at their heads and feet to make them sinke, and giue them three gunnes for their funerals, Swabber make cleane the ship, Purser record their Names, Watch be vigilant to keepe your berth to wind ward that we lose him not in the night, Gunners spunge your Ordnance, Souldiers scowre your peeces, Car∣penters about your leakes, Boat swaine and the rest repaire the sailes and shrouds, and Cooke see you obserue your di∣rections against the morning watch, Boy, Holla Master Holla, is the kettle boiled, yea, yea, Boatswaine call vp the men to prayer and breake fast. Boy fetch my cellar of bottels, A preparation for a fresh charge. a health to you all fore and aft, courage my hearts for a fresh charge, Gunners beat open the ports, and out with your lower tire, and bring me from the weather side to the lee, so many peeces as we haue ports to beare vpon him, Master lay him aboord loufe for loufe, mid ships men see the tops and yards well manned, with stones, fi e pots, and brasse bailes, to throw amongst them before we enter, or if we be put off, charge them with all your great and small shot, in the smoke let vs enter them in the shrouds, and euery squadron at his best aduan∣tage, so sound Drums and Trumpets, and Saint George for England. How a prise doth yeeld, and how to entertaine him Sea-man like. They hang out a flag of truce, hale him a maine, a base, or take in his flag, strike their sailes and come aboord with their Captaine, Purser and Gunner, with their commission, cocket, or bils of loading. Out goes the boat, they are lanched from the ship side, entertaine them with a generall cry, God saue the Captaine and all the company with the Trumpets sounding, examine them in particular, and then conclude your conditions, with feasting, freedome, or pu∣nishment, as you finde occasion; but alwayes haue as much care to their wounded as your owne, and if there be either young women or aged men, vse them nobly, which is e∣uer the nature of a generous disposition. To conclude, if you surprize him, or enter perforce, you may stow the men, rifle, pillage, or sacke, and cry a prise. How to call a Counsell of War, and order a Nauy at Sea. To call a Councell of Warre in a Fleet; There is your Councell of Warre to manage all businesses of import, and the common Councell for matters of small moment, when they would haue a meeting, where the Admirall doth appoint it; if in the Admirall, they hang out a flag in the maine shrouds; if in the Vice Admirall, in the fore shrouds; if in the Reare Admirall, in the mizen; If there bee many squadrons, the Admirall of each squadron vpon sundry occasions doth carry in their maine tops, flags of sundry colours, or else they are distinguished by seuerall pen∣dants from the yards armes; euery night or morning they are to come vnder the Lee of the Admirall to salute him and know his pleasure, but no Admirall of any squadron is to beare his flag in the maine top, in the presence of the Admirall generall, except the Admirall come aboord of him to Councell, to dinner, or collation, and so any ship else where he so resideth during that time, is to weare his flag in the maine top. They vse to martiall or order those squadrons in rankes like Manaples, which is foure square, if the wind and Sea permits, a good berth or distance from each other, that they becalme not one another, nor come not fowle of each other; the Generall commonly in the middest, his Vice Admirall in the front, and his Reare Admirall in the Reare; or otherwise like a halfe Moone, which is two squadrons like two triangles for the two hornes, and so the rest of the squadrons behinde each other a good distance, and the Generall in the middest of the halfe circle, from whence he seeth all his fleet, and sendeth his directions, as he findes occasion to whom he pleaseth. Now betweene two Nauies they vse often, Stratagems for Sea-men. especially in a harbour or road where they are at anchor, to fill old Barkes with pitch, tar, traine oile, lincet oile, brim∣stone, rosen, reeds, with dry wood, and such combustible things, sometimes they linke three or foure together in the night, and puts them adrift as they finde occasion. To passe a fort some will make both ship and sailes all black, but if the fort keepe but a fire on the other side, and all the peeces point blanke with the fire, if they discharge what is betwixt them and the fire, the shot will hit if the rule bee truly obserued; for when a ship is betwixt the fire and you, shee doth keepe you from seeing it till shee bee past it. To conclude, there is as many stratagems, aduantages, and inuentions to be vsed as you finde occasions, and therefore experience must be the best Tutor. Chap. XIV. The names of all sorts of great Ordnance, and their appurtenances, with their pro∣per tearmes and expositions, also diuers obseruations concerning their shooting, with a Table of proportion for their weight of metall, weight of powder, weight of shot, and there best at randome and point blanke inlarged. The Names of great Ordnance. A Canon royal, or double Canon, a Canon, a Canon Serpentine, a bastard Canon, a demy Canon, a Canon Petro, a Culue∣ring, a Basilisco, a demy culuering, a bastard Culuering, a Sacar, a Minion, a Falcon, a Falconet, a Serpentine, a Rab∣binet. Carriages. To all those doe belong carriages whereon peeces doe lie supported by an axeltree betwixt two wh eles, Trunnions. whereon doth lie the peece vpon her trunni∣ons, which are two knobs cast with the peece on each of hersides, which doth lie in two halfe holes vpon the two cheekes of the carriages, to raise her vp or downe as you will, Capsquares. ouer them are the capsquares, which are two broad peeces of iron doth couer them, made fast by a pin with a fore locke to keepe the peece from falling out. That the peece and carriages is drawne along vpon wheeles euery one doth know, Wheeles. if shee bee for land seruice, they haue wheeles made with spokes like coach wheeles, and accor∣ding to their proportion strongly shod with iron, Trucks. and the pins at the ends of the Axeltree is called Linch pins. If for Sea she haue Trucks, which are round intier peeces of wood like wheeles. To mount a Peece. To dismount a Peece. Beds. Quoines. To mount a peece is o lay her vpon her carriages; to dismount her to take her downe. Her Bed is a planke doth lie next the peece, or the peece vpon it vpon the carriage, and betwixt the Peece and it they put their quoines, which are great wedges of wood with a little handle at the end to put them forward or backward for le∣uelling the Peece as you please. Trauas. To trauas a Peece is to turne her which way you will vpon her Platforme. Dispert. To dispert a Peece is to finde a difference betwixt the thicknesse of the metall at her mouth and britch or carnouse, Britch. Carnouse. Musell. which is the greatest circle about her britch, and her mussell Ring is the greatest circle about her mouth thereby to make a iust shot, there are diuers waies to dispert her, but the most easiest is as good as the best: and that is but by putting a little sticke or a straw that is strait into the toutch hole to the lower part of the Sillinder or Concaue, Sillinder. Concaue. Bore. which is the bore of the Peece and cut it off close by the metall, and then apply it in the same manner to the mouth, and it will exactly shew you the difference, How to dispert a Peece. which being set vpon the mussell of the Peece with a little Clay, Pitch, or Wax, it will bee as the pin of any Peece is to the sight, leuell to the carnouse or britch of the Peece, otherwaies you may giue her allowance according to your iudgement. Taper boared, Taper boared. is when a Peece is wider at the mouth then towards the britch, which is dangerous (if the Bullet goe not home) to burst her. Honicombed, Hony-combe. is when shee is ill cast or ouermuch worne shee will bee rugged within, which is dangerous for a crosse barre shot to catch hold by, or any ragge of her wadding being a fire and sticking there may fire the next charge you put in her; How to finde it. and you may finde if she be Taper boared, either with a crooked wyer at the end of a long staffe, by scratching vp and downe to see where you can catch any hold, or a light candle at the end of a staffe thrust vp and down to see if you can see any fault. Britchings. Britchings are the ropes by which you lash your Ordnance fast to the Ships side in foule weather. Chambers. Chambers is a charge made of brasse or iron which we vse to put in at the britch of a sling or Murtherer, containing iust so much powder as will driue away the case of stones of shot, or any thing in her. In a great Peece we call that her Chamber so far as the pow∣der doth reach when she is laded. Cartrages. A Cartrage is a bagge of Canuasse made vpon a frame or a round peece of wood somewhat lesse than the bore of the Peece, they make them also of paper, they haue also Car∣trages or rather cases for Cartrages made of Lattin to keepe the Cartrages in, which is to haue no more powder in them than iust the charge of your Peece, and they are close∣ly couered in those cases of Latten, Cases. to keepe them dry, and from any mischances by fire, and are farre more ready and safer than your Ladles or Budgbarrels. A Budgbarell. A Budgbarrell is a little Barrell made of Latten, filled with powder to carry from place to place for feare of fire; in the couer it hath a long necke to fill the Ladles withall without opening. A Ladle is a long staffe with a peece of thin Copper at the end like halfe a Cartrage, A Ladle. in bredth and length so much as will hold no more powder than the due charge for the Peece it belongs to. A Spunge. A Spunge is such another staffe, with a peece of a Lambe skin at the end about it to thrust vp and downe the Peece, to take off the dust, moisture, or sparkes of fire if any remaine in her. A Rammer. And a Rammer is a bob of wood at the other end to ramme home the Powder and the Waddings. Waddings. Waddings is Okum, old clouts, or straw, put after the powder and the Bullet. Wood cases. A Case is made of two peeces of hollow wood ioyned together like two halfe Car∣trages fit to put into the bore of a Peece, Case shot. & a case shot is any kinde of small Bullets, Nailes, old iron, or the like to put into the case to shoot out of the Ordnances or Murderers, these will doe much mischiefe when wee lie boord and boord: but for Spunges and Rammers they vse now a stiffe Rope a little more than the length of the Peece, which you may turne and wind within boord as you will, with much more ease and safety than the other. Round Shot is a round Bullet for any Peece: Round shot. Crosse bar shot. Crosbar∣shot is also a round shot, but it hath a long spike of Iron cast with it as if it did goe thorow the middest of it, the ends whereof are commonly armed for feare of bursting the Peece, To Arme a shot. which is to binde a little Okum in a little Canuasse at the end of each Pike. Trundle shot. Trundle shot is onely a bolt of iron sixteene or eighteene inches in length; at both ends sharpe pointed, and about a handfull from each end a round broad bowle of lead according to the bore of the Peece cast vpon it. Langrell shot runnes loose with a shackell, Langrill shot. to be shortened when you put it into the Peece, and when it flies out it doth spred it selfe, it hath at the end of either barre a halfe Bullet either of lead or iron. Chaine shot. Chaine shot is two bullets with a chaine betwixt them, and some are con∣triued round as in a ball, yet will spred in flying their full length in bredth; all these are vsed when you are neere a ship to shoot downe Masts, Yards, Shrouds, teare the sailes, spoile the men, or any thing that is aboue the decks. Fire workes. Fire∣workes are diuers, and of many compositions, Arrowes of wild fire. Pikes of wild fire. Granados of di∣uers sorts. Brasse Balles. as Arrowes trimmed with wild fire to sticke in the sailes or ships side shot burning. Pikes of wild fire to strike burning into a ship side to fire her. There is also diuers sorts of Granados, some to breake and fly in abundance of peeces euery way, as will your brasse balls & earthen pots which when they are couered with quartered bullets stucke in pitch, and the pots filled with good powder, in a crowd of people will make an incredible slaughter; some will burne vnder water, and neuer extinguish till the stuffe bee consumed; some onely will burne and fume out a most stinking poison smoke; some, being but onely an Oile, being nointed on anything made of dry wood, will take fire by the heat of the Sunne when the Sunne shines hot. There is also a Powder, which being laid in like manner vpon any thing subiect to burne, will take fire if either any raine or water light vpon it; but those inuentions are bad on shore, but much worse at Sea, and are naught because so dangerous, and not easie to bee quenched, and their practise worse, because they may doe as much mischiefe to a friend as to an enemy, therefore I will leaue them as they are. Powder. Serpentine pow∣der. Grosse corned Powder. Fine corned Powder. There are also diuers sorts of Powder, the Serpentine is like dust and weake, and will not keepe at Sea but be moist. The common sort is great corned powder but grosse, and onely vsed in great Ordnance. Your fine corned Powder for hand Guns is in goodnesse as your Salt-Peter is oft re∣fined, and from ten pence a pound to eighteene pence a pound. A Tomkin. A Tomkin is a round peece of wood put into the Peeces mouth and couered with Tallow, A Fid and a fid a little Okum made like a naile put in at the toutch hole, and couered with a thin lead bound aboue it to keepe the Powder dry in the Peece. Shackels. Shackels are a kinde of Rings but not round, made like them at the hatches cornes (by which we take them vp and lay them downe) but bigger, fixed to the middest of the por s within boord, through which wee put a billet to keepe fast the port for flying open in soule weather, which may easily indanger, To cloy a Peece or poyson her. if not sinke the Ship. To cloy or poi∣son a Peece, is to driue a naile into her toutch hole, then you cannot giue fire. To vncloy. And to vncloy her, is to put as much oile as you can about the naile to make it glib, and by a traine giue fire to her by her mouth, and so blow it out. Compasse Calli∣pers. Compasse Callipers belongs to the Gunner, and is like two halfe Circles that hath a handle and ioint like a paire of Compasses, but they are blunt at the points to open as you please for to dispert a Peece. Horne. Priming Iron. A Horne is his touch box, his Primer is a small long peece of iron, sharpe at the small end to pierce the Cartrage thorow the toutch hole. His Lint stock is a handsome carued stick, Lint stocke. more than halfe a yard long, with a Cocke at the one end to hold fast his Match, and a sharpe pike in the other to sticke it fast vpon the Deck or platforme vpright. Gunners qua∣drant. Darke Lanthorn. Morters. The names of small Peeces, and their implements The Gunners quadrant is to leuell a Peece or mount her to any randon. A darke Lanthorne is as well to be vsed by any body as he. For Morters, or such chambers as are only vsed for triumphs, there is no vse for them in this seruice; but for Curriours, Hargabusacrocks, Muskets, Bastard-muskets, Coliuers, Crabuts, Carbins, long Pistols or short Pistols, Bandilers. Bullet bags. Wormes. Scowrers. Melting Ladles. Lead Molds. Quartered shot. there belongs to them Bandi∣liers, bullet Bags, Wormes, Scowrers, melting Ladles, Lead, Molds of al sorts to cast their shot. Quarter Bullets is but any bullet quartered in foure or eight parts, and all those are as vsefull a ship-boord as on shore. For the soule, trunke, bore, fortification, the diuersity of their metals, and diuers other curious Theormes or tearmes vsed about great Ordnance, there are so many vncertainties as well in her mounting, leuelling vpon her platforme, as also the accidents that may happen in the powder, the ground, the aire, and differences inproportion, I will not vndertake to prescribe any certaine artificiall rule. These proportions following are neere the matter, but for your better satisfaction reade Master Digs Pantrimetria, Master Smith, or Master Burnes art of Gun∣nery, or Master Robert Nortons Exposition vpon Master Digs Stratiaticos, any of those will shew the Theoricke at large. But to bee a good Gunner you must learne it by practise. A Table of proportion for the weight and shooting of great Ordnance. The names of the great Peeces. The height of the peeces. The weight of the peeces. The weight of the shot. The weight of the powder The bredth of the Ladle. The length of the Ladle. 2400. . of powder makes of shot in a Shot point blanke in Shot ran∣dome in Inches. Pound. Pound. Pound Inche. Inches. P ce. Pi e e . These Peeces be most seruiceable for battery being within 80. paces to their marke, which is the chiefe of their forces. 1 A Canon Royall. 8 ½ 8000 66 30 13 ¼ 24 ½ 80 16 1930 2 A Canon. 8 6000 60 27 12 24 85 17 2000 3 A Canon Sarpentine. 7 ½ 5500 53 ½ 25 10 ½ 23 ⅓ 96 20 2000 4 A Bastard Canon. 7 4500 41 ¼ 20 10 23 ⅓ 120 18 1800 5 A demy Canon. 6 ½ 4000 30 ¼ 18 9 ⅓ 23 ¼ 133 17 1700 6 A Canon Petro. 6 3000 24 ¼ 14 9 23 171 16 1600 These Peeces be good and also ser∣uiceable to be mixt with the aboue Ordnance for battery to peeces being crost with the rest, as also fit for castles, Forts, and Walls to be planted, and for defence. 7 A Culuering. 5 ½ 4500 17 ⅓ 12 8 ½ 22 ⅓ 200 20 2500 8 A Basilisco. 5 4000 15 ¼ 10 7 ½ 22 240 25 3000 9 A demy Culuering. 4 ½ 3400 9 ⅓ 8 6 ⅕ 21 300 20 2500 10 A bastard Culuering. 4 3000 7 6 ¼ 6 20 288 18 1800 11 A Sacre. 3 ½ 1400 5 ⅓ 5 ⅓ 5 ½ 18 490 17 1700 12 A Minion. 3 ¼ 1000 4 4 4 ½ 17 600 16 600 13 A F ulcon. 2 ½ 660 2 ¼ 2 ¼ 4 ½ 15 1087 15 1500 14 A Faulcon. 2 ⅓ 800 3 3 4 ¼ 15 800 15 1500 These Peeces are good and seruice∣able for the field, and most ready for defence. 15 A Faulconet. 2 500 1 ¼ 1 ¼ 3 ¼ 11 ¼ 1950 14 1400 16 A Sarpentine. 1 ½ 400 ½ ⅓ 2 ½ 10 7200 13 1300 17 A Rabonet. 1 300 ½ ½ 1 ½ 6 4800 12 1000 Note that seldome in Ships they vse any Ordnance greater than Demy Canons, nor haue they any certainty ei∣ther at point blanke or any random. Note your Serpentine powder in old time was in meale, but now corned and made stronger, and called Canon corne powder. But that for small Ordnance is called corne Powder fine, and ought to haue in strength a quarter more, because those small Peeces are better fortified than the greater. Now if you haue but one sort of Powder for all, abate ¼ part, and cut off ¼ of the bredth and length of your Ladle. But Cartrages are now found the best and most readiest. Prouided alwaies, that all Shot must be a quarter lesse than the height of the Peece. CHAP. XV. How they diuide their shares in a man of Warre, what Bookes and Instruments are fit for a Sea man, with diuers aduertisements for Sea men, and the vse of the petty Tally. THe ship hath one third part, the victuallar the other third, the other third part is for the Company, and this is subdiuided thus in shares. Shares. The Captaine hath 10 In some but 9. The Lieutenant 9 or as he agreeth with the Captaine. The Master 8 In some but 7. The Mates 7 5. The Chirurgion 6 3. The Gunner 6 5. The Boatswaine 6 5. The Carpenter 6 5. The Trumpeter 6 5. The 4. quarter Mast. 5 apeece, or 4. The Cooper 5 4. The Chirurg. Mate 5 4. The Gunners Mate 5 4. The Carpent. Mate 5 4. The Corporall 4 3. The quarter Gunners 4 3. The Trump. Mate 3 3 ½. The Steward. 4 3. The Cooke 4 3. The Coxswaine 4 3. The Swabber 4 3. In English ships they seldome vse any Marshall, whose shares amongst the French is equall with the Boatswaines, all the rest of the Younkers, or fore-mast-men according to their deserts, some 3. some 2. and ½. some 1. and . and the boyes 1. which is a single share, or 1. and ½. or as they doe deserue. Now the Master, or his right hand Mate, the Gunner, Boatswaine, and foure quarter Masters doe make the shares, not the Captaine, who hath onely this priuilege, to take away halfe a share, or a whole share at most, to giue from one to another as he best pleaseth. For to learne to obserue the Altitude, Latitude, Longi∣tude, Amplitude, the variation of the Compasse, the Suns Azimuth and Almicanter, to shift the Sunne and Moone, and know the tides, your Roomes, pricke your Card, say your Compasse, and get some of these bookes, but practice is the best. Master Wrights errours of Nauigation. Master Tapps Sea-mans Kalender. The Art of Nauigation. The Sea Regiment. The Sea-mans secret. Waggoner. Master Gunters workes. The Sea-mans glasse for the Scale. The New Attracter for variation. Master Wright for vse of the Globe. Master Hewes for the same. Instruments fitting for a Sea-man. Compasses so many paire and sorts as you will, an A∣strolobe Quadrant, a Crosse staffe, a Backe staffe, an A∣strolobe, a Nocturnall. Young Gentlemen that desires command at Sea, Aduertisment for young Com∣manders, Cap∣taines, and other Officers. ought well to consider the condition of his ship, victuall, and company, for if there be more learners than sailers how slightly soeuer many esteeme sailers, all the worke to saue, ship, goods, and liues must lie vpon them, especially in fowle weather, then their labour, hazzard, wet and cold, is so incredible I cannot expresse it. It is not then the number of them that here can say at home what I cannot doe I can quickly learne, and what a great matter is it to saile a ship, or goe to Sea; surely those for a good time will doe more trouble than good, I confesse it is most necessary such should goe, but not too many in one ship; for if the labour of threescore should lie vpon thirty, (as many times it doth) they are so ouer-charged with labour, bruises, and ouer∣straining themselues they fall sick of one disease or other, for there is no dallying nor excuses with stormes, gusts, ouer∣growne Seas, and lee-shores, and when their victuall is pu∣trified it endangers all: Men of all other professions in lighting, thunder, stormes, and tempests with raine and snow may shelter themselues in dry houses by good fires, but those are the chiefe times Sea-men must stand to their tackling, and attend with all diligence their greatest la∣bour vpon the deckes. Many suppose any thing is good e∣nough to serue men at sea, and yet nothing sufficient for them ashore, either for their healthes, for their ease, or e∣states, or state; A Commander at Sea should doe well to thinke the contrary, and prouide for himselfe and compa∣ny in like manner; also seriously to consider what will bee his charge to furnish himselfe at Sea with bedding, linnen, armes, and apparrell, how to keepe his table aboord, and his expences on shore, and prouide his petty Tally, which is a competent proportion according to your number of these particulars following. he petty Tally. Fine wheat flower close and well packed, Rice, Cur∣rands, Sugar, Prunes, Cynamon, Ginger, Pepper, Cloues, greene Ginger, Oyle, Butter, Holland cheese, or old Cheese, Wine vineger, Canarie sacke, Aqua vita, the best Wines, the best waters, the iuyce of Limons for the scuruy, white Bisket, Oatmeale, gammons of Bacon, dried Neats tongues, Beefe packed vp in vineger, Legs of Mutton minced and stewed, and close packed vp, with tried sewet or butter in earthen pots. To entertaine stran∣gers Marmalad, Suckets, Almonds, Comfits and such like. Some it may be will say I would haue men rather to feast than fight; The vse of the petty Tally. But I say the want of those necessaries occa∣sions the losse of more men than in any English fleet hath beene slaine since 88. For when a man is ill, or at the point of death, I would know whether a dish of buttered Rice with a little Cynamon, Ginger, and Sugar, a little minced meat, or rost Beefe, a few stewed Prunes, a race of greene Ginger, a Flap-iacke, a can of fresh Water brewed with a little Cinamon, Ginger, and Sugar bee not better than a little poore Iohn, or salt fish with oile and mustard, or bis∣ket, butter, cheese, or oatmeale pottage on fish dayes, or on flesh dayes salt Beefe, Porke, and Pease with six shillings beere, this is your ordinary ships allowance, and good for them are well if well conditioned, which is not alwayes as Sea-men can (too well) witnesse. And after a storme, when poore men are all wet, and some haue not so much as a cloth to shift him, shaking with cold, few of those but wil tell you a little Sacke or Aqua vitae is much better to keepe them in health, than a little small beere, or cold water although it be sweet. Now that euery one should prouide those things for himselfe, few of them haue either that prouidence or meanes, and there is neither Ale-house, Tauerne, nor Inneto burne a faggot in, neither Grocer, Poulterer, Apo∣thecary, nor Butchers shop, and therefore the vse of this petty Tally is necessary, and thus to be imploied as there is occasion. To entertaine strangers as they are in quality e∣uery Commander should shew himselfe as like himselfe as he can, as well for the credit of the ship, and his setters sorth, as himselfe; but in that herein euery one may moderate themselues according to their owne pleasures, therefore I leaue it to their owne discretions, and this briefe discourse, and my selfe to their friendly construction, and good opinion. FINIS.