A map of Virginia VVith a description of the countrey, the commodities, people, government and religion. VVritten by Captaine Smith, sometimes governour of the countrey. Whereunto is annexed the proceedings of those colonies, since their first departure from England, with the discourses, orations, and relations of the salvages, and the accidents that befell them in all their iournies and discoveries. Taken faithfully as they were written out of the writings of Doctor Russell. Tho. Studley. Anas Todkill. Ieffra Abot. Richard Wiefin. Will. Phettiplace. Nathaniel Povvell. Richard Pots. And the relations of divers other diligent observers there present then, and now many of them in England. By VV.S. Smith, John, 1580-1631. A map of Virginia VVith a description of the countrey, the commodities, people, government and religion. VVritten by Captaine Smith, sometimes governour of the countrey. Whereunto is annexed the proceedings of those colonies, since their first departure from England, with the discourses, orations, and relations of the salvages, and the accidents that befell them in all their iournies and discoveries. Taken faithfully as they were written out of the writings of Doctor Russell. Tho. Studley. Anas Todkill. Ieffra Abot. Richard Wiefin. Will. Phettiplace. Nathaniel Povvell. Richard Pots. And the relations of divers other diligent observers there present then, and now many of them in England. By VV.S. Smith, John, 1580-1631. Symonds, William, 1556-1616? Abbay, Thomas. Hole, William, d. 1624, engraver. Because many doe desire to knowe the maner of their language, I haue inserted these few words. Ka ka torawincs yowo. What call you this. Nemarough. a man. Crenepo. a woman. Marowanchesso a boy. Yehawkans. Houses. Matchcores. Skins, or garments. Mockasins. Shooes. Tussan. Beds. Pokatawer. Fire. Attawp. Abowe. Attonce. Arrowes. Monacookes. Swords. Aumoughhowgh. A Target. Pawcussacks. Gunnes. Tomahacks. Axes. Tockahacks. Pickaxes. Pamesacks. Kniues. Accowprets. Sheares. Pawpecones. Pipes. Mattassin. Copper. Vssawassin. Iron, Brasse, Silver, or any white mettal. Musses. Woods. Attasskuss. Leaues, weeds, or grasse. Chepsin. Land. Shacquohocan. A stone. Wepenter, a cookold. Suckahanna. Water. Noughmass. Fish. Surgion. We ghsha ghes. Flesh. Sawwehone. Bloud. Netoppew. Friends. Marrapough. Enimies. Maskapow. The wo rst of the enimies. Mawchick chammay. The best of friends. Casacunnakack, peya quagh acquintan v asantasough. In how many daies will there come hether any more English ships? Their numbers. Necut. 1. Ningh. 2 Nuss. 3. Yowgh. 4. Paranske. 5. Comotinch. 6. Toppawoss. 7. Nusswash. 8. Kekatawgh. 9. Kaskeke. They count no more but by tennes as followeth. Case, how many. Ninghsapooeksku. 20. Nussapooeksku. 30. Yowghapooeksku. 40. Parankestassapooeksku. 50. Comatinchtassapooeksku. 60. Nussswashtassapooeksku. 80. Toppawousstassapooeksku. 70 Kekataughtassapooeksku. 90. Necuttoughtysinough. 100. Necuttwevnquaough. 1000. Rawcosowghs. Daies. Keskowghes. Sunnes. Toppquough. Nights. Nepawweshowghs. Moones, Pawpaxsoughes. Yeares. Pummahumps. Starres. Osies. Heavens. Okes. Gods. Quiyoughcosucks. Pettie Gods, and their affinities. Righcomoughes. Deaths. Kekughes. Liues. Mowchick woyawgh tawgh noeragh kaquere mecher. I am verie hungrie? what shall I eate? Tawnor nehiegh Powhatan. where dwels Powwahtan. Mache, nehiegh yowrowgh, orapaks. Now he dwels a great way hence at orapaks. Vttapitchewayne anpechitchs nehawper werowacomoco. You lie, he staide ever at werowocomoco. Kator nehiegh mattagh neer vttapitchewayne. Truely he is there I doe not lie. Spaughtynere keragh werowance mawmarinough kekaten wawgh peyaquaugh. Run you then to the king mawma∣rynough and bid him come hither. Vtteke, epeya weyack wighwhip. Get you gone, and come againe quickly. Kekaten pokahontas patiaquagh niugh tanks manotyens neer mowchick rawrenock audowgh. Bid Pokahontas bring hither two little Baskets, & I wil giue her white beads to make her a chaine. FINIS. VIRGINIA THE DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA BY CAP∣TAINE SMITH. V IRGINIA is a Country in Ameri∣ca that lyeth betweene the degrees of 34 and 44 of the north latitude. The latitude. The bounds thereof on the East side are the great Ocean. On the South lyeth Florida: on the North nova Francia. As for the West thereof, the limits are vnknowne. Of all this country wee purpose not to speake, but only of that part which was planted by the English men in the yeare of our Lord, 1606. And this is vnder the degrees 37. 38. and 39. The temperature of this countrie doth agree well with English constitutions being once seasoned to the country. Which appeared by this, that though by many occasions our people fell sicke; yet did they recover by very small meanes & continued in health, though there were other great causes, not only to haue made them sicke, but even to end their daies, &c. The sommer is hot as in Spaine; the winter colde as in The tēperature. Fraunce or England. The heat of sommer is in Iune, Iulie, and August, but commonly the coole Breefes asswage the vehemencie of the heat. The chiefe of winter is halfe De∣cember, Ianuary; February, and halfe March. The colde is extreame sharpe, but here the proverbe is true that no ex∣treame long continueth. In the yeare 1607. was an extraordinary frost in most of Europe, and this frost was founde as extreame in Uirginia. But the next yeare for 8. or 10. daies of ill weather, other 14 daies would be as Sommer. The windes here are variable, but the like thunder and The windes. lightning to purifie the aire, I haue seldome either seene or heard in Europe. From the Southwest came the greatest gustes with thunder and heat. The Northwest winde is cō∣monly coole and bringeth faire weather with it. From the North is the greatest cold, and from the East and South-East as from the Barmadas, fogs and raines. Some times there are great droughts other times much raine, yet great necessity of neither, by reason we see not but that all the variety of needfull fruits in Europe may be there in great plenty by the industry of men, as appeareth by those we there planted. There is but one entraunce by sea into this country and The entrances. that is at the mouth of a very goodly Bay the widenesse whereof is neare 18. or 20. miles. The cape on the South∣side is called Ccpe Henry in honour of our most noble Cape Henry. Prince. The shew of the land there is a white hilly sand like vnto the Downes, and along the shores great plentie of Pines and Firres. The north Cape is called Cape Charles in honour of the Cape Charles. worthy Duke of Yorke. Within is a country that may haue the prerogatiue over the most pleasant places of Europe, A¦sia, Africa, or America, for large and pleasant navigable rivers, heaven & earth never agreed better to frame a place for mans habitation being of our constitutions, were it ful∣ly manured and inhabited by industrious people. here are mountaines, hils, plaines, valleyes, rivers and brookes, all The country. running most pleasantly into a faire Bay cōpassed but for the mouth with fruitfull and delightsome land. In the Bay and rivers are many Isles both great and small, some woo∣dy, some plaine, most of them low and not inhabited. This Bay lieth North and South in which the water floweth neare 200 miles & hath a channell for 140 miles, of depth betwixt 7 and 15 fadome, holding in breadth for the most part 10 or 14 miles. Frō the head of the Bay at the north, the land is mountanous, & so in a manner from thence by a Southwest line; So that the more Southward, the farther of from the Bay are those mounetaines. From which fall certaine brookes which after come to fiue principall navi∣gable rivers. These run from the Northwest into the South east, and so into the west side of the Bay, where the fall of every River is within 20 or 15 miles one of another. The mountaines are of diverse natures for at the head of The moūtaines. the Bay the rockes are of a composition like milnstones. Some of marble, &c. And many peeces of christall we foūd as throwne downe by water from the mountaines. For in winter these mountaines are covered with much snow, & when it dissolveth the waters fall with such violence, that it causeth great inundations in the narrow valleyes which yet is scarce perceived being once in the rivers. These wa∣ters wash from the rocks such glistering tinctures that the ground in some places seemeth as guilded, where both the rocks and the earth are so splendent to behold, that better iudgements then ours might haue beene perswaded, they con∣tained more then probabilities. The vesture of the earth in most places doeth manifestly proue the nature of the soile to be lusty and very rich. The colour of the earth we found The soile. in diverse places, resembleth bole Armoniac, terra sigillata ad lemnia, Fullers earth marle and divers other such appea∣rances. But generally for the most part the earth is a black sandy mould, in some places a fat slimy clay, in other pla∣ces a very barren gravelli. But the best ground is knowne by the vesture it beareth, as by the greatnesse of trees or a∣bundance of weedes, &c. The country is not mountanous nor yet low but such The vallyes. pleasant plaine hils & fertle valleyes, one prettily crossing an other, and watered so conveniently with their sweete brookes and christall springs, as if art it selfe had devised them. By the rivers are many plaine marishes containing Plaines. some 20 some 100 some 200 Acres, some more, some lesse. Other plaines there are fewe, but only where the Savages inhabit: but all overgrowne with trees and weedes being a plaine wildernes as God first made it. On the west side of the Bay, wee said were 5. faire and delightfull navigable rivers, of which wee will nowe pro∣ceed to report. The first of those rivers and the next to the mouth of the Bay hath his course from the West and by North. The name of this river they call Powhatan accor∣to The river Pow∣hatan. the name of a principall country that lieth vpon it. The mouth of this river is neere three miles in breadth, yet doe the shoules force the Channell so neere the land that a Sacre will overshoot it at point blanck. This river is navigable 100 miles, the shouldes and soundings are here needlesse to bee ex∣pressed. It falleth from Rockes farre west in a country inha∣bited by a nation that they call Monacan. But where it commeth into our discoverie it is Powhatan. In the far∣thest place that was diligently observed, are falles, rockes, showles, &c. which makes it past navigation any higher. Thence in the running downeward, the river is enriched with many goodly brookes, which are maintained by an infinit number of smal rundles and pleasant springs that di¦sperse themselues for best service, as doe the vaines of a mans body. From the South there fals into this river. First The branches. the pleasant river of Apamatuck. next more to the East are the two rivers of Quiyoughcohanocke. A little farther is a Bay wherein falleth 3 or 4 prettie brookes & creekes that halfe intrench the Inhabitants of Warraskoyac then the ri∣ver of Nandsamund, and lastly the brooke of Chisapeack. From the North side is the river of Chickahamania, the backe river of Iames Towne; another by the Cedar Isle, where we lived 10 weekes vpon oisters, then a convenient harbour for fisher boats or smal boats at Kecoughtan, that so conveniently turneth it selfe into Bayes and Creeks that make that place very pleasant to inhabit, their cornefields being girded therein in a manner as Peninsulaes. The most of these rivers are inhabited by severall nations, or rather families. Of the name of the rivers. They haue also in every of those places some Gouernour, as their king, which they call Werowances. In a Peninsula on the North side of this Iames Towne. river are the English planted in a place by thē called Iames Towne, in honour of the Kings most excellent Maiestie, vpon which side are also many places vnder the Werow∣ances. The first and next the rivers mouth are the Kecoughtans, The severall in∣habitants. who besides their women and children, haue not past 20. fighting men. The Paspaheghes on whose land is seated the English Colony, some 40. miles from the Bay haue not past 40. The river called Chickahamania neere 200. The Weanocks 100. The Arrowhatocks 30. The place called Powhatan, some 40. On the South side this river the Ap∣pamatucks haue 60 fighting men. The Quiyougcohanocks, 25. The Warraskoyacks 40. The Nandsamunds 200. The Chesapeacks are able to make 100. Of this last place the Bay beareth the name. In all these places is a severall com∣mander, which they call Werowance, except the Chickha∣manians, who are governed by the Priestes and their Assi∣stants of their Elders called Caw-cawwassoughes. In somer no place affordeth more plentie of Sturgeon, nor in winter more abundance of fowle, especially in the time of frost. There was once taken 52 Sturgeons at a draught, at ano∣ther draught 68. From the later end of May till the end of Iune are taken few, but yong Sturgeons of 2 foot or a yard long. From thence till the midst of September, them of 2 or three yards long and fewe others. And in 4 or 5 houres with one nette were ordinarily taken 7 or 8: often more, seldome lesse. In the small rivers all the yeare there is good plentie of small fish, so that with hookes those that would take paines had sufficient. Foureteene miles Northward from the river Powhatan, R. Pamavnke. is the river Pamavnke, which is navigable 60 or 70 myles, but with Catches and small Barkes, 30 or 40 myles farther. At the ordinary flowing of the salt water, it divideth it selfe into two gallant branches. On the South side inha∣bit the people of Youghtanund, who haue about 60 mē for The inhabitants. warres. On the North branch Mattapament, who haue 30 men. Where this river is divided the Country is called Pa∣mavuke, and nourisheth neere 300 able men. About 25 miles lower on the North side of this river is Werawocomo∣co, where their great King inhabited when Captain Smith was deliuered him prisoner; yet there are not past 40 able men. But now he hath abandoned that, and liueth at Ora∣pakes by Youghtanund in the wildernesse; 10 or 12 myles lower; on the South side of this river is Chiskiack, which hath some 40 or 50 men. These, as also Apamatuck, Irro∣hatock, and Powhatan, are their great kings chiefe alliance and inhabitance. The rest (as they report) his Conquests. Before we come to the third river that falleth from the Payankatank. R mountaines, there is another river (some 30 myles navi∣gable) that commeth from the Inland, the river is called Payankatanke, the Inhabitants are about some 40 service∣able men. The third navigable riuer is called Toppahanock. (This Toppahanock. R is navigable some 130 myles) At the top of it inhabit the people called Mannahoackes amongst the mountaines, but they are aboue the place we describe. Vpon this river on the North side are seated a people called Cuttatawomen, The inhabitants with 30 fighting men. Higher on the riuer are the Mo∣raughtacunds, with 80 able men. Beyond them Toppaha∣nock with 100 men. Far aboue is another Cuttatawomen with 20 men. On the South, far within the river is Nau∣taughtacund hauing 150 men. This river also as the two former, is replenished with fish and foule. The fourth river is called Patawomeke & is 6 or 7 miles in breadth. It is navigable 140 miles, & fed as the rest with Patawomek, R. many sweet rivers and springs, which fall from the borde∣ring hils. These hils many of them are planted, and yeelde no lesse plenty and variety of fruit then the river exceedeth with abundance of fish. This river is inhabited on both sides. First on the South side at the very entrance is Wigh∣cocomoco & hath some 130 men, beyond them Sekacawone with 30. The Onawmanient with 100. Then Patawomeke The inhabitants with 160 able men. Here doth the river divide it selfe in to 3 or 4 convenient rivers; The greatest of the least is cal∣led Quiyough treadeth north west, but the river it selfe tur∣neth North east and is stil a navigable streame. On the we∣sterne side of this bought is Tauxenent with 40 men. On the north of this river is Secowocomoco with 40 men. Some what further Potapaco with 20. In the East part of the bought of the river, is Pamacacack with 60 mē, After Moy owances with 100. And lastly Nacotchtanke with 80 able men. The river 10 miles aboue this place maketh his pas∣sage downe a low pleasant vally overshaddowed in manie places with high rocky mountaines; from whence distill innumerable sweet and pleasant springs, The fifth river is called Pawtuxunt, and is of a lesse pro∣portion Pawtuxunt, R. then the rest; but the channell is 16 or 18 fadome deepe in some places. Here are infinit skuls of divers kinds of fish more then elsewhere. Vpon this river dwell the peo∣ple called Acquintanacksuak, Pawtuxunt and Mattapa∣nient. 200 men was the greatest strength that could bee there perceived. But they inhabit togither, and not so dis∣persed as the rest. These of al other were found the most ci∣vill to giue intertainement. Thirty leagues Northward is a river not inhabited, yet na¦vigable; Bolus, R. for the red earth or clay resembling bole Armoni∣ack the English called it Bolus. At the end of the Bay where The head of the Bay. it is 6 or 7 miles in breadth, there fall into it 4 small rivers, 3 of them issuing from diverse bogges invironed with high mountaines. There is one that commeth du north 3 or 4. daies iourny frō the head of the Bay and fals from rocks & mountaines, vpon this riuer inhabit a people called Sas∣quesahanock. They are seated 2 daies higher then was pas∣sage Sasquesahanock. for the discoverers Barge, which was hardly 2 toons, and had in it but 12 men to perform this discouery, where∣in they lay aboue the space of 12 weekes vpon those great waters in those vnknowne Countries, hauing nothing but a little meale or oatmeale and water to feed them; & scarse halfe sufficient of that for halfe that time, but that by the Savages and by the plentie of fish they found in all places, they made themselues provision as opportunitie served; yet had they not a marriner or any that had skill to trim their sayles, vse their oares, or any businesse belonging to the Barge, but 2 or 3. The rest being Gentlemen or as ig∣norant in such toyle and labour, yet necessitie in a short time by their Captaines diligence and example, taught thē to become so perfect, that what they did by such small meanes, I leaue to the censure of the Reader to iudge by this discourse and the annexed Map. But to proceed, 60 of those Sasquesahanocks, came to the discouerers with skins, Bowes, Arrowes, Targets, Beads, Swords, and Tobacco pipes for presents. Such great and well proportioned men, are seldome seene, for they seemed like Giants to the Eng∣lish, yea and to the neighbours, yet seemed of an honest & simple disposition, with much adoe restrained from ado∣ring the discoverers as Gods. Those are the most strange people of all those Countries, both in language and attire; for their language it may well beseeme their proportions, sounding from them, as it were a great voice in a vault, or caue, as an Eccho. Their attire is the skinnes of Beares, and The description of a Sasquesa hanough. Woolues, some haue Cassacks made of Beares heades and skinnes that a mans necke goes through the skinnes neck, and the eares of the beare fastned to his shoulders behind, the nose and teeth hanging downe his breast, and at the end of the nose hung a Beares Pawe, the halfe sleeues com¦ming to the elbowes were the neckes of Beares and the armes through the mouth with pawes hanging at their no¦ses. One had the head of a Woolfe hanging in a chaine for a Iewell, his Tobacco pipe 3 quarters of a yard long, pret∣tily carued with a Bird, a Beare, a Deare, or some such de∣vise at the great end, sufficient to beat out the braines of a man, with bowes, and arrowes, and clubs, sutable to their greatnesse and conditions. These are scarse knowne to Powhatan. They can make neere 600 able and mighty men and are pallisadoed in their Townes to defend them from the Massawomekes their mortall enimies. 5 of their chiefe Werowances came aboard the discoverers and crossed the Bay in their Barge. The picture of the greatest of them is signified in the Mappe. The calfe of whose leg was 3 quar∣ters of a yard about, and all the rest of his limbes so answe∣rable to that proportion, that he seemed the goodliest man that euer we beheld. His haire, the one side was long, the other shore close with a ridge over his crown like a cocks combe. His arrowes were fiue quarters long, headed with flints or splinters of stones, in forme like a heart, an inch broad, and an inch and a halfe or more long. These hee wore in a woolues skinne at his backe for his quiver, his bow in the one hand and his clubbe in the other, as is de∣scribed. On the East side the Bay is the river of Tockwhogh, & Tockwhagh. R. vpon it a people that can make 100 men, seated some 7 miles within the river: where they haue a Fort very wel pal lisadoed and mantelled with the barke of trees. Next to them is Ozinies with 60 men. More to the South of that East side of the Bay, the river of Rapahanock, neere vnto Rapahanock. R. Kuskarawaock. R. Wighcocomoco. R. which is the river of Kuskarawaock. Vpon which is seated a people with 200 men. After that is the river of Tants Wighcocomoco, and on it a people with 100 men. The peo∣ple of those rivers are of little stature, of another language from the rest, and very rude. But they on the river of Aco∣hanock with 40 men, and they of Accomack 80 men doth Accomack. R. equalize any of the Territories of Powhatan & speake his language, who over all those doth rule as king. Southward they went to some parts of Chawonock and Chawonock. the Mangoags to search them there left by S r Walter Ra∣leigh; for those parts to the Towne of Chisapeack hath for∣merly been discovered by M r Heriots and S r Raph Layne. Amongst those people are thus many severall nations of sundry languages, that environ Powhatans Territories. The seueral lan¦guages. The Chawonokes, the Mangoags, the Monacans, the Man∣nahokes, the Masawomekes, the Powhatans, the Sasquesaha∣nocks, the Atquanachukes, the Tockwoghes, and the Kusca∣rawaokes. Al those not any one vnderstandeth another but by Interpreters. Their severall habitations are more plain∣ly described by this annexed Mappe, which will present to the eie, the way of the mountaines and current of the ri∣uers, with their seuerall turnings, bayes, shoules, Isles, In∣lets, and creekes, the breadth of the waters, the distances of places and such like. In which Mappe obserue this, that as far as you see the little Crosses on riuers, mountaines, or other places haue beene discovered; the rest was had by information of the Savages, and are set downe, according to their instructions. Of such things which are naturall in Uirginia and how they vse them. Uirginia doth afford many excellent vegitables and li∣uing Creatures, yet grasse there is little or none, but what groweth in lowe Marishes: for all the Countrey is over∣growne Why there is lit∣tle grasse. with trees, whose droppings continually turneth their grasse to weedes, by reason of the ranck nesse of the ground which would soone be amended by good husban∣dry. The wood that is most common is Oke and Walnut, Weeds with their fruits. many of their Okes are so tall and straight, that they will beare two foote and a halfe square of good timber for 20 yards long; Of this wood there is 2 or 3 seuerall kinds. The Acornes of one kind, whose barke is more white, then the other, is somewhat sweetish, which being boyled halfe a day in severall waters, at last afford a sweete oyle, which they keep in goards to annoint their heads and ioints. The fruit they eate made in bread or otherwise. There is also some Elme, some black walnut tree, and some Ash: of Ash Elme. and Elme they make sope Ashes. If the trees be very great, the ashes will be good, and melt to hard lumps, but if they be small, it will be but powder, and not so good as the o∣ther. Of walnuts there is 2 or 3 kindes; there is a kinde of Walnuts. Supposed Cypres wood we called Cypres, because both the wood, the fruit, and leafe did most resemble it, and of those trees there are some neere 3 fadome about at the root very straight, and 50, 60, or 80 foot without a braunch. By the dwelling of the Savages are some great Mulbery trees, and in some parts of the Countrey, they are found growing naturally Mulberies. in prettie groues. There was an assay made to make silke, & and surely the wormes prospered excellent well, till the master workeman fell sicke. During which time they were eaten with rats. In some parts were found some Chesnuts whose wild fruit Chesnuts. equalize the best in France, Spaine, Germany, or Italy, to their tasts that had tasted them all. Plumbs there are of 3 sorts. The red and white are like our hedge plumbs, but the other which they call Putchamins, grow as high as a Pal∣meta: the fruit is like a medler; it is first greene then yellow, and red when it is ripe; if it be not ripe it will drawe a mans mouth awrie, with much torment, but when it is ripe, it is as delicious as an Apricock. They haue Cherries and those are much like a Damsen, Cherries. but for their tastes and colour we called them Cherries. we see some few Crabs, but very small and bitter. Of vines Vines. great abundance in many parts that climbe the toppes of the highest trees in some places, but these beare but fewe grapes. But by the riuers and Savage habitations where they are not overshadowed from the sunne, they are cove∣red with fruit, though never pruined nor manured. Of those hedge grapes wee made neere 20 gallons of wine, which was neare as good as your French Brittish wine, but certainely they would proue good were they well ma∣nured. There is another sort of grape neere as great as a Cherry, this they call Messaminnes, they bee fatte, and the iuyce thicke. Neither doth the tast so well please whē they are made in wine. They haue a small fruit growing on little trees, husked like a Chesnut, but the fruit most like a very Chechinquaēs small acorne. This they call Chechinquamins which they e∣steeme a great daintie. They haue a berry much like our gooseberry, in greatnesse, colour, and tast; those they call Rawcomenes, and doe eat them raw or boyled. Of these na∣turall fruits they liue a great part of the yeare, which they Rawcomens vse in this manner, The walnuts, Chesnuts, Acornes, and How they vse their fruits Chechinquamens are dryed to keepe. When they need them they breake them betweene two stones, yet some part of the walnut shels will cleaue to the fruit. Then doe they dry them againe vpon a mat ouer a hurdle. After they put it in∣to a morter of wood, and beat it very small: that done they mix it with water, that the shels may sinke to the bottome. This water will be coloured as milke, which they cal Paw∣cohiscora, and keepe it for their vse. The fruit like medlers Walnut milke. they call Putchamins, they cast vppon hurdles on a mat and preserue them as Pruines. Of their Chesnuts and Chechinquamens boyled 4 houres, they make both broath and bread for their chiefe men, or at their greatest feasts. Besides those fruit trees, there is a white populer, and ano∣ther tree like vnto it, that yeeldeth a very cleere and an o∣doriferous Gumme like Turpentine, which some called Bal∣som. Gummes. Cedars. Saxafras trees. There are also Cedars and Saxafras-trees. They also yeeld gummes in a small proportion of themselues. Wee tryed conclusions to extract it out of the wood, but nature afforded more then our arts. In the warry valleyes groweth a berry which they call Qcoughtanamnis very much like vnto Capers. These they Berries. dry in sommer. When they will eat them they boile them neare halfe a day; for otherwise they differ not much from poyson. Mattoume groweth as our bents do in meddows. The seede is not much vnlike to rie, though much smaller. Matoume. this they vse for a dainty bread buttered with deare suet. During Somer there are either strawberries which ripen Strawberries in April; or mulberries which ripē in May & Iune. Raspises hurtes; or a fruit that the Inhabitāts call Maracocks, which is a pleasant wholsome fruit much like a lemond. Many hearbes in the spring time there are commonly dispersed throughout the woods, good for brothes and sallets, as Hearbs. Violets, Purslin, Sorrell, &c. Besides many we vsed whose names we know not. The chiefe roote they haue for foode is called Tocka∣whoughe, Rootes. It groweth like a flagge in low muddy freshes. In one day a Savage will gather sufficient for a weeke. These rootes are much of the greatnes & taste of Potatoes. They vse to couer a great many of thē with oke leaues & ferne, and then couer all with earth in the manner of a colepit; o∣ver it, on each side, they continue a great fire 24 houres be∣fore they dare eat it. Raw it is no better then poison, & be∣ing roasted, except it be tender and the heat abated, or sli∣ced and dried in the sun, mixed with sorrell and meale or such like, it will prickle and torment the throat extreame∣ly, and yet in sommer they vse this ordinarily for bread. They haue an other roote which they call wighsacan: as Wighsacan a▪ Root. thother feedeth the body, so this cureth their hurts & dis∣eases. It is a small root which they bruise and apply to the wound. Pocones, is a small roote that groweth in the moū∣taines, Pocones a small Roote. which being dryed & beate in powder turneth red. And this they vse for swellings, aches, annointing their ioints, painting their heads and garments. They account it very pretious and of much worth. Musquaspenne is a roote of the bignesse of a finger, and as red as bloud. In drying it Musquaspenne. a Root. will wither almost to nothing. This they vse to paint their Mattes, Targets and such like. There is also Pellitory of Spaine, Safafrage, and diuers o∣ther Pellitory. Sasafrage. simples, which the Apothecaries gathered, and com∣mended to be good, and medicinable. In the low Marishes growe plots of Onyons contai∣ning Onyons. an acre of ground or more in many places; but they are small not past the bignesse of the Toppe of ones Thumbe. Of beastes the chiefe are Deare, nothing differing from Their chiefe beasts are Deare ours. In the deserts towards the heads of the riuers, ther are many, but amongst the riuers few. There is a beast they call Aroughcun, much like a badger, but vseth to liue on trees as Aroughcun. Squirrels. Squirrels doe. Their Squirrels some are neare as greate as our small est sort of wilde rabbits, some blackish or blacke and white, but the most are gray. A small beast they haue, they call Assapanick but we call them flying squirrels, because spreading their legs, and so Assapanick a Squirrel flying stretching the largenesse of their skins that they haue bin seene to fly 30 or 40 yards. An Opassom hath a head like a Swine, & a taile like a Rat, and is of the bignes of a Cat. Vn∣der Opassom. her belly shee hath a bagge, wherein shee lodgeth, car∣rieth, and sucketh her young. Mussascus, is a beast of the forme and nature of our water Rats, but many of thē smell Mussascus. exceeding strongly of muske. Their Hares no bigger then our Conies, and few of them to be found. Their Beares are very little in comparison of those of Muscovia and Tartaria. The Beaver is as bigge as Beares. The Beaver. an ordinary water dogge, but his legges exceeding short. His fore feete like a dogs, his hinder feet like a Swans. His taile somewhat like the forme of a Racket bare without haire, which to eate the Savages esteeme a great delicate. They haue many Otters which as the Beavers they take with snares, and esteeme the skinnes great ornaments, and Otters. of all those beasts they vse to feede when they catch them. There is also a beast they call Vetchunquoyes in the forme of a wilde Cat, their Foxes are like our siluer haired Conies Vetchunquoyes. Foxes. Dogges. of a small proportion, and not smelling like those in Eng∣land. Their Dogges of that country are like their Wolues, and cannot barke but howle, and their wolues not much bigger then our English Foxes. Martins, Powlecats, wees∣sels Martins. Polcats. Weesels. and Minkes. and Minkes we know they haue, because we haue seen many of their skinnes, though very seldome any of them aliue. But one thing is strange that we could never perceiue their vermine destroy our hennes, Egges nor Chickens nor do any hurt, nor their flyes nor serpents anie waie perniti∣ous, where in the South parts of America they are alwaies dangerous and often deadly. Of birds the Eagle is the greatest devourer. Hawkes Birds. there be of diuerse sorts as our Falconers called them. Spa∣rowhawkes, Lanarets, Goshawkes, Falcons & Osperayes, but they all pray most vpon fish. Patrridges there are little big∣ger then our Quailes, wilde Turkies are as bigge as our tame. There are woosels or blackbirds with red shoulders, thrushes and diuerse sorts of small birds, some red, some blew, scarce so bigge as a wrenne, but few in Sommer. In winter there are great plenty of Swans, Craynes, gray and white with blacke wings, Herons, Geese, Brants, Ducke, Wigeon, Dotterell, Oxeies, Parrats and Pigeons. Of all those sorts great abundance, and some other strange kinds to vs vnknowne by name. But in sommer not any or a very few to be seene. Of fish we were best acquainted with Sturgeon, Grampus, Fish. Porpus, Seales, Stingraies, whose tailes are very dangerous. Brettes, mullets, white Salmonds, Trowts, Soles, Plaice, Herrings, Conyfish, Rockfish, Eeles, Lampreyes, Catfish, Shades, Pearch of 3 sorts, Crabs, Shrimps, Creuises, Oy∣sters, Cocles and Muscles. But the most strange fish is a smal one so like the picture of S. George his Dragon, as pos∣sible can be, except his legs and wings, and the Todefish which will swell till it be like to brust, when it commeth into the aire. Concerning the entrailes of the earth little can be saide for certainty. There wanted good Refiners. for these that The Rocks. tooke vpon them to haue skill this way, tooke vp the wa∣shings from the mounetaines and some moskered shining stones and spangles which the waters brought down, flat∣tering themselues in their own vaine conceits to haue bin supposed that they were not, by the meanes of that ore, if it proued as their arts and iudgements expected. Only this is certaine, that many regions lying in the same latitude, afford mines very rich of diuerse natures. The crust also of these rockes would easily perswade a man to beleeue there are other mines then yron and steele, if there were but meanes and men of experience that knew the mine from spare. Of their Planted fruits in Uirginia and how they vse them. They diuide the yeare into 5. seasons. Their winter some call Popanow, the spring Cattapeuk, the sommer Cohatta∣yough, How they di∣vide the yeare. the caring of their Corne Nepinough, the haruest & fall of leafe Taquitock. From September vntill the midst of Nouember are the chiefe Feasts and sacrifice. Then haue they plenty of fruits as well planted as naturall, as corne, greene and ripe, fish, fowle, and wilde beastes exceeding fat. The greatest labour they take, is in planting their corne, for the country naturally is ouergrowne with wood. To How they pre∣pare the ground prepare the ground they bruise the barke of the trees neare the root, then do they scortch the roots with fire that they grow no more. The next yeare with a crooked peece of wood, they beat vp the woodes by the rootes, and in that moulds they plant their corne. Their manner is this. They make a hole in the earth with a sticke, and into it they put 4 graines of wheate, and 2 of beanes. These holes they make 4 foote one from another; Their women and childrē do continually keepe it with weeding, & whē it is growne midle high, they hill it about like a hop-yard. In Aprill they begin to plant, but their chiefe plantatiō is in May, and so they continue till the midst of Iune. What How they plant they plant in Aprill they reape in August, for May in Sep∣tember, for Iune in October; Every stalke of their corne commonly beareth two eares, some 3, seldome any 4, many but one & some none. Every eare ordinarily hath betwixt 200 and 500 graines. The stalke being green hath a sweet iuice in it, somewhat like a suger Cane, which is the cause that when they gather their corne greene, they sucke the stalkes: for as wee gather greene pease so doe they their corne being greene, which excelleth their old. They plant also pease they cal Assetamens, which are the same they cal in Italy', Fagioli. Their Beanes are the same the Turkes cal Garnanses, but these they much esteeme for dainties. Their corne they rost in the eare greene, and bruising it in a morter of wood with a Polt, lappe it in rowles in the How they vse their corne. leaues of their corne, and so boyle it for a daintie. They also reserue that corne late planted that will not ripe, by toasting it in hot ashes, the heat thereof drying it. In win∣ter they esteeme it being boyled with beans for a rare dish, they call Pausarowmena. Their old wheat they first steep a night in hot water, in the morning pounding it in a mor∣ter. They vse a small basket for their Temmes, then pound againe the great, and so separating by dashing their hand in the basket, receaue the flower in a platter made of wood scraped to that forme with burning and shels. Tem∣pering this flower with water, they make it either in cakes couering them with ashes till they bee baked, and then washing them in faire water they drie presently with their owne heat: or else boyle them in water eating the broth with the bread which they call Ponap. The grouts and pee∣ces of the cornes remaining, by fanning in a Platter or in the wind, away, the branne they boile 3 or 4 houres with water, which is an ordinary food they call Ustatahamen. But some more thrifty then cleanly, doe burne the core of the eare to powder which they call Pungnough, mingling that in their meale, but it never tasted well in bread, nor broth. Their fish and flesh they boyle either very tenderly, How they vse their fish and flesh. or broyle it so long on hurdles over the fire, or else after the Spanish fashion, putting it on a spit, they turne first the one side, then the other, til it be as drie as their ierkin beefe in the west Indies, that they may keepe it a month or more without putrifying. The broth of fish or flesh they eate as commonly as the meat. In May also amongst their corne they plant Pumpeons, Planted fruits. and a fruit like vnto a muske millen, but lesse and worse, which they call Macocks. These increase exceedingly, & ripen in the beginning of Iuly, and continue vntil Septem∣ber. They plant also Maracocks a wild fruit like a lemmon, which also increase infinitely. They begin to ripe in Sep∣tember and continue till the end of October. When all their fruits be gathered, little els they plant, & this is done by their women and children; neither doth this long suf∣fice them, for neere 3 parts of the yeare, they only obserue times and seasons, and liue of what the Country naturally affordeth from hand to mouth, &c. The commodities in Uirginia or that may be had by industrie. The mildnesse of the aire, the fertilitie of the soile, and the situation of the rivers are so propitious to the nature & vse of man as no place is more convenient for pleasure, profit, and mans sustenance. Vnder that latitude or climat, here will liue any beasts, as horses, goats, sheep, asses, hens, A proofe cattell will liue well. &c. as appeared by them that were carried thether. The waters, Isles, and shoales, are full of safe harbours for ships of warre or marchandize, for boats of all sortes, for trans∣portation or fishing, &c. The Bay and riuers haue much marchandable fish and places fit for Salt coats, building of ships, making of iron, &c. Muscovia and Polonia doe yearely receaue many thou∣sands, for pitch, tarre, sope ashes, Rosen, Flax, Cordage, The cōmodities. Sturgeon, masts, yards, wainscot, Firres, glasse, & such like, also Swethland for iron and copper. France in like manner for Wine, Canvas, and Salt, Spaine asmuch for Iron, Steele, Figges, Reasons, and Sackes. Italy with Silkes, and Velvers consumes our chiefe commodities. Holand maintaines it selfe by fishing and trading at our owne doores. All these temporize with other for necessities, but all as vncertaine as peace or warres. Besides the charge, travell, and danger in transporting them, by seas, lands, stormes, and Pyrats. Then how much hath Virginia the prerogatiue of all those florishing kingdomes for the benefit of our land, whenas within one hundred miles all those are to bee had, either ready provided by nature, or else to bee prepared, were there but industrious men to labour. Only of Copper wee may doubt is wanting, but there is good probabilitie that both copper and better munerals are there to be had for their labor. Other Countries haue it. So thē here is a place a nurse for souldiers, a practise for martiners, a trade for marchants, a reward for the good, and that which is most of all, a businesse (most acceptable to God) to bring such poore infidels to the true knowledge of God and his holy Gospell. Of the naturall Inhabitants of Virginia. The land is not populous, for the men be fewe; their far greater number is of women & children. Within 60 miles of Iames Towne there are about some 5000 people, but of able men fit for their warres scarse 1500. To nourish so The numbers. many together they haue yet no means because they make so smal a benefit of their land, be it never so fertill. 6 or 700 700 men were the most were seene together whē they thoght to haue surpri∣sed Captaine Smith. A description of the people. haue beene the most hath beene seene together, whē they gathered themselues to haue surprised Captaine Smyth at Pamavuke, hauing but 15 to withstand the worst of their furie. As small as the proportion of ground that hath yet beene discovered, is in comparison of that yet vnknowne. The people differ very much in stature, especially in lan∣guage, as before is expressed. Some being very great as the Sesquesahamocks; others very little, as the Wighcocomocoes: but generally tall and straight, of a comely proportion, & of a colour browne when they are of any age, but they are borne white. Their haire is generally black, but few haue any beards. The men weare halfe their heads shaven, the The barbers. other halfe long; for Barbers they vse their women, who with 2 shels will grate away the haire, of any fashion they please. The women are cut in many fashions agreeable to their yeares, but ever some part remaineth long. They are The constitution very strong, of an able body and full of agilitie, able to en∣dure to lie in the woods vnder a tree by the fire, in the worst of winter, or in the weedes and grasse, in Am∣buscado in the Sommer. They are inconstant in everie The disposition. thing, but what feare constraineth them to keepe. Craftie, timerous, quicke of apprehensiō & very ingenuous. Some are of disposition fearefull, some bold, most cautelous, all Savage. Generally covetous of coppeer, beads, & such like trash. They are soone moved to anger, and so malitious, that they seldome forget an iniury: they seldome steale one from another, least their coniurers should reueale it, and so they be pursued and punished. That they are thus feared is certaine, but that any can reueale their offences by con∣iuration I am doubtfull. Their women are carefull not to bee suspected of dishonesty without the leaue of their hus∣bands. Each houshold knoweth their owne lands & gar∣dens, and most liue of their owne labours. For their appa∣rell, The possessions they are some time couered with the skinnes of wilde beasts, which in winter are dressed with the haire, but in sommer without. The better sort vse large mātels of deare Their attire. skins not much differing in fashion frō the Irish mantels. Some imbrodered with white beads, some with copper, o∣ther painted after their manner. But the common sort haue scarce to cover their nakednesse but with grasse, the leaues of trees, or such like. We haue seen some vse mantels made of Turky feathers, so prettily wrought and wouen with threeds that nothing could bee discerned but the feathers. That was exceeding warme and very handsome. But the women are alwaies couered about their midles with a skin and very shamefast to be seene bare. They adorne thēselues most with copper beads and paintings. Their women some Their ornamēts haue their legs, hands, brests and face cunningly imbrode∣red with diuerse workes, as beasts, serpentes, artificially wrought into their flesh with blacke spots. In each eare commonly they haue 3 great holes, whereat they hange chaines bracelets or copper. Some of their men weare in those holes, a smal greene & yellow coloured snake, neare halfe a yard in length, which crawling & lapping her selfe about his necke often times familiarly would kisse his lips. Others wear a dead Rat tied by the tail. Sōe on their heads weare the wing of a bird, or some large feather with a Rat∣tell. Those Rattels are somewhat like the chape of a Rapier but lesse, which they take from the taile of a snake. Many haue the whole skinne of a hawke or some strange sowle, stuffed with the wings abroad. Others a broad peece of copper, and some the hand of their enemy dryed. Their heads and shoulders are painted red with the roote Bocone braied to powder mixed with oyle, this they hold in somer to preserue them from the heate, and in winter from the cold. Many other formes of paintings they vse, but he is the most gallant that is the most monstrous to behould. Their buildings & habitations are for the most part by Their buildings the riuers or not farre distant from some fresh spring. Their houses are built like our Arbors of small young springs bowed and tyed, and so close covered with mats, or the barkes of trees very handsomely, that notwithstanding ei∣ther winde, raine or weather, they are as warme as stooues, but very smoaky, yet at the toppe of the house there is a hole made for the smoake to goe into right over the fire. Against the fire they lie on little hurdles of Reedes co∣vered Their lodgings. with a mat borne from the ground a foote and more by a hurdle of wood. On these round about the house they lie heads and points one by that her against the fire, some covered with mats, some with skins, and some starke naked lie on the ground, from 6 to 20 in a house. Their houses are in the midst of their fields or gardens which are smal plots Their garden. of ground. Some 20, some 40. some 100. some 200. some more, some lesse, some times from 2 to 100 of those houses togither, or but a little separated by groues of trees. Neere their habitations is little small-wood or old trees on the ground by reason of their burning of them for fire. So that a man may gallop a horse amongst these woods any waie, but where the creekes or Rivers shall hinder. Men women and children haue their severall names ac∣cording How they vse their children. to the seuerall humor of their Parents. Their wo∣men (they say) are easilie deliuered of childe, yet doe they loue children verie dearly. To make them hardy, in the col∣dest mornings they thē wash in the riuers and by painting and ointments so canne their skins, that after a year or two, no weather will hurt them. The men bestowe their times in fishing, hunting, wars & The industry of their women. such manlike exercises, scorning to be seene in any womā like exercise, which is the cause that the women be verie painefull and the men often idle. The women and children do the rest of the worke. They make mats, baskets, pots, morters, pound their corne, make their bread, prepare their victuals, plant their corne, gather their corne, beare al kind of burdens and such like. Their fire they kindle presently by chasing a dry poin∣ted sticke in a hole of a little square peece of wood, that fi∣ring How they strike fire. it selfe, will so fire mosse, leaues, or anie such like drie thing, that will quickly burne. In March and Aprill they liue much vpon their fishing, weares, and feed on fish, Tur∣kies Their order of diet. and squirrels. In May and Iune they plant their fieldes and liue most of Acornes, walnuts, and fish. But to mend their diet, some disperse themselues in small companies & liue vpon fish, beasts, crabs, oysters, land Torteyses, straw∣berries, mulberries, & such like. In Iune, Iulie, and August they feed vpon the rootes of Tocknough berries, fish and greene wheat. It is strange to see how their bodies alter with their diet, euen as the deare and wilde beastes they seeme fat and leane, strong and weak. Powhatan their great king and some others that are provident, rost their fish and flesh vpon hurdles as before is expressed, and keepe it till scarce times. For fishing and hunting and warres they vse much their bow and arrowes. They bring their bowes to the forme of How they make their bowes and arrowes. ours by the scraping of a shell. Their arrowes are made some of straight young sprigs which they head with bone, some 2 or 3 inches long. These they vse to shoot at squir∣rels on trees. An other sort of arrowes they vse made of reeds. These are peeced with wood, headed with splinters of christall or some sharpe stone, the spurres of a Turkey, or the bill of some bird. For his knife he hath the splinter Their kniues. of a reed to cut his feathers in forme. With this knife also, he will ioint a Deare or any beast, shape his shooes, bus∣kins, mantels, &c. To make the noch of his arrow hee hath the tooth of a Beuer, set in a sticke, wherewith he grateth it by degrees, His arrow head he quickly maketh with a little bone, which he ever weareth at his bracer, of any splint of a stone, or glasse in the forme of a hart and these they glew to the end of their arrowes. With the sinewes of Deare, and the tops of Deares hornes boiled to a ielly, they make a glew that will not dissolue in cold water. For their wars also they vse Targets that are round and Their Targets and Swords. made of the barkes of trees, and a sworde of wood at their backs, but oftentimes they vse for swords the horne of a Deare put through a peece of wood in forme of a Pickaxe. Some a long stone sharpned at both ends vsed in the same manner. This they were wont to vse also for hatchets, but now by trucking they haue plenty of the same forme of y∣ron. And those are their chiefe instruments and armes. Their fishing is much in Boats. These they make of one Their boats. tree by bowing & scratching away the coles with stons & shels till they haue made it in forme of a Trough. Some of them are an elne deepe, and 40 or 50 foot in length, and some will beare 40 men, but the most ordinary are smaller and will beare 10, 20, or 30. according to their bignes. In∣steed of oares, they vse paddles and sticks with which they will row faster then our Barges. Betwixt their hands and thighes, their women vse to spin, the barks of trees, deare How they spin. sinews, or a kind of grasse they call Pemmenaw, of these they make a thred very even & readily. This thred serveth for many vses. As about their housing, apparell, as also they make nets for fishing, for the quantity as formally braded as ours. They make also with it lines for angles. Their Their fishooker. hookes are either a bone grated as they nock, their arrows in the forme of a crooked pinne or fishook or, of the splin∣ter of a bone tied to the clift of a litle stick, and with the ende of the line, they tie on the bate. They vse also long arrowes tyed in a line wherewith they shoote at fish in the rivers. But they of Accawmack vse staues like vnto Iave∣lins headed with bone. With these they dart fish swim∣ming in the water. They haue also many artificiall weares in which they get abundance of fish. In their hunting and fishing they take extreame paines; yet it being their ordinary exercise from their infancy, they esteeme it a pleasure and are very proud to be expert there∣in. And by their continuall ranging, and travel, they know all the advantages and places most frequented with Deare, Beasts, Fish, Foule, Rootes, and Berries. At their huntings they leaue their habitations, and reduce themselues into companies, as the Tartars doe, and goe to the most desert How they hunt places with their families, where they spend their time in hunting and fowling vp towards the mountaines, by the heads of their riuers, where there is plentie of game. For betwixt the rivers the grounds are so narrowe, that little commeth there which they devoure not. It is a marvel they can so directly passe these deserts, some 3 or 4 daies iour∣ney without habitation. Their hunting houses are like vn∣to Arbours couered with mats. These their women beare after them, with Corne, Acornes, Morters, and all bag and baggage they vse. Whē they come to the place of exercise, euery man doth his best to shew his dexteritie, for by their excelling in those quallities, they get their wiues. Forty yards will they shoot leuell, or very neare the mark, and 120 is their best at Random. At their huntings in the de∣serts they are commonly 2 or 300 together. Hauing found the Deare, they enuiron them with many fires, and betwixt the fires they place themselues. And some take their stands in the midst. The Deare being thus feared by the fires and their voices, they chace them so long within that circle that many times they kill 6, 8, 10, or 15 at a hunting. They vse also to driue them into some narrowe point of land; when they find that aduantage and so force them into the riuer, where with their boats they haue Ambuscadoes to kill them. When they haue shot a Deare by land, they fol∣low him like blood hounds by the blood and straine and oftentimes so take them. Hares, Pattridges, Turkies, or Egges, fat or leane, young or old, they devoure all they cā catch in their power. In one of these huntings they found Captaine Smith in the discoverie of the head of the river of Chickahamania, where they slew his men, and tooke him prisoner in a Bogmire, where he saw those exercises, & ga∣thered these observations. One Savage hunting alone, vseth the skinne of a Deare One Savage hun∣ting alone. slit on the one side, and so put on his arme, through the neck, so that his hand comes to the head which is stuffed, and the hornes, head, eies, eares, and every part as artefici∣ally counterfeited as they can devise. Thus shrowding his body in the skinne by stalking he approacheth the Deare, creeping on the ground from one tree to another. If the Deare chance to find fault, or stande at gaze, hee turneth the head with his hand to his best advantage to seeme like a Deare, also gazing and licking himselfe. So watching his best aduantage to approach, hauing shot him, hee chaseth him by his blood and straine till he get him. When they intend any warres, the Werowances vsually Their consulta∣tions. haue the advice of their Priests and Coniurers, and their Allies and ancient friends, but chiefely the Priestes deter∣mine their rosolution. Every Werowance, or some lustie fel∣low, they appoint Captaine over every nation. They sel∣dome make warre for lands or goods, but for women and children, and principally for revenge. They haue many eni∣mies, Their enimies namely all their westernely Countries beyond the mountaines, and the heads of the rivers. Vpon the head of the Powhatans are the Monacans, whose chiefe habitation is at Russawmeake, vnto whome the Mouhemenchughes, the Massinnacacks, the Monahassanuggs, and other nations pay tributs. Vpon the head of the river of Toppahanock is a people called Mannahoacks. To these are contributers the Tauxsnitanias, the Shackaconias, the Outponcas, the Tego∣neaes, the Whonkentyaes, the Stegarakes, the Hassinnungas, and diuerse others, all confederats with the Monacans though many different in language, and be very barbarous living for most part of wild beasts and fruits: Beyond the mountaines from whence is the head of the river Patawo∣meke, the Savages report inhabit their most mortall eni∣mies, the Massawomekes vpon a great salt water, which by Massawomekes. all likelyhood is either some part of Commada some great lake, or some inlet of some sea that falleth into the South sea. These Massawomekes are a great nation and very popu lous. For the heads of all those riuers, especially the Patta∣womekes, the Pautuxuntes. The Sasquesahanocks, the Tock∣woughes are continually tormented by them: of whose cru∣eltie, they generally complained, and very importunate they were with Captaine Smith and his company to free Their offer of subiection. them from these tormentors. To this purpose they offered food, conduct, assistance, & continuall subiectiō. To which he concluded to effect, But the counsell then present emu∣lating his successe, would not thinke it fit to spare him 40 men to be hazarded in those vnknowne regions, hauing passed (as before was spoken of) but with 12, & so was lost that opportunitie. Seaven boats full of these Massawomeks the discouerers encountred at the head of the Bay; whose Targets, Baskets, Swords, Tobaccopipes, Platters, Bowes and Arrowes, and euery thing shewed, they much excee∣deed them of our parts, and their dexteritie in their small boats made of the barkes of trees sowed with barke and well luted with gumme, argueth that they are seated vpon some great water. Against all these enimies the Powhatans are constrai∣ned sometimes to fight. Their chiefe attempts are by Stra∣tagems, trecheries, or surprisals. Yet the Werowances, wo∣men and children they put not to death but keepe them Captiues, They haue a method in warre and for our plea∣sures they shewd it vs, and it was in this manner perfor∣med at Mattapanient. Having painted and disguised themselues in the fiercest Their manner of battell. manner they could devise. They divided themselues into two Companies, neare a 100 in a company. The one com∣pany Called Monacans, the other Powhatans. Either army had their Captaine. These as enimies tooke their stands a musket shot one from another; ranked themselues 15 a breast and each ranke from another 4 or 5 yards, not in fyle, but in the opening betwixt their fyles, So as the Reare could shoot as conueniently as the Front. Hauing thus pit ched the fields: from either part went a Messenger with these conditions, that whosoever were vanquished, such as escape vpon their submission in 2 daies after should liue, but their wiues and children should be prize for the Con∣querers. The messengers were no sooner returned, but they approached in their orders; On each flanke a Sarieant, and in the Reare an officer for levitenant, all duly keeping their orders, yet leaping & singing after their accustomed tune which they vse only in warres. Vpon the first flight of ar∣rowes they gaue such horrible shouts and screeches, as though so many infernall helhounds could not haue made them more terrible. When they had spent their arrowes they ioined together prettily, charging and retiring, every ranke seconding other. As they got advantage they cat∣ched their enimies by the haire of the head, and downe he came that was taken. His enimie with his wooden sword seemed to beat out his braines, and still they crept to the Reare, to maintaine the skirmish. The Monacans decrea∣sing, the Powhatans charged them in the forme of a halfe moone; they vnwilling to be inclosed, fled all in a troope to their Ambuscadoes on whome they led them very cun∣ninngly. The Monacans disperse themselues among the fresh men, wherevpon the Powhatans retired, with al speed to their seconds; which the Monacans seeing, took that ad∣vantage to retire againe to their owne battell, and so each returned to their owne quarter. All their actions, voices & gestures, both in charging and retiring were so strained to the hight of their quallitie and nature, that the strangenes thereof made it seem very delightfull. For their musicke they vse a thicke cane, on which they pipe as on a Recorder. For their warres they haue a great Their Musicke deepe platter of wood. They cover the mouth thereof with a skin, at each corner they tie a walnut, which meeting on the backside neere the bottome, with a small rope they twitch thē togither till it be so tought and stiffe, that they may beat vpon it as vpō a drumme. But their chiefe instru∣ments are Rattels made of small gourds or Pūpions shels. Of these they haue Base, Tenor, Countertenor, Meane and Trible. These mingled with their voices sometimes 20 or 30 togither, make such a terrible noise as would rather af∣fright then delight any man. If any great commāder arriue Their entertain ment. at the habitation of a Werowance, they spread a mat as the Turkes do a carpet for him to sit vpon. Vpō an other right opposite they sit themselues. Then doe all with a tuna∣ble voice of showting bid him welcome. After this doe 2. or more of their chiefest men make an oration, testifying their loue. Which they do with such vehemency & so great passions, that they sweate till they drop, and are so out of breath they can scarce speake. So that a man would take them to be exceeding angry or starke mad. Such victuall as they haue, they spend freely, & at night where his lodging is appointed, they set a woman fresh painted red with Po∣cones and oile, to be his bedfellow. Their manner of trading is for copper, beades, and such like, for which they giue such commodities as they haue, Their trade. as skins, fowle, fish, flesh, and their coūtry corne. But their victuall is their chiefest riches. Every spring they make themselues sicke with drinking the iuice of a root they call wighsacan, and water, whereof Their phisicke. they powre so great a quantity, that it purgeth them in a very violent maner; so that in 3 or 4 daies after they scarce recover their former health. Sometimes they are troubled with dropsies, swellings, aches, and such like diseases; for Their chirurge∣ry. cure wherof they build a stoue in the form of a douehouse with mats, so close that a fewe coales therein covered with a pot, will make the pacient sweate extreamely. For swel∣lings also they vse swal peeces of touchwood, in the forme of cloues, which pricking on the griefe they burne close to the flesh, and from thence draw the corruption with their mouth. With this root wighsacan they ordinarily heal greene wounds. But to scarrifie a swelling or make incisi∣on their best instruments are some splinted stone. Old vl∣cers or putrified hurtes are seldome seene cured amongst thē. They haue many professed Phisitions, who with their Their charmes to cure. charmes and Rattels with an infernall rowt of words and actions will seeme to sucke their inwarde griefe from their navels or their grieved places; but of our Chirurgians they were so conceipted, that they beleeued any Plaister would heale any hurt. Of their Religion. There is yet in Uirginia no place discouered to bee so Savage in which the Savages haue not a religion, Deare, and Bow, and Arrowes. All things that were able to do thē hurt beyond their prevention, they adore with their kinde of diuine worship; as the fire, water, lightning, thunder, our ordinance, peeces, horses, &c. But their chiefe God they worship is the Diuell. Him they call Oke & serue him more Their God. of feare then loue. They say they haue cōference with him, and fashion themselues as neare to his shape as they can i∣magine. In their Temples they haue his image euill favou∣redly carued, and then painted and adorned with chaines copper, and beades, and couered with a skin, in such māner as the deformity may well suit with such a God. By him is commonly the sepulcher of their kings. Their bodies are How they bury their kings. first bowelled, then dryed vpon hurdles till they bee verie dry, and so about the most of their iointes and necke they hang bracelets or chaines of copper, pearle, and such like, as they vse to weare, their inwards they stuffe with copper beads and couered with a skin, hatchets and such trash. Then lappe they them very carefully in white skins and so rowle them in mats for their wineding sheetes. And in the Tombe which is an arch made of mats, they lay them or∣derly. What remaineth of this kinde of wealth their kings haue, they set at their feet in baskets. These Temples and bodies are kept by their Priests. For their ordinary burials they digge a deep hole in the Their ordinary burials. earth with sharpe stakes and the corpes being lapped in skins & mats with their iewels, they lay them vpon sticks in the ground, and so couer them with earth. The buriall ended, the women being painted all their faces with black cole and oile, doe sit 24 howers in the houses mourning & lamenting by turnes, with such yelling & howling as may expresse their great passions. In every Territory of a werowance is a Temple & a Priest 2 or 3 or more. Their principall Temple or place of super∣stition Their Temples. is at Uttamussack at Pamavuke, neare vnto which is a house Temple or place of Powhatans. Vpon the top of certaine redde sandy hils in the woods. There are 3 great houses filled with images of their kings and Divels and Tombes of their Predecessors. Those hou∣ses are neare 60 foot in length built arbor wise after their building. This place they count so holy as that but the Priestes and kings dare come into them; nor the Savages dare not go vp the river in boats by it, but that they solēn∣ly cast some peece of copper white beads or Pocones into the river, for feare their Oke should be offended and revē∣ged of them. In this place commonly is resident 7 Priests. The chiefe differed from the rest in his ornaments, but inferior Priests Their ornamēts for their Priests could hardly be knowne from the cōmon people, but that they had not so many holes in their eares to hang their ie∣wels at. The ornaments of the chiefe Priest was certain at∣tires for his head made thus. They tooke a dosen or 16 or more snake skins and stuffed them with mosse, and of wee∣sels and other vermine skins a good many. All these they tie by their tailes, so as all their tailes meete in the toppe of their head, like a great Tassell. Round about this Tassell is as it were a crown of feathers, the skins hang round about his head necke and shoulders and in a manner cover his face. The faces of all their Priests are painted as vgly as they can devise, in their hands they had every one his Rat∣tell, some base, some smaller. Their devotion was most in songs which the chiefe Priest beginneth and the rest fol∣lowed him, sometimes he maketh invocations with brokē sentences by starts and strange passions, & at every pause, the rest giue a short groane. It could not bee perceiued that they keepe any day as more holy then other; But only in some great distresse of want, feare of enimies, times of triumph and gathering to∣gither Their times of solemnities. their fruits, the whole country of men women and children come togither to solemnities. The manner of their devotion is, sometimes to make a great fire, in the house or fields, and all to sing and dance about it with rat∣tles and shouts togither, 4 or 5 houres. Sometime they set a man in the midst, and about him they dance and sing, he all the while clapping his hands as if he would keepe time, & after their songs and dauncings ended they goe to their Feasts. They haue also diuers coniurations one they made whē Their coniura∣tions. Captaine Smith was their prisoner (as they reported) to know if any more of his countrymen would ariue there, & what he there intended. The manner of it was thus. First they made a faire fire in a house; about this fire set 7 Priests setting him by them, and about the fire, they made a circle of meale. That done the chiefe Priest attired as is expressed began to shake his rattle, and the rest followed him in his song. At the end of the song, he laid downe 5 or 3 graines of wheat and so continued counting his songs by the graines, till 3 times they incirculed the fire, then they di∣vided the graines by certaine numbers with little stickes, laying downe at the ende of euery song a little sticke. In this manner they sat 8, 10, or 12 houres without cease, with such strange stretching of their armes, & violent pas∣sions and gestures as might well seeme strange to him they so coniured who but every houre expected his end: not a∣ny meat they did eat till late in the evening they had fini∣shed this worke, and then they feasted him and themselues with much mirth, but 3 or 4 daies they continued this ce∣remony. They haue also certaine Altar stones they call Pawco∣rances, Their altars. but these stand from their Temples, some by their houses, other in the woodes and wildernesses. Vpon this they offer blood, deare suet, and Tobacco. These they doe when they returne from the warres, from hunting, and vp∣on many other occasions. They haue also another supersti∣tion that they vse in stormes, when the waters are rough in Sacrifices to the water. the riuers and sea coasts. Their Coniurers runne to the wa∣ter sides, or passing in their boats, after many hellish out∣cries and invocations, they cast Tobacco, Copper, Pocones or such trash into the water, to pacifie that God whome they thinke to be very angry in those stormes. Before their dinners and suppers the better sort will take the first bit, and cast it in the fire, which is all the grace they are known to vse. In some part of the Country they haue yearely a sacri∣fice of children. Such a one was at Quiyoughcohanock some 10 miles from Iames Towne and thus performed. Fifteene Their solemne sacrifices of children. of the properest young boyes, betweene 10 and 15 yeares of age they painted white. Hauing brought them forth the people spent the forenoone in dancing and singing about them with rattles. In the afternoone they put those childrē to the roote of a tree. By them all the men stood in a guard, every one hauing a Bastinado in his hand, made of reeds bound together. This made a lane betweene them all a∣long, through which there were appointed 5 young men to fetch these childrē: so every one of the fiue wēt through the guard to fetch a child each after other by turnes, the guard fearelesly beating them with their Bastinadoes, and they patiently enduring and receauing all, defending the children with their naked bodies from the vnmercifull blowes that pay them soundly though the children escape. All this while the women weepe and crie out very passio∣nately, prouiding mats, skinnes, mosse, and drie wood, as things fitting their childrens funerals. After the children were thus passed the guard, the guard tore down the trees, branches, and boughs, with such violence that they rent the body, and made wreathes for their heads, or bedecked their haire with the leaues. What else was done with the childron, was nonseene, but they were all cast on a heape, in a valley as dead, where they made a great feast for al the company. The Werowance being demanded the meaning of this sacrifice, answered that the children were not al dead, but that the Oke or Divell did sucke the blood from their left breast, who chanced to be his by lot, till they were dead, but the rest were kept in the wildernesse by the yong men till nine moneths were expired, during which time they must not conuerse with any, and of these were made their Priests and Coniurers. This sacrifice they held to bee so necessarie, that if they should omit it, their Oke or Divel and all their other Quiyoughcosughes which are their other Gods, would let them haue no Deare, Turkies, Corne, nor fish, and yet besides, hee would make a great slaughter a∣mongst them. They thinke that their Werowances and Priestes which Their resurre∣ction. they also esteeme Quiyoughcosughes, when they are dead, doe goe beyound the mountaines towardes the setting of the sun, and euer remaine there in forme of their Oke, with their heads painted with oile and Pocones, finely trim∣med with feathers, and shal haue beades, hatchets, copper, and tobacco, doing nothing but dance and sing, with all their Predecessors. But the common people they suppose shall not liue after death. To diuert them from this blind idolatrie, many vsed their best indeauours, chiefly with the Werowances of Qui∣youghcohanock, whose devotion, apprehension, and good disposition, much exceeded any in those Countries, who though we could not as yet preuaile withall to forsake his false Gods, yet this de did beleeue that our God as much exceeded theirs, as our Gunnes did their Bowes & Arrows and many times did send to the President, at Iames towne, men with presents, intreating them to pray to his God for raine, for his Gods would not send him any. And in this la∣mentable ignorance doe these poore soules sacrifice them selues to the Diuell, not knowing their Creator. Of the manner of the Virginians governement. Although the countrie people be very barbarous, yet haue they amongst them such governement, as that their Magistrats for good commanding, and their people for du subiection, and obeying, excell many places that would be counted very civill. The forme of their Common wealth is a monarchicall gouernement, one as Emperour ruleth o∣uer many kings or governours. Their chiefe ruler is called Powhatan, and taketh his name of the principall place of dwelling called Powhatan. But his proper name is Wahun∣sonacock. Some countries he hath which haue been his an∣cestors, and came vnto him by inheritance, as the countrie called Powhatan, Arrohateck, Appamatuke, Pamavuke, Youghtanud, and Mattapanient. All the rest of his Terri∣tories expressed in the Map, they report haue beene his se∣uerall conquests. In all his ancient inheritances, hee hath houses built after their manner like arbours, some 30 some 40 yardes long, and at euery house provision for his enter∣tainement according to the time. At Werowcomoco, he was seated vpon the Northside of the riuer Pamavuke, some 14 miles from Iames Towne, where for the most part, hee was resident, but he tooke so little pleasure in our neare neigh∣bourhood, that were able to visit him against his will in 6 or 7 houres, that he retired himself to a place in the deserts at the top of the riuer Chickahamania betweene Youghta∣nund & Powhatan. His habitation there is called Orapacks A description of Powhatan. where he ordinarily now resideth. He is of parsonage a tall well proportioned man, with a sower looke, his head som∣what gray, his beard so thinne that it seemeth none at al, his age neare 60; of a very able and hardy body to endure any labour. About his person ordinarily attendeth a guard of 40 or 50 of the tallest men his Country doth afford. E∣very His attendance and watch. night vpon the 4 quarters of his house are 4 Sentinels each standing from other a flight shoot, and at euery halfe houre one from the Corps du guard doth hollowe, vnto whome every Sentinell doth answer round from his stand; if any faile, they presently send forth an officer that beateth him extreamely. A mile from Orapakes in a thicket of wood hee hath a house in which he keepeth his kind of Treasure, as skinnes, His treasuris. copper, pearle, and beades, which he storeth vp against the time of his death and buriall. Here also is his store of red paint for ointment, and bowes and arrowes. This house is 50 or 60 yards in length, frequented only by Priestes. At the 4 corners of this housestand 4 Images as Sentinels, one of a Dragon, another a Beare, the 3 like a Leopard, and the fourth like a giantlike man, all made euillfauordly, accor∣ding to their best workmanship. He hath as many women as he will, whereof when hee His wiues. lieth on his bed, one sitteth at his head, and another at his feet, but when he sitteth, one sitteth on his right hand and another on his left. As he is wearie of his women, hee be∣stoweth them on those that best deserue them at his hands. When he dineth or suppeth, one of his women before and after meat, bringeth him water in a woden platter to wash his hands. Another waiteth with a bunch of feathers to wipe them insteed of a Towell, and the feathers when he hath wiped are dryed againe. His kingdome des∣cendeth not to his sonnes nor children, but first to his bre∣thren, whereof he hath 3. namely Opitchapan, Opechanca∣nough, His successors and Catataugh, and after their decease to his sisters. First to the eldest sister then to the rest and after thē to the heires male and female of the eldest sister, but never to the heires of the males. He nor any of his people vnderstand any letters wherby to write or read, only the lawes whereby he ruleth is cu∣stome. Yet when he listeth his will is a law and must bee o∣beyed: not only as a king but as halfe a God they esteeme Their authority him. His inferiour kings whom they cal werowances are ty∣ed to rule by customes, and haue power of life & death as their command in that nature. But this word Werowance which we call and conster for a king, is a common worde whereby they call all commanders for they haue but fewe words in their language, and but few occasions to vse anie officers more then one commander, which commōly they call werowances. They all knowe their severall landes, and The tenor of their lands. habitations, and limits, to fish, sowle, or hunt in, but they hold all of their great Werowances Powhatan, vnto whome they pay tribute of skinnes, beades, copper, pearle, deare, turkies, wild beasts, and corne. What he commandeth they dare not disobey in the least thing. It is strange to see with what great feare and adoration all these people doe obay this Powhatan. For at his feet they present whatsoever hee commandeth, and at the least frowne of his browe, their greatest spirits will tremble with feare: and no maruell, for he is very terrible and tyrannous in punishing such as of∣fend him. For example hee caused certaine malefactors to be bound hand and foot, then hauing of many fires gathe∣red His maner of punishments. great store of burning coles, they rake these coles roūd in the forme of a cockpit, and in the midst they cast the of∣fenders to broyle to death. Somtimes he causeth the heads of them that offend him, to be laid vpon the altar or sacrifi∣cing stone, and one with clubbes beates out their braines. When he would punish any notorious enimie or malefac∣tor, he causeth him to be tied to a tree, & with muscle shels or reeds, the executioner outteth of his ioints one after an∣other, euer casting what they cut of into the fire; then doth he proceed with shels and reeds to case the skinne from his head and face; then doe they rip his belly and so burne him with the tree and all. Thus themselues reported they exe∣cuted George Cassen. Their ordinary correction is to beate them with cudgels. Wee haue seene a man kneeling on his knees, and at Powhatans command, two men haue beat him on the bare skin, till he hath fallen senselesse in a sound, & yet neuer cry nor complained. In the yeare 1608, hee surprised the people of Payanka∣tank his neare neighbours and subiects. The occasion was to vs vnknowne, but the manner was thus. First he sent di∣verse of his men as to lodge amongst them that night, then the Ambuscadoes inuironed al their houses, & at the houre appointed, they all fell to the spoile, 24 men they slewe, the long haire of the one side of their heades with the skinne cased off with shels or reeds, they brought away. They sur∣prised also the women & the children and the Werowance. All these they present to Powhatan. The Werowance, womē and children became his prisoners, & doe him service. The lockes of haire with their skinnes he hanged on a line vnto two trees. And thus he made oftentation of as great a tri∣umph at Werowocomoco, shewing them to the Emglish men that then came vnto him at his appointment, they expec∣ting provision, he to betray them, supposed to halfe con∣quer them by this spectacle of his terrible crueltie. And this is as much as my memory can call to mind wor¦thie of note; which I haue purposely collected, to satisfie my friends of the true worth and qualitie of Virginia. Yet some bad natures will not sticke to slander the Countrey; that will slovenly spit at all things, especially in company where they cā find none to contradict them. Who though they were scarse euer 10 miles from Iames Town, or at the most but at the falles; yet holding it a great disgrace that amongst so much action, their actions were nothing, ex∣claime of all things, though they never adventured to knowe any thing; nor euer did any thing but devoure the fruits of other mens labours. Being for most part of such tender educations and small experience in martiall acci∣dents, because they found not English cities, nor such faire houses, nor at their owne wishes any of their accustomed dainties, with feather beds and downe pillowes, Tavernes and alehouses in every breathing place, neither such plen∣ty of gold and siluer and dissolute liberty as they expected, had little or no care of any thing, but to pamper their bel∣lies, to fly away with our Pinnaces, or procure their means to returne for England. For the Country was to them a mi∣serie, a ruine, a death, a hell, and their reports here, & their owne actions there according. Some other there were that had yearely stipends to pass to and againe for transportation: who to keepe the myste∣ry of the businesse in themselues, though they had neither time nor meanes to knowe much of themselues; yet al mēs actions or relations they so formally tuned to the tempo∣rizing times simplicitie, as they could make their ignoran∣ces seeme much more, then al the true actors could by their experience. And those with their great words deluded the world with such strange promises as abused the businesse much worse then the rest. For the businesse being builded vpon the foundation of their fained experience, the plan∣ters, the mony, tinne, and meanes haue still miscaried: yet they ever returning, and the Planters so farre absent, who could contradict their excuses? which stil to maintain their vaineglory and estimation, from time to time they haue v∣sed such diligence as made them passe for truthes, though nothing more false. And that the advēturers might be thus abused, let no man wonder; for the wisest liuing is soonest abused by him that hath a faire tongue and a dissembling heart. There were many in Virginia meerely proiecting, verbal and idle contemplatours, and thoseso deuoted to pure idle nesse, that though they had lived two or three yeares in Virginia, lordly, necessitie it selfe could not compell them to passe the Peninsula, or Pallisadoes of Iames Towne, and those wittie spirits, what would they not affirme in the be∣halfe of our transporters to get victuall from their ships, or obtaine their good words in England to get their passes. Thus from the clamors and the ignorance of false infor∣mers, are sprung those disasters that sprung in Virginia, and our ingenious verbalists were no lesse plague to vs in Uir∣ginia, then the Locusts to the Egyptians. For the labour of 30 of the best only preserued in Christianitie by their indu strie the idle livers of neare 200 of the rest: who liuing neer 10 months of such naturall meanes, as the Country natu∣rally of it selfe afforded, notwithstanding all this, and the worst furie of the Savages, the extremitie of sicknesse, mu∣tinies, faction, ignorances, and want of victuall; in all that time I lost but 7 or 8 men, yet subiected the Savages to our desired obedience, and receaued contribution from 35 of their kings, to protect and assist thē against any that should assalt them, in which order they continued true & faithful, and as subiects to his Maiestie, so long after as I did gouern there, vntill I left the Country: since, how they haue revol∣ted, the Countrie lost, and againe replanted, and the busi∣nesses hath succeeded from time to time, I referre you to the relations of them returned from Virginia, that haue bin more diligent in such observations. FINIS. TO THE READER. L Ong hath the world longed, but to be truely satisfied what Virginia is, with the truth of those proceedings, from whence hath flowne so manie reports of worth, & yet few good ef∣fects of the charge, which hath cau∣sed suspition in many well willers that desire yet but to be truely satis∣fied therein. If any can resolue this doubt it is those that haue lived residents in the land: not salers, or passengers, nor such mercinary contemplators, that only bedeck them∣selues with others plumes. This discourse is not from such, neither am I the author, for they are many, whose particu∣lar discourses are signed by their names. This solid trea∣tise, first was compiled by Richard Pots, since passing the hands of many to pervse, chācing into my hands, (for that I know them honest men, and can partly well witnesse their relations true) I could do no lesse in charity to the world thē reveale; nor in cōscience, but approue. By the advise of ma∣ny graue and vnderstanding gentlemen, that haue pressed it, to the presse, it was thought fit to publish it, rather in it owne rude phrase then other waies. For that nothing can so purge that famous action from the infamous scandal some ignorantly haue conceited, as the plaine simple and naked truth. For defect whereof the businesse is still suspected, the truth vnknowne, and the best deservers discouraged, and neglected, some by false reports, others by coniecture, and such power hath flattry to ingender of those, hatred and af∣fection, that one is sufficent to beguile more, then 500 can keepe from being deceiued. But this discourse is no Iudge of mens manners, nor ca∣talogue of their former courses; only a reporter of their acti∣ons in Virginia, not to disgrace any, accuse any, excuse any, nor flatter any; for which cause there is no wrong done but this, shortnesse in complaining, & so sparing in cōmending as only the reader may perceiue the truth for his paines, & the action purged of foule slander; it can detract from none that intendeth there to adventure their fortunes; and to speake truly of the first planters, that brake the yee & beate the path, howsoeuer many difficulties obscured their inde∣vours, he were worse then the worst of Ingrates, that would not spare them memory that haue buried themselues in those forrain regions. From whose first adventures may spring more good blessings then are yet conceived. So I rest thine, that will read, pervse, & vnderstand me. If you finde false orthography or broken English, they are small faultes in souldiers, that not being able to write learnedly, onlie striue to speake truely, and be vnderstood without an In∣terpreter. T. ABBAY. THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE ENGLISH Colony in Virginia, taken faithfully out of the writings of Thomas Studly Cape-marchant, Anas Todkill, Doctor Russell, Nathaniel Powell, William Pheti∣place, and Richard Pot, with the laboures of other dis∣creet observers, during their residences. CHAP. 1. I T might wel be thought, a coun∣trie so faire (as Virginia is) and a people so tractable, would long ere this haue beene quietly pos∣sessed, to the satisfaction of the adventurers, and the eternizing of the memorie of those that af∣fected it. But because all the world doe see a defaile∣ment; this following Treatise shall giue satisfaction to all indifferent readers, how the businesse hath beene carried, where no doubt they will easily vnderstand and answer to their question, howe it came to passe there was no better speed and successe in those pro∣ceedings. Captaine Bartholomew Gosnold, the first mover of The first mouer of the action. this plantation, hauing many yeares solicited many of his friends, but found small assistants; at last prevai∣led with some Gentlemen, as M r Edward-maria Wing∣field, Captaine Iohn Smith, and diverse others who de∣pended a yeare vpon his proiects, but nothing could be effected, till by their great charge and industrie it came to be apprehended by certaine of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and Marchants, so that his Maiestie by his letters patents, gaue commission for establishing Councels, to direct here, and to governe, and to exe∣cute there; to effect this, was spent another yeare, and by that time, three ships were provided, one of 100 Tonns, another of 40. and a Pinnace of 20. The trans∣portation of the company was committed to Cap∣taine Christopher Newport, a Marriner well practised for the westerne parts of America. But their orders for gouernement were put in a box, not to be opened, Orders for go∣vernment. nor the governours knowne vntill they arived in Vir∣ginia. On the 19 of December, 1606. we set saile, but by vnprosperous winds, were kept six weekes in the sight of England; all which time, M r Hunt our Preacher, was so weake and sicke, that few expected his recove∣rie. Yet although he were but 10 or 12 miles from his habitation (the time we were in the downes) and not∣withstanding the stormie weather, nor the scandalous imputations (of some few, little better then Atheists, of the greatest ranke amongst vs) suggested against him, all this could never force from him so much as a seeming desire to leaue the busines, but preferred the service of God, in so good a voyage, before any affec∣tion to contest with his godlesse foes, whose disaste∣rous designes (could they haue prevailed) had even then overthrowne the businesse, so many discontents did then arise, had he not with the water of patience, and his godly exhortations (but chiefly by his true de∣voted examples) quenched those flames of envie, and dissention. Wee watred at the Canaries, wee traded with the Salvages at Dominica; three weekes we spent in refre∣shing ourselus amongst these west-India Iles; in Gwar∣dalupa we found a bath so hot, as in it we boiled porck as well as over the fire. And at a little Ile called Moni∣ca, Monica an vn∣frequented Ile full of birds. we tooke from the bushes with our hands, neare 2 hogshheads full of birds in 3 or 4 houres. In Mevis, Mona, and the Virgin Iles, we spent some time, where∣with a lothsome beast like a Crocadil, called a Gwayn, Tortoses, Pellicans, Parrots, & fishes, we daily feasted. Gone from thence in search of Virginia, the compa∣ny was not a little discomforted, seeing the Marriners had three daies passed their reckoning and found no land, so that Captaine Ratcliffe (Captaine of the Pin∣nace) rather desired to beare vp the helme to returne for England, then make further search. But God the guider of all good actions, forcing thē by an extream storme to hul all night, did driue them by his provi∣dence to their desired port, bey ond all their expecta∣tions, for never any of them had seene that coast. The first land they made they called Cape Henry; where anc∣horing, Their first lan∣ding. M r Wingfeild, Gosnoll, and Newport, with 30 others, recreating themselues on shore, were assalted by 5 Salvages, who hurt 2 of the English very dange∣rously. That night was the box opened, and the or∣ders read, in which Barthelomew Gosnoll, Edward Wing∣feild, Christopher Newport, Iohn Smith, Iohn Ratliffe, Iohn Martin, and George Kendall, were named to bee the Councell, and to choose a President amongst them for a yeare, who with the Councell should governe. Matters of moment were to be examined by a Jurie, Matters of go∣vernment. but determined by the maior part of the Councell in which the Precedent had 2 voices. Vntill the 13 of May they sought a place to plant in, then the Coun∣cell was sworne, M. Wingfeild was chosen Precident, & an oration made, whie Captaine Smith was not ad∣mitted of the Councell as the rest. Now falleth every man to worke, the Councell contriue the Fort, the rest cut downe trees to make place to pitch their Tents; some provide clapbord to relade the ships, some make gardens, some nets, &c. The Salvages often visited vs kindly. The Precidents overweening iealousie would admit no exeroise at armes, or fortification, but the boughs of trees cast together in the forme of a halfe moone by the extra∣ordinary paines and diligence of Captaine Kendall, Newport, with Smith, and 20 others, were sent to dis∣cover The discouery of the Falles and Powhatan. the head of the river: by divers smal habitations they passed, in 6 daies they arrived at a towne called Powhatan, consisting of some 12 houses pleasantly sea∣te don a hill; before it 3 fertil Iles, about it many of their cornefields, the place is very pleasant, and strong by nature, of this place the Prince is called Powhatan, and his people Powhatans, to this place the river is na∣vigable, but higher within a mile, by reason of the Rockes and Iles, there is not passage for a smal boate, this they call the Falles, the people in al parts kindly intreated them, til being returned within 20 miles of Iames towne, they gaue iust cause of iealousie, but had God not blessed the discoverers otherwise then those at the fort, there had then beene an end of that planta∣tion; for at the fort, where they arived the next day, they found 17 men hurt, and a boy slaine by the Sal∣vages, and had it not chanced a crosse barre shot from The Fort assal∣ted by the Sal∣vages. the ships strooke down a bough from a tree amongst them that caused them to retire, our men had all been slaine, being securely all at worke, and their armes in drie fats. Herevpon the President was contented the Fort should be pallisadoed, the ordinance mounted, his mē armed and exercised, for many were the assaults, and Ambuscadoes of the Salvages, and our men by their disorderly stragling were often hurt, when the Salva∣ges by the nimblenesse of their heeles well escaped. What toile wee had, with so smal a power to guard our workmē adaies, watch al night, resist our enimies and effect our businesse, to relade the ships, cut downe trees, and prepare the ground to plant our corne, &c. I referre to the readers consideration. Six weekes being spent in this manner, Captaine Newport (who was hited only for our transportation) was to return with the ships, now Captaine Smith, who all this time from their departure from the Canaries was restrai∣ned as a prisoner vpon the scandalous suggestions of some of the chiefe envying his repute) who fained he intended to vsurpe the governement, murder the Councell, and make himselfe king, that his confede∣rats were dispearsed in all the three ships, and that di∣vers of his confederats that revealed it, would affirme it, for this he was committed, 13 weekes he remained thus suspected, and by that time the ships should re∣turne they pretended out of their commisserations, to referre him to the Councell in England to receaue a check, rather then by particulating his designes make him so odious to the world, as to touch his life, or vt∣terly overthrowe his reputation; but he much scorned their charitie, and publikely defied the vttermost of their crueltie, hee wisely prevented their pollicies, though he could not suppresse their envies, yet so wel he demeaned himselfe in this busines, as all the com∣pany did see his innocencie, & his adversaries malice, and those suborned to accuse him, accused his accusers of subornation; many vntruthes were alleaged against him; but being so apparently disproved begat a gene∣rall hatred in the harts of the company against such vniust commanders; many were the mischiefes that daily sprong from their ignorant (yet ambitious) spi∣rits; but the good doctrine and exhortation of our preacher M r Hunt reconciled them, and caused Cap∣taine Smith to be admitted of the Councell; the next day all receaved the Communion, the day following the Salvages voluntarily desired peace, and Captaine Newport returned for England with newes; leaving in Cap. Newports returne for Eng land. Virginia 100. the 15 of Iune 1607. The names of them that were the first plan∣ters, were these following. M r Edward Maria Wingfield. Captaine Bartholomew Gosnoll. Cap. Iohn Smyth. Cap. Iohn Ratliffe. Cap. Iohn Martin. Cap. George Kendall. Councell. M r Robert Hunt Preacher. M r George Percie. Anthony Gosnoll. Cap. Gabriell Archer. Rob. Ford. William Bruster. Dru Pickhouse. Iohn Brookes. Thomas Sands. Iohn Robinson. Vstis Clovill. Kellam Throgmorton. Nathaniell Powell. Robert Behethland. Ieremy Alicock. Thomas Studley. Richard Crofts. Nicholas Houlgraue. Thomas Webbe: Iohn Waler. William Tankard. Francis Snarsbrough. Edward Brookes. Richard Dixon. Iohn Martin. George Martin. Anthony Gosnold: Thomas Wotton, Sierg. Thomas Gore. Francis Midwinter. Gent. William Laxon. Edward Pising. Tho. Emry. Rob. Small. Carpenters. Anas Todkill. Iohn Capper. Iames Read, Blacksmith. Ionas Profit, Sailer. Tho. Couper, Barber. Iohn Herd, Brick layer. William Garret, Bricklayer Edward Brinto, Mason. William Loue, Taylor. Nic. Skot, Drum. Iohn Laydon. William Cassen. George Cassen. Tho. Cassen. William Rods. William White. Ould Edward. Henry Tauin. George Golding. Iohn Dods. William Iohnson. Will. Vnger. Will. Wilkinson. Surgeon Labourers. Samuell Collier. Nat. Pecock. Iames Brumfield. Rich. Mutton. Boyes. with diverse others to the number of 105. CHAP. 2. What happened till the first supply. B Eing thus left to our fortunes, it fortuned that within tennedaies The occasion of sicknesse. scarse ten amongst'vs coulde ei∣ther goe, or well stand, such ex∣treame weaknes and sicknes op∣pressed vs. And thereat none need morvaile, if they consider the cause and reason, which was this; whilest the ships staied, our allowance was some∣what bettered, by a daily proportion of bisket which the sailers would pilser to sell, giue or exchange with The sailers abu∣ses. vs, for mony, saxesras, surres, or loue. But when they departed, there remained neither taverne, beere-house nor place of relife but the common kettell. Had we beene as free from all sinnes as gluttony, and drunken∣nes, we might haue bin canonized for Saints; But our President would never haue bin admitted, for ingros∣sing to his privat, Otemeale, sacke, oile, aquavitae, beefe egs, or what not, but the kettel; that indeede he allow∣ed equally to be distributed, and that was halfe a pinte of wheat and as much barly boyled with water for a man a day, and this having fryed some 26. weeks in the ships-hold, contained as many wormes as graines; so that we might truely call it rather so much bran then corne, our drinke was water, our lodgings castles in aire, with this lodging and diet, our extreame toile in bearing and planting pallisadoes, so strained and brui∣sed vs, and our continuall labour in the extremity of the heate had so weakned vs, as were cause sufficient to haue made vs as miserable in our natiue coūtry, or any other place in the world. From May, to Septem∣ber, those that escaped; lived vpon Sturgion, and sea-Crabs, 50. in this time we buried, The rest seeing the Presidēts proiects to escape these miseries in our Pin∣nas Abad Precidēt. by flight (who all this time had neither felt want nor sicknes) so moved our dead spirits, as we deposed him; and established Ratcliffe in his place, (Gosnoll be∣ing dead) Kendall deposed, Smith newly recovered, Martin and Ratliffe was by his care preserved and re∣lieued, but now was all our provision spent, the Stur∣geon gone, all helps abandoned each houre expecting the fury of the Salvages; when God the patron of all good indeavours in that desperate extreamity so chā∣ged the harts of the Salvages, that they brought such plenty of their fruits, and provision as no man wan∣ted. Plentie vnex∣pected. And now where some affirmed it was ill done of the Councel to send forth men so badly prouided, this incontradictable reason will shew them plainely they are too ill advised to nourish such il conceipts; first the fault of our going was our owne, what coulde bee thought fitting or necessary wee had, but what wee should finde, what we should want, where we shoulde be, we were all ignorant, and supposing to make our passage in two monthes, with victuall to liue, and the advantage of the spring to worke; we weare at sea 5. monthes where we both spent our victuall & lost the opportunity of the time, and season to plant. Such actions haue ever since the worlds beginning beene subiect to such accidents, and every thing of worth is found full of difficulties, but nothing so diffi∣cult as to establish a common wealth so farre remote from men and meanes, and where mens mindes are so vntoward as neither do well themselues nor suffer o∣thers; but to proceed. The new President, and Martin, being little belo∣ved; of weake iudgement in dangers, and lesse industry in peace, cōmitted the managing of all things abroad to captaine Smith: who by his owne example, good words, and faire promises, set some to mow, others to The building of Iames Towne. binde thatch, some to build houses, others to thatch them, himselfe alwaies bearing the greatest taske for his own share, so that in short time, he provided most of them lodgings neglecting any for himselfe. this done, seeing the Salvages superfluity beginne to de∣crease (with some of his workemen) shipped himselfe in the shallop to search the country for trade, the wāt of the language, knowledge to mānage his boat with out sailers, the want of a sufficient power, (knowing the multitude of the Salvages) apparell for his men, & other necessaries, were infinite impediments, yet no discouragemēt. Being but 6 or 7 in company he went down the river to Kecoughtan, where at first they scor∣ned him, as a starved man, yet he so dealt with them, that the next day they loaded his boat with corne, & in his returne he discouered & kindly traded with the The beginning of trade abroad, Weraskoyks, in the meane time those at the fort so glut∣ted the Salvages with their commodities as they be∣came not regarded. Smith perceiving (notwithstanding their late mise∣rie) not any regarded but from hand to mouth, (the company being well recovered) caused the Pinas to bee provided with things fitting to get provision for the yeare following; but in the interim he made 3. or 4. iournies and discovered the people of Chickahamine yet what he carefully provided the rest carelesly spent. Wingfield and Kendall liuing in disgrace, seeing althings at randome in the absence of Smith, The companies dislike of their Presidents weaknes, & their small loue The discoverie of Chickahami∣ne. to Martins never-mending sicknes, strengthened thē∣selues with the sailers, and other confederates to re∣gaine their former credit & authority, or at least such meanes abord the Pinas, (being fitted to saile as Smith had appointed for trade) to alter her course and to go for England. Smith vnexpectedly returning had the plot discovered to him, much trouble he had to pre∣vent it till with store of fauken and musket shot he for¦ced them stay or sinke in the riuers, which action cost the life of captaine Kendall. These brawles are so dis∣gustfull, as some will say they were better forgotten, yet all men of good iudgement will conclude, it were better their basenes should be manifest to the world, then the busines beare the scorne and shame of their excused disorders. The President and captaine Archer not long after intended also to haue abandoned the country, which proiect also was curbed, and suppres∣sed by Smith. The Spanyard never more greedily desi∣red Another proiect to abandon the Country. gold then he victuall, which finding so plentiful in the riuer of Chickahamine where hundreds of Salvages in diuers places stood with baskets expecting his cō∣ming. And now the winter approaching, the rivers be came so covered with swans, geese, duckes, & cranes, that we daily feasted with good bread, Virginia pease, pumpions, and putchamins, fish, sowle, and diverse sorts of wild beasts as fat as we could eat them: so that none of our Tustaffaty humorists desired to goe for Englād. But our comaedies never endured lōg without a Tragedie; sōe idle exceptiōs being muttered against Captaine Smith, for not discovering the head of Chic∣kahamine river, and taxed by the Councell, to bee too slowe in so worthie an attempt. The next voyage hee proceeded so farre that with much labour by cutting of trees in sunder he made his passage, but when his Barge could passe no farther, he left her in a broad bay out of danger of shot, commanding none should goe ashore till his returne, himselfe with 2 English & two Salvages went vp higher in a Canowe, but hee was not long absent, but his mē went ashore, whose want of government, gaue both occasion and opportunity to the Salvages to surprise one George Casson, & much failed not to haue cut of the boat & all the rest, Smith little dreaming of that accident, being got to the mar shes at the rivers head, 20 myles in the desert, had his 2 men slaine (as is supposed) sleeping by the Canowe, whilst himselfe by fowling sought them victuall, who finding he was beset with 200 Salvages, 2 of them hee slew, stil defending himselfe with the aid of a Salvage his guid, (whome hee bound to his arme and vsed as his buckler, till at last slipping into a bogmire they tooke him prisoner: when this newes came to the fort much was their sorrow for his losse, fewe expecting what ensued. A month those Barbarians kept him pri∣soner, many strange triumphes and coniurations they made of him, yet hee so demeaned himselfe amongst them, as he not only diverted them from surprising the Fort, but procured his owne liberty, and got himselfe and his company such estimation amongst them, that those Salvages admired him as a demi God. So re∣turning safe to the Fort, once more staied the Pinnas her flight for England, which till his returne, could not set saile, so extreame was the weather, and so great the The 3 proiect to abando the fort frost. His relation of the plentie he had seene, especially at Werowocomoco, where inhabited Powhatan (that till that time was vnknowne) so revived againe their dead spirits as all mens feare was abandoned, Powhatan ha∣ving sent with this Captaine divers of his men loaded with provision, he had cōditioned, & so appointed his trustie messengers to bring but 2 or 3 of our great or∣denances, but the messengers being satisfied with the sight of one of thē discharged, ran away amazed with feare, till meanes was vsed with guifts to assure them our loues. Thus you may see what difficulties stil cros∣sed any good indeavour, and the good successe of the businesse, and being thus oft brought to the very peri∣od of destruction, yet you see by what strange meanes God hath still delivered it. As for the insufficiencie of them admitted in commission, that errour could not be prevented by their electors, there being no other choice, and all were strangers each to others educati∣on, A true proofe of Gods loue to the action. quallities, or disposition; & if any deeme it a shame to our nation, to haue any mention made of these e∣normities, let them pervse the histories of the Spanish discoveries and plantations, where they may see how many mutinies, discords, and dissentions, haue accom∣panied them and crossed their attempts, which being knowne to be particular mens offences, doth take a∣way the generall scorne and contempt, mallice, and ig¦norance might else produce, to the scandall and re∣proach of those, whose actions and valiant resolution deserue a worthie respect. Now whether it had beene better for Captaine Smith to haue concluded with a∣ny of their severall proiects to haue abandoned the Countrie with some 10 or 12 of them we cal the bet∣ter sort, to haue left M r Hunt our preacher, M. Antho∣ny Gosnoll, a most honest, worthie, and industrious gen∣tleman, with some 30 or 40 others his countrie men, to the furie of the Salvages, famin, and all manner of mischiefs and inconveniences, or starved himselfe with them for company, for want of lodging, or but Of two evils the lesser was chosē adventuring abroad to make them provision, or by his opposition, to preserue the action, and saue all their liues, I leaue to the censure of others to consider. Thomas Studley. CHAP. 3. The arrivall of the first supply with their pro∣ceedings and returne. A LL this time our cares were not so much to abandon the Coun∣trie, but the Treasurer & Coun∣cell in England were as diligent and carefull to supplie vs. Two tall ships they sent vs, with neere 100 men, well furnished with all things could be imagined neces∣sarie, both for them and vs. The one commanded by Captaine Newport: the other by Captaine Nelson, an honest man and an expert marriner, but such was the leewardnesse of his ship, (that though he were within sight of Cape Henry) by stormy contrarie windes, was The Phenix frō Cape henry for∣ced to the west Indies. forced so farre to sea, as the West Indies was the next land for the repaire of his Masts, and reliefe of wood and water. But Captaine Newport got in, and arived at Iames towne, not long after the redemption of Cap∣taine Smith, to whome the Salvages every other day brought such plentie of bread, fish, turkies, squirrels, deare, & other wild beasts, part they gaue him as pre∣sents from the king; the rest, hee as their market clarke set the price how they should sell. So he had inchāted those poore soules (being their prisoner) in demonstrating vnto them the roundnesse of the world, the course of the moone and starres, the cause of the day and night the largenes of the seas the quallities of our ships, shot and powder, The devision of the world, with the diversity of people, their com∣plexions, customes and conditions. All which hee fai∣ned How C. Smith got his liberty. to be vnder the command of Captaine Newport, whom he tearmed to them his father; of whose arri∣val, it chanced he so directly prophecied, as they estee∣med him an oracle; by these fictions he not only saved his owne life, and obtained his liberty, but had them at that command, he might command them what he li∣sted. That God that created al these things; they knew Their opinion of our God. he adored for his God, whom they would also tearme in their discourses, the God of captaine Smith. The President and Councel so much envied his estimation amongst the Salvages (though wee all in generall e∣qually participated with him of the good therof) that they wrought it into their vnderstandings, by their great bounty in giuing 4. times more for their com∣modities then he appointed; that their greatnesse and authority, as much exceed his, as their bounty, and li∣berality; Now the arrivall of his first supply, so over∣ioyed vs, that we could not devise too much to please the mariners. We gaue them liberty to track or trade at their pleasures. But in a short time, it followed, that could not be had for a pound of copper, which before was sold for an ounce, Thus ambition, and sufferance, cut the throat of our trade, but confirmed their opini∣on of Newports greatnes, (wherewith Smith had pos∣sessed Powhatan) especially by the great presents New∣port (often sent him, before he could prepare the Pinas to go and visit him; so that this Salvage also desired to see him. A great bruit there was to set him forwarde: when he went he was accompanied, with captaine Smith, & M r Scrivener a very wise vnderstanding gē∣tleman newly arrived, & admitted of the Councell, & 30. or 40. chosen men for that guarde. Arriving at We∣rowocomo Newports cōceipt of this great Salvage, bred many doubts, and suspitions of treacheries; which Smith, to make appeare was needlesse, which 20. men Smiths revisi∣ting Powhatan well appointed, vndertooke to encounter (with that nūber) the worst that could happē there names were. Nathaniell Powell. Robert Beheathland. William Phettiplace. Richard Wyffin. Anthony Gosnoll. Iohn Taverner. William Dier. Thomas Coe. Thomas Hope. Anas Todkell with 10. others whose names I haue forgotten, These being kindly receiued a shore, with 2. or 300. Salvages were conducted to their towne; Powhatan strained Powhatans first entertainement of our men. himselfe to the vttermost of his greatnes to entertain vs, with great shouts of Ioy, orations of protestatiōs, and the most plenty of victuall hee could prouide to feast vs. Sitting vpon his bed of mats, his pillow of leather imbroydred (after their rude manner) with pearle & white beades, his attire a faire Robe of skins as large as an Irish mantle, at his head and feet a hand∣some young woman; on each side his house sate 20. of his concubines, their heads and shoulders painted red, with a great chaine of white beads about their necks, before those sate his chiefest men in like order in his arbor-like house. With many pretty discourses to re∣nue their olde acquaintaunce; the great kinge and our captaine spent the time till the ebbe left our Barge a ground, then renuing their feasts and mirth we quar∣tred that night with Powhatan: the next day Newport came a shore, and receiued as much content as those The exchange of a Christian for a Salvage. people could giue him, a boy named Thomas Savage was then giuen vnto Powhatan who Newport called his son, for whom Powhatan gaue him Namontacke his trusty servant, and one of a shrewd subtill capacity, 3. or 4. daies were spent in feasting dancing and trading, wherin Powhatan carried himselfe so prowdly, yet dis∣creetly (in his Salvage manner) as made vs all admire his natural gifts considering his education, as scorning to trade as his subiects did, he bespake Newport in this manner. Captain Newport it is not agreeable with my great Powhatas speech. nes in this pedling manner to trade for trifles, and I e∣steeme you a great werowans, Therefore lay me down all your commodities togither, what I like I will take, and in recompence giue you that I thinke fitting their value. Captaine Smith being our interpreter, regar∣ding Newport as his father, knowing best the disposi∣tiō of Powhatan told vs his intent was but to cheat vs; yet captaine Newport thinking to out braue this Sal∣vage in ostentation of greatnes, & so to bewitch him with his bounty, as to haue what he listed, but so it chanced Powhatan having his desire, valued his corne at such a rate, as I thinke it better cheape in Spaine, for we had not 4. bushels for that we expected 20. hogs∣heads, This bred some vnkindnes betweene our two captaines, Newport seeking to please the humor of the vnsatiable Salvage; Smith to cause the Salvage to Difference of o∣pinions. please him, but smothering his distast (to avoide the Salvages suspition) glaunced in the eies of Powhatan many Trifles who fixed his humour vpon a few blew beads; A long time he importunatly desired them, but Smith seemed so much the more to affect thē, so that ere we departed, for a pound or two of blew beads he brought over my king for 2 or 300 bushels of corne, yet parted good friends. The like entertainement we foūd of Spechanchynough king of Pamaunke whom al∣so he in like manner fitted, (at the like rates) with blew beads: and so we returned to the fort. Where this new supply being lodged with the rest, accidently fired the quarters, & so the Towne, which being but thatched with reeds the fire was so fierce as it burnt their palli∣zadoes (though 10. or 12 yardes distant) with their Iames towne burnt. armes, bedding, apparell, and much private provision. Good M r Hunt our preacher lost all his library, and al that he had (but the cloathes on his backe,) yet none ever see him repine at his losse. This hapned in the winter, in that extreame frost, 1607. Now though we had victuall sufficient, I meane only of Oatemeale, meale, and corne, yet the ship staying there 14. weeks when shee might as well haue been gone in 14. daies, A ship idly loi∣tring 14 weeks. spent the beefe, porke, oile, aquavitae, fish, butter, and cheese, beere and such like; as was provided to be lan∣ded vs. When they departed, what their discretion could spare vs, to make a feast or two with bisket, pork beefe, fish, and oile, to relish our mouths, of each som∣what they left vs, yet I must confest those that had ei∣ther mony, spare clothes, credit to giue bils of pay∣ment, gold rings, furres, or any such commodities were ever welcome to this removing taverne, such was our patience to obay such vile commanders, and buy our owne provision at 15 times the valew, suffe∣ring thē feast (we bearing the charge) yet must not re∣pine, but fast, and then leakage, ship-rats, and other ca∣sualties occasioned the losse, but the vessell and rem∣nants (for totals) we were glad to receiue with all our hearts to make vp the account, highly commending their providence for preserving that. For all this plen∣tie our ordinarie was but meale and water, so that this great charge little relieved our wants, whereby with the extreamity of the bitter cold aire more then halfe of vs died, and tooke our deathes, in that piercing win¦ter I cannot deny, but both Skrivener and Smith did their best to amend what was amisse, but with the Pre∣sidents went the maior part, that their hornes were too short. But the worst mischiefe was, our gilded re∣finers with their golden promises, made all men their slaues in hope of recompence, there was no talke, no The effect of meere verba∣lists. hope, no worke, but dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold, such a brute of gold, as one mad fellow de∣sired to bee buried in the sandes, least they should by their art make gold of his bones, little need there was and lesse reason, the ship should stay, their wages run a needles charge on, our victuall consume, 14 weekes, that the Marri∣ners might say, they built such a golden Church, that we can say, the raine washed neare to nothing in 14 daies. Were it that Captaine Smith would not ap∣plaud all those golden inventions, because they admit∣ted him not to the sight of their trials, nor golden con¦sultations I knowe not; but I heard him question with Captaine Martin and tell him, except he would shew him a more substantiall triall, hee was not inamored with their durtie skill, breathing out these and many other passions, never any thing did more torment him, then to see all necessarie businesse neglected, to fraught such a drunken ship with so much gilded durt; till then wee never accounted Captaine Newport a re∣finer; who being fit to set saile for England, and wee not having any vse of Parliaments, plaies, petitions, A returne to England. admirals, recorders, interpreters, chronologers, courts of plea, nor Iustices of peace, sent M. Wing field & Cap. Archer with him for England to seeke some place of better imploiment. CHAP. 4. The arivall of the Phoenix, her returne, and other accidents. T HE authoritie nowe consisting in resi∣ning, Captaine Martin and the still sick∣ly President, the sale of the stores com∣modities maintained their estates as in∣heritable revenews. The spring appro∣ching, and the ship departed, M. Skriuener and Capt. The repairing of Iames towne Smith divided betwixt thē, the rebuilding our towne, the repairing our pallisadoes, the cutting downe trees, preparing our fields, planting our corne, & to rebuild our Church, and recover our store-house; al men thus busie at their severall labours, M. Nelson arived with his lost Phoenix (lost I say, for that al men deemed him lost) landing safely his men; so well hee had mannaged his ill hap, causing the Indian Iles to feed his company that his victuall (to that was left vs before) was suffici∣ent for halfe a yeare, he had nothing but he freely im∣parted it, which honest dealing (being a marriner) cau∣sed vs admire him, wee would not haue wished so much as he did for vs. Nowe to relade this ship with some good tidings. The President (yet notwithstan∣ding with his dignitie to leaue the sort) gaue order to Captaine Smith and M. Skriuener to discover & search the commodities of Monacans countrie beyound the Falles, 60 able men was allotted their number, the 60 appointed to discover Mona∣can. which within 6 daies exercise, Smith had so well trai∣ned to their armes and orders, that they little feared with whome they should encounter. Yet so vnseaso∣nable was the time, and so opposite was Capt. Martin to every thing, but only to fraught his ship also with his phantasticall gold, as Captaine Smith rather desi∣red to relade her with Cedar, which was a present di∣spatch; then either with durt, or the reports of an vn∣certaine discoverie. Whilst their conclusion was resol∣ving, this hapned. Powhatan to expresse his loue to Newport, when he departed, presented him with 20 Turkies, conditional¦ly to returne him 20 Swords, which immediatly were An ill example to sell swords to Salvages. sent him; Now after his departure hee presented Cap∣taine Smith with the like luggage, but not finding his humor, obaied in sending him weapons he caused his people with 20. devises to obtain them, at last by am∣buseadoes at our very ports they would take them per Powhatans trea¦cherie. force, surprise vs at work, or any way, which was so lōg permitted that they became so insolent, there was no rule, the command from England was so straight not to offend thē, as our authority bearers (keeping their houses) would rather be any thing thē peace breakers: this charitable humor prevailed, till well it chaunced they medled with captaine Smith, who without far∣ther The governours weaknesse. deliberation gaue thē such an incounter, as some he so hunted vp and downe the Ile, some he so terrifi∣ed with whipping, beating and imprisonment, as for revenge they surprised two of his forraging disorder∣ly Smiths attempt to suppresse the Salvages inso∣lencies. souldiers, and having assembled their forces, boldly threatned at our ports to force Smith to redeliver 7. Salvages which for their villanies he detained priso∣ners, but to try their furies, in lesse then halfe an houre he so hampered their insolencies, that they brought the 2. prisoners desiring peace without any farther cō∣position for their prisoners, who being threatned and examined their intents and plotters of their villanies confessed they were directed only by Powhatan, to ob∣taine him our owne weapons to cut our own throats, with the manner how, where, and when, which wee plainely found most true and apparant, yet he sent his messengers & his dearest Daughter Pocahuntas to ex∣cuse Powhatans ex∣cuses. him, of the iniuries done by his subiects, desiring their liberties, with the assuraunce of his loue, after Smith had giuen the prisoners what correction hee thought fit, vsed them well a day or two after, & then deliuered thē Pocahūtas, for whose sake only he fained to saue their liues and graunt them liberty. The pati∣ent councel, that nothing would moue to warre with the Salvages, would gladly haue wrangled with cap∣taine Smith for his cruelty, yet none was slaine to any mans knowledge but it brought them in such feare & obedience, as his very name wold, sufficiently affright them. The fraught of this ship being concluded to be A ship fraught with Cedar. Cedar, by the diligence of the Master, and captaine Smith shee was quickly reladed; M r Scrivener was neither Idle nor slow to follow all things at the fort, the ship falling to the Cedar Ile, captaine Martin ha∣ving made shift to be sicke neare a yeare, & now, nei∣ther pepper, suger, cloues, mace, nor gmets, ginger nor sweet meates in the country (to inioy the credit of his supposed art) at his earnest request, was most willingly admitted to returne for England, yet having beene there but a yeare, and not past halfe a year since the ague left him (that he might say somewhat he had seene) hee went twice by water to Paspahegh a place neere 7. miles from Iames towne, but lest the dew The adventure of Capt. Mart should distemper him, was ever forced to returne be∣fore night, Thus much I thought fit to expresse, he ex¦presly commāding me to record his iournies, I being his man, and he sometimes my master. Thomas Studly. Anas Todkill. Their names that were lan∣ded in this supply: Matthew Scriviner, appointed to be of the Councell. Michaell Phetyplace. William Phetyplace. Ralfe Morton. William Cantrill. Richard Wyffin. Robert Barnes. George Hill. George Pretty. Iohn Taveruer. Robert Cutler. Michaell Sickelmore. Thomas Coo. Peter Pory. Richard Killingbeck. William ausey. Doctor Russell. Richard Worley. Richard Prodger. William yley. Richard Molynex. Richard Pots. Iefrey Abots. Iohn Harper. Timothy Leds. Edward Gurganay. George Forest. Iohn Nicholes. William Gryvill. Gent. Daniell Stalling Iueller. William Dawson Refiner. Abraham Ransacke Refiner. William Iohnson Goldsmith. Peter Keffer a Gunner. Robert Alberton a Perfumer. Richard Belfield Goldsmith. Ramon Goodyson. Iohn Speareman. William Spence. Richard Brislow. William Simons. Iohn Bouth. William Burket. Nicholas Ven. William Perce. Francis Perkins. Francis Perkins. William Bentley. Richard Gradon. Rowland Nelstrop Richard Salvage. Thomas Salvage. Richard Miler. William May. Vere. Michaell. Bishop Wyles. Labourers. Iohn Powell. Thomas Hope. William Beckwith. William Yonge. Laurence Towtales. William Ward. Tailer. Christopher Ro es. Iames Watkings. Richard Fetherstone. Iames Burne. Thomas Feld. Iohn Harford. Apot hecaries. Post Gittnat a Curgion. Iohn Lewes a Couper. Robert Cotten a Tobaco-pipe-maker. Richard Dole a blacke Smith & divers others to the number of 120. CHAP. 5. The accidents that happened in the Discove∣rie of the bay. T He prodigality of the Presidēts state went so deepe in the store that Smith and Scrivener had a while tyed both Martin & him to the rules of proportion, but now Smith being to depart, the Presidents authoritie so over∣swayed M r Scriveners discretion as our store, our time, our strength and labours was idlely consumed to fulfill his phantasies. The second of Iune 1608. Smith left the fort to performe his dis∣coverie; with this company. Walter Russell Doctour of Physicke. Ralph Morton. Thomas Momford. William Cantrill. Richard Fetherstone. Iames Bourne. Michael Sicklemore. Gent. Anas Toakill. Robert Small. Iames VVatkins. Iohn Powell. Sould. Iames Read blackesmith. Richard Keale fishmonger. Ionas Profit fisher. These being in an open barge of two tunnes bur∣then leaving the Phenix at Cape-Henry we crossed the bay to the Easterne shore & fell with the Iles cal∣led Smiths, Iles the first people we saw were 2. grimme and stout Salvages vpon Cape-Charles with long Cape Charles. poles like Iavelings, headed with bone, they boldly de∣manded what we were, and what we would, but after many circumstances, they in time seemed very kinde, Acawmacke. and directed vs to Acawmacke the habitation of the We rowans where we were kindly intreated; this king was the comliest proper civill Salvage wee incountred: his country is a pleasant fertill clay-soile. Hee colde vs of a straunge accident lately happened him, and it was Two dead children by the extreame passions of their parents, or some dreaming visions, phantasie, or affe∣ction moved thē againe to revisit their dead carkases, A strange mor∣talitie of Salua∣ges. whose benummed bodies reflected to the eies of the beholders such pleasant delightfull countenances, as though they had regained their vital spirits. This as a miracle drew many to behold them, all which, (being a great part of his people) not long after died, and not any one escaped. They spake the language of Powhatā wherein they made such descriptions of the bay, Iles, and rivers that often did vs exceeding pleasure. Passing along the coast, searching every inlet, and bay fit for harbours & habitations seeing many Iles in the midst of the bay, we bore vp for them, but ere wee could at∣taine them such an extreame gust of wind, raine, thū∣der, and lightning happened, that with great daunger we escaped the vnmercifull raging of that ocean-like An extreame gust. water. The next day searching those inhabitable Iles (which we called Russels Iles) to provide fresh water, Russels Iles. the defect whereof forced vs to follow the next Eas∣terne channell, which brought vs to the river Wighco∣comoco, Wighcocomoco. the people at first with great furie, seemed to assault vs, yet at last with songs, daunces, and much mirth, became very tractable, but searching their habi∣tations for water, wee could fill but 3, and that such An extreame want of fresh water. puddle that never til then, wee ever knew the want of good water, we digged and searched many places but ere the end of two daies wee would haue refused two barricoes of gold for one of that puddle water of Wighcocomoco. Being past these Iles, falling with a high land vpon the maine wee found a great pond of fresh water, but so exceeding hot, that we supposed it some bath: that place we called Point ployer, being thus re∣freshed in crossing over from the maine to other Iles, the wind and waters so much increased with thunder, lightning, and raine, that our fore-mast blew overbord and such mightie waues overwrought vs in that smal The barge neere sunk in a gust. barge, that with great labour wee kept her from sin∣king by freeing out the water, 2 daies we were infor∣ced to inhabit these vninhabited Iles, which (for the extremitie of gusts, thunder, raine, stormes, and il wea∣ther) we called Limbo. Repairing our fore saile with our shirts, we set saile for the maine & fel with a faire river on the East called Kuskaranaocke, by it inhabit the people of Soraphanigh, Nause, Arsek, and Nauta quake that much extolled a great nation called Massa∣womekes, The first notice of the Massawo¦mecks. in search of whome wee returned by Limbo, but finding this easterne shore shallow broken Iles, & the maine for most part without fresh water, we pas∣sed by the straights of Limbo for the weasterne shore So broad is the bay here, that we could scarse perceiue the great high Cliffes on the other side, by them wee ancored that night, and called them Richards Cliffes. 30 leagues we sailed more Northwards, not finding any inhabitants, yet the coast well watred, the moun∣taines very barrē, the vallies very fertil, but the woods extreame thicke, full of Woolues, Beares, Deare, and other wild beasts. The first inlet we found, wee called Bolus, for that the clay (in many places) was like (if not) Bole-Armoniacke: when we first set saile, some of Bolus river. our gallants doubted nothing, but that our Captaine would make too much hast home; but hauing lien not aboue 12 daies in this smal Barge, oft tired at their oares, their bread spoiled with wet, so much that it was rotten (yet so good were their stomacks that they could digest it) did with continuall complaints so im∣portune him now to returne, as caused him bespeake them in this manner. Gentlemen if you would remē∣ber the memorable historie of Sir Ralfe Lane, how his Smiths speech to his souldiers. company importuned him to proceed in the discove∣rie of Morattico, alleaging, they had yet a dog, that be∣ing boyled with Saxafras leaues, would richly feed thē in their returnes; what a shame would it be for you (that haue beene so suspitious of my tendernesse) to force me returne with a months provision scarce able to say where we haue bin, nor yet heard of that wee were sent to seeke; you cannot say but I haue shared with you of the worst is past; and for what is to come of lodging, diet, or whatsoever, I am contented you allot the worst part to my selfe; as for your feares, that I will lose my selfe in these vnknowne large waters, or be swallowed vp in some stormie gust, abandon those childish feares, for worse then is past cannot happen, and there is as much danger to returne, as to proceed forward. Regaine therefore your old spirits; for return I wil not, (if God assist me) til I haue seene the Massa∣womekes, found Patawomeck, or the head of this great water you conceit to be endlesse. 3 or 4 daies wee ex∣pected wind and weather, whose adverse extreamities added such discouragements to our discontents as 3 or 4 fel extreame sicke, whose pittiful complaints cau∣sed vs to returne, leauing the bay some 10 miles broad at 9 or 10 fadome water. The 16 of Iune we fel with the river of Patawo∣meck: The discovery of Patawomeck. feare being gon , and our men recovered, wee were all contented to take some paines to knowe the name of this 9 mile broad river, we could see no inha∣bitants for 30 myles saile; then we were conducted by 2 Salvages vp a little bayed creeke toward Onawma∣ment where all the woods were laid with Ambusca∣does to the number of 3 or 400 Salvages, but so Ambuscados of Salvages. strangely painted, grimed, and disguised, showting, yelling, and crying, as we rather supposed them so ma∣ny divels, they made many bravadoes, but to appease their furie, our Captaine prepared with a seeming willingnesse (as they) to encounter them, the grazing of the bullets vpon the river, with the ecco of the woods so amazed them, as down went their bowes & arrowes; (and exchanging hostage) Iames Watkins was sent 6 myles vp the woods to their kings habita∣tion: wee were kindly vsed by these Salvages, of whome wee vnderstood, they were commaunded to betray vs, by Powhatans direction, and hee so di∣rected A treacherous proiect. from the discontents of Iames towne. The like incounters we found at Patawomeck Cecocawone & divers other places, but at Moyaones Nacothtant and Taux, the people did their best to content vs. The cause of this discovery, was to search a glistering met∣tal, the Salvages told vs they had from Patawomeck, (the which Newport assured that he had tryed to hold halfe siluer) also to search what furres, metals, riuers, Rockes, nations, woods, fishings, fruits, victuals and o∣ther commodities the land afforded, and whether the bay were endlesse, or how farre it extended. The mine we found 9 or 10 myles vp in the coūtry from the ri∣ver, Antimony. but it proved of no value: Some Otters, Beavers, Martins, Luswarts, and sables we found, and in diverse places that abundāce of fish lying so thicke with their heads aboue the water, as for want of nets (our barge driving amongst them) we attempted to catch them with a frying pan, but we found it a bad instrument to catch fish with. Neither better fish more plenty or va∣riety An abundant plentie of fish. had any of vs ever seene, in any place swimming in the water, then in the bay of Chesapeack, but there not to be caught with frying-pans. To expresse al our quarrels, treacheries & incounters amongst those Sal∣vages, I should be too tedious; but in briefe at al times we so incoūtred thē & curbed their insolēcies, as they concluded with presents to purchase peace, yet wee How to deale with the Salva¦ges. lost not a man, at our first meeting our captaine ever observed this order to demaunde their bowes and ar∣rowes swords mantles or furres, with some childe for hostage; wherby he could quickly perceiue when they intended any villany. Having finished this discovery (though our victuall was neare spent) he intended to haue seene his imprisonments, acquaintance vpon the river of Toppahannock. But our boate (by reason of the ebbe) chansing to ground vpon a many shoules lying in the entrance, we spied many fishes lurking amongst the weedes on the sands, our captaine sporting him∣selfe to catch them by nailing thē to the ground with his sword, set vs all a fishing in that māner, by this de∣vise, we tooke more in an houre then we all could eat; but it chanced, the captaine taking a fish frō his sword A Stingray very hurtfull. (not knowing her condition) being much of the fa∣shion of a Thornebacke with a longer taile, whereon is a most poysoned sting of 2. or 3. inches long, which shee strooke an inch and halfe into the wrist of his arme the which in 4. houres had so extreamly swolne his hand, arme, shoulder, and part of his body, as we al with much sorrow concluded his funerall, and prepa∣red his graue in an Ile hard by (as himselfe appointed) which then wee called stingeray Ile after the name of the fish. Yet by the helpe of a precious oile Doctour Russels applyed, ete night his tormenting paine was so wel asswaged that he eate the fish to his supper, which gaue no lesse ioy and content to vs, then ease to him∣selfe. Having neither Surgeō nor surgerie but that pre∣servatiue oile, we presently set saile for Iames Towne; passing the mouth of pyankatanck, & Pamavnke rivers, the next day we safely arrived at Kecoughtan. The sim∣ple Salvages, seeing our captaine hurt, and another bloudy (which came by breaking his shin) our number The Salvages affrighted with their owne sus∣pition. of bowes, arrowes, swords, targets, mantles and furs; would needs imagine we had bin at warres, the truth of these accidents would not satisfie them) but impa∣ciently they importuned vs to know with whom wee fought, finding their aptnes to beleeue, we failed not (as a great secret) to tel them any thing that might af∣fright them what spoile wee had got and made of the Masawomeekes, this rumor went faster vp the river thē our barge; that arrived at weraskoyack the 20. of Iulie, where trimming her with painted streamers, and such devises we made the fort iealous of a Spanish frigot; where we all safely arrived the 21. of Iuly, there wee found the last supply, al sicke, the rest, some lame, some bruised, al vnable to do any thing, but complain of the A needlesse mi∣serie. pride and vnreasonable needlesse cruelty of their sillie President, that had riotously consumed the store, & to fulfill his follies about building him an vnnecessarie pallace in the woods had brought them all to that mi∣serie; That had not we arrived, they had as strangely tormented him with revenge. But the good newes of our discovery, and the good hope we had (by the Sal∣vages relation) our Bay had stretched to the South-sea, appeased their fury; but conditionally that Ratliffe should be deposed, & that captaine Smith would take vpo him the government; their request being effected, hee Substituted M r Scrivener his deare friend in the Presidencie, equally distributing those private provisi∣ons the other had ingrossed; appointing more honest officers to assist Scrivener, (who then lay extreamelie tormented with a callenture) & in regard of the weak∣nes of the company, and heat of the yeare they being The company left to liue at ease. vnable to worke; he left them to liue at ease, but im∣barked himselfe to finish his discovery. Written by Walter Russell and Anas Todkill. CHAP. 6. What happened the second voyage to discover the Bay. THE 20. of Iuly Captaine Smith set forward to finish the discovery with 12. men their names were Nathaniell Powell. Thomas Momford. Richard Faetherstone. Michaell Sicklemore. Iames Bourne. Gent. Anas Toakill. Edward Pysing. Richard Keale. Anthony Bagnall. Iames Watkins. Sould. William Ward. Ionas Profit. The winde beeing contrary caused our stay 2. or 3: daies at Kecoughtā the wer S feasting vs with much mitth, his people were perswaded we went purpose∣ly to be reuenged of the Massawomeckes, in the eve∣ning we firing 2. or 3. rackets, so testified the poore Salvages, they supposed nothing impossible wee at∣tempted, The Salvages admire fire∣workes. and desired to assist vs. The first night we an∣cored at Stingeray Ile, the nexte day crossed Palawo∣mecks riuer, and hasted for the riuer Bolus, wee went not much farther before wee might perceiueiue the Bay to devide in 2. heads, and arriving there we founde it The head of the Bay. devided in 4, all which we searched so far as we could saile them; 2. of them wee found vninhabited, but in crossing the bay to the other, wee incountered 7. or 8. Canowes full of Massawomecks, we seeing them pre∣pare An incounter with the Massa¦womecks. to vs left our oares & made way with our saile to incoūter them, yet were we but fiue (with our captaine) could stands or within a daies after wee left Kecoughtan, the rest (being all of the last supply) were sicke almost to death, (vntill they were seasoned to the country) hauing shut them vnder our tarpawling, we put their hats vpon stickes by the barge side to make vs seeme many, and so we thinke the Indians suppo∣sed those hats to be men, for they with all possible speed to the shoare, and there stayed, staring at the sai∣ling of our barge, till we anchored right against them. Long it was ere we could drawe them to come vnto vs, at last they sent 2 of their company vnarmed in a Conowe, the rest all followed to second them if need required; These a being but each presented with all bell, brought aborde all their fellowes, presenting the captain with venison beares flesh, fish, bowes, arrows, clubs, targets, and beare skins; wee vnderstood them nothing at all but by signes, whereby they signified vn to vs they had been at warres with the Tockwoghs the which they confirmed by shewing their green woūds; but the night parting vs, we imagined they appointed the next morning to meete, but after that we never saw them. Entring the River of Tockwogh the Saluages all ar∣med An incounter with the Tock∣woghs. in a fleere of Boates round invironed vs; it chan∣ced one of them could speake the language of Powha∣tan who perswaded the rest to a friendly parly: but when they see vs furnished with the Massawomeckes weapons, and we faining the inuention of Kecoughtan to haue taken them perforce; they conducted vs to their pallizadoed towne, mantelled with the barkes of trees, with Scaffolds like mounts, brested about with Barks very formally, their men, women, and children, with dances, songs, fruits, fish, furres, & what they had kindly entertained vs, spreading mats for vs to sit on, stretching their best abilities to expresse their loues. Many hatchets, kniues, & peeces of yron, & brasse, we see, which they reported to haue from the Sasque∣sahanockes Hatchets from Sasquesahanock a mighty people, and mortall enimies with the Massawomeckes; The Sasquesahanocks, inhabit vpon the chiese spring of these 4. two daies iourney higher then our Barge could passe for rocks. Yet we prevai∣led with the interpreter to take with him an other in∣terpreter to perswade the Sasquesahanocks to come to visit vs, for their language are different: 3. or 4. daies we expected their returne then 60 of these giant like peo∣ple came downe with presents of venison, Tobacco pipes, Baskets, Targets, Bowes and Arrows, 5 of their Werowances came boldly abord vs, to crosse the bay for Tockwogh, leaving their men and Canowes, the winde being so violent that they durst not passe. Our order was, dayly to haue prayer, with a psalm, at which solemnitie the poore Salvages much won∣dered: our prayers being done, they were long busied, with consultation till they had contrived their busi∣nesse; then they began in most passionate manner to hold vp their hands to the sunne with a most feareful song, then imbracing the Captaine, they began to a∣dore The Sasquesa∣hanocks offer to the English. him in like manner, though he rebuked them, yet they proceeded til their song was finished, which don with a most strange furious action, and a hellish voice began an oratiō of their loues; that ended, with a great painted beares skin they covered our Captaine, then one ready with a chaine of white beads (waighing at least 6 or 7 pound) hung it about his necke, the others had 18 mantles made of divers sorts of skinnes sowed together, all these with many other toyes, they laid at his feet, stroking their ceremonious handes about his necke for his creation to be their governour, promi∣sing their aids, victuals, or what they had to bee his, if he would stay with them to defend and revenge them of the Massawomecks; But wee left them at Tockwogh, they much sorrowing for our departure, yet wee pro∣mised the next yeare againe to visit them; many de∣scriptions and discourses they made vs of Atquana∣hucke, Massawomecke, and other people, signifying they inhabit the river of Cannida, and from the French to Cannida. haue their hatchets, and such like tooles by trade, these knowe no more of the territories of Powhatan then his name, and he as little of them. Thus hauing sought all the inlets and rivers worth noting, we returned to discover the river of Pawtux∣unt, these people we found very tractable, and more ci Pawtuxunt. R. vill then any, wee promised them, as also the Patawo∣mecks, the next yeare to revenge them of the Massa∣womecks. Our purposes were crossed in the discoverie of the river of Toppahannock, for wee had much wran∣gling Toppahanock. R with that peevish nation; but at last they became as tractable as the rest. It is an excellent, pleasant, well inhabited, fertill, and a goodly navigable river, toward the head thereof; it pleased God to take one of our sicke (called M. Fetherstone) where in Fetherstons bay we buried him in the night with a volly of shot; the rest Fetherstone ba∣ried. (notwithanding their ill diet, and bad lodging, crow∣ded in so small a barge in so many dangers, never re∣sting, but alwaies tossed to and againe) al well recove∣red their healthes; then we discovered the river of Pay∣ankatank, and set saile for Iames Towne; but in crossing Payankatanke discovered. the bay in a faire calme, such a suddaine gust surprised vs in the night with thunder and raine, as wee were halfe imployed in freeing out water, never thinking to escape drowning yet running before the winde, at last we made land by the flashes of fire from heaven, by which light only we kept from the splitting shore, vn til it pleased God in that black darknes to preserue vs by that light to find Point comfort, and arived safe at Iames Towne, the 7 of September, 1608. where wee found M. Skriuener and diverse others well recovered, Their procee∣dings at Iames Towne. many dead, some sicke. The late President prisoner for muteny, by the honest diligence of M. Skriuener the harvest gathered, but the stores, provision, much spoi∣led with raine. Thus was that yeare (when nothing wanted) consumed and spent and nothing done; (such was the government of Captain Ratcliffe) but only this discoverie; wherein to expresse all the dangers, acci∣dents, and incounters this small number passed in that small barge, with such watrie diet in these great wa∣ters and barbarous Countries (til then to any Christi∣an vtterly vnknowne) I rather referre their merit to the censure of the courteous and experienced reader, then I would be tedious, or partiall, being a partie; By Nathaniell Poell, and Anas Todkill. CHAP. 7. The Presidencie surrendred to Captaine Smith, the arrivall and returne of the second sup∣ply: and what happened. T He 10. of September 1608. by the ele∣ction of the Councel, & request of the company Captaine Smith received the letters patents, and tooke vpon him the place of President, which till then by no meanes he would accept though hee were often im∣portuned therevnto. Now the building of Ratcliffes pallas staide as a thing needlesse; The church was re∣paired, the storehouse recouered; building prepared for the supply we expected. The fort reduced to the QVERE, forme of this figure, the order of watch renued, the squadrons (each setting of the watch) trained. The whole company every Satturday exercised in a fielde prepared for that purpose; the boates trimmed for trade which in their Iourney encountred the second supply, that brought them back to discover the coun∣try of Monacan, how, or why, Captaine Newport ob∣tained such a private commission as not to returne without a lumpe of gold, a certainty of the south-sea or one of the lost company of S r Walter Rawley I know not, nor why he brought such a 5. pieced barge, not to beare vs to that south sea, till we had borne her over the mountaines: which how farre they extend is yet vnknowne) as for the coronation of Powhatan & his presents of Bason, Ewer, Bed, Clothes, and such costly nouelties, they had bin much better well spared, then so ill spent. For we had his favour much better, onlie for a poore peece of Copper, till this stately kinde of Powbatans scorne when his curtefie was most deserved soliciting made him so much overvalue himselfe, that he respected vs as much as nothing at all; as for the hi∣ring of the Poles and Dutch to make pitch and tarre, glasse, milles, and sope-ashes, was most necessarie and well. But to send them and seauenty more without vi∣ctuall to worke, was not so well considered; yet this could not haue hurt vs, had they bin 200. (though thē we were 130 that wanted for our selues.) For we had the Salvages in that Decorum, (their haruest beeing newly gathered) that we feared not to get victuall suf∣ficient had we bin 500. Now vvas there no way to No way but one to overthrowe the busines. make vs miserable but to neglect that time to make our provision, whilst it was to be had; the which vvas done to perfourme this strange discovery, but more strange coronation; to loose that time, spend that vi∣ctuall we had, tire & starue our men, having no means to carry victuall, munition, the hurr or sicke, but their owne backs, how or by whom they vvere invented I knovv not; But Captaine Newport we only accounted the author, vvho to effect these proiects had so gilded all our hopes, vvith great promises, that both compa∣ny and Councel concluded his resolution. I confesse we little vnderstood then our estates, to conclude his conclusion, against al the inconveniences the foresee∣ing President all eadged. There was added to the coū∣cell one Captaine Waldo, and Captaine Winne two an∣cient souldiers and valiant gentlemen, but ignorant of the busines (being newly arrived) Rateliffe vvas also permitted to haue his voice, & M r Scrivener desirous to see strange countries, so that although Smith was President, yet the Councell had the authoritie, and ru∣led it as they listed; as for cleering Smiths obiections, how pitch, and tarre, wanscot, clapbord, glasse, & sope ashes, could be provided to relade the ship; or provisi∣ongot to liue withal, when none was in the Country and that which we had, spent before the ships depar∣ted; The answer was, Captaine Newport vndertook to fraught the Pinnace with corne, in going and retur∣ning in his discoverie, and to refraught her againe frō Werawocomoco; also promising a great proportion of victuall from his ship, inferring that Smiths proposi∣tions were only devises to hinder his iourney, to ef∣fect it himselfe; and that the crucltie Smith had vsed to the Salvages, in his absence, might occasion them to hinder his designes; For which, al workes were left; and 120 chosen men were appointed for his guard, and Smith, to make cleere these seeming suspicions, that the Salvages were not so desperat, as was preten∣ded by Captaine Newport, and how willing he was to further them to effect their proiects, (because the co∣ronation Captaine Smith with 4 goeth to Powbatan. would consume much time) vndertooke their message to Powhatan; to intreat him to come to Iames Towne to receiue his presents, accompanied only with Captaine Waldo, M. Andrew Buckler, Edward Brinton, & Samuell Collier; with these 4 hee went over land, against Werawacomoco, there passed the river of Pa∣mavuke in the Salvages Canowes, Powhatan being 30 myles of, who, presently was sent for, in the meane time his women entertained Smith in this manner. In a faire plaine field they made a fire, before which The womens en∣tertainement at Werawcomoco he sitting vppon a mat; suddainly amongst the woods was heard such a hideous noise and shriking, that they betooke them to their armes, supposing Powhatan with all his power came to surprise them; but the be∣holders which were many, men, women, & children, satisfied the Captaine there was no such matter, be∣ing presently presented with this anticke, 30 young women camenaked out of the woods (only covered behind and before with a few greene leaues) their bo∣dies al painted, some white, some red, some black, some partie colour, but every one different, their leader had a faire paire of stagges hornes on her head, and an ot∣ter skinne at her girdle, another at her arme, a quiver of arrowes at her backe, and bow and arrowes in her hand, the next in her hād a sword, another a club, ano∣ther a pot-stick, all hornd alike, the rest every one with their severall devises. These feindes with most hellish cries, and shouts rushing from amongst the trees, cast themselues in a ring about the fire, singing, and daun∣cing with excellent ill varietie, oft falling into their in∣fernall passions, and then solemnely againe to sing, and daunce. Having spent neere an houre, in this maskara∣do, as they entered; in like manner departed; hauing re¦accommodated themselues, they solemnely invited Smith to their lodging, but no sooner was hee within the house, but all these Nimphes more tormented him then ever, with crowding, and pressing, and hanging vpon him, most tediously crying, loue you not mee. This salutation ended, the feast was set, consisting of fruit in baskets, fish, & flesh in wooden platters, beans and pease there wanted not (for 20 hogges) nor any Salvage daintie their invention could devise; some at∣tending, others singing and dancing about them; this mirth and banquet being ended, with firebrands (in∣stead of torches) they conducted him to his lodging. The next day, came Powhatan; Smith delivered his Captain Smiths message. message of the presents sent him, and redelivered him Namontack, desiring him come to his Father New∣port to accept those presents, and conclude their re∣venge against the Monacans, wherevnto the subtile Salvage thus replied. If your king haue sent me presents, I also am a king, Powhatans an∣swer. and this my land, 8 daies I will stay to receaue them, your father is to come to me, not I to him, nor yet to your fort, neither will I bite at such a baite: as for the Monacans, I can revenge my owne iniuries, and as for Atquanuchuck, where you say your brother was slain, it is a contrary way from those parts you suppose it. But for any salt water beyond the mountaines, the re¦lations you haue had from my people are false, wher∣vpon he began to draw plots vpon the ground (accor∣ding to his discourse) of all those regions; many other discourses they had (yet both desirous to giue each o∣ther content in Complementall courtesies) and so Captaine Smith returned with this answer. Vpon this Captaine Newport sent his presents by Powhatans Co∣ronation. water, which is neare 100 miles, with 50 of the best shot, himselfe went by land which is but 12 miles, where he met with our 3 barges to transport him o∣ver. All things being fit for the day of his coronation, the presents were brought, his bason, ewer, bed & fur∣niture set vp, his scarlet cloake and apparel (with much adoe) put on him (being perswaded by Namontacke they would doe him no hurt.) But a fowle trouble there was to make him kneele to receaue his crowne, he neither knowing the maiestie, nor meaning of a Crowne, nor bending of the knee, indured so many perswasions, examples, and instructions, as tired them all. At last by leaning hard on his shoulders, he a little stooped, and Newport put the Crowne on his head. When by the warning of a pistoll, the boates were prepared with such a volly of shot, that the king start vp in a horrible feare, till he see all was well, then re∣membring himselfe, to congratulate their kindnesse, he gaue his old shoes and his mantle to Captain New∣port. But perceiuing his purpose was to discover the Monacans, hee laboured to divert his resolution refu∣sing to lend him either men, or guids, more then Na∣montack, and so (after some complementall kindnesse on both sides) in requitall of his presents, he presented Newport with a heape of wheat eares, that might cō∣tain some 7 or 8 bushels, & as much more we bought ready dressed in the towne, wherewith we returned to the fort. The ship having disburdened her selfe of 70 per¦sons, with the first gentlewoman, and woman servant The discovery of Monacan. that arrived in our Colony; Captaine Newport with al the Councell, and 120 chosen men, set forward for the discovery of Monacan, leauing the President at the fort with 80. (such as they were) to relade the shippe. Arriving at the falles, we marched by land some forty myles in 2 daies and a halfe, and so returned downe to the same path we went. Two townes wee discovered of the Monacans, the people neither vsing vs well nor ill, yet for our securitie wee tooke one of their pettie Werowances, and lead him bound, to conduct vs the way. And in our returne searched many places wee supposed mynes, about which we spent some time in refining, having one William Callicut a refiner, fitted for that purpose, from that crust of earth wee digged hee perswaded vs to beleeue he extracted some smal quan titie of silver (and not vnlikely better stuffe might bee had for the digging) with this poore trial being con∣tented to leaue this faire, fertill, well watred countrie. Cōming to the Falles, the Salvages fained there were diverse ships come into the Bay to kill them at Iames Towne. Trade they would not, and find their corn we could not, for they had hid it in the woods, and being thus deluded we arrived at Iames Towne, halfe sicke, all complaining, and tired with toile, famine, and dis∣cōtent, to haue only but discovered our gilded hopes, and such fruitlesse certaineties, as the President fore∣told vs. No sooner were we landed, but the President dis∣persed many as were able, some for glasse, others for pitch, tarre and sope ashes, leaving them, (with the fort) to the Councels oversight. But 30 of vs he cōdu∣cted 5. myles from the fort to learn to make clapbord, cut downe trees, and ly in woods; amongst the rest he had chosen Gabriell Beadell, & Iohn Russell the only two gallants of this last supply, and both proper gentle∣men: strange were these pleasures to their conditions, yet lodging eating, drinking, working, or playing they doing but as the President, all these things were carri∣ed so pleasantly, as within a weeke they became Ma∣sters, making it their delight to heare the trees thun∣der as they fell, but the axes so oft blistered there ten∣der fingers, that commonly every third blow had a lowd oath to drowne the eccho; for remedy of which sin the President devised howe to haue everie mans oathes numbred, and at night, for every oath to haue a can of water povvred downe his sleeue, vvith A punishment for swearing. vvhich every offender vvas so vvashed (himselfe & all) that a man should scarse heare an oath in a weeke. By this, let no mā think that the President, or these gentlemen spent their times as common wood-hac∣kers at felling of trees, or, such like other labours, or that they were pressed to any thing as hirelings or cō∣mon slaues, for what they did (being but once a little inured) it seemed, and they conceited it only as a plea¦sure and a recreation. Yet 30 or 40 of such voluntary Gentlemen would doe more in a day then 100 of One gentleman better then 20 lubbers. the rest that must bee prest to it by compulsion. Master Scrivener, Captaine Waldo, and Captaine Winne at the fort, every one in like manner care∣fully regarded their charge. The President retur∣ning from amongst the woodes, seeing the time con∣sumed, and no provision gotten, (and the ship lay Idle, and would do nothing) presently imbarked himselfe in the discovery barge, giving order to the Coūcell, to send M r Persey after him with the next barge that ar∣rived at the fort; 2. barges, he had himselfe, and 20. mē, but arriving at Chickahamina that dogged nation, was too wel acquainted with our wants, refusing to trade, with as much scorne and insolencie as they could ex∣presse. The President perceiving it was Powhatans pol∣licy to starue vs, told them he came not so much for The Chickaha∣mines forced to contribution, their corne, as to revenge his imprisonment, and the death of his men murdered by them, & so landing his men, and ready to charge them, they immediatly fled; but then they sent their imbassadours, with corne, fish, fowl, or what they had to make their peace, (their corne being that year bad) they complained extream∣ly of their owne wants, yet fraughted our boats with 100 bushels of corne, and in like manner M r Persies, that not long after vs arriued; they having done the best they could to content vs, within 4. or 5. daies we returned to Iames Towne. Though this much contented the company (that then feared nothing but starving) yet some so envied his good successe, that they rather desired to starue, thē A bad reward for well doing. his paines should proue so muchmore effectuall then theirs; some proiects there was, not only to haue de∣posed him but to haue kept him out of the fort, for that being President, he would leaue his place, and the fort without their consents; but their hornes were so much too short to effect it, as they themselues more narrowly escaped a greater mischiefe. All this time our old taverne, made as much of all A good tauerne in Virginia. them that had either mony or ware as could bee desi∣red; and by this time they were become so perfect on all sides (I meane Souldiers, Sailers, and Salvages,) as there was ten-times more care, to maintaine their dā∣nable and private trade, then to provide for the Colo∣ny things that were necessary, neither was it a small pollicy in the mariners, to report in England wee had such plenty and bring vs so many men without victu∣all, when they had so many private factors in the fort, that within 6. or 7. weekes after the ships returne, of 2. or 300. hatchets, chissels, mattocks, and pickaxes searce 20. could be found, and for pike-heads, kniues, shot, powder, or any thing (they could steale frō their A bad trade of masters and sai∣lers. fellowes) was vendible; They knew as well (and as se∣cretly) how to convay them to trade with the Salva∣ges, for furres, baskets, mussaneekes, young beastes or such like commodities, as exchange them with the sai∣lers, for butter, cheese, biefe, porke, aquavitae, beere, bis∣ket, and oatmeale; and then faine, all was sent thē frō their friends. And though Virginia afford no furs for the store, yet one mariner in one voyage hath got so many, as hee hath confessed to haue solde in England for 30 l . Those are the Saint-seeming worthies of Virginia, that haue notwithstanding all this, meate, drinke, and pay, but now they begin to grow weary, their trade being both perceived and prevented; none hath bin in Virginia (that hath observed any thing) which knowes not this to be true, and yet the scorne, and shame was the poore souldiers, gentlemen and carelesse gover∣nours, who were all thus bought and solde, the ad∣venturers cousened, and the action overthrowne by their false excuses, informations, and directions, by this let all the world Iudge, how this businesse coulde prosper, being thus abused by such pilfering occasi∣ons. The proceedings and accidents, with the second supply. M r Scrivener was sent with the barges and Pinas to Werawocomoco, where he found the Salvages more rea∣dy Skriueners voi∣age to Werawo∣comoco. to fight then trade, but his vigilancy was such, as prevented their proiectes, and by the meanes of Na∣montack got 3. or 4. hogsheads of corne, and as much Red paint which (then) was esteemed an excellent die. Captaine Newport being dispatched with the try∣als of pitch, tarre, glasse, frankincense, and sope ashes, with that clapoord and wainscot could bee provided met with M r Scrivener at point Comfort, & so retur¦ned for England, leaving vs in all 200. with those hee brought vs. The names of those in this supply are these. Captaine Peter Winne. Captaine Richard Waldo. were appointed to bee of the Councell. M r Francis West. Thomas Graues. Rawley Chroshaw. Gabriell Bedle. Iohn Russell. Iohn Bedle. William Russell. Iohn Gudderington. William Sambage. Henry Collings. Henry Ley. Harmon Haryson. Daniell Tucker. Hugh Wollystone. Iohn Hoult. Thomas Norton. George Yarington. George Burton. Henry Philpot. Thomas Maxes. Michaell Lowicke. M r Hunt. Thomas Forest. William Dowman. Iohn Dauxe. Thomas Abbay. Gent. Thomas Phelps. Iohn Part. Iohn Clarke. Iefry Shortridge. Dius Oconor. Hugh Wynne. Davi Vphu. Thomas Bradley. Iohn Burras. Thomas Lavander. Henry Bell. M r Powell. Davi Ellys. Thomas Gipson. Tradsin. Thomas Dowse. Thomas Mallard. William Taler. Thomas Fox. Nicholas Hancock. Walker. Williams. Morrell. Rose. Scot. Hardwin. Laborers. Milman. Hellyard. Boyes. Mistresse Forest and Anne Buras her maide, 8. Dutchmen, and Poles with divers to the number of 70. persons. Those poore conclusions so affrighted vs all with famine; that the President provided for Nansamund, Nansamund forced to con∣tribution. tooke with him Captaine Winne & M r Scrivener (thē returning from Captaine Newport), these people also long denied him trade, (excusing themselues to bee so cōmanded by Powhatan) til we were constrained to be¦gin with them perforce, and then they would rather sell vs some, then wee should take all; so loading our boats, with 100. bushels we parted friends, and came to Iames Towne, at which time, there was a marriage be¦tweene Iohn Laydon and Anna Burrowes, being the first marriage we had in Virginia. Long he staied not, but fitting himselfe & captaine Waldo with 2. barges, from Chawopo, weanocke and all parts there, was found neither corne nor Salvage, but all fled (being Iealous of our intents) till we discovered the river and people of Appametuck, where we founde Appamatucke discovered. little that they had, we equally devided, betwixt the Salvages and vs (but gaue them copper in considera∣tion) M r Persie, and M r Scrivener went also abroad but could finde nothing. The President seeing this procastinating of time, was no course to liue, resolved with Captaine Waldo, (whom he knew to be sure in time of need) to surprise Powhatan, and al his provision, but the vnwillingnes of Captaine Winne, and M r Scrivener (for some private respects) did their best to hinder their proiect: But the President whom no perswasions could perswade to starue, being invited by Powhatan to come vnto him, & if he would send him but men to build him a house, bring him a grinstone, 50. swords, fome peeces, a cock and a hen, with copper and beads, he would loade his shippe with corne, the President not ignoraunt of his devises, yet vnwilling to neglect any opportunity, pre∣sently sent 3. Dutch-men and 2. English (having no vi∣ctuals to imploy them, all for want therof being idle) knowing there needed no better castel, thē that house to surprize Powhatā, to effect this proiect he took or∣der with Captaine Waldo to second him if need requi¦red; Scrivener he left his substitute; and set forth with the Pinnas 2. barges and six and forty men which on∣ly were such as volentarily offered themselues for his iourny, the which (by reason of M r Scriveners ill suc∣cesse) was censured very desperate, they all knowing Smith would not returne empty howsoever, caused many of those that he had appointed, to finde excu∣ses to stay behinde. CHAP. 8. Captaine Smiths iourney to Pamavnke. THE 29 of December hee set forward for Wera∣wocomoco, his company were these. In the Discovery barge, himselfe. Robert Behethland. Nathaniell Powell. Iohn Russell. Rawly Crashaw. Michaell Sicklemore. Richard Worlie. Gent. Anas Todkill. VVilliam Loue. VVilliam Bentley. Geoffery Shortridge. Edward Pising. VVilliam VVarde. Sould. In the Pinnace. M r George Persie, brother to the Earle of Northumber. land, M r Frauncis VVest, brother to the Lord De-la-Ware. VVilliam Phetiplace Captaine of the Pinnas. Ionas Profit Master. Robert Ford clarcke of the councell. Michaell Phetiplace. Geoffery Abbot Serg. VVilliam Tankard. George Yarington. Iames Bourne. George Burton. Thomas Coe. Gent. Iohn Dods. Edward Brinton. Nathaniel Peacocke. Henry Powell. David Ellis. Thomas Gipson. Iohn Prat. George Acrigge. Iames Reade. Nicholas Hancocke. Iames VVatkins. Anthony Baggly Serg. Thomas Lambert. Edward Pising Serg. Sould. 4. Dutchmen and Richard Salvage were sent by land, to build the house for Powhatan against our arrivall. This company being victualled but for 3. or 4. daies lodged the first night at Weraskoyack; where the Presi∣dent tooke sufficient provision; This kind Salvage did his best to divert him from seeing Powhatan, but per∣ceiuing he could not prevaile, he advised in this maner The good coun∣sell of Weras∣koyack. Captaine Smith, you shall finde Powhatan to vse you kindly, but trust him not, and bee sure hee haue no op∣portunitie to seaze on your armes, for hee hath sent for you only to cut your throats; the Captaine than¦ked him for his good counsell, yet the better to try his loue, desired guides to Chowanoke, for he would send a present to that king to bind him his friend. To per∣forme this iourney, was sent Michael Sicklemore, a ve∣ry honest, valiant, and painefull souldier, with him two guids, and directions howe to search for the lost com∣pany of S r Walter Rawley, and silke grasse: then wee de∣parted thence, the President assuring the king his per∣petuall loue, and lēft with him Samuell Collier his page to learne the language. The next night being lodged at Kecoughtan 6017 daies, the extreame wind, raine, frost, and snowe, cau∣sed vs to keepe Christmas amongst the Salvages, Plentie of vic∣tuall. where wee were never more merrie, nor fedde on more plentie of good oysters, fish, flesh, wildfoule, and good bread, nor never had better fires in England thē in the drie warme smokie houses of Kecoughtan, But departing thence, when we found no houses, we were not curious in any weather, to lie 3 or 4 nights toge∣ther vpon any shore vnder the trees by a good fire, 148 fowles the President, Anth. Bagly, and Edward Pi∣sing, did kill at 3 shoots. At Kiskiack the frost forced vs 3 or 4 daies also to suppresse the insolencie of those 148 Fowles kil∣led at 3 shoots. proud Salvages; to quarter-in their houses, and guard our barge, and cause them giue vs what wee wanted, yet were we but 12 with the President, and yet we ne∣ver wanted harbour where we found any houses. The 12 of Ianuarie we arrived at Werawocomoco, where the river was frozen neare halfe a mile from the shore; but to neglect no time, the President with his barge, so farre had approached by breaking the Ice as the eb left him amongst those oozie shoules, yet rather then to lie there frozen to death, by his owne example hee taught thē to march middle deepe, more then a flight shot through this muddie frozē ooze; when the barge An ill march. sloted the appointed 2 or 3 to returne her abord the Pinnace, where for want of water in melting the salt Ice they made fresh water, but in this march M. Russell (whome none could perswade to stay behind) being somewhat ill, and exceeding heavie, so overtoiled him selfe, as the rest had much adoe (ere he got a shore) to regaine life, into his dead benummed spirits, quarte∣ring in the next houses we found, we sent to Powhatan for provision, who sent vs plentie of bread, Turkies, & Venison. The next day hauing feasted vs after his or∣dinarie manner, he began to aske, when we would bee¦gon, faining hee sent not for vs, neither had hee any corne, and his people much lesse, yet for 40 swords he would procure vs 40 bushels. The President shewing him the men there present, that brought him the message and conditions, asked him how it chaunced he became so forgetful thereat the king concluded the matter with a merry laughter, asking for our commo∣dities, but none he liked without gunnes and swords, Powhatans sub∣teltic. valuing a basket of corne more pretious then a bas∣ket of copper, saying he could eate his corne, but not his copper. Captaine Smith seeing the intent of this subtil Sal∣vage; Capt. Smithes discourse to Powhatan. began to deale with him after this manner, Pow∣hatan, though I had many courses to haue made my provision, yet beleeving your promises to supply my wants, I neglected all, to satisfie your desire, and to te∣stifie my loue, I sent you my men for your building, neglecting my owne: what your people had you haue engrossed, forbidding them our trade, and nowe you thinke by consuming the time, wee shall consume for want, not hauing to fulfill your strange demandes, as for swords, and gunnes, I told you long agoe, I had none to spare And you shall knowe, those I haue, can keepe me from want, yet steale, or wrong you I will not, nor dissolue that friendship, wee haue mutually promised, (except you constraine mee by your bad vsage. The king hauing attētiuely listned to this discourse; Powhatans re∣ply & flattery. promised, that both hee and his Country would spare him what they could, the which within 2 daies, they should receaue, yet. Captaine Smith, (saith the king) some doubt I haue of your cōming hither, that makes me not so kindly seeke to relieue you as I would; for many do informe me, your comming is not for trade, but to invademy people and possesse my Country, who dare not come to bring you corne, seeing you thus armed with your men. To cleere vs of this feare, leaue abord your weapons, for here they are needlesse we being all friends and for ever Powhatans. With many such discourses they spent the day, quartring that night in the kings houses, the next day he reviewed his building, which hee little intended should proceed; for the Dutchmen finding his plenty, and knowing our want, and perceived his preparation to surprise vs, little thinking wee could escape, both him, and famine, (to obtaine his favour) revealed to him as much as they knew of our estates and proiects, and how to prevent them; one of them being of so good a iudgement, spirit, and resolution, & a hireling that was certaine of wages for his labour, and ever well vsed, both he and his countrimen, that the Presi∣dent knewe not whome better to trust, & not know∣ing any fitter for that imploiment, had sent him as a spie to discover Powhatans intent, then little doubting his honestie, nor could ever be certaine of his villany, till neare halfe a yeare after. Whilst we expected the comming in of the coun∣trie, we wrangled out of the king 10 quarters of corne for a copper kettle, the which the President perceived him much to effect, valued it at a much greater rate, but (in regard of his scarcety) hee would accept of as much more the next yeare, or else the country of Mo∣nacan, the king exceeding liberall of that hee had not yeelded him Monacan. Wherewith each seeming well contented; Powhatan began to expostulate the diffe∣rence betwixt peace and war, after this manner. Captaine Smith you may vnderstand, that I, hauing seene the death of all my people thrice, and not one li∣ving Powhatan course of peace and warre. of those 3 generations, but my selfe, I knowe the difference of peace and warre, better then any in my Countrie. But now I am old, & ere long must die, my brethren, namely Opichapam, Opechankanough, and Ke∣kataugh, my two sisters, and their two daughters, are distinctly each others successours, I wish their expe∣riences no lesse then mine, and your loue to them, no lesse then mine to you; but this brute from Nansamūd that you are come to destroy my Countrie, so much affrighteth all my people, as they dare not visit you; what will it availe you, to take that perforce, you may quietly haue with loue, or to destroy them that pro∣vide you food? what can you get by war, when we can hide our provision and flie to the woodes, whereby you must famish by wronging vs your friends; & whie are you thus iealous of our loues, seeing vs vnarmed, and both doe, & are willing still to feed you with that you cannot get but by our labours? think you I am so simple not to knowe, it is better to eate good meate, lie well, and sleepe quietly with my women & childrē, laugh and be merrie with you, haue copper, hatchets, or what I want, being your friend; then bee forced to flie from al, to lie cold in the woods, feed vpon acorns roots, and such trash, and be so hunted by you, that I can neither rest, eat, nor sleepe; but my tired men must watch, and if a twig but breake, everie one crie there comes Captaine Smith, then must I flie I knowe not whether, and thus with miserable feare end my mise∣rable life; leauing my pleasures to such youth as you, which through your rash vnadvisednesse, may quickly as miserably ende, for want of that you never knowe how to find? Let this therefore assure you of our loues and everie yeare our friendly trade shall furnish you with corne, & now also if you would come in friend∣ly manner to see vs, and not thus with your gunnes & swords, as to invade your foes. To this subtil discourse the President thus replied. Seeing you will not rightly cōceaue of our words, wee striue to make you knowe our thoughts by our deeds. The vow I made you of my loue, both my selfe C. Smiths reply and my men haue kept, as for your promise I finde it everie daie violated, by some of your subiects, yet wee finding your loue and kindnesse (our custome is so far from being vngratefull) that for your sake only, wee haue curbed our thirsting desire of revenge, else had they knowne as wel the crueltie we vse to our enimies as our true loue and curtefie to our friendes. And I thinke your iudgement sufficient to conceiue as well by the adventures we haue vndertaken, as by the ad∣vantage we haue by our armes of yours: that had wee intended you anie hurt, long ere this wee coulde haue effected it; your people cōming to me at Iames towne, are entertained with their bowes and arrowes with∣out exception; we esteeming it with you, as it is with vs, to weare our armes as our apparell. As for the dā∣gers of our enimies, in such warres consist our chiefest pleasure, for your riches we haue no vse, as for the hi∣ding your provision, or by your flying to the woods, we shall so vnadvisedly starue as you conclude, your friendly care in that behalfe is needlesse; for we haue a rule to finde beyond your knowledge. Manie other discourses they had, til at last they be∣gan to trade, but the king seing his will would not bee admitted as a lawe, our gard dispersed, nor our men disarmed, he (sighing) breathed his mind, once more in this manner. Captaine Smith, I never vsed anie of Werowances, so kindlie as your selfe; yet from you I receaue the least Powhatans im∣portunitie for to haue them vnar¦med, to betray them. kindnesse of anie. Captaine Newport gaue me swords, copper, cloths, a bed, tooles, or what I desired, ever ta∣king what I offered him, and would send awaie his gunnes when I intreated him: none doth denie to laie at my feet (or do) what I desire, but onelie you, of whō I can haue nothing, but what you regard not, and yet you will haue whatsoever you demand. Captain New∣port you call father, and so you call me, but I see for all vs both, you will doe what you list, and wee must both seeke to content you: but if you intend so friendlie as you saie, sende hence your armes that I may beleeue you, for you see the loue I beare you, doth cause mee thus nakedlie forget my selfe. Smith seeing this Salvage but trifled the time to cut his throat: procured the Salvages to breake the ice, (that his boat might come to fetch both him and his corne) and gaue order for his men to come ashore, to haue surprised the king, with whom also he but trifled the time till his men landed, and to keepe him from suspition, entertained the time with this reply. Powhatan, you must knowe as I haue but one God, C Smiths dis∣course to delay time, that hee might surprise Powhatan. I honour but one king; and I liue not here as your sub¦iect, but as your friend, to pleasure you with what I cā: by the gifts you bestowe on me, you gaine more then by trade; yet would you visite mee as I doe you, you should knowe it is not our customes to sell our curte∣sie as a vendible commoditie. Bring all your Country with you for your gard, I will not dislike of it as being over iealous. But to content you, to morrow I will leaue my armes, and trust to your promise. I call you father indeed, and as a father you shall see I will loue you, but the smal care you had of such a child, caused my men perswade me to shift for my selfe. By this time Powhatan hauing knowledge, his men Powhatans plot to haue murde∣red Smith. were readie: whilst the ice was breaking, his luggage women, and children fledde, and to avoid suspition, left 2 or 3 of his women talking with the Captaine, whilst he secretly fled, and his men as secretlie beset the house, which being at the instant discovered to Capt. Smith, with his Pistol, Sword & Target, he made such a passage amongst those naked divels, that they fled be sore him some one waie some another, so that with∣out hurt he obtained the Corps du-guard; when they perceiued him so well escaped, and with his 8 men (for he had no more with him) To the vttermost of their skill, they sought by excuses to dissemble the matter, and Powhatan to excuse his flight, and the suddaine cō∣ming of this multitude, sent our Captaine a greate A chain of perle for a present. bracelet, and a chaine of pearle, by an ancient Orator that bespoke vs to this purpose, (perceiving then frō our Pinnace, a barge and men departing & comming vnto vs.) Captaine Smith, our Werowans is fled, fearing His excuse. your guns, & knowing when the ice was broken there would come more men, sent those of his to guard his corne from the pilfrie, that might happen without your knowledge: now though some bee hurt by your misprision, yet he is your friend, and so wil continue: and since the ice is open hee would haue you send a∣waie your corne; and if you would haue his companie send also your armes, which so affrighteth this people, that they dare not come to you, as he hath promiseed they should: nowe having provided baskets for our men to carrie the corne, they kindlie offered their ser∣vice to gard our armes, that none should steale them. A great manie they were, of goodlie well appointed Pretending to kill our men loded with bas∣kets we forced the Salvages carrie them. fellowes as grim as divels; yet the verie sight of coc∣king our matches against them, and a few words, cau∣sed them to leaue their bowes & arrowes to our gard, and beare downe our corne on their own backes; wee needed not importune them to make quick dispatch. But our own barge being left by the ebb, caused vs to staie, till the midnight tide carried vs safe abord, ha∣ving spent that halfe night with such mirth, as though we never had suspected or intended any thing, we left the Dutchmen to build, Brinton to kil fowle for Pow∣hatan (as by his messengers he importunately desired) and left directions with our men to giue Powhatan all the content they could, that we might inioy his com∣pany at our returne from Pamaunke. CHAP. 9. How we escaped surprising at Pamavnke. W EE had no sooner set saile, but The dutchmen deceaue C Smith Powhatan returned, and sent A∣dam and Francis (2. stout Dutch men) to the fort, who faining to Captaine VVinne that al things were well, and that Captaine Smith had vse for their armes, wherefore they requested newe (the which were given them) they told him their cō∣ming was, for some extraordinary tooles and shift of apparell, by this colourable excuse, they obtained 6. or 7. more to their confederacie, such expert theefes, that presētly furnished thē with a great many swords, pike-heads, peeces, shot, powder and such like, they had Salvages at hand ready to carry it away, the next day they returned vnsuspected, leaving their confe∣derates to follow, and in the interim, to convay them a competencie of all things they could, for which ser∣vice they should liue with Powhatan as his chiefe affe∣cted: free from those miseries that would happen the Colony. Samuell their other consort, Powhatan kept for their pledge, whose diligence had provided them, 300. of their kinde of hatchets, the rest. 50. swords, 8. peeces, and 8. pikes: Brinton, & Richard Salvage seeing the Dutch-men so strangly diligent to accommodate the Salvages these weapons attempted to haue got to Iames Towne, but they were apprehended; within 2. or 3. daies we arrived at Pamavnke, the king as many daies, entertained vs with feasting and much mirth: & the day he appointed to begin our trade, the Presidēt, with M r Persie, M r West, M r Russell, M r Beheathland, M Powell, M r Crashaw, M r Ford, and some others to the number of 15. went vp to Opechancanougs house (near a quarter of a mile from the river,) where we founde Opechanca∣noughs abando∣ned. nothing, but a lame fellow and a boy, and all the hou∣ses about, of all things abandoned; not long we staide ere the king arrived, and after him came divers of his people loaded with bowes and arrowes, but such pin∣ching commodities, and those esteemed at such a va∣lue, as our Captaine beganne with him in this man∣ner. Opechancanough the great loue you professe with your tongue, seemes meere deceipt by your actions; Smiths speech to Opechanca∣nough. last yeare you kindly fraughted our ship, but now you haue invited me to starue with hunger. You know my want, and I your plenty, of which by some meanes I must haue part, remember it is fit for kings to keepe their promise, here are my commodities, wherof take your choices; the rest I will proportion, fit bargaines for your people. The king seemed kindly to accept his offer; and the better to colour his proiect, sold vs what they had to our own cōtēt; promising the next day, more cōpany, better provided; (the barges, and Pinnas being com∣mitted to the charge of M r Phetiplace) the President with his old 15 marched vp to the kings house, where we foūd 4 or 5 men newly cōe with great baskets, not long after came the king, who with a strained cheere∣fulnes held vs with discourse, what paines he had takē to keepe his promise; til M r Russell brought vs in news that we were all betraied: for at least 6. or 700. of well appointed Indians had invironed the house and beset 700 Salvages beset the Eng∣lish being but 16. the fields. The king coniecturing what Russell related, we could wel perceiue how the extremity of his feare bewrayed his intent: whereat some of our companie seeming dismaide with the thought of such a multi∣tude; the Captaine incouraged vs after this manner. Worthy countrymen were the mischiefes of my Smiths speech to his company. seeming-friends, no more then the danger of these e∣nemies, I little cared, were they as many more, if you dare do, but as I. But this is my torment, that if I es∣cape them, our malicious councell with their open mouthed minions, will make mee such a peace-brea∣ker (in their opinions) in Englād, as wil break my neck; I could wish those here, that make these seeme Saints, and me an oppressor. But this is the worst of all, wher in I pray aide me with your opinions; should wee be∣gin with them and surprize this king, we cannot keep him and defend well our selues, if we should each kill our man and so proceede with al in this house; the rest will all fly, then shall we get no more, then the bodies that are slaine, and then starue for victuall: as for their fury it is the least danger; for well you know, (being a∣lone assaulted with 2 or 300 of them) I made them cō pound to saue my life, and we are now 16 & they but 700. at the most, and assure your selues God wil so as∣sist vs, that if you dare but to stande to discharge your peeces, the very smoake will bee sufficient to affright them; yet howsoever (if there be occasion) et vs fight like men, and not die like sheep; but first I will deale with them, to bring it to passe, we may fight for some thing, and draw them to it by conditions. If you like this motion, promise me youle be valiant. The time not permitting any argument, all vowed, to execute whatsoever he attempted, or die; wherevpon the cap∣taine, approaching the king bespoke him in this man∣ner. I see Opechancanough your plot to murder me, but I Smiths offer to Opechanca∣nough. feare it not, as yet your men and mine, haue done no harme, but by our directions. Take therefore your arms; you see mine; my body shalbe as naked as yours; the Ile in your river is a fit place, if you be contented: and the conqueror (of vs two) shalbe Lord and Master over all our men; otherwaies drawe all your men into the field; if you haue not enough take time to fetch more, and bring what number you will, so everie one bring a basket of corne, against all which I will stake the value in copper; you see I haue but 15 men, & our game shalbe the conquerer take all. The king, being guarded with 50 or 60 of his chiefe Opechanca∣noughs devise to betray Smith. men, seemed kindly to appease Smiths suspition of vn∣kindnesse, by a great present at the dore, they intreated him to receiue. This was to draw him without the dore where the present was garded with (at the least 200 men and 30 lying vnder a greate tree (that lay thwart as a Barricado) each his arrow nocked ready to shoot; some the President commanded to go & see what kinde of deceit this was, and to receiue the pre∣sent, but they refused to do it, yet divers offered whom he would not permit; but commanding M r Persie and M r VVest to make good the house, tooke M r Poell and M r Beheathland to guard the dore, and in such a rage snatched the king by his vambrace in the midst of his men, with his pistoll ready bent against his brest: thus he led the trembling king, (neare dead with feare) a∣mongst all his people, who delivering the Captaine his bow and arrowes, all his men were easily intreated to cast downe their armes, little dreaming anie durst in that manner haue vsed their king; who then to es∣cape himselfe, bestowed his presents in goodsadnesse. And hauing caused all his multitude to approach dif∣armed; the President argued with them to this effect. I see you Pamavnkies the great desire you haue to Smiths discourse to the Pama∣unkies. cut my throat; and my long suffering your iniuries, haue inboldened you to this presumption. The cause I haue forborne your insolēcies, is the promise I made you (before the God I serue) to be your friend, till you giue me iust cause to bee your enimie. If I keepe this vow, my God will keepe me, you cannot hurt me; if I breake it he will destroie me. But if you shoot but one arrow, to shed one drop of blood of any of my men, or steale the least of these beades, or copper, (I spurne before me with my foot) you shall see, I wil not cease revenge, (if once I begin) so long as I can heare where to find one of your natiō that will not deny the name of Pamavnke; I am not now at Rasseneac (halfe drownd with mire) where you tooke me prisoner, yet then for keeping your promise, and your good vsage, & saving my life, I so affect you, that your denials of your trea∣cherie, doth half perswade me to mistake my selfe. But if I be the marke you aime at, here I stand, shoote hee that dare. You promised to fraught my ship ere I de∣parted, and so you shall, or I meane to load her with your dead carkases; yet if as friends you wil come and trade, I once more promise not to trouble you, ex∣cept you giue me the first occasion. Vpon this awaie The Salvages dissemble their intens. went their bowes and arrowes, and men, women, and children brought in their commodities, but 2 or three houres they so thronged about the President, and so overwearied him, as he retired himself to rest, leaving M r Beheathland and M r Powel to accept their presents; but some Salvage perceiving him fast asleepe, and the guard carelesly dispersed, 40 or 50 of their choice mē each with an English sword in his hand, began to en∣ter the house, with 2 or 300 others that pressed to se∣cond them. The noise and hast they made in, did so shake the house, as they awoke him from his sleep, & being halfe amazed with this suddaine sight, betooke him straight to his sword and target, M r Crashaw and some other charging in like manner, they thronged faster backe, then before forward. The house thus Their excuse & reconcilement. clensed, the king and his ancients, with a long oration came to excuse this intrusion. The rest of the day was spent with much kindnesse, the company againe re∣nuing their presents of their best provision. And what soever we gaue them, they seemed well contented with it. Now in the meane while since our departure, this hapned at the fort, M r Scriuener willing to crosse the surprizing of Powhatan; 9 daies after the Presidents de∣parture, would needs visit the Ile of hogges, and took with him Captaine Waldo (though the President had appointed him to bee readie to second his occasions) with M r Anthony Gosnoll and eight others; but so vio∣lent was the wind (that extreame frozen time) that the boat sunke, but where or how, none doth knowe, for they were all drowned; onlie this was knowne, that the Skiffe was much overloaded, & would scarse haue The losse of M r Skriuener and others with a Skiffe. lived in that extreame tempest, had she beene emptie; but by no perswasion hee could bee diverted, though both Waldo and 100 others doubted as it hapned. The Salvages were the first that found their bodies, which so much the more encouraged them to effect their proiects. To advertise the President of this heavie newes, none could bee found would vndertake it, but the iourney was often refused of all in the fort, vntill M r Wiffin vndertooke alone, the performance there∣of; wherein he was encountred with many dangers & M r Wiffin his iourney to the President. difficulties, and in all parts as hee passed (as also that night he lodged with Powhatan) perceived such prepa∣ration forwarre, that assured him, some mischiefe was intended, but with extraordinarie bribes, and much trouble, in three daies travell at length hee found vs in the midst of these turmoiles. This vnhappie newes, the President swore him to conceale from the rest, & so dissembling his sorrow, with the best countenance he could, when the night approached, went safely a∣bord with all his companie. Now so extreamely Powhatan had threatned the Powhatan con∣straineth his mē to be trecherous death of his men, if they did not by some meanes kill Captaine Smith, that the next day they appointed the Countrie should come to trade vnarmed: yet vnwil∣ling to be treacherous, but that they were constrained hating fighting, almost as ill as hāging, such feare they had of bad successe. The next morning the sunne had not long appeared, but the fieldes appeared covered with people, and baskets to tempt vs ashore. The Pre∣sident determined to keepe abord, but nothing was to bee had without his presence, nor they would not in∣dure the sight of a gun; then the President seeing ma∣ny Their third at∣tempt to betray vs. depart, and being vnwilling to lose such a booty, so well contrived the Pinnace, and his barges with Am∣buscadoes, as only with M r Persie, M r West, & M r Rus∣sell armed, he went ashore, others vnarmed he appoin ted to receiue what was brought; the Salvages floc∣ked before him in heapes, and (the bancke serving as a trench for retreat) hee drewe them faire open to his ambuscadoes, for he not being to be perswaded to go to visit their king, the King came to visit him with 2 or 300 men, in the forme of two halfe moons, with some 20 men, and many women loaded with great painted baskets; but when they approached somewhat neare vs, their women and children fled; for when they had environed and beset the fieldes in this manner, they thought their purpose fure; yet so trembled with fear as they were scarse able to nock their arrowes; Smith standing with his 3 men readie bent beholding them, till they were within danger of our ambuscado, who, vpon the word discovered themselues, and he retiring to the banke; which the Salvages no sooner perceived but away they fled, esteeming their heeles for their best advantage. That night we sent to the fort M r Crashaw and M r Foard, who (in the mid-way betweene Werawocomoco and the fort) met 4 or 5. of the Dutch mens confede∣rates going to Powhatan, the which (to excuse those gentlemens Suspition of their running to the Salva∣ges returned to the fort and there continued. The Salvages hearing our barge depart in the night were so terriblie affraide, that we sent for more men, (we having so much threatned their ruine, and the ra∣sing of their houses, boats, and canowes) that the next day the king, sent our Captaine a chaine of pearle to A chaine of pearle sent to obtaine peace. alter his purpose; and stay his men, promising (though they wanted themselues) to fraught our ship, & bring it abord to avoid suspition, so that 5 or 6 daies after, from al parts of the countrie within 10 or 12 miles, in the extreame cold frost, and snow, they brought vs provision on their naked backes. Yet notwithstanding this kindnesse and trade; had their art and poison bin sufficient, the President with M r West and some others had been poysoned; it made thē sicke, but expelled it selfe; Wecuttanow a stout yong The President Poysoned. The offender pu nished. fellow, knowing hee was suspected for bringing this present of poison, with 40 or 50. of his choice com∣panions (seeing the President but with a few men at Potavncat—) so prowdlie braved it, as though he ex∣pected to incounter a revenge; which the President perceiving, in the midst of his companie did not onlie beat, but spurned him like a dogge, as scorning to doe him anie worse mischiefe; wherevpon all of them fled into the woods, thinking they had done a great mat∣ter, to haue so well escaped; and the townsmen remai∣ning, presentlie fraughted our barge, to bee rid of our companies, framing manie excuses to excuse Wecutta∣now (being son to their chiefe king but Powhatan) and told vs if we would shew them him that brought the poyson, they would deliver him to vs to punish as wee pleased. Men maie thinke it strange there should be this stir for a little corne, but had it been gold with more ease we might haue got it; & had it wanted, the whole col∣lonie had starved. We maie be thought verie patient, to indure all those iniuries; yet onlie with fearing thē, we got what they had. Whereas if we had taken re∣venge, thē by their losse we should haue lost our selus. We searched also the countries of Youghtanund and Mattapamient, where the people imparted that little they had, with such complaints and tears from womē The Salvage want & po rty and children; as he had bin too cruell to be a Christian that would not haue bin satisfied, and moved with cō∣passion. But had this happened in October, Novēber, and December, when that vnhappie discoverie of Mo¦nacan was made, we might haue fraughted a ship of 40 tuns, and twice as much might haue bin had; from the rivers of Toppahannock, Patawomeck, & Pawtuxunt. The maine occasion of our temporizing with the Sal¦vages was to part friends, (as we did) to giue the lesse cause of suspitiō to Powhatan to fly; by whom we now The Dutchmen did much hurt. returned, with a purpose, to haue surprised him & his provision, for effecting whereof, (when we came a∣gainst the towne) the President sent M r Wiffin and M r Coe, a shore to discover and make waie for his inten∣ded proiect. But they foūd that those damned Dutch-men had caused Powhatan to abandon his new house, and werawocomoco, and to carrie awaie all his corne & provision; and the people, they found (by their means so ill affected, that had they not stood well vpon their guard, they had hardlie escaped with their liues. So the President finding his intention thus frustrated, & that there was nothing now to be had, and therefore an vnfit time to revenge their abuses, helde on his course for Iames Towne; we having in this Iornie (for 25 l of copper 50 l of Iron and beads) kept 40 men 6. weekes, and dailie feasted with bread, corne, flesh fish, and fowle, everie man having for his reward (and in consideration of his commodities) a months provisi∣on; (no trade being allowed but for the store;) and we delivered at Iames Towne to the Cape-Marchant 279 bushels of corne. Those temporall proceedings to some maie seeme too charitable; to such a dailie daring trecherous peo∣ple: to others vnpleasant that we washed not the ground with their blouds, nor shewed such strange in ventions, in mangling, murdering, ransaking, and de∣stroying, (as did the Spaniards) the simple bodies of those ignorant soules; nor delightful because not stuf∣fed with relations of heaps, and mines of gold and sil∣ver, nor such rare commodities as the Portugals and Spaniards found in the East & West Indies. The wāt wherof hath begot vs (that were the first vndertakers) no lesse scorne and contempt, then their noble con∣quests & valiant adventures (beautified with it) praise and honor. Too much I confesse the world cannot at∣tribute to their ever memorable merit. And to cleare vs from the worlds blind ignorant censure, these fewe words may suffise to any reasonably vnderstanding. It was the Spaniards good hap to happen in those parts, where were infinite numbers of people, whoe had manured the ground with that providence, that it afforded victuall at all times: and time had brought them to that perfection, they had the vse of gold and silver, and the most of such commodities, as their coū∣tries afforded, so that what the Spaniard got, was on∣ly the spoile and pillage of those countrie people, and not the labours of their owne hands. But had those fruitfull Countries, beene as Salvage as barbarous, as ill peopled, as little planted, laboured and manured as Virginia, their proper labours (it is likely) would haue produced as small profit as ours. But had Virginia bin peopled, planted, manured, and adorned, with such store of pretious Iewels, & rich commodities, as was the Indies: then had we not gotten, and done as much as by their examples might bee expected from vs, the world might then haue traduced vs and our merits, & haue made shame and infamy our recompence and reward. But we chanced in a lande, even as God made it. Where we found only an idle, improvident, scattered people; ignorant of the knowledge of gold, or silver, or any commodities; & carelesse of any thing but frō hand to mouth, but for bables of no worth; nothing to encourage vs, but what accidentally wee found na∣ture afforded. Which ere wee could bring to recom∣pence our paines, defray our charges, and satisfie our adventurers, we were to discover the country, subdue the people, bring them to be tractable, civil, and indu∣strious, and teach them trades, that the fruits of their labours might make vs recompence, or plant such co∣lonies of our owne that must first make provisiō how to liue of themselues, ere they can bring to perfection the commodities of the countrie, which doubtles will be as commodious for England, as the west Indies for Spaine, if it be rightly managed; notwithstanding all our home-bred opinions, that will argue the contra∣rie, as formerly such like haue done, against the Spani∣ards and Portugals. But to conclude, against all rumor of opinion, I only say this, for those that the three first yeares began this plantation, notwithstanding al their factions, mutenies, and miseries, so gently corrected, and well prevented) pervse the Spanish Decades, the relations of M. Hacklut, and tell mee how many ever with such smal meanes, as a barge of 2 Tunnes; some∣times with 7. 8. 9, or but at most 15 men did ever disco∣ver so many faire and navigable rivers; subiect so ma∣ny severall kings, people, and nations, to obedience, & contribution with so little bloud shed. And if in the search of those Countries, wee had hapned where wealth had beene, we had as surely had it, as obedience and contribution, but if wee haue o∣verskipped it, we will not envy them that shall chance to finde it. Yet can wee not but lament, it was our ill fortunes to end, when wee had but only learned how to begin, and found the right course how to proceed. By Rich. Wiffin, William Phettiplace, and Anas Todkill. CHAP. 10. How the Salvages became subiect to the English. W Hen the shippes departed, al the provision of the store (but that the President had gotten) was so rotten with the last somers rain, and eaten with rats, and wormes, as the hogs would scarsely eat it, yet it was the souldiers diet, till our returnes: so that wee found nothing done, but victuall spent, and the most part of our tooles, and a good part of our armes convayed to the Salvages. But now, casting vp the store, & finding sufficient till the next harvest, the feare of starving was abandoned; and the company divided into tennes, fif∣teenes, or as the businesse required. 4 houres each day was spent in worke, the rest in pastimes and merry ex∣ercise; but the vntowardnesse of the greatest number, caused the President to make a generall assembly, and then he advised them as followeth. Countrimen, the long experience of our late mise∣ries, The Presidents advise to the company. I hope is sufficient to perswade every one to a present correction of himselfe; and thinke not that ei∣ther my pains, or the advēturers purses, will ever main∣taine you in idlenesse and sloth; I speake not this to you all, for diverse of you I know deserue both honor and reward, better then is yet here to bee had: but the greater part must be more industrious, or starue, how∣soever you haue bin heretofore tolerated by the au∣thoritie of the Councell from that I haue often com∣manded you, yet seeing nowe the authoritie resteth wholly in my selfe; you must obay this for a law, that he that will not worke shall not eate (except by sick∣nesse he be disabled) for the labours of 30 or 40 honest and industrious men, shall not bee consumed to main∣taine 150 idle varlets. Now though you presume the authoritie here is but a shaddow, and that I dare not touch the liues of any, but my own must answer it; the letters patents each week shall be read you, whose cō∣tents will tell you the cōtrary. I would wish you there∣fore without contempt seeke to obserue these orders set downe: for there are nowe, no more Councells to protect you, nor curbe my indeauors. Therefore hee that offendeth let him assuredly expect his due punish ment. Hee made also a table as a publike memoriall of every mans deserts, to encourage the good, and with shame to spurne on the rest to amendment. By this many became very industrious, yet more by severe punishment performed their businesse; for all were so tasked that there was no excuse could prevaile to de∣ceiue him, yet the Dutchmens consorts so closely still convaid powder, shot, swords, and tooles, that though we could find the defect, we could not find by whom it was occasioned, till it was too late. All this time the Dutchmen remaining with Pow∣hatan, The Dutchmens plot to murder Capt. Smith. received them, instructing the Salvages their vse. But their consorts not following them as they ex∣pected, (to knowe the cause, they sent Francis their companion (a stout young fellow) disguised Salvage like) to the glasse-house, (a place in the woods neere a myle from Iames Towne) where was the randavus for all their vnsuspected villany, 40 men they procured of Powhatan to lie in Ambuscadoe for Captaine Smith, who no sooner heard of this Dutchman, but hee sent to apprehend him, who foūd he was gon, yet to crosse his returne to Powhatan, Captaine Smith presently dis∣patched 20 shot after him, and then returning but frō the glasse-house alone, hee incountred the king of Pas∣paheigh, a most strong stout Salvage, whose perswasi∣ons not being able to perswade him to his ambush, see¦ing him only armed but with a fauchion, attempted to haue shot him; but the President prevented his shot by grapling with him, and the Salvage as well preven∣ted him for drawing his fauchion, and perforce bore him into the river to haue drowned him; long they struggled in the water, from whence the king percei∣ving two of the Poles vpon the sandes would haue fled; but the President held him by the haire & throat Smith taketh the king of Pas∣paheigh prisoner til the Poles came in; then seeing howe pittifully the poore Salvage begged his life, they conducted him prisoner to the fort. The Dutchman ere long was also brought in, whose villany, though all this time it was suspected, yet he fained such a formall excuse, that for want of language, Win had not rightly vnderstood them, and for their dealings with Powhatan, that to saue their liues they were constrained to accommo∣date his armes, of whome he extreamely complained to haue detained them perforce; and that hee made this escape with the hazard of his life, and meant not to haue returned, but only walked in the woods to ga∣ther walenuts: yet for all this faire tale (there was so smal appearance of truth) hee went by the heeles; the king also he put in fetters; purposing to regaine the Dutch-men, by the saving his life; the poore Salvage did his best, by his daily messengers to Powhatan, but all returned that the Dutchmen would not returne, neither did Powhatan stay them, and bring them fiftie myles on their backes they were not able; daily this kings wiues children, and people, came to visit him with presents, which hee liberally bestowed to make his peace, much trust they had in the Presidents pro∣mise, but the king finding his gard negligent (though fettered) yet escaped; Captaine Win thinking to pur∣sue him, found such troopes of Salvages to hinder his passages, as they exchanged many volies of shot for flights of arrowes. Captaine Smith hearing of this, in returning to the fort tooke two Salvages prisoners, the one called Kemps, the other Kinsock, the two most exact villaines in the countrie; with those, Captaine Win, and 50 chosen men attempted that night to haue regained the king, and revenged his iniurie (and so had done if he had followed his directions, or bin advised by those two villaines, that would haue betraied both their king and kindred for a peece of copper, but hee trifling away the night, the Salvages the next morning by the rising of the sunne, braved him come a shore to fight, a good time both sides let flie at other, but wee heard of no hurt, only they tooke two Canows, burnt the kings house and so returned. The President fearing those bravadoes, would but incourage the Salvages, begun himselfe to trie his cō∣clusions; whereby 6 or 7 Salvages were slaine, as ma∣ny The Salu ges desire peace. made prisoners; burnt their houses, tooke their boats with all their fishing weares, and planted them at Iames Towne for his owne vse; and nowe resolved not to cease till he had revenged himselfe vpon al that had iniured him, but in his iourney passing by Paspa∣heigh towards Chickahamina, the Salvages did their best to draw him to their ambuscadoes; but seeing him regardlesly passe their Countrey, all shewed thēselues in their bravest manner, to rrie their valours, he could not but let flie, and ere he could land, the Salvages no sooner knewe him, but they threw downe their armes and desired peace; their Orator was a stout young mā called Ocanindge, whose worthie discourse deserveth Geanindge his Oration. to be remembred; and this it was. Captaine Smith, my master is here present in this company thinking it Captaine Win, and not you; and of him hee intended to haue beene revenged, having never offended him: if hee haue offended you in esca∣ping your imprisonment; the fishes swim, the fowles flie, and the very beastes striue to escape the snare and liue; them blame not him being a man, hee would en∣treat you remēber, your being a prisoner, what paines he tooke to saue your life; if since he hath iniured you he was compelled to it, but howsoever, you haue re∣venged it with our too-great losse, we perceiue & well knowe you intend to destroy vs, that are here to in∣treat and desire your friendship, and to enioy our hou∣ses and plant our fields, of whose fruit you shall parti∣cipate, otherwise you will haue the worst by our ab∣sence, for we can plant any where, though with more labour, and we know you cannot liue if you want our harvest, and that reliefe wee bring you; if you promise vs peace we will beleeue you, if you proceed in revēg, we will abandon the Countrie. Vpon these tearmes the President promised them peace, till they did vs in∣iurie, vpon condition they should bring in provision, so all departed good friends, & so continued till Smith left the Countrie. Ariving at Iames Towne, complaint was made to the President ihat the Chickahaminos, who al this while A Saluage smo∣thered at Iames Towne, and was recouered. continued trade, and seemed our friendes, by colour thereof were the only theeues, and amongst other things, a pistol being stolne, and the theese fled, there were apprehended 2 proper young fellows that were brothers, knowne to be his cōfederats. Now to regain this pistoll, the one we imprisoned, the other was sent to returne againe within 12 houres, or his brother to be hanged, yet the President pittying the poore naked Salvage in the dungeon, sent him victuall and some charcole for fire; ere midnight his brother returned with the pistoll, but the poore Salvage in the dungeon was so smothered with the smoke he had made, and so pittiously burnt, that wee found him dead, the other most lamentably bewailed his death, and broke forth in such bitter agonies, that the Presidēt (to quiet him) told him that if herafter they would not steal. he wold make him aliue againe, but little thought hee could be recovered, yet (we doing our best with aquavitae & vineger) it pleased God to restore him againe to life, but so drunke and affrighted that he seemed lunaticke, not vnderstanding any thing hee spoke or heard, the which as much grieved and tormented the other, as before to see him dead; of which maladie (vpon pro∣mise of their good behaviour afterward) the President promised to recover him and so caused him to be laid by a fire to sleepe, who in the morning (hauing well slept) had recovered his perfect senses; and then being dressed of his burning, and each a peece of copper gi∣ven them, they went away so well contented, that this was spread amongst all the Salvages for a miracle, that Captaine Smith could make a man aliue that is dead; these and many other such pretty accidents, so ama∣zed and affrighted both Powhatan and all his people that from all parts with presents they desired peace, returning many stolne things which wee neither de∣maunded nor thought of. And after that, those that were taken stealing (both Powhatan and his people) haue sent them backe to Iames Towne to receiue their punishment, and all the countrie became absolutely as free for vs, as for themselues. CHAP. 11. What was done in three monthes hauing victuall. The store devoured by rats, how we lived 3 monthes of such naturall fruits as the countrie afforded. N OW wee so quietly followed our businesse, that in 3 monthes we made 3 or 4 last of pitch and tarre, and sope ashes, produced a triall of glasse, made a well in the forte of excellent sweete water (which till then was wanting) built some 20 houses, recouered More done in 3 monthes then 3 yeares. our Church, provided nets and weares for fishing (& to stop the disorders of our disorderly theeues & the Salvages) built a blocke house in the necke of our Ile, kept by a garrison to entertaine the Salvages trade, & none to passe nor repasse, Salvage, nor Christian, with out the Presidents order, 30 or 40 acres of ground we digged, and planted; of 3 sowes in one yeare increased 60 and od pigges, and neere 500 chickens brought vp themselues (without hauing any meate giuen them) but the hogges were transported to hog Ile, where al∣so we built a blocke house with a garrison, to giue vs notice of any shipping, and for their exercise they made clapbord, wainscot, and cut downe trees against the ships comming. We built also a fort for a retreat, neare a convenient river vpon a high commanding hill, very hard to be assaulted, and easie to be defended; but ere it was halfe finished this defect caused a stay; in searching our casked corne, wee found it halfe rotten, the rest so consumed with the many thousand rats (in∣creased first from the ships) that we knewe not how to keepe that little wee had. This did driue vs all to our wits ende, for there was nothing in the countrie but what nature afforded. vntill this time Keinps and Tas∣sore, were fettered prisoners, and daily wrought, and taught vs how to order and plant our fields. Whome now (for want of victuall) we set at libertie, but so wel were they vsed, that they little desired it; and to express their loues, for 16 daies continuance, the Countrie brought vs (when least) 100 a daie of squirrils, Turkies, Deare, and other wild beastes; but this want of corne occasioned the end of all our workes, it being worke sufficient to provide victuall. 60 or 80 with Ensigne Laxon were sent downe the river to liue vpon oysters, & 20 with leiftenant Percie to trie for fishing at point∣comfort, but in 6 weekes, they would not agree once to cast out their net. M r West with as many went vp to the falles, but nothing could bee found but a fewe berries and acornes; of that in the store every one had their equall proportion. Till this present (by the ha∣zard and endeavour of some 30 or 40) this whole nū∣ber The pains of 40 fed 150. had ever been fed. Wee had more Sturgeon their could be devoured by dogge and man; of which the in dustrious, by drying and pownding, mingled with ca∣viare, sorrel, and other wholsome hearbs, would make bread and good meate; others would gather as much Tockwough roots in a day, as would make them bread a weeke, so that of those wilde fruites, fish and berries, these lived very well, (in regard of such a diet) but such was the most strange condition of some 150, that had they not beene forced nolens volens perforce to ga∣ther and prepare their victuall they would all haue star ved, and haue eaten one another: of those wild fruites the Salvages often brought vs: and for that the Presi∣dent would not fulfill the vnreasonable desire of those distracted lubberly gluttons, to sell, not only our ket∣tles, howes, tooles, and Iron, nay swords, peeces, & the very ordenance, and houses, might they haue prevai∣led but to haue beene but idle, for those salvage fruits they would haue imparted all to the Salvages, especi∣ally for one basket of corne they heard of, to bee at Powhatans, 50 myles from our fort, though he bought neere halfe of it to satisfie their humours, yet to haue had the other halfe, they would haue sold their soules, Their desire to destroy them∣selues. (though not sufficient to haue kept them a weeke) thousands were their exclamations, suggestions, and devises, to force him to those base inventions, to haue made it an occasion to abandon the Countrie. Want perforce constrained him to indure their exclaiming follies till he found out the author, one Dyer, a most craftie knaue, and his ancient maligner, whom he wor¦thely punished, and with the rest he argued the case in this manner. Fellow souldiers, I did little thinke any so false to The Presidents speech to the drones. report, or so many so simple to be perswaded, that I ei∣ther intēd to starue you, or that Powhatan (at this pre∣sent) hath corne for himselfe, much lesse for you; or that I would not haue it, if I knewe where it were to be had. Neither did I thinke any so malitious as nowe I see a great many, yet it shall not so much passionate me, but I will doe my best for my worst maligner. But dreame no longer of this vaine hope from Powhatan, nor that I wil longer forbeare to force you from your Idlenesse, and punish you if you raile, you cannotdeny but that by the hazard of my life, many a time I haue saued yours, when, might your owne wils haue pre∣vailed, you would haue starued, and will doe still whe∣ther I will or no. But I protest by that God that made me, since necessitie hath not power to force you to¦gather for your selus those fruits the earth doth yeeld, you shall not only gather for your selues, but for those that are sicke: as yet I never had more from the store then the worst of you; and all my English extraordi∣narie provision that I haue, you shall see mee devide among the sick. And this Salvage trash, you so scorn∣fully repine at, being put in your mouthes your sto∣macks can digest it, and therefore I will take a course you shall provide it. The sicke shal not starue, but e∣qually share of all our labours, and every one that ga∣thereth not every day as much as I doe, the next daie shall be set beyond the river, and for ever bee banished from the fort, and liue there or starue. This order many murmured, was very cruell, but it caused the most part so well bestir themselues, that 200 men (except they were drowned) there died not past 7 or 8. As for Captaine Win, and M r Ley, they di∣ed But 7 of 200 di¦ed in 9 months ere this want happened, and the rest died not for want of such as preserued the rest. many were billitted among the Salvages, whereby we knewe all their pas∣sages, fieldes, and habitations, howe to gather and vse their fruits, as well as themselues. So well those poore Salvages vsed vs, (that were thus Billited) as divers of the souldiers ran away, to The Salvages returne our su∣gitiues. search Kemps our old prisoner. Glad was this Salvage to haue such an occasion to testifie his loue for insteed of entertaining them, & such things as they had stolne with all the great offers and promises they made thē; to revenge their iniuries vpon Captaine Smith, First he made himselfe sport, in shewing his countrymen (by them) how he was vsed; feeding them with this law who would not worke must not eat, till they were neere starved, continuallie threatning to beate them to death, neither could they get from him, til perforce he brought them to our Captaine, that so we conten∣ted him, and punished them: as manie others that in∣tended also to haue followed them, were rather con∣tented to labour at home, then adventure to liue Idle among the Salvages, (of whom there was more hope to make better christians and good subiects, then the one halfe of those that counterfeited thēselues both.) For so afeard were all those kings and the better sorte of their people, to displease vs, that some of the baser sort that we haue extreamelie hurt and punished for their villanies, would hire vs, we should not tell it to their kings or countrymen, who would also repunish them, and yet returne them to Iames Towne to con∣tent the President, by that testimonie of their loues. M r Sicklemore well returned from chawonock, but Search so them sent by Sir Wal∣ter Rawley. found little hope and lesse certainetie of them were left by Sir Walter Rawley. So that Nathaniell Powell & Anas Todkill, were also, by the Quiyoughquohanocks, conducted to the Mangoages to search thē there. But nothing could we learne but they were all dead, this honest, proper, good promis-keeping king, of all the rest did ever best affect vs, & though to his false Gods he was yet very zealous, yet he would confesse, our God as much exceeded his, as our guns did his bowe and arrowes, often sending our President manie pre∣sents to praie to his God for raine, or his corne would perish, for his Gods were angrie all this time. to re∣claime the Dutchmen, and one Bentley an other fugi∣tiue, we imploied one Williā Volda (a Switzer by birth) with pardons and promises to regaine them. Litle we then suspected this double villanie, of anie villanie, who plainlie taught vs, in the most trust was the grea¦test treason. For this wicked hypocrit, by the seeming hate he bore to the lewd condition of his cursed coū∣trimē, The Dutchmens proiects. having this opportunitie by his imploiment to regaine them, conveighed them everie thing they de∣sired to effect their proiect to destroie the colonie. With much devotion they expected the Spanyard, to whom they intended to haue done good service. But to begin with the first oportunitie, they seeing necessi∣tie thus inforced vs to disperse our selues; importuned Powhatan to lend them but his forces, and they would not onlie destroie our hogs, fire our towne, and be∣traie our Pinnas; but bring to his service and subiecti∣on the most part of our companies. With this plot they had acquainted manie discontents and manie were agreed to their divelish practise. But on Thomas Douese & Thomas Mallard, whose christian harts much relenting at such an vnchristian act, voluntarily revea∣led it to Captaine Smith: who did his best it might be concealed, perswading Douese and Malard to proceed in the confederacie: onlie to bring the irreclamable Dutch men, and inconstant Salvages in such a maner amongst his ambuscadoes, as he had prepared, as not manie of them shoulde ever haue returned from out our penisula. But this brute cōming to the ears of the impatient multitude, they so importuned the Presi∣dent to cut of those Dutchmen, as amongst manie that offered to cut their throates before the face of Powhatan. M r Wiffin and Iefra Abot were sent to stab or shoot them; but these Dutch men made such excu∣ses Two gentlemen sent to kill them. accusing Volday whom they supposed had revealed their proiect, as Abbot would not, yet Wiffin would, perceiving it but deceipt. The king vnderstanding of this their imploiment, sent presentlie his messengers to Captaine Smith to signifie it was not his fault to de¦taine them, nor hinder his men from executing his command, nor did he nor would he maintaine them, or anie to occasion his displeasure. But ere this busi∣nes was brought to a point, God having seene our mi¦sery sufficient, sent in Captaine Argall to fish for Stur∣gion with a ship well furnished with wine and bisket, which though it was not sent vs, such were our occa∣sions we tooke it at a price, but left him sufficient to returne for England, still dissembling Valdo his villany, but certainlie hee had not escaped had the President continued. By this you may see, for all those crosses, treache∣ries, and dissentions, howe he wrastled and overcame Note these in∣conveniences. (without bloud shed) all that hapned. Also what good was done, how few died, what food the country natu∣rally affordeth, what small cause there is men shoulde starue, or be murdered by the Salvages, that haue dis∣cretion to manage this courage and industry. The 2. first years though by his advētures he had oft brought the Salvages to a tractable trade, yet you see how the envious authority ever crossed him, and frustrated his best endeavours. Yet this wrought in him that experi∣ence and estimation among the Salvages, as other∣waies it had bin impossible he had ever effected that he did, though the many miserable yet generous and worthy adventures, he had long, & oft indured as wel in some parts of Africa, and America, as in the most partes of Europe and Asia by land or sea had taught him much, yet in this case he was againe to learne his Lecture by experience. Which with thus much a doe having obtained, it was his ill chance to end, when hee had but onlie learned how to begin. And though hee left these vnknowne difficulties, (made easie and fami∣liar) to his vnlawfull successors, whoe onlie by living in Iames Towne, presumed to know more then al the world could direct them though they had all his soul∣diers with their triple power, and twise triple better meanes, by what they haue done in his absence, the world doth see: and what they would haue done in his presence, had he not prevented their indiscretions: it doth iustlie approue what cause he had to send them for England. but they haue made it more plaine since their returne, having his absolute authoritie freely in their power, with all the advantages, and opportunity that his labours had effected. As I am sorry their acti∣ons haue made it so manifest, so I am vnwilling to say what reason doth compell me, to make apparant the truth, least I should seeme partial, reasonlesse, or mali∣tious. CHAP. 12. The Arivall of the third supply. T O redresse those iarres & ill pro∣ceedings, The alteration of the governe∣ment. the Councell in Eng∣land altered the governement & devolved the authoritie to the Lord De-la-ware. Who for his deputie, sent S r Thomas Gales, & S r George Somers, with 9 ships & 500 persons. they set saile from England in May 1609 a smal catch perished at sea in a Herycano. The Admi∣rall, with 150 men, with the two knights, & their new commission, their bils of loading with al manner of di∣rections, and the most part of their provision arived not. With the other 7 (as Captaines) arived Ratliffe, The losse of Vir¦ginia. whose right name was Sickelmore, Martin, and Archer. Who as they had been troublesome at sea, beganne a∣gaine to marre all ashore. For though, as is said, they vere formerly deposed & sent for England: yet now returning againe, graced by the title of Captaines of the passengers, seeing the admirall wanting, and great probabilitie of her losse: strengthned themselues with those newe companies, so railing and exclaiming a∣gainst Captaine Smith, that they mortally hated him, ere ever they see him. Who vnderstanding by his scouts, the arivall of such a fleet (little dreaming of a∣ny such supply) supposing them Spaniards, hee so de∣termined and ordered his affaires, as wee little feared their arivall, nor the successe of our incoūter, nor were the Salvages any way negligent or vnwilling, to aide and assist vs with their best power, had it so beene, wee had beene happy. For we would not haue trused them The Salvages of¦fer to fight vn∣der o r coulors. but as our foes, whereas receiving those as our coun∣triemen and friends, they did their best to murder our President, to surprise the store, the fort, and our lod∣gings, to vsurp the governement, and make vs all their servants, and slaues to our owne merit, to 1000 mis∣chiefes Mutinie. those lewd Captaines led this lewd company, wherein were many vnruly gallants packed thether by their friends to escape il destinies, and those would di∣spose and determine of the governement, sometimes one, the next day another, to day the old commission, to morrow the new, the next day by neither. In fine, they would rule all or ruine all; yet in charitie we must endure them thus to destroy vs, or by correcting their follies, haue brought the worlds censure vpon vs to haue beene guiltie of their bloods. Happy had we bin had they never arrived; and we for ever abandoned, & (as we were) left to our fortunes, for on earth was ne∣ver more confusion, or miserie, then their factions oc¦casioned. The President seeing the desire those braues had to The planting Nansamund. rule, seeing how his authoritie was so vnexpectedly changed, would willingly haue left all and haue retur∣ned for England, but seeing there was smal hope this newe commission would ariue, longer hee would not suffer those factious spirits to proceed. It would bee too tedious, too strange, and almost incredible, should I particularly relate the infinite dangers, plots, & prac∣tises, hee daily escaped amongst this factious crue, the chiefe whereof he quickly laid by the heeles, til his lea sure better served to doe them iustice; & to take away al occasions of further mischiefe, M r Persie had his re∣quest granted to returne for England, & M r West with 120 went to plant at the falles. Martin with neare as A plantation of the falles. many to Nansamund, with their due proportions, of all provisions, according to their numbers. Now the Presidents yeare being neere expired, he made Martin President, who knowing his own insuf∣ficiencie, and the companies scorne, and conceit of his vnworthinesse, within 3 houres resigned it againe to Captaine Smith, and at Nansamund thus proceeded. The people being contributers vsed him kindly: yet The breach of peace with the Salvages. such was his iealous feare, and cowardize, in the midst of his mirth, hee did surprize this poore naked king, with his monuments, houses, and the Ile he inhabited; and there fortified himselfe, but so apparantly distrac∣ted with fear, as imboldned the Salvages to assalt him, kill his men, redeeme their king, gather and carrie a∣way more then 1000 bushels of corne, hee not once daring to intercept them. But sent to the President thē the Falles for 30 good shotte, which from Iames towne immediatly were sent him, but hee so well im∣ploid them, as they did iust nothing, but returned, com¦plaining of his childishnesse, that with them fled from his company, and so left them to their fortunes. M r West hauing seated his men at the Falles, pre∣sently returned to revisit Iames Towne, the President met him by the way as he followed him to the falles: where he found this company so inconsiderately sea∣ted, in a place not only subiect to the rivers invndatiō, but round invironed with many intollerable inconve∣niences. For remedy whereof, he sent presently to Pow¦hatan, to sell him the place called Powhatan, promising Powhatan sold for copper. to defend him against the Monacans, and these should be his conditions (with his people) to resigne him the fort and houses and all that countrie for a proportion of copper: that all stealing offenders should bee sent him, there to receiue their punishment: that every house as a custome should pay him a bushell of corne for an inch square of copper, and a proportion of Po∣cones as a yearely tribute to King Iames, for their pro∣tection as a dutie: what else they could spare to barter at their best discreation. But both this excellent place and those good con∣ditions did those furies refuse, contemning both him, Mutinies. his kind care and authoritie. the worst they could to shew their spite, they did. I doe more then wonder to thinke how only with 5 men, he either durst, or would adventure as he did, (knowing how greedy they were 5 suppresse 120 of his blood) to land amongst them and commit to im¦prisonment the greatest spirits amongst them, till by their multitudes being 120. they forced him to retire, yet in that retreate hee surprised one of the boates, wherewith hee returned to their shippe, wherein was their provisions, which also hee tooke. And well it chaunced hee found the marriners so tractable and constant, or there had beene small possibility he had ever escaped. Notwithstāding there were ma∣ny of the best, I meane of the most worthy in Iudge∣ment, reason or experience, that from their first lan∣ding hearing the generall good report of his old soul∣diers, and seeing with their eies his actions so wel ma∣naged with discretion, as Captaine Wood, Captaine Web, Captaine Mone, Captaine Phitz-Iames, M r Par∣tridge, M r White, M r Powell and divers others. When they perceived the malice and condition of Ratliffe, Martin, and Archer, left their factions; and ever rested his faithfull friends: But the worst was, the poore Sal∣vages that dailie brought in their contribution to the President, that disorderlie cōpany so tormented those poore naked soules, by stealing their corne, robbing The breach of peace with the Salvages at the Falles. their gardens, beating them, breaking their houses, & keeping some prisoners; that they dailie complained to Captaine Smith he had brought thē for protectors worse enimies then the Monocans themselues; which though till then, (for his loue) they had indured: they desired pardon, if hereafter they defended themselues, since he would not correct them, as they had long ex∣pected he would: so much they importuned him to punish their misdemeanores, as they offered (if hee would conduct them) to fight for him against them. But having spent 9. daies in seeking to reclaime them, shewing them how much they did abuse themselues, with their great guilded hopes, of seas, mines, commo¦dities, or victories they so madly conceived. Then (see¦ing nothing would prevaile with them) he set saile for Iames Towne: now no sooner was the ship vnder saile but the Salvages assaulted those 120 in their fort, fin∣ding An assault by the Salvages some stragling abroad in the woods they slew manie, and so affrighted the rest, as their prisoners es∣caped, & they scarse retired, with the swords & cloaks of these they had slaine. But ere we had sailed a league our shippe grounding, gaue vs once more libertie to summon them to a parlie. Where we found them all so stranglie amazed with this poore simple assault, as they submitted themselues vpon anie tearmes to the Presidents mercie. Who presentlie put by the heeles 6 or 7 of the chiefe offenders, the rest he seated gallāt∣lie at Powhatan, in their Salvage fort they built and pre tilie fortified with poles and barkes of trees sufficient to haue defended them from all their Salvages in Vir∣ginia, drie houses for lodgings 300 acres of grounde readie to plant, and no place so strong, so pleasant and The planting of Nonsuch. delightful in Virginia, for which we called it nonsuch. the Salvages also he presentlie appeased; redelivering to every one their former losses. Thus al were friends, New peace cō∣cluded. new officers appointed to command, and the Presi∣dent againe readie to depart. But at that Instant arri∣ved M r West, whose good nature with the perswasi∣ons and compassion of those mutinous prisoners was so much abused, that to regaine their old hopes new turboiles arose. For the rest being possessed of al their victuall munition and everie thing, they grow to that height in their former factions, as there the President left them to their fortunes, they returning againe to the open aire at west fort, abandoning Nonsuch, and he to Iames Towne with his best expedition, but this hapned him in that Iournie. Sleeping in his boat, (for the ship was returned 2 C Smith blowne vp with powder. daies before,) accidentallie, one fired his powder bag, which tore his flesh from his bodie and thighes, 9. or 10. inches square in a most pittifull manner; but to quench the tormenting fire, frying him in his cloaths he leaped over bord into the deepe river, where ere they could recover him he was neere drownd. In this estat, without either Chirurgiō, or chirurgery he was to go neare 100. miles. Ariving at Iames Towne cau∣sing all things to bee prepared for peace or warres to obtain provisiō, whilest those things were providing, Martin, Ratliffe, and Archer, being to haue their trials their guiltie cōsciences fearing a iust reward for their deserts, seeing the President vnable to stand, & neare bereft of his senses by reason of his torment, they had plotted to haue murdered him in his bed. But his hart did faile him that should haue given fire to that mer∣cilesse A bloody intens pistol. So, not finding that course to be the best they ioined togither to vsurp the government, there∣by to escape their punishment, and excuse themselues by accusing him. The President, had notice of their proiects: the which to withstand, though his old soul∣diers importuned him but permit thē to take of their heads that would resist his commaund, yet he would The governe∣ment vsurped. nor permit them, But sent for the masters of the ships and tooke order with them for his returne for Eng∣land. Seeing there was neither chirurgion, nor chirur∣gery in the fort to cure his hurt, and the ships to de∣part the next daie, his commission to be suppressed he knew not why, himselfe and souldiers to be rewarded he knew not how, and a new commission graunted they knew not to whom, the which so disabled that au¦thority he had, as made them presume so oft to those mutinies and factions as they did. Besides so grievous were his wounds, & so cruell his torment, few expe∣cted he could liue, nor was hee able to follow his busi∣nesse to regaine what they had lost, suppresse those fa∣ctions and range the countries for provision as he in∣tended, and well he knew in those affaires his owne a∣ctions and presence was as requisit as his experience, and directions, which now could not be, he went pre∣sently abord, resolving there to appoint them gover∣nours, and to take order for the mutiners and their confederates. Who seeing him gone, perswaded M c Persie (to stay) and be their President, and within lesse then an howre was this mutation begun and conclu∣ded. For when the company vnderstood Smith would leaue them. & see the rest in Armes called Presidents and councellors, divers began to fawne on those new commanders, that now bent all their wits to get him resigne them his commission, who after many salt and bitter repulses, that their confusion should not be at∣tributed to him for leaving the country without go∣vernment and authority; having taken order to bee The causes why Smith left the countrie & his Commission. free from danger of their malice; he was not vnwil∣ling they should steale it from him, but never consen∣ted to deliver it to any. But had that vnhappy blast not hapned, he would quickly haue quallified the heate of those humors and factions, had the ships but once left them and vs to our fortunes, and haue made that pro∣vision from among the Salvages, as we neither feared Spanyard, Salvage, nor famine: nor would haue left Virginia, nor our lawfull authoritie, but at as deare a price as we had bought it, and paid for it. What shall I say? but thus we lost him, that in all his proceedings, made Iustice his first guid, and experience his second; ever hating basenesse, sloth, pride, and indignitie, more then any dangers; that never allowed more for him∣selfe, then his souldiers with him; that vpon no danger would send them where he would not lead them him∣selfe; that would never see vs want what he either had, or could by any meanes get vs; that would rather want then borrow, or starue then not pay; that loved acti∣ons more then wordes, and hated falshood and cous∣nage worse then death: whose adventures were our liues, and whose losse our deathes. Leaving vs thus with 3 ships, 7 boates, commodities ready to trade, the harvest newly gathered, 10 weekes provision in the store, 490 and odde persons, 24 peeces of ordinances, 300 muskets snaphanches, and fire lockes, shot, pow∣der, and match sufficient, curats, pikes, swords, and mo∣ryons more then men: the Salvages their language & habitations wel knowne to 100 well trained and ex∣pert souldiers; nets for fishing, tooles of all sortes to worke, apparell to supply our wants, 6 mares and a horse, 5 or 600 swine, as many hens and chicken; some goates, some sheep, what was brought or bread there remained, but they regarded nothing but from hand to mouth, to consume that we had, tooke care for no∣thing but to perfit some colourable cōplaints against Captaine Smith, for effecting whereof, 3 weekes lon∣ger they stayed the 6 ships til they could produce thē. that time and charge might much better haue beene spent, but it suted well with the rest of their discreati∣ons. Now all those, Smith had either whipped, punish∣ed, Their cōplaints and proofe a∣gainst him. or any way disgraced, had free power and liberty to say or sweare any thing, and from a whole armefull of their examinations this was concluded. The mutiners at the Falles, complained hee caused the Salvages assalt them, for that hee would not re∣venge their losse, they being but 120, and he 5 men and himselfe, and this they proved by the oath of one hee had oft whipped for periurie and pilfering. The dutch-men that he had appointed to bee stabd for their trea∣cheries, swore he sent to poison them with rats baine. The prudent Councel, that he would not submit him∣selfe to their stolne authoritie. Coe & Drer, that should haue murdered him, were highly preferred for swea∣ring, they heard one say, he heard Powhatan say, that he heard a man say: if the king would not send that corne he had, he should not long enioy his copper crowne, nor those robes he had sent him: yet those also swore hee might haue had corne for tooles but would not. The truth was, Smith had no such ingins as the king demanded, nor Powhatan any corne. Yet this argued he would starue them. Others complained hee would not let them rest in the fort (to starue) but forced thē to the oyster bankes, to liue or starue, as he liued him∣selfe. For though hee had of his owne private provisi∣ons sent from England, sufficient; yet hee gaue it all a∣way to the weake and sicke, causing the most vnto∣ward (by doing as he did) to gather their food from the vnknowne parts of the rivers & woods, that they lived (though hardly) that otherwaies would haue star¦ved, ere they would haue left their beds, or at most the sight of Iames Towne to haue got their own victuall. Some propheticall spirit calculated hee had the Salva∣ges in such subiection, hee would haue made himselfe a king, by marrying Pocahontas, Powhatans daughter. It Pocahontas Powhatans daughter. is true she was the very nomparell of his kingdome, & at most not past 13 or 14 yeares of age. Very oft shee came to our fort, with what shee could get for Cap∣taine Smith, that ever loved and vsed all the Countrie well, but her especially he ever much respected: & she so well requited it, that when her father intended to haue surprized him, shee by stealth in the darke night came through the wild woods and told him of it. But her marriage could no way haue intitled him by any right to the kingdome, nor was it ever suspected hee had ever such a thought, or more regarded her, or any of them, thē in honest reason, & discreation he might. If he would he might haue married her, or haue done what him listed. For there was none that could haue hindred his determination. Some that knewe not any thing to say, the Councel instructed, and advised what to sweare. So diligent they were in this businesse, that what any could remember, hee had ever done, or said in mirth, or passion, by some circumstantiall oath, it was applied to their fittest vse, yet not past8 or 9 could y much and that nothing but circumstances, which all men did knowe was most false and vntrue. Many got their passes by promising in England to say much against him. I haue ipresumed to say this much in his behalfe for that I never heard such foule slaunders, so certainely beleeued, and vrged for truthes by many a hundred, that doe still not spare to spread them, say them and sweare them, that I thinke doe scarse know him though they meet him, nor haue they ether cause or reason, but their wills, or zeale to rumor or opini∣on. For the honorable and better sort of our Virgini∣an adventurers I think they vnderstād it as I haue writ it. For instead of accusing him, I haue never heard any giue him a better report, then many of those witnes∣ses themselues that were sent only home to testifie a∣gainst him. Richard Pots, VV. P. When the ships departed C. Davis arived in a smal Pinnace with some 16 proper men more, to those The planting at point comfort. were added a company from Iames Towne vnder the command of Captaine Ratliffe to inhabit Point com∣fort. Martin and M r West hauing lost their boates, and neere halfe their men amongst the Salvages, were re∣turned to Iames Towne, for the Salvages no sooner vnderstood of Captaine Smiths losse, but they all re∣volted, and did murder & spoile all they could incoun∣ter. Now were we all constrained to liue only of that which Smith had only for his owne company, for the rest had consumed their proportions. And now haue we 20 Presidents with all their appurtenances, for M r Persie was so sicke he could not goe nor stand. But ere all was consumed, M. West and Ratliffe each with a pin∣nace, and 30 or 40 men wel appointed, sought abro to trade, how they carried the businesse I knowe not, but Ratliffe and his men were most slaine by Powhatan, Ratliffe slain by Powhatan. those that escaped returned neare starved in the Pin∣nace. And M r West finding little better successe, set saile for England. Now wee all found the want of Captaine Smith, yea his greatest maligners could then curse his losse. Now for corne, provision, and contri∣bution from the Salvages; wee had nothing but mor∣tall wounds with clubs and arrowes. As for our hogs, hens, goats, sheep, horse, or what lived, our comman∣ders and officers did daily consume them, some small proportions (sometimes) we tasted till all was devou∣red then swords, arrowes, peeces; or any thing we tra∣ded to the Salvages, whose bloody fingers were so im∣brued in our bloods, that what by their crueltie, our Governours indiscreation, and the losse of our ships; Of 500, within 6 monthes after there remained not many more then 60. most miserable and poore crea∣tures. It were to vild to say what we endured; but the occasion was only our owne, for want of providence, industrie, and governement, and not the barrennesse and defect of the countrie, as is generally supposed, for till then in 3 yeares (for the numbers were landed vs) we had never landed sufficient provision for 6 months such a glutton is the sea, and such good fellowes the marriners, wee as little tasted of those great proporti∣ons The fruits of im∣p ovidences. for their provisions, as they of our miseries, that notwithstanding ever swaid and overruled the busi∣nesse: though we did liue as is said, 3 yeares chiefly of what this good countrie naturally affordeth: yet now had we beene in Paradice it selfe (with those gover∣nours) it would not haue beene much better with vs, yet was there some amongst vs, who had they had the governement, would surely haue kept vs frō those extremities of miseries, that in 10 daies more would haue supplanted vs all by death. But God that would not it should bee vnplanted, sent Sir Thomas Gates, and Sir George Sommers, with a The arivall of S r Tho. Gates with 150. 150 men, most happily preserved by the Berondoes to preserue vs. strange it is to say how miraculously they were preserved, in a leaking ship, in those extreame stormes and tempests in such overgrowne seas 3 daies and 3 nights by bapling out water. And having givē themselus to death, how happily when least expected that worthy Captaine Sir George Somers, having line all that time cuning the ship before those sawlowing waues, discovered those broken Iles, where how plen∣tifully they lived with fish & flesh, what a paradice this is to inhabit, what industrie they vsed to build their 2 ships, how happily they did transport them to Iames Towne in Virginia, I refer you to their owne printed relations. But when those noble knights did see our miseries Iames Towne abandoned. (being strangers in the country) and could vnderstand no more of the cause but by their coniecture, of our clamors and complaints, of accusing or excusing one an other, they imbarked vs with themselues, with the best means they could, and abandoning Iames Towne set saile for England. But yet God would not so haue it, for ere wee left The arival of the Lo d La∣ware. the river; we met the Lord de-la-ware, then governour for the coūtrie, with 3 ships exceeding well furnished with al necessaries fitting, who againe returned them to the abandoned Iames Towne, the 9. of Iune, 1610. accompanied with Sir Ferdinando Wainman, and di∣vers other gentlemen of sort. Sir George Somers, and Captaine Argall he presentlie dispatcheth to require the Bermondas to furnish them with provision: Sir Thomas Gates for England to helpe forward their sup∣plies: himselfe neglected not the best was in his power for the furtherance of the busines and regaining what was lost. But evē in the beginning of his proceedings, his Lordsh had such an incounter with a scurvy sicke∣nesse, that made him vnable to weld the state of his bo¦dy, much lesse the affaires of the colonie, so that after 8. monthes sicknesse, he was forced to saue his life by his returne for England. In this time Argall not finding the Bermondas, ha∣ving 2 Ships sent to the Bermundas lost Sir George Somers at sea, fell on the coast of Sagadahock, where refreshing himselfe, found a con∣venient fishing for God. With a tast whereof hee re∣turned to Iames towne, from whence the Lord De-la-ware sent him to trade in the river of Patawomecke, where finding an English boy those people had pre∣served from the furie of Powhatan, by his acquaintāce had such good vsage of those kind Salvages, that they fraughted his ship with corne, wherewith he returned to Iames Towne, and so for England with the Lord governour, yet before his returne, the adventurers had sent S r Tho. Dale with 3 ships, men and cattell, and all The arival of S r Tho Dale. other provisions necessarie for a yeare, all which ari∣ved the 10 of May, 1611. Againe, to second him with all possible expedition there was prepared for S r Tho Gates, 6 tale ships with 300 men, and 100 kyne, with other cattel, with muni∣tion and all manner of provision could bee thought needfull, and they arived about the 1 of August next after safely at Iames towne. S r George Somers all this time was supposed lost: but thus it hapned missing the Bermondas, hee fell also as S r George So∣mers arivall at the Bermondas and dieth. did Argall with Sagadahock, where being refreshed, would not content himselfe with that repulse, but re∣turned againe in the search; and there safely arived. But overtoiling himselfe on a surfeit died. And in this Ce∣dar ship built by his owne directions, and partly with his owne hands, that had not in her any iron but only one bolt in her keele, yet well endured thus tossed to and againe in this mightie Ocean, til with his dead bo∣she arived in England at line, & at Whitchurch in Dor∣setshire, his body by his friends was honourably buri∣ed, with many volies of shot, and the rights of a soul∣dier. And vpon his Tombe was bestowed this Epi∣taph Hei mihi Virginia, quod tam cito praeterit aestas, Autumnus sequitur, saeuiet inde & hyems. At ver perpetuum nascetur, & Anglialaeta his Epitaph. Decerpit flores, Floryda terra tuos. Alas Virginia Somer so soone past Autume succeeds and stormy winters blast, Yet Englands ioyfull spring with Aprill shewres, O Floryda, shall bring thy sweetest flowers. Since there was a ship fraughted with provision, and 40 men, and another since then with the like num ber and provision to stay in the Countrie 12 months with Captaine Argall. The Lord governour himselfe doth confidently de∣termine to goe with the next, or as presently as hee may in his owne person, with sundry other knights & gentlemen, with ships & men so farre as their meanes will extend to furnish: as for all their particular acti∣ons since the returne of Captaine Smith, for that they haue beene printed from time to time, and published to the world, I cease farther to trouble you with any repetition of things so well knowne, more then are necessarie. To conclude the historie, leauing this assu∣rance to all posteritie, howe vnprosperously things may succeed, by what changes or chances soever, The action is honorable and worthie to bee approved, the defect whereof hath only beene in the managing the businesse; which I hope now experience hath taught them to amend, or those examples may make others to beware, for the land is as good as this booke doth report it. FINIS. CAptaine Smith I returne you the fruit of my la∣bours, as M r Croshaw requested me, which I be∣stowed in reading the discourses, & hearing the relations of such which haue walked, & observed the land of Virginia with you. The pains I took was great: yet did the nature of the argument, and hopes I con∣ceaued of the expedition, giue me exceeding content. I cannot finde there is any thing, but what they all af∣firme, or cannot contradict: the land is good: as there is no citties, so no sonnes of Anak: al is open for labor of a good and wise inhabitant: and my prayer shall e∣ver be, that so faire a land, may bee inhabited by those that professe and loue the Gospell. Your friend W. S.