Nevv Englands trials Declaring the successe of 26. ships employed thither within these sixe yeares: with the benefit of that countrey by sea and land: and how to build threescore sayle of good ships, to make a little navie royall. Written by Captaine Iohn Smith. Smith, John, 1580-1631. Nevv Englands trials Declaring the successe of 26. ships employed thither within these sixe yeares: with the benefit of that countrey by sea and land: and how to build threescore sayle of good ships, to make a little navie royall. Written by Captaine Iohn Smith. Smith, John, 1580-1631. NEVV ENGLANDS Trials. N Ew England is a part of Ame∣rica betwixt the degrees of 41. and 45. the very meane be∣twixt the North Pole and the Line: From 43. to 45. the coast is mountainous, rockie, barren and broken Iles that make ma∣ny good harbours. The water is deepe close to the shoare; there are many riuers and fresh springs: few Saluages, but an incredible aboundan e of fish, fowle, wilde fruites, and good timber. From 43. to 41. and halfe, an excellent mixed coast of stone, sand, and clay: much corne, many people, some Iles, many good harbours, a temperate ayre, and therein all things necessarie; for the building ships of any proportion, and good merchandize for their fraughts; within a square of twelue leagues 25. harbours I sounded, thirtie seue∣rall Lordships I sawe, and so neare as I could ima∣gine, three thousand men. I was vp one riuer for∣tie miles, crossed the mouths of many, whose heads are reported to be great Lakes; where they kill their Beuers; inhabited with many people, who trade with those of New England, and them of Cannada. The benefite of Fishing, as that famous Philosopher Master Dee reporteth in his Brittish Monarchie. He saith, that more then forty foure yeares agoe, the Herring Busses out of the Low-countries, vn∣der the King of Spaine, were fiue hundred, besides one hundred Frenchmen, and three or foure hun∣dred saile of Flemings. The coasts of Wales and Lankashire was vsed by three hundred sayle of strangers. Ireland at Baltemore fraughted yerely three hun∣dred sayle of Spaniards, where King Edward the sixt intended to haue made a strong Castell, because of the straite, to haue tribute for fishing. Blacke Rocke was yearely fished by three or foure hundred sayle of Spaniards, Portugalls, and Bis∣kiners. Mr. Gentleman and many Fisher-men and Fishmon∣gers, with whom I haue conferred, report: The Hollanders raise yearely by Herrings, Cod, and Ling, 3000000. pounds. English, and French by Salt-fish, poore Iohn, Salmons, and Pilchards, 300000. pounds. Hambrough and the Sound, for Sturgion, Lob∣sters, and Eeles, 100000. pounds. Cape Blanke, Tunny and Mullit, by the Biskin∣ners and Spaniards. 30000. pounds. But diuers other learned experienced Obseruers say, though it may seeme incredible: That the Duke of Medina receiueth yearely tri∣bute, S. of the Fishers of Tunny, Mullit, and Purgos, more then 10000. pounds. Lubeck hath seuen hundred shippes: Hambrough sixe hundred: Embden lately a fisher towne, 1400, whose customes by the profit of fishing hath made them so powerfull as they be. Holland and Zeland, not much greater then Yorke∣shire, hath thirty walled townes, 400. villages, and 20000. sayle of ships and hoyes; 3600. are fisher∣men, whereof 100. are Dogers, 700. Pinckes and Welbotes, 700. frand botes, 400. Enaces, 400. gal∣botes, Britters and Todebotes, with 1300. Busses; besides three hundred that yearely fish about Yar∣mouth, where they sell their fish for gold; and 15. yeares agoe they had more then 116000. Sea-far∣ing men. These fishing ships do take yearely 200000. Last of fish, 12. barrells to a Last; which amounteth to 3000000. pounds by the Fishermens price that 14. yeres agoe did pay for their tenths 300000. pound; which venting in Pomerland, Sprusland, Denmarke, Lesland, Russia, Suethland, Germany, Netherlands, England, or e sewhere, &c. make their returnes in a yeare about 7000000. pounds; and yet in Hol∣land they haue neither matter to build shippes, nor merchandize to set them foorth, yet they asmuch encrease as other Nations decay. But leauing th se vncertainties as they are, of this I am certaine: That the coast of England, Scotland, and Ireland, the north Sea, with Island, and the Sound, New-foundland, and Cape Blancke, doe serue all Europe, as well the land Townes as Portes, and all the Christian shipping, with these sorts of Staple fish which is transpor∣ted; from whence it is taken, many a thousand mile, viz. Herring: Salt-fish. poore Iohn. Sturgion. Mullit. Tunny. Porgos. Caviare. Buttargo. Now seeing all these sorts of fish, or the most part of them, may be had in a land more fertile, tempe∣rate, and plentifull of all necessaries for the building of ships, boates and houses; and the nourishment of man: the seasons are so proper, and the fishings so neare the habitations wee may there make, that New England hath much aduantage of the most of those parts, to serue all Europe farre cheaper then they can, who at home haue neither wood, salt, nor food, but at great rates; at Sea, nothing but what they carry in their shippes, an hundred or two hun∣dred leagues from their habitation. But New Englands fishings neare land, where is helpe of wood, water, fruites, fowles, corne, or o∣ther refreshings needefull; and the Terceras, Me∣deras, Canaries, Spaine, Portugall, Prouance, Sauoy, Si∣cilia, and ali Italy, as conuensent markets for our dry Fish, greene Fish, Sturgion, Mullit, Caviare, and Buttargo, as Norway, Swethland, Littuania, or Ger∣many, for their Herring, (which is here also in a∣boundance, for taking;) They returning but wood, pitch, tarre, soape-ashes, cordage, flaxe, waxe and such like commodities: We, wines, oyles, su∣gars, silkes, and such merchandizes as the Straites affoord, whereby our profites may equalize theirs; besides the increase of Shipping and Mariners. And for proofe hereof: With two shippes I went from the Downes, Proofe 1. 1614. the third of March, and arriued in New England, the last of A∣prill. I had but fortie fiue men and boyes, we built seuen boates, 37. did fish; my selfe with eight Bthers ranging the coast, I tooke a plot of what I could see, got acquain∣tance of the inhabitants, eleuen hundred beuer skinnes, one hundred Martins, and as many Otters: fortie thou∣sand of dry fish we sent for Spaine, with the salt-fish, treine oyle and furres, I returned for England the 18. of Iuly, and arriued safe with my company the latter end of August. Thus in sixe moneths I made my voyage, out and home, and by the labour of 45. got neare the valew of fifteene hundred pounds in those grosse com∣modities. This yeare also one went from Plimmouth, spent his victuall, and returned with nothing. The Londoners, Proofe 2. 1615. vpon this, sent foure good shippes, and because I would not vndertake it for them, hauing ingaged my selfe to them of the West, the L ndoners entertained the men that came home with me; They set sayle in Ianuary, and arriued there in March: they found fish enough vntill halfe Iune, fraughted a shippe of three hundred Tunnes; went for Spaine with drie fish, which was taken by the Turkes; one went to Virginia, to re∣lieue that Collony; and two came for Eng and, with the greene fish, treine oyle, and f rres, within sixe mo∣neths. With a labyrinth of trouble I went from Plimmouth with a shippe of two hundred Tunnes, Proofe 3. 1615. and one of fiftie; but ill weather breaking all my mastes, I was forced to returne to Plimmouth, where re-imbarking my selfe in a ship of three score tunnes, how I escaped the English , and the French, and was betrayed by foure Frenchmen of warre, I referre you to the Description of New England; but my Vice-admirall, notwithstand∣ing the latenesse of the yeare, setting forth with me in March, the Londoners in Ianuary, she arriued in May, they in March, yet came home well fraught in August, and all her men well, within fiue moneths odde dayes. The Londoners, Proofe. 4. 1616. ere I returned from France, for all their losse by the Turkes, which was valewed about foure thousand pounds, sent two more in Iuly: but such courses they tooke by the Canaries to the west Indies; it was ten months ere they arriued in New England: wa∣sting in that time, their seasons, victuall, and healths; yet there they found meanes to refresh themselues, and the one returned, neere fraught with fish and traine, within two moneths after. From Plimmouth went foure ships, Proofe 5. 1616. onely to fish and trade, some in February, some in March; one of two hundred tunnes, got thith r in a moneth, and went full fraught for Spaine, the rest returnd to Plimouth well fraught, & their men well, within 5 months odde daies. From London went two more, Proofe 6. 1616. one of 220. tunnes, got thither in sixe weekes; and within sixe weekes after, with fortie foure men and boyes, was full fraught, and returned againe into England within fiue months and a few dayes; the other went to the Canaries with dry fish, which they solde at a great rate, for royalls of eight, and (as I heard) turned Pirates. I being at Plimouth, Proofe 7. 1617 prouided with three good ships, was wind-bound three months, as was many a hundred sayle more; so that the season being past, the shippes went for New-found-land, whereby my desseigne was frustrate, which was to me and my friends, no small losse. There was foure good shippes prepared at Plimouth; Proofe 8. 1618. but by reason of their disagreement, the season so wa∣sted, as onely two went forward, the one being of two hundred tunnes, returned well fraught to Plimouth, and her men in health, within fiue moneths; the other of foure score, went for Bilbow with dry fish, and made a good returne. This yeare againe, Proofe 9. 1619. diuers shippes intending to go from Plimmouth, so disagreed, as there went but one of 200. tuns, who stayed in the Countrey about sixe weekes, with thirty eight men & boyes, had her fraght, which she sold at the first penny for 2100. pounds, besides the furres; so that euery poore Sayler, that had but a single share, had his charges and sixteene pound ten shiltings for his seuen moneths worke: but some of the company say, for sixe months in the Hercules, they receeued seuenteene pound two shillings a share. For to make triall this yeare there is gone six or seuen sayle from the west Country, Proofe 10. 1620. onely to fish, three of which are returned; and (as I am certainely informed) haue made so good a voyage, that euery Sayler for a single share had twenty pounds for his seuen moneths worke, which is more then in twenty moneths he should haue gotten, had he gone for wages any where. Now though all the former ships haue not made such good vyages as they expected, by sending opinionated vnskilfull men, that had not experienced diligence, to saue that they tooke; nor take that there was; which now patience and pra∣ct se hath brought to a reasonable kinde of perfection in d sp te of all D tractors, For this next yeare 1621. it is reported 12. or 20. saile is a pre∣paring. and Calumniations, the Coun∣trey yet hath satisfied all, the defect hath beene in their vs ng or abusing it, not in it selfe, nor me. Heere I entreate your Honourable leaues to an∣swer some obiections. Many do thinke it strange, if this be true, I haue made no more vse of it, and rest so long without employment. And I thinke it more strange they should tax me before they haue tried what I haue done, both by Sea and Land, as well in Asia, and Affrica, as Europe and America. These fourteene yeres I haue spared neither pains, nor money, according to my abilitie, in the disco∣uery of Norumbega, where with some thirty seauen men and boyes, the remainder of an hundred and fiue, against the fury of the Saluages, I began that plantation now in Virginia; which beginning (here and there) cost mee neare fiue yeares worke, and more then fiue hundred pound of my owne estate; beside all the dangers, miseries and incomberances, and losse of other imployments I endured gratìs. From which blessed Virgin, where I stayed till I left fiue hundred English, better prouided then euer I was (ere I returned) sprung the fortunate habitati∣on of Somer Iles. Burmudos. This Virgins sister (called New-England, An. 1616 at my humble suite, by our most gracious Prince Charles ) hath bene neare as chargeable to mee and my friends; from all which, although I neuer got shilling, but it cost mee a pound, yet I thinke my selfe happy to see their prosperities. If it yet trouble a multitude to proceede vppon these certainties, what thinke you I vndertooke, when nothing was knowne, but that there was a vast Land? I neuer had power and meanes to do any thing (though more hath beene spent in for∣mall delayes then would haue done the businesse) but in such a penurious and miserable maner, as if I had gone a begging to builde an Vniuersity; where, had men bin as forward to aduenture their purses, as to crop the fruites of my Labours, thou∣sands ere this, had been bettered by these designes. Thus betwixt the spurte of Desire, and the bridle of Reason, I am neare ridden to death in a ring of Despaire; the reines are in your hands, therefore I entreate you to ease mee: and those blame mee (beleeue) this little may haue taught me, not to be so forward againe at euery motion, vnlesse I inten∣ded nothing but to carry newes. For now they dare aduenture a shippe, that, when I went first, would not aduenture a groat, so they may be at home againe by Michaelmasse; but to the purpose. By this all men may perceiue the ordinary per∣formance of this voyage in fiue or sixe moneths, the plenty of fish is most certainely approoued; and it is certaine from Cannada and New England hath come neare twenty thousand Beuer skinnes, within these fiue yeares. Now, had each of those shippes transported but sixe, or three pigs, as ma∣ny goates and hens, fruits, plants and seeds as I pro∣iected▪ by this time there might haue beene victu∣all for a thousand men. But the desire of present gaine (in many) is so violent, and the indeuours of many vndertakers so negligent, euery one so regar∣ding his priuate, that it is hard to effect any pub∣lique good, and impossible to bring them into a body, rule, or order, vnlesse both Authoritie and Mony assist experiences: it is not a worke for euery one to plant a Colonie (but when a house is built, it is no hard matter to dwell in it.) This requireth all the best pars of art, iudgement, courage, hone∣stie, constancy, diligence and experience to doe but neare well: and there is a great difference be∣twixt Saying and Doing. But to conclude, the fi∣shing will go forward if you plant it or no; where∣by you may transport a colony for no great charge, that in a short time, might prouide such fraughts, to buy of vs their dwelling, as I would hope no ship could goe or come emptie from New England. The charge of this is onely salt, nettes, hookes, lines, kniues, Irish rugges, course cloth, beads, hat∣chets, glasse and such trash, onely for fishing and trade with the Saluages, besides our owne necessa∣rie prouisions, whose indeuours will quickely de∣sray all this charge; and the Saluages haue intrea∣ted me to inhabit where I will. Now all those ships haue bin fished within a square of two leagues, & not one ship of all these, would yet aduenture fur∣ther, where questionlesse 500. saile may haue their fraught, better then in Island, Newfoundland, or else∣where, and be in their markets before the other can haue their fish in their ships. Because New Eng∣lands fishing beginneth in mid-February, the other not till mid-Maie, the progression heereof tends much to the aduancement of Virginia, and the Bur∣mudas: and will be a good friend in time of need to the Inhabitants in New-found-land. The returnes made by the Westerne shippes are commonly divided into 3. parts; one for the ow∣ners of the shippe, another for the maister and his company, the third for the victulers; which course being still permitted, will be no hinderance to the plantation, goe there neuer so many, but a meanes of transporting that yearely for little or nothing, which otherwise will cost many a hundred of pounds. If a Ship can gaine, twenty, thirty, fifty in the hundred, nay neare three hundred for 100. in seuen moneths, as you see they haue doone, spending twice so much time in going and coming as in stay∣ing there; were I there planted, seeing the varie∣tie of the fishings in their seasons, serueth the most part of the yeare; and with a little labour we might make all the salt we neede vse. I can conceiue no reason to distrust, but the doubling and trebling their gaines that are at all the former charge, and can fish but two months in a yeare: and if those do giue twenty, thirty, or forty shillings for an acre of land, or ship Carpenters, Forgers of yron &c. that buy all things at a deare rate, grow rich, when they may haue as good of all needfull necessaries for ta∣king (in my opinion) should not grow poore; and no commoditie in Europe doth more decay then wood. Maister Dee recordeth in his Brittish Monarchie, that King Edgar had a nauie of foure thousand saile, with which he yearely made his progresse about this famous Monarchy of Great Brittany, largely declaring the benefit thereof: whereupon it seems he protected to our most memorable Queene Eli∣zabeth, the erecting of a Fleete of three score saile, he called a little Nauy Royall; immitating the ad∣mired Pericles prince of Athens, that could neuer se∣cure that tormented estate, vntill he was Lord and Captaine of the Sea. At this none neede wonder, for who knowes not, her Royall Maiestie during her life, by the in∣credible aduentures of her Royall Nauy and vali∣ant Souldiers aud Sea-men; notwithstanding all treacheries at home, the protecting and defending France and Holland, and re-conquering Ireland, yet all the world, by Sea or Land, both feared, loued, and admired good Queene Elizabeth. Both to maintaine and increase that incompa∣rable honour (God be thanked) to her incompa∣rable Successour, our most Royall Lord and Soue∣raigne King Iames, &c. this great Philosopher hath left this to his Maiesty and his kingdomes conside∣rations. That if the Tenths of the Earth be proper to God, it is also due by Sea, the Kings highwayes are common to passe, but not to digge for mines or a∣nie thing, so Englands coasts are free to passe, but not to fish, but by his Maiesties prerogatiue. His Maiestie of Spaine, permits none to passe the Popes order for the East and West Indies, but by his permission, or at their perills. If all that world be so iustly theirs, it is no iniustice for England to make as much vse of her owne, as strangers doe, that pay to their owne Lords the tenth, and not to the ow∣ners of those Liberties any thing, whose subiects may neither take nor sell any in their territories; which small tribute, would maintaine his little Na∣uy Royall, and not cost his Maiesty a penny; and yet maintaine peace with all forrainers, and allow them more curtesie, then any Nation in the world affords to England. It were a shame to alledge, that Holland is more worthy to enioy our fishings as Lords thereof, be∣cause they haue more skill to handle it then we, as they can our wooll, and vndressed cloth, notwith∣standing all their wars and trouble some disorders. To get mony to build this Nauy he saith, Who would not spare the hundred penny of his Rents, and the 500. penny of his goods; each seruant that taketh 33. s. 4. d. wages, 4. pence, and euery forrainer seuen yeares of age, 4. pence yearely for 7. yeares 3▪ not any of these but yearely they will spend 3. times so much in pride, wantonnesse or some superfluity. And doe any men loue the security of their estates that are true subiects, would not of themselues be humble suters to his Maiestie, to do this of free will as a voluntary beneuolence, so it may be as honest∣ly and truly imployed as it is proiected, the poorest mechanicke in this kingdome will gaine by it. If this be too much, would the honorable Ad∣uenturers be pleased to moue his Maiestie, that but the 200. penny of Rents, and the thousandth peny of Goodes might bee thus collected, to plant New England, and but the tenth fish there taken, leauing strangers as they are. You might build ships of a∣ny burden and numbers you please, fiue times cheaper then you can doe heere, and haue good marchandize for their fraught in this vnknowne Land, to the aduauncement of Gods glorie, his Church and Gospel, and the strengthening and re∣liefe of a great part of Christendome, without hurt to any: o the terror of Pirates, the amazement of enemies, the assistance of friends, the securing merchants, and so much increase of Nauigation, to make Englands Trade and Shipping, as much as any Nation in the world, besides a hundred other benefits, to the generall good of all true subiects, and would cause thousands yet snborne, blesse the time, and all them that first put it in practise. Now, lest it should be obscured, as it hath bene, to private ends; or so weakely vndertaken, by our ouer-weening incredulitie, that strangers may pos∣sesse it, whilst we contend for New Englands goods, but not Englands good. I present this vnto your Lordship, and to all the Lords in England, hoping (by your honorable good liking and approbation,) to moue all the worthy Companies of this noble City, and all the cities and Countries in the whole Land to consider of it, since I can find them wood, and halfe victuall with the aforesaide aduantages, with what facility they may build and maintaine this little Nauy Royall, both with honour, profite and content, and inhabit as good a countrey as any in the world, within that parallell, which with my life, and what I haue, I will indeuour to effect, if God please, and you permit. As for them whom pride or couetousnes lulleth asleepe in a Cradle of slouthfull carelesnesse; would they but consider, how all the great Monarchies of the Earth haue bene brought to confusion: or but remember the late lamentable experience of Con∣stantinople; and how many Cities, Townes, and Provinces, in the faire rich kingdomes of Hungaria, Transilvania, and Wallachi; and how many thou∣sands of Princes, Earles, Barons, Knights, and Merchants, haue in one day, lost goods, liues, and honours: or solde for slaues, like beasts in a market place; their wiues, children & seruants slain, or wan∣dering they knew not whither: dying, or liuing in all extreamities of extreame miseries and calami∣ties. Surely, they would not onely doe this, but giue all they haue, to enioy peace and libertie at home; or but adventure their persons abroade, to prevent the conclusions of a conquering foe, who commonly assaulteth, and best prevaileth, where he findeth wealth and plenty (most armed) with igno∣rance and securitie. Much more I could say, but lest I should be too tedious to your more serious affaires, I humbly craue your honorable and favorable constructions and pardons, if any thing be amisse. If any desire to bee further satisfied, they may reade my Description of Virginia, and New England, and peruse them with their seuerall Mappes; what defect you finde in them, they shall finde supplied in mee, or in my Authors, that thus freely haue throwne my selfe, with my Mite into the Treasury of my Countries good, not doubting but God will shirre vp some noble spirits, to consider and exa∣mine it worthy Collumbus could giue the Spaniards any such certainties for his dessigne, when Queene Isabell of Spayne set him forth with fifteene saile: And though I can promise no mines of golde, yet the warrelike Hollanders let vs immitate, but not hate, whose wealth and strength are good testimo∣nies of their treasure gotten by fishing. Therefore (honourable and worthy Countrymen) let not the meannesse of the word Fish distaste you, for it will afford as good golde as the mines of Guiana, or Tu∣batu, with lesse hazard and charge, and more cer∣taintie and facilitie: and so I humbly rest. FINIS.