


AN EXPOSITION vpon the sixt Chapter of the Prophesie of HOSEA.



HOSEA. 6. VER. 1.

1. Come let vs returne to the Lord: for hee hath spoyled, and he will heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and he will binde vs vp.

THe Lord our God,Exod. 34.6. Ier. 31.20. as he is gracious and mercifull, flow to anger, and aboundant in goodnesse and truth, and therefore not easily drawne to punish, and to take vengeance vpon hard hearted and impenitent sinners: So, when hee punisheth, and afflicteth any man or woman, as a most gracious God and louing Father, he aimes at their good, and seekes the saluation of their soules; that being tamed, and truely humbled for their sinnes, they might turne vnto him by true and vnfained repentance, that so he might haue mercy vpon them, in pardoning their sinnes, and sauing their soules: And as this is manifest in the whole booke of God; so it is very apparent
 out of this place: when as the Lord had threatned the people of the Iewes with present destruction, by and by he beginnes to exhort them to true repentance, shewing this to be the onely way, both to auoid the anger of God, and to saue their owne soules.
This 6. Chapter contains two generall and principall parts.Parts of the Chapter. In the first is set downe, the godly practises of true repentance, and the fruits thereof, in the person of the beleeuing Iewes, from the first verse to the end of the third; the which we must carefully imbrace and follow. In the second is set down, the counterfeit repentance of Hypocrites, from the fourth verse to the end of the Chapter, which was neither sound nor sincere, nor yet durable and lasting; whereof wee must take heed, and labour to auoyde all hypocrisie in the seruice of God, who, as hee is a spirite; so he loues truth in the inward affections, And will bee serued in spirit and truth.
Psal. 51.6.The three first verses, containe a most holy and christian perswasion of the beleeuing Iewes,Text diuided. to turne vnto the Lord from all their sinnes, especially from that vile and horrible sinne of Idolatry. And in the same we are to consider three things.
 First, the motion and godly perswasion which the children of God make one to another; Come let vs returne, etc.
 Secondly, the reasons and arguments which they vse to enforce their godly exhortation to perswade each other to turne vnto the Lord; and they bee two especially: The first, drawn from the iustice of God in these two words; Hee hath spoyled, hee hath wounded. The other, drawne from the mercy of God in these words; Hee will heale vs, hee will bind vs vp. And because this argument taken from the mercy of God, is a reason of all reasons, and such an argument as Paul
 makes choyse of aboue all others, saying; I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that yee giue vp your bodies,Rom. 12.5. etc. As if he should say; If the manifold mercies of God, both for soule and body; if the bloudshed of Iesus Christ will not moue a man to turne vnto God, he is in a wofull case. I say, because this argument is of speciall force to moue hard-hearted sinners to turne vnto God. The people of God in this place vrge it further, and amplifie this argument by two other circumstances. First, The shortnes of the time, After two dayes hee will reuiue vs, and the third day hee will rayse vs vp, If wee draw neere vnto him by true and vnfained repentance. The other circumstance is taken from the greatnesse of Gods mercy, Hee will reuiue vs, Hee will rayse vs vp: answerable to the two former words: He hath spoyled vs, he hath wounded vs: So here the mercy of God exceedes his iustice: for it is not sayde, that hee had kilde vs, or cast vs away, but onely spoyled vs, and wounded vs with a blow, or stripe, or twaine: But his mercy is aboue all his workes: for though he had vtterly killed vs, yet he will reuiue vs; Nay, hee will rayse vs vp, though wee had layne not foure dayes, but foure hundred dayes in the graue of sinne; yet his mercifull right hand can and will rayse vs vp againe.
The third speciall thing in these verses, is the fruits  of repentance, and of true conuersion: If we doe truly repent, and draw neere vnto God by Conuersion: The first fruit of our Repentance is this; That as wee draw neere vnto God by true and vnfained Repentance; so he will draw neere vnto vs, and Wee shall liue in his sight; that is, in his fauour, and in the light of his countenance: Nay, wee that are truely conuerted, shall liue and behaue our selues as euer in Gods presence, and before his blessed face.

The second fruit of our true Conuersion and sincere Repentance is,Ioh. 17.3. That wee shall haue knowledge. The Lord will in mercy poure into our hearts, the true sauing knowledge of himselfe, euen the knowledge of the whole Trinity, Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost: Nay, wee shall not onely haue this heauenly knowledge poured into our hearts by the Spirite of Iesus Christ; but as a man in a dropsie, the more hee drinkes, the more he thirsts, and desires drinke: so Wee shall indeuour our selues to know the Lord: That is, wee shall hunger and thirst after this heauenly knowledge, as the food of our soules, and neuer to be glutted with it, but labour to abound more and more in it.
The third fruit of our Conuersion, is in the third verse; That as wee doe by true and vnfained repentance draw neare vnto our God: So will he be most ready to helpe and to comfort vs. The Lords comming foorth, is prepared as the morning: True it is, that the sense and feeling of Gods mercy, is oftentimes extinguished in the hearts of his children, as the comfortable light and beames of the Sunne vnder a thicke cloud, or when it is gone vnder the earth: So, as oftentimes wee thinke that God forgets vs, and hides himselfe from vs: But his comming to helpe vs is Prepared, and therefore most certaine: and he shall come as the Morning, most comfortably vnto vs. Euen as the bright beames and cleare countenance and face of the Sunne, after a windy, tempestuous, stormy, and boysterous night, is very comfortable: So the bright beames of Gods mercies, breaking foorth, and shining vpon our hearts after a darke and cloudy night of affliction, it is most comfortable to glad and reioyce the distressed Soule of a poore sinner.
Nay, in the second similitude hee shewes, that the
 comming of the Lord, shall bee not onely ioyfull and very comfortable, but most effectuall to a wounded Soule that lyes languishing vnder the heate of Gods wrath; that as helpe long looked for, and in time of greatest danger, is of al other most welcome: so, when the Lord shall come with helpe and deliuerance, after great danger, and long expected, this is most set by, and most esteemed: And therefore the Prophet sayeth; The Lord will come as the raine, euen as the latter raine vnto the earth. Now, as moderate raine is welcome at all times, so especially in the heate of summer, after a great and a long drought, when the earth is scorched with the heate of the Sunne, and begins to capper and gape for want of moisture: so then a gracious raine, a sweet shower is most welcome; then it doth most good, not onely to cherish the thirstie and scorched earth, but also to ripen the fruites of the field, and to bring them to perfection: Euen so, when a poore Soule doth pant and breath vnder the burthen of his sinnes, and is scorched with the burning heate of affliction: then if the Lord in mercie send a gracious storme and comfortable raine into our thirsty soules, and send a heauenly shower of his blessed mercy; Nay, if he distill but one little droppe of his mercy in the burning heate of affliction, this is most welcome, this is most comfortable to asswage, and to comfort the heate of a sinner, scorched and tormented for feare of the burning anger and wrath of God against sinne.


Thus much briefly for the vnfoulding of the words, and the meaning of them in generall.

IN the former Chapter, the Lord told them,Coher: that hee would bring great and grieuous Iudgements vpon
 them, vntill such time as they would turne and seeke him, confessing their sinnes and amending their euill liues: And in the last verse of the former Chapter, the Lord saith, In their afflictions they will seeke me diligently. Shewing that there is nothing better to turne the pride of mans heart, then afflictions: So Manasses a wicked Idolatrous King,2. Cro. 33.12 yet in his afflictions hee sought the Lord, and prayed vnto the Lord his God, whom he dishonored before.Psal. 1 19. Lam. 3 27. Luk. 9.23. And Dauid confesseth, that it was very good for him that he was afflicted, for before he was carelesse of the seruice of God. Yea, the Prophet Ieremy saith, that a man can neuer begin too soone to suffer the crosse: It is good that a man beare the yoake of afflictions from his youth. And our Sauiour himselfe saith, That we must take vp the crosse dayly; and in very deed nothing is better for young or old, man or woman, then affliction: if God sanctifie the same vnto vs, and giue vs the true vse of them, they will make a man search his heart, and call his former life to accompt, they will humble vs, and make vs see our weaknesse, they will compell vs to run to God by most earnest and harty prayer, to deny our selues, to put our whole trust, confidence, and affiance in the mercy of God in Iesus Christ. Now the Lord had no sooner spoke the word, that in their afflictions they would seek him, but heere we see it is effected, Come (say they,) let vs returne vnto the Lord, etc.
Afflictio^s are of excellent vse to turne vs to God.So that the first point of Doctrine we obserue from the text, is this, That afflictions are of excellent vse to turne vs to God; the Church of God in generall, and the seruants of God in particular, when they cannot profitably vse prosperity, and beare themselues thankefully in the dayes of peace, doe learne in aduersity to turne vnto God, and are therby brought home againe; and this comes to passe not by meanes of the
 crosse, for in it selfe it is a curse, but in that the Lord doth sanctifie the same vnto his, it comes to passe that the state of affliction is a safer estate,Iudg. 14.14. Rom 5.3. 2 Cor. 4.13. Heb. 12.11. then the estate of prosperity. It is true, that as the Philistims could not vnderstand Sampsons riddle, how sweete came out of sower, and meat out of the eater, so cannot worldlings vndersta^d, that tribulatio^ bringeth out patience, and that our light and momentany afflictions cause vnto vs a far more excellent and eternall waight of glory. But the Children of God, they find it true by experience, that albeit no visitation bee sweete for the present, yet afterwards it brings the quiet fruit of righteousnesse vnto them who are thereby exercised,Esay 26.16. Psal. 107. Luke. 15.18. and that there is more solide ioy in suffering rebuke with Christ, then in all the pleasures of sinne which are but for a season.Gen. 21.16. This the Prophet setteth downe in the song of the faithfull, Lord in trouble haue they visited thee, they powred out a prayer when thy chastising was vpon them: yea, the people of God the Israelits in the time of their afflictions were humbled and sought the Lord,Ionas 1.5. Lam. 3.27. Psal. 119.71, Io. 15.2. who in time of prosperity forgat him, and the mighty workes that he had done for them, They wandred in the desart and found no Citty to dwell in; Then they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, and he deliuered them out of their distresse. The Prodigall sonne neuer intended to returne home againe to his Father, vntill a famine had met with him, and he was pinched with want, then he resolued with himselfe, to acknowledge his fault, and to entreat for pardon. Hagar was proud in the house of Abraham and despised her Mistresse, but in the wildernesse humbled by want. Ionas sleepeth in the ship, but in the belly of the Whale watcheth and prayeth. It is good therefore (saith Ieremy) for a man to beare the yoake in his youth, and Dauid acknowledgeth it was good for him that he was afflicted, yea our Sauiour saith, Euery branch that beares fruit, my heauenly father purgeth it, that
 it may bring forth more fruit. All these testimonies and examples of the seruants of God, as euident and direct consents of the Scripture, do teach vs that afflictions are of speciall and singular vse to turne vs to God.Amos 3.6. And this comes to passe, by reason they are the workes of Gods hand, there is no euill in the Citty which the Lord hath not done. He hath his Quiuer full of arrowes to strike vs, and to punish vs, the Sword, Famine, Plague, Pestilence, yea, he hath all Creatures at a beck, and at a cal, to humble the rebellious hart of man, and to this end we may pray to the Lord, that so he do still remember the promise made to the Sonnes of Dauid, I will visite them with rods if they sinne against mee,2. Sa. 7.14.15 but my mercy will I neuer take from them; that rather then that wee should bee frozen in the dreggs of our owne naturall corruptions, and spend our daies in a carelesse security without the feare of his holy name, that God would chang our estates, and awaken vs with the touch of his owne hand, purge vs with fier, and chasten vs with his rods.
 First, seing that chastisements and afflictions are of such excellent vse to turne vs to God, and that the Lord doth vse the same to bring vs home to himselfe; heere wee may clearely behold the mighty power of God, that can by so many waies and meanes turne the hearts of men, humble them, and bring them home vnto himselfe: Indeed the preaching of the word is the ordinary meanes whereby God doth breake in sunder the stony heart of man;Esay 5.4. Iob 33.16. Rom. 11.13. but when that will not serue, but that his patience and long suffering is abused, and his word contemned, the Lord hath sundry iudgments in store, which being sent from God, are powerfull to turne our hearts, and to make a way for Repentance. Oh the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisedome and knowledge of God! how vnsearchable are his iudgements, and his wayes past finding out. Let vs then here
 acknowledge the greatnesse both of the mercy and power of God, in working out the saluation of mankind so wonderfully, and that by so many meanes, bringing light out of darkenesse, and good out of euill.
Seeing that afflictions are of such excellent vse to  turne vs to God when the Lord doth sanctifie the same to that end vnto vs: Here we see the cause why the godly runne not into all euill, as the Horse rusheth into the battell; euen as the children of this world do into the same excesse of ryot. Surely, the reason is not because there is ought in them by Nature more then in other men: No, no, wee were all warmed in vncleane bloud, and the best wee haue drawne from our mothers breasts, hath beene rebellion: but God calleth them backe by his hand, his afflictions are remembrances vnto them, and his corrections are their instructions; and the Lord thus exercising his Children in the Schoole of afflictions, doth thereby breake in them the power of sinne, let out (as it were) the superfluous humour of pride and selfe-loue, which are ready to corrupt euen our best actions: So that, albeit afflictions bee grieuous and bitter, yet they are not vnprofitable to those whom God hath chosen to better graces. The mercies of God indeed ought to leade vs to repentance, and the more aboundantly the Lord doth bestow his mercies vpon vs, the more should bee our obedience: But alas, it fareth otherwise with vs, for his blessings and benefites are vnto vs many times occasions of euill, insomuch as wee turne the grace of GOD into wantonnesse: And therefore farre better were it for many, in respect of the good of their soules, that they had alwayes beene held in the bedde of affliction,
 then enioying health, peace, prosperitie, strength of body, etc. they should abuse the same to the great dishonour of God, and the ruine of their owne soules.
 Seeing that afflictions, when the Lord doth lay the same vpon vs, to this end, to better vs in obedience, are so auaileable, that they worke a reformation in the whole man: We are hereby put in mind of our duety, how wee ought to behaue our selues vnder the hand of God, that if the Lord hath humbled vs by long and tedious sicknesse, by losse of goods, children, friends, etc. or by any other meanes whatsoeuer, that then we trie and examine our hearts, what reformation these things haue wrought in vs, whether they haue made vs to call our owne wayes to account, and straightly to examine our owne hearts, what euill thoughts, corrupt words, or sinfull action hath passed from vs, that hath thus made the Lord to strike and to punish vs, and when wee haue taken, as it were, a Catalogue of all our sinnes (if it were possible:) then let vs try our sorrow, whether wee be truely humbled for them,Lam. 3.39. or no? This duty is vrged by Ieremie. Wherefore is the liuing man sorrowfull? Man suffereth for his sins: Let vs search and trie our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. For surely, this is the marke that God doth ayme at, not by affliction to destroy vs, or to confound vs for euer; but to make vs to call our owne hearts to account, to see our sinnes, and to bring vs home to himselfe.
 And last of all, wee are taught here, not to measure the fauour and loue of God towards our selues or others,Eccle. 9.2. eyther by prosperity or aduersity: for, as Salomon sayth; All things come alike to all, and the same condition is to the iust and to the wicked. And as the Apostle sayth;Rom. 14.17. The Kingdom of God standeth not in meat
 and drinke, etc. So that if wee desire some euidences of Gods fauour and loue towards vs, we must not seeke for it in our outward peace and tranquility of body and mind heere, or in continuall aduersity, both which are common to the iust and vniust, to the good and bad: onely try them by the effects of affliction: for in the godly they bring forth the quiet fruit of repentance, whereas they make the wicked but the more obdurate and hardned in their sinnes: the godly in their sufferings communicate with the Crosse of Christ,Psal. 126.6. whereas the wicked in their sufferings communicate with the curse of sinners; and take this for a rule that neuer fayleth, That the Crosse (if care bee had to profite thereby) neuer departeth, but it leaueth a blessing behind.
Come let vs returne, Here we may see, what is the counsell that they giue one to another in affliction, namely, to make speed to turne vnto God, whose wrath and heauy displeasure they had prouoked against them by their sinnes, and whose iudgements were already gone out against them: they were assured, that there was no other way or meanes to pacifie the wrath of God,Luk. 13.5. but onely to breake off their sinnes by repentance: and therefore they call one vnto another, Come let vs turne, etc.
Here wee are taught this lesson for our instruction, euen from the example of these beleeuing Iewes,What counsell it is that wee must giue to others in aduersity. stirring vp one another in the time of affliction, to return againe vnto God by repentance, from whom they had departed by their sins: What is the counsell that wee must giue one to another in affliction; namely, to exhort men to turne vnto God, to confesse their sinnes, to bee grieued for them,Dan. 4.24. and to beg the pardon of them. This is the counsell that Daniel gaue to Nabuchadnezar; namely, to breake off his sinnes by
 repentance: Wherefore, O King, let my counsell bee acceptable vnto thee, and breake off thy sinnes by righteousnesse: and thine iniquities by mercy towards the poore, etc. Again, the Prophet Ieremy obserues the same:Lam. 3.39. Wherefore is the liuing man sorrowfull? Man suffereth for his sinne; Oh let vs search and try our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. And surely, this is the best counsell that any Christian man or woman can giue to another in affliction, namely, to breake off their sinnes by vnfained repentance, and turning vnto the Lord: This is the right way to stoppe the breach of Gods wrath, and to call in his iudgements. Many men haue sought other meanes and wayes to preuent the Lords iudgements; but (alas) as the cause of all iudgements are our sins; Our sinnes turne many good things from vs, And a fruitfull land maketh hee barren for the wickednes of them that dwell therein: So vnlesse they be taken away by true and vnfained repentance, wee doe but weary our selues in vaine: for we must first remoue the cause of Gods iudgements, our sinnes; else the hand of God cannot bee remoued. Wee see in a lacke, so long as the weight hangs vpon the corde, it moues the wheeles; but take off the lead, and it will cease. Our sinnes bee as a mighty Milstone, to plucke downe Gods fearefull iudgements vpon vs: now remoue our sinnes, then Gods anger shall cease: but let vs know, till wee cease from sinning,Leuit. ^6. Hos. 4.1.2. the Lord cannot cease from smiting: Nay, if wee walke stubbornely against him, and will not turne, hee will euen whet his sword, and neuer cease smiting, till he make an end of vs. Yea, the Prophets, and holy men of God, in such times when we lye open to Gods wrath, haue called vs to repentance, stirred vs vp to prayer, moued vs to humiliation, and acknowledgement of our sinnes, which haue deserued such chasticements. What is the reason that
 the Lord sends such barrennesse vpon the earth, vnseasonable weather, immoderate raine: surely, our sinnes, our ignorance, contempt of the Word, our abuse of the Sacraments; yea, our abuse of plenty in drunkennesse, whoredome, swearing, etc. Now, whats the way to haue plenty and aboundance? how may wee remoue the anger of God, and his iudgements, eyther already vpon, or else eminent ouer our heads? Surely, remoue the cause of Gods iudgements; namely, sinne; else the hand of God cannot bee remoued. And therefore let vs all practise this counsell, and wisely consider what the Lord hath against vs, and wherefore hee is angry with vs; that so wee may bee reconciled vnto him, and brought into his fauour againe.
This Doctrine, may serue to condemne that preposterous course that many men doe take eyther for themselues, when they lye vnder the Crosse, or with others. For themselues, If the hand of God lye vpon them with long and tedious sicknesse; how many are there that leaue the Lord, and resort to Witches and Wizards, that looke againe more to the meanes, then they doe to the Lord, without whose blessing they can doe vs no good: So in time of Famine, Pestilence, Warre, and the like; how many are the windings and turnings in the heart of man, to preuent the iudgements of God? they will leaue no attempt vnattempted for their deliuerance: But to trie their owne hearts, to find out their sinnes, which are so many rebellious Ionasses in the shippe of their own soules, that haue moued the Lord to send those stormes of afflictions; Oh, this they neuer thinke vpon. And as they themselues fayle in the maine point of all, that is, to try their owne hearts, to looke into their wayes, and to turne vnto the Lord by vnfained sorow: So
 deale they with others: for what is the counsell else they giue vnto others in time of sicknesse, but this; Be of good cheare, Eate warme meats, Vse good physicke, etc. Oh! this is not the counsell we should giue; but to say with the godly heere; Come, returne to the Lord; Repent of thy sinnes, beg the pardon of them at Gods hands: This is the counsell wee must giue to the afflicted, and not to seeke helpe from men, before wee haue sought forgiuenesse of sinnes of God.
Come let vs returne vnto the Lord. Heere we may see the fruit of true conuersion, they seeke not euery man his owne good, but the good of their brethren, and therefore vse godly motions and christian perswasio^s one to another, to returne vnto God.
 From whose godly practise and religious example, wee gather a further poynt of Doctrine,It is the duty of euery christian to labor to draw others to god. that it is not inough for a man to goe to heauen himselfe; but it is the duty of euery Christian to labour to draw others with them, as these holy Seruants of God say heere, Come let vs returne, these bee their godly perswasions one to another, they labour to goe hand in hand in their repentance, and as we say to men and women, Come will yee goe to the Market, fayre, etc. So in Religion we must call one vpon another, to draw men to God: and as one wicked man seeketh to make another like himselfe; so hee that is truely conuerted, will not rest in that inward comfort of his owne conuersion, but will labour by all meanes to conuert others vnto GOD, and labour to make them partakers of the same comfort which they themselues haue receiued from God. This thing is very apparant in the conuersion of the godly; when Andrew was brought to Christ, hee found his brother Simon,Io. 1.41.43.45. and said vnto him; We haue found that Messias that is Christ. So when Christ called
 Phillip and said vnto him, Follow me:Io. 4 28. Phillip found Nathaniel and sayd vnto him, Wee haue found him of whom Moses did write in the Law and in the Prophets; Iesus the sonne of Ioseph that was of Nazareth. The like appeares in the woman of Samaria, when Christ had reueiled himselfe vnto her, and offered her to drinke of the water of life, after which she should neuer thirst agane, shee ran into the Citty and said, Come see a man which hath told mee all things that euer I did, is not hee that Christ? being moued her selfe, she labours to moue others. And this doth the Prophet Dauid promise vnto the Lord, that if hee would restore him once more vnto the ioy of his saluation, that then he would become a Preacher,Ps. 51.12.13. Ps. 66.16. Ps. 116. Gal. 3, 2. Cor. 1.4. Esay 38.19. Luk. 22.23. and Proclaimer of the same mercy vnto others. And surely this is a speciall fruit of faith and true repentance, to labour by all meanes possible, to conuay grace vnto others, and to shew them what God hath done for our soules, and to draw out the blessings which God hath bestowed vpon our selues, to the good and benefit of others. The Prophet Dauid doth labour herein: Come (sayth he) and I will shew you what God hath done for my soule: And the Elect are called vessels of mercy, because they being themselues filled with the mercies of God, should draw out the same as good liquor, for the vse and comfort of others. Saint Paul sayth, God had mercy on him, that he might shew mercy vnto others. The child of God is not like vnto Nabol, All for himselfe: but he is taught of God, to loue his brother. And thus wee see how wee ought to behaue our selues, in respect of Gods gifts: we must not hide them in the ground, or in a napkin; but wee must imploy the same to the good of others.
This may serue to reproue that common conceite  in mens minds, that so long as they doe well themselues, they need not care how other^ doe, whether
 they sinke or swimme, whether they goe forward, or backeward, grow vpward, or downeward, to God, or the Diuell: but it is impossible for any Christian man or woman, who hath truely tasted of the worke of grace in his owne heart, but hee must communicate the same to the good of others. Indeed, most men little regarde this, they cannot be perswaded that they bee bound to saue the soules of their brethren, and therefore they say, euery man for himselfe, and God for vs all: but the truth is, that when euery man seeks himselfe, the Deuill gets all. To saue soules, to draw men to Christ: Oh, wee thinke this is the Ministers duety, it belongs to him alone, it belongs not to vs. True it is, that it belongs especiall to the Minister to labour to saue mens soules; and therefore they are especially bound to labour by continuall teaching and preaching of the word of God; as also by their godlie life, to draw men to God, to exhort them, to call vpon them to turne vnto the Lord: and if they bee negligent and carelesse, the flocke of Christ must needs go to ruine: yet many there are that feed themselues to the full, but regard not to feed the flocke, ouer which the holy Ghost hath made them Ouerseers. These are they that liue of the Altar, but care not to minister at the Altar: They will bee sure to reape carnall things, but they haue no conscience to sow spirituall things. The Apostle could say, I seeke not yours, but you. But these men, if they would speake the truth, might say, Wee seeke not you,1. Cor. 9.16. but yours. Paul cryes out: Woe vnto mee if I preach not the Gospell. Oh! woe, and ten thousand woes vnto thee that art a carelesse sheepheard; who, though thou hast taken vpon thee the Cure and Charge of Soules, yet by thy carelesnesse in thy place and calling, and by thy euill example, art a stumbling blocke vnto others, that wilt not turne to
 God thy selfe, nor helpe them forward that would.
Well, as it is the duty of the Minister; especially, in publike: so it is the duety of euery Christian man in priuate, to bring others to God. Art thou an husband, thou hast the charge of the soule of thy wife: art thou a father, thou shalt answere for the soule of thy child: art thou a master, well, looke to draw thy seruants vnto God. The charge of soules is committed to you. Our Sauiour Christ sayth to his Father;Heb. 2.13. Behold Father, heere am I, and the children which thou hast giuen mee, Oh, what a comfort is it to a christian soule, to a godly man, or a christian woman, when they can say, O Lord, heere am I, and heere bee my wife, my children, and my seruants, which thou hast giuen me. You are carefull to prouide for your wiues, meate, drinke, and apparrell; and for your children, lands, and liuings; and haue you not care of their poore soules, but let them perish for want of instruction?
But such is the negligence and grieuous carelesnes of Masters and Parents in this miserable and cursed age of the world, that it were better to bee some mens sheepe then their sonnes, and their horses then their seruants; for no man is so carelesse, but hee will pittie his horse, and looke to his sheepe: but as for their sonnes or seruants, they may sinke or swimme, they care not for them: Well, thy wife may perish in her sinnes, thy sonne may perish in his ignorance, and thy seruant for want of thy instruction; but the Lord will require their bloud at thy hands. Nay, wee may see in this present example, that it is not onely the duety of the Minister, and those which bee Masters and Parents, to seeke to draw those that are vnder them to God; but the same is the duety of euery Christian man and woman; it is that which belongs vnto all men, to call on others to draw them to God: Nay, if
 thou doest not labour to draw him to repentance,Leuit. 19.17. thou doest but hate him in thy heart: Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shalt rebuke him, and suffer him not to sinne. In euery commandement is two parts, Negatiue and Affirmatiue: Now, in the sixt Commandement we be forbidden to kill; and therefore euery one, not onely the Minister, as most men erroneously thinke, are bound to saue mens liues; but euery one of vs, be wee what wee may bee, are bound by this Commandement to saue the soule of our brother,Exod. 24.3. to dtaw him to God. If thou see thine enemies oxe or sheepe go astray, thou must bring him home, Oh how much more, if thou see the poor soule of thy brother, of thy wife, or of thy child, straying from God; nay, going the broad way to eternall destruction: how much more art thou bound to bring him backe againe to God: If thou see his horse lye vnder his burthen, thou art bound in conscience to helpe him vp: Had God such care ouer Oxen and Asses, and wilt thou haue no care of the Soule of thy brother?
 Oh! let vs put this duety in practise, to call one vpon another, to bring others to God: wee can call one another to the Market: Oh, let vs call one another:Esay 55.1. Oh, come, let vs goe to the Lords Market to buy the food of our soule: Labour to bring thy Family, thy Wife and Children to the house of God, to the word of God, to the food of their soules: Oh, thou shalt doe a blessed worke,Iam. 5.20. thou shalt conuert a sinner to God, saue a soule from death, and couer a multitude of sinnes. Oh, what a comfort will this bee vnto those, who haue beene carefull for the performance of this duety, that haue beene carefull to make others partakers of the same comforts they haue reaped themselues. It is a blessed thing indeed, when men
 haue endeuoured to their power to benefite others, to exhort them, to admonish them, and to comfort them, and in all things to haue sought their good. Oh, what a wonderfull consolation and comfort shall this bee vnto vs, when wee leaue this world, and goe the way of all flesh, to remember wee haue fought the good of others:Dan. 12.3. Luk. 12.43. They that turne many vnto righteousnes shall shine as the starres in the firmament. And blessed is that seruant, when his Master commeth, shall finde so doing. Wee shall then finde more comfort of heart, and ioy of conscience when wee depart this life, that wee haue beene faithfull in that little committed to our trust, and made others partakers of the same, then if we had had great abundance of earthly blessings.
Come let vs returne to the Lord. Here we see, that they  doe acknowledge that they had turned themselues from God by their sinnes, especially,A man by sinning, turns from God. by Idolatry and damnable hypocrisie: and here they labour by their godly counsell, to exhort one another to turne again vnto God by repentance. So then heere we see, what it is that turnes a man from God; surely, sinne is that which turnes and auerts a mans soule from God, according to that of the Prophet Esay:Esay 59.2. Your iniquities haue separated betweene you and your God, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you. True it is, that Idolatry is that, which principally turnes a man from God; onely, the difference it this, that Idolatry turnes a man from the whole seruice of God: but other sins, as theft, whoredome, etc. in some one commandement. The spirite of God speaking of the whole race and generation of mankind, sayth, That all are gone out of the way:Psal. 14.3. Rom. 3.10. And againe, in the Prophet Esay: All wee like sheepe are gone astray. There is no creature more apt to wander, then sheepe, and being strayed,Esay 53.6. none more vnapt to turne into the way againe:Esay. 1.3. Wee (sayth the Prophet) like sheepe
 are gone astray,Esay. 53.8. to shew our simplicity, and how vnpossible a thing it is of our selues, as of our selues to return home againe:Rom. 3.16. yea, the Prophet addes further, Wee haue turned euery one to his owne way: Yea, wee walke the pathes that our owne sinnefull affections haue chosen to our selues, and the way of truth wee haue no desire to know. And howsoeuer many can make blinde excuses for their owne euill life: surely, the beginning of all euill is this, to turne away from God. It was the case of the Prodigall Sonne, and in him of all sinners, that when hee had receyued his patrimony,Luk. 15. Hee tooke his iourney into a farre Country: farre away, and yet hee thought not himselfe farre inough from his Father: but who willed him to depart, was hee put out of his Fathers house? Surely, no; but he himselfe of his own accord would needes bee gone. Euen so, doth a sinner make a voluntary separation betwixt God and his soule. God doth neuer forsake till hee bee forsaken. Now a sinner is sayde to depart from God in two respects: First, by an opposite and far different disposition, Gods volo being mans nolo, Gods will being mans nill: by omitting that which hee should commit, and by committing that which hee should omit: As when wee see two sitting and talking together, and the one varieth from the other in opinion, we say, the one is farre from the other: and in the same respect, is a sinner said to goe farre from God. Secondly, a sinner is said to goe far from God, in regard of the greatnesse, or the multitude of his sinnes that he doth commit, which the more they are, the farther they leade a sinner: for euery sinne being a departure from God, a sinner may rightly bee said to depart lesser or farther, according to the number and quality of the sins they commit: Some, being the sinnes of infirmity, some of ignorance, some of malice, and some of presumption;
 but Hee that hath eyes like a flame of fire,Reu. 2.18. doth still behold them; and although Adam doe goe about to hide himselfe amongst the thickets of the garden, from the presence of God: yet was hee still in Gods presence, neyther could hee escape: Many thinke they cannot runne farre inough from God,Psal. 1 39. of whom the Prophet speaketh: Whither shall wee flie from Gods presence: shall wee flie into heauen? It is no part of our thought; shall wee flie into the vtmost part of the earth? the whole world is vnder Gods gouernment: shall wee take a voyage by Sea? it may bee, God will send vs farther then we are minded to flie: for little did Ionas thinke, by flying from God, that God would vexe him with all his stormes: But if wee will not venture so farre, but onely flye into the darkenesse, we must know, that with God The darkenesse and light are both alike. There is no distance of place betwixt God and a sinner: but alas, the cause of all is this, we know not the mischiefe that will follow by our departure from God: how many sighes and groanes, euen of our dearest hearts it will cost vs, ere wee can get into fauour againe. This did Dauid finde by wofull experience, that hauing left the Lord, and made a departure from his God by walking in the broad pathes of vngodlinesse,Psal. 51.1.2. Psal 6. adultery and murther; did not the Lord bring him backe againe by the weeping Crosse, that hee lay a long time wala-daying his griefe of heart, ere hee could be perswaded that God would receiue him again into fauour?Gen. 16. What found Hagar out of Abrahams house, but want and sorrow? What found the Prodigall child,Luk. 15. being departed from his father, but want and pouerty. When Cain went away from God, there was no more account made of him then of a vagabond and odious person, Behold, saith Cain to God,Gen. 4.14. thou hast cast mee out this day from the earth, and from thy face shall I bee hid, and shall bee
 a vagabond and a runnagate vpon the face of the earth, and whosoeuer findeth me, shall slay mee. This is the danger and fearefull estate of them, which committing sinne, depart from God. Oh that wee were wise, then would wee consider our latter end.Deut. 32.
Reason of the Doctrine.Now let vs see the reason of the Doctrine, that so it may worke the deeper impression in euery one of our soules. We haue heard, that sinne is a departure from God, and that a sinner hauing left the wayes of life, finds no comfort nor peace, till with the prodigal son, they return to God again. The reason is, nothing can satisfie the soule of man, but God himself: as a pottle or a gallon cannot be filled with the measure of a pinte: so are the pleasures of sinne, but as a graine of musterseed in the belly of an Elephant: The desires of the soule remaine infinite, and must haue an infinit God to satisfie them; whereas the profites and pleasures of this world haue their bounds: so that there is no other remedy for vs in this life, but to remoue our minds from the desire of these earthly things, and to transport the same vnto God, that there they may rest content, and be satisfied: for the grace of God, and the heauenly gifts of his spirit, they are the onely comforts vnto the soule, because his presence and goodnesse is most agreeable thereto, being created after the likenesse of God: as for all other things, they are but death and famishment, as stones and grauell are to the body.
Hence then, let all men learn to be warned betimes:  Thou that takest liberty to thy self to liue in sinne, Oh know that thou art now departing from God, In whose presence is the fulnesse of ioy, and at whose right hand there is pleasure for euermore. And now thou art trauelling with the Prodigall sonne into a farre Country, wandring from God to serue sinne and Sathan. Well,
 know (O man) that if thou wilt needes goe, that thou doest now runne vpon manifest hazard and danger: for, who can tell whether in this thy disordered course thou shalt come to mischiefe, or to some miserable end, or whether thou shalt haue that mercy granted thee, to call thy selfe to better remembrance. Oh, goe not then after thy concupiscence, nor follow not the inticement of thy lust; let reason and iudgement take place. Pray with the Prophet, O Lord,Psal. 17. lighten my darkenes, that I sleepe not in death. The Iewes hauing their choyce, desired rather Barrabas to be deliuered vnto them, then Christ the Sauiour of their soules. O follow not the example of so bad Marchants to make a worse choyce then they; for, if thou yeeldest thy selfe to sinne, and wandrest from God, refusing Christ Iesus, the saluation of thy owne soule, and goest a whoring after sinne and Sathan: hereby, thou shewest thy selfe farre worse then euer the Iewes were in their choyee: And albeit thou goest not from God, all on a sodaine; yet thy departure will steale vpon thee by degrees, as a man goeth far, steppe by steppe. First, there may creepe vpon thee a dislike of goodnesse of preaching, prayer, etc. Then to the loathing of it, and so by little and little to bee drawn away from godlinesse. And thou, which sometimes wast an earnest professor, shalt grow key colde in Religion. And so, for the committing of some euill, if the Deuill can but spie the casements of thy soule to bee open, thy eyes, thy eares, etc. hee will then easily wind himselfe into thy heart: if hee can but preuaile so farre with Dauid, as but to cast his eyes vpon naked Bethshaba, the battell then is halfe wonne. Thus did this wilie Serpent deale with our first Parents: First, hee presented vnto the view of Eue the forbidden fruite: Secondly, shee desired it: Thirdly, shee tasted of it:
 Fourthly, shee gaue to her husband, and he did eate. Thus the Deuill by degrees doth steale vs away from God, from one sinne to a second, from a second to a third, and from a third to a fourth, as by so many steppes, vntill at last, hee hath euen plunged vs into the gulfe of perdition. Oh that men would consider this betimes, when they commit sinne, lying, swearing, stealing, whoredome, drunkennesse, etc. By this sinne, I turne my selfe from God, I run from God, and serue the Deuill: The Lord stands on the right hand, the Deuill on the left; the Deuill he cals mee by pleasures, profites and preferments. If I listen to Sathan, I shall turne away from God, Oh, if men had this consideration in their hearts, what a bridle would it bee vnto them, to keepe them from many sinnes.
 If thou hast gone from the Lord by committing of sinne, and seest now that there can bee no peace, nor comfort vnto thy soule, but a fearefull expectation of iudgement: Follow the counsell of the Prophet Ieremie, O search, and try thy wayes, and turne vnto the Lord:Lam. 3.39. Endeuour by all meanes possible to returne to God again, from whom thou hast departed; the which thou shalt the better performe, if thou haue respect to that way, the footsteps whereof thou hast left behind thee, and which are abominable vnto the Lord, and by which thou wentest from God. Follow the aduice of the blessed Apostle, Cast off lying, and speake euery man truth vnto his neighbour.Eph. 4. He that hath stolen, let him steale no more, but rather labour, and worke with his hands, that hee may giue to him that needeth. If thou hast beene a proud man, by which sinne thou hast made a departure from God, become now humble and lowly of mind: For God resisteth the proud; but giueth grace vnto the humble. If thou hast made a departure
 from the Lord by drunkennesse, returne againe by sobriety; the vncleane to be chaste, the couetous to be charitable: yea, if wee haue made a departure from God by any sinne whatsoeuer, let vs draw neere vnto him againe by a reformed life, holy manners, and godly conuersation; that it may bee spoken of vs, as Paul speaketh of the Ephesians,Eph. 2. Yee which were a farre off, are made neere.



Come, let vs returne vnto the Lord.

These words containing in them the effectuall conuersion of a sinner to God; shew withall, wherehence it proceedeth, namely, from affliction, and from the knowledge and feeling of our owne misery. Let vs returne (say they) and therefore it is a token they knew themselues to haue gone astray, and that there was no true comfort to be found in those pathes of sinne, in which they walked: and howsoeuer before they thought well of their estate when they committed Idolatry, and made conscience of no sinne: yet, now (by the mercy of God) hauing got to the sight of their sinne, they call themselues to remembrance, they see there is no sound comfort, but onely in the fauour of God: this is the matter that they debate amongst themselues, and conclude of this, To turne againe vnto the Lord.
The Doctrine then which by the authority of the  Text is this: namely,A right vnderstanding and a true acknowledgement of our own misery, the first step to Saluation. that there ought to bee in euery one that desireth eternall life and saluation, a right vnderstanding, and a true acknowledgement of his owne wandring. And to this end, in the Word of God, the Lord there oftentimes cals vpon men to consider their wayes, to call their liues to account, that so they may attaine to the sight of their own sins.
 Know thy sinnes,Ier. 3.13. Zeph. 2.1.2: O Ierusalem: The like speech is vsed by the Prophet Zephany, Fan your selues, Oh my people. Yea, the Prophet Ieremy doth oftentimes put vs in mind of this duety,Lam. 3.40. Oh let vs search and try our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. Yea, common reason doth require the same, before a man can frame himselfe to enter into a right course, hee must throughly bee resolued and perswaded within himselfe, that he hath been mistaken in his former course of life; for, why else should this man alter his former course, if hee were not mistaken: Reason it selfe will perswade vs to this: Yea, what meaned God in those his variety of demands to our first Parent when hee had sinned; but that God laboured to bring Adam to the sight of his sinne.Gen. 3. Where art thou? Who tolde thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree? Dauid lay a long time in his sinne,2. Sam. 11. and neuer sought vnto God for mercy: but being at last awakened by the reprehension of Nathan; hee sought the Lord incontinently; yea, the Lord by the Prophet doth assigne this as a reason of all those rebellions of the people of Israel, euen ignorance of their estate; saying, The Oxe knoweth his owner, and the Asse his Masters cribbe: but Israel hath not knowne:Esay. 1.3. Luk. 15. Esay. 46.12. Psal. 16.12. my people vnderstand not. The Prodigal sonne a true patterne for all sinners; hee neuer seekes to his Father, till at last that Hee came to himselfe: which is a token that he went farre astray, and was as it were in a swound of sinne; but being a long while in a traunce, at last hee reuiued, and that his disordered life vpon his vnderstanding thereof, he reformed, calling himselfe to better remembrance, what kindnesse he had in his Fathers house, and now what misery he had brought vpon himselfe by his own wilfull disobedience. I might easily multiply examples of this kind, but these may serue, to shew that the sense and apprehensio^ of our own
 wandring from God, is the onely way and meanes to bring vs to God: And this was the happy condition of this people here, who being for a time intangled and insnared in sinne; It pleased the Lord by affliction to humble them, and to bring them to a true sight of their wandring; that now they resolue incontinently to turne vnto the Lord.
Here we see the maine cause, why there is so little  faith and true repentance in the world, why men are no more humbled for their sinnes, and doe not repent for them: poore soules, they know not that they doe euill: they eyther cannot,Lam. 3.40. or do not search themselues, they neuer call their hearts to account. Now then going on in security, seeing and fearing no danger; alas, how should they repent? how should they turne to God? for, if thou couldest see the misery of thy soule, and thy wofull estate, by reason of sinne, if thou couldest see the number and greatnesse of thy sinnes; Oh, thou wouldest euen tremble for feare: Oh, let this serue to help vs forward in this most needfull point, the right iudging of our owne estate: let vs not bee wilfully carelesse herein: Wee all haue a hope that it is well with vs. Oh let vs looke to it, that this hope of ours make vs not ashamed:Rom. 5.5. there is no hurt got by the triall of our selues, onely security is dangerous: many thousands are now in hell, that in their life time thought nothing lesse, till they came there. Oh then in the feare of God, let vs looke to it: Wee are all trauellers in one of these two wayes, and we shall most certainely arriue at one of these two places; who would not now bee glad to know in which of these two he is, that if hee bee in the euill way, he may spedily come out of it: if he be in the right way, that he may continue his race with cheerefulnesse? Well, this is the truth of this doubt, and I deliuer it vnto you


 as the truth of God, that all which are partakers of life eternall, they are the heyres of grace and saluation: this is their first steppe vnto it, the true sight and vnderstanding of their owne wandring; that they perceyue themselues that they liue that course of life, the issue whereof must needs bee eternall death; and that they now stand and wonder at their owne folly and extreame madnesse, and withall Gods infinite goodnesse and patience, and would not bee in that case againe for all the world. Well then, marke this doctrine, doe not lightly passe it ouer, but esteeme it as the blessed truth of God: that the sight of our owne wandring, is the first steppe to eternall light and saluation. Well then, let me aske thee this question, or rather demaund it of thy owne soule: Didst thou euer see thy wofull misery, the wretched estate wherin thou art by reason of sinne: what a miserable sinner thou art, out of the fauour of God; yea, indeed in the state of damnation? didst thou euer finde thy selfe to stand in need of Gods mercy, and in extreame want of Christs bloud to saue thy soule: so as thou hast euen with sighes and teares intreated for the same at Gods hand, as for life and death? If thou hast not found and felt these things in thee, in some measure, thy case then is dangerous and fearefull; thou didst neuer as yet truely repent, the mercy of God belongs not vnto thee.
 We are then to count it a singular fauour of God, when he doth open a mans eyes to see his misery, and to find himselfe like a lost sheepe, to haue gone astray: this is the beginning of all grace, and true conuersion vnto God, to finde our selues empty of grace: And therefore this should teach vs to pray vnto God, that hee would in mercy open our eyes that wee might see our sinnes, and feele our misery, and that wee may
 feele our selues to stand in extreame need of Gods mercy, and of euery droppe of Christs bloud to saue our soules: and the contrary is a fearefull plague and iudgement of God, for men to lye and snort in sinne without remorse of conscience, without the sence and feeling of sinne, or want of mercy. This Dauid, and the rest of Gods seruants knew by wofull experience, that if they had dyed without repentance, they had perished. Of all diseases, they are most dangerous that are least felt, as a Lethargie, or dead palsie, or the like: so it is a most fearefull estate for any man to lie in sinne without the feeling of it: for ^^at is a signe that the heart is hardned in sinne. A m^^ that thinks hee is well ynough, will scorne the Physitian: so those poore blind sinners, that thinke they are well ynough, and feele no want of Gods mercy, of all men they are most to bee pittied, they bee in a most dangerous estate and condition. And therefore we see, that it is a great blessing of God to be told of our sinnes, and to bee reproued for them; that so, seeing them, and the danger into which they haue plunged our poore soules, wee might seeke to God for mercy.
Come let vs returne vnto the Lord. Hitherto we haue spoken of their exhortation and godly counsell one to another. Come let vs, etc, Before we leaue the words to come to the reasons of their exhortation. There is one thing more which I may not omit, and that is the time of their repentance, when they should make this their returne vnto God, and that is presently, without any delay: for the word here vsed doth signifie a Tense or Time that is present.
From whence wee gather another point of Doctrine; namely,Men must deferre no time, but repent out of hand. that we must not stand to debate in the motions of the Spirit, but presently to proceed to execution. Indeed, in worldly businesse of good deliberation
 comes no harme; but it is a point of wisedome to deliberate before a man determine of any thing: But in spirituall matters it is dangerous; and therefore sayth the Prophet,Esay. 55.6.7. Seeke the Lord while hee may bee found, Call yee vpon him while hee is neere; let the wicked forsake his wayes, and the vnrighteous his owne imaginations, and returne vnto the Lord, and hee will haue mercy vpon vs, and to our God, for hee is very ready to forgiue.Psal. 119.60. I made haste (sayth the Prophet Dauid) and I delayed not to keepe thy commandements. And it was a thing commendable in Peter and Andrew,Mat. 4.20. Luk. 19.6. Gal. 6.10. that when Christ called them, they left their Nets straightway, and followed him (...) And when Christ called Zacheus, hee came downe hastily from the Figge-tree, and receyued Christ ioyfully. While yee haue time (sayth the Apostle) let vs doe good vnto all men,Heb. 3.7. Eccl. 5, 7. Act. 8.36. and 10.33. but specially vnto them that are of the houshold of faith. And againe, To day if yee will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts. Now, as this Christian duety is to bee obserued in the performance of any holy duety: so especially in the worke of repentance, we must neuer debate the matter with flesh and bloud; for then wee shall neuer proceed to execution: but whensoeuer God shall worke in any of vs a godly purpose to forsake our sins, of all things in the world, wee must now take heed of delayes; for such is the policy of Sathan, and such is the deceitfulnesse of our owne hearts, that they will cause vs to neglect it. And this ought so much the more to hasten our returne vnto the Lord, because many are dead and gone, which in their life time purposed to returne vnto God, and to breake off their sinnes, which were preuented by death, and neuer performed the same. Yea, although thou diddest know that thou shouldest liue long, yet oughtest thou to repent soone: for then is thy repentance most acceptable
 to God, when thou doest offer it in the prime of thy youth, and in the flower of thy age. In the sacrifices of the Lord,Deu. 15.21. Mal. 1. Pro. 1. Mat. 25.11. they were commanded to offer a Male of a yeare olde, withou spot and blemish, and they that offered the blinde and the lame, were reproued. How then should the Lord accept of thy crooked sacrifice of olde age, which is as lame and blind before God, and the Lord doth seldome accept of it? Nay, it is rather most iust with God, that at the last hee should reiect vs and our prayers, who haue before contemned him in the strength of our yeares, when that God did cry and call vnto vs. Oh what yelling and crying wil there bee at the last, Lord, Lord, open vnto vs. When that heauy Depart from mee yee cursed, I know you not, shall bee their portion. Oh that men were wise, then would they consider their latter end. Let vs looke vnto the practise of men in temporall affayres, and learne to bee wise. What makes the husbandman to breake his sleepe, to rise vp so earely, and to bee so diligent in plowing, digging, and sowing? Aske him, and hee will tell thee, the season requires it, and the time lost, cannot bee redeemed: And shall wee thinke that wee haue repentance at commaund? no, no, thou mayest seeke it at last, euen with teares,Heb. 12.17. as Esau did, and yet goe without it, if thou omittest the season and time, when God doth now offer the same vnto thee. Let this that hath bin spoken, serue for the confirmation of the euerlasting truth of this Doctrine; that men must defer no time to repent, and to turn vnto the Lord. Now let vs see some reasons that may enforce the same.
The first reason shewing the necessity of timely repentance,Reasons to shew the necessity of timely repentance. may bee taken from the great vncertainty of mans life, if hee omit the present occasion when it is offered: for God doth call home from his worke,
 some in the morning, some at noone, and some at night: For, as his Labourers enter into his Vineyard; so they goe out, that is, in such manner, and at such howres;Mat. 20.1.2.etc. some dye in the dawning of their life, passing (as it were) from one graue to another; some dye in their youth, as in the third howre; some at middle age, and some stay vntill the euening of mans yeares, that is, old age; yet more before ten, then after threescore.Luk. 12.20. Gen. 6. That rich man in the Gospell that promised vnto himselfe many yeares to come, had in a moment of time, his soule taken from him. The old world neuer thought themselues more freer, or surer from vengeance, then when they were eating and drinking,Luk. 17.27. marrying wiues, etc. But then did the iudgements of God ouertake them: The morning was fayre when Lot went out of Sodom,Gen. 19.23. and yet, before night lay Sodom in ashes. Herod was well when he beganne his Oration to the people; but by and by after,Act. 12.23. 1. Thes. 5.3. the Angell of the Lord stroke him, that hee was eaten vp of worms, and so gaue vp the Ghost. What then is our life, and how vaine and false is our hope of long life? Shall any say with Agag, Surely, the bitternesse of death is past,1. Sam. 15.32 because wee dye not so soone as others; when wee heare a solemne knell, we say, some body is departed: and why should we not thinke, that the feet of them who carryed out that body, is at the dore to carry vs out also?Act. 5.9. so that, if wee deferre our repentance but one day, yea, but one houre, we haue no warrant to assure vs that wee can repent the next, but that the Lord may preuent vs by death, and so we perish.
Secondly, if wee slip the oportunity of well doing, when God doth offer the same vnto vs, we shall bee more vnapt and vnfit afterwards; whilest the waxe is plyable, it is the fittest time to set on the seale, whereas
 if it coole againe, it will then hardly receiue any impression: Euen so, if our hearts euer beginne to soften and to yeeld, if wee now resist the spirit of God, and the worke of grace, we shall hardly haue the like oportunity againe, as at the first. And therefore that which Salomon exhorteth in the case of vowes, is to bee practised of all holy purposes and good desires.Eccl. 5.3. Wee must not deferre, nor bee flacke to performe them. And this hath beene carefully practised of the godly;Psal. 119.60. Dauid sayth of himselfe, I haue considered my wayes, and turned my feet into thy testimonies: I made has^^,Luk. 19.6. Act. 8.36. and prolonged not the time to keep thy commandements. Dauid doth not take any dayes with God, like a bad debter day after day, and keepe none of them; but whatsoeuer good duty hee had purposed in his heart, he would presently performe the same. Zacheus came downe hastely, and receyued Christ ioyfully. The Eunuch being instructed in the sauing knowledge of his saluation, by the preaching of Philip; so soone as euer he name where water was, hee would be baptized, land receiue the Seale of grace: and as this care is to bee had of euery Christian in the performance of all holy duties, so especially, in the worke of repentance; because the longer a man doth put off his repentance, the harder will it bee for him to performe the same at last.Ier. 13.23. Can the Blacke-More change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? Then may they do good, that haue beene accustomed to doe euill. The Prophet doth account it as a thing almost impossible, for a man that hath a long time continued in sinne, to leaue the same, and to become a good man at the last. Oh when sinne growes vp with a man, it will grow at the last to bee so inward with him, as his dearest friend, and being so long acquainted together, and bred in the bone, they will handly part, or out of the flesh. Oh that men would consider this, that the
 custome of sinne causeth a hardning in sinne: for so sayth the Apostle;Rom. 2.5. Thou, after thine hardnesse, and heart that cannot repent, heapest vnto thy selfe, wrath against the day of wrath; And that custome will adde to nature, and turne sinne vnto nature, that a man can bee no more without it, then his naturall food. This is the danger that those are in, that defer their repentance, the harder is their recouery at the last.
 Thirdly, and lastly, all our seruice whatsoeuer, is onely due vnto the Lord, our selues, our soules, and bodies, and all that wee haue, the Lord doth iustly challenge vnto himselfe: Wee are deliuered out of the hands of our enemies, that wee might serue God In righteousnesse and holinesse all the dayes of our life.Luke. 1.57. 1. Cor. 6.20. And againe, the Apostle sayth, Yee are bought with a price, therefore glorifie God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are God. So that God must haue all, we may not take so much as one houre, no, not so much as a minute of an houre, to bestow the same vpon the world, the flesh,Tit. 2.11.12. or the Deuill. Excellent is that place to Titus, The grace of God that bringeth saluation vnto all men, hath appeared, and teacheth vs that wee should deny vngodlinesse and would by lusts, and that wee should liue soberly and righteously, and godly in this present world. The meaning is, that the doctrine of saluation is preached vnto all, not to embolden men in sinne, but to vrge them to lay aside all prophanesse, and to renounce their owne lusts, and to haue their fruit in holinesse, as they hope to haue the end euerlasting life. And to these may be added that of the Apostle Peter,1. Pet. 1.17. Passe the time of your dwelling here in feare, knowing that we were redeemed, not with corruptible things, etc. And therefore, in all these respects; you see, wee must immediately, without any further delay, apply our hearts to wisdome, to seeke those things which doe concerne the glory of God
 onely, and to take no more care for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. So that nothing is to bee preferred before the Lord, but the Lord before all things: so that our repentance is not to bee deferred any time; but the works thereof are to be done out of hand, that so God may haue his due and right, in being serued, and obeyed before all things, as hee ought to be.
The vse of this Doctrine serueth to reproue those  that are negligent in the performance of this duety, who haue had many good purposes in their hearts; but for want of timely prosecuting of them, alas, they haue proued but as the morning cloud,Hos. 6.4. quickly dispersed. I haue knowne many, that while they haue beene vnder the Ministery of the Word, haue beene touched with sorrow for their sinnes, their consciences being conuinced, and for the time present they haue purposed to forsake them.Act. 26.28. So that as Agrippa sayde to Paul, Thou hast almost perswaded me to be a Christian: So, they haue almost beene perswaded to a better course: but alas, how sodainely it hath been forgotten, it may appeare by their falling into the same sinne againe; for, so soone as they haue beene out of the Church, they remember it no more, but returne to their former courses; As the dogge to the vomite.2. Pet. 2.22. Others againe, when the hand of God hath been vpon them by sicknesse, losse of goods, etc. and when their consciences haue beene (as it were) vpon the Racke, they haue then made vowes vnto God, and promised reformation of life, that they will neuer doe as they haue done, but that they would become new men, and walke more carefully and conscionably then euer they did before: but as soone as euer the Lord hath remoued the rod, and set them at liberty, they neuer remember it more. And herein they deale with the Lord, as the people of Israel did, who,Psal. 78.33. when God
 brought any iudgement or calamity vpon them, then presently they returned, and sought God earely; but when the iudgement of God was remoued, they started aside like a broken bow. Then the swearer maketh, great protestation to leaue his swearing, the drunkard his drunkennesse, the whoremaster his whoredome, etc. But if the Lord restore them to their health againe, they fall a fresh to their sinnes againe, which they made shew to haue forsaken. Oh then, let vs not deferre the time of our repentance, but so soone as euer we heare our sinnes reproued, and the iudgements of God threatned against them, that our consciences are conuinced: Oh let vs then with speed addresse our selues to performe it. If we should heare of a man, that hauing committed treason against his Prince, and for the same should die, vnlesse he would seeke to pacifie his wrath, and to stay the execution against himselfe, that would deferre it from time to time, and make light account of it; would not all men condemne him, and say, hee were worthy to die? Well, this is the folly, or rather extreame madnes of many a poore soule, who, though they know how to asswage the anger of God that is kindled against them for their sinnes; yet deferre the same, and put it off from time to time. And herein the Deuill deales with men like a racking Vsurer, who is wont to giue day after day of payment vnto a man, vntill at last hee winde his inheritance into his hand: Euen so doth the Deuill deale with sinners, hee doth harden them on still from day to day in their sinnes, vntill at the last hee hath gotten them into his owne inheritance, and made them partakers of eternall darkenesse with himselfe for euer. Oh, let vs not then giue place to the Deuill, and strangle our good motions by prophanesse; but let vs immediately prosecute them,
 that they may worke the good effect of grace in vs.
Here we are taught, that if we haue hitherto fayled  in the performance of this Christian duety of repentance, that we deferre the same now no longer, but while it is called to day, to spend the time of our being here in the practise of it; and indeed the end of all our endeauours while we liue should bee this,Luke. 13.5. to gette a roome in the Kingdome of God, which wee can neuer haue without repentance, and he which omitteth the present occasion when it is offered, can neuer repent. This made our Sauiour to weepe for Ierusalem,Luk. 19.42. and say; Oh if thou haddest knowne at the least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace! And againe, Shee knew not the time of her Visitation. Now then if thy conscience tell thee, that thou hast not yet repented, and that thou art not yet a liuely member of Iesus Christ; Oh delay no longer, no, not one minute of an houre, but with all speed repent, and turn vnto God, and bring forth the fruits worthy amendment of life, that thou mayest haue comfort when the houre of death,Gen. 22.3. or the day of iudgement shall be. And as Abraham rose vp earely in the morning to sacrifice his dearest sonne, which made much for the commendations of Abraham, that hee went about the commandement of the Lord so cheerefully: so doe thou likewise; it is not thy sonne that thou art to sacrifice, but thy sinne, which otherwise will cut the throat of thy soule. Oh rise vp earely with Abraham, deferre no time; this shall bee the best sacrifice that euer we offered vp vnto God. Now all of vs doe confesse, that sinne is to be left, and that God is to bee serued of vs, but wee cannot accord of the time when to beginne this worthy worke. I remember the report of the Prophet against the people that neglected the reedifying of the Temple,Hag. 1.2.
 This people (sayth he) say, that the time is not yet come, that the Lords house should bee builded. So many thinke it is not yet time for them to looke to heauenward: Youth must haue a Spirit, and the pleasures of the flesh must first he tasted; We must first goe take our leaue of our friends, and then we will follow Christ. We may safely aduenture our young yeares, and when we are old,Reu. 2.24. and going out of the world, then we will retire our selues; let God beare with vs a little, and yet a little, and in time wee will repent: This is indeed the very Deepenesse of Sathan. But the time is present that we must lay hold on, to turn to the Lord. Did euer any whom we read of in the Scripture, feeling the piercing power of Gods spirit, smiting vpon their hearts, indent with the Lord, and say so, that God would bee pleased to let them continue in their sinne a moneth or two, or a yeare, that then they would leaue their sinne, and serue the Lord in new obedience? No, no, I neuer read of any that did thus couenant with the Lord, but presently as God did smite them, so they were humbled, and were conuerted; they deferred not the time, but imbraced the truth from God without delay. Oh lay this to heart, and the Lord giue you a right vnderstanding in al things, that this day, wherein I now speake vnto you, may be the day of your Conuersion vnto the Lord, and for the which hereafter you may reioyce for euermore. It was too late for the foolish Virgins to knocke, and to cry,Mat. 25. Luk. 16. Lord, Lord, open vnto vs, when the gate was shut against them, the gate of repentance, and the gate of mercy: And it was too late for the Glutton to cry for one droppe of water to coole his flaming tongue, which in his life time refused to giue one dramme of comfort to poore Lazarus. Oh, remember your selues betimes, blesse the name of God that you haue not
 been preuented with death in the time of your ignorance and blindnesse, as many haue been before you; It is the greatest mercy that men can enioy, that the sunne of death hath not yet set vpon them, but that they may yet repent, Oh seeke the Lord while hee may be found, and call vpon him while hee is neere; while yee haue light walke in the light, least darkenesse come vpon you: make no couenant with your sinnes, but vtterly renounce them for euer. And albeit they say to thee, as the Deuils sayd to Christ, Why doest thou torment vs before the time? Yet hearken not vnto them, for the time is already come, if not past already: for indeed, we should haue repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, if we had done as we ought to haue done: but seeing we haue spent so much time in the seruice of sinne, and of Sathan, how carefull should we bee now to redeeme the time, and to defetre no day nor houre longer? but while the word is sounding in our eares, let vs be conuerted vnto the Lord, that wee may liue in his sight.
But notwithstanding all this that hath been sayd, it is strange to see, how men imbolden themselues in their sinnes, vnder this pretence, that God is mercifull, and that therefore they may repent as their leysure; because God is a God of mercy, he will forgiue vs whensoeuer we shall repent, and turne to him. It is true indeed, that God is a God of mercy, and his mercies are ouer all his works:Psal 145. And therefore if men would make a right vse thereof, the mercy of God should lead them to repentance; for so sayth the Apostle,Rom. 2.4. Gal. 5.22. Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnesse and patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the bountifulnesse of God should lead thee to repentance? but as he is mercifull, so is he iust, and the longer that God in mercy expecteth thy amendment, so much the more
 grieuously will he punish thee,E^od. 20. Psal. 18.26. Pro. ^.34. and 28. if thou neglect it: look in the second commandement, how the Lord doth there threaten To visite the iniquities of the Fathers vpon their children vnto the third and fourth generation of such as hate him; Yea, the Lord threatneth obstinate sinners, that hee will not regard them when they seeke vnto him; Then shall they call vpon mee, but I will not answere, they shall seeke mee earely, but they shall not find me, because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the feare of the Lord. So that wee see that all hope is taken away from presumptuous sinners, that God should euer receiue them into fauour at last; seeing that the Lord there threatneth, that he will then be so far from pittying them, as that hee will euen laugh at their destruction. Oh, happy then is he that sinneth least, next he, that returneth vnto God soonest; but most wofull is the estate of him,Heb. 10.26. Heb. 12.17. that with Ieroboam hath sold himselfe to worke wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, that hath quenched the good motions of the spirit, that hath denyed the power of saluation, they haue despised the spirit of grace: Alas, alas, though at the last, such a one should seeke the blessing with teares, they can find no place to repentance: Oh, what a fearefull and lamentable estate is this for a man to bee thus left vnto himselfe, giuen vp to Sathan, and to be forsaken of God for euer! From this estate, the Lord for his mercy sake keepe vs. But notwithstanding all this, will some say, That the theefe vpon the Crosse, at the last gaspe was receyued to mercy, who had spent all the course of his life in sinne; why then may not I likewise hope for the same mercy in the end? But alas, one Swallow makes not a summer, and of one example, where a precept is wanting, nothing is concluded. The Lord in mercy hath left one extraordinary example of his mercy, that men at the last gaspe, might
 not altogether despayre, and but one, that no man might presume. Now, would not all men condemne him of meere foolishnesse, that would goe about to spurre his Asse till hee speake, because Balams Asse spake? It is farre greater madnesse in any man to harten himselfe in his sinne by one mans example. Were it not a safe course to follow the example of Dauid, Peter, Paul, Zacheus, Cornelius, etc. who, so soone as God did touch their hearts with a sight of their sins, presently returned vnto the Lord by repentance; then that wee should presume by the example of one, and so misse of saluation, as many thousands haue done before vs. Wherefore, to conclude this point, let no conceit in the world, nor perswasion whatsoeuer, hinder vs from a present conuersion vnto God, but out of hand, while it is called To day, let vs turne vnto him.


Thus much for the Exhortation. The Reasons follow.

For hee hath spoyled, and hee will heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and hee will bind vs vp.

WE haue heard already the godly perswasion of the beleeuing Iewes one to another,Reasons to inforce the former exhortation. to turn to the Lord, from whom they had departed by their sins. Now followes the reasons of their exhortation; and they are twofold; The first, is drawn from the iustice of God, in these words, He hath spoyled vs, hee hath wounded vs. q. d. We haue beene plagued and smitten: Well it is the Lord that hath layd these heauy iudgements vpon vs, it is the correcting hand of God that hath brought these grieuous afflictions vpon vs; therfore let vs now Returne vnto him. The second, is drawn
 from the mercy of God in these words: Hee will heale vs, hee will binde vs vp, q. d. Though the Lord hath smitten vs, yet hee will helpe vs, and heale vs, if we will seeke to him for succour. And surely, these two reasons ought to be of force to moue euery one of vs to turne vnto God: if his iudgements cannot compel vs; yet his louing mercies ought to draw vs, and allure vs to turne vnto him.
 Whereas the people of God in this place, do not onely perswade one another, simply to Returne vnto God,Mans nature so corrupt, that it stands in need of many reasons to perswade to holy duties. but vse reason vpon reason to induce and to perswade them thereunto: Hence wee may obserue the frowatdnesse and the vntowardnesse, and great backwardnesse that is in all men by natuae, to perform any holy duty: That wee thus stand in need of so many arguments, and so many reasons to perswadr vs thereunto. In the whole Scriptures it is the vsuall manner of the Prophets and Apostles, and holy men of God, when they exhort to any vertue, or dehort from any vice; to adde sundry reasons, that by the force thereof, they might draw men to obedience. This is practised of the Prophet Dauid, when hee perswaded his sonne Salomon to haue a care to learne, and practise the will of God:1. Chro. 28.8. And thou Salomon my sonne, know thou the God of thy Fathers, and serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind: (And hee addes reasons to perswade him thereunto;) For the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vnderstandeth all the imaginations of thoughts; if thou seeke him, hee will bee found of thee, but if thou forsake him, hee will cast thee off for euer. Again, when Moses doth exhort the people of Israel to obserue and to keepe the commandements of the Lord, how many forcible arguments and reasons doth hee alledge to moue the people, and to perswade them thereunto, some taken from the mercies of God: If thou shalt obey
 the voyce of the Lord thy God,Deut. 28.1.2.3. and v. 15.16. etc. Leuit. 26.14. Mal. 2.2. and obserue all his commandements which I command thee this day: all these blessings shall come on thee, and ouertake thee: Blessed shalt thou bee in the City, and blessed in the field, etc. Others, taken from the iustice of God: But if thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord thy God, to keepe, and to doe all his commandements and ordinances which I command thee this day,Deu. 6.5. cursed shalt thou bee in the towne, and cursed in the field, etc. And in all Pauls Epistles, it is his vsuall manner,Rom. 12.1. where he exhorts to any vertue, or dehorts from any vice, to adde sundry reasons, that by the force thereof, he might the better preuaile:2. Cor. 9.7. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that yee giue vp your bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy and acceptable vnto God. And againe, As euery man wisheth in his heart, so let him giue not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loueth a cheerefull giuer. And in the Ephesians,Eph. 5.22.23. exhorting diuers estates and degrees of men, as husbands and wiues, Parents and children, masters and seruants, to the performance of the duties of their seuerall callings, he doth still second the same exhortations with diuers arguments and reasons.Eph. 6.5. Col. 3.22. 1. Pet. 2.11. Wiues submit your selues to your husbands, as to the Lord; and he ads a forcible reason thereto: For the husband is the wiues head as Christ is the head of his Church; and so likewise of husbands, seruants, etc. This course is likewise practised of the Apostle Peter, when he sayth: I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrimes, abstaine from fleshly lusts which fight against the Soule. These and the like examples, whereof the Scriptures are plentifull, serue to manifest vnto vs the corruption that is in our nature, that are so backward in the performance of any holy duety, that we stand thus in need of reasons to perswade vs to the same.
Now, this comes to passe by reason that the Theoricke part of man, his will, vnderstanding and knowledge
 (since the fall of man) is so blinded and corrupted, that it vnderstands not the things that are of God, but the will and vnderstanding are so depraued, of grace, that now they are direct opposite to Gods will: And this is the cursed nature of all men vnregenerate, as the Apostle sayth: The wisdome of the flesh is enmitie against God,Rom. 8.7. for it is not subiect to the law of God, neither can be: Where the Apostle shewes plainely, that the wil of a natural man,2. Cor. 3.5. that liues in sinne vnregenerate,Phil. 2.13. Gen. 6. Rom. 3.7. is flat contrary; nay, Enmity it selfe against God, and neyther will nor can be subiect to Gods will: So that whatsoeuer God wils, man wils not: Wee are not able of our selues to thinke a good thought. It is God alone that must touch our hearts, and worke in vs power, either to will well, or worke well: Nay, the Lord sayth more:Pro. 14.12. That the whole frame of mans heart is altogether euill continually. The whole frame of mans heart, the mind, will, vnderstanding, conscience, reason, affection, yea, the whole frame of mans heart is euill onely, and that continually: so that it is cleare, our wils are contrary to Gods will by nature, and wee can no more set our selues to the performance of any good duty, then a dead man can of himselfe rise out of his graue and performe any action: but our wils are so infected and poysoned with sinne, that we now onely seeke and desire that which is euill, and against the will of God, and the good of our owne soules.
 Oh how should this humble vr, when we shall consider what wee are by nature, Euen vnto euery good worke, Reprobate: that we are not able not so much as to moue one finger to the performance of any spirituall duty:Ibo. 42.6. This should make vs to Abhor our selues in dust and ashes: Oh, in the matters of the world we are quicke of conceit. If a man should tell vs, how we should get some profite, or enioy some pleasure, or
 come to preferment: These things are wee ready to conceiue of: They shall not need to alledge any reasons to perswade vs to seeke after them, nor arguments to moue vs. But, how eagerly doe we hunt after these temporall things, and that with great delight: but when we shall be taught out of the Word of God, how we may attain that true treasure, that the rust and moath cannot corrupt, and which shall neuer be taken from vs, euen the Kingdome of heauen, and the euerlasting saluation of our owne soules: how carelesly doe we listen after it: Nay, the Ministers of Gods word had need to vse reason vpon reason, and all to little to perswade vs, to seeke after them? Oh, that wee should be so carelesse, when we are exhorted to Returne vnto the Lord for the pardon of our sins; that wee should thus sleepe still in sinne, and blesse our selues in our euill and vngodly wayes: Nay, that which is worst of all, how many bee there that when they are exhorted to any holy duty, that are so farre from yeelding vnto them, that they obiect against them fleshly reasons, as it were, laying stumbling blockes in their owne wayes to keepe them from God! We see this cleare in many, who being exhorted vnto a new course of life, and told of the necessity of labouring, to get knowledge, and hearing the Word of God: They can obiect for themselues, I shall then lose my time, neglect my busines, hinder my estate, and make my selfe a laughing stock vnto the world. These are like those Guests in the Gospell,Mat. 22.5.6 Mat. 13.22. who being bid to the banquet, made excuses, and would not come, but made light of it: Yea, our Sauiour teacheth, that when the Word of God is preached vnto vs, the cares of this world, the deceitfulnes of riches, and the lusts of or her things choke the Word, and it is made vnfruitfull. Oh, let vs beware, that wee be not led aside


 by the subtilty of Sathan, and these corrupt imaginations of our owne hearts: but when the Word of God reproueth any sin in vs, though the same seem neuer so sweet vnto the flesh; Oh, stride ouer all the rockes of offence that stand before vs to make vs fall; that so, we may hearken vnto the voyce of God, and that God may delight in vs, and take pleasure in our obedience, proceeding from the heart.
 Secondly, as this shewes the backwardnes and vntowardnes that is in mans nature, to the performance of any holy duty that we stand in need of; so many reasons and arguments to perswade vs: So it shewes vs also, what course the Minister of Gods Word must take in preaching the Word; That is, not onely simply to propound, and shew men their duties; but hee must exhort them, call vpon them; nay, he must study how hee may speake, and vse all perswasions, reasons and arguments to draw men to obedience, and to Turne vnto the Lord;Ioh. 15. Mat. 13. Ioh. 10.1. Mat. 3.10. Luke. 8.4. they must exhort, they must intreat, they must perswade, and vse reason vpon reason, and argument vpon argument, and all will bee too little to draw men to seeke vnto God, and to obey his blessed Word: This hath beene the course which the Prophets from time to time haue obserued in their Sermons vnto the people, that haue stooped downe to the capacity and vnderstanding euen of the simplest, raising diuers Similes and Comparisons to illustrate the doctrines vnto the people, and to presse the same with diuers reasons and arguments, to the end, that all men might be left without excuse, and that as the Apostle sayth:2. Cor. 4.3. If the Gospell be hid, it is hid vnto them that be lost.



He hath spoyled vs: he hath wounded vs.

Now, we are to come to the words themselues. And
 it is all one, as if they should haue said, Behold, wee are grieuously spoiled, we see how the Lord hath been offended and angry with vs for our sins; how he hath for our rebellions thus spoyled vs of our liberty, spoiled vs of our Country, of our goods, possessions; yea, and spoyled vs of his mercy and fauour hee was wont to shew vnto vs: Nay; he hath wounded vs, and that grieuously, he hath laden vs with the grieuous burden of afflictions: Wee see it is the correcting hand of God for our sinnes; and therefore let vs Returne vnto him by true repentance, that he may heale vs, and helpe vs.
Seeing then that they vse the remembrance of Gods  anger and of his iudgements vpon them, as a meanes to draw them to God,Gods iudgements must moue men to repentance and to bring them to repentance: Wee may hence learne what is the end of all Gods iudgements, eyther generall vpon a whole land, or priuate, vpon any particular man or woman. What, hath the Lord any delight to punish and to plague men and women with his heauy iudgements? no verily, the Lord doth not punish vs willingly,Lam. 3.33. he takes no delight to afflict the children of men. God sent his Prophet to cry in the streets of Nineueh, Yet forty daies,Ionas. 3. and Nineueh shall be destroyed. They made the true vse of Gods iudgements threatned against them, when they fasted and prayed, and did put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them, to the least of them, and did turn from their euill wayes, and from the wickednes that was in their hands.1. Reg. 21.27. When Ahab had heard the iudgements of God threatned against him and his house,Psal. 78. Psal. 107. He rent his clothes, and put on sackcloth vpon him, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly. So did the rebellious Israelites from time to time, when the iudgements of God were vpon them, they sought the Lord. This appeares likewise by the example of the progigal
 son, when iudgement followed him at the heels, and had ouertaken him (as it is the wages of al sin) he then came to himselfe, and resolued of a return home to his father. Whensoeuer therefore God shal lay his rod vpon our backes, eyther in our owne persons, in our goods, or in our good names, or in our wiues and children, or any other that are deare vnto vs; it is for this end, that feeling the smart, we may humble our selues vnder his hand. And withall let vs know, that whensoeuer our stubbornnes and disobedience shall driue the Lord to take this course with vs, it is neuer without his great griefe, as that place of the Prophet Hosea is worth our best consideration,Hosea. 11.8. where the Lord sayeth: How shall I giue thee vp, O Ephraim? how shall I deliuer thee, O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within mee, my repentings are rolled together: So that the words shew vnto vs, how that the Lord is (as it were) troubled and perplexed in himselfe, that he could not tell what course to take, when the sinnes of the people stirred vp his displeasure; on the one side, the hainousnes of the peoples sinnes prouoked him to punish them, and to make them as Sodom and Gomor: but on the other side, his fatherly loue and tender compassion moued him to hold his hand,Iudg. 10.16. and to stay his iudgements. And in another place it is sayd, That his soule was grieued for the miserie of Israel. Euen as a tender hearted Father doth many times correct his child when the teares stand in his owne eyes:Psal. 89.33. So that we see that true of the Prophet, That the mercy of God is ouer all his workes, and that in iudgement he remembreth mercy: yea, hee hath promised, that though hee whip and scourge his children, yet his mercy hee will neuer take from them. And howsoeuer for the present time no affliction is ioyous but grieuous, yet, if we haue grace to submit
 our selues vnto it: It bringeth with it the quiet fruit of righteousnesse. Thus haue wee seene with what affection the Lord doth chasten vs, as also, that all iudgements whatsoeuer layde vpon vs, should moue vs to repentance.
And the reason is, because by repentance and amendment of life, all perils and dangers are preuented, and wholly remoued away from vs, according to that of the Prophet: But if a Nation against whom I haue pronounced, turne from their wickednesse,Ier. 18.8. I will repent of the plague that I thought to bring vpon them. This appeares by the example of Nineueh, whom we named before, and the like; and therefore let all such as lye vnder any chastisement, alwayes search out their wayes, and descend into their owne consciences, to see how they haue moued God to wrath, and prouoked him against them* This is the onely practise that the Prophet doth prescribe vs to take, vnder any iudgement or calamity whatsoeuer:Lam. 3.39. Wherefore is the liuing man sorrowfull? Man suffereth for his sinne: Let vs search and try our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. This is the right way to stop the breach of Gods wrath, and to call in his iudgements when they are gone out against vs.
This Doctrine may serue to direct vs, what wee ought to doe, and how wee ought to carry our selues in all manner of iudgements and calamities whatsoeuer; namely, not to bee gazers, to looke vpon Gods iudgements, but to take them to heart; and say, surely, the Lord is iust in his visitation; for the Lord hath vsed al means to do vs good, by his mercies, and by his iudgements, famine, sword, sicknes, and the like: but where is the man that makes the true vse of Gods chastisements, that is humbled by them, that doth meet the Lord by vnfained sorrow for sinne? Alas, this is little thought of by many, as appeareth by their seuerall
 windings and turnings that are in their hearts to escape the iudgements of God; but yet neuer resolue of this which is the onely way of all, To turne vnto the Lord. Oh, let vs therefore be admonished hereby, to search our wayes, to suruay our owne hearts, and to proue by the touchstone of the Word, our owne thoughts, words and works that we haue conceiued, spoken and done; that hath moued the Lord to proceed so in iustice against vs, and when wee haue found out our falles and infirmities, we are in a serious manner to mourne for them, and to turne vnto the Lord with all or hearts. This duty is vrged by the Prophet Ieremy:Lam. 3.39.40.41.42. Heb. 12.5.6.10.9. Wherefore is the liuing man sorrowfull? Man suffereth for his sinnes: Oh, let vs search and try our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. Let vs lift vp our hearts with our hands vnto the God of heauen saying, we haue sinned, and haue rebelled, therefore thou hast most spared: for surely this is the onely marke that God shooteth at, and this is the end of all his chasticements; namely this, to bring vs home to himselfe, and not to destroy vs for euer.



He hath spoyled, he hath wounded.

 Marke here how the people of God doe acknowledge, that it was the correcting hand of God which had thus afflicted them,All chasticements and afflictions come from God. and brought all this wofull misery vpon them: they do not say, it was the Assirians that had spoyled and wounded them, but they looke higher, and attribute all to the Lord, and say, The Lord hath spoyled, and hee hath wounded vs. From whence wee obserue a third point of Doctrine; namely, that all chasticements and afflictions, iudgements, and corrections come from the Lord alone, hee sends them, imposeth them, and layes them on his people, he moderates them at his pleasure; for so sayth the Prophet,
 Is there any euill in the City which the Lord hath not sent? That is, any iudgement or punishment, sicknes,Amos. 3.6. pouerty, crosses, afflictions, or calamities, but they come from the Lord, he sends them, and layes them on his people: his Quiuer is full of these arrowes,Exod. 9.32. Psal. 148.8. Ier. 25.9.11. he hath the sword to strike vs, he hath the pestilence to consume vs, he hath famine to pine vs; yea, he hath all creatures at commaund to humble man, and being sent of God, they shall preuaile, As the Flies, Frogs and Lyce did preuayle against Pharaoh and his people; yea, Fire and Hayle. Snow and Vapors,Deu. 4.27. Stormes and winds doe execute his wurd. If it hayle in Egypt, God sendeth that haile on Pharaoh: If an east wind bring in Grashoppers,Hos. 2.6. and a west wind driue them out; Moses tels vs, that both come from the Lord, what iudgements, chastisements or afflictions soeuer light vpon man, they come not by chance, or any blind fortune, but they come to passe through the soueraigne power of the Almighty Creator: I will send (sayth the Lord) and take to me all the Families of the North, and I wil bring them against this land. And againe, I beginne to plague that City where my name is called vpon. And againe, when the Lord would bring his Church from Idolatry, hee sayeth: Behold,2. Reg. 19.6. I will stoppe thy wayes with thornes, and wake an hedge that shee shall not find her pathes: So Esay comforteth the messengers of Hezechiah against the blasphemy of Senacherib: So shall you say to your Master:Iob. 1.12. and 2.6. Mat. 8.31. Thus sayth the Lord, Bee not afraid of the words which thou hast heard: Behold, I will send a blast vpon him, etc. And wee see in the History of Iob, that the Deuill could not slay the seruants of Iob with the sword, burne vp his sheepe with fire, spoyle him of his Cammels by robbers, destroy his children with winds, nor touch his person with byles, before the Lord had sayd vnto him, Loe, all that hee hath is in thy hand, but saue his life. The like
 we see in the Gospel, when Christ had dispossessed the two possessed with Deuils which came out of the graues; they had not the power of themselues being dispossest, to enter into the heard of swine, before that Christ had giuen them leaue: So that the tyranny of Sathan himselfe, and of all his wicked instruments, be it neuer so great, yet it is bounded within the lists and limits of the power of God. All these, and the like examples, whereof the Scripture is full, serue for the confirmation of the euerlasting truth of this doctrine, that all iudgements, chastisements and afflictions whatsoeuer, they happen vnto vs, nor by chance or fortune (as men say) but they come from God. And this is acknowledged by the godly Iewes in this place, where they say, The Lord hath wounded vs, etc. And the reason is this, because the prouidence of God ruleth all things, both in heauen and earth, as well the smallest as the greatest; so that there is no roome left for chance or fortune, but by the speciall prouidence of God doe all things come to passe: This doth our Sauiour teach most clearely, when he sayth, Are not two Sparrowes solde for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father: yea, the hayres of your head are numbred. Now if the prouidence of God be in such small things, as in Sparrows, and the haires of ones head, how much more in weightier things? This is acknowledged by the Apostles in the Acts: Doubtlesse,Act. 4.27. against thy onely Sonne Iesus whom thou hast annointed, Both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel gathered themselues together, to do whatsoeuer thy hand and thy councell hath determined before to be done. So that the Apostles of Iesus Christ doe there acknowledge, that whatsoeuer hapned vnto Christ Iesus, both for his apprehension, arraignement and condemnation, it came not to passe alone through the
 trecherousnes of Iudas, nor the malice of the whole nation of the Iewes; but that God in his eternall decree had fore-ordayned the same. So then, if we looke vnto the prouidence of God which ruleth al things both in heauen and earth, and without whose prouidence nothing can come to passe; ir must needs cleare this Doctrine vnto vs, that all iudgements, chastisements and afflictions come from God. Now let vs come to the vses of this Doctrine.
Seeing that all iudgements, chastisements and afflictions  whatsoeuer happen vnto vs, come from God; This may teach vs patience vnder the Crosse, not to murmur and grudge against them; but to beare them patiently, seeing they come not by fortune,Gen. 15.13. Ier. 25.11. Io. 19.10. Luk. 22.53. or by the malice of the Deuill, but by the most wise decree and purpose of God, yea, the yeares and dayes, the very houres and moments of time, touching the afflictions of the godly, are determined of God: Oh let vs then learne to possesse our soules with patience, whensoeuer God shal humble vs in our bodies, goods or name, by any iudgement or calamity, eyther inward or outward; assuring our selues, that if the fault be not in our selues, the crosse when it doth depart, will leaue a blessing behind it, and we shall be sure to gain more in the Spirit then we can lose in the Flesh. And howsoeuer the wicked may persecute the godly here; yet they are but the rod of God, and they cannot passe the bonds of their commission granted them from the Lord; they cannot shorten one moment of our life, or adde vnto our afflictions more then what God hath purposed. And in the end God will cut them off, when it pleaseth him, that they shall proceede no further.
Secondly, this may condemne those that neuer  looke vnto the hand of God, but thinke all things
 come by fortune, or else do onely look on the means, but neuer looke vp vnto God who smiteth by them, like a dogge that snatches the stone, but lookes not after him that flung it.Iob. 1.21. Iob was of another mind, hee doth not so much as looke vpon the Caldeans, Sabeans, or the Deuill that had spoyled him: but Iob acknowledgeth, that it was the Lord that had done all this: Not like many amongst vs in these dayes, who, if they haue any losse in their cattell, or sicknesse in themselues, wiues or children, by and by they be bewitched and so runne to the Deuill for counsell: How farre was this from godly Dauid, when Abishai the son of Zeruiah would haue killed Shemi for cursing Dauid: What haue I to doe with you yee sonnes of Zeruiah (sayth Dauid) hee curseth because the Lord bade him curse mee.2. Sam. 16.10 And surely, this must needs be the notable policy of the Deuill, that men not considering that it comes from the Lord, should neuer seeke to him for remedy. And here we may take occasion to reproue one common fault amongst many, who thinke that Witches haue power to destroy mens goods, to afflict mens bodies, lame their cattell, kill their children, and the like:Deu. 18.10. whereas, if we consider the matter aright, wee shall find it otherwise. Indeed, there are Witches, which vpon their conuiction are to die, and not to be suffered to liue: but withall, wee must obserue for what cause they are to die; not because they destroy mens goods, afflict mens bodies, or kill mens children; for the Scriptute neuer attributes these iudgements to come from Witches, but from God, whose purpose and prouidence is in all things: but they are to die, because they haue made a league with the Deuils, which are Gods enemies, and because they seduce the people of God, and draw them into error, and into many diuelish practises, to leaue God their Creator,
 and to seeke for helpe from the Deuill or his cursed instruments;Amos. 3.6. whereas indeed, all iudgements and afflictions whatsoeuer, layd vpon our bodies, goods and children, come from God; and there is no more, nor lesse hurt done, then if there were no Witches at all; neyther can the sending of the Deuill by a Witch giue him any power or commission to doe any thing more then that, for the which hee hath receyued commission from God. But here is the policy of the Deuill,Note. and here is the iudgement of God vpon sinners that will bee deluded: the Deuill when he hath receyued commission from God to hurt, he will not by and by execute the same, till (if it be possible) some Witch or Sorcerer doe send him, seeming all this while vnto them to be their seruant and slaue, whereas indeed, al this while they are his vassals and bondslaues, vsing them as his cursed instruments; not to receiue helpe by them, but onely for a colour, that hee might by that meanes draw many to seeke helpe from him, and so carry them headlong into eternall condemnation: for indeed, the Deuill is more forward to do hurt, then any Witch can be: Oh then let vs labour to become so spiritually wise, that wee may discouer the policy of the Deuill herein; and to helpe vs herein, let vs assure our selues that All power is of God;Mat. 28. that neyther the Deuill, nor the Witch can kill man or beast at their pleasure; till they haue authority first from God; for, it is the Lord alone, by whose wise prouidence and purpose, all things both in heauen and earth come to passe, onely our sinnes prouoke him to chastise, and afflict vs: God giueth the Deuill leaue as an executioner of his vengeance, to correct and scourge vs for our sinnes, and when he hath obtayned leaue of God, he seeketh to doe it at his best aduantage, as may further his owne kingdome, and delude the simple.




For he hath spoyled vs, hee hath wounded vs.

We haue heard before, how that they do acknowledge  all those iudgements that lighted vpon them, to haue come from God,God doth chastice his own children when they sinne against him. and that most iustly for their sinnes, especially, for their sinne of Idolatry. Before we leaue the words of this their first reason, wee are to obserue one thing more from the persons afflicted; He hath spoyled vs, etc. Euen they that were the Church and people of God, whom God had honoured aboue all other nations and people vnder heauen; yet when they fell away from God by Idolatry, God did not spare to bring euen vpon them, many and grieuous iudgements and afflictions. Hence we obserue this point of Doctrine, that God will not spare to chastise his owne children if they sinne against him, although he take not his louing kindnes from them, nor suffer his truth to fayle:Numb. 11.33 Yet hee will visite their transgressions with the rodde, and their sinnes with scourges. The history of the Israelites in their iourneying towards Canaan, their manifold murmurings and rebellions, is a plentifull witnesse of this truth, when they lusted for flesh, and loathed Manna: How did God smite them with exceeding great plagues, euen iudgement vpon iudgement, vntill hee had consumed the greatest fort of them? We may fee this in the example of Salomon, when his heart was turned away from the true God, the Lord was angry with him, therefore the Lord stirred vp one aduersary against Salomon,1. Reg. 11. and afterwards another aduersary which did much mischiefe and euill against Israel. When Ionas had disobeyed the voyce of the Lord, being sent to preach against Nineueh; how did the Lord vexe Ionas with his stormes,Ionas 1.2.3 that the shippe could haue no rest, till she had disburdened her selfe
 of Ionas? The iudgements of God as a Serieant pursued Ionas to arrest him, as a fugitiue seruant: so that albeit Ionas fled from God, yet the hand of God followed after him, and ouertooke him.Num. 12.10. When Miriam the sister of Moses, contemned Moses because she was not a Prophetesse, as great in authority as himselfe: although Moses meekely suffered it, yet the Lord reuenged the wrong, and stroke her with a Leprosie, that for a season sh^ was shut out of the hoast. When Dauid had falne into his sinnes of Adultery and Murder, though he were a man beloued of God, yea,2. Sam. 12.9 a man after Gods owne heart; yet the Lord did stir vp euill against him out of his owne house: yea, Christ Iesus himselfe vnto whom sinne was but imputed, for he neuer committed any; hee was afflicted with sorrowes for our defaults, he was bruised for our iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was layde vpon him,Esay. 53.5. and by his stripes we are healed. The like may be sayd of Manasses, Iehosaphat, Iosiah, Hezechiah, and the like: Al which serue to confirm vs in the truth of this doctrine, that God will not spare, no, not the godly themselues, bee they neuer so neare or deare vnto him, but will bring vpon them many and grieuous iudgements if they sinne against him. And this did this people in this present Text, find to be true by wofull experience; for, sinning with a high hand against God, and committing Idolatry, the Lord did bring most heauy and grieuous iudgements vpon them for the same.
And the reason is, that all the world might take notice of his iustice, that he is no respecter of mens persons, but will shew himselfe vtterly to hate an sinne whensoeuer, wheresoeuer, or in whomsoeuer hee findeth it. The Lord hath euer in all ages shewed examples of his iustice against sinne, to the end wee might quake and tremble at the committing of it: he
 is not a God that loueth wickednes, neyther shall any euill dwell with him; for he hateth all them that worke iniquity, bee they what they will be; if they be found to commit sinne against God, God wil not spare them: He accepteth not the persons of Princes (saith Elihu) nor regardeth the rich more then the poore,Io. 34.19. They being all the works of his hands: This doth the Prophet Dauid acknowledge, when he sayth: Against thee, against thee onely haue I sinned,1. Sam. 16.7. Psal. 51.4. and done euill in thy sight, that thou mayest bee iust when thou speakest, and pure when thou iudgest: So that if men breake his statutes, and keepe not his commandements, God will bee sure to visite their transgressions with the rodde, and their sinnes with scourges, and all to manifest the truth of his owne Word, and to make good those threatnings gone out of his mouth against sinne: yet wee must know, that there is great difference between the children of God and the wicked; when the Lord corrects his children, they are bettered by their afflictions, they are humbled, confesse their sinnes, and bewayle them, they labour to reforme their liues, and to Turne vnto the Lord by true Repentance: but the wicked, the more the Lord spoyles and wounds them, they are the worse by it: and whereas the children of God take occasion by affliction to Turne to God, the wicked are by them driuen the further from God; they eyther see it not that afflictions come from God, and so repute them to fortune or chance, or some secondary causes, or else they murmur and breake out into impaciency, as we may see in Pharaoh, the more the Lord plagued and spoyled him, the more he hardned his heart.
 Here then we are first of all to confesse, that great is the wrath of God against sinne, seeing he will not spare, no not the Elect themselues: those that are as neare and as deare vnto God as the apple of his owne
 eye, as we haue seene by the example of the Israelites, Gods people, of Miriam, Dauid, Salomon, and the like. Oh then, what miserable wretches are wee, that wee should presume of Gods mercy, seeing wee haue such fearefull spectacles of his iustice? for the Lord doth lay to heart the sinnes of the godly, more then the sinnes of the wicked: There can be no greater despite done vnto a man, then when his own children rise vp against him: Euen so, what greater dishonour can be offered vnto the most high God, then when his sonnes by adoption and grace, shall rebell against him, from whom he expecteth the greatest honour: And therefore if they sinne against God, God doth euer take it hainously at their hands, and will assuredly punish them for the same. And if this be the course of Gods iustice against the Elect, how safely may wee thus conclude, that the wicked and vngodly shall not escape; howsoeuer the Lord beare for a time with the vessels of wrath, according to that of the Prophet Ieremy: Thus sayth the Lord of Hoasts,Ier. 25.29. Yee shall certainely drinke, for loe, I beginne to plague the City where my name is called vpon, and shall you goe free? Oh, how may this terrifie all vngodly wretches to consider, that howsoeuer God spareth them for a time, and let them run on in their vngodly courses, yet their damnation sleepeth not all this while; their transgressions are recorded in the booke of God, and are layde vp in store for them against the day of reckoning. This is that which Salomon calleth to their remembrance, when he sayth, Behold, the righteous shall bee recompensed in the earth,Pro. 11.31. how much more the wicked and the sinner? And to the same purpose sayth the Apostle Peter,2. Pet. 4.17. The time is come that iudgement must beginne at the house of God: And if it beginne at vs, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospell of God? If the righteous bee soarsly saued,
 where shall the vngodly and sinner appeare?
 Secondly, seeing the Lord doth chastise his owne children when they sinne against him, as we see in this present example: Hence we may note, that afflictions be not alwayes tokens of Gods anger; neyther may wee measure the fauour or loue of God towards our selues or others, by outward blessings, or outward crosses, by prosperity, or aduersity: for as Salomon sayth; All things happen alike to all,Eccles. 9.2. and the same condition is to the iust, and the wicked. We may not then condemn those on whome wee see the Lord to lay great and grieuous afflictions, as many naturall men vse to do: Nay, on the contrary, seeing the Lord corrects euery one that he loues, wee may rather iudge afflictions, tokens of his loue; as if wee see a man beat or correct a child, and let another goe, we will iudge him his sonne whom he corrects. Oh then art thou spoyled and wounded in thy soule, bee not any whit discouraged: if thou be one of Christs Lambes, thou must be content then to bee spoyled of thy Fleece, and to haue the bloudy knife at thy throat all the day long: but if thou be a Sheepe to be solde, then thou shouldest bee pastured and fatted in the best grasse.Mat. 3. The children of God, be the Lords Wheat: Now then, they must bee content to be cut with the Sickle, to bee carried into the Barne, they must vndergoe the blowes of the Flaile, they must be fanned and grownde to powder with the Milstone of afflictions, and baked in the Ouen and Furnace of a wounded conscience, before they can be bread for Gods Table. Oh that we could see how our poore and miserable soules bee spoyled and wounded by sinne and Sathan! Oh, we haue many a deadly wound in our soules by Sinne; and this is the reason why so few seeke vnto Iesus Christ, the good Physitian of our soules; and why so few runne to God
 for the pardon of their things; namely, because they see not themselues spoyled; they neuer feele the bleeding wounds of their poore soules and consciences: Oh that the Lord would open our blind eyes to see our misery, how wee bee vtterly spoyled, and touch our hard hearts to feele the bleeding wounds, and bloudy issues of our soules surely, it is the beginning of all grace, to feele themselues wounded at heart for their sinnes.
Alas, the blind and carnall men of the world, if they see one spoyled or wounded at the heart for sinne, they by and by condemne him for a wicked man, as the Heathen men did Paul:Act. 26. Psal. 6. and 130.77. Iob. 13. Esay. 38. Act. 2.37. But who euer were more spoyled then the dearest Saints and Seruants of God haue beene? Looke vpon Dauid, who euer was wounded both in Body and Soule as Iob was, who thought that God had become his enemy? he sayth, that the Lord shot his arrowes at him, as if hee had beene his marke to shoot at, and that the very venome of his arrowes pearsed his soule, and drunke vp his spirit. Looke vpon good King Ezechias, he sayth, that the Lord broke his bones like a Lyon, and wounded him sore, Who euer was so spoyled and wounded as the Son of God himselfe: and therfore we may not take them as tokens of Gods anger? no, no: Iudgement begins at Gods house, and if God doe not try: men by crosses and afflictions, let them suspect themselues, that they be rather Bastards, and not Sonnes; for the Lord doth chastice them he loueth; and if he suffer men to runne on in their owne wayes without breaking and taming them as young Colt^ and vntaimed Heyfers, it is a signe rather that God cares not for them. Well then, let vs confesse the hand of God in all our troubles, and withall confesse our sinnes, as the procuring cause of all Gods iudgements, and turne, and seeke
 to him for mercy and forgiuenesse, and take his fatherly corrections as tokens of his loue, that he would thereby humble our hearts, purge our soules, draw vs to loue him, and to seeke to him for mercy.
 Here we are taught which is the right way to bring men to God, namely, to spoyle them of all hope in themselues, to bring them to a flat nothing, in regard of themselues, that they may say, I am the greatest and the chiefest sinner: Oh miserable man, who shall deliuer mee from this body of sinne? Men must be thus wounded, else they cannot be healed: and as for them which neuer felt themselues spoyled and wounded at the heart for their sinnes, they are not yet truly called, they be not yet truly conuerted: therefore let it be spoken to euery soule heere present, if you neuer felt your soules wounded, neuer felt your hearts pricked, and your consciences touched, grieued and afflicted for your sinnes; Alas, you are not yet turned to God, you neuer had as yet true grace wrought in your hearts. But those which feele the smart of sinne, and feele their hearts wounded for sinne, they will esteeme more of one droppe of Gods mercy for the pardon of the same, and of one drop of the bloud of Iesus Christ for the saluation of their soules, then of ten thousand worlds if they were offered vnto them: whereas the secure and hard hearted Sinner, which finds not himselfe to be spoyled and wounded, doth make no account at all of the same, nor neuer seekes vnto God for mercy.




Hee will heale vs, hee will bind vs vp.

NOw followes the second reason drawne from the mercy of God: For though hee hath spoyled vs and wounded vs, yet he will heale vs and bind vs vp againe. And these be the most gracious words of God himselfe: Behold, I am hee, and there is no God but I:Deu. 32.34. 1. Sam. 26. I kill and make aliue, I wound and make whole againe. And therefore this reason drawne from the mercy of God, seeing hee offers himselfe to heale vs, and to bind vp the wounds of our soules: Oh, it ought to moue vs greatly to turne vnto him.
So then the point of Doctrine that offers itselfe to  be considered of vs is this,The mercy of God must lead men to repentance. that as the iudgements of God must alluremen to repentance, and to returne vnto God, so must his mercies. I remember the speech in the Prophet, where the Lord is pleased (to make vs the better to conceiue of his mercy) to take to himselfe the affections of a man:Ier. 31.20. Hos. 11.8. His bowels were troubled for Ephraim. And againe; How shall I giue thee vp, Ephraim? how shall I deliuer thee Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within mee, my repentings are rowled together. It is all one as if the Lord should haue said; Oh, it goes neare me, O Ephraim,Exod. 34.6.7 O Israel, that I should euen be forced by thy rebellion and horrible impieties, to deale so straightly with thee. And the Lord tels Moses;Psal. 86.15. that he is a Mercifull and a gracious God, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and truth, reseruing mercy for thousands and forgiuing iniquity, and transgression, and sinne. Hee is called againe of the Psalmist, A pittifull God. And the like is intended in the language of the new Testament; That when hee saw the multitude dspersed as sheepe hauing no shepheard, his bowels earned within him.Mat. 9.36. These examples
 and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, all serue to confirm the euerlasting truth of this doctrine, that God is a God of mercy, and that his mercies ought to allure men to repentance: for though the thundering out of the threatnings and iudgements of the Law, be a meanes to awake a secure heart, yet nothing will so much affect a mans mind, and euen melt a mans soule, to make a man returne vnto God, as the due knowledge and consideration of the vnspeakable riches of Gods mercy; and therefore it is no maruell though the Prophet here doe vse this as one forcible reason to stir vp men to make their returne vnto God by vnfained repentance, for that he will bee ready to Heale our sores, and Bind vp the bleeding wounds of our soules, which we haue made by sinne, if we will repent and returne vnto him. And indeed this is one of the maine differences betwixt the godly and the wicked: The iustice of God doth sometimes so farre preuaile with the wicked, as that they feare and tremble, but it is not for the losse of Gods fauour, but for feare of torment: But on the contrary, the goodnesse and mercy of God, doth euen cause the seruants of God to quake and to tremble, lest by any means they should depriue themselues of the comfortable enioying of his loue, according to that of the Prophet Dauid:Psal. 130.4. There is mercy with thee O Lord that thou mayest be feared. Oh blessed feare, when the mercy of God doth beget it in a mans Soule: So, then we see that the mercy of God is infinite, his compassion is higher then the heauens, it is the greatest dishonour done vnto God that can be, to doubt of his fauour, and to call his louing kindnesse into question. Let vs build vp his promises as a sure foundation that shall neuer be remoued: Heauen and Earth shall passe away, but his word shall not passe away. We haue the Word and the Oath of God as two vnchangeable
 Witnesses; so that it is impossible he should lye or be deceyued: Againe, we haue the Sacraments of God as two Authenticke Seales to ratifie his promises, and to make them most sure vnto vs.Mat. 5.18. Heb. 6.18. Rom. 8.16. And we haue withall, the earnest penny, as a pawne left vnto vs, and all to assure vs of his fauour and loue, and therefore this reason of the Church and people of God drawne from the mercy of God: seeing that he is so ready to pardon sinne, and to entertain poore penitent sinners, that sue to him for mercy, it ought to be most forceable vnto vs to moue vs to Returne vnto him. Now let vs come to the vses.
First, seeing that the Lord as hee doth wound vs, and chastice man for sinne; so it is he alone that is the spirituall  Physitian of our soules. Hence then we are directed to whom to seeke for remedy, euen vnto God alone, who, as he wounds, so he heales, as he breaketh asunder, so hee bindeth vp. If a man haue some dangerous disease in his body, or other deadly wound, if hee know any man to be of skill, and a faithfull Chirurgion, he will seeke to him, and let him out and la^nce him: Well, this is our case, we bee spiritually sicke, euen vnto eternall death, in regard of ourselues, our soules be grieuously and dangerously wounded, what shall we now doe but runne to Iesus Christ the blessed Physitian of our soules, who is most able and willing to cure vs and heale vs? And as the poore Begget vnlaps his legges, and shewes his grieuous sores to those that passe by, and all to moue compassion; So let vs not be ashamed to lay open our soules to Iesus Ghrist, let vs confesse our grieuous and manifold sinnes: Let vs not be ashamed to let him see our spirituall wounds; but let vs make our moane to him, and craue his help, and begge as for life and death for the pardon of them: and if wee can get but one drop of his precious bloud,
 it will bee a plaister to heale our wounds, and cure the deadly diseases of our soules. When the children of Israel had grieuously sinned,Num. 21. the Lord sent fierie Serpents amongst them; now many of them by the stinging and biting of them, were so inflamed that they died, and could not be cured: But when they repented and cryed to God in their misery, behold, he commaunds that Moses should make a brazen Serpent and set it vpon hie, that so many as were stung with those fiery Serpents, might cast their eyes immediately vpon that brazen Serpent, and so might bee cured: Euen so, all of vs are stung by the fiery Serpents of our sinnes, and we newly wallowing in the bloud of our soules: Yet see, Oh see the mercy of God, who hath giuen vnto vs his owne sonne, who is the brazen Serpent to cure our soules; for no other creature in heauen or earth could heale vs or helpe vs, but hee must be our Physitian to make a plaister to heale our wounds; the pains that he tooke to temper this plaister, it made him sweat both water and bloud; and in the end when nothing else could doe it,Luke. 23. hee was content to temper a plaister of his owne heart bloud: such a blessed Sauiour, such a louing Physitian haue we: Oh then let vs runne to Iesus Christ, let vs make our moane vnto him, let vs not feare to lay open our wounded soules and distressed consciences vnto him, who is so louing and mercifull a Physitian to poore distressed soules. Art thou an hard hearted, and an impenitent sinner? thou art sicke at the very heart, thou art wounned by sinne and Sathan vnto eternall death, though thou see it not, yet thy poore soule is ready to bleede vnto eternall death, See, Oh see heere Iesus Christ thy Sauior, he offers himself to become the Physitian, hee hath tempered a plaister that is able to heale thy sicke soule if thou wilt come vnto him: Alas, wilt thou
 then runne on in sinne, and suffer thy poore soule to rot and fester with sinne, and contemne the mercy of God, and the kindnesse of Iesus Christ, who offers to heale thee, and to helpe thy wounded soule? The poore man which fell among theeues who spoyled him and wounded him, and left him for halfe dead:Luk. 10. alas, what had becom of him if the good Samaritan had not come by and pittied him? Sinne and Sathan hath spoyled vs and wounded vs body and soule. Now alas, what shall become of vs, if that Iesus Christ the good Samaritan and blessed Physitian of our soules doe not pitty vs, bind vp our wounds, and powre in the oyle of grace into our hearts, to cure our sicke and wounded soules? but hee is so pittifull and tender hearted a Chirurgion, that he will pull off the rotten ragges of our sinnes, and lap them vp in the most precious white robe of his owne righteousnes, and poure into them the oyle of grace, euen his owne deare and precious heart bloud, to our euerlasting comfort and saluation.
Secondly, wee obserue hence a further vse, that if  any do perish through their sinnes and transgressions, he must not impute the fault therof vnto God, but vnto himself; for God doth cal men from their euill waies, that so they might not perish, but bee saued: the Prophet Dauid doth speake excellently of this, saying, The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse: Hee hath not dealt with vs after our sinnes, nor rewarded vs according to our iniquities:Psal 103. for as high as the heauen is aboue the earth, so great is his mercy towards them that feare him. As farre as the East is from the West; so farre hath hee remoued our sinnes from vs: As a father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that feare him. But some may obiect and say, that it is true, the mercy of God is exceeding great
 indeed, but the sinnes that I haue committed against God, haue not beene so much sinnes of weakenesse, or sinnes of infirmity, as they haue beene presumptuous horrible sinnes; yea, multitudes of them, besides all this, I haue continued a long time in them, tenne, twenty, thirty, or more yeares together; and therefore I may well doubt, whether the Lord hath any mercy for me:Esay. 1.18. Marke therefore what the Lord himselfe sayth vnto such: Come, let vs reason together, sayth the Lord, though your sinnes were as Crimson, they shal be made as white as Snow, and though they be as Scarlet, they shall be as wooll. So that no man can say without iniury against his owne soule, and giuing the lye vnto the glorious maiesty of God: My sinne is greater then can be forgiuen. True it is, that the Scripture makes mention of an vnpardonable sinne that shall neuer bee forgiuen eyther in this world,Mat. 12.31. or in the world to come. The blasphemy against the spirit, but that is not in respect of the sinne it selfe, that it should exceed the mercies of God, or for that God is not able to forgiue it; but because they cannot relent, and repent that commit it, they are so farre gone that they can neuer Returne backe again; for, as no sinne is so small, but is able to plunge vs down to the bottome of hell if wee liue in it without repentance: so no sinne is so great and grieuous, but vpon repentance there is pardon and mercy to bee found with God: yet men must take heed that they abuse not Gods goodnesse and mercy, as an occasion of liberty to turne his grace into wantonnesse, saying, as the manner of some is, Oh, God is mercifull, hee is gracious to great and grieuous sinners, and so conclude thereupon, that they may liue as they list, and so deferre their repentance, and Returne vnto God till the last gaspe: but the holy Apostle will teach vs, an other vse of Gods mercy then so, when he sayth,
 Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnesse and patience,Rom. 2.4. and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnesse of God should lead thee to repentance? So that, do wee heare of the patience of God, the mercy of God, and the long suffering of God: Oh, what may it teach vs all but this lesson especially, to make haste, and to deferre no time to returne vnto him; for, what is God so mercifull and so patient, that hee hath spared thee so long, and giuen thee so large a time of repentance? Oh then how iust, and how great shall thy condemnation bee if thou reiect it, and make no other vse of it, then to boulster thee in thy sinnes; but of this before.
Last of all, hete is matter of consolation to all the children of God that are deiected and cast downe with the sense and feeling of their sinnes, their soules being heauy, and their consciences oppressed with their sin, they goe drouping and hang down their heads; well, let them cheare vp their soules, such they are that Christ calleth,Math. 11.28. Come vnto mee all yee that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, for my yoke is easie, and my burthen is light. When our terrors and temptations grow thus strong vpon vs, and that Sathan shall seeke to perswade vs, that our sinnes are more then God can forgiue, and the punishment that is due vnto vs for them, is greater then can be pardoned: What shall wee doe at this time, but labour herein to discouer the Arch-enemy of our soules, Sathan, who, thus as a lying spirit seekes to draw vs from this doctrine of Gods mercy, and to plunge our soules into the gulfe of desperation: but if our sinnes bee neuer so great, haue wee committed them without number, haue we committed them neuer so long, bee they as Crimson, double dyed sinnes, as infectious as a Leprosie, as red as Scarlet, and as filthy as dung; yet if God giue repentance, and wee can
 beleeue here, wee haue the promise of Gods mercy, yea, assurance of forgiuenes. Let vs returne vnto the Lord, and hee will heale vs, hee will bind vs vp. Oh then, let none bee discouraged from seeking vnto him for mercy: but let them seeke it rightly, and that by Repentance, and they shall obtaine assuredly.





VERSE. 2.

After two dayes hee will reviue vs, and the third day he will rayse vs vp, and wee shall liue in his sight.

IN these three verses, we first obserued these three speciall points? First, a most godly and christian exhortation of the beleeuing Iewes, wherein they perswade each other mutually to Returne vnto the Lord. Secondly, the reasons that they vse the better to moue and induce one another to performe this duty of Repentance, the first drawn from the iustice of God in these words, He hath wounded vs, Hee hath spoyled vs: The second, drawn from his mercy: Hee will beale vs, hee will bind vs vp. And because this reason drawne from the mercy of God is a reason of all reasons, yea, a most speciall reason to moue any one to turne to God that hath any sparke of grace; therfore
 the the holy Ghost doth amplifie this reason by two other circumstances; the first, drawn from the shortnesse of the time, wherein the Lord afflicts his people; it is but for a day or twaine, or at the most for three dayes, a short time, the Lord will not alwayes be angry with his children, but howsoeuer, he shall chastice them for a time, it will bee but for a time, Heauinesse may indure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning.
The second, taken from the greatnesse of his deliuerance, that though he hath spoyled vs, yet hee will Reuiue vs, and though hee had grieuously wounded vs, yet he will bind vp all the bleeding wounds of our soules, if we will patiently abide his leasure.
The third speciall point, is the fruit of true repentance, which are three: The first is, that if wee haue once beene spoyled of our owne righteousnesse, and wounded truely for our sinnes, and beene healed, and wrapped vp by the mercifull hand of God, We shall then liue as in his presence, in all holines and righteousnes. Secondly, he will power into our hearts that knowledge which will bring vs vnto eternall life, to know his will, how hee is affected towards vs: and this knowledge shal direct vs to walke wisely before his face, so that we shal desire to grow in this knowledge, and study dayly to attaine to a greater measure of it: We shall endeuour our selues to know the Lord. And the third and last fruit of Repentance is, that if we will draw neare to God by true repentance, hee will draw neare to vs, to comfort vs; set out by two similitudes, the first of them is in these words: The Lords comming is prepared as the morning: for indeed, many times it comes to passe in the  hearts of Gods children, that the sense and feeling of Gods loue and fauour is oftentimes extinguished: as the comfortable heate and light of the Sunne is taken away by reason of some thicke cloud that doth passe
 betwixt the Sunne and the earth; so, many times we thinke that God forgets vs, and hides himselfe from vs: but his comming to helpe vs is prepared, and therefore most certaine. And he shall come as the morning, and therefore most comfortable: for as the bright beams and cleare countenance of the Sunne after a windy and boisterous night, is very comfortable: Euen so, when after a cloudy night of affliction, wherein wee haue beene wounded and broken in our soules for our sinnes: the bright beams of Gods mercy breaking then forth, shall bee most comfortable to glad and reioyce the soule of a poore sinner: This then is the first fruit that shall follow our true conuersion vnto God, The Lords going foorth (to comfort vs, and to deliuer vs) is prepared, the Lord hath purposed it, and determined it of folde, that those that repent and Returne vnto him, shal find comfort and refreshing.
The second similitude which sheweth the second fruit of repentance, sheweth that the Lords comming shal not onely bee comfortable, but also most effectuall, and most welcome vnto the soule of this same poore sinner, that as helpe and deliuerance in time of greatrst danger is most welcome: So, when the Lord shall come with great and effectuall comfort, and bring helpe and deliuerance in time of greatest affliction and danger. Oh then it will be most set by and esteemed, and to assure the poore child of God of this comfort in time of need, the Prophet saith, that the Lord will come as the Raine, euen as the latter raine vnto the earth: Now as moderate raine is welcome as at all times, so especially in the heate of summer after a great and a long drought, when the earth is scorched with the heat of the Sunne, and beginnes to capper and gape for want of moisture, then a gracious and sweet shower is most welcome: Euen so, when a poore soule doth
 pant and breath vnder the burthen of his sinnes, and is schorched with the burning heat of affliction: then if the Lord in mercy send a gracious raine, an heauenly shower of his blessed mercy in this heat of affliction, this would bee most welcome, this would bee most comfortable; and this doth the Lord promise and assure his Church and children if they will Returne vnto him.
Of the exhortation wee haue spoke of before, as also of their reasons; the first, drawne from his iustice, Hee hath wounded vs, hee hath spoyled vs. And the second, drawne from his mercy, Hee will heale vs, hee will bind vs vp.
Now because this reason or argument drawn from the meccy of God, is the chiefest of all other, as Paul teacheth when he sayth,Rom. 12.1. I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God: therefore the holy Ghost here amplifies this reason: first by the shortnesse of time wherein the Lord afflicts his people, it is but for a day or two, a very short moment, After two dayes, or at the most, in the third day, hee will come vnto vs, if we humble our selues vnder his mighty hand,
After two dayes. It is all one as if they should haue said, True it is, the Lord hath grieuously spoyled vs for our sinnes, and wounded vs for our iniquities, so as his hand seemes grievous vnto vs: yea, let vs breake off our sinnes by repentance, and let vs Returne againe vnto him from whom we haue departed by our sinnes, and the Lord will soon remoue his iudgements from vs.
In this verse note three things: first, the person from whom all helpe, comfort and deliuerance doth come, He.Verse diuided.
Secondly, the circumstance of time, in the which the Lord will deliuer vs: After two dayes, or at the most, the third day.

Thirdly, the deliuerance it selfe with the seuerall fruits of it: He will reuiue vs, Raise vs vp, and wee shall liue in his sight.
 For the first of these which is the person from whom all helpe, comfort and deliuerance doth come, it is the Lord,The Person. for this is that the Church acknowledgeth here when they say, Hee will reuiue vs, hee will rayse vs vp. It was hee that had wounded them and spoyled them, so they seeke onely to him for helpe and deliuerance.
 Whose example may bee a notable president vnto vs in all misery to direct vs,In all our miseries wee must flie vnto God for deliuerance. vnto whom we should sue for deliuerance, euen to the Lord, who, as it is hee alone that killeth, so it is hee alone that maketh aliue againe. And in the performance of this duety, the holy Seruants of God haue gone before vs, who in the midst of all their troubles and afflictions, haue euermore had recourse vnto God, as that of the Prophet Dauid so oft in the booke of the Psalmes: Lord, how are my aduersaries increased against mee?Psal. 3.12. many say to my soule there is no helpe for him in his God, But thou O Lord art my Buckler.Psal. 7.1.2. And againe, O Lord in thee haue I put my trust, saue mee from them that persecute me,1. King. 17. Exod. 12. Deu. 32.39. and deliuer me. Who was it that sent Manna to the Israelites when they wanted bread, but the Lord? Who was it that could giue water out of a stony rock, but the Lord? And who was it againe that could command the Rauens to feed his Prophet, but the Lord? And who was it that brought the people out of Egypt when they were so pursued by Pharaoh, euen to the red Sea, where through they passed safely when the Egyptians perished, but the Lord? This doth Moses set downe,2. Kin. 19.3. Act. 12.1.2. Io 5.14, Dan. 9.17. at large when hee speaketh in the person of God: Behold now, for I am hee, and there is no Gods with me, I kil and giue life, I wound and make whole, neither is there any that can deliuer out of my hand: This duty was practised
 of good King Ezechi^s when Ierusalem was besieged, and the Temple was in danger to be desolated? What was the course that this godly King did take in this time of great calamity and misery of the Church? surely, hee sought vnto the Lord, and prayed, saying:Io. 11.41. O Lord I beseech th^e saue vs out of his hand, that all the Kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou (O Lord) art onely God. Besides these plentifull examples, and the like whereof the Scriptures are full; wee haue the promise of God that hee will heare vs, and deliuer vs if we seeke onely for helpe and deliuerance at his hands. As that place of the Psalmist:Psal. 50.15. Mat. 7.7. Psal. 34.9. and 37.5. Call vpon mee in the day of thy trouble and I will heare thee, and deliuer thee. And againe, Aske and you shall haue, Seeke and you shall find, Knocke and it shall be opened vnto you. Oh what gracious and mercifull promises hath God made vnto his Church and people, and all to make vs to rely vpon him? It is not tribulation, it is not afflictions that shall any whit hinder our blessednesse, the Lord hath promised to sanctifie them all vnto vs, and that they shall worke for our good, they shall neuer depart from vs, but they shall leaue a blessing behind them. Now let vs come to the vses of this Doctrine.
The Doctrine being thus cleared, that as all iudgements  and afflictions come from God, so wee must seeke onely to him for helpe and deliuerance; this serueth in the first place to condemne that horrible and diuelish practise of many in these dayes and times wherein wee liue, that when the hand of God is vpon them,Brand of a wicked man to resort to Witches for health in time of distresse. and that the Lord doth strike their bodies with long and tedious sicknesse, losse of Cattell, or the like, where they might see clearely the hand of God, and the finger of the Lord: What doe they, out by and by ^^nd out to some Cunning man (as they call them) of Cunning women, or rather indeed, vnto
 the Deuill himselfe, neuer looke vnto the purpose and prouidence of God which ruleth and gouerneth all things from the highest to the lowest in the world, without whose purpose and prouidence nothing could come to passe, no, not the least ache in a mans little finger, as our Sauiour teacheth, The farthing Sparrow cannot light on the ground without the prouidence of your heauenly Father. Oh, what folly and madnesse is this in men, that they should thus forsake the Lord, and runne to the Deuill; surely, it is a note and a brand of a wicked man, for the child of God in the time of misery and affliction doth euer turne vnto God by true and vnfained repentance, and doth bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life, they beleeue in God and rest vpon him for comfort and deliuerance: But of this before.
Secondly, wee may obserue hence the endlesse  goodnesse of God towards his Church and people, that hee neuer leaueth them without comfort:Comfort to the godly, that hee is priuy to their miseries, and will deliuer them. for if the Lord command vs to seeke vnto him in time of trouble and great distresse, surely, then the Lord will not send vs away empty, not suffer vs to depart away ashamed: let our present care then bee to serue the Lord, and then wee shall haue our part and portion in this perogatiue, which all the wicked and vngodly wretches of the world come short off: I called vpon the Lord in trouble (sayth the Prophet Dauid) and the Lord heard mee at large:Mat. 28. All other comforts come short of this, that in time of Sicknesse, Triall, Trouble, Assaults of Sathan, Temptation and houre of death, wee shall finde comfort if wee Returne vnto him* Oh* blessed life, Oh happy condition, that God (...) leaue his comfortlesse, but will bee thus with them (...) end of the world. So that no man can now (...) vaine to serue the Lord:Mal. 3.14. And what profit (...) ^^^ping
 the commandement, herein wee see our Labour is not in vaine in the Lord, because in the middest of all our troubles, miseries and afflictions here,Rom. 8.37. We are more then Conquerours through him that hath loued vs. Oh then let vs goe vnto God, and seeke euer for helpe and deliuerance at his hands: No Father is more ready and willing to heare his child, then the Lord is ready and neare at hand to heare vs. Let vs tread in the steps of Dauid, Ezechias, the Prophets and Apostles, and other holy men of God, who haue euer in their greatest troubles resorted vnto the Lord for helpe and deliuerance. And howsoeuer the Papists may teach men to pray to Saints and Angels, to the Virgin Mary, and to Stockes and Stones, pretending therein humility, that they will not bee so bolde to come to God themselues, but vse the mediation of such as are about him: Yet let vs know, that Abraham, Isaack and Iacob, Moses and the Prophets were as humble men, yea, more humble then any Papist can be; yet their humility did no whit hinder their holy boldnesse to come into Gods presence, and to sue to him for grace and fauour.
The second generall obseruation, is the circumstance of time, in the which the Lord will deliuer vs: After two dayes, and the third day hee will rayse vs vp. q. d. True it is the Lord hath grieuously spoyled vs for our sinnes, and wounded vs for our iniquities: wee haue tasted and felt the powerfull hand of God vpon vs, there is no way to escape his iudgements, but to breake off our sins by true and vnfained repentance, and (...) the Lord wil quickly remoue his iudgements (...) After two dayes, etc.Circumstance of time.
(...) we gather, that the afflictions that are layd (...) children, are neyther very durable, for  (...) day or two; neyther altogether incurable
 or intollerable,Afflictions layde vpon Gods children, are neyther durable, nor incurable. Esay. 54.7.8. 2. Cor. 4.17. for God will raise vs out of them all. This doth the Lord himselfe make cleare vnto vs by his Prophet, when hee sayth, For a little time haue I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: for a moment in mine anger hide I myselfe from thee, for a little season, but with euerlasting mercy haue I had compassion on thee. The holy Apostle Saint Paul teacheth vs that our light afflictions which last but for a moment, bring vnto vs a farre more excellent, euen an eternall weight of glory. Where note how the Apostle cals all our afflictions first light,Mat. 11.28. for Christs yoke is easie, and his burthen is light. And secondly, Momentany, lasting but a very short time, a day or twaine as the Text sayth here: Hereunto commeth the saying of the Psalmist:Psal. 30.5. Hee indureth but a while in his anger, and in his fauour is life: heauinesse may indure for a night,1. Cor. 10.13. but ioy commeth in the morning. Againe, They that sow in teares, shall reape in ioy: So that the afflictions of Gods people last but from euening till morning,Heb. 12.2. from sowing time till haruest; and howsoeuer God maketh the wicked men his Rodde,Psal. 37.74. yet the Rodde of the wicked shall not alwayes rest vpon the lotte of the righteous:Psal. 125.3. Though the Lord appoint his children for a time to be afflicted, yet it shall bee but for a time,Heb. 18. Gen. 47.14. And which shall come, will come, and will not tarry. This point of Doctrine is further cleared by the example of Ioseph, the Israelites in Egypt, of Dauid, of Daniel, and of many of the Saints and deare seruants of God,Exod. 12.41. who suffered shame, and indured the Crosse; were some of them tryed by one iudgement and affliction, some by another, yet the Lord awaked at last, as a man out of sleepe, and as a Gyant refreshed with wine, and when the time of refreshing came, they were deliuered. So that by this that hath been sayd,Dan. 6.23. we may safely conclude of the truth of this point, that how (...) ^he Lord may humble his Church and people (...) some
 Crosse for a time, yet hee will neuer leaue them destitute of his helpe and comfort, but at last deliuer them out of all.
And the Reasons are plaine: for first, the Lord is  priuy to our wants, and to our weakenesse, Hee knoweth whereof wee bee made, hee remembreth that wee are but dust: What Father but will pitty the wants of his Child, and when it is ready to fall into danger, wil not helpe it? the Lord is more tender to his children, then any earthly Father can bee towards his child:Mat. 6.7.11 Now if yee which be euill, know to giue your children good things how much more will your heauenly Father? And therefore saith the Apostle, That God is faithfull, which will not suffer vs to bee tempted aboue that wee are able,1. Cor. 10.13. but will euen giue the issue with the Temptation, that wee may bee made able to beare it.
Secondly, his eares are alwayes open to the cries  of his Children, and he putteth their teares into a bottle of remembrance, hee is priuy to their wants, and he heares their cries: I haue seene, I haue surely seen (sayth the Lord) the troubles of my people, I haue also heard their cries, and I will deliuer them: So long therefore as wee haue a voyce to call vpon God, or a heart to sigh and grone vnto him, wee need not to doubt of our deliuerance: so that, whether wee consider that the Lord is priuy to our wants or weaknesse, and alwayes heares the prayers, yea, the sighes and grones of his children; we need not any way to doubt, but that the Lord will put an end vnto all our troubles heere. The vses follow.
Seeing then that the Lord our God in afflicting  vs, layes no more vpon vs then wee shall bee able to beare, but in the middest of all our troubles, giues a blessing, and if wee seeke vnto him, hee doth manifest his loue in deliuering vs. This may teach vs all a profitable
 lesson, namely, to possesse our soules with patience, and to wayte the Lords leasure: for if we seeke to him by true repentance and hearty prayer; Hee that shall come and will come,Luke. 21. and will not tarry: This must be our comfort, that after two dayes, or at the most three dayes hee will visite vs, and rid vs out of our trouble and affliction (if the Lord do see the same to be good for vs:) And let vs take heed that we fall not to murmur against God, to repine and grudge at his chastisements, much lesse to charge God of cruelty: no, he afflicts but with light affliction, and such as bee but for a moment, a very short time, and therefore let vs runne to God, patiently endure his trials, kisse his rod, and his hand that smiteth vs, seeing hee afflicts vs for our good, and seeks onely our reformation, comfort, and saluation.
 But here I know it will bee obiected, How can this be true, that the iudgements and afflictions of Gods Church and children are so short, that God doth reuiue his children after two dayes, or at the third day at the most? Do we not see many good Christians that are the deare children of God, haue grieuous afflictions, some sicknes, some pouerty, some imprisonment, some exercised with the griefe of a wounded conscience, and they pray earnestly for remedy, yet the Lord doth still continue them in their misery; how then doth this stand, that afflictions last but a day or two, or some short time?
An. True it is indeed, that the Lord oftentimes throweth his children into continuall miseries and afflictions, continuall pouerty and sicknesse all their dayes, and the paine of a wounded conscience and troubled spirit till their last end; yet it is for their good: for by this meanes, the Lord wil purge their corrupt and cankered hearts, to humble them throughly, and to exercise
 their faith and patience, to mortifie their carnall hearts, to make them more earnest with God in praier, and by their continuall afflictions to preserue and keepe them, and preuent them from manifold sinnes and rebellions. And yet notwithstanding, God heares his children in their miseries, and forsakes them not, but in two dayes, or at the most in three dayes, that is, in a very short time, sends them comfort; though hee take not their afflictions away, yet he giues them that which is better for them. Our Sauiour Christ prayed vnto his Father most earnestly with cries and teares, to be freed from death,Heb. 5.7. And was heard in that hee feared. How was our Sauiour Christ heard in his Petition, praying to be freed from death, and yet hee must needes taste of the bitter cuppe of death? Ans. He was heard on this manner: first, in that hee was strengthned, not onely to beare and suffer the death vpon the Crosse, but to ouercome it, and to vanquish it, his Father sent an Angell to comfort him, and afterward he was freed from the sorrowes of death.
And so it is with the poore members of Christ, they be afflicted, they liue in sorrow, in pouerty, in sicknesse, in griefe of mind: Well, the Lord he giues them patience to suffer this affliction, so as it is not tedious and grieuous vnto them, and by his continuall afflicting of them he humbles them, and purges them of their cankered corruption, and stirres vp in them the feruency of prayer, makes them out of loue with the world, and makes them more to hunger after his mercy, and to depend on his fatherly goodnes. And thus though men thinke God forgets vs in our afflictions, yet hee doth remember vs, and giues vs that which is better for vs, then if hee should altogether remoue his correction. Iacob serued seuen yeers for Rahel, and it seemed vnto him but a few dayes,
 because hee loued her:Gen. 29.20. And surely, if we be perswaded of the loue of God, that though hee afflict vs seuen times seuen yeares, wee shall thinke it but a short time.
But the child of God oft complains, that they be afflicted not onely with continuall pouerty and sicknesse, but that they bee tormented with griefe of Soule, and feele the heauy burthen of their sinnes, and the anger of God against them for the same: yet remember what befell thy Lord and Master Iesus Christ when hee went to execution, the cruell Iewes made him carry his owne Crosse on his backe so long, till hee could carry it no longer hee was so faint; then behold, the Lord sent a good Symon of Syren to carrie his Crosse for him: So, art thou crossed with affliction? is thy soule wounded with the griefe and smart of sinne, and doest thou pant and breath vnder the heauy burthen of the Crosse? remember what thy Sauiour sayth vnto thee: Come vnto mee all yee that trauell and bee heauy laden,Mat. 11.28. and I will refresh you: If thou canst runne to Iesus Christ in the middest of thy griefe and misery by true repentance and earnest prayer, then he will become a blessed Simon to beare thy Crosse for thee, hee will put vnder his owne shoulder, hee will take thy sinnes, and the anger of God, and beare them on his owne backe; and if wee can but fling our selues into the blessed Armes of his mercy, hee will giue euerlasting rest vnto our soules.
And lastly, whereas many of Gods children complaine,Lam. 1.12. as Ieremy, See if there were euer any sorrow like my sorrow; And as the Prophet Dauid complaines, Hath God forgotten to bee gracious, and hath hee shut vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure? Yet they must know and confesse, that God doth in a short time comfort his children, and that his afflictions are neyther troublesome
 nor tedious, for though they last for the space of a mans life, what is a mans life, but a spanne long? and a thousand yeares with God, are but as a day. Againe, when they bee past and gone, though they lasted many yeares, it seemes but a short time. And what is twenty yeares affliction in comparison of eternall ioy and happinesse in heauen? who had not rather leade their liues in misery here, then in eternall torment in Hell fire in the life to come?
Well, seeing the afflictions of Gods children bee  but light and moment any, and last but for a few daies, wee must learne that lesson which Saint Paul teacheth vs, namely, to reioyce in affliction, knowing,Rom. 5.3. that affliction bringeth foorth patience; patience in suffering bringeth forth experience of Gods loue and fauour; and experience, hope; and hope makes vs rest our selues wholly content to wayte the Lords leasure; and were it not for this hope that God wil one day ease vs, the hearts of Gods children would burst in sunder; and his hope makes vs not ashamed, seeing that such is the loue of God, that he neuer failes nor forsakes his children: Many indeed are our infirmities, feares, cares, sorrowes and troubles heere, yet in the middest of them all wee must say with the Prophet:Psal. 42.5. Why art thou cast downe Oh my Soule, and why art thou disquieted within mee? Wayte on God, for I will yet giue him thanks, he is my present helpe and my God: Let vs not therfore despayre in the time of trouble,Rom. 16.20. The God of peace shall tread Sathan vnder your feet shortly, he is faithfull which hath promised. Affliction must bee our portion heere, wee must then get faith and patience into our soules, that so we may hold out vnto the end.
The third generall obseruation, is the deliuerance  it selfe, with the seuerall fruits and benefites therof, in these words: Hee will reuiue vs, hee will rayse vs vp,The deliuerance it selfe. and
 wee shall liue in his sight;Eph. 2.1. which words are expounded by the Apostle Paul, when hee sayth: Yee that were dead in trtspasses and sinnes hath hee quickned: Meaning thereby, that vntill such time as wee are quickned, and that the Lord doth reuiue vs by the grace of Regeneration, wee be no better then dead men, howsoeuer we walke and talke, heare and performe the actions of men; yet in respect of any spirituall life, or any spirituall actions, alas, wee are starke dead till the Lord reuiue vs: this being so, wee learne hence a twofold Doctrine: First, that by nature we are all starke dead in trespasses and sins: And secondly, that our Regeneration is as hardly wrought, as to raise vp a dead man, and to restore him againe to life.
 For the first of these, wee are taught heere, what we are by nature,All men by nature are dead, in respect of any spirituall life. namely, dead in trespasses and sinnes, sin is the bane and death of our soules: for the Wages of sinne is death: Death bringeth vs into the full and absolute power of the Deuill, that wee are all of vs thus seruants vnto sinne: It is plain by the Apostles complaint:Eph. 2.1. Rom. 6.23. Rom. 7.14. Rom. 6.16. Gen. 2.17. I am carnall sold vnder sinne, and then vnto whom soeuer wee giue our selues as seruants to obey, his seruants we are. Now that we are all by nature seruants vnto sin, and vnto death, it cannot bee denied; for what was it that God sayd vnto Adam, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt die the death: As soone as Adam had sinned, presently the sentence tooke place, and Adam is now become the child of death, and eternall destruction became his portion; and this is the condition of all Adams posterity; there is not the greatest, the noblest, the wealthiest, nor the fayrest amongst the sonnes of men, but wee are thus bound till the Sonne make vs free: Men are not onely sicke with sinne, or wounded by sinne, or halfe dead, but starke dead, bereft of all spirituall sense and motion: And this doth
 the Apostle most liuely and effectually set out vnto vs in another place, when he sayth, Yee were once darknes,Eph. 5.8. but now are light in the Lord; He doth not say, we were in darknesse,Io. 3.6. for then perhaps wee might haue come of our selues into the light againe: But yee were darknesse: Darknesse it selfe, yea, nothing else but Darknesse: and hence againe is it, that naturall men are called Flesh, not Fleshly, but flesh it selfe; and the wisdom, that is,Rom. 8.7. the best part that can bee in a naturall man, what is it but Enmitie with God, it may bring a man to Hell, but it cannot lead him one inch nearer vnto heauen: and therefore being thus starke dead in sinne, Alas, what can a dead man doe to helpe himselfe? No more can a natural man moue so much as one finger to procure saluation to himselfe; no, no, being dead in sinne, we cannot so much as thinke one good thought; much lesse haue wee free will of our selues to seeke for saluation, vntil such time as the Lord hath reuiued vs, and quickned vs by the Spirit of grace. Lazarus in the Gospell had layne dead foure dayes in the graue, so as hee beganne to rotte and to stinke; yet when our Sauiour Christ cryed with a loud voyce, Lazarus,Io. 11. come foorth, hee arose incontinently, and came and stood foorth: This is our case and condition, yea, the estate and condition of euery soule in the world, we be starke dead in trespasses and sinnes, nay, we lye rotting and putrifying in the graue of our sinnes, and vntill Iesus Christ by his spirit and loude voyce of the preaching of the Gospell, which is the Word of life, shal breath within vs the breath of life, and reuiue vs poore soules, wee cannot moue so much as one little finger to the Kingdome of heauen.
This may serue in the first place to confute that erroneous  Doctrine of the Papists, who say, that a man hath naturally Free-will in himselfe, by vertue whereof
 hee can dispose himselfe to the worke of his regeneration,Condemnes the Doctrine of the Papists touching Free Will. whose opinion, if it were granted, then were the power of God lesse seene in our second birth, then in our first birth, which were iniurious to the Spirit of God so to thinke: for, what can a dead man do to his owne quickning and raysing vp from the graue? can hee turne himselfe, or any way fitte or prepare himselfe to bee raysed? surely no, it is altogether impossible, nay, let a dead man haue all the helpe that may be to bee Raysed vp, yet vnlesse the soule bee giuen vnto him, all is in vaine; so fareth it with the naturall man, he can by no meanes dispose himselfe to any spirituall action or motion, vnlesse some spirituall life be put into him: But what sayeth the Aduersary, he may giue his consent to his quickning, though hee quicken not himsele: But say I, what consent, call wee the consent of a man that is dead; but not to stand vpon their presumptuous doctrine of Free wil, the which amongst many other points of Popery maintained by them, hath lifted vp many so high amongst them with this vaine opinion of their own worthinesse, that they find not themselues to stand in need for the Lord to lift them vp.
Then in the feare of God let euery man and woman,  and euery mothers child, labour to see our misery, to see our poore Soules how they lye rotting in sinne, and let vs,Serues to humble vs in that wee are dead, till the Lord quicken vs by his spirit. seeing wee bee as the poore Flyes in Winter starke dead, not able to moue our little finger to heauen, pray vnto the Lord, that hee would cause the blessed Sunne-shine of his Word and Gospell to shine vpon vs, to warme our cold and benummed soules, to quicken our dead consciences by the word of Life, and the blessed worke of his holy Spirit: for, so long as God doth not quicken vs, nor reuiue vs, alas, our soules be dead in sinne, and this death is the next step
 vnto eternall death in the fire of Hell: And therefore their case is dangerous and miserable which sleepe and snort in sin, and lye starke dead in the graue of sin, vntill it please the Lord to reuiue them by the preaching of the Gospell, which is the Power of God vnto Saluation, to Reuiue and to quicken our dead soules. This being so,Note. we see then it is no maruell though many that are present in the Assemblies of Gods people at the preaching of the Word, and yet reape no profite by it; the reason is, they are dead, now sound a Trumpet in a dead mans eare and he heares it not: Euen so,Esay. 58. let the Minister of Gods Word cry neuer so loude, and lift vp his voyce like a Trumpet, men are no more moued, eyther with the comforts of the Word, or with the threates of the Law, then the seates men sit on, because they are dead, till the Lord doe please to put life into them; And as for those that haue eares to heare with profite and comfort, blesse God for it, and giue him the glory for so great a mercy; for certaine it is, by nature the condition of all men is alike, till the Lord hath wrought in vs the worke of grace, and Reuiued vs with the breath of life. Oh what cause then hath man by nature to swell with pride, or to bee lifted vp with any conceit at all of his owne worthinesse, though they haue neuer so many excellent parts of nature, as wit, capacity, strength, beauty, or outward gifts, as riches, honour, authority, etc. yet surely, men may see, that if they bee not Reuiued, if they bee not borne againe, translated out of Adam, and ingrafted into Iesus Christ; alas, they are but as a dead corps that is trimmed and stucke with so many goodly flowers; yea the due consideration of that miserable estate and condition in the which they are by nature, may cause them to droupe,Tit. 1.15. and to hang downe their heads, for by their owne filthinesse and impuritie,
 all these their excellent ornaments are defiled, and become impure, for so sayth the Apostle, To those that are defiled is nothing pure, but euen their minds and consciences are defiled. Oh, if this point were wel considered, how it would pull downe the pride of mans heart, and make men to hasten to come out of so fearefull an estate and condition.
 The second point of Doctrine wee obserue hence by the authority of this Text, is, that our regeneration is as hardly wrought,Regeneration a worke of new creation. Rom. 5.12. Rom. 6.23. as to rayse vp a dead man, and to restore him againe to life, as hard a thing to saue a soule that is dead, as to giue life to one that hath a long time lyen rotting in the graue. Death is gone ouer all, sayth the Apostle, and The wages of sinne is death. And God told Adam,Gen. 2.17. that in that day that he should eate of the forbidden fruit, Hee should die the death. Now, in so much as wee haue all taken part with him in his disobedience, wee must also partake with him in his punishment, and the punishment is Death, not death in respect of any being of the creature (as all wicked and vngodly sinners might wish it were:) but Death, in respect of our eternall separation from God, In whose presence is life, and at whose right hand is pleasure for euermore: This is our estate and condition by nature, vntill the Lord doe Reuiue vs: and to Reuiue vs, and quicken vs, is as hard a matter, as to rayse vp a dead man out of his graue. This doth the Prophet Dauid acknowledge, when he desired of God, that he would Create in him a new heart.Psal. 51.10. And surely, it is as great a matter to Create a new heart, as for the Lord againe to Create a new world; yea, and in some respects it may seeme harder, for in the Creation of the world, the Lord but spake the Word, and all was made, there was no hinderance, there was no opposition; but in the creation of the heart a new, there are many lets and hinderances;
 first, within a man, for euery man by nature is an enemy vnto his owne saluation, and the flesh resists this worke: besides, the Deuil he labours by al means possible to hinder so blessed a worke. Besides all this, it is a worke of great difficulty, not accomplished without great labour and paine, and therefore it is called in the Scripture, A Birth, a Death, a Circumcision: now as no Birth, no Death, no cutting off the Flesh can be without paine and sorrow; no more can the conuersion of a sinner; the Infant is not deliuered out of the Mothers wombe without paine; and doest thou thinke (O man) to part with sinne that is within thee, which was conceiued in the wombe with thee, and euer since hath been nourished and brought vp with thee as a familiar companion, and not taste of paine,Eph. 2.1. and heart smart in thy new birth? no assuredly, it will not be, but it will cost thee much sorrow, many a sigh, and many a bitter teare before this work of grace be effectually wrought in thee. It is not in this case, as in producing the forms of many Natural things here below which are brought e potentia materiae, out of a capable pronenesse of the thing it selfe, to receiue such a forme: but in the worke of our Regeneration, God doth by his spirit deliuer the mind from blindnesse and ignorance, the will from rebellion, the affections from disorder, and all the powers and faculties of the soule from corruption, when man is altogether opposite thereto.
This Doctrine doth iustly condemne most men and  women amongst vs; we think it is an easie matter to be a Christian, and so be saued, that it is an easie maner to goe to Heauen, and many men who be starke dead in sinne, and blesse themselues in their euill wayes, yet blush not to say, they hope to come to heauen as well as the best Preacher of them all: Oh poore soule, thou art but a dead man in the sight of God, wounded
 at the heart with sinne, and vnlesse thou bee reuiued and quickned, and raysed out of the graue of sinne by the wonderfull worke of God, thou canst not bee saued. Our Sauiour Christ being working of some great miracle, hee tels his Disciples that they should do greater works then that; namely, they should saue mens soules, and that is farre greater then to saue and helpe the body. God created all things with his bare word, breathed into Adam the Breath of Life;Gen. 2. Io. 11. Our Sauiour Christ raysed Lazarus with his word; but before hee can rayse a Sinner out of the graue of sinne, and put into vs the breath of spirituall life, the Sonne of God must come from Heauen and suffer a most cruell and shamefull death,1. Cor. 1.21. Iohn. 17.17. euen the death vpon the Crosse before he can quicken and Reuiue vs; and therefore it is not so easie a matter as most men take it to bee, to become a good Christian: No, no, it is the hardest thing in the world to become a good Christian, and so to be saued. And therefore seeing this is the estate and condition of vs all; Oh how carefull ought wee to bee to vse all good meanes that God hath appointed,Act. 15.9. to saue our soules, as namely, the Word preached, the Sacraments, Prayer, Meditations in the Law of God, seeing that by these meanes the Lord doth quicken and Reuiue our dead soules.Ps. 119.
 Secondly, wee are taught heere, that seeing we are all dead in Adam by nature, vntill such time as the Lord doth quicken vs, and Reuiue vs; let no man then content himselfe with this diuelish conceit and perswasion, that hee can at his owne time and leasure deliuer himselfe from the bondage of sinne and Sathan, as it is the corrupt thought of many, that though they haue beene the seruants of sinne and of death, twentie or forty yeares together, yet they thinke that one Lord haue mercy vpon me, will open the Heauen gates:
 but O thou vaine man, O thou vaine woman, Oh, see heere, that it is the Lord that must worke in thee this worke of grace, for by nature thou art Reprobate vnto euery good worke: And this new birth is not giuen to euery one; No, no, onely Gods children, who are carefull to vse the meanes, as hearing the Word preached and taught, Sacrament, Prayer, etc. for, by these doth the Lord Reuiue vs and quicken vs, else we cannot thinke a good thought: and as the Lord must beginne grace in our hearts, so hee must continue it, and increase it; and therefore it is sayd heere,Reu. 20.6. He shall rayse vs vp, and make vs able to walke in the duties of pietie and religion, of faith and repentance, and sincere obedience: Holy and blessed are they that haue part in the first Resurrection, for, on them the second Death hath no power. If then God hath begunne to Reuiue thee, and to Rayse thee out of the graue of sinne: Oh, then thou art blessed and happy, for thou mayest bee sure that the second death, that is, eternall death, shall haue no power ouer thee: but as for those which are yet in the state of Nature, vnregenerate, not Reuiued, not quickned by the life of grace; Alas, alas, they bee at the next dore to eternall death, And vnlesse, they seeke vnto the Lord by true and vnfained repentance, that hee may Reuiue their dead Soules, and Rayse them vp from the graue of sinne, they must needs perish eternally: And therefore, vntill such time as the Lord shall Reuiue vs, and that wee shall feele the power of Christs death within vs dye to sinne, whatsoeuer the vaine and foolish perswasion of our hearts may be, yet we are in a most cursed and wretched estate and condition.

And in the third day hee will rayse vs vp,

These words containe in them the second degree of their deliuerance; where wee may see that there 
 bee degrees of our spirituall life;Regeneration begun, must be continued. As we see a child first learnes to stand alone, then to goe in the hands of the Nurse, and after, comming to more strength, to walke alone: So fareth it with Gods Children; First, the Lord must Reuiue and quicken vs, else we cannot thinke a good thought; and as the Lord must begin grace in our hearts, so hee must continue it, and increase it, and therefore it is sayd heere: Hee shall raise vs vp, and make vs to walke in the duties of Piety and religion, of Faith, Repentance, and true obedience.
So that the point of Doctrine which wee are to obserue, hence is this, that the worke of Regeneration begunne in vs, must bee continued, and dayly more and more encreased; so as wee may feele the power of the Spirit dayly subduing sinne in vs,2. Cor. 7.1. and our naturall corruption and carnall affections that are so deepely rooted in vs by nature. It is the exhortation of the blessed Apostle,Heb. 6.1. That wee cleanse our selues from all filthinesse of the Flesh and Spirit, and grow vp vnto full holinesse in the feare of God. And the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews exhorts men, not to satisfie them selues with the Principles of Religion, which hee calleth the Doctrine of the beginning of Christ, as though it were inough that they had made an entrance and a beginning, but that they bee ledde forward to Perfection. q. d. It is true, you haue begunne well, yet yee must thinke that it is not sufficient, but there is a kind of perfection to bee aymed at. And Paul speaking of the excellent estate of a Christian,Phil. 3.13.14. sayth, I count not my selfe that I haue attayned it: And yet Paul was wonderfully expert in the mystery of Christ: But one thing I doe sayth hee, I forget that which is behind, and I endeuour my selfe to that which is before, and follow hard towards the marke for the price of the highest calling of God in Christ Iesus.2. Tim. 3.13.
 It is noted as a brand of a wicked man, that hee waxeth worse and worse,Deu. 29, 19. and fals away dayly more from one extremity to another: adding Drunkennes to thirst whereas, on the contrary part, It is a true note of the spirit of God in a man when they grow in grace, and are led nearer and nearer to perfection. And this same spirituall growth in grace and in godlines, is not in mans power by nature to performe, no more then the beginning thereof, as we heard before, but it is the proper worke of the holy Ghost:1. Thess. 5.23. The very God of peace sanctifie you through out: It cannot come from our parents: For who can bring a cleane thing out of filthinesse?Iob. 13. Iob. 1.16. but Of his fulnesse wee all receiue grace for grace. It is a point no doubt, well knowne vnto vs in speculation, that we are to goe on from one degree of sactification to another, from one measure of grace to another: and therefore I forbeare any further to enlarge the point.
This may serue to reproue those that thinke they haue got knowledge inough into their soules like the  Church of Laodicea;Reu. 3.16. and are not ashamed many times to cloake their owne neglect of holy duties, to say, that they know as much as the best Preacher of them all: And indeed, were it not so that men were so perswaded, that for matters of religion they were forward inough, and had learned inough; It could not be that they should make so little account of the means to bring them vnto more perfection: How is it possible, that they should not bee ashamed of themselues, to bee found out of Gods house on the Saboath day, and to make their chimney corners their Chappell of ease? And how could it bee, that they should be now as ignorant in the grounds of Religion, as they were many yeares agoe? Alas, how can this holde good with this Text of Scripture, that those that are once reuiued by God, and quickned by the Spirit of grace,
 that they are also Raysed vp, that is, dayly more and more drawn away from the earth and earthly things, to Seeke those things that are aboue? Oh, let vs looke vnto our owne wayes betimes, And turne our feet into his Testimonies. And when we perceiue in vs any beginning or inclination to seeke after grace, resolue with Dauid, to Runne the way of Gods commandements.Psal. 119. Not to go forward, is to go backward in Religion; And howsoeuer the gift of Regeneration, the spirit of grace can neuer vtterly be extinguished and lost; yet when wee grow not in it, it is iust with God that wee should lose the comfort of that grace, and the feeling of that ioy wee were wont to finde in the same; and wee can neuer recouer it without much sorrow and griefe of heart. Let vs therefore remember that exhortation of the Holy Ghost: Hee that is holy, let him bee more holy; and not to content our selues with the beginning of grace,Reu. 22.11. but labour to goe on in grace, from one degree to another, till at last wee become perfect men in Christ Iesus.
 Secondly, wee are taught here, that if it bee so dangerous a thing not to goe forward in religion, what a fearefull sinne must it needs be then, to grow backeward in holy things?Luk. 11.26. Their last estate (sayth our Sauiour) shall bee worse then the first. And againe, It had beene better for them not to haue knowne the way of righteousnesse,2. Pet. 2.21. then after they haue known it, to turne away. The righteous are by Salomon compared to the Sunne that shineth more and more till it bee perfect day.Pro. 4.18. Ezec. 47.3.4. And the Prophet Ezechiel figures out the graces of God by waters flowing from the Sanctuary, which were at the first to the Ankles,Heb. 6.6. then to the Knees, then to the Loynes; and last, as a Riuer that could not bee passed ouer: so are the graces the which God bestowes vpon his children. And therefore on the contrary part, what is it but a
 feareful iudgement of God vpon the soule of that man that doth decay in spirituall grace,1. Thess. 4.4. and a fearefull signe of Reprobation? for, They which haue beene once enlightned, and haue tasted of the gifts of Gods spirit, if they once fall backe, it is impossible they should bee reuiued by repentance: Oh then,2. Pet. 3.18. let the exhortation of the Apostle be precious with vs, That we encrease yet more and more, that wee grow in grace, and bee led Forward to perfection; that so wee may minister true comfort and reioycing vnto our owne soules, that the Lord hath begun that good worke in vs, that hee hath Reuiued vs, euen because hee hath Raysed vs vp, and that there is a spirituall growth of Gods graces in vs.


And wee shall liue in his sight.

THe third principall point in this Text, is the fruit  of true Repentance, for,The fruit of true repentance. Mat. 12.33. Mat. 3.10. as our Sauiour Christ sayth; Euery tree is knowne by his fruit: And againe, Euery tree that bringeth not foorth good fruit, is h^wen down, and cast into the fire. Euen so, that Repentance which brings not foorth fruit in our life and conuersation; namely, a reformation of the whole man to liue in the feare of God, and in the true knowledge of God, it is but a barren and fruitlesse faith, a counterfeit and fained Repentance. And therefore, though thou professe thy selfe a Christian, and takest thy selfe to be the child of God, hearest the Word, and receyuest the Sacrament; yet if thou find not these fruits of faith and repentance, more or lesse in thy heart and life, thou deceyuest thine owne Soule; for it cannot be, that those which truely beleeue in Christ, and repent vnfainedly, but they must needs lead holy liues in righteousnesse and true obedience.

And wee shall liue in his fight. First, the Lord must quicken and Reuiue vs, then wee shall liue: He must first rayse vs vp, else wee cannot Liue in his sight: For indeed, wee are like vnto trees, which seeme all the Winter time to be dead trees, without buddes, blossomes, leaues or fruit; but in the Spring time, they are warmed and reuiued through the heat of the Sun, and bring foorth fruit accordingly: Euen so, all the Winter, that is, the time of our remayning in the estate of nature: We are Dead in trespasses and sinnes, and wee are so frozen in our sinnes, that wee haue neyther budde nor blossome, neyther can we bring forth any fruit till such time as Iesus Christ warme out dead and benummed soules, and quicken vs by the blessed beams of his grace and mercy. When as the dead bones of the man were put into the graue of the man of God, they reuiued: Euen so, when as Iesus Christ shal but touch our dead hearts by the gracious working of his blessed Spirit, wee shall bee Reuiued, raised vp, and we shal liue in his sight.
Wee shall liue in his sight. These words may be taken two wayes,Gods sight, What? 1. Vel in fau^^ (...), that is, in his fauour: Vel conspectu illius, that is, in his most blessed presence; both of which Expositions be profitable and fitte for this place.
First, Wee shall liue in his sight, that is in his fauour, and in the bright Beames and Sunne-shine of Gods mercy,1. Gods fauour. for so are these words, Before his face, often taken in the Scriptures,Psal. 31.22. as that of the Prophet Dauid, I sayd in my haste, I am cast from thy presence, or face. Againe,Psal. 4.6. the same Prophet sayth in another place: Many say, who will shew vs any good? But Lord, lift thou vp the light of thy countenance vpon vs. So these words, Wee shal liue in thy sight, that is, we shall liue in thy fauour, wheras, for our sinnes thou hast been iustly angry, and offended
 with vs, and turned away thy loue and fauour, and beene angry with vs: Yet now, if we shall repent and turne vnto thee, wee shall then finde thee gracious and mercifull vnto vs, and that thou wilt shew vs thy louing and amiable countenance, now after the time that thou hast plagued vs.
Heere wee are taught what is the wofull fruit of  sinne, namely,Godly by repentance, are brought into Gods fauour. to auert and turn away the louing countenance of the Lord from a man, and to cast him out of his fauour. As also, what a wonderfull blessing we get and obtaine at Gods hands by true and vnfained repentance; namely, this, that we shall then liue in his sight, that is, in his fauour, when wee shall enioy his louing fauour, his goodnesse, and comfortable presence. This Doctrine is cleare by the scope of the whole Scriptures, how that the godly by their hearty repentance, and Turning vnto God, haue a gracious acceptance with God, and are receyued againe into fauour: Hee will not alwayes bee chiding,Psal. 1 c 3.9. neyther keepeth hee his anger for euer. Indeed, hee sheweth sometimes his heauy countenance and his wrathfull displeasure against sinne and sinners: but so soone as the sinner is humbled, and Returns vnto him by vnfained repentance, he receyueth him to mercy; the sinne is pardoned, and the punishment remoued: When Dauid had sinned in numbring the people,2. Sam. 24.17 1. Chr. 21.15. the Lord was moued to wrath against Dauid for this his sinne, and sent the pestilence three daies in Israel, that many thousands of the people dyed: But when Dauids heart smote him, and that he had confessed his sinne, the Lord repented him of the euill, and sayd vnto the Angell, It is inough, let thy hand cease: This is further confirmed by that generall proclamation of the Prophet Ezechiel, where hee sayth:Ezez. 18.21.22. If the wicked will returne from the sinnes hee hath committed, and keepe all my statutes, and doe
 that which is lawfull and right, hee shall surely liue, and not die: All his transgressions that he hath committed, shall not bee mentioned vnto him, but in the righteousnesse that hee hath done hee shall liue. This is further confirmed vnto vs by the example of the Prodigall sonne, a true patterne of euery penitent Sinner, when he had intertained within himselfe this purpose of heart, to Returne againe to his Father, his Father preuented him with his loue, he went out to meet him, and when he met him, such was his ioy that hee fell on his necke, and kissed him. This Father of the Prodigall, is indeed God our Father, and his loue and kindnes remembred in that Parable, is recorded for all posterities to the end of the World, to assure them of Gods mercifull dealing towards those that doe truely repent and turn vnto him, that hee will receiue them againe into fauour, which is heere meant by The sight of God, or his presence. And the Prophet Dauid sayth,Ps. 16.11. In his presence is life and fulnesse of ioy and happinesse for euermore. And thus wee see, that howsoeuer by our sinnes we make a separation betwixt God and vs, and cause him to plague and punish vs heere; yet, His mercy is ouer all his works, And vpon our repentance hee will receiue vs againe into fauour.
 And the reason of this the mercifull dealing of God, is especially for the comfort and reioycing of Gods poore people, that none to the end of the world should despaire of obtaining mercy, for the mercy of God in Christ is aboue all his works; hee extendeth it to thousands, it is infinite without measure. And the Lord is not content onely to promise mercy and fauour vnto penitent sinners, but also confirmes vs in the assurance of it, by the examples of his manifold mercies shewed to others before vs: When we looke vpon them, let our weakenesse bee strengthned, and
 let vs not thinke that the Lord will shut that dore of mercy vpon vs, ere wee repent, who hath opened the same to so many before vs, Hee hath beene found of them that sought him not, sayth the Prophet,Hos. 11.4. and will he hide himselfe from vs, if forsaking our sinnes, wee seeke him in Spirit and truth? His mercies shewed to others, must be vnto vs, Cords of Loue, to draw vs amongst the rest vnto him.
The Doctrine being thus cleared: Let vs now come to the vses of it.
First, seeing there is mercy in store for the Penitent, and howsoeuer by sinne we deserued vtterly to bee cast out of Gods fauour, yet if wee can repent and Returne vnto him, he will receiue vs againe into fauour, And we shall liue in his sight. It requireth of vs speedily to repent, and to Turne vnto him, and not to deferre our repentance from day to day, lest it come to passe, that our hearts be hardned through the deceitfulnesse of sin. As no sinne is so great, but vpon repentance it is pardonable: so, no sinne is so small, but without repentance it is able to plucke vs downe to the bottome of Hell. Let vs then take heed that wee abuse not his goodnesse, nor to take occasion of liberty,Rom. 4.2. to turne his grace into wantonnesse; for, wee doe not know how soone the threed of our fraile life will bee cut off, when there shall bee no place for Repentance, though with Esau wee seeke the same with Teares.Heb. 12. Luk. 12.20. 1. Thes. 5.3. Luk. 17.27. There was but a little time betweene Soule eate, drinke, etc. and Thou foole, this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee. And againe, the Apostle sayth, When men shall say, peace, peace, then shall come vpon them sodaine destruction. The olde World neuer thought themselues more secure, then when the floud came vpon them:G 9.23. The morning was faire when Lot went out of Sodom, and yet before night were the Sodomites destroyed.Act. 12.23. Well was it with Herod
 when hee beganne his Oration, but before it was ended, the Angell of the Lord smote him that hee was eaten vp of wormes. Oh, let vs lay these examples to heart: And whereas, wee haue by our sinnes turned away the louing kindnesse of God, and caused him to turne away his fauourable countenance from vs, and haue drawne downe his heauy iudgements vpon vs;Now that the Lord hath denied vs the deawes of heauen. Zach. 1.3. so as wee are cast out of his sight. Oh, let vs labour to be reconciled to him againe, let vs pray much and often, that hee would lift vp the Light of his countenance vpon vs, as in times past: Let vs Turne from our sinnes, and the Lord will Turne vnto vs. And this duty wee would the sooner practise, if we could but consider the wofull and miserable estate in which wee stand, vntill such time as wee bee reconciled to God. If a man were conuicted of high Treason against his Prince, and for the same were condemned to some cruell and shameful death, and that euery moment of an houre hee expected the execution of it, who could expresse the griefe of heart of this man? What comfort could he take in wife or children, in lands, or goods, in meat, or musicke? surely, nothing in the whole World could cheare his dead heart, saue onely the pardon of the Prince: such a Traytor is euery impenitent sinner, conuicted of hie Treason against the King of Heauen and earth, and he is within an ynch of death and hell, there wants nothing but the execution of Gods iudgements, which is sure and certain to come, without repentance. Good Lord, who would not now labour for his peace with God, Before the decree come forth? Yet we are in the way, we may now make our peace with our Aduersary: but if wee bee once arrested by Gods Serieant, Death, and wee bee cast into prison, there is no departure to be hoped for, till wee haue payde the vtmost farthing.

Secondly, seeing it is so blessed a thing to enioy  the fauour and comfortable presence of God, To liue in his sight: How should this moue vs to Turne to God, to auoyde all sinne, and euery euill way, and to take heed that wee doe nothing that may auert and turn away his louing countenance from vs? If it be a matter of great honour to liue in the presence of an earthly Prince, and to be in his fauour, how much more to be in the fauour of the Lord, to Liue for euer in his sight,1. Reg. 10.8. and to enioy his loue and fauour? If the Queene of the South did truely pronounce Salomons seruants happy that stood in his sight, and heard his wisdome? Oh, how much more are they happy men and women that liue in Gods presence, and be in high sauour with the Almighty! Oh, that wee could labour for this priuiledge: Well, let vs pray much and often, that the Lord would lift vp the light of his countenance vpon vs, and cause his face to shine vpon vs, that wee might draw neare vnto his presence by true repentance and holy obedience.
Thirdly, wee may hence conclude the blessed estate  of all that liue in Gods fauour: Hee is counted happy in the world that hath the fauour of a Prince: indeed, they bring with them many Priviledges and preferments; but alas, they are but temporall, neither last they for euer: for they are most vnstable and vncertaine, their honour in a moment of time is turned into dishonour, their glory into shame and confusion: Haman one day the happiest man in a Kingdome next to the King; the next day the most wtetched;Hest. 5.12. and 7.9. one day honoured, the next day hanged: Yea, it is the condition of the godly themselues, as wee may see in Dauid, Who greater in Sauls Court then Dauid? made the Sonne in Law of the King, and Captaine of the Hoast; yet by and by disgraced, degraded, and in perill
 of his life. But it is not so with God, for whome hee loueth once, he loueth euer: He doth not change, hee cannot lie, his gifts are without repentance. Oh then, let vs seeke for his fauour aboue the fauour of Princes, and when wee haue it, make much of it, for the estate of that man is happy and blessed; hee is at peace with heauen and earth, with men and Angels, with himselfe, and all others, with life and with death, and hath this comfort and assurance from the almighty, that nothing shall bee able to do him hurt.
Indeed, the child of God hath no promise to bee freed from trials and temptations, sicknesse, pouerty, and the like; but the child of God hath this promise, that these things shall neuer hurt him, the Lord will sanctifie them to his children, and they shall bee sure to leaue a blessing behind them. This is it which the Prophet Dauid handleth at large,Psa. 91.1. etc. Who so dwelleth in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty: Surely, hee shall deliuer thee from the snare of the Hunter, and from the noysome pestilence, etc. Not that the godly shall bee freed from all these calamities; but the meaning is, they shall not hurt the godly, but the Lord will euer giue them a sanctified vse of them, that they shall gaine more in the Spirit, then they can lose in the Flesh: so that wee see what a maruellous comfort it is that wee are at peace with God, that hee is our friend, and that he hath no controuersie against vs: for, if God were against vs, who should bee able to stand for vs? but being iustified by faith, wee are at peace with God: Besides that, wee are at peace with the elect Angels of God, with the children of God, with the creatures of God, and with himselfe for, if a man were at peace with all the world, with men and Angels, and yet were at warre in himselfe, that his owne sinnes did muster themselues against him,
 hee should then see what a blessing it is to haue a cleare conscience: But he is at peace with himselfe; so that the godly man alone that repents of his sins, is hee alone that is the blessed man. Hee liues in Gods sight.
Fourthly, and lastly, seeing that he that repents and Turnes vnto God, is hee alone That liues in Gods sight, that is, in Gods fauour: Alas then, how fearefull and wretched is the estate and condition of all those that are yet in their sinnes, and are out of Gods fauour? Ah poore soules, they haue no rest, they can looke for no peace; for both heauen, earth, and all creatures shall conspire against them: And as it was sayd of Ismael, his hand should bee against euery man, and euery mans hand against him: God is become their enemy, the Angels of God are armed to destroy them, and their owne consciences conuince and condemne them; Heauen gates are shut against them, and Hel opens her mouth maruellous wide to swallow them: there is not any thing in the whole world that can truly and properly bee called a wicked mans, but hell and damnation, and this, one day shall sure bee his portion. Marke then the difference betweene the child of God, and the wicked; the condition of the godly is many times in shew, miserable to the outward appearance;2. Cor. 6.9. but yet in it selfe most blessed and happy: They are as vnknowne, and yet knowne: as dying, and behold they liue; as chastened and yet not killed; as sorrowing, and yet alway reioysing; as poore, and yet making many rich; as hauing nothing, and yet possessing all things. Whereas, on the other side, the estate and condition of the wicked, is in shew many times blessed and happy, whereas indeede and in trueth, it is in it selfe most desperate, most wretched and miserable: for if those that Repent and Turne vnto God,
 Liue in Gods sight, and in his fauor; then those that are yet in their sins, are vnder Gods wrath and heauy displeasure.
Wee shall liue in his sight, or before his face; that is,Vel conspectu illius. wee shall endeuour to leade holy liues and godlie conuersations, euen as wee liued and stood before the eyes of the Lord himselfe, denying all vngodlinesse and worldly lusts, and liuing soberly, iustly, and godly in this present world.
 This Phrase, that wee must liue as in the presence of God, shewes how wee must behaue ourselues in this world;Godly liue as in Gods sight. Gen. 5.12. Gen. 22.1. namely, that in all we doe, we must consider, that wee bee euer in the blessed presence of God: So it is sayd, that Enoch walked with God, that is, in his whole life behaued himselfe as in the presence of God. So Gen. 22.1. I am God all-sufficient, walke before mee, and bee thou perfect: And surely, it is a worthy fruite of true Repentance, and a sound note of a man regenerate,Gen. 39. when as in all his waies hee walkes and liues as in the sight of God. So did Dauid, I haue set God at my right hand, that I might not fall. It is a true note of him that repents truely, when hee doth walke as before the face of God, and is afraide to sinne, because he would not offend his God in whose presence hee stands:Phil. 3.20. Our Conuersation (sayth the Apostle) is in heauen, from whence we looke for a Sauiour, euen the Lord Iesus: Dauid makes this question,Psal. 15.1. Lord, who shall rest in thy mountaine, that is, in heauen, not as Pilgrimes for a time, but as heyres for euer?Ver. 2. And God maketh this answere, Hee that walketh vprightly, and worketh righteousnesse; that is, hee that liueth holily heere, as in Gods presence, he shall liue for euer; hee that loueth the face of God in his Church, shall one day see the face of God in his Kingdome: hee that professeth the Gospell, and is carefull of his wayes, not walking with a leg
 and a stumpe as they doe who seeme religious, and liue ill appearing righteous, and yet prophane, Hee shall stand before the Lord for euer, And indeede,Ps. 24.3.4. though wee haue our beeing heere in this vayle of misery, yet our conuersation must bee in heauen: We are but Exiles heere in this world, our Country is heauen, We are Pilgrimes and Strangers heere, our home is heauen, therefore we must liue according to the lawes of our Country, euen as if wee were in the Kingdome of Heauen, where we be free Denizens. And as Pilgrimes behaue themselues in an Inne, they stay not seuen or eight yeares, but a night or two, and so are gone: So must not wee settle our dwelling heere, where we are but Pilgrimes, but in heauen our dwelling place must our conuersation bee; as if now we were in Heauen, and in the presence of God. And as a stranger being farre from home, desires to come to his owne house, thinks euer of his Wife and Children, and of his own land and liuing: So must we heere being in a strange country, thinke of our home, desire still to see the face of God and of Christ our most blessed Redeemer, that so wee may liue in his blessed presence.
Seeing this is a speciall note of a man truely regenerate, and that hath truely repented, to behaue  himselfe as in the presence of God, and as in his sight: so as hee dares doe nothing that may offend the eyes of God. This shewes most plainely, that most men and women are farre from true repentance, and were neuer borne a new. Seeing many will make conscience of sin in the sight of men, which yet make no bones to commit it in the sight of God: What man is so shamelesse to commit Adultery in the sight of men? yet there bee many that feare not, nor blush not to commit it in the sight of God: Saint Paul saith,
 They steale, commit Adulterie, and do all euill in the night: Alas,Phil. 4.5. night and day bee all alike to God, the Lord is at our elbowes, and therefore let vs remember this, and as wee would not dare to commit any vnseemely thing in the presence of the King: so let vs not dare to commit sin in the presence of God. Men will looke carefully to their behauiour, while they are in the presence of the Prince or temporal Magistrate, though otherwise wicked and godlesse men; yet in the presence of the Prince they will abstaine from euill: Oh that wee were as carefull to behaue our selues in the most glorious presence of the great King of heauen and earth, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Hee sees all wee doe, heares our words, pierces into the secrets of our hearts: neyther can the least though of ours escape the piercing eye of the Almighty: and therefore we should labour to watch ouer al our works and words, yea, ouer the very thoughts of our hearts, that they may be sincere, and such as we need not be ashamed of; for, bee wee wel assured, that wee shall giue account of the very thoughts of our hearts, yea, of euery idle word; how much more of blasphemous oathes and most monstrous sinnes. The theefe steales in the night, the drunkard is drunke in the night, and the filthy person commits his vncleannesse in the night, and they thinke they bee sure, who sees them? who can accuse them? Oh, thy God sees thee, thou standest in his presence, hee heares and sees all thou doest: and though thou mayest keepe it close from the eyes of men, yet thou canst not hide it from the eyes of the Almighty, who wil one day call thee to an account for the same.






VERSE. 3.

Then shall wee haue knowledge, and indeuour our selues to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come vnto vs as the raine, and as the latter raine vnto the earth.

IN this third verse, wee haue heere described vnto vs two other most heauenly and blessed effects of sound repentance,Two other effects of true repentance set downe. and true conuersion vnto the Lord.
First, that all those which doe vnfainedly  mourne for their sinnes, and the pardon of them at the hands of God, as for life and death; the Lord will not onely comfort their wounded soules, but enable them by the gracious worke of his holy and sanctifying Spirit, to liue holily in his sight: but hee will with all poure into their soules this heauenly and blessed Knowledge, which shall direct them to the true seruice and worship of God.
And secondly, if wee doe draw neare vnto God by  true repentance, the Lord likewise, though he defer his helpe for a time, yet in the end will come assuredly with most pleasant and effectuall comfort, which is described vnto vs by two most excellent similitudes: First, of the chearefull breaking foorth of the
 Sun after a tempestuous storme: Secondly, by the latter raine, distilling vpon the scorched earth, by both of which, the Lord will shew, that he is ready in due time to comfort the distressed soule and conscience of a poore sinner.


Then shall wee haue knowledge, and endeuour our selues to know the Lord.

Text diuided.IN these words being the first part of the Verse, wee are to obserue three speciall points.
 First, the roote from the which this true, sauing, and heauenly knowledge is deriued, and the fountaine from the which it doth spring, in this word, Then.
 Secondly, wee are to search and to trie what maner of knowledge this is heere spoken of by the Holy Ghost. It is not carnall knowledge, it is not any worldly knowledge, it is no Philosophicall Knowledge, or the knowledge of humane Arts and Sciences: But this knowledge heere spoken of, is a spirituall knowledge, a diuine knowledge, an heauenlie knowledge, a sauing knowledge, which is of that nature and quality, that it puts all those which haue it, into a reall possession of eternall life; It is the way to eternall life, it is the Key to open the gate of heauen vnto vs, and it is (as it were) the finger of God that puts vs into reall possession of eternall life.
Thirdly, wee haue to consider another special fruit  or quality of this sauing Knowledge, that it will neuer suffer those men and women which haue this Knowledge put into their hearts by rhe finger of God, to be content with a little, or a scant measure of this knowledge; but it is of that diuine nature; that it wil whet
 them on, and inflame their hearts to hunger, and thirst after a great measure and portion of this heauenly and blessed Knowledge; so, as it will make men to labour, and to endeauour to come to a greater measure of it: To grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Iesus Christ.
And first of all, for the root from whence this true, sauing, and heauenly Knowledge is deriued,Point. and the fountaine from which it doth spring, it is layde downe in this word, Then shall wee haue Knowledge; that is,Repentance goes before sanctified knowledge. when men are truly humbled for their sins, do mourn for them, and when that men haue the feare of God before their eyes, so as they liue as in the presence of God, and looke carefully to themselues, not only outwardly in regard of their words and works, but euen inwardly to the thoughts of their hearts, and therein labour to bee approued of the Lord: then will the Lord poure into their hearts this heauenly and blessed Knowledge, euen when that men haue the feare of God before their eyes, to liue and behaue themselues, As in his sight.
Heere then wee are taught in the first place, what  is the ground and foundation of the true knowledge of God, which, as our Sauiour sayth,Humiliation for sin, must goe before the sanctified knowledge of God. Io. 17.3. will bring a man to eternall life, and without which wee cannot be saued. Namely, this, the sight of a mans sins, and of his wandring from God by error of life; When a man sees the most wofull and miserable estate in which he is by reason of sinne, and hath in him a godly purpose of heart to cleaue vnto the Lord, and for the time to come, so to liue and to walke, as euer in the sight of God: Surely, this is the foundation that must be layde by euery Soule, to get this Knowledge of God;Pro. 1.7. Agreeable to this is that of Salomon: The feare of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. It is the chiefest part
 of true wisdome indeed:Deut. 4.6. This is your wisdome and vnderstanding, that you keepe these ordinances, and do them. If we looke into the Scripture, we shal see good proofe for this point, namely, that the true sight of our own wandring from God by our by-past error of life, with a godly care and christian resolution, that for the time to come, we will Liue as in his sight, that is, in his blessed presence, is the ground-worke or foundation of this Knowledge of God, which will bring a man to life eternall: Wherefore did almighty God so expostulate the matter with our Grandfather Adam after he had sinned,Gen. 3. by his variety of demaunds; Adam, where art thou? Who tolde thee that thou wast naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree? But all to this end, to bring Adam to the sight of his sin, and thereby to make way for a further worke of grace.Ier. 8.6. And Ieremie lamenting the backwardnesse of people, that there was no true conuersion to be found amongst them,Psal. 14.3. Rom. 3.10. Esay. 53.6. Esay. 1.3. assigneth this as the cause of all. I hearkned (sayth he) but none spake aright, no man repented him of his wickednesst, saying, Alas, what haue I done? q. d. There was not a man to be found amongst them, that had so much as a conceit of his owne wandring from God, but euery man was highly conceited of himselfe, and of his owne worthinesse, that their present courses were right and vnblameable; and that is the cause why so few conuert and turne to the Lord. So then, by this that hath been spoken, it appeareth clearely, that true humiliation for sinne, and reuerent awe of the presence of God, must be the ground-work and foundation of this sanctified Knowledge of God, which, as our Sauiour sayth, will bring a man to life eternall. And now wee come to the vses.
 First, seeing wee are taught heere, that the sight of a mans sinne, with this godly purpose and resolution
 of heart, to leaue and forsake them, and a reuerent awe of Gods presence, is the beginning and foundation of that true sanctified Knowledge; which will bring a man to life eternall. If then wee doe thinke that there is a God in heauen which is true of his word, and that this Doctrine now deliuered, is part of that holy truth, by the which wee shall all be iudged at the last day: if wee bee not able to deny but the renouncing of our old and accustomed sins, which haue been so neare and so deare vnto vs,Io. 17.3. must euer goe before this Knowledge of God, which will giue vs one day an admittance into eternall life. How should it bee then that wee should so much deceyue our owne soules, as to thinke that wee can be saued; seeing yet wee haue not forsaken the deeds of the flesh; nor yet neuer set one foot forward in the way that leadeth vnto life; for our owne hearts doe know, and besides, the world is priuy to it, that what sinfull courses heretofore wee liued and delighted in, in the same we continue at this day. Alas, alas, it is the iust complaint that may bee taken vp of those times, that Euery man turnes to his race, as the horse rusheth into the battell. Where is the man amongst vs that entreth into a strict examination of his owne estate, and to say, Alas, what haue I done? How is it with mee? how shall I be able to answere for this course of life, in the which I haue liued, when the Lord shall call mee to a stricct account for the same? Alas, I finde that I haue gone astray as a sheepe that is lost, I haue wandred a long time in the by-pathes of sin and wickednesse, and I will now at last, Arise and goe to my Father, and say to him, Father, I haue sinned against heauen, and against thee,Luke. 15. and am no more worthy to bee called thy sonne. O, where is the man that thus communeth with himselfe, and with his owne heart in his secret Chamber betwixt God and his owne soule? but
 rather on the contrary, euery man holds on in his wonted fashion, vaine pleasures, and violent catching after the things of this world, as if wee were born to no other end, but to adde sin vnto sin, and to adde vnto the measure of Gods wrath, to bee heaped vp against vs, against the day of his wrath, and manifestations of his most righteous iudgement. And that this is so, I appeale vnto the conscience of euery one amongst vs: What sinne is there whereunto we haue formerly beene addicted that (by the Ministery of the Word, now more plentifully reuealed vnto vs then in former times) wee haue for conscience sake reformed, and in stead thereof haue brought foorth the fruits of the Gospell? Oh, how can wee looke at the last day to stand with ioy and comfort before God and his Angels, when hee shall come to iudge the secrets of all hearts, when as that witnesse in our owne bosomes, I meane, our owne consciences, cannot testifie for vs, that wee haue reformed any one corruption. Well, to end this vse, commend mee to thy conscience, and tell it thus from me, whatsoeuer thou bee, that if thou abidest still in thy olde sins, thy ignorance, blindnesse, prophanenes, adulterie, vncleannesse, drunkennesse, swearing, couetousnesse, malice, etc.2. Cor. 5.17. This Pearle heere spoken of, this sanctified Knowledge of God, which will giue a man one day an admittance into eternall life, can neuer bee thine: hee must become a new Creature that will come into that new Ierusalem: Deceiue wee not our owne selues therefore any longer; eyther wee must beginne heere at the sight of our old errors, or else wee can neuer tread the path that leadeth vnto life.
Secondly, seeing that the true sight and feeling  of a mans sinnes, his reuerent feare and awe of God, is the fountaine of this knowledge, which brings vs to
 eternall life; let vs then pray vnto God that he would put his feare into our hearts, that wee may not sinne against him, for till such time as wee haue this feare of God, till wee bee truely humbled for our sinnes, and mourne for them, and liue and behaue our selues as in the presence of God, we shall neuer attaine to this Knowledge, which is the right way to bring vs to eternall life: for though men haue neuer so great knowledge in the word of God, and can speake of it neuer so well, though they can dispute of it, and discourse of the Scriptures; yet if our knowledge be not ioyned with the feare of God, to liue according to our knowledge; Alas, it is but a braine knowledge, it is farre from that sauing knowledge which wee ought to haue; and therfore if we would be assured that our knowledge is sound, and such as one day will giue vs an admittance into the kingdome of heauen, and yeeld true comfort and reioycing vnto our owne soules: Let vs then labour to finde our hearts humbled for sinne past, and a watchfull eye ouer our owne wayes for the time to come, and thtt we so carry and behaue our selues, as alwayes in the presence of God: for otherwise, though men think neuer so highly of their knowledge, if these things bee wanting in vs, wee can neuer attaine to this true sanctified knowledge heere spoken of.
Now I come to the next point, that is, to consider  diligently of what nature and condition this knowledge is, which is heere a most blessed fruit of Repentance,Point. and of the feare of God. And surely,What knowledge it is, hee heere speakes of. Io. 17.3. wee shall finde that this knowledge, it is no carnall knowledge, it is no worldly knowledge, it is not the knowledge of Philosophy, or of humane arts and sciences, vhich in themselues are good too: but this Knowledge heere spoken of, it is a heauenly Knowledge, whereof our Sauiour Christs speakes, hauing powred foorth vnto his Father
 that his heauenly prayer, that he would giue vnto his children eternall life; in the third verse he shews wherein this eternall life consists, namely, This is life eternall, to know thee to be the true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Of this knowledge speaketh the Prophet Esay, saying; By this knowledge shal my righteous seruant iustifie many,Esay. 53.11. Io. 6.68. for hee shall beare their iniquities. And of this Knowledge wee shall read of, when our Sauiour Christ taught, that all they which must liue for euer, must eate the flesh of the sonne of man: It is said that many of his Disciples departed from him: Christ sayth to the twelue: Will yee also goe away from mee? Peter answereth in the name of the rest; Master, whither shall wee goe from thee? Thou hast the Word of eternall life and wee beleeue and know that thou art Christ the sonne of the liuing God: Where, marke how the Apostle ioines faith and knowledge together; noting indeed that this knowledge is a fruit of faith, for till men beleeue in God the Father, as our Father, and in Iesus Christ his sonne, as our redeemer, and in the holy Ghost, as our sanctifier, wee cannot know God as wee ought to know him.
Now then, in that this Knowledge is promised from  the Lord, as a fruit of true repentance, which shall follow immediately vpon our conuersion vnto God, and without which conuersion wee can neuer attaine vnto this sanctified knowledge of the Lord Iesus, which will one day giue vs an admittance into the eternall inheritance:
The true knowledge of God in Christ is giuen only to the Elect after their conuersion.We are taught, that the true knowledge of God, and of Iesus Christ, is giuen onely vnto the Elect, and doth follow their repentance and conuersion vnto God: for so is it taught vs heere, after that these beleeuing Iewes had exhorted and stirred vp one another to returne vnto the Lord; they promise this knowledge
 vnto themselues as a fruit of their repentance and conuersion vnto God, Then shall wee haue knowledge; that is, howsoeuer wee haue heretofore deceyued our own soules, resting vpon our owne selues, our own knowledge and righteousnesse, which indeede is but generall and confused, and such as the wicked themselues may partake of; yet now, if wee will repent of our sins, and Returne againe wnto the Lord, from whom wee haue departed by our manifold impieties, we shal haue giuen vnto vs a sanctified knowledge of the Lord Iesus; yea, such a liuely knowledge that will neuer leaue vs, till it set vs into the full possession of life eternall, according to that of our Sauiour: This is life eternall,Io. 17.3. to know thee to bee the true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. And againe, our Sauiour witnesseth the same in another place, where hee sayth:Io. 6.45. All the Elect are taught of God. And the Prophet Ieremy maketh it the glory of all the Elect; Thus sayth the Lord,Ier. 9.24. Let not the Wiseman glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, neyther let the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that hee vnderstandeth and knoweth mee, sayth the Lord. It is the singular gift of Gods grace, not giuen (as I said before) vnto al men indifferently, but onely to the Elect (as our Sauiour testifieth of his Disciples:Mar. 4.11. To you it is giuen to know the mistery of the Kingdom of God: but vnto them which are without, all things are done in Parables,Phil. 3.9. that they seeing may not see, etc.Rom. 10.2. And the Apostle Paul esteemed al things but dung incomparison of this knowledge: without it, zeale is little worth, and sacrifice is in vaine.Hos. 6.6. And this knowledge is brought and conuayed vnto vs by the ministery of the Gospell of Christ.Rom. 1.20. It is not the knowledge of God reueiled in the Booke of his Creatures, that he heere speakes of,2 Cor. 4.6. nor a knowledge of God reuealed in the morall law of God, where God requireth absolute
 and perfect obedience; but it is that knowledge which is made known vnto vs through the couenant of grace in the glorious Gospell of Christ: And hence it is that the Apostle sayth,Rom. 10.3. that the Iewes knowing the righteousnesse which is by the Law, and went about to stablish it, and to seeke to bee iustified by it, being altogether ignorant of this Euangelicall righteousnesse which is by faith without the works of the Law: and no maruell, for as the Apostle sayth, that they whose cogitations are darkned, are strangers from the life of God. Well then, knowest thou not Christ, what hee is, and what hee hath done, and how his death and sufferings may bee auaileable for thee, to the saluation of thy Soule? Let mee tell thee, that thou art not yet in the way to eternall life; for, if thou haddest faith, it would apply Iesus Christ vnto thy owne soule in particular, though not at all times, with the like assurance: this Paul begged for the Colossians, That they might bee filled with all wisedome, and spirituall vnderstanding, that they might bee able to comprehend what is the breadth and length, and depth, and height,Col. 1.9. Eph. 5.18. and to know the loue of Christ: So that wee see, that the true knowledge of God, and of Christ, it is such a iewell that God will not trust all men with, but onely the Elect. Now let vs see what vses this Doctrine may affoord vs, for our further instruction.
 This may serue in the first place to reproue those that rest vpon a confused and superstitious knowledge of God, such knowledge as may bee had by the light of nature, or such as may bee gathered by the sight of creatures: but will some say, are there any such amongst Christians? vndoubtedly there be, who hauing liued in the bosome of the Church, and in the cleare light of the Gospell, ten, twenty, yea, thirty, or
 more yeares together; and yet to their shame be it spoken,) haue no more true sauing knowledge of God, then the very heathen that neuer heard of Christ: so that,Heb. 5.12. whereas in regard of their continuance in the Church, and the meanes that haue beene offered vnto them, They might haue beene teachers of others, yet haue they need to bee taught the beginning of faith; and are such as haue need of milke, and not of strong meat; who can consider without griefe of heart, in what state the greatest number of our people stand at this day? how many haue wee amongst vs, I will not say, as God said of the Infants of Nineueh, that know not their right hand from their left? but men growne, and of riper yeares, which in regard of their time might haue beene teachers of other; yet themselues are ignorant in the maine principles of Religion: these are like to the Potters clay, ready to take any form. What false religion and idolatrous worship (if it were authorized) would they not subscribe vnto? a lamentable case that wee should be still as babes and children, ready to bee drawne away with euery blast of vaine Doctrine, not being able to decerne the darkenesse of error from the light of truth; seeing as our Apostle saith;2. Cor. 4.3.4. 2. Thes. 2.11.12. If our Gospell bee hid, it is hid to them which perish, in whom the God of this world hath blinded their minds: Thus doth God send them strong delusions, that they should beleeue lyes; That all they might bee damned which beleeue not the truth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes.Io. 5.39. Let vs then seeke for knowledge as for treasures, and let vs Search the Scriptures, that in them wee may haue eternall life: Let vs haue the word of God dwell plentifully in vs, which is able to make vs wise to saluation: Let vs vse all good meanes to beget knowledge in vs, euen this sanctified knowledge which will bring a man to eternall life; Let vs often call our own wayes to an
 account, and labour to bee humbled for our sins; beg hard for mercy and pardon of them at Gods hands, and then vse all good meanes, as hearing the Word, reading, praying, etc. For, if by these things we make not way to our knowledge, whereupon it may be built as vpon a sure foundation: Alas, our knowledge it will be but vaine, idle, swimming in the braine, and farre from leading a man to the Kingdome of grace, or of glory. Oh then, thinke of this betimes, whilest the day of grace lasteth. Oh man, thou art laboured with from Sabbath to Sabbath, that thy heart may be seasoned with the knowledge of saluation, and that now thou mayest bee prepared for Christ: if now therefore thou reiect this kindnesse of his, it shall at last bee iust with God to turne this thy great ingratitude as dung into thy face, and because thou hast hated knowledge,Mat. 1.23. Pro. 7.22. therefore the Lord may iustly say, Depart from mee yee cursed, I know you not.
And that wee may bee able to try our selues, whether we haue this knowledge in our hearts, which puts vs into the reall possession of eternall life, it hath certaine notes and properties whereby it may bee decerned.
The properties of this sauing knowledge. 1. Io. 3.3. Act. 15.9.The first effect and property of this sauing knowledge is this, that being put into the heart of a Christian, it will purge a mans soule, mind, will and affection: Euery one that hath this hope (speaking of this knowledge of God) hee will purge himselfe as hee is pure. And againe, Faith purifieth the heart: so then hereby thou mayest trie and proue thy knowledge whether it bee this sauing knowledge of God,1 It purgeth the heart. or not: if thou finde that it purifies thy heart, purgeth thy mind, will and affection from sinne; this is an infallible marke and token, that it is this blessed and sanctified knowledge that is begunne in thee: whereas on
 the contrary part, carnall knowledge puffes vp the mind, but this knowledge expels pride, and casts a man downe for his sins: and therefore if thou finde thy heart filthy, and thy will rebellious, thy knowledge then is but fleshly and carnall, and it is not this sauing knowledge that is within thee.
Secondly, this knowledge is not a dead knowledge, but it is a liuing knowledge,2 It will quicken those that haue it. it is a quickning knowledge, and therefore called Eternall life, because it is liuing, and will quicken those that haue it in their breasts; it will not suffer a man to lye dead in sin, and rotting in sin, but it will rayse him vp, and quicken him in all holy duties to doe the Will of God.
The third property of this Knowludge is,3 It is euer working to destroy sinne. it is not an idle knowledge, onely swimming in the braine; but it is an operatiue and working knowledge; it will worke in them that haue it the mortification of sinne, and it will abolish naturall corruption by little and little, it will be powerful to worke many graces in them which haue it, as Faith, Repentance, Mortification, and newnesse of life, loue of God, zeale of his glory, sincere obedience to his Will in all things.
The fourth property of this sauing knowledge is this,4 It is permanent, it lasts for euer. that being put into the mind of any Christian man or woman, it is durable and permanent; and therefore our Sauiour cals it Eternall Life, because this Knowledge lasteth, not for a day or two, or for a yeare or two, but being begunne in this life, it lasteth for euer: Wee know in part onely in this life, but our knowledge shall bee perfect in the life to come.
Now seeing what this Knowledge is, and what properties  and effects it hath, namely, that this Knowledge is such a blessed gift of God wrought in the
 hearts of his children alone, as being powred into the breast of any man or woman, it will purge from sinne and dead works; it will quicken our dead and benummed soules, it will worke the mortification of the flesh, and enable vs dayly more and more to obey the will of God in holinesse and righteousnesse: and lastly, that this Knowledge is durable and permanent, not onely for this life, but also for the life to come. Oh let vs then euery one of vs in the feare of God try and examine our selues, whether wee haue in vs the knowledge of God, yea, or nay: If wee find the same to be in vs by the notes and properties of it, as abouesaid, wee bee then blessed and happy, wee bee in the right way to eternall life: nay, this blessed Knowledge will put vs into reall possession of eternal life, and the saluation of our poore soules. But diddest thou neuer find this blessed knowledge as yet in thy heart, but in stead therof thy mind full of ignorance: Thy will froward and rebellious, thy affections louing and delighting in sinne and vncleannesse? Alas, thou art then in a most cursed and miserable estate; thou abidest in death, and in danger of eternall damnation: And yet if wee trie our selues, it will appeare that most men and women haue not this sauing Knowledge in them, but liue in a most palpable ignorance, notwithstanding these clear sun-shine dayes of the Gospell.
 Againe, is this knowledge such an excellent gift and grace of God, that it puts men into a reall possession of eternall life? Oh, how should men therefore labour and study for this knowledge all the dayes of our life: If a man haue all the knowledge in the world, and yet want this knowledge, namely, that hee hath not this knowledge to know God the Father to be his Father, God the Son to bee his Redremer, and the Spirit of God to bee his Sanctifier; all other knowledge is but
 carnall, and shall not profite him to saluation. Wee see men can bee content to take great paines to study for worldly knowledge, the knowledge of the tongus, of Arts and Sciences, the knowledge of Philosophy, of Trades and Occupations, and that to maintaine a temporall life: And shall wee which bee Christians take no paines to study the word, and to heare it preached and taught vnto vs, thereby to attaine to this blessed knowledge which shall last for euer and euer, and neuer leaue vs till it bring vs to eternall life. And yet alas, wee see that most men and women are so bewitched with the loue of the world and earthly things which are but momentany, and last but for a time, that they eyther contemn, or at least they neglect this blessed Knowledge of God and of Christ, which will make them happy and blessed for euermore: this they neuer seeke for, nor will not put their heads out of their dores to come to heare the Word, whereby they might attaine to this knowledge: but let such carnall men and women know, that they contemning this knowledge of Christ heere, hee will likewise contemne them hereafter, and say vnto them, Depart from mee yee cursed, I know you not.
Seeing this knowledge thus to know God the Father  to bee our Father, Christ his Son our Sauiour and Redeemer, the Spirit of God our Comforter and Sanctifier, is the right way to eternall life, and puts our Soules in reall possession of the Kingdome of heauen; then all they which want this knowledge must needs abide in death, they liuing in blindnesse and ignorance of God and his Word, the Deuill must needs carry them blindfold to perdition; for the want of this knowledge is it that brings men to eternall confusion. Alas, poore miserable soules, when wisdome comes and cries at our dores, and yet men shall most
 vngratefully contemne this Knowledge, and refuse instruction, and trample this precious pearle vnder foot: Surely, these men and women bee they what they will bee, they doe voluntarily strippe themselues of eternall life; nay, like blind Bayards they run their poore soules into the pitte of Hell before they be aware: and therefore in the feare of God, if wee neuer had this Knowledge of God as yet: Now let vs labour for it, if wee haue it, then let vs labour that it may become effectuall vnto vs, to purge vs, to quicken vs, to change vs, that it bee not idle and naked.
Hitherro haue I shewed the nature and propertie of this knowledge: Now, because this knowledge is so excellent, so heauenly and diuine, therefore it must  needs haue an excellent obiect: What then is the obiect or the thing that wee must know? Surely, this knowledge is not of Arts and Sciences,It is God himselfe that is the obiect of a sanctified knowledge. it is not the knowledge of tongues, it is not the knowledge of Philosophy, and of the nature of things, all which are commendable in themselues: but the thing which wee must know, and which is the obiect of this heauenly and blessed knowledge, it is God himselfe. This is taught by our blessed Sauiour:Io. 17.3. 2. Cor. 13.^ This is life eternall, that they know thee the onely true God, and whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ. And this knowledge is so needfull and so necessary, that our hearts can neuer be ridde of the occasion of feare of our reprobation, till wee doe know God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the Holy Ghost, with their distinct offices.
Obiect. But alas, how can we which liue in darknes, attaine to the knowledge of God, who inhabiteth in that light which none can attaine vnto.
Answer. Certaine it is, that this knowledge of the true God is not attained vnto by nature, it is not in any man as hee is a natural man, to attain to this heauenly
 knowledge,Rom. 8.7. let naturall education bee neuer so good, and men neuer so excellent in witte or vnderstanding, or any other gift of nature: no, no, flesh and bloud can neuer attaine to this heauenly knowledge of the true God: But this knowledge thus to know the true God, is the proper gift of Iesus Christ alone, put into our hearts by the finger of his owne spirit, according to that of the Prophet Esay,Esay. 53 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous seruant iustifie many. And againe, No man knoweth the Father but the Sonne,Mat. 11.27. and he to whom the Sonne will reueale him.
Obiect. But how doth Iesus Christ the Sonne of God reueale his Father vnto vs, and makes him known to sinful men.
Ans. Iesus Christ reueales this Knowledge vnto vs which is eternal life, by the finger of his owne blessed Spirit, Paul may plant, Apollo may water,1. Cor. 3.6. but God alone giues the encrease. The Preaching of the Word, it is the ordinary means to beget this sauing Knowledge: But men can onely preach to the outward eares; it is the spirit of God alone that must open our hearts as hee did the heart of Lydea, and annoint our blind eyes,Act. 16 Reu 3.18. else wee shall neuer see. And therefore the Spirit of God is sayd to reueale such things vnto men, as neuer came into the heart of any carnal man once to thinke,1. Cor. 2.10. Euen the secret things of God: And what bee those, surely, such things as the most learned in the world maybe ignorant of: And the poore vnlearned and vnlettered man may haue greater knowledge in these then the greatest Doctor of all; namely,Note. the Spirit of God makes knowne to his children the loue of God in Iesus Christ: the pardon of sin; hee sees in his Soule and conscience,Rom. 8.15. what a blessed thing it to haue the pardon of sin, to feele the comfortable power of Gods Spirit, teaching vs to cry to him, Abba Father,




 and none else can haue this same sauing knowledge of God, so as the same may be powerfull and effectuall vnto their soules and consciences, saue the children of God.
How God the Father is to be known of vs. Deu. 6.6. Math. 22.37. Luk. 10.17.Now, concerning God the Father, wee must know and acknowledge, and that truely, soundly and beleeuing, that hee is the onely true God, and that there is none other God in heauen or earth, but him alone, and therefore he alone must bee adored, worshipped, beleeued, and prayed vnto, as the onely true God.
Secondly, wee must know and acknowledge, that God the Father is not onely the true God, but our God, not onely the Father of Christ, but also our Father, and hath adopted vs to be his children in Iesus Christ; and hath put his Spirit into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba, father; and he that doth thus know God is in the right way to eternal life: But he that cannot thus beleeue God sauingly,2. Tim. 1.12. soundly, and particularly, that the onely true God is his God, and that the Father of Iesus Christ is his Father, that he loues him as his child, and will bestow the Kingdom of Heauen vpon him as his inheritance; alas, hee abides in death, and hath not this sanctified knowledge of God within him.
Then wee must not rest vpon this bare knowledge, to know that God the Father is the onely true God, and the Father of Christ; for this is a bare knowledge, and a naked knowledge, and such a knowledge as may befal a wicked man,Iam. 2. Mar. 1.23. yea, the Deuill himselfe: for he beleeues and trembles, he acknowledgeth Christ to be the Sonne of God. And yet alas, how many thousand soules amongst vs come short of this knowledge of God which the Deuill hath? how many feare and tremble to thinke of God, and of the day of iudgement;
 but let vs euery one, euery man and euery woman, and euery mothers child amongst vs (if we would not bee in worse case then the Deuill himselfe) labour to goe beyond the Deuill and all wicked men watsoeuer, to know, and that soundly and particularly, that the onely true God is our God, and that the Father of Christ is our Father, that wee labour to get assurance of his loue towards vs, that he loues vs as his children, and wil bestow the kingdome of heauen vpon vs at the last. And if wee thus know God to be our God, and our blessed Father; wee must labour to performe all such duties as belong vnto him, as our God and louing Father.
First, that man that beleeues God to be the true  God, and vnto him a louing Father;Duties that are to be performed vnto God. this man must imitate him, and follow him, for it is the will of God that his Children should be like vnto himselfe.
Secondly, euery one that knoweth and beleeueth  God to be the true God, and in Christ his Father, this man must as a good child bee obedient to his fathers will in all things, for of them doth God the Father approue of to bee his children: And hence it is that God sayth; If I be a Master, where is my feare?Mal. 1.6. Mat. 12.50. If I bee a Father, where is my honour? And againe, Whosoeuer shall doe my Fathers will which is in Heauen, the same is my Brother, my Sister, and Mother:M. Perkins on the Creed Where wee see plainely taught vs this second duty, that if God be our Father, then as good children wee should shew obedience vnto him; but if we disobey him, then we must know, that that saying of Christ wil be verefied vpon vs; Yee are of your Father the Deuill,Io. 8.44. for the works of the Deuill yee will do: And indeed, no man can be so like to his Father that begot him, as are the disobedient and rebellious sinners like to their Sire, the Deuill.
Thirdly, euery one that knoweth and beleeueth 
 God to be the true God, and in Christ his Father, hee must learne to beare all crosses and outward afflictions patiently, knowing that they come from God, and to wayte for deliuerance from him; For, whom God loueth hee chastiseth. If two children should be fighting, and a man comming by should part them, and giue correction to one of them, euery man would conceiue that hee were his child whom he corrected: and surely, when the Lord doth lay his rod heauiest vpon his children, yet euen then doth hee shew himselfe a louing Father vnto vs: Now, if our earthly Fathers corrected vs, and wee gaue them reuerence, taking it patiently; should wee not much rather bee in subiection to the Father of Spirits, that we may liue. In a word, if wee thus know God to bee our God, and our blessed Father, we must loue him as our God and Father, feare him as our God, obey him, beleeue in him, and rest vpon him both in prosperity and aduersity, as vpon our mercifull God.
 The second thing to bee knowne to eternall life, is Iesus Christ the Sonne of God:How God the Sonne is to be known of vs. And therefore seeing no man can know the Father vnlesse he know the Sonne; therefore this knowledge is as necessary as the former, and concerning this, Saint Iohn sayth: We must not onely know the Father, but him also whom the Father hath sent, Iesus Christ. Now to that end wee may know him aright, wee must know and beleeue particularly, that hee is our Iesus our blessed Sauiour and Redeemer, who by his perfect obedience, and his bitter death and passion,Reu. 1.7. hath saued vs from all our sinnes, and from the curse of God and eternall damnation due to the same.
And in this one point is contained the height and depth of all knowledge, thus assuredly and beleeuingly to know in particular, that Iesus Christ was sent
 of his Father, that in our Nature he might die for our sinnes, and rise againe for our iustification. Oh blessed and thrice happy is that man and woman which hath this blessed knowledge put into their hearts by the spirit of God,Rom. 4.23. thus particularly to know and beleeue that Iesus Christ is their Iesus and Sauiour, who hath died for them to saue their soules: And indeed, this is the sweetnesse of the Gospell, and the marrow of all Religion, not simply to know that Iesus Christ is a Sauiour, but to know that hee is my Sauiour; not simply to know that he died for sinners, but for mee the chiefe of al sinners; not simply to know that there is an eternall life, but to know that there is eternall life layde vp for me: So that wee see, that it is not inough for a Christian to know the history of the Bible, that Iesus Christ is the Sauiour of the world, and dyed for those which beleeue in him: for this knowledge the Deuill himselfe hath, hee knoweth, and doth acknowledge Iesus Christ to bee the Sauiour of the world: but wee must labour for this particular knowledge, this certaine and experimentall knowledge: so as wee can say in truth of heart,Note. I beleeue and know that Iesus Christ is not onely the Sauiour of the world, but my Sauiour, not onely that he dyed for them which beleeue in him, but that hee dyed for me, and shedde his bloud to saue my soule: And though this were true, that though but one man or woman in the whole world should bee saued, yet we ought to haue this certaine knowledge, to beleeue I am the man, I am the woman: and they which haue this certaine and vnfalilble knowledge, they are in the right way to eternal life, but they which haue only a general and confused knowledge, swimming in the braine, alas, they abide in death.
The third speciall thing which wee must know, is
 the Spirite of God,How God the holy Ghost is to be knowne of vs. when as we can find and feele the worke of Gods Spirit within vs, when wee acknowledge him to bee the author and sole worker of this knowledge, when wee can know by experience in our owne selues, in our soules and consciences, that the Spirit of Christ is in vs,Gal. 2 20. 2. Cor. 13.5. that wee can say with the Apostle, Christ liueth in mee, and that hee doth make vs with boldnesse to call vpon God, and to cry vnto him Abba father,Rom. 8.15. when wee doe feele the blessed worke of the Spirit to mortifie our corrupt nature by little and little, weakening the strength of sinne, and naturall corruption within vs, and dayly raysing vs vp to newnesse of life, and repayring in vs more and more the blessed image of God in holinesse and righteousnesse, which hath greatly defaced in vs by reason of sinne and Sathan. This is that Knowledge, which whosoeuer finds put and powred into their soules by the Spirit of Christ Iesus, they are happy and blessed: they are in reall possession of eternall life: but as for those which want this knowledge, seeme they neuer so excellent, nor thinke they neuer so well of themselues, they bee but miserable and cursed, and abide in eternall death and damnation.
 Hauing thus at large shewed what is that knowledge heere spoken of,Ignorance of God and his word in matters of Religion is dangerous. and also the excellent fruits and effects that come from it; and what it is that wee must know; as also what great profite this knowledge brings to all those which haue it, namely, eternall life: It shall not now bee amisse to consider in a word, how dangerous a thing it is to want this sauing knowledge, and what great misery come to men and women by ignorance, and want of knowledge.
The blessed Sonne of God himselfe, who being most true, nay, the very truth and life it selfe, when he would shew the root and very spawne of sinne and iniquity,
 hee tels the Scribes and Pharisees,Mat. 22.29. Yee erre because yee know not the Scriptures, and the power of God.
And to what should we impute this in these dayes; that men runne into errors, and teach false, heretical, nay, damnable doctrine? surely, to this, because men know not the Scripture, and haue no knowledge in the word. What is the cause that men liue in sinne, in drunkennesse, whoredome, adultery, swearing, couetousnesse, etc? Alas, the cause of all is this, because they haue no knowledge: There is an excellent place to this purpose, in the Prophet Hosea,Hos. 1.2. where the Lord by his Prophet takes vp a great and grieuous complaint against the inhabitants of the land, because there was no Mercy nor Truth to bee found, but that men liued in Swearing, lying, killing, whoring, theeuing, etc. And the reason of all these, is there layde down in these words: There is no knowledge of God in the land. Read the fourth Chapter of Leuiticus,Leuit. 4. and there it wil appeare, how highly Almighty God condemned this sin of Ignorance by those Sacrifices that were to bee offered vp euen for the same.Heb. 2.1.
Now Ignorance is threefold.
1. It is a simple and meere ignorance.2. Is a carelesse ignorance.3. Is a wilfull and an affected ignorance.
All these kinds of ignorance are heere forbidden and condemned, as the greatest enemies to this knowledge.
The first of these, is simply for want of meanes,1 Of simple ignorance. which few men in these dayes and times wherein wee liue, are able to obiect; for the voyce of Gods Ministers haue sounded the Lords Trumpet of warning in
 most places of this land: so that if men now should bee ignorant, it must needs bee a wilfull and an affected ignorance; for by the mercy of our God, wee liue now in such times as knowledge is euen thrust vpon men, both by publike authority, and the restlesse labours of Gods faithfull Ministers:2. Cor. 4. so that we may conclude with the Apostle; If the Gospell bee hid, it is hid to them that perish, whom the Prince of this World hath blinded their minds: yet notwithstanding that men should want these means of knowledge, yet wil not their ignorance excuse them in the day of the Lord; It may excuse a tanto, but not a toto, as Diuines affirme, their punishment may be something the lesse, but it shal not free them from hauing any at all.
The second kind of ignorance that is heere condemned as an vtter engine to this knowledge,2 Of carelesse ignorance. is carelesse ignorance, which is indeed the onely sinne of these times, when hauing the means of knowledge, we care not for it, but neglect and contemne it: this is farre worse then the former: and if the former sort of ignorance will not excuse a man, much lesse will this: Oh, it is the sinne of thousands in the world at this day, that out of negligence and carelesnesse, neglect the meanes of knowledge offered vnto them:2. Cor. 4. Oh what a fearefull sinne is this, considering, that if the Gospell bee hidde, it is hid to them that perish; and that Christ Iesus will come at the last to render Vengeance to them which know him not,2. Thess. 1.8. and obey not the Gospell of Christ.
The last, is the wilfull and affected kind of ignorance,3 A wilfull and affected ignorance. when men shall please themselues in their owne wayes, and will not know their error, but labour and striue against it: when a man is addicted to some particular sinne, and will not see the same to bee a sin; this is the highest degree of
 ignorance, according to that common Prouerbe, None so blind, as he that wil not see. These are like those rebellious Iewes the Prophet Ieremie speaketh of, which sayd,Ier. 44.16. The word that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lord, wee will not heare it of thee, but wee will do whatsoeuer thing goeth out of our owne mouth. Alas, how many are there of this sort in these dayes and times wherein wee liue that are wilfully blind and ignorant,Psal. 58.5. That will not heare the charmer, charme he neuer so wisely. Oh let vs take heed, as of all ignorance, so especially of this last, for to sin in this degree, is to sin with a high hand against God, and it is a steppe to that sin against the holy Ghost, which shall neuer be forgiuen.
This may serue to condemne that cursed and damnable  doctrine of the Church of Rome, who teach, that ignorance is the Mother of Deuotion, and the more ignorant, the more deuout and religious: Yea, one of their fellowes in this land, in a seditious booke is not ashamed to say,Radford in his directatory to the truth. pag. 419 Mat. 22.18. that the poor Plow-man that sayth his PATER NOSTER, not vnderstanding the words, may pray with more deuotion, and please God better, then the greatest Doctor that can make a Sermon of euery Petition of the same. But our Sauiour Christ the chiefe Doctor of the Church, hee teacheth, that ignorance is the mother of error, sin, rebellion and damnation: And in euerie place the word of God shewes the danger of this sin; that those that liue in ignorance, and without the knowledge of God in his world, liue in a most feareful estate and condition, abounding in all maner of sin and iniquity, both against God and man. And surely this Doctrine of ignorance is one of the maine pillars of Popish Religion, to keepe men in blindnesse and ignorance, that they may not see their filthy abominations: for, if men were not extreame ignorant in the matters of God and his Word, how could they bee so
 abused and deceiued, to worship stockes and stones, to fall down to dumbe Images, etc.
 Secondly, this shewes the fearefull estate of al those that liue in ignorance without the knowledge of God and his word: these men must needs liue in sinne and wickednesse; for ignorance is the mother of all sin: And surely,Hos 4.1. it is a fearefull iudgement of God vpon this people: for, as the Prophet sayth, There is no knowledge of God in the land: so wee may say generally, There is no knowledge of God amongst many;Act. 17.30. but al kind of sin and wickednes abounds, because men liue in ignorance without the knowledge of God and his Word, as Popery, Idolatry, carnall security, presumption, swearing, blasphemy, contempt of the Word, prophanation of the Sabbath, neglect of all religion and good duties, all spring from this roote; want of knowledge.Luk. 23. Paul persecuted the Church of God, but it was through ignorance: And our Sauiour prayed to his Father for his persecutors,Mat. 11.20. because they knew not what they did. Oh, if men knew what a fearefull thing it is to liue in ignorance, and to want, neglect, or contemne the meanes of knowledge: how durst they dishonour God as they doe? but so long as men liue in ignorance, so long they will run into al sin, be prophane and wicked.
But of all ignorance there is none more dangerous and pernicious, and so a fearefull signe of Reprobation, as wilfull ignorance, when men shal shut their eyes at the light of the Gospel stoppe their eares, harden their hearts, and despise knowledge: Wisdom cryeth with^ut,Pro. 1.20. O yee fooles, how long will yee loue foolishnes, and the scornefull delight in scorning, and Fooles hate knowledge? because I haue called and yee refused, I haue stretched out my hand, and none regarded: but yee despise all my counsell, and would none of my Nurture, I will also
 laugh at your destruction.
Well, you heare that ignorance is a great sinne, especially, wilfull ignorance. You heare again that it abounds in most places, generally, the body of our people bee exceeding ignorant, as though they had neuer heard of God: Now, where ignorance abounds, there sin abounds, and where sin abounds, the curse of God must needs hang ouer their heads, as in that place of Hosea, the Lord threatneth,Hos. 4.2.3. that because of sinne, hee will make the whole Land to mourne.
Thus hauing shewed the sin it selfe, Ignorance, the Nature of the same, that it is opposite to knowledge, wee will proceed a little further, and shew the causes, why this fearefull iudgement of God raignes in most places, and why people are so ignorant. And secondly, the remedy of this sinne, how people may get out of it, and so come to the knowledge of God, and Eternall life.
The mayne cause why people bee so ignorant as they bee,Causes of ignorance. is the want of teaching in most Congregations, howsoeuer it hath pleased God that this complaint cannot bee taken vp of this Country, and parts:1 Want of Preaching yet I am not ignorant, that in some Townes and Parishes they haue the Word very seldome preached vnto them, perhaps monthly, or lesse: Now,Pro. 29.18. Where the Word is not preached, there the people perish; or where vision failes, the people are naked, void of knowledge,Rom. 10.14. grace, or the feare of God: How shall they beleeue without a Preacher? so, how should they know God,Mat. 15.14. Hos. 4 9. vnlesse they bee taught? for, if the Blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch: And againe, There shall bee like Priest, like people: Like Shepheard, like sheepe; an ignorant, carelesse and vnconscionable Minister, an ignorant, blind, and prophane people. And how can
 it bee otherwise: And therefore in the three first Chapters of the Revelation, where the Holy Ghost commends or discommends the Minister; he doth likewise commend or discommend the people, for the good estate of the people, depends (for the most part) on the good paines of the Minister.
2 Carelesnes of the people.Another cause why ignorance abounds, is the wonderfull security and carelesnesse of the people, they haue no desire to know God, nor loue, nor desire to the sincere Milke of the Word: yea, they are well content to liue still in their damnable ignorance and blindnesse:2. Pet 2. Iob. 21.15. Mal. 3 14. Who is the Almighty that wee should serue him, and what profite should wee haue if wee should pray vnto him? And againe, It is in vaine to serue the Lord, and what profit is it that we haue kept his commandement? Poore Soules, they thinke themselues to bee in good estate, that they haue knowledge inough, so long as they can say the Lords Prayer, the ten commandements and the Creed; and so it comes to passe, that they despising knowledge, and contemning the meanes, especially, the Ministery of the Word, they remaine so blinde and so ignorant as they bee.
The third maine cause of ignorance, is mans naturall corruption;3 Naturall corruption of man Ier. 10.14. Euery man by Nature is a beast by his owne knowledge: Man by Nature hath no more knowledge of God, then a beast; When Adam fell, hee lost that excellent knowledge of God, and now by Nature wee are blind and ignorant, without the true knowledge of God in Iesus Christ, till the Lord doe enlighten vs, and open our eyes, and reueale his Sonne Iesus Christ vnto vs in the Ministerie of his Word, the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ.
Now let vs come to the remedies: Ignorance
 of Gods word is a great sinne,Remedies of Ignorance. and a fearefull iudgement of God vpon any people; for, they can neuer come to faith, repentance, obedience, and etetnall life so long as they liue in it; no, they must needs liue in all sin against God and man.
Well,1 To see our ignorance, and to repent of the same. would you know how to get out of your ignorance, and so from vnder this fearefull and heauy iudgement of God that lies so heauy vpon you? would you come to knowledge to know God the Father, and his Sonne Iesus Christ, which is the onely way to eternall life? You must then repent of your ignorance,Io. 17.3. Act. 17.20. you must carefully see it, and acknowledge it that you bee extreame ignorant in Gods matters, blind in Gods word, without the true Knowledge of God in Iesus Christ; you must see it and confesse it, and withall bee sorry for it, and bewayle your estate that you haue liued so long in ignorance; and withall, you must desire the pardon of the same at Gods hands, and labour to come to knowledge in time to come.
Secondly, if you would get out of your wofull ignorance, and come to true knowledge,2 Attend vpon the ministery of the Word preached. 1. Pet. 2.2. Rom. 1.21. and 10.14. 1. Cor. 1.21. Act. 2.37. you must then carefully vse all holy meanes to come thereto. First, aboue all the rest, you must hunger and thirst after the Word of God, the preaching of the Word: Frequent Sermons, and tread in Gods house where wisdome cryes vnto you, and vtters her voyce. The preaching of the Word of God is the most excellent meanes to bring men out of the gulfe of their ignorance to sauing knowledge, true faith, and eternall life.
A third meanes to get out of ignorance, and to attaine vnto this sauing Knowledge,3 To reade the Scriptures. is the diligent and carefull reading of the holy Scriptures, the olde and new Testament, according to that of our Sauiour,
 Search the Scriptures,Io. 5.39. Psal. 119. Psal. 1.2. So that serious reading of the Word, with meditating vpon the same, it is a most excellent meanes to get out of ignorance, and to come to knowledge.
4 The reading and hearing of godly Catechismes.A fourth meanes to get out of ignorance, and to attaine to this sauing Knowledge, is the reading and learning of Catechismes, which containe the summe of Christian Religion: It is a speciall means to bring men to knowledge; and howsoeuer men thinke base of this kind of teaching; yet it is exceeding profitable and necessary, and a speciall means to bring men to knowledge; and as for those that vnderstand not the Principles of Religion, certainely, their case is dangerous; for Faith is not without the knowledge of these Principles in some measure, of the Law, the Gospell, Faith, Sacraments, Prayer, the Trinity of persons, etc.
The last speciall means to get out of ignorance, and to attaine to true and sauing Knowledge,5. Care to practise that wee know. is for a man to frame his life according to the Word of God, to leade a holy, a Christian, and a godly life; that howsoeuer his knowledge is not great, yet his care and desire to walke with God,Luk. 12.47. to lead a holy and sanctified life, and to liue according to his knowledge, this pleaseth the Lord well:Hos. 6.6. for I doubt not but little knowledge when the same is found in Christian obedience, is farre better,1 Sam. 15. and more acceptable with God, then much knowledge when obedience is wanting.
Well, to conclude this point, the vse of this Doctrine concernes both Minister and people.
 First, the Ministers who take vpon them the charge of mens soules,The Ministers duty. Io. 21. and stand bound vnto God by a solemne vow and obligation, To feed the Flocke of God that depends vpon them, and ouer which they bee made Ouerseers and Shepheards: and therefore
 woe vnto such Ministers as bee themselues ignorant,1. Pet. 5. Hos. 4.6. Ezec. 3. and cannot teach; or prophane and vnconscionable, and therefore will not take the paines to teach the people of God, but suffer them to lye and rotte in their ignorance, and so suffer them to perish for want of knowledge: How will such answere it in the day of the Lords wrath, when God will lay the bloud of mens soules to their charge? And surely, Soule-murder, it is the highest degree of murder. Christ was mooued with pitty when he saw the people scattered abroad as sheepe, hauing no shepheard:Mat. 14.14. But these Dumbe-dogs that cannot barke, so they may haue the Flesh and the Fleece, they care for no more. Christ sayth, that his Ministers that loue him, will Feed his Lambes; and hee giues this commandement three times to Peters,Io. 21. as the tryal of his loue to Christ: but if wee may try the loue of Ministers to Christ Iesus by this marke, namely; their careful, conscionable, and continuall feeding of Christs Sheepe: Wee may then say, the loue of many to Christ is like that of Iudas, he kissed him and killed him al at once, betraying him into the hands of his enemies to bee crucified. These contrary the members of Christ, by them betrayed into the hands of the Deuil, to destroy both soule and body in Hell fire: and therefore all such vnconscionable Ministers, as eyther preach not at all, or else but coldly and carelesly, though they should sweare that they loue Christ Iesus, yet the loue of Christ is not in them. Oh then, let this admonish all Ministers of Gods Word, that as they loue their owne soules; yea, as they desire Gods glory, and loue the Lord Iesus Christ, and haue any pitty of the poore Soules of his members, that they may not perish for euer in hel; so they would vse all careful diligence in Preaching the Word in season, and out of season, in labouring and vsing al careful diligence
 to saue mens Soules; to teach them, to Catechize them, and to instruct them, that so they may be saued.
 Secondly, for the people, they are to know, and to bee assured, that Ignorance of Gods Word is a great and feareful sin,The Hearers duety. and a heauy iudgement of God vpon this Land, it abounds wonderfully with ignorance; and so long as men be ignorant, they wil bee prophane. I would to God I had no iust cause to complaine of this our people: but the truth is, that though wee bee the Lords Vineyard, and hee hath hedged vs about, and planted a Vine-presse, euen the Preaching of the Gospel, to water the Land, yet as Paul sayth;Mat. 22.29. 1. Cor. 15. I speake to your shame, some haue not the knowledge of God. Now, if Paul might say so to the Church of Corinth; surely, this may as well bee verefied of many in our Church; I speake to your shame, some haue not the knowledge of God: Nay, that complaint of the Holy Ghost in another place may iustly bee taken vp against vs; Whereas, concerning the time, yee ought to bee Teachers: yet had yee need to bee taught the Principles of Religion. Euen so, whereas the most of vs, if we respect the long time God hath taken in teaching vs, we might haue been teachers; yet the truth is, the most had need to be taught the a. b. c. euen the principles of Christian Religion. Oh then, I beseech you in the feare of the Lord, that you would now at last looke into your estates; It is not the least of Gods fauours towards vs, that hee hath spared vs so long, that he hath not cut off the thred of our life in the dayes of our ignorance and blindnes, as many haue been before vs: Let vs now make hast to Returne vnto the Lord, and repent of this sin, That wee may liue in his sight.
Thus much for the second fruit of our conuersion
 and sincere Repentance, Wee shall haue knowledge. Now it is further added, And endeuour our selues to know the Lord.
AS a true, liuely,Meaning of the words. and sauing Knowledge is a fruit of true Repentance and Conuersion vnto God: so in these words, Wee shall endeuour our selues to know the Lord; is heere layde downe the fruit of sauing knowledge: namely, to hunger after more knowledge, as the Man of God had no sooner cast his Mantle vpon Elizeus but hee ran after him: so, if the Lord do but cast one dramme, and put one sparke of this sauing knowledge into the heart of any man or woman, it wil make them to run after the Lord, with an earnest desire and endeuour to get more knowledge.
The Word heere translated Endeuour, it signifyeth to prosecute earnestly,Three things required, to get this sauing knowledge. and to hunt after the knowledge of the Lord, euen with no lesse paines, nor lesse perseuerance, nor with no lesse pleasure then the Huntsman doth follow his game. So then this word commends three most excellent vertues vnto vs, in seeking after the Knowledge of God: for, as those which follow the game, take great pains, run through thicke and thin. And secondly, they perseuere, and continue from morning till night, and wil not leaue til they kil; and thirdly, take great delight in their paines. Euen so should wee, in seeking this blessed knowledge of God, vse these three: First, vse all pains and diligence. Secondly, persist and continue in seeking. And thirdly, take pleasure in it.
Hence then out of the first of these,Labour and pains required in all that will get sauing knowledge. we are taught this Doctrine, that a Christian man or woman must not bee secure, idle, or slothfull: but vse all possible paines, diligence and labour for the attaining of this sauing knowledg. We shall endeuour our selues to know
 the Lord, sayth the Text; that is, wee shall vse al possible meanes to attaine to this sauing knowledge of the Lord Iesus. For, it fares with this heauenly knowledge as with a man in a dropsie, the more hee drinks, the more he thirsts and desires drinke: so, Wee shall endeuour ourselues, that is, wee shall hunger and thirst after this heauenly knowledge, as the foode of our Soules, and neuer bee glutted with it, but labour to abound more and more in it. And for the further confirmation of this point of doctrine, the Scriptures afford vs diuers examples of Gods children, who haue been content to take great paines to seeke this knowledge of God.2. Reg. 4.23. When the Sunamite would goe to the Prophet Elizeus, her husband answered, Why wilt thou goe, seeing it is neythor New Moone, nor Sabboth day? Out of which words it appeares, that vpon such dayes they vsed to goe, yea farre iourneys to be instructed in the Word:L^k. 8.1.2. Act. 8.27. Luk. 13.24. So, in the Gospell wee shall read, that the people tooke long iourneyes and great paines to heare our Sauiour Christ: It was not the tediousnes of the weather, the distance of place, nor the weakenesse of their Sexe, being many of them women, that could any whit discourage them from seeking after Iesus Christ the Sauiour of their soules. And we read of the Eunuch, who went a long, troublesome and costly iourney to Ierusalem to get this knowledge of the true God: And it is the Precept of our blessed Sauiour himselfe, That wee striue to enter in at the straight gate: These examples, and the like, whereof the Scripture is full, al serue to confirme the truth of this point vnto vs; that diligence, labour and paines are reqvired in all those that would attaine to this blessed knowledge. It is not for a Christian man while he is heere to cast himselfe vpon a bed of ease, as Iezabel vpon her bed of fornication, and to promise a rest
 vnto himselfe heere: but there must bee a continuall growth and proceeding of knowledge, faith, repentance and the like graces: And if a man to gain worldly riches or honour, or knowledge, or the like, will goe farre and neare, by sea, and by land; how much more ought a Christian man to take paines to obtain that knowledge which will bring vs to eternall life, and puts vs into a reall possession of Gods Kingdome?
This doth most iustly condemne many amongst vs of great contempt and damnable negligence;  who wil not take any paines to get this Knowledge? nay, though it be brought vnto them, yet many vngratefully trample this blessed Knowledge vnder their feet: Alas, if wee could see the want of this Knowledge, what a dangerous thing it is, euen that which brings endlesse confusion,Io. 17.3. and also the good and gain which comes by it, namely, eternall life and saluation; then surely wee would seeke far and neare for it, as the people of God doe and haue done. But of this before.
Secondly, this word Endeuour doth import vnto vs the perseuerance that is required in all those that seeke for this Knowledge.Perseuerance and constancy is required in seeking for sauing knowledge. Act. 17.12. Wee see the Huntsman for his pleasure in his game, hee can bee content to seeke in euery bush, and to plod euery furrow till he find his game, and then hee neuer leaues from morning till night! Oh, how much more should we seeke and neuer lin seeking for this heauenly and sauing Knowledge till wee find it. The men of B^rea are commended for seeking and turning their books, to confirme and to encrease this Knowledge in them: So should wee not onely heare, but also Search the Scriptures, examine euery Chapter, leafe by leafe and line by line till wee find this Knowledge: It is not inough
 to begin to seeke, bot wee must continue seeking for this Knowledge:Luk. 11.62. Hee that puts his hand to the Lords Plough, and looketh backe, is not meet for the Kingdom of God:Mat. 24.4. but hee which endures to the end, shall be saued. Againe,1. Cor. 16.13. Stand fast in the faith, quite you like men, and bee strong. This is further cleared by that speech of our Sauiour to the Church of Smyrmye:Reu. 2.10. Bee thou faithfull vnto death,Gal 33. and I will giue thee a Crowne of life. And Paul blamed the Galathians, and called them Foolish, for beginning in the spirit, and ending in the Flesh: for not holding on as they had begun: and surely, the estate of such men is most fearefull, it had beene better for them that they had neuer known the truth: Nay, it had been better for them that they had neuer beene borne,2. Pet. 2.20. as Christ speaketh of Iudas, and as the Apostle obserues: If they after they haue escaped from the filthinesse of the World, through the acknowledging of the Lord and of the Sauiour Iesus Christ, are yet tangled againe therein, the latter end with them is worse then the beginning. And the reason of this Doctrine is cleare;  for of all graces and vertues, it is onely constancy and perseuerance that shall bee crowned. As no sinne condemns a man, but this final impenitency or continuance in the same sinne: so no grace or vertue shall bee crowned, but that which continues to the end. It is only continuance and perseuerance in any grace whatsoeuer that shall bee crowned with glory: for, If a righteous man turne from his righteousnesse;Ezec. 18.24. and do the thing that is euill, all the righteousnesse that hee hath done, shall bee remembred no more, hut in the wickednesse that hee hath committed, in the same hee shall die. And therefore wee may safely conclude, that continuance and perseuerance in seeking after more knowledge, and euery spiritual grace is that which doth crowne all our vertues whatsoeuer.

If then thou hast entered into the profession of Religion, if thou hast begunne to shew thy selfe sound in knowledge, and that thou hast tasted of the power of Gods Word: Oh, bee constant in that soundnesse and in that sincerity: Goe on in the same, grow dayly more and more towards perfection; let thy works be more at last then at first: And surely, this exhortation is very needfull, and cannot sufficiently bee vrged in this back-sliding age, wherein, many with Demas fall into loue with the world,Reu. 2.4. and with the Church of Ephesus loose their first loue, and grow secure and carelesse: nay, neyther hote nor cold in Religion; but the Lord one day will spue such back sliders out of his mouth: Alas, wee are hardly brought on to make a beginning in matters of Religion; for, it fareth with vs as it did with Zacheus,Luk. 19. when hee had a purpose to see Christ, the multitude stood in his way, that hee was constrayned to goe vp into a Fig-tree: so fareth it with euery Christian man and woman, when wee haue entertained any good purpose of heart to seeke the Lord, to labour to get knowledge into our Soules, and to grow and encrease in the same: Oh how many lets and stumbling blocks will Sathan now beginne to lay in our way, inward and outward, and all to keepe vs from enioying of Christ! But when a man shall ouer stride them all, and giue vp his name to Christ, and then fall away, this were a most wofull estate and condition,Note. they are no better then dogges and swine; and it had beene better for such that they had neuer knowne the truth, then after they haue knowne it to fall away: for, how doth this man or woman cause the Lord by degrees a little and little to take away from them his Spirit, that whereas, in times past they had a loue to the truth, and were carefull to heare, and to sanctifie the Lords Sabbath; hee might now
 vpon their contempt of grace giue them ouer as prisoners to Sathan, who shal so manicle their hands, feet, yea, heart and all, that by degrees they shall grow to hate and contemn both grace itselfe, and the meanes to obtaine the same.
Thirdly, wee must not onely vse paines, and perseuer in seeking for this knowledge;  but wee must also take delight in the same:A godly man seekes after knowledge willingly and chearefully. Wee see those that follow their sport, take great delight in it; and this pleasure of theirs swallowes vp all their pain, and makes it seem nothing vnto them: So should wee in seeking for this blessed knowledge, find our hearts rauished with a loue and a liking; and a godly pleasure in the same: You shal see, that this hath beene the affection of the children of God in all ages. Thus did Iob, I esteemed thy word more then my appointed food:Iob. 23.12. And this affection was in the Prophet Dauid, when hee sayth, Lord, what loue haue I vnto thy Law,Psal. 119. all the day long is my study in them. And in the description of a godly man, the Prophet Dauid obserues this to bee one property in him,Psa. 1.2. Hee meditates in the Law of God day and night: which shew vnto vs that hee takes delight in it: for otherwise hee would neuer, by night especially meditate vpon the same. And Ieremie, after hee had found the Word of God,Ier. 15.16. hee did eate it, and it was sweet vnto him; nay, it was his ioy, and the reioycing of his Soule.Psal. 16.10. And the Prophet Dauid speaking in another place of this knowledge, sayth; That it is more to bee desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold; sweeter also then the honey and the honey combe. And that which the Apostle setteth down concerning Almes,Mat. 22.37. Rom 12.8. Deu. 6.5. 2. Cor. 9.7. Ezec. 3.3. As euery man wisheth in his heart, so let him giue, not grudgingly, or of necessity, but willingly, for God loueth a chearefull giuer; may truly bee vnderstood of euery Christian duety. When wee pray, wee must pray vnto God chearefully,
 when wee are to heare the Word preached and taught, read, receiue, or what duty else wee are to perform in Gods seruice, chearefulnesse is required. And indeed, this is that which puts the difference betwixt the godly and the wicked in all Christian dueties whatsoeuer: The wicked man with Cain comes with his Sacrifice as well as Abel: And so, for hearing, reading, prayer, receyuing, and the like, the Hipocrite comes so maskt vnto these duties, that the child of God at all times is not able to decerne betwixt them both, the godly and the wicked: yet if they would sit as Iudge ouer their owne hearts, they might euen by the rule of this Doctrine,Note. perceiue a great difference: for, the one doth performe these duties for fashion sake, for feare of the Law, shame, punishment, or the like; whereas the child of God doth performe them willingly and chearefully, notwithstanding no temporall Law did require the same, but onely in obedience vnto Gods most righteous lawes and holie commandements. And surely, there can be no greater ioy to any Christian soule, then to know how God the Father is affected vnto him, and loues him as his child; to know that Iesus Christ hath been content to shed his owne heart bloud to saue his soule; and to know the power of Gods Spirit, weakning our corruption, and making vs to cry Abba Father: this knowledge passeth all knowledge in the world,Rom. 8.15. this wil bring peace of conscience, and ioy in the Holy Ghost.
Seeing that wee must seeke after Knowledge so willingly and so chearefully, as the Huntsman after his game. And so that all duties in Gods worshippe and seruice, are to be performed of vs willingly and chearefully: we learn how God doth esteeme of our actions, and that not according to the worke it selfe,
 but according to the affection of the doer: This is cleare by the Lords own words, when he sayth, This people come neare mee with their mouth,Esa. 29.13. and honour mee with their lips, but their hearts are farre from mee. Alas, what the better to draw neare to the Lord with our lippes, when our hearts are from the Lord: It is the seruice of the heart that tht Lord looks after: and this was Ezechias comfort and cheare, when he was to goe the way of all flesh, that hee could say in truth of heart;Esa. 28.3. Remember Lord that I haue walked before thee in truth, and with an vpright heart. And what is the cause why carnall men and women neuer seeke for this knowledge, but come alwayes to the Ministery of the Word for custome and for fashion sake? Alas, they could neuer find the excellency of this Knowledge, they neuer felt the power of this Knowledge, they neuer yet tasted of the sweetnesse of this Knowledge, and then no maruell they prize it not, nor heare it with any chearefulnesse at all. Oh then, let vs all labour to feele our spirituall want of it, that so wee may hunger and thirst after it as the spirituall foode of our Soules.



Then shall wee endeuour our selues to know the Lord.

One thing more may be noted from these words, that seeing the child of God vpon his Repentance and true conuersion vnto God, hath not onely true sanctified Knowledge,Gods children labour for an encrease of knowledge dayly in the^. Then shall wee haue Knowledge, but more then that, Wee shall endeuour our selues to know the Lord: that is, not rest content with a small measure of the Knowledge of Gods will; but to attaine euerie day to a greater measure of the same.
Hence wee are taught this point of Doctrine, that the children of God are not content with a little knowledge,
 but they still desire for more, and labour to grow, and to encrease in Knowledge. The couetous man the more hee hath, the more hee couets: Euen so the Christian man and woman is right couetous of heauenly matters, hee couets dayly for more knowledge in the Word, to haue a greater part in this blessed Knowledge of God, and of our saluation by Iesus Christ: and in this regard the child of God is like vnto a man in a dropsie, the more he drinks, the more he is a thirst: Euen so, the more knowledge the child of God hath, the more he hungers and thirsts after this Knowledge, that he may grow in the same.
And this is a speciall point to bee noted, that there is no standing at a stay in Religion, for eyther wee must goe forward or backward, eyther wee must grow dayly in Knowledge,1. Thes. 4.4. or else we must needs decay in Knowledge. And for this cause Saint Paul doth often pray for those Churches to whom hee writes, that they may grow in Knowledge and spirituall vnderstanding; and Saint Peter hee exhorts vs,1. Pet. 2.2. As new borne Babes to desire the sincere milke of the Word, that wee may grow thereby. Where hee layes down three most excellent points. First, that here wee be but as babes in Knowledge, and children in vnderstanding of the Word: Wee know heere but in part. Secondly, hee shewes the means whereby we must encrease in knowledge, namely, the sincere Milke of the Word of God, the Preaching of the Gospell of Christ; it is the foode of our soules whereby wee must bee nourished to eternall Life. And thirdly, the end of the preaching the Gospell; namely, that wee may grow in knowledge, grow in faith, grow in obedienc: so that though men heare the Word, yet if they grow not, and are not bettered by it, they are no good hearers, the Word hath no good fruit in them. This duty of growing, and increasing
 in Knowledge, and all spirituall graces is often vrged in the Scripture:1. Cor. 13.9. 1. Thes. 4.4. 2. Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.1. Pro. 4.18. We beseech you brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Iesus, that yee encrease more and more, grow in grace. And againe, Let vs bee ledde forward to perfection. And the Prophet compares the graces of God in the Elect, to the waters flowing from the Sanctuary,Ezec. 47.3. which were at the first to the Ancles, then to the Knees, next, to the Loynes; and last, to a Riuer that could not bee passed ouer: So are the graces of God in the Elect, though their beginning be but small, yet they encrease dayly till they come to that full measure the which the Lord hath allotted to euery Christian. The Doctrine being thus cleared, wee will now come to the vses of the same.
 This Doctrine doth concerne vs all very neerely, wee professe our selues Schollers in the Schoole of Christ, now then let vs not proue Trewants, after long teaching and preaching, to proue ignorant of the Principles of Religion, as the a.b.c. If our children goe to Schoole and learne nothing, it must needs be that they play the Truants, or else they haue a bad Master: Euen so, we being long taught in the word, what shame is it that wee should still proue ignorant of the Word of God? We are trees in the Lords Orchard, hee prunes vs, hee dresseth vs, he watereth vs by the conntinuall preaching of the Gospell; and therefore let vs not bee as dead stocks and barren trees, for such are good for nothing, but for the fire. Wee are carefull to see our children to bee nourished, to grow to bee men; wee are careful and ioyfull to see our cattell thriue, to see our corne grow: And shall we haue no care for our owne poore soules? shall they bee of lesse esteem with vs, then our very beasts? shall wee vse no meanes to haue our poore soules fed and nourished, that wee grow in the Knowledge of God? it
 is the farewell Peter makes to the Iewes, to whom he wrote, exhorting them to Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Iesus Christ.
We see, that men do try themselues whether they grow in wealth, they will cast vp their bookes, take account to see how they haue gained at the yeares end. Oh let this bee our practise, I beseech you, to try our knowledge, whethet wee grow in knowledge, whether wee haue more knowledge this yeare, then we had the last, If wee haue not, alas, wee are vprofitable Schollers in the Schoole of Christ: Now, what a shame is this, that after long teaching and preaching, there should bee no profiting, no more knowledge in men and women now, then three, foure, or ten years agoe; but that they should remaine as blinde and as ignorant as many yeares agoe: Oh, it is a dangerous thing, for if wee grow not forward, then wee go backward. If a man should put his child to Nurse, and after two or three yeares should find his child nothing grown, hee would surely bee grieued. Alas, if we shall after many yeares preaching grow nothing in knowledge, it is a manifest signe that wee are indeed but staruelings: and therefore let vs euery one in the feare of God, labour to Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Iesus Christ. And seeing the food of our soules, and the meanes whereby wee must grow, is the preaching of the Word; Let vs hunger and thirst after it, let vs seeke for it, for if that be wanting, it is impossible we should grow in knowledge, or in any grace of God to eternal life.
And thus much for the third fruit or effect of true Repentance; namely, a hungring after more knowledge, and a dayly growth and proceeding in the same. It followeth.




His going forth is prepared as the Morning.

IN these words is heere layde downe the fourth fruit and effect of true repentance; namely, that when as sinners doe truely Turne vnto God, and draw neare vnto him by true repentance, then will hee draw neare vnto vs to helpe vs, and to deliuer vs out of all our misery.
The meaning of the words.His going forth is prepared as the Morning, that is, as though the people of God should haue said, Although the Lord hath let vs lye a long time in misery, so as he seemed to haue cleane forgotten vs; although hee hath hidden his face from vs for a little time, yet now hee is comming to succour vs: for by this comming forth of the Lord, is signified his helpe and comfort, which he is ready to shew to his people in time of great extremity and need.
As the Morning, The meaning is, that euen as the bright beames and cleare countenance of the Sunne, after a windy, tempestuous, stormy and boysterous night is very comfortable: euen so, the bright beams of Gods mercy breaking forth, and shining vpon our hearts after a sad and solemne, nay, a darke and cloudy night of affliction, it is most comfortable to glad and reioyce the distressed Soule of a poore Sinner.
 From whence wee obserue this Doctrine, that howsoeuer God doth humble his children for a time,Howsoeuer God doth humble his children for a time, hee forsaketh them not for euer. yet hee forsaketh them not for euer; the Lord putteth vnder his owne hand, hee is priuy to the sighes and grones of his seruants, and in his due time he wil deliuer them; howsoeuer their afflictions may continue vpon them, perhaps a long time together, and that they haue no breathing time, No, not to swallow
 their spittle, as Iob complaineth;Psal. 37.24. Iob. 7.19. yet Hee that keepeth Israel doth neyther slumber nor sleepe, and when he hath sufficiently humbled vs, He will then arise, and haue mercy vpon Sion.Esa. 54.7.8. This the Lord expresseth by the Prophet Esay, For a little time haue I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee: In a moment in my anger I hid my face from thee, for a little season, b^t with euerlasting mercy haue I had compassion on thee:Psa. 34.15.18 This is acknowledged by the Prophet Dauid, where he sayth, The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his eares are open vnto their cry: The Lord is neare vnto those that are of a contrite heart, and will saue such as are afflicted in spirit. What larger promise can bee made vnto the afflicted then this, that his eares are open to their cry, and that hee will saue such as are afflicted in spirite. And this is it which our Sauiour himselfe often alledgeth for the comfort of his Disciples;Ioh. 14.18. Mat. 18.20. Mat 28.20. Gen. 41.14. Iam. 5.11. Exod. 12.41. Psal. 18.1. Dan. 6.23. Micha. 7.8.10 I will not leaue you comfortlesse, but I will come vnto you, loe, I am with you to the end of the world: This appeareth by the histories of Ioseph, of Iob, of the Church in Egypt, of Dauid, of Daniel, whom the Lord did humble for a time vnder the heauy burden of fore affliction; but it was but for a time; for comfort was euen then prepared: and when the time of refreshing came, it brake out as the rising of the Sunne, and tne bright beames of the Morning after a tempestuous night, which of all things is then most ioyfull and comfortable. And so shall it bee with all the godly; let their afflictions be what they may bee, inward or outvard, of body, or of mind, or of both; the Lord may seeme for a time to haue forgotten his; but hee that should come will come, and will not tarry, and when deliuerance is most welcome, and that wee vtterly despaire of any comfort of our selues, then will the Lords Mercy and deliuerance breake foorth as the Morning. And to this
 purpose are the words of Salomon, where hee sayth, The hope that is deferred,Pro. 13.12. is the fainting of the heart: But when the desire commeth, it is a tree of life. All these Testimonies are so many witnesses of this truth, that howsoeuer Gods children goe drouping for a time, through the sense and feeling of their sins, and cannot any way, or by any meanes receiue any comfort, or howsoeuer outwardly they may bee afflicted, yet God hath determined their deliuerance: His comming foorth (to comfort and deliuer them) is prepared as the morning, etc.
Now, this deliuerance which the Lord hath promised to his children, to comfort their wounded consciences,Gods deliuerance compared to the morning in three respects and those that are in misery, hee compares it to the rising of the Sunne, and the bright and comfortable beames of the morning for these three causes.
 First, because that though the Lord doe seeme to forget his people for a time, and deferre his helpe; yet in his good time hee will come with abundance of comfort, and cause the bright beams of his fauour and the cleare Sunne-shine of his mercy,A Similie. to shine into our distressed soules. If a man were in a waste wildernesse in a darke and solemne night, and see neyther Sunne, Moone nor Starre, but heare the fearefull and terrible roaring and velling of wilde beasts: Oh how glad would this man be, after a dangerous, tempestuous, stormy and solemne night, to see the face of the Sunne, and the comfortable dawning of the day: Euen so, what can bee more comfortable to a poore distressed Soule, and a wounded conscience, after many blacke and stormy nights of affliction, when the conscience of a poore sinner is vpon the Racke, and when a poore Soule shall see the anger of God against sinne, see the torment of Hell, and his owne
 conscience accusing him for sinne? What can bee more comfortable or more longed for of such a man, then to behold the bright beames of Gods mercy in Iesus Christ; to see the comfortable face of God to shine vpon him, and to haue a sense and feeling of his mercy?Act. 27. When Paul and his company had not seene the Sunne nor Moone for a long season, at length they were glad to see the light appeare, Euen so, when a poore soule hath beene plunged, euen to the bottome of the sea of desperation, and sees no one glaunce or glimmering of Gods mercy, but rather hath a long time wrestled against the waues of desperation, then to see but one sparke or glimmering of Gods mercy, it is that which makes the hearts of Gods children to leape for ioy.
Secondly, it pleaseth the Lord to compare his helpe to the rising of the Sunne, because as nothing  can hinder that from rising, but it keepeth continually that course which God hath set it: Euen so the Lord he hath prepared the helpe of his people, and the Deuill, nay all the Deuils in Hell cannot hinder him, no more then wee can by all our skill and might, hinder the rising of the Sunne. And surely, this is greatly for the comfort of Gods children, that when the Lord is once: Prepared, and comming to helpe them, no Creature in heauen or earth can stay or stop him.
Thirdly, as the morning doth not diffuse and spread his light ouer the earth all at once, but by degrees, by little and little, as the Sunne growes higher and higher: Euen so, the Lord for the most part makes his loue and his mercy known vnto men, not all at once, but by degrees, by little and little, as it seemes best to his Maiesty, and for the comfort of his children.

Seeing the Lord is Prepared to helpe vs, and that with abundance of comfort, and so as no Creature, no, not the gates of Hell cannot hinder him, but he will make his loue knowne vnto vs: Wee must all learne to possesse our soules with patience, to awayte the Lords leasure for our deliuerance; not to prescribe vnto him the manner or the time when wee would be deliuered. It is sufficient for vs to know that comfort is prepared: Wee are ready in our troubles when we find not present helpe at hand, to suppose the Lord to bee farre off, and so grow impatient of delay, and cannot abide to wayte the Lords leysure; so soon as Gods hand is layde vpon vs, wee looke to haue it taken off, and so soone as wee feele the heat of affliction, we look that God should quench it: This made the Prophet Dauid in the heat of his affliction to cry out;Psal. 10.1. Why standest thou so farre off O Lord, and hidest thee in due time, euen in affliction? And in another place hee sayth, Hath God forgotten to bee gracious, and hath hee shut vp his louing kindnesse in displeasure. Thus the children of God haue wonderfully beene assaulted, and the flesh somtime wrestling against the Spirit preuaileth, and for a time getteth the vpper hand. But seeing our doctrine hath taught vs (as wee haue heard) that howsoeuer God doth humble his children for a time, yet he forsaketh them not for euer: but in the middest of all their afflictions and tryals, mercy and deliuerance is prepared for them. Let vs learne heere (how great so euer our conflicts bee) not to despayre of Gods mercy, but to Tarry the Lords leysure: for it will surely and certainly come, euen as the Sun is sure to rise though it bee set for a time, or hidden by a thicke cloud, yet it will breake out and appeare most comfortably.
 Seeing the Lords comming vnto the godly is
 prepared, and therefore most certaine to come: So the same shall come as the Sunne in the morning, most comfortable: Wee are taught heere that our deliuerance from God shall bee sure to come, when wee can most of all prize it, and when the same shall bee most welcome vnto vs. A Marchant takes his voyage into a farre Country,A Similie. and makes his reckoning within so many monethes to returne, his louing wife at home, about that time appointed, with gladsome heart looketh dayly for his returne: but by distresse of weather, or some other accident, she heares not of him; or if shee doe, the newes is most vncomfortable: thus shee hath her heart possessed with sorrow, hauing more cause of feare, then hope: At last, when stee thinketh least, her dearest husband returneth safe with great store of wealth; who is able to expresse her ioy, and is not her ioy the greater, and her husband so much the more welcome for that he stayed so long? Yes doubtlesse. So it fareth with our God: his delaying of comfort and deliuerance, makes vs to prize the same the better when it doth come: When wee haue layne a long time vnder the heat of Gods wrath, and suffered a sore night of affliction, when our sinnes haue mustered themselues before vs, and gone ouer our heads, as afore burthen too heauie for vs to beare; and when wee shall seeme altogether lost in our selues, then to be found of the Lord is most sweete and comfortable: Oh it is the case of many of Gods deare children that haue vndergone a sore night of affliction and sorrow for sinne,A principall comfort for the afflicted soule. and haue been ready to say, I am cast out of thy fauour: yet hath the Lord at last answered their long expectation with a ioyful Morning of Sunne-shine of his mercy and fauour, and the bones that seemed to be broken haue reioyced: Oh then let vs stay our soules vpon this, that howsoeuer,
 No chasticement for the present seemeth to be ioyous,Heb. 12.11. but grieuous: yet there is a time when it shall bring the quiet fruit of righteousnesse vnto them that are exercised therby:Deu. 8.16. In regard hereof, Moses the man of God sayth, That the Lord humbled his chosen people, and proued them, that hee might doe them good at their latter end. And in my poore iudgement, a man may gather farre more vndoubted assurance of Gods euerlasting fauour towards his soule by these inward afflictions, then by any outward prosperity in the world whatsoeuer: the Lord grant vnto his poore afflicted seruants, that their troubled soules, which with sorrow for sinne, are cast downe so low, that they may reape this gracious blessing. It followeth.



And hee shall come vnto vs as the raine, euen as the latter raine vnto the earth.

IN these words the Prophet doth yet more fully expresse the mercy of God towards poore distressed soules, by the later rain that fals vpon the earth: that euen as raine is most welcome to the scorched and parched earth in the time of summer, after a long drought to coole the heat, and to quench the thirst thereof (as our owne experience this last summer hath taught vs) as also to ripe the fruits of the earth, and to bring them to perfection: Euen so, when poore soules be wounded and spoyled of all sense and feeling of the mercy of God in Iesus Christ, and lye bleeding in their miseries, scorched and tormented with the heat of Gods anger for sin euen when men seem to be past hope: then if the Lord send a gracious raine, and a blessed shower to quench the heat of their poore afflicted soules for sin, it shal be most welcome, for then is mercy most welcom when men haue felt the bitter smart of sinne. But of this
 more largely the doctrine before.
Now,The ends wherefore the Lord doth defer his helpe. if any aske wherefore the Lord lets his owne people lye oftentimes so long soking in misery before hee helpe them, and then helps them when as there is least hope of helpe. I answere, he doth this.
First, for the tryall of their faith, whether they will depend and hang vpon him, also, for the exercise of  their faith and patience.
Secondly, to make them see and know, that they  bee nothing in themselues, but that the strength they haue is in Christ.
Thirdly, to stir them vp to seeke and pray vnto  him more earnestly for helpe and succour.
And lastly, to make them highly to esteeme of his  mercy, for such things as bee easily come by, are lightly esteemed; but things which be long in getting, cost much trouble and paines, and likewise such things as come in time of great trouble and need, they must bee most set by; and therefore the Lord defers his mercy often to the last gaspe, that so it might bee the more esteemed.
This may teach vs to continue our patience, and to wayte still his leysure: though hee deferre long, and seeme to forget vs; yet Wee must liue by faith, We must hope for life in the midst of death, and say with Iob, Though thou kill mee, yet I will trust in thee. So, though the Lord defer his helpe and comfort many yeares, yet wee must neuer let goe our hold, but still hang vpon his mercy with the hands of faith.
And thus much for the first generall part of this Chapter, the godly practise of true repentance, and the seuerall fruit and effects thereof. The second followeth.






VERSE. 4.

O Ephraim, what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreat thee? for your goodnes is as the morning cloud, and as the Morning Dew it goeth away.

The second generall part of this chapter.IN the Chapter going before, the Lord hath threatned many great and grieuous iudgements against Ephraim and Iudah, as verse 14. I will be vnto Ephraim as a Lyon, and as a Lyons whelpe to the house of Iudah: I, euen I, will spoyle and goe away: I will take away, and none shall rescue it.
And in the three first verses of this Chapter, wee haue seene what fruite it had in the beleeuing Iewes; namely, that they were truely humbled for their sins, feared Gods anger, and Returned vnto him by true and vnfained repentance, Come, say they, Let vs return vnto the Lord, etc.
In the second part of this Chapter, is set down what fruits and effects Gods denuntiations and terrible iudgements threatned against sinne, had in the vnbeleeuing Iewes; namely, a most vile and stubborn rebellion
 against all the meanes that the Lord vsed to conuert them, ver. 4. Secondly, the punishment of their rebellion, ver. 5.
So that the summe of these two verses is nothing else but a pittifull complaint of the Lord for the stubbornnesse and rebellion of the Iewes, that could not by any meanes the Lord vsed, be reclaimed.The summe of these two verses. O Ephraim, what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreat thee? for your goodnes is as the morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goeth away.
Secondly, the iust punishment of almighty God vpon them for the same, ver. 5. Therefore haue I cut down by the Prophets, I haue slaine them by the words of my mouth, and thy iudgements are as the light that goeth forth.

In the first of these, we are to note 3. things.
1. The complaint, What shall I doe vnto thee? how shall I intreat thee?
2. The persons of whom the Lord complaineth thus, Ephraim, Iudah.
3. The cause of the complaint, or the thing wherof the Lord complaineth, Your goodnes is as the morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goeth away.


In the second wee are to note 4 things.
1. Who was the author of their punishment, and did inflict it, I haue cut, etc.
2. The greatnes of it, I haue cut down and flaine them.
3. The meanes or instrument God vsed in punishing them. By my Prophets and the words of my mouth.
4. The equity of this iudgement, and punishment inflicted vpon them: For
 thy iudgements were as the light: So cleare and so manifest that no man could complaine or excuse themselues by ignorance; they were in the view of all men.

Of these in order, and first to beginne with the complaint.


What shall I doe vnto thee, how should I intreat thee.

THese words containe in them the complaint the Lord takes vp against these rebellious Iewes; and it is as much, as if he should haue said; I haue for my part vsed all the meanes that possible I could, to humble you, and to bring you to repentance; but now alas, I know not what to do vnto thee more, or what course to take to doe thee good; and yet I can bring thee to no good passe, but all is in vain that euer I haue done vnto thee: and therefore in great griefe, pittying thy wretched and forlorne estate, I can but mourn for thy misery.
 Hence we see, in the dealing of God with this people, the wonderfull mercy of God towards them, in that hee shewed himselfe so mercifull,God doth not proceede in iudgement before hee hath offered all means of mercy. as first to vse all the meanes hee could to conuert them, and humble them before hee punished and destroyed them. If the Lord had but shewed one meanes as the Word preached; it was his great mercy, for hee might iustly take all aduantage at our hands, to cut vs off in the height of our sins; and damne vs presently for the same; but in that he vseth so many meanes, so long a time, it shewes his wonderfull mercy to these people, in that he sayth: Oh, what shall I do? how shall I entreat? It shewes, the Lord had vsed all the meanes hee could, his word, his mercies,
 his iudgements, threatnings, punishments; and yet all would not humble them.
So that hence we may obserue the wonderful mercy of God towards his people, in that hee vseth so many meanes to humble them for their sins ere hee cut them off. The truth of this Doctrine is confirmed by diuers places of Scripture,Ier. 7.13. as that of the Prophet Ieremy, I rose vp earely and spake vnto you: but when I spake yee would not heare mee, neyther when I called would yee answere. And that of the Prophet Esay,Esay. 68.2. I haue stretched out my hand all the day long vnto a rebellious people.Ioel. 2.13. This is further confirmed vnto vs by the Prophet Ioel, when hee sayth; Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turne vnto the Lord your God, for hee is gracious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse,Ezech. 33.11 and repenteth him of the euill. And so much doth God himselfe teach vs of himselfe, when he sayth, As I liue sayth the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turne from his way and liue.2. Sam. 12.1. When the Prophet Dauid had committed very haynous and horrible sinnes, how graciously did the Lord send vnto him his Prophet Nathan, to awake him out of his sinne, and to call him home by repentance. And againe afterwards,2. Sam. 24.10 when in the pride of his heart hee had numbred his people; hee sent the Prophet Gad vnto him to humble him for the same: Yea the Lord is so rich in mercy, that hee offereth the same vnto the wicked themselues, though they in their prophanesse neglect and contemne the same. When Cains heart beganne to boyle in malice against his brother Abel,Gen. 4.6.7. the Lord sayd inough to him if hee had had grace to haue kept him from that horrible sinne of murder: Why art thou wroth (sayth Almighty God to Cain) and why is thy countenance cast downe, If thou doest well, shalt thou not bee rewarded? etc. And after that Cain had slaine his brother, the Lord
 left him not,Gen. 6.3. but laboured to bring him to remorse, when hee asked him, Cain, where is thy brother Abel? And againe, The voyce of thy brothers bloud cryeth from the earth.
And when God was purposed to destroy the olde World,2. Pet. 2.1. Gen. 19. 2. Reg. 21.28 what meanes did hee vse first to reclaime them? hee gaue them a hundred and twenty yeares to repent in, and all this while sent vnto them Noah that Preacher of righteousnesse, to warne them of that iudgement to come, yet they repented not: So dealt hee with the filthy Sodomites, by placing iust Lot amongst them to labour their conuersion,Mat. 27.19. and was so farre preuailed with by Abraham, that if ten righteous soules had beene found in those Cities, God had spared them for their sakes. The like may bee sayde of Ahab and of Pilate; yea, the Lord offered his mercy vnto Iudas, when as before any thing was effected, Christ put him in mind of his bloudy thoughts against him, making it manifest that hee was the man that should betray him. Thus haue wee seene cleared the truth of this Doctrine, that God is a God of mercy, and that hee will not easily proceede in iudgement before hee hath offered all meanes of mercy, What shall I doe vnto thee? how shall I intreat thee?
The meanes by the which the Lord doth humble men.Now the meanes by the which the Lord doth humble men, are diuers:
First and principally, the Ministery of his Word. Thus dealt the Lord with his seruant Dauid, as wee heard before, sending his Prophets vnto him to bring him to the sight of his sinne:1 The Ministery of the Word. and to this end hath the Lord commaunded his Prophets and Ministers to cry aloud,Esa. 58.1. Pro. 8.1.2.3 and 9.1.2.3. and to lift vp their voyces like Trumpets, to preach the Doctrine of repentance, and to shew the people their sins. And Salomon in diuers places of his booke of Prouerbs bringeth in Christ Iesus, the wisedome of
 God, sometimes crying aloud in his owne person, and sometimes by his Ministers, to summon men to repentance. Thus dealt hee with the Nineuites, sending vnto them his Prophet Ionas to preach repentance vnto them, that there rested but forty dayes,Ion. 3.4. and then (without repentance) Nineueh should lye in the dust: And hence is it that the Apostle Paul calleth the Ministery of the Word The power of God to saluation to euery one that beleeueth. And in another place hee sayth,Rom. 1.16. that howsoeuer the seeming Wisemen of the World do account of Preaching but as foolishnes, yet it hath pleased God By that foolishnesse of preaching,1. Cor. 1.21. to saue them that beleeue. And this Word of God is called the Lords Hammer,Ier. 23.29. whereby he knockes at the dore of our hard hearts: and this is the most principall, the most powerfull and effectuall meanes, being Gods ordinance to conuert sinners, and to bring them to repentance,
Secondly, his manifold mercies and blessings, the which hee Renueth towards vs euery morning:2 His Blessings and by this meanes doth the Lord seeke to wooe and winne our hearts to him; hee giues vs life, and health, meate,Lam. 3.23. drinke, apparrell, lodging; hee keepes vs from many dangers, and poures downe thousand blessings vpon vs, and euery one of these giue a knocke at our hearts, and cry aloud in our eares, that the Lord by them doth labour to draw and winne vs vnto him; and this was that that made Dauids sinne exceeding sinnefull; namely, That God had annointed him King ouer Israel,2. Sam. 12.7.8. and had deliuered him out of the hands of Saul, and had giuen him his Lords house, and his Lords wiues into his bosom, etc. And would if that had been too little, haue giuen him much more; and therefore his vnthankefulnesse must needs bee the greater, to sinne against so gracious and mercifull a God.

 Thirdly, by his corrections and chasticements which God doth lay vpon vs;His iudgements. by these doth the Lord ring many a warning peale in our eares, sometimes by long and tedious sicknes, diseases, crosses, losses, troubles, calamities, in wife, children, goods, good name; the Lord hath many of these wayes to humble vs, that by them perceyuing his angry countenance towards vs, wee might be humbled for our sins, and sue to him for mercy; and whensoeuer the Lord is constrayned to take this course with vs, hee doth it vnwillingly, with griefe of heart, as is manifest by that notable place in this Prophet:Hos. 11.8. How shall I giue thee vp, O Ephraim? how shall I deliuer thee O Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my heart is turned within mee, and my repentance is rolled together. The iustice of God in this place requires vengeance, the mercy of God requires pitty and compassion, and betwixt them both God seemeth to bee straighted, which shewes, how hardly he is drawne to punish that, notwithstanding the sinnes of Ephraim and Israel did require that the Lord should punish them as he did Sodom and Gomorrah and the Cities about them: yet his fatherly loue and tender compassion towards them stayed his iudgements.
 Now let vs come to the vses of this Doctrine.
This serues in the first place to reproue and condemne the desperate behauiour of al wicked and vngodly sinners, that neglect and contemne (if not stubbornely resist) all the meanes of their good that the Lord doth offer vnto them: so as the Lord may iustly complain of them as of Ephraim and Iudah heere: O Ephraim what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I entreat thee? His word, his mercies, his iudgements, what means soeuer the Lord may vse for their conuersion, they frustrate them all. If hee doe cry in their eares by his
 Prophets through the preaching of the Word, which is the power of God: Alas, how many be there amongst vs, that Like the deafe Adder stop their eares at the voyce of the Charmer charme hee neuer so wisely?Psal. 58.4.5. but this Word the which now they seem so much to despise, shal leaue such an impression in their soules and consciences, that at the last day if there were no witnesse to accuse them for their contempt thereof, yet their owne consciences would hayle them to iudgement: or else, if they doe hearken vnto it, and attaine to some knowledge by it, yet they hate to bee reformed by it,Psal. 50.4.5. and so by that means procure vnto themselues the greater damnation.
Againe, if God allure them by his gracious benefites, how many bee there amongst vs that most carelesly and most wretchedly abuse them, That turne the grace of God into wanto^nes; or if the Lord proceed further to correct them, they are neuer the better by it, but with wicked Ahaz, Trespasse yet more against the Lord:2. Cor. 28.22 so that the Lord may iustly complaine of them, as sometimes hee did of the old rebellious Iewes, I haue corrected them, but they haue not been humbled. And I would to God that this complaint might not iustly bee taken vp of vs the people of this land, vnto whom the Lord hath vsed euery one of these meanes. His faithfull Ministers that haue cryed vnto vs almost these threescore yeares together; besides how many blessings haue wee enioyed, liberty, peace, abundance; euery man may sit and reioyce vnder his owne Vine; besides this, many times againe Hee hath hedged in our wayes with thornes, as famines, pestilences, sicknesses,Hos. 2.6. vnseasonable weather, as this Winter and Summer last doe testifie. And now againe hath turned our sorrow into ioy, by giuing vs a happy season this latter part of the yeare: so that in these respects the Lord may say vnto
 vs as hee sayd sometimes of Israel, What shall I doe vnto thee that I haue not done, or as my Text sayth here, Oh Ephraim what shall I doe vnto thee? Oh Iudah how shall I intreat thee?
Neuer age had more experience of the goodnesse of God towards them then this age wherein wee liue, if wee eyther regard the preaching of the Word, his iudgements or his mercies: by some of them the Lord hath still sought vnto vs; and yet alas, as though all this were nothing,Esay. 5.12. wee passe our time in carnall security and sinnefull pleasures, Neuer regarding the works of the Lord, nor considering the operation of his hands. So that now the Lord may iustly take vp that complaint against vs,Esay. 5.4. as heere hee did against Ephraim and Iudah, O England, what shall I doe vnto thee? O England, how shal I intreat thee? And therefore we may well feare that he that thus called vpon vs,Pro. 1.24.26 and that by so many meanes, and wee refused, that the time shall come that we shall cry and call vpon him, euen till our hearts are ready to breake within vs, and hee will not heare vs, but bee so farre from pittying vs in time of our distresse, as that hee will rather laugh at our destruction.
Secondly, this may serue to admonish vs all in the  feare of God, that whensoeuer the Lord shall call vs by any meanes whatsoeuer, be it by the Ministery of his Word, bee it by his mercies, or bee it by his iudgements, or any other means whatsoeuer, that we be not of a dead and senselesse heart that will not stoupe vnder Gods hand, but labour to make a sanctified vse of euery one of them; for if they preuaile not with vs to humble vs for sinne, and to make vs seeke vnto God by true and vnfained repentance; alas, our case is most miserable and desperate. Oh then in the feare of God let vs heare his voyce when he speaketh vnto vs in his word, and pray vnto him, that hee would open our
 hearts as he did the heart of Lydia; if that doe not, yet let his mercies wherewith hee doth, as it were, follow vs at the heeles, most rebellious wretches, as wee bee: moue vs and mollifie our hard and stony hearts; if not his mercy, yet let his iudgements preuaile with vs to make vs to stoope vnder his mighty hand. Otherwise, if wee will needs bee desperate, and harden our hearts against all such blessed meanes; Oh then let vs assure our selues that that iudgement shall come vpon vs, and overtake vs,Ver. 5. that heere hee threatned against Ephraim and Iudah. I haue cut them downe by the Prophets, I haue slaine them by the words of my mouth: that is, because no meanes that I could vse would doe them good, but they did harden their hearts against the same; therefore now those threatnings of my Propbets shall come vpon them, and I will make good the words of my mouth, that is, bring to passe all my iudgements threatned against them.
Secondly, in that the Lord complaineth here, that  no meanes that hee could vse,Wicked men continue still in sinne, notwithstanding all meanes to the contrary. could doe them any good, saying: What shall I doe vnto thee? how shall I intreat thee? Wee may heete behold how desperate the case of this people were, and their maruellous obstinacy and rebellion, in that though Almighty God did vse all meanes to humble them and reclaime them, yet they could by no meanes bee brought to goodnes, to bee humbled, but notwithstanding all the gracious meanes God vsed, they continued rebellious and stubborne still: And this appeares by the Lords complaint, in vpbraiding them with sinne still, q. d. I perceyue thou wilt bee stout against mee, thou wilt not yeeld, thou wilt be brought to no good passe, thou art exceeding obstinate and rebellious; and thus doth the Lord complaine of them in another place, Wherefore should I smite them any more? And againe,Esay. 1.5. Thou O
 Lord hast striken them but they haue not sorrowed, thou hast consumed them,Ier. 5.3. but, they haue refused to receiue correstion: for they haue made their faces harder then a stone, and wil not returne:Amos. 4.6. And againe, by the Prophet Amos hee complaineth thus; I haue giuen you cleannesse of teeth in all your Cities, and scarsenes of bread in all your places, yet haue yee not returned vnto mee sayth the Lord. If wee looke vpon examples,Gen 4.6. wee shall finde diuers in the Word of God that proue the same, as that of Cain, albeit the Lord did forewarn him of that wrath hee had conceiued against his brother Abel, that hee would neuer be at rest till hee had killed him. And this is clearely seen in the old World, when the Lord saw the wickednesse of man to waxe great vpon the earth,Gen. 6.3. hee stirred vp Noah that Preacher of righteousnesse, to warne them of iudgement to come; yet they continued still in their sinnes: The like may bee sayd of Sodom and Gomorah, of Pharaoh, Iudas, and the like: So that it appeareth to bee an euident truth, that wicked men continue stil in sinne, notwithstanding all the means that God doth vse to the contrary,Pro. 27.22. according to that of Salomon, If thou bray a foole in a morter, yet will not his foolishnes depart from him.
And this thing so comes to passe in them, because God in his iust iudgement hath giuen them ouer to a reprobate sense, according to that of the Apostle Paul, God gaue them ouer vnto vile affections,Rom. 1.26. to worke filthinesse against nature, etc. And as it was sayde of the sonnes of Ely;1. Sam. 2.24. They would not heare their Fathers voyce, because the Lord would destroy them.
 Seeing wicked and vngodly men continue still in sinne, notwithstanding all gracious means to the contrary: This may be a terror to all wicked and vngodly wretches, to consider, that as their hearts are hardned, and their consciences seared; so great shall bee
 their iudgement; and by this means they doe but increase their punishment,Rom. 2.4.5.6 and hoard it vp as a treasure against the day of Gods wrath; Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnes and patience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God leadeth thee to repentance? but thou after thy hardnesse, and heart that cannot repent, heapest vp vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath. In which words wee may see the wofull and miserable estate and condition of all those that runne from euill to worse, that their damnation all this while sleepeth not; but when the measure of their iniquity is once full, the Lord will bee sure to bring his iudgements vpon them.
Againe, to apply this doctrine somwhat more neerly  vnto our selues: was this the desperate estate of this people, and damnable rebellion against all the gracious meanes God vsed: Alas, if we compare our estate with theirs, wee shall find our case to bee farre worse; for the Lord hath vsed more means to humble vs then them, but yet we are hard hearted stil, we are not humbled, wee haue not melting hearts: how did the Lord smite the creatures this last winter by frost and snow, that many thousands of them perished in euery place and corner of this land? besides, for this summer which is the pleasantest time in the yeare, hath not euen now the creature mourned vnto vs, to teach vs to mourne? What fearefull and lamensable fires haue hapned within these few yeares in most peaces of this land? and yet, good Lord, how few are the number of those that lay these iudgements of God to heart? Well, let vs take heed, that if these humble vs not, least the Lord send such iudgements and plagues amongst vs, that the very Sorcerers of Egypt (if they were amongst vs) would acknowledge it to bee the finger of God. When that Moses smote the Rocke it gushed out with water:
 the Lord hath often smitten our hard and flinty, and rocky hearts with the rodde of his iudgements, and stil smites, but all in vaine; for we are stubborne and rebellious still. So that wee may iustly feare, that as he cast off this people, slew them, consumed them, and destroyed them; euen so will hee deale with vs in his anger, and that because wee haue not profited by his iudgements, nor yet no meanes that hee hath vsed can preuaile with vs, to bring vs to repentance. If we contemne so great saluation, how can wee thinke to escape?
 Thirdly, out of this patheticall and compassionate speech of the Lord,The Lord takes it hardly that the meanes of our good should bee contemned. O Ephraim, what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreat thee? Wee may learne that it is a grieuous thing vnto the Lord, and vexeth his spirit, to see all the meanes hee doth vse in mercy to doe vs good, and to saue vs, to bee carelesly regarded, and lightly esteemed, or proudly and desperately contemned of vs: for the Lord hath tryed all possible meanes to doe them good, yet they regarded them not, but lightly esteemed them and passed them ouer; and therefore the Lord takes vp this pittifull complaint, O Ephraim what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah how shall I intreat thee? It is all one as if he should haue sayd, It grieues me right sore to see you so stubborne against mee. This Doctrine is cleared in diuers places of the Holy Scriptures, as that speech of Almighty God himselfe, when hee sayth to the people of Israel,Deu. 5.29. when they had made that solemne promise to obey Moses the seruant of the Lord in all things: Oh that there were such a heart in them to feare mee, and to keepe my commandements alwayes, that it might go well with them, and their children for euer.Psal. 81.13. This affection the Lord expresseth in another place when he sayth, O that my people had hearkned vnto me, and Israel had walked in my waies:
 Yea, our Sauiour himselfe doth expresse the same affection in him, in the dayes of his flesh:Luk. 19.41.42. And when hee came neare it, hee beheld the City, and wept ouer it, saying; Oh if thou haddest knowne, at the least in this thy day those things that belong vnto thy peace. These testimonies and the like, whereof the Scripture is full, serue to confirm the truth of this Doctrine vnto vs, how hardly the Lord doth take it at our hands, when wee neglect and contemne the meanes of our good. The vses remaine to be handled.
Doth the Lord take it so grieuously to see his ordinances  contemned, when men will not bee humbled by his Word and by his iudgements? Oh how then must hee needs bee angry with vs, the people of this land, who haue grieued his Maiesty by vile contempt of his holy Ordinances, how little dooth his Word moue vs, and how hard hearted are wee at his iudgements? What Nation vnder Heauen is there, who liuing vnder a Christian Prince, hearing and professing the Word of God as wee doe, amongst whom the sacred ordinances of God are more contemned then amongst vs.Nehem. 1. All the meanes God hath vsed to humble vs and to saue vs, and to bring vs to repentance and reformation of life: Alas, they fall to the ground generally, no man taketh them to heart. Daniel in his prayer acknowledgeth,Dan 9.14. that the Lord did iustly plague them for their sinne, because they had not profited by Gods iudgements. Now if the Lord were sore angry and grieued with his people for the not profiting by the meanes: and will hee not much more bee stirred vp to wrath against vs for the contempt of all those gracious meanes the which he in mercy vsed to humble vs? yes, no doubt,Hos. 4.1. and for the same cause the Lord hath a Controuersie against the inhabitants of the Land, and hath taken the Rodde into his owne hand, and chastened
 and whipt vs diuers wayes, and vnlesse we do meet him by repentance with prayers and teares, surely, hee will poure out euen the dregger of his anger against vs at last.
 Secondly, seeing nothing more grieues the Lord, then to see his ordinance and gracious means vsed for our good, contemned and lightly regarded, so as wee profit not by them: Oh, how should this grieue vs and humble vs, that wee haue been so exceeding carelesse to profite by the meanes? Wee see that a louing child will bee loath to doe any thing to vexe his kinde and louing Father, and if any child should bee so stubborne that hee would not bee reclaimed, neyther by his Fathers kind promises, dayly gifts, nor yet by his rodde and correction, wee would thinke him vnworthy to liue. Well, the Lord hee vseth many means to humble vs, and hee is much grieued to see vs profite nothing by them, but still to rebel and to be stubborn; and therfore it should much grieue vs and humble vs, to grieue our gracious and mercifull God. Oh then let vs labour to bee humbled, and to profite by the meanes the Lord vseth for our good.
 Thirdly, this checkes the carnall man, who so long as hee liues an honest ciuill life, and is neyther whore nor theefe, thinkes God is not displeased with him: they thinke all is well, and hope to bee saued aswel as the best, and doubt not of Gods loue: but if thou bee not bettered by Gods iudgements, if thou profite not by those meanes, the Lord vseth to humble thee, whether it bee the Ministery of the Word, his mercies, or his iudgements, or the like, thou shalt one day know that hee is highly offended with thee, and therefore let vs not flatter our selues, but let vs profite by Gods iudgements, and labour to be humbled by them to seeke the Lord, least by the neglect and contempt
 thereof, hee bee moued to send more fearefull, and that eternall damnation in the end.
Fourthly, and lastly, heere is matter of comfort and consolation to the children of God, and all those that  take the iudgements of God to heart, and profite by them to repentance, and seeke to God; for as the Lord is grieued with those that profite not by the means, dislikes all contemners and despisers of them: so on the contrary, hee loues and likes, and fauours them that profite by the meanes that hee vseth to conuert them. When Nehemie heard that Ierusalem was waste,Nehem. 1.9. that the people were in heauinesse, and the Church afflicted, Hee sate downe and wept, and fasted,Hab. 3.16. and prayed vnto God for them. And againe, When I heard,Ezech. 9. my belly trembled, etc. How did the Lord commaund his seruant, clothed in white, with a penne and inke at his side to set a marke vpon all those that mourned for their own sinnes and the sinnes of the people. Well then, aske this question of thy owne Soule: Hast thou beene grieued at Gods anger, and mourned for the sinnes and rebellion of the land? Doest thou take Gods iudgements to heart, Oh then comfort thy Soule, for the Lord will loue thee, and set his Marke vpon thee, Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall bee comforted. They are blessed that can mourne and weepe for sinne, and can take Gods iudgements to heart to bee affected with them; but alas, how few are the number of those that are humbled for their owne sinnes to feare Gods anger, and profite by Gods iudgements vpon others.
Thus much of the complaint, the persons follow.




O Ephraim, what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, how shall I intreat thee?

 THe persons then of whom the Lord complaineth thus,The persons of whom the Lord complaineth. is Ephraim and Iudah, namely, the whole body of the Iewes, and the people of both the kingdoms, Israel and Iudah, the greatest Tribe being put for al the rest.
So then the complaint is very generall, euen of the common people, and all the multitude of both the Kingdomes, except a very few that did repent and beleeue the Word, as in the three first verses of this Chapter.
Concerning the persons, Ephraim and Iudah, there is the common people and generall multitude of both Kingdoms,Deu. 8.7. seeing they were those whom God chose to be his peculiar people; euen because he had a loue vnto them, to whom belonged the adoption, glory, and the couenant, and to whom did belong the seruice of God, the worshippe and oracles of God, and vnto whom all the Prophets were sent: which had many priuiledges aboue all other Nations, of whom it is sayd thus; Hee sheweth his Word vnto Iacob, his statutes and iudgements vnto Israel.Ps. 147.19.20 Hee hath not dealt so with euery Nation, etc. Yet of this people, euen of Iudah and Israel doth the Lord complaine here, that they were rebellious; and therefore must bee destroyed and cast off.
 Wee learne hence this Doctrine, that no outward priuiledge or prerogatiue whatsoeuer,No outward priuiledge wil free a man from punishment when reformation of heart and life is wanting, Psa. 132.4 will keepe backe Gods anger, and deliuer a man from destruction if they liue in sinne, and bee not reformed in heart and life. There was neuer Nation or people vnder heauen, that were graced with more outward priuiledges and prerogatiues
 then this nation and people of the Iewes. They had the Temple of the Lord amongst them, of the which the Lord speaketh thus: This is my rest for euer, heere will I dwell: for I haue a delight therein: They had amongst them the Arke of Gods couenant, the Mercy seate, they had amongst them the true seruice and worshippe of God, and what not: yet for all this Iudah and Israel must bee destroyed, defaced and extinguished, and made spectacles of Gods wrath to all posterities for euermore. This point is clearly to be seene by those threatnings of Almighty God himselfe by his Prophet Ieremie, where hee sayth,Ier. 7.11.12 13.14. Is my house become a Denne of theeues, whereupon my Name is called before your eyes? Behold, euen I see it, sayth the Lord. Therefore will I doe vnto this house, whereupon my name is called, wherein also yee trust, euen to the place that I gaue to you and your Fathers, as I haue done vnto Shilo. And I will cast yee out of my sight, as I haue cast out all your brethren, euen the whole seed of Ephraim.Ier. 16.4.6. The like threatning hee vseth by the same Prophet in another place, saying, If yee will not hearken, and turne euery man from his euill waye, etc. Then will I make this house like Shilo, and will make this City a curse to all the Nations vpon earth. And this is further confirmed vnto vs by that threatning of our Sauiour himselfe against Ierusalom, where he saith, Thy house shall bee left vnto thee desolute.Mat. 23.38. And thus haue wee seene this Doctrine confirmed by the example of this Nation and people of the Iewes, who were graced with many and excellent priuiledges and prerogatiues; yet the Lord doth esteeme them as nothing, when reformation of heart and life is wanting. The same truth is further cleared by diuers other examples in the booke of God. Iudas had many outward priuiledges, and yet for all that a damnable hypocrite: for his calling hee was an Apostle, a calling more honourable then any
 other in the Church of God,Act. 1.17. Gal. 1.1. because the ordination was not of Man or by man, but by Iesus Christ. The company with whom hee was conuersant was matchlesse, for hee was conuersant with Iesus Christ and his Disciples, his gifts they were not meane, for hee was a Preacher. And lastly, his behauiour was very sober: for when Christ tolde his Disciples that one of them should betray him, they were farre from suspecting Iudas, that they rather misdeemed themselues, Master, is it I, sayth one, Master, is it I, sayth another? and yet for all this Iudas a desperate reprobate.
This is further to bee seene in Cain, who was as forward in offering sacrifice as his brother Abel,Gen. 4.3.4.5 yet because hee came in hypocrisie for fashion sake, the Lord reiected both him and his sacrifice.Mar 6.20. Herod loued Iohn Baptist, and did many things at his request; yet by reason of his Incest hee is branded for an hypocrite. What shall I say of the foolish Virgins, who went out to meet the Bridegroome aswel as the wise?Mat. 15.1.2. yet because they wanted the oyle of graee in their hearts, were reiected.Act. 8.13. Act. 5.8. The like may bee sayd of Simon Magus, of Ananias and Saphira, and diuers the like examples, all seruing to this end, to confirme the euerlasting truth of this Doctrine vnto vs, that no outward priuiledge in the world will free a man from Gods iudgements, when reformation of heart and life is wanting.
 And the reason is cleare, because God himselfe is not tyed to any people, nor respecteth any persons but onely such as feare him, I perceyue (sayth Peter) that God is no accepter of persons,Act. 10.34.35. but in euery Nation hee that feareth him and worketh righteousnesse is accepted of him: Hee will cleare his iustice, to hate sinne, wheresoeuer, whensoeuer, or in whomsoeuer hee findeth it.
Now let vs come to the vses.
This may serue in the first place for the iust reproofe
 of those that flatter themselues in respect of an outward profession, and beare themselues aloft, in respect of some outward priuiledge, and thinke that they shall therefore escape: but alas, it is not all the priuiledges in the world can doe vs good, if the inward sincerity bee wanting. This we haue seen cleared here by the example of Ephraim and Iudah, the Nation and people of the Iewes, who were graced with many and excellent priuiledges, as no Nation or people vnder heauen were the like: yet because they wanted this reformation of heart and life, the Lord threatneth heere to destroy them. And now to apply this Doctrine to our selues, we are by Gods blessing the people of God, and haue as many priuiledges as euer they had: What then, because we are now the Church of God, and enioy the Gospell, Word, and Sacraments, peace and plenty, shall wee grow secure and wanton, like an vntamed Calfe,Ier. 19.31. and cast off the yoake of obedience? God forbid: for then the Lord will reiect vs as hee did them. And yet alas, is not this the state of this land at this day, from the highest to the lowest; wee are guilty of the sinnes of this people.Hos. 4 1, 2.3. Among the men of Ephraim and Iudah were found many great and grieuous sins, as the Lord doth charge them with by this Prophet, as swearing, and lying, and killing, and whoring, and that bloud touched bloud. Now alas, are wee strangers to these sinnes? no, no, Wee are too well acquainted with them, and new sinnes that Ephraim and Iudah neuer were acquainted withall; and what is the Lords hand shortned that hee should not plague England as hee did Ephraim and Iudah: Surely, if wee partake with them in their sinnes, wee shall one day partake with them of their punishments: And looke how much the more familiar wee haue beene acquainted with the best of
 Gods graces, the greater shall bee our iudgement for the abuse of them: Yea, it had beene better for vs that wee had neuer known God, nor heard of his Word, but been borne euen Turks and Canibals, Pagans and Infidels, then to haue the Priuiledges as wee haue amongst vs; namely, the Word and Sacraments, and the like, and not to bee reformed by them. Marke what terrible and fearefull words our Sauiour denounceth against those Cities where the Word had beene preached most, and they wanted this reformation:Mat. 11.21. etc. Woe bee to thee Corazin, woe bee to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works which were done in you, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, they had repented long agoe in sackcloth and ashes: but I say vnto you, it shall bee easier for them in the day of iudgement then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted vp into heauen, shalt bee brought down to Hell, for if the great works which haue beene done in thee, had beene done amongst them of Sodom, they had remayned to this day. But I say vnto you, that it shall bee easier for them of the land of Sodom in the day of iudgement then for thee.
In this place our Sauiour declares vnto vs, that such places as haue had the preaching of the Word amongst them, and haue accounted light of the same, shall receiue at the last day a greater measure of condemnation, then those that neuer heard the sound therof. You wil think it a harsh comparison, if I should compare our land to Sodom and Gomor: wee know how the Lord destroyed them with fire and brimstone from heauen: And yet I say vnto you in the name of God from the warrant of his sacred word, by the which wee shall all one day be iudged; that if we liue in the open contempt of Gods truth, ignorance, blindnesse and prophanesse, which sins are scarce the tenth that may bee found amongst vs at this day, it had beene
 much better that wee had beene borne Sodomites and Gomoreans; yea, the time shall come, when many amongst vs shall cry out, and wish that they were Sodomites and Gomoreans: Oh that I were a Sodomite, Oh that I were one of them of Gomorah, and that, because wee knew not the day of our Visitation. And this fauour and mercy of our God that now we enioy, to heare him, to speake vnto vs in his Word, and that wee haue his seruice and worship amongst vs, shall bee so farre at the last day from procuring vs any fauour or mercy at Gods hand, as that wee hauing had the same amongst vs, and wee most prophanely did neglect and contemne the same; shall reape euen therefore the greater measure of condemnation:Deu. 32.29. Oh that men would bee wise, then would they consider their latter end.
Secondly, seeing that most excellent prerogatiues  and priuiledges will not serue to keepe backe Gods anger, and to deliuer vs from destruction if wee liue in sinne, and bee not reformed in heart and life: then let vs labour to ioyne to our outward profession of the Word, sound obedience, true repentance and reformation of our wayes, and marke then what will follow: If yee will hearken and obey, yee shall then eate the good of the land. Wee must not stand so much vpon the largenesse of the leaues of our profession, who should professe most; as wee should vpon sincerity, who should practise most. I am sure it is our behauiour concerning the things of the world: There is no man but had rather be rich, then accounted rich; be wealthie, then seeme to bee wealthy. And yet for that true riches that shall make vs rich vnto saluation, wee can content our selues with shadowes and shewes of it, and looke not after the substance; Like Iehu who made great boast of the zeale hee had for the glory of God:
 Come with mee sayth he to Ionadab, And see the zeale that I haue for the Lord:2. Reg. 10.16 but yet for all this, his heart was not vpright in the sight of God:Act. 24.16. but the Apostle Paul was affected otherwise, who endeuoured himselfe to haue alway a cleare conscience towards God and man. And surely this is it that shall bee our comfort in life, in death, and after death,Esay. 38.3. that wee can say with good King Ezechiah, Remember Lord that I haue walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.
 Againe, seeing the Lord complaines here of Ephraim and Iudah, that is, of the whole body of the people, and the generall multitude of both Kingdomes,Though God doth offer the meanes of saluation vnto all, yet few receiue them. that they were wicked and rebellious, and profited not by al the gracious means that he vsed to reclaim them: we learne hence, that though the Lord do offer the means alike to all, as his Word, iudgements, admonitions, corrections, etc. yet very few doe receiue them and profite by them, and the greatest part remaine ignorant, vnrepentant and rebellious against the meanes, as wee may see heere in this people: they had the meanes al alike to call them to repentance; yet the greatest part and the greatest number vnreformed still; so that the Lord speakes heere of the whole Nation and people of the Iewes, O Ephraim, O Iudah, those that resolued to Returne vnto the Lord, as in the three first verses of this chapter, their number was exceeding small in comparison of those that did neglect and contemne the same; and therefore he speakes of them wholy together, Ephraim, Iudah.
This Doctrine is further cleared by the example of the old World, that notwithstanding the meanes of deliuerance was offered to all men alike, yet only Noah was moued with reuerence,Gen. 6.3. Heb. 11. Gen. 19. to feare Gods iudgements, when all the rest of the world were euen drunke in security, and lay weltring in their sinnes. So in Sodom,
 one righteous Lot. Elias sayth, Hee was left alone: hee could not see one open professor of Religion in his time. Woe is mee (sayth the Prophet) For I am as the Summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the Vintage;Mich. 7.1. Ier. 3.14. Luk. 12.32. Mat. 27. there is no cluster to eate. Alas, when the haruest is in the gleaning, it is very small, heere an eare and there an eare; One of a City, and two of a Tribe. And Christ cals his flocke a little flocke; Feare not little Flocke. All cried against the Sonne of God, Crucifie him, Crucifie him.Reu. 13. All receyued the Marke of the beast.
This is plaine by wofull experience in our dayes, how few true worshippers of God, sound Christians, though wee haue the meanes alike, how few profit by them, the greatest part remaine ignorant still, vile, rebellious and prophane; and so few, that they bee like a handfull of corne in a heape of chaffe, many hypocrites, many meere Laodiceans, neyther hote nor cold;Reu. 3.17. many halfe Christians with Agrippa, onely those that profite truely by the meanes, are exceeding few.
Hence wee see that Multitude is no note of a true  Church: And therefore it confutes the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, who would make men beleeue, that therefore they must needes bee the true Church, because their Religion is so generally receiued and imbraced of many Kingdomes: But here wee see,Luke. 12.32. that the greater part is the worst; and Christs flocke is a little flocke; and therefore this Doctrine beates and batters down one of the maine pillars of Popery, whervpon they ground their religion, and supplant their Church, they ground vpon this sandy foundation, and the pillar is a number and multitude of men, that many receiue their religion, and few ours; but if this reason be good, then those few beleeuing Iewes that repented, as in the three first verses of this Chapter
 should not bee the children of God; but Ephraim and Iuda, euen the common multitude should be accounted the Church, which is most false: for, seeing the Flocke of Christ is small, and they few that beleeue be the true Church of God; this reason is more against them then with them.
Secondly, this may serue to condemn them that  excuse their sinnes by the example of the multitude, as Pride, couetousnesse, etc. I doe but as others doe, It is the fashion, and I am not alone. And thus poore soules they thinke they haue alleadged an argument that cannot bee answered. What, shall wee go to Hel for company?Psal. 50.18. Wee see it is dangerous to doe as most doe. The gate is wide that leadeth to destruction, and many goe in thereat: Let vs rather suspect our selues, because wee doe as the most doe: and Fashion not our selues like vnto the world, but ioyne with the little Flocke of Christ: and if there bee but one Elias that feares God, let vs ioyne with him to obey God. And therefore let men know, that by shrouding themselues vnder the multitude,Exod. 23.2 Ier. 6.13. they are so far from excusing themselues, as that the rather they accuse themselues, because commonly the greatest part is the worst.
 Thirdly, this may comfort the Ministers of the Word of God, who, when they study, take paines, preach in season and out of season, and yet see no fruit of their labour, few beleeue and repent, it is that which indeed doth much grieue them and discourage them, as wee see in Elias; but this must bee our comfort, that it hath euer been so in olde time, in the Prophets times, in Christs time, and since, and wil be so to the end of the world: onely let euery faithfull Minister of Iesus Christ doe his indeuour, and commit the successe to God.
And thus much of the persons of whom the
 Lord complayneth: the complaint it selfe followeth.



For your goodnes is as the morning cloud, and as the Morning Dew it goeth away.

HEre is the third generall point in the complaint;  namely, the cause of it,The complaint it selfe. which so moued the Lord to complaine of this people: And it is indeed the preuenting of an obiection and cauill of this people: for they might obiect and say, What aileth him, he hath no cause so to exclaime and complaine of vs, that he cannot bring vs to repentance, and to serue God: why doe wee not bring our Sacrifices to his Altar? doe wee not come dayly to serue God? Yea, we haue lamented our sinnes and humbled our selues before his face, crauing pardon at his hands. What would hee haue vs to do more?
To this cauill of theirs the Prophet answeres, in laying open the cause of this complaint, in these words For your goodnesse, etc. By goodnesse, here he meanes their outward seruice and worship of God, their fayned repentance; they had some outward shew of holines, and of repentance, and seruice of God; but it was voyd of sincerity and soundnesse of heart, it was not in truth, but from the teeth outward; and therefore it was vanishing and vnconstant, and of the sodaine, like vnto the Dew or Morning cloud, which is dispersed in a moment by the Sunne.
In this people here we may behold the nature and  property of all hypocrites; they content themselues with the bare, naked, and outward seruice of God,It is the property of hypocrites to minde more the outward part of Gods worship, then the inward. neuer looking for the truth of it in their hearts and soules: for though they offered Sacrifices and oblations, came
 to the Temple, seemed to repent; yet it was onely in outward shew, not sound nor sincere, it neuer came from their hearts. And what account such seruice of God is with God, hee declares by his Prophet Esay, when hee sayth,Esay. 1.14. My soule hateth your New Moones, and your appointed Feasts: They are a burden vnto mee, I am a weary to beare them. They would keepe the Sabbaths, and frequent the solemne assemblies, but it was but for custome and for fashion sake: they would learne nothing at al; though their bodies were there, yet their hearts were not there. And this sinne of theirs Almighty God layeth to their charge else where, when he sayth,Esay. 29.13. This people come neare vnto mee with their mouth, and honour mee with their lips, but their hearts are far from mee. He blameth them, not for that they came not into Gods Temple, and into the Assembly of Gods people; for, herein they were very forward; but that they brought now a lame Sacrifice vnto the Lord, it was but a lippe seruice, and a Will worshippe, and the Lord doth esteeme no better of it then the killing of a man, and the cutting off of a dogges necke, or the offering vp of Swines bloud; all which are abominable vnto the Lord: for God is a spirit, and therefore will bee worshipped,Esay. 66.3.4 not onely according to the outward ceremony of his worshippe, but in spirit and truth: To whom will I haue respect vnto, but to him that is poore, and of a contrite spirit,Ier. 7.7. Pro. 15.11. and trembleth at my words, And if this bee wanting, all that wee can doe in the seruice and worshippe of God, is but sinne vnto vs, and shall adde vnto the measure of our iniquities. And surely, this is the onely reason, as I take, why men profit no more vnder the Preaching of the Word, in this time of the Gospell; namely this, because men perswade themselues, that so long as they performe the outward rites of Gods worshippe and seruice, as to come to Church,
 heare the Word, receiue the Sacrament and the like, all is well with them, they need no more.
In these Iewes wee may clearely see a counterpane of our people and time. What is the cause, why after  so much and so long preaching, men should remayne so ignorant, so couetous, so vile, and so sinneful stil; is it not because most men content themselues with the outward seruice and worship of God? Why did not the meanes that conuerted those Iewes in the beginning of this Chapter, conuert these of whom the Lord speaketh in this place? Surely, the Prophet giues a reason of it in this verse; namely, because these Iewes thought that they had goodnesse inough, and religion inough, so long as they performed the outward part of Gods worshippe and seruice, and for this very cause, all these meanes could doe them no good.
And is not this the sinne of our times and people?Note. doe not most men content themselues with the outward seruice and worshippe of God, to come to Church to heare the Word, and receiue the Sacrament? and thinke then they haue honoured God highly, and serued him aswell as the best of them all, and that God can require no more at their hands: I appeale vnto your hearts and consciences whether this be not so, that most doe content themselues with the very outward action of Gods worshippe, neuer looking for soundnesse of heart to come in faith, repentance, and obedience.
Oh then let this moue vs all to bee grieued for this sinne; Let vs amend it:Esay. 1.16. Pro. 15.11. Let vs labour to come with penitent and obedient hearts, else all our prayers, and all things else that we doe in Gods seruice,Ier. 7.7. is but Abomination to the Lord. And indeed, when men are once come to this passe, that they thinke they haue knowledge
 inough, faith and repentance inough, and are forward inough so long as they come to Church, and heare the Word: when men are once come to this passe, many meanes and great meanes can doe them no good. This people of the Iewes had many means, the Lord sent his Prophets earely and late,Ier. 7. but they could not conuert them, and why? because they cryed, the Temple,Mich. 6.6.7. the Temple, and trusted in lying vanities. So the Lord sent his Prophet Mica, threatning them with iudgements, yet they were not reformed: and the reasons is, because they contented themselues with these outward shewes of repentance, and thought their outward worshippe was inough, and that God would bee content with their sacrifices. And again, he heard the Prophet Ezechiel preach and denounce Gods Iudgements;Ezec. 33.31.32. yea, they commended him, and were forward to heare him; yet this vile thought and perswasion being in their hearts, that it was inough to heare, though they went no further, stopt their hearts so as they could not repent:Mar. 6.^0. This was Herods sin, who was come to this height of impiety, that if Iohn Baptist would bee content with his hearing, so it was, but reformation of life, especially of his beloued sinne, hee should neuer see in him.Reu. 3.15. And surely, this is that that makes all good things vnprofitable to vs, because men thinke they are wise inough, and good inough. Is it not a wonder that men should liue so many yeares vnder the meanes, heare so much, and read so much, and yet profite so little? Indeed it could neuer bee so, if men did see their wants, and come with penitent and obedient hearts. Oh then I beseech you in the feare of God, lay aside this proud conceit, lay aside this vaine perswasion, that you should thinke your outward seruice and worship of God is inough, that you know inough, and are good enough; rather thinke the worst
 of your selues, and desire more grace, that yee may seeme good with more feeling and comfort.
Secondly, in that the Lord compares their repentance and goodnes, all their piety and seruice of God to a Morning cloud, and to the dew before the Sunne, he shewes that their Repentance was not onely vnsound but also vncertaine, of no continuance; some good motions came into their minds, and some prickes of conscience for their sinnes; but yet they would not leaue their olde sinnes, and turne to God with al their hearts.
From whence wee obserue a further point of Doctrine, that the wicked themselues haue somtimes good motions in them, howbeit they bee not lasting.The wicked haue sometimes good motions in them but not lasting. When Gods hand is vpon them by long and tedious sicknes, how ready are many to make solemne vowes vnto the Lord of reformation of their liues; but alas this is but while their consciences are vpon the racke, but when that his iudgements are remoued, it may be sayde of them, as of wicked Ahaz,2. Chr. 28.22 They trespasse yet more against the Lord. This was the desperate estate and condition of this people, the Lord threatned them with many great and grieuous iudgements, as in the former chapter, vnder the which they seemed to bee humbled for a time: but alas, it was but for a time, for it quickly vanished away, euen as the Dew when the Sun shines hote vpon it. This was the case of the people in Moses time, they made a fayre shew for a time,Deu. 5.27 saying to Moses the seruant of the Lord, Goe thou neare and heare all that the Lord our God sayth:Num. 23, 10. and declare thou vnto vs al that the Lord our God sayth vnto thee, and wee will heare it, and doe it. Balam that false Prophet, that loued so the wages of iniquity, as that hee would haue done directly against the commandement of the Lord; yet hauing his mind inlightned, desired that hee might Die the
 death of the righteous; which was in it selfe a good and a godly prayer, had it not proceeded from a wicked and a gracelesse heart: but it was not constant in Balam, but as a sudden flashing of a lightning quickly vanishing away.Exod. 9.27. What shall wee say of Pharaoh, who cryed out, I haue sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked. This appeareth further in the Iewes, who wished to come to happinesse if that would haue serued the turne,Io. 6.34. Lord giue vs euermore this bread: they had grieuously sinned against the Sonne of God, and yet in a certaine remorse of conscience they wished to be partakers of eternall life. This the Apostle condemneth in the Galathians,Gal. 5.7. Yee did runne well, what did let you that yee did not obey the truth? Was not this the case of Hymeneus and Philetus,1. Tim. 1.10. 2. Tim. 2.18 2. Tim. 4.10. were they not held to bee great Christians in their times, and obtayned a good report in the Church of God, in the which they liued? yet afterwards fell away, making shipwracke of faith, and a good conscience. What shall wee say of Demas,Philemo^. 24. who went so farre in Religion, as that hee suffered imprisonment for the truthes sake, and yet fell in loue with the world? What did it profite Iehu to bee zealous for the Lord in slaying the Priests of Baal, seeing he Departed not from the sinnes of Ieroboam?2. Reg. 10.25 v. 31. What did it profite Lots wife to goe out of Sodom, commanded by the Angel,Gen. 19.26. accompanied by her deare husband, seeing shee looked backe, and was turned into a piller of salt? Wee must therefore contend for more faith, for more knowledge, and for more grace, that wee may finde in our selues a dayly increase in the same; for not to goe forward in Religion, is to goe backeward, and not to increase in spirituall graces, is certainely to decrease and decay in them. Wee haue in the Scriptures many lawes to incite and prouoke vs to goe forward to perfection, to walke, to labour, and to striue for godlines:
 but wee haue none to giue liberty, to sit still, to bee idle, or to loyter, to bee carelesse or secure. This doth the Lord himselfe teach vs, when hee sayth; If a righteous man turne from his righteousnesse,Ezec. 18.24. and do the thing that is euill: all the righteousnesse that hee hath done shall bee no more thought vpon, but in the wickednesse that hee hath done, in the same hee shall die.1. Cor. 9.24. And this is taught by the Apostle Paul, when hee sayth, Know yee not that they which runne in a race, runne all? yet one receiueth the prize: So runne that yee may obtaine. So then wee haue seene this Doctrine cleared, that the wicked themselues are not so farre giuen ouer to themselues, but that at somtimes they haue som touch of conscience, and remorse of heart for sinne, as this people heere then seemed to bee humbled vnder Gods iudgement, and they seemed to repent for their sinnes; but all this was but for a time, it was not durable and lasting, but as the Morning cloud, and as the Morning dew it went away. God graunt the same be not our sin.
Now this thing comes thus to passe in the wicked, because their consciences taking notice of all their sins, doth assure the sinner that God is iust in punishing of sinne, and therefore when the Lord shall but shake the sword of iudgement ouer a wicked man, hee cannot but be humbled for sinne for the time present, though they harden their hearts like an Adamant, and their faces like flint, yet when the stormes of Gods iudgements shall arise,Act. 24.25. they shall quake and tremble as Felix did.
Seeing that many beginne well, and yet proue but as the Morning cloud, which is quickly gone. We may  from hence conclude the wofull, miserable and wretched estate of all those that shrinke away, that begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: Surely, I may say of them as Christ sometime sayd of Iudas, It had beene
 good: for them if they had neuer been borne. This the Apostle Peter setteth downe fully, when hee sayth, If they after they haue escaped from the filthinesse of the World, thorough the acknowledging of the Lord,2. Pet. 2.20.21.22. and of the Sauiour Iesus Christ, are yet tangled therein and ouercome; the latter end is worse with them then the beginning: for it had been better for them not to haue acknowledged the way of righteousnesse, then after they haue acknowledged it, to turne away from the holy commandement giuen vnto them But it is come vnto them according to the Prouerbe: The Dogge is turned to his owne vomit, and the Sow that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire. Oh that all wicked and vngodly sinners would consider this aright, how the holy Ghost doth esteeme of them, euen no better then dogs and swine: Let them seeme neuer so holy and religious, if they doe not perseuere in piety and religion, alas, they are neuer the nearer heauen, but hauing beene acquainted with Gods Word, Sacraments and Prayer, the greater shall bee their torment at the last for the abuse thereof. Yea, it is a righteous thing with God to giue ouer such men and women vnto a reprobate sense, taking his spirit from them, so that they shal grow by degrees to be worse and worse, as wee may see in these Iewes, vnto whom the Lord had vsed many meanes to humble them, and to bring them home by repentance, as his Word in the mouthes of his Prophets, his blessings and benefites; besides all this, his iudgements one vpon the necke of another; yet all would not serue to humble them; but all labour was lost, and all cost was ill bestowed: Well, what was the end of all this, did they not grow to bee the greatest enemies to the Gospell and Crosse of Christ? And thus fared it with Iudas, being an Apostle, became a most desperate reprobate. And thus doth Almighty God as a most iust reuenger of sin, many times punish
 one sinne by another. Oh let these iudgements, of God vpon the wicked, breake in sunder the hard and stony hearts of the wicked, that so they may anew renue their Couenant with God, that he may haue mercy vpon them, and that they may liue in his sight.
Secondly, wee are taught heere, that it is not innough  to beginne well, to entertaine holy thoughts, and godly purposes; but we must withall nourish and cherish them, that so wee may haue comfort by them at our latter end; this people beganne well, but they ended ill. Oh then let vs looke to our owne soules, and try whether our repentance bee like to theirs or not, if wee find it vnsound, that it comes not to the heart, but rests in outward shewes, and that it is soone vanished away; then truely it is nought, Dauid was humbled for his sinnes all the dayes of his life: And it is reported of Peter, that after his repentance,Stella in Lucam. hee rose euer at the call of the Cocke to prayers, and other the like duties of piety and religion: And so must it bee with vs, otherwise God cares not for it, and it will stand vs in no stead in that day of Gods searching account.
Now, if wee may iudge of your Repentance by your life and outward behauiour, truely, it is to bee doubted,The great drought. that it is little better then the repentance of this people, not worth a button, but counterfeit and fayned: For, doth not the Lord euen call men to fasting, weeping, lamentation and mourning, to amendment of life and true repentance? and how do men performe this? who layes the iudgement of God to heart, who mournes for Gods anger vpon the land? nay rather, doe they not make this time of fasting, a time of feasting. Many seeme to repent, and to hang downe their heads like a bul-rush, and cry, Lord helpe vs,
 but truely it is but lippe-labour, but forged from the teeth outward; it comes not from the heart, but as this people in this place. Men are like to Schollers and Children, when the rodde is vpon their backe, they cry and yell, and promise to doe so no more; yet as soone as the rod is remoued, doe the same things againe. Euen so fareth it with most men amongst vs, while the iudgements of God are vpon them, and their consciences are vpon the racke, they are ready to cry to the Lord for helpe and deliuerance: but if the Lord doe but remoue his hand, you shall see them with the dogge to the vomite, and the Sow to the myre, couetous still, cruell still, ignorant, filthy, and vncleane still. Is not this the common repentance of our times? And is not this like the Iewes heere, which the Lord so highly condemneth? Oh alas, it is, and therefore the Lord must needs bee as highly offended with vs as euer hee was with them: And therefore it is now hie time to looke to our selues, to ioyne to our outward profession, true reformation of heart and life, to build vpon the Rocke Christ; and for the time to come, to lay a sure foundation, and be sure of an honest heart, that it bee sound in the worshippe of God; for the Lord prefers such a heart that comes in faith, repentance and obedience, before most glorious and goodly shewes, when sincerity of heart is wanting. And truelie it is greatly to bee feared, that many now professing the Gospell in these dayes of peace, if the Sun should wax hote, if stormes should come, and tryall for the Gospell sake, they would fal away, and ^ee like this people heere; whose goodnesse all they did professe, was but as a droppe of dew before the Sunne. Oh then let vs labour for soundnesse and sincerity in Gods seruice: Let vs labour to find our eyes opened, our minds illuminated, our hearts softned, and our affections touched,
 that so wee may haue ioy and comfort heere, and euerlasting peace and comfort in the end.
Thirdly, seeing wee are taught heere, that many  may seeme forward for a time, zealous and godly, and yet the same proue in the end but as The morning cloud, quickly scattered, and as The Morning Dew, which is quickly gone when the face of the Sun doth shew it selfe vpon it. Wee are taught hence, not to be offended when wee see some of those that for the time past haue seemed to be forward in Religion, to fall away, and that the life of Gods spirit doth decay in them: for there haue been euer such counterfeit Christians, euen from the beginning in the houshold of Adam,Gen. 4.56. there was a wicked Cain, and in the family of Abraham there was a scoffing Ismael; yea, there is no society eyther in Church or common wealth, but the Scriptures afford vs some example or other,Mat. 27. that there haue been some wicked amongst them: But what of all this, must this discourage vs? No, no: What if all the world will be disobedient, as in the dayes of Noah? What if there be but one Elias in all Israel? Oh let vs ioyne with him,Note. and let vs euen hereby bee wise, and learne to take heed by other mens harmes, to take a faster hold vpon Religion, and lay to build vpon a sure foundation, for at one time or other, God will lay some tryall or other vpon vs, that wee shall appeare to bee eyther chaffe or Wheat: the faithfull seruants of the Lord, or the cursed limbs of Sathan: and if we haue hitherto felt and enioyed peaceable times, that the Lord hath not yet sifted and winnowed vs as Sathan desired to sift Peter: What, shall wee bee secure therefore? God fotbid: rather let vs in the dayes of peace prepare for the time of tryall, euer looking out when God will shake his sword against vs.




Your goodnes is as the morning cloud, etc.

IN that the Lord doth compare the repentance or goodnesse of this people to the Morning cloud, and to the Morning Dew, because it was neyther true nor sincere, nor durable, not lasting, but quickly gone; and therefore are branded with this blacke cole of hypocrites, and such as the Lord threatens to Cut downe, and to slay, euen vtterly to roote out, as in the verse following.  Wee are taught by their example, that if wee would bee religious indeed, and approued for sound Christians before God,Sincerity of heart and perseuerance in godlines, a true note of the child of God. that wee labour for that which was wanting in them, and which shall approue vs for Christians before God; namely, sincerity of heart, as also that we perseuere in the duties of piety and godlines, euen vnto the end.
It was the commendations of Enoch and of Noah, that notwithstanding they liued in sinfull times, being ouerrunne with all manner of impieties, yet they walked with God;Gen. 5.22. Gen. 6.9. they kept themselues vnspotted of the world: they made not the practise of other men, an example for them; but walked so as euer in Gods presence. This was Ezechias his comfort when hee was summoned to die;Esay. 38.3. Remember Lord that I haue walked before thee in truth and with an vpright heart.Iob. 16.19. And when Iob was censured for an hypocrite (according as the maner of the world is at this day, to despise and disgrace euery one that is more carefull to please God, then themselues:) What was his comfort but this, that hee could say; My witnesse is in heauen, and my Record is on hie. q. d. My comfort is; that though you speake your pleasure of mee now, yet you shall not bee my Iudges, but God that is aboue, whom I haue ever serued in spirit and truth, will iustifie me one day against you.

And this was the care of godly Paul,Act. 24.16. 2. Cor. 4.2. To endeuour aboue all things to keepe a cleare conscience before God and man: for this is that which will approue vs to be Christians indeed, when as the vizard of hypocrisie shall be taken from vs; and if this be wanting in vs, alas, all our shewes bee they neuer so goodly and glorious, shal no way stand vs in stead, but the Lord will rather cast them as dung into our faces: And yet good Lord, men thinke they haue profited highly in Religion, if they can but make a glorious shew therof before men: Oh, I would that men could be brought once to this passe that we might cast out this Deuil from them: but of this before.
Seeing that sincerity of heart is such an infallible note of the child of God, when as all shewes and shadowes will stand in no stead; this may vtterly condemn the art of Seeming, which euery man almost hath learned in our time. The hypocrite can come with his Lord, Lord.Mat. 7.21. Iob. 31.24. Pro. 30.20. The couetous man that hath made gold his hope, hee feares not. The vncharitable man, Whose torgue is like a Razar, is not abashed. The whorish woman Wipeth her mouth, and sayth, I haue not committed Iniquity, blusheth not. Thus euery one commeth into Gods house, heareth Gods word, receyueth his blessed Sacrament; and comes vnto these dueties so maskt, that they passe heere for currant coyne: we are not able to see into their hearts, it is the Lord alone, who is The searcher of the heart, that sees them: And thus men if they may passe with our approbation, they care for no more. Ah poore soule, Ah poore soule, what of al this? If the Lord doe not approue of thee, it is not all thy shewes and shadowes, be they neuer so goodly, nor so glorious, that wil stand thee in stead in the day of Gods searching account, but hauing acted the part of an hppocrite here vpon the Stage of this World, it
 shall at the last day be a iust and righteous thing with the righteous God, to giue thee the portion of hypocrites, euen euerlasting fire: Depart from mee yee Hypocrites into euerlasting fire, prepared for the Deuill and his Angels. Oh that this might perswade vs to affect sincerity of heart. What a thing were this that we should liue in these dayes and times wherein wee liue, wherein knowledge and grace is euen thrust vpon vs, and yet for all that, wee should proue such Iudasses vnto our owne poore Soules, thus to betray them into the hands of sathan. I cannot but taxe many of you of this parrish of Roxwell with this sin, the Lord lay it not one day to your charge. At my first co^ming amongst you, I obserued some forwardnes in you, in sanctifying the Sabbath, and hearing the word diligently; since which time who doth not perceiue a decay of zeale, a decay of hearing in a great many of this congregation, that will scarce now vouchsafe God your presence in the assembly of his people once a month. The full soule (sayth Salomon) loatheth the honey combe.Reu 3.14. I feare, you are full euen of spirituall pride with the Church of Laodicea. Well, bee warned betimes, lest your footings that you haue taken so oft in your bowling Allyes, surmount your steps into Gods house, and so the Lord lay this sinne of ingratitude to your charge, that hee should offer vnto you such gracious oportunities, and ye should so carelesly neglect the same.
 Secondly, this condemnes the common repentance of most men and women, that it is not sound nor sincere, because though they condemne sinne, and know it to be sinne; yet they neuer proceede so farre, as to leaue and forsake it.Mar. 6. Herod could not bee brought to leaue his Incest: Demas made a fayre shew for a while, but by and by left all, and fell into loue with the world: so, many men will for a brunt serue God, and seeme
 very forward both to heare the Word, read, pray, etc. yet the strength of their owne corruptions, and the loue of the World steales away their hearts, so as it comes to nothing: but sure it is that the grace of God when it hath taken possession in a mans soule, it will throughly purge the same, though not altogether from sinne: for the Flesh will euer rebell against the Spirite; yet from the power of sinne, so as that man that is truely sanctified, shall not from henceforth become a seruant vnto sinne; for a purpose to continue in sin, and the grace of God, cannot abide both in one Soule: but of this before.
And thus much of the Complaint: the Iudgement followeth.






VERSE. 5.

Therefore haue I cut downe by the Prophets, I haue slaine them by the words of my mouth, and thy iudgements were as the light that goeth foorth.

HAuing heard of their sinue, now wee are to speake of their punishment, which the Lord inflicted vpon them for the same; namely, fearefull destruction and vtter ouerthrow.
In speaking of their punishment, we are hence to obserue foure things.
Parts of the Text.First, the Author of it, I, that is the Lord himselfe.
Secondly, the greatnesse of it, Cut downe and slaine them.
Thirdly, the Instruments the Lord vseth, My Prophets, my word.
Fourthly, the equity of it; namely, that the Lord made his iudgements as cleare as the noone day vnto them, so as they could not plead ignorance, or want of knowledge.

Therefore haue I cut downe.

Therefore, that is, because I haue on my part done what I can to reclaim you, and bring you to some good
 passe; but you refused, and hardned your hearts, and contemned my words: for then the cause of Gods iudgements is their rebellion against the meanes, and their contempt of the Word of God, and preaching of his Prophets.
Then hence wee learne, what a grieuous sinne it is to contemne the meanes of saluation,To contemn the meanes of saluation is a grieuous sinne, and neuer goes vnpunished. Gen. 7.10.11.12. to contemne the Gospell of Christ Iesus, it neuer goes vnpunished. When Noah had preached repentance to the people of the old World, for the space of one hundred and twenty yeares together, and the people had despised the same; what followed in the end, but a fearefull destruction, euen a generall Deluge, which swept them all away? When Lot spake to his sonnes in Law which married his daughters, and warned them to escape out of Sodom, for the iudgements of God were at hand, to bee layde vpon that City: The Text sayth,Gen. 19.14 that Hee seemed to his Sonnes in Law as though hee had mocked: but what followed, did not they perish with those sinnefull Sodomites? And Iob makes this one of the marks of a reprobate: They say vnto God, Depart from vs,Iob. 21.14. for wee desire not the knowledge of thy wayes: not that there are any so desperately wicked as to vse such speeches against the Lord: but the meaning is, that men declare so much by their liues, they liue in open contempt of the gracious meanes of their saluation, whatsoeuer they pretended in words, their deeds declared, that they cared not to bee acquainted with Gods will. To the same purpose is that complaint in the Psalme My people would not heare my voyce, and Israel would none of mee.Psal. 81.11.12 The Lord had often spoken to that people by his seruants, the Prophets, but they regarded them not; much like to our people in these times: but what followed? the Lord would neuer put vp this great ingratitude at their hands, but sayth in the verse following,Ver. 12.1.1 So I gaue them
 vp vnto the hardnes of their owne hearts, and they walked in their owne councels. And this is further cleared by that speech of Almighty God by his Prophet Ieremy, where hee sayth,Ier. 7.13. I rose vp earely, and spake vnto you: but when I spake, yee would not heare me; neyther when I called, would ye answere. Behold here the desperate estate and condition of this people, that notwithstanding God had dealt so graciously with them from time to time to offer vnto them so many gracious oportunities of their saluation, following them, as it were, at the heeles with the same; sometimes by his Word, sometimes by his mercies, sometimes by his iudgements, yet they neglected them al, they contemned the^ al. But afterward the Lord made good the words of his seruants, he brought his iudgements vpon them and their Temple,Verse. 14. in the which they seemed so much to trust vppon the Lord made it as Shilo, and as the same Prophet complaineth in another place, That the wayes of Sion lamented,Lam. 1.4. because no man came to their solemne feasts: all her gates are desolate, the Priests sigh, etc. It was not their outward priviledges that would now stand them in stead, that they were the posterity of Abraham, that they had amongst them the Arke of Gods couenant, the Mercy seat,Psal. 132.14. the Temple of the Lord; and that the Lord had appointed that for his rest for euer. Seeing they contemned his Prophets,Ier. 6.10. delighted not in Gods voyce, but tooke pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. And this is that our Sauiour layes to the charge of the people of Ierusalem,Mat. 23.37. How often would I haue gathered you together, and yee would not: Behold now, your habitation is loft desolate:Mat. 11.21. Yea, our Sauiour Christ tels them of Capernaum, that it shall bee easier for the land of Sodom in the day of iudgement, then for them: so then we may safely conclude this doctrine with that speech of the Apostle,2. Thes. 2.10.11.12. Because they receiue not the loue of the
 truth, that they may be saued, therefore God will send them strong delusions, that they should beleeue lyes, that all they may bee damned that beleeue not the truth, but take pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. The Lotd graunt vs more sanctified hearts, that wee may make better vse of his gracious oportunities that hee doth offer vnto vs, that for the time to come, we may make more righter steps to his kingdome

This Doctrine maketh,

First, for the iust reproofe of all Papists, and all such  as are popishly affected, as such as the Lord may most iustly taxe with this great ingratitude of contemning the meanes of their owne saluation, that will rather hearken to erronious and hereticall doctrine, then to the truth of God contained in his holy Word. Let them stand neuer so much of their works of piety and deuotion, as Fastings, prayer, almes, etc. they are without the Word, but abhomination to the Lord, the Lord hates them, and his soule abhorres them, being not done in faith, repentance, and true obedience, as Salomon sayth, He that turneth away his eare from hearing the Law, euen his prayer shall be abhominable. But oh, the iust iudgement of God vpon them, they haue refused to embrace the loue of the truth, and haue beleeued lies, and therefore it is a righteous thing with God, to giue them ouer to hardnesse of heart, and rebrobate minds to be deluded by Sathan, and so to perish with him for euer.
Secondly, this Doctrine doth nearely concerne  vs all. Wee see here, what a fearefull sinne it is before the Lord to contemne his Word, to neglect his Doctrine, and lightly to esteeme of the meanes of our saluation, it is of that nature that the Lord cannot at any hand put it vp, but will most surely punish the contempt therof, as we haue seene before by the examples
 of the old world, the Sodomites, the people of the Iewes and the like, And yet alas, wee see it a sinne too too common, so as men doe generally neglect and contemne, if not desperately despise the means of their saluation, the most glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ, making no account of it, but trample it vnder foot, and esteeme no more of the Word preached, then they do of their old shooes, they wil not go to the dore to heare it, but rather lye vpon their beds, sit by the fire, talke in the streetes, play in their bowling Allies, and to doe any base or vaine thing then to come into Gods house to heare his Word, whereby their poore soules might be saued. Oh horrible impietie! Well I remember that Saul obserued Dauids seat when hee was wanting: much more doth the Lord take notice of our emptie seates and solitary Pewes when wee are wanting. Will you heare how the Lord hath grieuously punished such contempt, yea the neglect of holy meanes: and hath not the Lord met with vs for this sinne? yes questionlesse, as the plague and pestilence is sent for sin, so I am perswaded no one sinne of the land hath been a greater cause to prouoke the Lord to anger, and to plague our land so often with the pestilence, and other grieuous iudgements of vnseasonable weather, and the like, then our long, our generall, and our continuall contempt of his most holy Word, and prophaning of his Sabbaths: so as the Lord may say to vs, for this cause haue I cut you downe, euen by hundreds and thousands, for the contempt of the gracious means I haue vsed to do you good. Oh then I beseech you in the feare of God, let vs lay this to heart: and seeing the Lord will neuer suffer the contempt of his Word goe vnpunished: let vs now at last repent of this sinne; let vs esteeme better of the Word, let vs receiue it, beleeue it, and bee more carefull to heare it, otherwise
 if wee liue in the open contempt of it, as now wee doe; I say vnto you in the name of the Lord, and from the warrant of his sacred Word, by the which wee shall al bee iudged at the last day,Mat. 11.21. that it shall bee easier for the men of Sodom and Gomor then for vs: yea, the time may come when wee shall weepe and howle, crie out and say, Oh that I were a Sodomite, Oh that I had beene borne one of Gomorah, and enuy the felicity euer of the Sodomites in comparison of our own torments,Heb. 2.3. If now wee neglect so great saluation.
Thirdly and lastly, seeing the Word preached and taught is the ordinary meanes of our saluation, and the neglect and contempt thereof doth draw downe  such heauy iudgements vpon vs as we haue heard before; how may this teach vs all according to godly Salomon his aduice, to take heed to our feet when we come into Gods house, and as our Sauiour sayth,Eccl. 4.17. Mat. 13. Luk. 8.18. to take heed how wee heare? It is not to bee accounted a light matter that we haue this liberty to come into Gods house, that wee may heare him speake vnto vs in his Word: for if wee benefite not by these holy exercises of religion, and draw nearer vnto heauen, wee are made by them the more hardned in sinne to our greater confusion at the last: let vs not therefore come for fashion sake or for custome, but for conscience sake before God, and in obedience to his commadement. And to this end wee must learne to prepare our selues before wee come, by heartie prayer to God, both that he would direct the tongue of the Minister his seruant, that hee may deliuer the Word truely and powerfully, as also that hee would open our hearts as hee did the heart of Lydea, that wee may attend vnto those things that shall bee taught; which godly preparation if it were carefully obserued of our hearers, it could not bee after so much and long teaching, they should remaine
 so ignorant and barren of Gods Worke, as generally they bee. Well, to conclude this Doctrine, let this be for our present instruction, that if we would bee free from the accusation of wicked, graceles and prophane persons; let vs labour to bee willing and well affected hearers, that wee come with hungring and thirsting desires vnto the spirituall food of our soules, that it may bee vnto vs a sauor of life vnto a better life: and that the Lord may neuer bee constrained to vse the same, as here hee did to this people; namely, as an instrument to Cut downe, and a meanes of our further condemnation at the last; would wee not haue beene loath to haue beene in Sodom, when God rained downe fire and brimstone from heauen vpon their heads? Oh Lord, how should wee quake and tremble to thinke of this slaughter, that the Lord threatneth here, namely, To cut downe by his Prophets, and to slay by the words of his mouth.


I haue cut downe.

 IN that the Lord professeth here that he was the author of their punishment,The Author of this iudgement. and did inflict this iudgement on them for their sinnes and rebellions: Wee learne hence this point of Doctrine:
 That the Lod is the Author of all punishments for sinne;The Lord is the author of all punishments for sinne. though hee vse secondary causes, and some outward meanes; yet hee is the Author of all iudgements and punishments vpon men and women: Indeed hee vseth sometime men to do his will, as his rod to punish his people: for so is Ashur called the Lords rodde,Esay. 10.5. to whip his people, and his Staffe to beat them. The Lord vseth sometimes the Deuils themselues to afflict his people,Iob. 1. as wee see in Iobs affliction, yet so,
 as the Lord was the chiefe Author thereof, the Deuill but an instrument: Euen so, al iudgements come from God, hee imposeth and inflicts them on his people for their sinnes. Excellent is that place of the Prophet Esay to this purpose; But now,Esay. 43.1.2.3 thus sayth the Lord that created thee O Iacob, and hee that formed thee O Israel, feare not for I haue redeemed thee, I haue called thee by name, thou art mine, when thou passest thorough the waters, I will bee with thee, and thorough the flouds, that they shall not ouerflow thee, etc. And againe, Shall there be any euill in the City, and the Lord hath not done it? This point is fully declared by Moses, when hee sayth; If yee will not obey mee, nor doe all these commandements,Leu. 26.16.17. I will appoint ouer you fearefulnesse, a consumption, and a burning ague, the sword, famine and pestilence to destroy you, and to make you few in number. Let this schoole vs if the Lord so deale with vs: If the Crosse come to vs as a thing iudged fit of God: Let vs not set him a stint to say, thus much will I beare, and no more; but leaue the same to his owne good pleasure, expecting, and enduring euen one vpon the necke of another, taking hold of his promise by a liuely faith, that Hee will neuer lay more vpon vs then wee shall bee able to beare; but will giue vs a happy issue vnto them all, that wee shall gaine more in the Spirit, then we can lose in the flesh, and that the Crosse in Gods due time shall depart to our aduantage, to leaue a blessing behind it. This Doctrine haue I cleared in the first verse of this Chapter; Let this suffice for this Text. Wee come to the vses of it.
Let vs all take knowledge of this Doctrine, that  the Lord is the Author of all punishments whatsoeuer, by what instrument soeuer it pleaseth him to vse for the accomplishing of the same; Iob the faithfull seruant of the Lord acknowledgeth this, when he saith
 The Lond giueth, the Lord taketh away: yet wee know that it was the Deuil and wicked men, whom the Lord vsed as his instruments to afflict this his holy seruant. And let vs learne to acknowledge, that all punishments sent of God come from his hand, and he imposeth and layeth them vpon vs, eyther as punishments of our sinnes,Iob. 2.10. as heere in this Text, or else for the triall of our faith, patience, and the like graces. But of this before.
Secondly, this may serue to condemne those foolish  men that impute all to fortune and chance, all their troubles, miseries, crosses, sicknesses, losses, and the like that happen vnto them in their bodies, children, goods, cattell, they impute them all to blind Fortune and chance, and neuer looke vp to the hand of God, to see his angry countenance turned towards the^ by reason of their sinnes and horrible impieties. Here is Ignorance with a witnesse: Where is the prouidence of God all this while, which rules and gouernes all things that are in heauen and earth? Oh let vs labour to reforme this common fault amongst vs, and looke higher euen vnto God himselfe, from whence they come.
This knowledge and acknowledging that God doth inflict his iudgements, punishments, and afflictions vpon vs for our sinnes; it is a good meanes to bridle vs, and to keepe vs from impatiency, murmuring and muttering against the Lord. The Lord sent Shemi to curse;2. Sam. 16.10. who dare say then, why doest thou curse mee? so Iob, The Lord giueth, the Lord taketh away, blessed bee the name of the Lord: And the want of this, is the cause why men bee so impatient in sicknesse and misery, because they do not consider that it is the hand of the Lord layd vpon them for their sinnes; and so they neuer make any vse at al of Gods iudgements,
 thinking eyther that they come by chance, lucke, or fortune; or else looke onely vpon the outward means and instrument, and not vnto the Lord himselfe. Oh let vs learne to bee wise, to lift vp our eyes higher, to see that it is the hand of the Lord: I draw my sword, I kill and make aliue, I send the plague and pestilence to consume and to destroy. And the knowledge of this is a good meanes to humble vs, and to make vs to confesse our sinnes, that the Lord is holy in all his wayes, and righteous in all his works, the which is acknowledged by the Prophet Dauid, when hee sayth, I know O Lord,Psal. 119.75. that thy iudgements are right, and that thou hast afflicted me iustly. And if wee can but once truely apprehend this, that it is the Lord that striketh, it will make vs euen to blesse God, when hee seemes to deale with vs most hardly, giuing him the prayse of equity, as Dauid doth, here acknowledging that his sharpest corrections are not so great as our sinnes. And these two things will bee great motiues to patience in trouble, if wee consider that the same affliction is measured out vnto vs from the Lord, Who is faithfull, and will lay no more vpon vs, then we are able to beare. And next, that our stripes are not according to our sinnes: for if he should beate vs with as many rods as wee haue grieued him with sinnes, hee should adde yet ten times more vnto our greatest afflictions.



I haue cut downe and slaine them.

THe second point, is the indgement and punishment  it selfe, and the manner of it,The iudgement it selfe. which shewes that the same is no small iudgement, but a very grieuous punishment, For I haue cut downe and slaine them: as though the Lord should haue sayd; whereas they
 would not receyue my Doctrine, nor beleeue my Word, that they might bee brought to repentance, and so bee saued. I haue now cut them down and slaine their soules by my Word, and wounded them euen to death eternall: for as my Word which I would haue made the sweet sauour of life vnto life, is now by their rebellion and stubbornnesse turned vnto them to bee the wofull sauour of death vnto death
Hence wee may obserue, that of all the iudgements  of God that befal a man in this life, there is none more grieuous or feareful, then an hard heart, that wil not stoupe to Gods Word,Hard heart the greatest iudgement that can bee layde vpon man. nor profite by the meanes of saluation. Oh, it is the heauiest iudgement that God can lay vpon man in this life; and it is a sure and certain fore-runner of eternall condemnation in the end: for when the Word of God doth light vpon a hard heart, oh, it wounds it and kils it, and giues many a mortall and deadly wound, though the wretched soule of the sinner see it not, or feele it not. The Scriptures affoord vs diuers examples, and all to confirme the truth of this point vnto vs.Gen. 4.5.6. This is clearely to be seene in the example of Cain; how did the Lord deale with Cain, both before hee had murdered his brother, and afterward, and all to haue kept him, if it had been possible, from that most horrible sinne of his? Before how did God deale with him; Cain, why is the countenance of thy face changed? If thou doest well, shalt thou not be rewarded? If thou doest euill, sin lyeth at thy dore. Had not this beene inough, if Cain had had but the least sparke of grace, to haue kept him and stayed him from committing that horrible sinne? but when this preuailed not, but Cain would needs shed the innocent bloud of righteous Abel; How did the Lord deale with Cain afterwards? Cain, where is thy brother Abel? but what now, did Cains heart relent? did hee confesse
 his sinne with Dauid, and say, I haue sinned. Did hee resolue into teares of repentance with Peter? No, no, but rather despised God to his face, saying; Am I my Brothers Keeper? Oh fearefull and horrible speech! What, was his conscience so seared, that neyther the shame of the world, the innocent bloud of his slaine brother, nor the glorious presence of the Lord could any whit astonish him? Behold here an example indeed of a heart that is hardned; and let the remembrance of the same euer possesse our soules, to make vs watchfull ouer our owne hearts, how we euer contemn the means of grace when the same is offered vnto vs. This is to be clearely seen in Pharaoh, vnto whom the Lord sent seuerall plagues and iudgements vpon him and his people, one vpon the necke of another,Exod. 9. ten in number, yet all would not humble Pharaoh,Exod. 7.23. but answered stoutly, saying; I know not the Lord, neyther will I let the people of Israel goe. This is taught by Iob,Iob. 18.5. Zeph. 1.17. when hee sayth, The light of the vngodly shall bee darkned, and the wicked shall become blind, because they haue sinned against the Lord. And againe, Their hearts being fat, their eyes heauy, and their eares shut, they shall heare indeed, but shall not vnderstand, they shall see, and not perceyue. And the Prophet Ieremie doth mow liuely set out vnto vs the wofull estate and condition of such a soule that is thus forsaken of the Lord, and giuen ouer to sinne, saying;Ier. 7.16. and 11.14. Because you haue done these things, and I spake vnto you, and you would not heare, therefore thou shalt not pray for this people, nor lift vp, cry, nor entreat mee, for I will not heare. Though Noah and Iob should intreat mee, though Moses and Samuel should pray vnto mee, yet will I not heare, neyther bee intreated. This is a lamentable estate, this is a fearfull iudgement, for a man to bee thus left vnto himselfe, giuen vp to Sathan, and forsaken of God for euer; Oh wofull is the estate of such a one: let that
 exhortation of the Apostle bee precious with vs,Heb. 3.12.13 Take heed brethren lest at any time there bee in any of you an euil heart, and vnfaithfull, to depart away from the liuing God. And of the Gentiles it is sayd,Ephes. 4.17. that they liued in the Vanity of their minds, hauing their cogitations darkned, strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardnesse of their hearts. So that you see that a hard heart, it is the most fearefullest iudgement of God that can befall a man in this life; for it is capable of no good, eyther by the Word preached, promises, or threatnings, mercies, or iudgments. The Word of God it is mighty in operation,Ier. 23.^9. it Diuideth the soule and spirit asunder. This Word of God is called the Hammer of the Lord; for by it the Lord doth breake in sunder the hard, stony and flinty hearts of man. This Hammer of the Lord is not able to breake the heart of a wicked man, but as the bright beams of the Sunne doe harden clay, and soften waxe; so this most heauenly and eternall Word of God shall neuer returne in vaine, but (by reason of the different disposition in the Subiect) it illuminateth, it melteth the righteous, it obdurates, it hardens the wicked. Now where the Word doth not preuaile with vs, to humble vs, there can bee no true repentance, as the Apostle teacheth,Rom. 2.5. when he sayth, But thou after thy hardnes, and heart that cannot repent, heapest vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath. Now where there is no repentance, there can bee no saluation,Luk. 13.5 for, so sayth our Sauiour; Except yee repent, yee shall all perish. This is a lamentable estate indeed, this is a iudgement with a witnesse, for a man to bee left thus vnto himselfe, to be giuen vp to Sathan, and to be forsaken of God for euer: Oh this, this is the estate and condition of euery hard hearted sinner: Oh happy then is that man or woman that sinneth least: next he that returneth home
 by repentance soonest; but most wofull is the estate of him that with Ieroboam hath solde himselfe to commit sinne; for this man,Rom. 1.28. 1. Tim 4.2 Zach. 1.12. though hee would weepe with Esau, and shed euen a fountaine of teates, yet all will not helpe; woe, alas, there is no recouery.
This may serue in the first place to reproue those  that iustifie the wicked, as in Malachy his time, The wicked prosper, and they that worke iniquity are set vp:Mal. 3.13.14. They seeme to bee the onely men of the World; they enioy their pleasures, they seeme not to be troubled for any thing, and who but they; Alas, alas, what of all this? If the heart bee frozen in the dregges of sinne, they are of all men most miserable, and of all men most to bee pittied; For thou after thy hardnes, and heart that cannot repent,Rom. 2.4.5. heapest vp vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath. Their damnation sleepeth not all this while, but still they runne in score in Gods booke, and when their iniquity is once full, the Lord will then come with his iudgements, and they shall pay full deare for their sweet pleasures, euen the losse of their owne soules for euer and euer. No greater iudgement can God inflict vpon the sonnes of men in this life, then such a stony heart; of all Gods iudgements, Oh let my soule bee free from this, for To whom will I haue respect vnto (sayth the Lord) but to him that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at my Word.Esa. 66.2.5. This Word is to the godly heart that is humbled for sinne, the sweet sauor of life vnto life; but to the seared heart, the woful sauor of death vnto death: and in this respect the Word is like to the thunderbolt, the thunderbolt is of that nature, that if it light vpon any soft matter, it hurteth it not, wounds it not, nor breaks it not: But if it fall vpon any hard matter, as vpon a tree, a stone wall, it breakes it in peeces, and rents it in sunder, it will breake the bones, and hurt not a mans
 flesh: Euen so the Word of God it is of that nature, that if it fall vpon a soft heart and tender heart, it will doe it good, it will comfort it, and instruct it, it will burne vp the drosse and filth of sin in that soft heart: But if this thunderbolt of the Word of God light vpon a hard and stony heart, it will wound it, rend it, yea kill it, euen to eternall death, vnlesse they repent: This is the state of a wicked mans heart, and therefore of al men he is most miserable.
 Secondly, doth the Word of God wound and kill to death eternall, such rebellious and stubborne sinners; doth it hurt none but such stony hearts; doth the Lords thunderbolt kill none but stony hearts? Oh then let vs intreat the Lord to free vs from this great and heauy iudgement of hardnesse of heart, which makes the Word of God and all other meanes vnprofitable vnto vs; and let vs labour to haue soft hearts, broken hearts, and brused hearts. Oh, let the Word of the Lord enter, giue it passage, that it may cut down sinne in thee, that thy sinnes cut not thee down at the last:Note this well. for this bee thou sure of, O man whatsoeuer thou bee, that if thou find not out thy sinnes now, they will bee sure to find out thee hereafter. When the Lord speaketh of a great mercy that he would shew vnto a people, hee sayth thus; I will take away their stony hearts,Ezech. 36.26. and I wil giue them hearts of flesh. Oh that the Lord would take away our stony hearts, and giue vs fleshy and tender hearts, that his Word might not kill vs and slay vs to death eternall! But alas, though this hard heart bee the most grieuous iudgement of God that can befall a man in this life; yet who thinks so of it; who feeles it, who complaines of it? No, no, men and women haue no feeling of it; yea, though this hard heart, and heauy iudgement of God raigne in most places, and most men bee possessed with hardnes
 of heart and carnall security; and so dead a sleepe in sinne, that the Lord may thunder from heauen, and his iudgements rattle about our eares; yet by reason of this deadnesse and hardnesse of heart, men are like the Smithes dogge, sleepe still, snort still, though the flame and sparckles flie about his eares, and sindge his haire, and though men can complaine, and rore at the paine of the stone in the Kidney, and seeke and send farre and neare for ease, and say, they are neuer able to endure it: yet of this fearefull and most heauy iudgement, The stone of the heart, men feele no paine, neuer cry for helpe, to be eased of it. Wee know, Oh wee know euery man in his owne bosome, the sinnes, the which wee most secretly foster, and will not let goe. But as Saint Paul exhorteth the Iewes, euen so will I you: To conclude this Doctrine, Take heed,Heb. 3.13. Ezech. 36.26. Oh take heed, lest in any of you there bee found a false and an euill heart, to depart from the liuing God: for of all the iudgements that Almighty God can lay vpon the sons of men, this is the greatest: from this estate the Lord of his endlesse mercy deliuer vs. Amen, Amen.
Thirdly, let vs marke heere how the Lord iudgeth  of such as bee wounded and killed by his Word, and cut downe by his iudgements, published out of his Word, the Lord accounts of this iudgement as that that is the most fearefull and terrible: for the Lord heere inflicts it as the greatest punishment of all for their euill wayes, their stubbornnesse and rebellion against the Lord, and against all those gracious meanes that hee had vsed for their good, for their hypocrisie and hardnesse of heart, and the like horrible sinnes that were to bee found amongst them: for the punishment of them all, the Lord sayth, I haue cut them downe and saine them; but not with the sword, not with


 the plague, which are fearefull and terrible, but with my Word, q. d. I haue not onely taught and instructed you by my Word, and shewed you what I would haue you to doe, and what to leaue vndone: but I haue by this plaine teaching of you, and by my doctrine propounded vnto you, euen pearced your very soules and consciences, so as in spite of your teeth you must needs acknowledge, though yee bee neuer so obstinate and rebellious, that you haue been wounded, and haue felt the force of my Word, to kill you, to conuince your consciences of your sinnes and rebellions, and that my iudgements are most iustly brought vpon you.
Hence wee see what a fearefull iudgement of God it is for those which liue in sinne, and delight in sinne, when as they heare their sinnes condemned out of the Word of God; they know that they doe euill, they must needs confesse, that the Word of the Lord hath conuicted their consciences of their sinnes, and euill wayes, so as they know it, and haue felt their soules beaten and wounded, and euen slaine by the power of the Word of God. This is a grieuous sinne indeed, to sinne against conscience, to sinne against knowledge, to sinne presumptuously with a high hand, it is a high step to the sin against the Holy Ghost, when men hearing and acknowledging the Word of God to bee true, feele their consciences to checke them for their vile and wicked wayes, and yet they will walke on still against knowledge, and against conscience, and so draw downe Gods iudgements vpon themselues. Oh then, if wee heare the Word of God, and perceiue the Lord to touch our hard hearts, so as we must needs acknowledge this Doctrine, that the Lord smites thy hard and benummed heart, as that thou canst say, I am guilty of this sinne, I heare God will punish it seuerely,
 and cut me downe by his Word, and slay mee: I say, Oh then especially take heed, how thou liuest in thy sinne still, against knowledge, and against conscience: It is the high way to the sinne against the Holy Ghost which cannot be pardoned: but let vs rather leaue our sinnes, and forsake them, and take heed of going on in the same: for certaine it is, it is but the fore-runner of some fearefull iudgement vnto the soule of that man.



I haue cut them downe by my Prophets, I haue slaine them by the words of my mouth.

IN that the Lord doth threaten this iudgement of al  other, as the greatest that hee could bring vpon them, namely, to Cut them downe, and to slay them,The Word of God is able to pearce the hardest heart. and that not by an ordinary meanes or slaughter, but by his Prophets and Word: that is, that he would make good his Word in their mouthes, and bring to passe all those terrible and fearefull iudgements that they had denounced against them from the Lord.
Hence we see the great power of the Word of God, it is able to pearce the hardest heart that is. The word of God makes mention of two sorts of swords. The sword of the mouth, and the materiall sword, as that place in the Hebrewes, The Word of God is liuely and mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword,Heb. 4.12. and entereth thorough, euen vnto the diuiding asunder of the Soule and the Spirit, and of the Ioynts and the Marrow, and is a decerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the heart. The people of the Iewes before that Peter spake vnto them, were full of hardnesse of heart: yea, their hearts before were as hard as steele, nothing could pricke or pearce them,Act. 2.37. they had committed monstrous
 murder, they shed innocent bloud, euen the bloud of the sonne of God, and yet they were neuer touched in their hearts for that sinne. But when Peter came with his weapon, namely, the Word of God, and told them that they were those that had crucified the Lord of life: this wounded them to the quicke, as that they cryed out in the bitternesse of their loules, O men and brethren, what shall wee doe to bee saued? Oh tell vs, tell vs, whether there be not some course yet to be taken, that wee that haue beene such desperate sinners, might yet againe obtaine Gods fauour, and bee saued? This was a blessed battel that was fought with them; behold then in them the wonderfull power of the Word of God, It cuts the throat of sinne, and makes men become dead vnto sinne, that they might become a liue vnto God.Ier. 23.29. Is not the Word of Iehouah like vnto fire? It is able to melt and mollifie a heart of steele, it is like a hammer that breakes the hardest stone: euen so this Word of God is able to bruise a stony heart, which is as hard as flint;Rom. 15.16. I am not ashamed (sayth the Apostle) of the Gospell of God, because I know that it is the power of God to saluation to all them that beleeue.1. Cor. 1.21. Yea, it is compared to a sacrificing knife,Ephes. 2.1.2. which will kill and cut the throat of sinne, and make the most rebellious heart to breake. It will put spirit and life in the dead hearts of dead and secure sinners, euen such as lay dead, and rotting in sin. If it enter not into thee to the rooting out of sinne, and the cutting downe of thy vncleannesse; for then it pearceth for thy good to life eternall, It wil bee sure to wound and to pearce thy dead and benummed soule, to the hardning of thee in thy sinnes, to death eternall,Esay. 55. for it neuer returnes in vaine, but is eyther the sauor of life vnto life, or the sauor of death vnto death.
The Lord sent his word vnto Pharaoh againe and againe
 by Moses and Aaron, but hee would not bee humbled by it,Exod. 9.^7. 1. Reg. 22.8. therefore hee became the more hardned in sinne. And Ahab was then the deadliest enemy to his owne soule,Mich. 2.7. when hee hated Michai for not speaking to his fantasie, but warned him faithfully of the iudgement which afterward came vpon him.Zach. 7.11. The Word of God is an aduersary to none, but to such as are aduersaries to themselues;Note this well. neyther doth it condemne any but such as (without repentance) assuredly shall one day bee condemned of the Lord. And therefore let the wicked wretches of the world stoppe their eares neuer so much from the hearing of the threatnings of the Word, yet they shall neuer stoppe that iudgement which the Word hath threatned. There is a cry that will come at Midnight, and will waken the dead: But, Oh blessed are they, who in time are wakened out of the sleepe of their sinnes, before that dreadfull iudgement come.
This serues to commend vnto vs, the excellencie  and power of the Word of God, which is able both to kill sinners, and to make them aliue again, and puts a manifest difference hetweene the Word of man, and the Word of God. All the wisdom, learning, eloquence and wit of men is not able to wound the hard heart of a wicked, obstinate and rebellious sinner, onely the Word of God can doe it, euen the plaine and simple preaching of the Word can doe it.1. Cor. 1.21. Psal. 19. The Law of the Lord is perfect to conuert the soule. There is more power in the plaine, rude, and simple preaching of the Word of God to conuert a sinner, then in the most learned and excellentest eloquence in men; nay,Rom. 10.14.15. it is impossible for all the eloquence in the World to saue a Soule; it is peculiar onely to the simple preaching of the Gospell, nor all the Writings of men cannot turne the heart vnto God, vnlesse the Lord doe blesse the preaching
 of the Word to doe it; and though nothing bee so contrary to our Nature as the Word of God, yet nothing is so powerfull to conuert, as is this word, by Gods blessing vpon it, being his owne ordinance, appointed to that end.
Secondly, seeing the Word of God is of this power,  that it will enter and pearce into stony hearts; and seeing if it cut not downe sinne and corruption, it will wound to death eternall all rebellious and hard hearted sinners; Oh then let vs submit our hearts vnto it, let vs suffer the Word to pearce and wound our hearts for sinne, to cut downe all sinne and corruption in vs here, or else it will bee the Lords Sword of the Spirit to kill vs and to wound vs to death eternall:Ephes. 6.1. Hee will smite the earth with the rodde of his mouth, and slay the wicked and rebellious with the breath of his lippes; that is, the Lord will make good all those feareful iudgements which his seruants haue denounced against them in his name:Esay. 11.4. And as the raine that fals, makes the earth more fruitfull, or else more barren: so it fareth with the Word, it eyther cuts downe sinne to our amendment, or else leaues most deadly wounds in our soules, euen to death eternall. Now then seeing the Word of God is so powerfull: Oh how should this stirre vp euery man and woman to the hearing of the Word of God, continually to frequent Sermons, to listen to the Doctrine of God, to beleeue that they heare, to yeeld vnto it, and to lay their hearts open and naked, that this Sword of Gods Spirit way wound them for sinne: for though thou beest a notorious sinner, a monstrous blasphemer, a common drunkard, a filthy whoremaster, yet if thou shalt heare this Word, and giue credite to it, it is able to wound thy Soule, and to pearce thy heart; and experience teacheth, that the Word of God hath done great things, it hath conuerted
 most fearefull and monstrous sinners, as Dauid,2. Sam. 12.1. Act. 9. Rom. 1.16. Saul, Peter, Mary Magdalen. Zacheus, etc. And therefore wayte on the meanes, attend on the Word, heare Sermons, and thou shalt find in the end, that the Word of God shall bee the power of God to saue thy Soule, if thou doe not harden thy heart against it. And as for those the which do despise the Word, and will not goe to the dore to heare it: truly, such men and women doe euen wilfully cast away their owne soules, and suffer themselues to bee led euen blindfold to hell: but if with care and conscience thou wilt attend vnto it, as Lydea did, and not cast it vp againe as those that haue queasie stomackes doe wholesome Physicke; surely, thou shalt find great power in the Word, to saue thy soule.



By my Prophets, and the words of my mouth.

HEre is layde downe now the meanes and the instruments  which God vsed for the effecting of his iudgements, namely, his seruants the Prophets,The Instrument. I haue cut downe by my Prophets: that is, I haue brought vpon you those plagues and iudgements which were threatned against you by my faithfull seruants the Prophets, euen those iudgements the which they haue denounced against you in my name, I haue inflicted, and brought them vpon you to slay, and to destroy you for your sins.
Seeing the Lord did effect and bring to passe  those iudgements the which the Prophets pronounced against his people for their sins, to slay them,The Word of God in the mouthes of his Ministers shall bee accomplished. and to destroy them: Hence wee learne that the Word of the Lord in the mouthes of his Ministers, it shall be accomplished; Looke what iudgement they pronounce
 against sinne in the name of the Lord (if men will not repent) they shall certainely bee accomplished, and come to passe: howsoeuer men regard them not, and will not beleeue them. Indeed many times his iudgements are deferred, and his punishments are prolonged, because hee is a patient God, and would not the death of a sinner;Mat. 14.35. yet hee is euer iealous of his Word, that not one iot or tittle of his Word shal not passe, but shall hee fulfilled. This is clearely to be seene by the examples of Gods iudgements in all ages.Gen. 2.17. and. 3.7. Consider this truth in our first parents; God threatned them, that if they tasted the forbidden fruit, they should die the death; and did not God accomplish the same? yea, all their posterity do to this day feele the smart of the same curse. When all the World were disobedient in the dayes of Noah that Preacher of righteousnesse,2. Pet 2.5. Gen. 6.3. God gaue them time and space to repent in, euen a hundred and twenty yeares; and when they repented not, the Lord did not fayle to bring his Iudgement vpon them. A most cleare and liuely example of this, wee haue in the booke of Iosuah:Iosu. 6.26. The man is cursed there before the Lord that should attempt the rebuilding of the City Iericho, and this is the curse that should passe vpon that man, namely this, That hee should lay the foundation of it in his eldest sonne, and in his youngest sonne shall hee set vp the gates of it. This was the irreuocable curse that almighty God had threatned against the man that should attempt the building of that City. Now afterwards when this threatning seemed to bee quite forgotten, God is still mindfull of his Word, and time is not able to weare that out:1. Reg. 16.34. for when Hiel the Bethelite did goe about to erect the same, God doth bring his former iudgement to passe vpon him. What shal wee say of Ahab and of Iezabel, vnto whom many
 fearefull and terrible iudgements were denounced by Elias the Prophet of the Lord,2. Reg. 9.37. That the carkas of Iezabel shall bee as dung in the field of Israel. This did God in his due time bring to passe vpon Iezabel, and vpon the whole house of Ahab, according to the Word of the Lord. So that we may safely conclude this point,Num. 23.19. Sam. 3.19. and say with Moses that seruant of the Lord, God is not as man that hee should lie, or the Sonne of man that he should repent.
Gods iudgements threatned may seeme to vs as vnlikely as the plenty the Prophet spake of, seemed to one of the Princes of Samariah: Though the Lord would make Windowes in heauen, could it come so to passe? But what sayd the Prophet? Behold,2. Reg. 7.2. and 19.20. thou shalt see it with thy eyes, but thou shalt not eat thereof: and so it came vnto him, for the people trode him in the gate, and hee died. Thus did our Sauiour foretell the destruction of the City Ierusalem, which came so to passe accordingly within the space of forty yeares after our Sauiour his Ascention.Mat. 24. And is not the Word of God as true now in the mouthes of his Ministers, yea, whatsoeuer iudgement they shall proclaime in the name of the Lord, and by vertue of the Word of God, it shall certainly come to passe: As they haue a long time threatned famine, pestilence, and the like iudgements; and hath not the Lord brought these iudgements and the like most iustly vpon vs for our sins? doe not wee feele the truth of it? yea, this Winter and Summer last, when the Lord seemed to stoppe his eares at the prayers of his seruants, and would not a long time be intreated. And therefore let all wicked and vngodly wretches lay this Doctrine to heart, that are ready to say. Where is the promise of his comming? and where bee those iudgements our Preachers haue so long spoke of? Oh, they shall know, euen to their eternall shame
 and confusion at the last, that the Lord will make good his Word, and bring to passe all those iudgements that haue been denounced against them.
And as it is true of Gods iudgements against rebellious sinners: so is it true of the gracious promises of the Gospell to all them that doe truely repent: Iesus Christ was a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of God.Rom 15.8. Ps. 89.33. And againe, I will not falsifie my Truth, my Couenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lippes. This was that worthy resolution of the Prophet long before Christ was borne: Thou wilt performe thy truth to Iacob,Micha. 7.20 and mercy to Abraham, as thou hast sworne to our fathers in olde time:Tit. 1.2. Psal. 102.27. And as this was accomplished touching the comming of the Messias, In the fulnesse of time: So the same holds true concerning all other the promises of God made vnto his Church and people. And the reason of all is this, because God is of an vnchangeable nature; Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord I change not: Whatsoeuer he hath sayd, shall be done, and whatsoeuer hee hath spoken shall bee accomplished: For with him is no variablenesse, nor shadow of change.
 This checks those proud spirits, and despisers of the Prophets of the Lord, who esteeme of Gods seruants and messengers as the scumme of the world, will not giue any credite to their Doctrine, make iests of them: and if they pronounce iudgements against sin; Tush, wee hope it is not so as these Preachers tell, wee hope wee shall doe well enough for all their threatnings: They haue denied the Lord and sayd; It is not hee, neyther shall the plague come vpon vs:Ier. 5.12.13. neyther shall wee see sword nor famine: And the Prophets shall bee as wind, and the Word is not in them. Like to them are many of our people amongst vs, they make but a Tush of all those threatnings that Gods Ministers doe denounce against them
 in the name of the Lord, till they come vpon them; and then they can acknowledge they had a fayre warning: Read that place diligently in Zachariah, and the Lord giue vs a right iudgement in all things,Zacha. 1.4.5.6. the words are these; Bee yee not as your Fathers vnto whom the former Prophets haue cryed saying, Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Turne you now from your euill wayes, and from your wicked works: but they would not heare, nor hearken vnto mee, sayth the Lord: Your Fathers, where are they? and doe the Prophets liue for euer? But did not my words and my statutes which I commanded by my seruants the Prophets, take holde of your Fathers? and they confessed, and sayd, As the Lord of Hoasts hath determined to doe vnto vs, according to our own wayes, and according to our works, so hath hee done vnto vs. See heere how the Lord sends these rebellious Iewes to former times, euen to looke vpon Gods iudgements, vpon their forefathers, q. d. Though your Fathers bee dead, yet my iudgements in punishing them ought still to be before your eyes: and though the Prophets bee dead, yet their Doctrine remaineth for euer: Behold yee then the force of my Doctrine in punishing your Fathers, and feare yee the threatnings contayned in the same, and declared a fresh vnto you by my Prophets. Oh may not this bee a fayre warning to vs that yet liue, to admonish all those that despise the Word of the Lord in the mouthes of his Ministers, to take heed how they contemne Gods faithfull Ministers, which esteeme their words but as wind; for if they speake in the name of the Lord, and haue the Word for their varrant, it shall certainely bee accomplished; Shall I spare such a people (sayth the Lord) shall I not bee auenged on them.Ier. 5.14. Behold (fayth the Lord to his Prophet) I will make my Word as fire in thy mouth, and this people shall bee as wood, and it shall deuoure them. Euen so shall the Lord vse his Word in the mouthes of
 his Ministers, as the sword of his Spirit to Cut down and slay, and will bring to passe his iudgements proclaymed by them; so as all wicked and vngodly men at the last, shall confesse and say, Oh I had a fayre warning. I was told of this long agoe, if I had beene wise to beleeue it: and now I see the Word of God is true in the mouthes of his Ministers. Oh what shall become now of all rebellious and hard-hearted sinners, who seeme to haue Made a Couenant with Death,Esay. 28.15. and an agreement with the graue: which go on in sinne and feare, no danger; but what followeth, Your Couenant with Death shall bee disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand, etc. Their hopes shall faile them in the end (God will not bee mocked) they shall bee sure to pay full deare for their contempt when it shall bee too late to amend. Oh let vs not then harden our hearts through the deceitfulnesse of sinne:Esay. 55.6. but Let vs seeke the Lord while he may bee found, and call vpon him while hee is neare.
Secondly, wee are taught heere not to bee dismayed when wee see the wicked to prosper and to flourish heere, spreading themselues as the greene Bay-tree:  for loe, God doth set them in slippery places: their damnation sleepeth not, Gods iudgements are gone out against them, they are determined with God, there wants nothing but the execution of them, the which in Gods due time shall bee accomplished, euen by an irreuocable decree. Now, what if in the meane time they rufle it out with great words and shewes, and who but they: Alas, their estates are rather to bee pittied, then enuyed, because Gods Word is against them, and their sinnefull courses, and by it at the last they shall bee sure to bee Cut downe.
Psal. 2.Pharaoh and the Egyptians may take crafty counsell together against the people of God; But hee that dwelleth in heauen doth laugh them to scorne, And this
 Pharaoh which seemed for a while to bee so terrible, his end was most fearefull. And what if Ahab and Iezabel plotte together, and abuse their authority for the winding in of Naboths Vineyard into their owne posession, and Naboth is slain,1. Reg. 21. Gods Word went out against him therfore by his Prophet Elias, and it was not his walled Pallace that could keepe backe Gods iudgements. A man that had seen Lazarus a poore begger,Luk. 16.22. destitute of all helpe and comfort, lying at the rich mans gate, his mind possest with cares, with his body full of sores, whilest the rich man within was clad of the finest, and fed of the daintiest; a man I say, that had beheld these rwo, if hee had had no more then naturall reason, would easily haue concluded the begger to bee miserable, and the rich man to bee happy: But God sees not as man sees, neyther are his thoughts as mans thoughts: for euen in this great misery of this poore begger, hee was a happy and a blessed man; and notwithstanding the great pompe of the other, in the middest of it all, hee was but wretched and miserable. Then let vs not rest in beholding the present face of outward things, but possesse our soules with patience, considering that All things happen alike to all: Yet in the end it shall goe well with the iust. And howsoeuer the wicked prosper wel in the world;Psal. 73.17. yet they are set but in slippery places: Gods threatnings in Gods due time shal be inflicted vpon them.
Thirdly, seeing the menaces and threatnings of  God shall bee accomplished vpon the wicked and vngodly; so is it true of the blessed promises of the Gospell: so as, looke what promise God hath made there, either of pardon of sinne, or of life and saluation, they shall likewise bee performed; wee are not to doubt of it: for will God keepe touch with the wicked, and will hee not much more remember his promise to his
 children, this were iniurious to the Spirit of God so to thinke. Oh then let vs learne to depend vpon God,2. Cor. 1.20. and to wayte duely vpon his gracious promises: Knowing that all his promises are yea, and Amen, and Hee is faithfull which hath promised. Let vs learne then to rest vpon him, for the pardon of our sinnes, the hearing of our prayers, the resurrection of our dead bodies, and life euerlasting: the Lord is iust and true in all his promises. Oh what a comfort is this to poore distressed soules! Doest thou mourne for sinne, and desirest to feare thy God, and walke in his wayes? wel, assure thy soule, that whatsoeuer gracious promise hee hath made vnto thee in his Word, it shall be performed: Heauen and Earth shall passe, but one iot or tittle of my Word shall not passe away: but a^ euery iudgement and plague pronounced against sinne and sinners, shal bee brought vpon them to destruction: euen so euery gracious promise made to Gods Church and people, shall bee performed to their eternall comfort and saluation: and therefore let vs beleeue this, and rest vpon it, that the Lord will perform his Word in the mouths of his Prophets and Ministers, Whatsoeuer yee bind on earth I will bind in heauen,Mat. 16.19. and whatsoeuer yee loose on Earth, I will loose in heauen.



And thy iudgements were as the light that goeth forth.

The equity of the iudgement.IN these words the Lord shewes that they could not pretend ignorance of the will and Word of God; for the Lord had taught them, and declared vnto them manifestly and apparantly what hee would haue them to doe: for by Iudgement in this place is meant the doctrine of God taught vnto them by his seruants the the Prophets. q.d. my Doctrine in the mouthes of
 my seruants, where I shewed and layde open before your eyes the way to lead holy liues, and to serue mee, it was cleare as the light, as the Sunne-shine at Noone day when there is no cloud: so as you haue now no excuse at all for yourselues, but must needs acknowledge that my iudgements are now iustly inflicted vpon you, and that you haue of malice with a hie hand and most rebellious heart, sinned against mee So then you see what is heere meant by the iudgement of the Lord; namely, the cleare and manifest doctrine of God to direct vs in the way to life eternall.
Seeing the Lord doth heere professe vnto his people, that his Iudgements, that is, the Doctrine of God, wherein hee would haue taught them how ro liue well and blessedly, was cleare and manifest,God neuer strikes with his iudgements before hee giues warning. and that they could alleadge no excuse of ignorance.
Hence we learne, that the Lord doth neuer strike with his iudgements, but hee first giues warning; so as if men would bee wise to beleeue his Word, and to amend their liues, they might auoyde his iudgements: but if they will bee so rebellious and hard hearted, that they will not amend, they must needs acknowledge, and confesse, that they are most worthy to bee plagued and punished.
This was Gods mercifull dealing towards the people of the old world, vnto whom the Lord vouchsafed one hundred and twenty yeares to repent in, before hee brought his iudgements vpon them: besides all which time he vouchsafed vnto them Noah that Preacher of righteousnesse,Gen 6.3. 2. Pet. 2.5. warning them still of a iudgement to com, to this end that they hearing from Noah what iudgement the Lord had intended against them, if they repented not, their condemnation might be so much the more heauy vpon them. Thus dealt the Lord with those sinnefull Sodomites,Gen. 19. vnto whom hee
 sent his seruant Lot,Exod. 9. Whose righteous soule was vexed from day to day. Thus dealt hee with Pharaoh and his people, vnto whom hee sent Moses and Aaron againe, and againe, and still againe, to admonish him to let the people of Israel goe: When this preuailed not, he sent iudgement vpon iudgement, and all to humble the hard heart of Pharaoh. What shall wee say of Ahab and Iezabel, vnto whom the Lord sent Elias? such is the goodnesse of God towards the sonnes of men, that hee will euer warne before hee strike, and admonish before hee correct: for so did the Lord deale with this people, as in the former verse, Oh Ephraim what shall I doe vnto thee?Hos. 11.8. Oh Iudah, how shall I entreat thee? Meaning thereby, that the Lord had vsed many wayes and meanes to humble them if it might bee, before he proceeded in iudgement against them. This is most liuely set out vnto vs in the booke of the Prouerbs,Pro. 1.20.21. where Salomon brings in Christ Iesus the wisdome of the Father, sometime by his Ministers, and sometimes by himselfe, calling and crying vnto vs to heare his voyce, and to receyue instruction; and if this fayre meanes that the Lord shall vse, will not serue to humble vs, the Lord doth there threaten, That the time shall come when wee shall cry and call vpon him, and hee will not heare vs: Yea, hee will bee then so farre from pittying in the time of our distresse, as that hee will then Laugh at our destruction, and that because wee did not chuse the feare of the Lord. This was the mercifull dealing of God towards the Niniuites,Ion. 3.4. vnto whom hee sent his Prophet Ionas to bring them home by repentance; and thus dealt hee with Ierusalem,Mat. 23.38. vsing all means possible to humble them before the iudgement came foorth: For, if God would reclaime vs by his Word, hee would neuer take his Rodde. But of
 this before.
And the reason of this Doctrine is cleare, because the Lord by this meanes will leaue the wicked, and those that are reserued to destruction, without all excuse; for this doth the Apostle declare,Act. 14.16.17 when he sayeth, In times past hee suffered all the Gentiles to walke in their owne wayes: Neuerthelesse he left not himselfe without witnesse, in that hee did good, and gaue them raine from heauen, and fruitfull seasons, filling their hearts with ioy and gladnesse. Now, if the giuing of them showers of raine, the dew of Heauen bee vnto them the Lords witnesses, and the Testimonies of his power: Oh how much more the^ is the word of God, which is the sauor of life vnto those that beleeue? Surely, this warning that the wicked haue heere hence, shall much more leaue them without excuse, in the day of the Lord.
Seeing then the Lord is not easily drawne to the  execution of iudgement, before hee hath offered many meanes of repentance and reconciliation, Oh let vs apply this Doctrine to our selues: Let vs looke backe vnto our former times: Let vs take notice of Gods mercifull dealing with vs: Hath not the Lord warned vs by many meanes, and proued vnto vs, that there is a necessity imposed vpon vs, that wee must needes Returne vnto him? I appeale vnto thy conscience, whosoeuer thou art that readest this: Haue wee not beene told plainely of our sins, that liuing in that course wee doe at this present, we cannot be saued? hath hee not againe warned vs of his iudgements by his Ministers? wee know, wee know euery one in the secret of his owne bosome, that the Lord hath spoken vnto vs, warning vs of iudgement: but when this means would not serue to bring vs home to himselfe by repentance, nor to returne vnto God: Now the Lord hath met vs
 with iudgement, euen this vnseasonable weather that makes the creature to mourne vnto vs, to teach vs to mourne: besides, how many particular afflictions and chasticements hath the Lord layd vpon vs in our bodies, goods, and good names, wife, children, cattell and the like? do not they al summon vs to repentance, and cry aloud in our deafe eares, that the Lord is at hand with his udgements? Oh let vs bee warned betimes to seeke vnto him by repentance, lest the Lord vsing all these meanes vnto vs to bumble vs, and wee remaine rebellions and hard hearted still, bee take occasion, euen therehence, to lay the heauier iudgement vpon vs. Let vs then acknowledge the Lord to bee a iust God, that giues vs such warning; and when his iudgements shall lye heauy vpon vs, let vs not accuse the Lord of any hard dealing, but rather accuse the hardnesse of our owne hearts, which would not bee warned by his Word and Iudgements.Dan. 9. Daniel confesseth, that because the people would not beleeue the Lords Prophets and faithfull seruants, therefore they were iustly plagued for their sinnes: Let vs do the like, and take heed, that wee doe not neglect the checks of our owne conscience, reprouing vs of our sinful waies; for the time commeth apace, and wee know not how soone, when this conscience of ours the which now doth checke vs, shall iudge vs, and this heart of ours, the which now doth reproue vs, shall torment vs, and that because wee haue wilfully neglected the meanes of our owne saluation, when the Lord hath offered the same vnto vs.
 Secondly, seeing the Lord doth vse so many means to humble vs, and to bring vs home to himselfe by repentance; wee are taught hence, that if any doe perish in his sinnes, hee must not impute the fault vnto God, but vnto himselfe; for the Lord may iustly say vnto
 vs, as somtimes to the people of Israel,Esay. 5.4. What could I haue done more to my Vineyard that I haue not done? so what should I haue done more to the soule of this sinner that I haue not done? my Word, my Iudgements, my mercies, the motions of my Spirit, all these haue I vsed to humble them: So that in all our plagues and iudgements, in all our woes and miseries, whether in this world, or in the world to come; the whole blame must light vpon our selues, whose hearts are so hard that they will not repent from this fearefull iudgement or hardnesse of heart: the Lord keepe vs all for his Christs sake.






VERSE. 6.

For I desire mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offerings.

THe Lord hauing threatned this rebellious people by his iudgements, and manifested his anger for their sinnes and disobedience; especially because they would not bee reformed of their euill courses, and bee humbled by his word: Now the Lord doth preuent an obiection, which this people might or did make,The preuention of an obiection. and takes away all colou^ of excuse: For thus they might say, why should the Lord bee thus angry with vs, and thus to chide vs, and to cry out vpon vs, to threaten vs by his Prophets? Doe wee not serue God, doe we not kill our beasts to offer them in sacrifice to God? Do wee not thus and thus? but wee can neuer please him, hee will neuer be content with vs, let vs doe what wee can: though wee offer neuer so many sacrifices and burnt offerings; yet the Lord is alwayes chiding, and finding fault with vs.
To all this the Lord seemes here to answere; I passe not for these outward Ceremonies, and outward worship
 vnlesse you ioyn true faith and obedience to God, and true loue and charity vnto men: Duties of piety to God, ioined with the true knowledge of God, and true reformation of our hearts and liues, together with iust, honest, and vpright dealing with men.
Hence then first of all wee may obserue, what account  the Lord makes of Sacrifices and Burnt offerings, that is, of all the outward seruice of God,God esteemes not of our outward seruice, when it is not performed in faith and obedience. the outward actions and ceremonies belonging to the same, seuered from the knowledge of God, true repentance, and hearty obedience, with loue and iust dealing with men; hee professeth here that hee cares not for them; hee hath no delight in them, they stinke in his eyes, and are abominable vnto him, What haue I to do (sayth the Lord) with the multitude of your sacrifices?Esay. 1.11.12 I am full of your burnt offerings of Rams, and the farre of fed beasts: and I desire not the bloud of Bullocks, nor of Lambes, nor of Goates: When yee come to appeare before mee, who required this at your hands to tread in my Courts. Where wee may see, that although Almighty God commanded these sacrifices for a time, as aydes and helpes vnto this people, for the exercise of their faith: and to leade them to Christ; yet because they offered them vp without faith or repentance: God detested them and they were abomination vnto him. This is cleared by the same Prophet in another place:Esay. 66.3. Hee that killeth a Bullocke is as if hee slew a man, hee that sacrificeth a sheepe, as if hee cut off a Dogges necke: Hee that offereth oblation, as if hee offered Swines bloud: hee that remembreth incense, as if hee blessed an Idoll: yea they haue chosen their owne wayes, and their soule delighteth in their abominations.
This people heere thought themselues holy by offering of their sacrifices, though they performed them neyther in faith nor repentance; therefore the
 Lord sheweth them in this place, that hee doth no lesse detest these Ceremonies, then hee doth the Sacrifices of the Heathen, who offered men dogs and swine to their Idols, which things were expresly forbidden in the Law.Ier. 7 9. This is taught by the Prophet Ieremy, where he sayth, Will you steale, murder, commit adultery, sweare falsly, burne incense vnto Baal, and walke after other gods whom yee know not, and come and stand before mee in this house? etc.
Pro. 29.8. Ioh 9.31. Psa. 50.17.The Prayers of the Wicked are an abhomination vnto the Lord. Againe, If I regard wickednesse in my heart, the Lord will not heare me: So that what sacrifice soeuer wicked men offer vp vnto God, as prayer, thanksgiuing, comming to the Sacrament, all they doe, is abhomination to the Lord, when they stand vpon the outward Ceremony of Gods worship,Mich. 6.6.7.8 and leaue vndone the duties of faith and repentance, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bowe my selfe before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and come with Calues of a yeare old? Will the Lord bee pleased with thousands of Rams? or with ten thousand riuers of oyle? shal I giue my first borne for my transgression, euen the fruit of my body for the sinne of my soule? Hee hath shewed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee: Surely, to doe iustly, and to loue mercy, and to humble thy selfe, and to walke with thy God.Reade these places. Marke here and see the state of an hypocrite, they goe so farre with the child of God, as that they aske how to please God, and are content to offer sacrifice, thinking thereby to auoyde Gods anger,Ier. 6.19.20. Micha 6.8. Mat. 5.20. and 6.1.2.3. Amos. 5.21. but they will not bee brought to mortifie their sinnefull affections. And therefore the Prophet enioyneth them in the eight verse, to the obseruation of the second Table, to performe the duties of loue, of iustice and mercy. In all which places the Lord shewes, that hee hath no delight nor pleasure
 in these outward partes of his seruice, when mens hearts remaine sinnefull, and they seuer the same from the knowledge and obedience to his Word, and from the dueties of loue and equity to men.
The reason of this Doctrine is cleare, The Lord will bee sanctified in all that come neare vnto him:Numb. 16. Hee is a holy God, and all that will worship him must be holy, and repent of their sinnes, beleeue in Iesus Christ. Besides this, the Lord hath respect to the manner; as to the matter of our sacrifices; neyther is it inough to do a good thing: as to offer sacrifice, to pray, to receiue the Sacraments, to giue to the poore, these bee good duties in themselues, but they must bee done in a holy manner, namely, in faith, repentance, and true obedience vnto Gods commandements: for otherwise The sacrifice of the wicked is abhomination to the Lord Cain and Abel performed both one action,Pro. 15.8. yet God had no respect to Cain nor his sacrifice, but to Abel hee had. Peter preached the Word, and prayed, so did Iudas, but the Lord hated all that Iudas did, both his preaching and his praying. The Scribes and Pharisies gaue much to the poore, the poore Woman gaue but a little; shee was approued, they condemned. So that we see, it is not inough to doe a good thing or matter, but wee must withall doe it in a good maner, and to a good end; namely, Gods glory, and the good of our neighbour; as also in faith and obedience to Gods commandements with hearts humbled for sinnes past, and hating sinne for the time to come.
Seeing the Lord esteemes no more of these outward things, as Sacrifices, oblations, and burnt-offerings, etc. When as they bee seuered from true faith, repentance and obedience: Then let vs learne hence not to content our selues to come to Church to heare
 the Word, to pray, etc. but especially, let vs looke to our hearts to reforme them, that wee may doe all in faith, good conscience and obedience, and ioyne with our duties of Piety to God, loue to men, else the Lord cares not for them: Oh let not men then any longer blesse themselues in their fond deuotions, as to think when they haue been at the Church, haue heard the Word, receiued the Sacrament, prayed with the Congregation, that therefore they haue pleased God as well as the best: Alas, all this they may do, and yet as Salomon sayth, Doe but offer the sacrifice of fooles; which is abhomination to the Lord. Now, what a lamentable thing were this, that men should liue twenty, thirty, forty or more yeares in the Church of God, and yet all this while doe nothing to please God? this is the lamentable estate and condition of many of our ciuill honest men, as we call them, who want the knowledge of God, and haue not repented of their sinnes, so as they might performe these duties in faith, repentance and obedience.
Secondly, this condemnes the whole Lumpe and  trash of Popery, which stands indeed in nothing else but in a company of foolish Ceremonies and outward shewes inuented by man, not warranted nor agreeable to the word of God: as the abominable Sacrifice of the Masse, Praier for the dead, Inuocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, and a Thousand the like, al which as they haue no footing nor warrant from the word of God, being the cheefe part of their religion; so they shall find, that the Lord will neuer put vp this Sacriledge at their hands, and that they haue in the middest of them all, when they haue beene most deuoute in the performance of these things, been so farre from pleasing God, as that they haue rather stirred him vp to wrath against them

Thirdly, and lastly, seeing those men that haue gone  so farre as to offer sacrifice vnto the Lord, according to Gods commandement, haue notwithstanding beene cursed and miserable, and euen by their sacrifices haue sinned highly, and prouoked the Lord against them, as wee see heere in this people, Oh then how miserable and wretched must the estate of those men be, that haue not yet proceeded so farre, that are so farre from offering sacrifice vnto God themselues, as that they despise those that doe, or if that they do it themselues, it proceedes from them but coldly and carelesly? this people heere were very forward to performe the outward ceremonies of Gods worship, but they neuer looked vnto the right manner of doing of them, which made the same to bee abhomination vnto the Lord. Now, if their fall shall bee so horrible and fearefull that build, and that with the good Word of God, doing those duties that God doth require, as this people did, (though they fayled in the manner of doing of them) how terrible must their iudgement needes be, that are so farre from building, as that they are rather pullers downe, and came so farre, euen behind these wicked Iewes themselues in the very shews of goodnes, as that they rather go beyond the^ in euery kind of grosse wickednesse? If these men that made such shewes of godlinesse and piety, were notwithstanding accursed, because they wanted reformation of heart and life: Oh what shall become of those, that want euen outward ciuility it selfe, whose liues rather abound with all maner of sinne and impiety? And if it went so hard with those that were Virgins,Mat. 25. and went with their lampes to meete the Bridegroome, wanting the oyle of grace in their hearts: then what will at last be the doome of all those that are not Virgins, but Adulterers and Adulteresses, euen those that haue committed spirituall fornicationIam. 4.4
 with sinne and Sathan, which yet neuer went out to meete the Bridegroome of their soules: Certainely, these mens iudgements doth not sleepe, and when it ouertakes them, woe vnto them. Oh then, seeing that hypocrites seeme to draw in the same yoake with the children of God, in respect of the outward Ceremonies of Gods worship, but want sincerity of heart and life. Let vs looke to our selues, that those things may bee repayred in vs that is wanting in them, that so the Lord may accept of vs and our sacrifices.
Againe, in that the Lord sayth here, I desire mercy  and not sacrifice, condemning the outward sacrifices of his worship when they proceeded not of faith towards God, and loue towards man.
Wee learne hence, that lawfull things must bee done lawfully:Lawfull things must bee done lawfully. for the Lord looks not so much vpon the outward face of his worship, as hee doth vpon the intent of the worshipper. This appeares clearely in this people, they seemed to bee humbled for sinne, aswell as those beleeuing Iewes spoken of in the three first verses of this chapter, they came into the Temple, they made great shewes of humiliation for sinne; yea, they were very forward to bring in their Peace offerings vnto God, thinking indeed that they had now done inough to satisfie Gods anger, and to appease his wrath: but because it was but as the Morning Dew, neyther durable nor lasting, nor sound and sincere, the Lord doth reiect both it and them.Gen. 4.5. This is further cleared by the example of Cain, who offered sacrifice aswell as Abel; but because hee performed not the same in a holy manner, in faith, repentance, and true obedience, the Lord esteemed not of it; but the same sacrifice of Cain added vnto the number of Cains sins. This may bee seene in that inditement which Christ brings against the old world,Mat. 24.38. They did eate and drinke,
 marry, and gaue in marriage: All which were lawfull in themselues; yet because they were not done in faith and repentance, they added vnto the measure of their sinnes; for they minded onely their pleasures, their heartes were onely set vppon carnall delightes, they eate and dranke without feare, without prayer, and thanksgiuing,Iude. 12. 1. Tim. 4.4.5. as if they were not beholden to the Lord for the same: besides, they abused the good creatures of the Lord, to surfetting and drunkennesse; these and the like corruptions in vs do turne eating and drinking into sinne. And the like may bee sayd concerning Marriage;Heb. 13. it is in it selfe a holy ordinance of God vnto those that are holy, and vse the same holily: but for the sons of God to ioyne themselues to the daughters of men, for beauties sake, riches, honour,Gen. 6.2. or any such carnal respects,Luk 17.28. when the same is not found in the way of vertue; this becomes an horrible sinne vnto vs. And the like is alleadged by our Sauiour against the Sodomites, They bought, they sold, they builded; things lawfull in themselues: but when they bought and sold with couetous desires, and oppressing their brethren, and builded not for necessity sake, but to shew their pride and vanity: These made the same become sins vnto them. These and the like examples, whereof the Scriptures are full, all serue to confirm the euerlasting truth of this point of Doctrine vnto vs, that lawfull things must be done by vs lawfully, otherwise the same become sinnes vnto vs. Now let vs come to the vses.
This serues for the exceeding terror of all wicked  and vngodly sinners: If these people in this place sinned so highly, euen in offering of sacrifices which were duties required at their hands, when they proceeded not in faith and repentance, not done in an holy maner: then how shall they bee able to stand hefore
 God in the day of his searching account, that haue heaped sinne vpon sinne, and one iniquity vpon another; that haue not onely done good things in an euill manner, but euill things in a worse manner. Againe, how many bee there that content themselues with an outward ciuill life, that come to Church, heare the Word, and receyue the Sacrament; thinking that all this while they haue done God good seruice, neuer looking into the manner of doing them, nor neuer disquiet themselues for their hidden corruptions? alas, what of all this, when faith and loue is wanting, Faith towards God, and loue and mercy towardes our brethren, when these thinges are wanting in vs?
 This serues in the second place to teach vs, aboue all things to take heed vnto the manner of our actions, that wee content not ourselues with the outward matter of Gods worship and seruice; but especially to looke into our heartes, that wee come vnto them in true faith, sound repentance, and holy obedience, for this is that that will cause the Lord to approue of all wee doe in his seruice, as the Mite of the poore Widdow was accounted a maruellous great gift with our Sauiour: and why not in it selfe: for what is a brazen token in Gods account, but because the same proceeded in faith, the Lord doth therefore account most highly of the same, the like may bee sayde of a cuppe of cold water that shall bee giuen to a Disciple of Christ, which Christ doth promise shall not goe vnrewarded. The manner, not the matter of Gods seruice is that which hee especiallie lookes after.



I will haue mercy, and not sacrifice.

THe Lord doth not heere complaine of them for  that they offered no sacrifice vnto him; no, for herein they were as forward as any,Property of an hypocrite, to content himselfe with the outward parts of Gods worship. but for want of faith towardes him, and loue towardes their brethren.
Hence wee may see a liuely picture of an hypocrite, and a counterfeit Christian, namely, such a one that contents himselfe with the outward parts of Gods worship, as this people did, who thought themselues religious inough and forward inough, so lo^g as they offred their sacrifices, brought their beasts to the altar, praied in the temple, kept their holy daies, and times of prayers (as our Papists doe at this day) and performed the outward ceremonies of the Law: but as for the knowledge of God, as for faith, repentance, obedience, reformation of their liues, and iust and vpright dealing with men, they made no bones of it,Esay. 1.12.13 had no regard of those things, and yet thought all was well. When yee come to appeare before mee (sayth the Lord) Who hath required this at your hands: Bring no more oblations in vaine, incense is abhomination vnto mee, I cannot suffer your new Moones, nor Sabbathes, nor solemne dayes, it is iniquiry, not solemne assemblies: My soule hateth your New Moones, and your appointed Feasts, they are a burden to me, I am weary to beare them. Thus they came not short in any Ceremony of the law, they were very strict in the obseruing of them, but they looked after no other thing to examine themselues in what manner they came vnto them, Againe, Will yee steale, murder,Ier. 7 9. and commit adultery, sweare falsly, burne Incence vnto Baal, and walke after other gods whom yee know not, and yet come and stand before mee in my house? Though they continued




 in most horrible and grieuous sinnes,Mich. 6.6. yet so long as they came into Gods house, and performed there the outward duties of his worship, they thought all was well. And again, the Lord sayth of them thus; This people draw neare vnto mee with their lips,Esay. 29.13. but their hearts are far from mee. They did onely professe outwardly in hypocrisie, and the Lord declares plainely that he regarded them not. Againe, in the Prophet Ieremies time, the people there debate the matter with the Prophet, and say, Oh wee come to the Temple, we pray, wee offer sacrifice, what would yee more? Oh sayth the Prophet, when yee liue in sinne, this is but to make the Lords house a denne of theeues. And by the Prophet Esay the Lord threatneth destruction to them that come vnto the seruice of God in hypocrisie, and our Sauior Christ in diuers places doth threaten a woe to the Scribes and Pharisies because they did all in hypocrisie to bee seene of men, and not of conscience towards God. Well then wee see the Doctrine sufficiently cleared, that it is the property of an hypocrite to content himselfe with the outward part of Gods worshippe,Two sorts of hypocrites. and neuer lookes after sincerity of heart within. Now there are two sorts of Hypocrites, the grosse Hypocrite, and the close Hypocrite.
The first is, hee that outwardly in words professeth the name of Christ, and yet in heart and life vtterly denies him, and these men are such as come to church, heare the Word, receiue the Sacrament, and perform all outward actions of Gods worship and seruice, as if they were true Christians: but if you looke into their liues, they are most vile and prophane. The holy Apostle Saint Paul describes them thus, They professe they know God,Tit. 1.16. and yet by their works they deny him, being disobedient, and to euery good worke reprobate. For they wil so professe Christ and the Gospell, as still they wil liue
 in sinne, in lying, stealing, drunkennesse, whordome,Three sorts of grosse hypocrites. swearing, couetousnesse, pride or ignorance; these be grosse hypocrites, which will cry Lord, Lord, and yet their liues are vile and wicked. And of these there are three sorts.
First, the Atheist, who professeth Christ in Word,Atheists. and yet in heart contemnes him; these are they which for feare of the Law come to Church, heare the Word, and receiue the Sacrament; and of this sort are the greatest sort of our Church-Papists, all contemners of the Word, and the like, professing Christ in shew; but yet in heart they deny him, contemne him, make no account of God nor his Word, but tread it vnder foot.
Secondly, those which for feare and fashion sake  professe Christ, come to Church, heare the Word,Temporists. and receiue the Sacrament; yet all for fashion and custome, nothing for conscience sake: and of these wee haue thousands amongst vs, who performe all these duties for custome and fashion sake. Oh let vs take heed, that we doe not professe onely in outward shew; but looke to our hearts, that wee may doe all of conscience to please God, and in obedience to his commandements: let vs not make it a matter of custome to come to heare the Word, to receiue the Sacrament, or for feare of the Law, but of conscience towards God; otherwise these things will turne one day to our greater condemnation.
And the third sort are the Epicures which make  their pleasures, sports and pastimes their God,Epicures. and will spend more houres in eating, drinking, sports and pleasures, then in the seruice of God, then hearing, reading, praying, singing of Psalmes and holy meditaon, all their profession of Christ is but in hypocrisie from the teeth outward, the heart is not sound, these
 me^ may ptofesse Christ long inough, come to church, heare the Word, and receiue the Sacrament; yet so long as their heart is set so eagerly on the World, on their profites and pleasures, they doe but deceiue their owne soules. Our Sauiour teacheth vs, that men may come with open mouth,Mat 7.21. and cry, Lord, Lord, if they lead not holy liues, and haue godlinesse and true obedience in their hearts they shall perish:2. Thes. 1.7. It is not Lord, Lord, that will serue the turne, but men must labour to know the Word and will of God; and ioyne to their knowledge christian obedience.
Oh then in what a lamentable estate and condition  bee most men and women, seeing this is the common bane of our time, that men and women content themselues with the outward and naked profession of Christ, onely to performe the outward parts of his worshippe and seruice, though in heart they care not for him; if they come to Church, and here spend an houre for fashion sake, or for feare of the Law; they looke after no more, though all the weeke after they contemne Christ, and serue the Deuil, the World, and their own vncleane lusts and desires. Oh let such men and women bee heere admonished, that it will not serue their turne, or goe for pay before God: Oh let vs learne then to goe farther, and in heart to beleeue in Christ, and in our liues to obey him: the people in Moses his time say, Oh, wee will doe all; but what sayth the Lord, Oh,Deu. 5.27. that there were such an heart in them: shewing indeed that they were but hypocrites, they had Gods word; Wee will doe all. Wee will come to the Church, we will heare the Word, receyue the Sacrament, and what yee will: Here were goodly words, golden speeches, glorious promises, but their hearts were naught: Oh is not this our case, wee haue goodly words, wee can cry, Lord, Lord, with open mouth; What will yee
 more? wee come to Church, wee heare the Sermon, wee receiue the Sacrament, etc. But tell me, is thy heart sound, is thy heart set vpon God, doest thou hunger after Iesus Christ, doest thou loue the Word of God aboue gold and siluer? if thou find not this affection in thee, thy heart is naught; neyther canst thou bee saued vnlesse thou repent.
The second sort of hypocrites are the close ones,Close hypocrites. which make a goodly shew, and a fayre outward profession of Christ; yea, haue sundry good gifts and common graces, and yet are but hypocrites in the sight of God, though not so discerned by men, because of their gifts and outward shewes, but are here taken for Christians and members of Christs Church; such men and women, who make so glorious a shew, and so professe Christ in outward manner, that in the iudgement of men, yea many times of themselues they be taken for Christians and members of the Church of God: but yet in truth are not so. And of this sort wee haue thousands that deceiue the world, that haue the vizard of Christianity on their faces, and hardly are discerned. Now what gifts and graces one of these hypocrites may haue, and yet be damned,M. Perkins on Mat. 7. v. 21. a most reuerend Diuine of our time hath most liuely discouered, vnto whom I send the Reader. We wil now conclude the Doctrine with these vses.
First of all, to apply it to our selues; hath this been  the propertie of Hypocrites to stand vpon Ceremonies, and the outward parts of Gods worship and seruice, to offer sacrifices, and to bee precise in obseruations, traditions, and inuentions of men, and to neglect the inward worship of God, neglect faith, repentance; obedience, reformation of their hearts and liues? Alas, then it stands vs in hand to looke to our owne soules, to try our selues, and to enter into our
 owne hearts, and wee shall find that the most of vs be no better then this people; all that wee ayme at in Gods seruice, is it any more then this people did performe? doe wee goe beyond them? If men come to Church, heare the Word, and receiue the Sacrament now and then for fashion sake, and abstain from grosse sinnes that the world cryes out on, men then thinke they haue done all that God requires of them, hee can desire no more at their hands: is not this the common religion of most men, and al the profession they make: and thus farre they come, and will goe no further, which shews that most mens case is not so good as they take it to bee:Esay. 1.11. Ier. 7.12. thus farre this people came in this place; yet all this while they bee ignorant soules without the true sauing knowledge of God, vniust dealers, filthy liuers, vse no conscience in buying and selling, couetous, mercilesse, proud, malicious, and giuen to reuenge. Alas, if this bee thy case, thou maiest come to Church long inough, heare the Word, and receyue the Sacrament; but thou art no better then an Hypocrite.Mar. 6. Herod went thus farre, Saul and Iudas might do all this; but let vs, if we would find comfort to our soules in the seruice and worship of God, giue him our hearts: My Sonne, giue mee thy heart: Let vs go beyond all the hypocrites in the World in true repentance,Esay. 13.29. hatred of sinne, in reformation of our hearts and liues, in an earnest study, and endeuour to please God, and to walke in his wayes, in doing the duties of the first Table to God, and of the second Table to men,
 Againe, seeing that Hypocrites may attaine vnto many singular gifts and graces, and yet perish in the end. Let vs know, that we had need to take heed and suspect our selues, that wee come not to performe these holy duties in hypocrisie, but in truth of heart;
 let vs call our selues to a reckoning, suspect our faith, repentance and obedience, for feare wee deceiue our selues; yea, as Paul sayth,1 Cor. 13.5. Proue your selues whether ye bee in the faith: for an Hypocrite, and one that shall finally perish, and bee danmed, may goe farre with the child of God in outward profession, and haue many common gifts and graces, Onely the doers of the Word shall bee instified: and therefore our Sauiour opposeth these two sorts, Sayers and Doers: If a man had a seruant which shewed great dutifulnesse to his Master in word, and yet would neuer doe that hee bids him, or cleane contrary to his mind, would any man thinke he were a good seruant? Euen so fareth it with many amongst vs; If God will be content with our faire words and promises, hee shal haue ynnow, but deeds he shal haue none: Oh let vs at last bee warned, and let vs labour to bee found doers of Gods will, and not to content ourselues with a bare and naked profession; for this will little auaile vs in the day of Gods searching account.
Marke here this wicked people, they grew so secure  and carelesse, that they did not onely content themselues with the outward seruice and worship of God,Wicked men make religion a cloake for sinne. but withal they would make it a cloake of all their sinnes, the euils and corruptions, not onely towards men, but towards God: for they thought that so long as they offered sacrifice to God, and came into the temple, and brought their beasts, and made some shew, that God was beholden vnto them, and that hee could not bee angry with them. Thus they made the seruice and worship of God a cloake of al their euils, and a couert of al their vile and enormous dealing, as blindnes, ignorance, cruelty, oppression, couetousnesse, pride, malice, etc. so as if the Prophets of God did reproue them, they were ready to tell them: Oh Sir, you see
 I hope we bring our offerings, sacrifices, and oblations, and come dayly to the Temple; and though wee bee somewhat ignorant, wee hope, so long as wee meane well, and doe this, wee hope, God will beare with vs, and wee shall doe well inough:Ie. 7.11.12. Mat. 6. So did the people in the time of the Prophet Ieremie, and the Scribes and Pharisies in the time of our Sauiour Christ.
 And is not this the common sinne of most men in these dayes? doe not men and women vnder the shew of religion, and colour of profession of the Gospell, go about to cloake their hypocrisie, their couetousnesse, pride, malice, enuie, and other sinnes? yes doubtlesse, they make their outward shew and profession of Religion a cloake of all their abhominable sinnes; and thinke so long as they come to Church, and bee no enemies of Religion, doe not persecute the Ministers and Professors,Ier. 7.13. they thinke God will not call them to account for their couetousnesse, pride, enuy, murder, ignorance, drunkennesse, vnconscionable dealing, etc. And what is this but to make the house of God a denne of theeues, a company of Atheists and prophane beasts? Oh then let vs beware of this, and take heed how wee abuse our holy profession, take heed that we make not religion, and the outward seruice and worship of God, a cloake of sinne to boulster vs vp in euill, to face out our impieties and abhominations. If a man should get the Kings cloath, or a Noblemans cloath, and so should vnder the colour of that, rob, defraud and oppresse poore men, and doe it vnder pretence of his masters cloath, how would his master bee angry, turn him out of his seruice, plucke his cloath ouer his eares? Euen so will the Lord deale one day with all hypocritical seruers of God; who, because they bee such as make shew of Religion and seruice of God, thinke that their profession may bee a cloake of all their impieties.




I desire Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

THis is a most worthy sentence, as it doth appeare in that our Sauiour Christ doth twice alleadge it in the Gospell of Mathew,Mat. 9.^3. when Christ kept company with the poore Publicans and sinners, the Scribes and Pharisies were angrie with him: our Sauiour bids them goe, and learne what this meanes; I will haue mercy and not sacrifice. Where hee shewes, that the Lord will not bee serued by outward Ceremonies and externall shewes; but then men serue God when they can pardon and forgiue iniuries and wrongs, and one pardon and forbeare another, and are not ouer cruell and seuere one to another. So when Christs Disciples pluckt the eares of corne vpon the Sabbath,Mat. 12. the Pharisies were presentlie offended, because they brake the Sabbath; but Christ tels them this Scripture, I will haue mercy, and not sacrifice: Where our Sauiour Christ sheweth, that they were ouer cruell censurers of others; thinking the keeping of the Sabbath to stand in such Ceremonies, whereas they did nothing but that they might doe without offence.
Now, as we haue cleared what it is that wee are to vnderstand of Sacrifice and Burnt offerings; namely, the outward and externall worship of God, and all the ceremonies of the Law: So now wee are to come to the two latter words, Mercy and Knowledge; by which we are to vnderstand the duties of Piety and Mercy, faith to God, and loue and mercy towards man.
And here the Lord compares these two together, and shewes that hee preferres faith, piety and godlinesse in the heart; and mercifull and kind dealing towards men, before the great shewes which men make
 in the outward seruice of God: True it is, the Lord will haue vs performe such parts of his seruice and worship, as hee commandeth in his Word, and such ceremonies as hee prescribes: but hee prefers faith, obedience, repentance, feare and loue of God, and loue and kindnesse, and mercifull dealing vnto men; before all such sacrifices and burnt offerings, and all other shewes whatsoeuer: Yea, all this outward shew, and all our profession of Religion, if it bee not ioyned with the knowledge of God, that is, with faith, repentance, and obedience, and with the dueties of loue vnto men, it is but abhomination in the sight of God.
 So then the point of Doctrine is this; that seeing the Lord sayth, I will haue mercy and not sacrifice;God doth prefer the duties of loue and mercy to men before his owne worship. that is, I desire rather mercy then sacrifice. It doth please the Lord better, to see men performe duties of loue, and kindnesse one towards another, then to haue sacrifices neuer so many or great, done vnto himselfe.
This is the Doctrine: We see heere how the Lord doth farre preferre loue and kindnesse to men, before al the outward shewes men make of religion whatsoeuer: nay, if men professe neuer so much, make neuer so great a shew in the seruice of God, for their hearing, praying, receyuing, and the like; yet if they want loue and kindnesse to their brethren, they cannot please God. And this is the cause that the faith of many in the Scriptures hath growne famous in the world, euen by their conscionable performance of the duties of the second Table, loue and mercy vnto men. I remember the Shunamites wife, who called the Prophet of the Lord into her house to eate bread, and sayd to her husband, Behold,2. Reg 4.8.9. I know now that this is an holy man of God that passeth by vs continually; let vs make him a little Chamber,
 with walles, and let vs set him there a bed, and a table, and a stoole, and a candlesticke, that hee may turne in thither when hee commeth to vs.Gen. 18. And of Abraham and Lot it is reported, that they entertayned strangers into their houses: Here was religion indeed, when the same goes hand in hand with good works: Happy Elias that hath such an Hostesse to giue him entertainement after his trauell; and happy, yea twice happy was shee by entertayning such a guest.Deut. 10.18. This is that which Moses deliuereth by precept vnto the people of Israel; The Lord our God is a God of gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and terrible, who doth right vnto the Fatherlesse and widdow, and loueth the stranger, giueth him food and raiment: loue yee therefore the stranger. Where we see that Moses vrgeth this duty of mercy and loue vnto others, euen from the example of God himselfe, who is euer at hand to helpe them.Esay. 58.7. This is it which the Prophet Esay commendeth: Is not this the fasting; that I haue commaunded, to deale thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poore that wander vnto thy house when thou seest the naked, that thou couer him, and hide net thy selfe from thy owne flesh. And this is noted as one part of the innocency and integrity of godly Iob, that hee could say, The stranger did not lodge in the streetes, but I opened my dores vnto him that went by the way.Iob. 31.32. It is the straight charge that Christ himselfe giueth: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother hath ought against thee, leaue there thine offering before the Altar, and goe thy way: first, bee reconciled to thy Brother, and thou come and offer thy gift. Where we see, that men do but lose their labor that come to hear the Word, pray, receyue, etc. or to any part of Gods worship that liue in malice, hatred or desire of reuenge:1. Cor. 13.1. Though I had the gift of Prophesie, and knew all secrets, and all knowledge; yea, if I had all faith, so that I could remoue
 mountaines, and bad not loue, I were nothing. Where wee see if men want loue, that is mercy and kindnesse to men, they can doe nothing to please God: so highly the Lord esteemes of this duty of mercy to men, that he sayth, There are but two Commandements, and this is one, to loue our neighbour as our selfe: and giues Peter commandement to forgiue his brother,Mat. 22.37. 1. Reg. 17. Act. 16. 2. Tim. 1. not till seuen times, but till seuenty seuen times. Lydea intreated Paul and his companions to come into her house, and to abide with her. Onesiphorus sought out Paul, and refreshed him in time of his necessity: All these examples, and the like whereof the Scriptures are full, all serue to teach vs the truth of this Doctrine, that the works of loue and mercy to our brethren, serue to commend our faith to God, and are more accepted with him then all things else wee can doe in his seruice and worship, when they are wanting in vs.
Now come we to the vses.
If the Lord thus loue mercy and brotherly kindnes  betwixt neighbour and neighbour, that hee prefers it before all our outward shewes of religion: nay, al that we do, is but abhomination without it: Oh how should this affect vs all? how should it inflame vs to loue one another, to pardon one another, to shew mercy one to another? Would you doe that which pleaseth God, which hee desires so much? it is this, that thou shew mercy to thy brother,Mat. 5. to pardon him, to forgiue him, to shew thy loue to him: Bee yee mercifull as your heauenly Father is mercifull. Some there are who in the outward exercises of religion are very diligent in repairing to the Congregation, in hearing Gods Word, and conforme themselues indifferently vpon the Sabbath day to other Christian dueties: but looke on them concerning their duties to men; there you shall finde them exceeding guilty, proud, disdainefull, malitious,
 cruell Oppressors, all for themselues, without any respect to others: Oh let vs looke vnto it, that wee separate not those thinges which God hath ioyned together, holinesse towards God, and righteousnesse towards men: Art thou a louer of God^ Word, delightest in the publike duties of Gods worshippe and seruice? thou doest well, it shall bee thy comfort in life, thy comfort in death, and thy ioy and reioycing after death: Well then, looke vnto this, that thou make conscience of equitie towards men; Doe to others as thou wouldest haue another doe vnto thee, else all thy deuotion is but hypocrisie, for God hath ioyned these two together.
Seeing the Lord compares, yea prefers Mercy  before Sacrifice, that is, loues and delights in mercifull dealing, and honest and faithfull dealing, more then in all outward sacrifices: yea, hee so esteemes of it, that they which want mercie towardes their neighbours, they cannot please God. How doth this condemne those which are so hard-hearted, and so straight laced, that they can shew no dramme of mercy to their brethren, but boyle in malice, and are so inflamed with anger and reuenge, that they cannot shew any mercy, not speake a kind Word, nor thinke one good thought of their Neighbour) Marke what the Lord sayth: I will haue Mercy, and not Sacrifice: I had rather haue thee shew mercifull and kind dealing, then to haue sacrifice and outward Ceremonies: nay, thou mayest offer thy Sacrifices with Cain, but if thou haue a bloudy,Gen 4.5. a cruell and malitious heart, the Lord cares no more for thee, or for thy sacrifice, then if thou shouldest kill a man: How canst thou heare the Word
 and receyue the Sacrament? How canst thou pray, Forgiue mee as I forgiue my Brother: Doest thou not craue a iudgement, yea, a plague from God vpon thy owne soule, that as thou wilt not pardon thy brother, so God should neuer pardon thee? Oh then remember what Christ sayth; If yee loue them which loue you,Mat. 5.46. what reward shall yee haue? doe not the Publicans euen the same? Let vs goe beyond the Publicans, inlouing euen our enemies, and shewing mercy vnto them, for this is that which God is well pleased withall.






VERSE. 7.

But they like men haue transgressed the Couenant; there haue they trespassed against mee.

IN this Verse and the rest that follow to the end of the Chapter,The summe of the rest of the Chapt. the Lord beginnes to lay them out in their colours, and to paint out their rebellions.
And first in this seuenth verse, hee sheweth in generall, that they had broken that league and holy Couenant which hee had made betwixt him and them: That holy Couenant which had beene so solemnly agreede vpon,Gen. 17.7. Exod. 19.5.6. wherein the Lord had promised hee would be their God, and they had promised to bee his people: this Couenant they had wilfully broken, and cast it behind their backe, and shaken off the yoake of their obedience.
In the eight verse, the Lord comes vnto them more particularly, and names Gilead, which was one of the Cities of refuge:Iosu. 20.8.9. This City has inhabited of the Leuites and the Priests, and therefore should haue been a mother City, a Nurse to Religion and Piety. And these Priests and Leuites should haue shined as stars, by holy life and pure Doctrine: but the Lord complains,
 that euen Gilead was a City full of all impietie, full of bloud and cruelty: and if it fared thus with Gilead, what could bee hoped for of other places, but that they did match her, or were farre worse then shee?
In the ninth verse, the Prophet doth not onely complaine of the common people, but shewes the miserable impiety of the Priests, whom hee compares to Murderers and Robbers, because they were full of cruelty and oppression, couetous, and giuen to all manner of vile dealing,The Prophet spares none. but especially they might bee compared to Robbers and Murderers, because they did murder the poore soules of Men and Women.
And in the two last Verses, hee sharpely reproues the Idolatry of the people, which was established hy Ieroboam and his Counsellers: so as wee see, the Prophet hee spares no estate; hee beganne with the common people, then comes to the Priests; and now hee layes open the vile dealing of the King and his Nobles, who neglected the true worshippe of God, and set vp Idolatry, and worshipped Baal.
In this seuenth Verse wee haue three things to be considered of vs:
The Text diuided.First, their sinne; They haue transgressed the Couenant, a great sinne to breake Couenant with God.
Secondly, the manner of it; namely, Like men: that is, when I meant in good earnest to make my couenant with you; and promised that I would bee your God, and gaue you my lawes; you most vnfaithfully and rebelliously haue cast oft the yoake of obedience, haue broken my couenant, and reiected my laws, and would not stand to your promise, as I thought yee would.
Thirdly, wherein they sinned; namely, in that they
 did most glory, and most of all rely vpon, There haue they transgressed against me; that is, euen in your very sacrifices, to the which you sticke, and thinke that I am beholden vnto you for them; your sacrifices of Lambes and Beasts are the things I desire, being done in an holy manner: but you boast your selues of these outward Ceremonies, as though you were as good worshippers of God as could bee: Euen in this I condemne you, because whereas I gaue them vnto you to helpe your blindnesse and rudenesse, and to leade you to Christ the true sacrifice, you casting aside repentance and duties of faith, and amendment of life, thought that these outward things, the bloud of buls, and sheepe might satisfie my anger, and purge you from your sinnes without the bloud of Christ, the son of God. And therefore you haue grieuously broken my Couenant, broken my lawes, and vtterly abused my ordinances.

Thus much of the Sense, now of the Doctrines.
But they like men haue broken my Couenant. q. d. I gaue them my Couenant and promised them I would bee their God,Their sinne. and they promised they would be my people: Well, I gaue them my lawes and commandements, and my ordinances, which were as a payre of Indentures betweene mee and them: I set to my Seales, and bound my selfe vnto them, to stand by them, to keepe and defend them from their enemies: And for my part if they had kept Couenant, I would for euer haue beene their God, and they should haue beene my people; but they haue quickly start out of the way, they haue forgot their couenant made with mee, broken my lawes, and cast aside my commandements, and haue abused my ordinances.

The Couenant what? Gen. 17 7.8. Gen. 18.9 10 Exo. 19.5.6. Rom. 4.17.What this Couenant was, these places shew; Moreouer I will stablish my Couenant betweene mee and thee, and thy seede after thee, in thy generations, for an euerlasting Couenant, to bee God vnto thee and to thy seede after thee. And I will giue thee and thy seede after thee the land, wherein thou art a stranger, Euen all the land of Canaan for an euerlasting possession, And I will be their God.
 Thus had God bound himselfe by Couenant vnto them to bee their God.The breaking of our couenant with god the cause of al iudgeme^ts And in that they had most vnthankefully violated the same, the Lord layes here this great ingratitude of theirs to their charge. So then the first point of Doctrine which this Text doth afford vs, is this:
We may here behold what is the cause that God forsaketh any people, and withdraweth his mercifull protection from them, and layes them open to all miseries, calamities, iudgements and distresses; namely, the breaking of our Couenant with God: for this doth highly offend God, and prouoke him to anger, to see his Couenants so lightly regarded, and so wilfully transgressed, as it doth appeare in this people, whose sinne was no small sinne, but a great and grieuous sin: for in keeping of their Couenant with God, did consist their euerlasting weale and kappinesse: for then the Lord had bound himselfe, that if they would keepe his commandements and lawes, that hee would bee their God to defend them from all their enemies, yea, to confound all their aduersaries: and so long as they were mindfull of their vow and couenant, and walked in his wayes, none could doe them harme; yea, they could want no blessing or mercie of God, as it doth appeare by Gods own words:Deut. 5.29. and Deut. 28. Oh that there were such an heart in this people, that they would feare mee and keepe my commandements alwayes, that it might goe well with them, and with their children after them for euer: so on the
 contrary, the breaking of this couenant, was as much as their liues were worth, for then the Lord was not bound to bee their God, nor to keepe them any longer, but they were naked of Gods protection, and lay open to all miseries and calamities; and were a prey to their enemies, and then all those curses pronounced against Couenant breakers,Deut. 28.15. must needs fall vpon them: If thou wilt not obey the voyce of the Lord thy God, to keepe, and to doe all his commandements, and his ordinances which I command thee this day, then shall these curses come vpon thee, and ouertake thee. Cursed shalt thou bee in the towne, and cursed in the field, cursed shall bee thy basket and store, the fruit of thy body, etc.Exod. 32.25. When the people of God had committed idolatry, and made them gods to goe before them, it is sayde by Moses, The people were naked, for Aaron had made them naked to their shame amongst their enemies. It was their sinne of Idolatrie that depriued them of Gods protection; for as keeping his Couenant men are guarded from all dangers; so breaking the same, he naked to all iudgements and calamities.
When Achan had stolne the Babylonish garment, and the wedge of gold, the whole Host of Israel was punished for the same fault till the sinner was found out; for because of the sin of Achan,Iosu. 7.24. the whole host of Israel were before their enemies, but as naked men, vtterlie destitute of Gods lpeciall protection: Wee see this in Salowon,1. Reg. 11.14.23. when his heart was turned away from the true God, and his hands were holden vp to strange gods, the Lord was wroth against Salomon: Then the Lord stirred vp one aduersary vnto Salomon, and afterwards another, which did much mischiefe and euill against Israel. And this is likewise cleare by the example of Rhehoboam the sonne of Salomon, who, when hee had once forsaken the Lord, and all Israel with him, the






 Prophet comes with this message from the Lord,2. Cron. 12.5. Thus sayth the Lord: Yee haue forsaken mee, therefore haue I left you in the hands of Shishak.
These examples and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, all serue to confirme the Doctrine now deliuered, that sinne is the cause of all miserie, and the breaking of our Couenant with God, the cause of all calamity. And good reason it should bee so; for it is a iust thing for God to depart from them, that depart from him, and to forsake them that forsake him, whose departure from vs is the cause of all those iudgements wee suffer here, and shall make vs one day to taste of the bitternesse of his iudgements, which last to confusion for euer.

Now let vs come to the Vses.

 This teacheth vs first of all to acknowledge that all iudgements which are layde vpon vs here, are most iust and righteous with our God, whose iudgements are alwayes iust; that howsoeuer the particular cause is not alwaies discerned vnto vs, why the Lord doth strike vs and chastice vs; yet certain it is, that if the stormes of Gods iudgements doe arise, some Ionas or other is in the shippe, some secret sinne or other lyes lurking in our soules, that hath caused the Lord to be so angry with vs, according to that of the Prophet Ieremy: Wherefore is the liuing man sorrowfull? Man suffereth for his sinne. Oh let vs search and trie our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord, where wee may see the cause of all iudgements, our sinnes. Secondly, the remedy, To search and trie our wayes, and turne vnto the Lord. Oh then let vs euer acknowledge the Lord to bee iust in all his wayes, and righteous in all his workes: yea, let vs in the middest of Gods iudgements conclude,Lam. 3.39. and say, It is the Lords mercy that wee are not consumed, because his compassions faile not: The Lord might iustly
 take all aduantage at our hands; but his mercy is ouer all his works, and in the middest of his iudgements he remembreth mercy.
Well, let vs apply this Doctrine to our selues, and  see whether wee can excuse our selues, that we are not Couenant breakers against our God. There is none of vs all but wee haue entred a solemne league, and made a solemne Couenant with our God: when wee were baptized, the Lord then receiued vs into the bosome of his Church, vpon this condition, that wee would become his people, and walke in his wayes: hee gaue vs his couenant, a gracious couenant, full of many gracious and heauenly promises of pardon of sinne, of life eternall: This Couenant hee sealed and confirmed by the heart bloud of his owne Sonne: that he would bee our gracious God and louing Father, that hee would pardon all our sinnes, receiue vs to fauour, and bestow eternall life and saluation vpon vs. Wee on the other side haue couenanted with our God, that wee would bee his people, and become his obedient seruants, that wee would renounce the Deuill and all his works, the stinking pleasures of the flesh; and that wee would not suffer our selues to bee ruled by them; but would manfully fight vnder the banner of our Lord Iesus Christ, against the Deuill, the world and the flesh. Now if wee examine ourselues, how wee haue kept this Couenant: wee shall find that the Lord may iustly say vnto vs, as hee did here vnto this people: Yee haue broken my Couenant: yea, we haue denied our obedience to Christ Iesus, and his Word, and wee haue serued sinne and Sathan, and the world Gods deadly enemies, and we haue liued in pleasures, in vanity, in couetousnesse, and in many other sinnes against our promise to God. Oh then in the feare of God, let vs take knowledge of this, that wee are vile
 and miserable couenant breakers: wee haue fayled in our promise to God, and haue not walked in his wayes as wee haue made a solemne Couenant with him, And now, let it make vs ashamed, that wee should deale thus vilely and decitfully with our most gracious God: If it bee a matter of shame to breake couenant with an honest man, and wee bee grieued for the same: how much more should this grieue vs and make vs ashamed, that wee haue dealt thus faithlesly with our gracious God.
And thirdlie, as wee must bee grieued, that wee  haue thus fayled and broken our Couenant with God heretofore: so now wee must bee more carefull to keepe our Couenant with him in time to come, manfully to fight vnder his banner against sinne, Sathan, and the world, his vtter enemies, and yeeld him obedience in heart and life, to deny all obedience to the Deuill and our owne lusts, and say with the Prophet Dauid,Psal. 119.10^ I haue sworne and am stedfastly purposed to keepe thy righteous iudgements. Oh let vs take a solemn oath of our selues, and purpose both in heart and life to keepe his righteous iudgements, neuer to sinne against our God, as wee haue done, but in all things to do his will, and to walke in his wayes.
And there is good reason to perswade vs hereunto; for if wee shall keepe our Couenant made to God in our Baptisme, then the Lord will take vs for his people, and will bee our gracious God and louing Father, then hee will performe all those gratious promises of pardon of sinne,Deu. 28. and life eternall and euery other gracious promise that hee hath layde down in his Word for our good, and the further increase of our happinesse, it shall then goe well with vs in life, in death, and after death. But if wee refuse to heare his voyce, and will not regard our vow and couenant
 made to him in Baptisme, then hee will withdraw his mercy and gratious protection from vs, he is no longer tyed vnto vs to doe vs good, then wee shall keepe his Couenant, and then what shall become of vs, if the Lord once forsake vs? if hee leaue vs, alas wee shal then lye open to all misery, both of soule and body: if God bee angry with vs, who can do vs good?
Fourthly, and lastly, this may serue to reprooue  those men, that vpon some particular occasions, as in time of warre, sicknesse, necessity, trouble, or any other danger, haue beene ready to enter into couenant with God, so that God would free them, and deliuer them, they will become new men; if they haue fallen into whoredome, or fornication, they vow they will bridle their lusts, and they will neuer delight in the Harlots company any more: If they haue fallen into drunkennesse, they will vow and enter couenant with God,Luk. 14.8. that they will abstaine from the hatefull house of that sinne, and all other prouocations to the same. The Oppressor is ready to promise more mercy to the poore, and so of all other sinnes:Dan. 4.24. the sinner is ready to enter Couenant with God (when his conscience is vpon the racke) that hee will leaue his sinne, and that for the time to come they will walke with God in better obedience, so that God would but deliuer them, and set them on foot againe. When a man hath most vainly and sinfully spent his time in drunkennesse, riotousnesse, idlenesse, wantonnesse, enuy, hatred, contempt of Gods Word, etc. If God strike such men with sicknesse (as I haue known many) that they haue feared death, for vnto such is the remembrance of death a terror: Oh how then doe they tremble and quake,Note. then send for Moses and Aaron in haste, send for the Minister (who before this time of all men they esteemed the most vile) and then good people pray for
 me; Oh I haue beene a great and grieuous sinner, I haue offended God many wayes, I haue been a most beastly drunkard, a most vncleane liuer, I haue dishonoured God many wayes by my vsury, oppressing of the poore, vniust and vnconscionable dealing with men by fraud and deceit, I haue made no conscience at all how I haue spent the Sabbath, but haue been at bowles, and Tables, or drinking in vaine company, when I should haue beene present in the Congregation of Gods people: Oh, if God vvill but now forgiue mee this sinne onely, I will neuer offend in the like againe, I will become a new man, for no mans pleasure will I be brought to dishonour God any more by these sinnes.
These and the like are the clamours and the crying out of many men when God doth touch them by sicknesse or some other calamity, and then are they very forward to enter into Couenant with God, euer to bee thankfull and obedient vnto him, and then to begin their repentance and amendment of life: But O alas, is not this the best day that God hath of them, and the best seruice that euer they performe vnto him? It is, it is; for when God doth free them, and set them at liberty,2. Pet. 2.1.2. they Turue with the Dogge to the vomite, and with the Sowe to the mire. Well, God will neuer put vp this great ingratitude at their hands; but being found to bee Couenant breakers with their God, all those iudgements which Almighty God hath threatned against such sinners, shall most surely come vpon them,Deu. 28. and ouertake them.




Like Men.

HEre is layde downe the manner of their sinning;  Like Men. That is,The manner. when I meant to make my Couenant with them, and promised that I would bee your God; and to this end, gaue you my lawes to traine you vp in obedience: you most vnthankfully, and rebelliously haue cast off the yoake of obedience, haue broken my Couenant, and would not stand to your promise. So that the Lord doth lay this to their charge, that they were most vnconstant and light, yea most vnfaithfull: I meant in good earnest to do as I said: but alas, you for your part, soon went away out of the way, and forgot your Couenant.
In their example wee may note what is the nature  of man, namely, most vnconstant in anie holy dutie,Man by Nature vnconstant in any holy duty. verie vnfaithfull, and easilie drawne away from obedience to the law of God, and easilie drawne into sin and wickednesse; yea, so weake and vnconstant are wee of our selues, that if the Lord leaue vs but a while to our selues, Oh into what foule sinne shall wee not easilie fall into? This is clearely to bee seene by the example of our first Parents, who,Gen. 3.6. though they were created in a most excellent estate, yet being left to themselues, they fell away from God incontinentlie; yea, weake and small meanes are of force sufficient to batter our faith, if God but euen a little doe withold his grace: This wee may clearelie behold by the examples of Noah and of Lot, that notwithstanding they had experience of Gods wrath against sinne and sinners by the destruction of the old world,Gen. 8. Gen. 19. and of Sodom and Gomon; yet both Noah and Lot fel incontinentlie from God; the one, in the sinne of drunkennesse, the other committed incest with his two daughters. All
 the strength that is in the best, not being supported by Gods grace, it is but as smoake which is vanished away with the least blast of wind. Looke on Dauid, a Prophet of the Lord,2. Sam 12.1. a man after Gods owne heart; yet being left vnto himselfe, fell into those great and grieuous sinnes of Adultery and Murder; yea, and continued in the same a long time, till the Lord sent vnto him his Prophet Nathan to awaken him. This the Prophet plentifully teacheth by the examples of the Israelites,Psa. 78.40.41 saying, How oft did they prouoke him in the wildernesse, and grieue him in the Desert? Yea, they turned and tempted God, and limitted the Holy one of Israel.Exo. 9.27 28 This is cleare by the example of Pharaoh, who sometimes could crie out, and say; I haue sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked: Pray yee to the Lord for mee, and I will let you goe. These were goodlie words and faire promises, but alas, they were nothing; for what followed? When the Hayle was gone, and the Thunder ceased, and the iudgement was remoued, his heart was hardned, and hee continued in his sinne. Who could cleare Dauids innocencie more then Saul?1. Sam. 34.17. Thou art more righteous then I, for thou hast rendred me good, and I haue rendred thee euill, etc. Yet did Saul afterward persecute Dauid: Sometime wee are bold and couragious in a good cause, as Peter was, Though all men deny thee, yet will not I deny thee: but when the least temptation is laid vpon vs, wee faint and are quickly discouraged. It fares with vs as it did with Peter, hee would needs walke vpon the water to go to Christ; but presentlie hee beganne to sinke, and so had perished, had not Christ reached out his hand and staied him: Euen so fareth it with vs, if the Lord reach not out his hand to stay vs, wee must needs sinke vnder euen the least temptation that Sathan laieth against our poore soules. Hereunto commeth that Parable propounded
 by Christ* A certaine man had two sonnes;Mat. 21.28. and came to there (...) and sayd, Sonne goe and worke to day in my Vineyard: but hee answered and sayd I will not; yet afterwards hee repented himselfe and went: Thou came hee to the second, and sayd so likewise; and hee answered, I will sir, yet went not. Hee seemed forward, ^^t presentlie hee hung backe: hee promised much, but performed nothing at all. The like may bee seene in the rich man that came to Christ, and said vnto him; Good master, what good thing shall I doe that I may haue eternall life? This man (no doubt) had a purpose to bee a Disciple of Christ, he was well perswaded of Christ and his doctrine* Tell me, Oh tell mee (saith he) what course I must take to that end I may bee s^^ed, and that eternall life may bee my portion? yet when he was tried,Mat. 19.16. Hee went away sorrowfull: and his good beginnings were but As the Morning Dew, not durable and lasting. So these places of the Apostle Paul do directlie proue the same, where hee saith; That many sinne againe after the receyuing and acknowledgment of the truth,Heb. 6. acording to the saying of the Wiseman, As the (...) againe to his owne vomit, so a foole turneth to his foolishnesse:Pro. 26.11. So that wee see the Doctrine sufficientlie proued and confirmed vnto vs, that man of himselfe is exceeding fraile mutable, and vnconstant, especiallie in holie and heauenlie businesses, vnlesse wee bee staied and sopported by God as his people here, that though they had entred Couenant, and reade a solemne promise to God, that they would become his people, yet Likemen, fraile and weake, they fell away.
And the reason of this Doctrine is cleare, Euery good and perfect gift it of God* It is not of our selues, or in our owne power, but it is the proper gift of God as the Apostle teacheth:Rom. 12.18.19. Beast not thy selfe against the branches, for if thou beast thy selfe, thou bearest not the roote,
 but the root beareth thee: Bee not high minded, but feare. The Apostle in this place taketh away all matter of boasting from the Gentiles, reasoning from their changeable condition, not being firmelie fastned, and deeplie grounded, as the root it selfe, but mutable and changeable, easilie to bee broken off, as boughes from a tree: So then it is God alone that is the Author of constancie and perseuerance, Who worketh in vs, both the will and the deed: And wee of our selues without the same helpe of God, are vnconstant in any holie dutie,
 Seeing this is the state and condition of vs all, that we are by nature very vnconstant in the performance of any holie duetie, when the Lord shall but a little leaue vs to our selues: Wee may from hence conclude, that woful is their estate and condition that the Lord leaueth thus to themselues, they shall shrinke away and melt as the waxe before the Sunne, and in the end such shall become very dogs and swine; for God giues many times such ouer to a reprobate sense, and tabes away his spirit from them, whereby they grow worse and worse: And those which once were enlightned, and afterwards haue fallen away, their end is most miserable, according to that of the Apostle: If they after they haue escaped from the filthinesse of the world,2. Pet. 2.20. etc. are yet tangled againe therein, and ouercome, the latter end is worse with them then the beginning. And this doth the Lord most iustlie bring to passe vpon manie, because they contemne grace, quenching the blessed motions of the spirit of God in them, that whe^ they haue some good motions in them, and godlie purposes of heart to cleaue vnto the Lord, they haue not striuen with the Lord by praier for the encrease thereof, but careleslie haue put out that light that began to shine in their hearts.

Oh let vs learne euen from their fearefull estate and condition, to make much of the least seed of godlinesse sowne in our hearts, and labour by all godlie meanes to worke the increase of grace in vs, If wee haue tasted how gracious the Lord is.
Secondlie, seeing this is our Nature to bee so vnconstant, especially in Gods matters, that wee are so easilie drawne to shake off the yoake of obedience, and so ready to fall into sin, and to breake the commandements of God: This must teach vs all a lesson of humilitie, not to presume too much of our owne strength; for wee are like a staffe in a mans hand, if he take away his hand, it wil down one way or other, it cannot stand of it selfe: Euen so fareth it with vs al, if the Lord take away his hand:Mat. 26. Alas wee shall then shew that wee are but weake and fraile men. It was Peters sinne that hee presumed too much of his owne strength; he thought himselfe so strong that he would neuer haue denied Christ; but being left to himselfe hee fell most fouly, and if Christ had not layde to his hand, hee had fallen euen into the gulfe of hell. It is the Deuils policie to make vs ouerweene our selues, and to presume of that, that (God wot) is not in vs, and all to bring vs to confusion, for Sathan knoweth well, that man is neuer nearer to destruction then when his heart is puffed vp with a vaine conceit of his owne worth, according to that of Salomon,Pro. 16.18. Pride goeth before destruction, and a high mind before the fall. And hence is that warning giuen by the Apostle: Let him that thinketh hee standeth, take heed least he fall. God hath not hired vs to labour in his Vineyard for an houre or two, neyther giueth vs liberty to depart out of his seruice when wee will, but we must perseuere, and hold out euen vntill the Euening of our dayes, and wee must dedicate to him both soule and bodie, both
 our life and death, both the beginning and end. Oh then let euery soule lay hold of this betimes, and learn hence, that seeing God alone is hee that must hold vs vp and support vs, that wee lay hold on the sweete mercy of God in Christ Iesus, and come boldly before the throne of his grace: aad not rashly presume too much vpon our owne strength and worthinesse; but rather rely vpon him, and seeke earnestly vnto him by prayer, that hee would support vs, and beare vs vp in his Armes, that wee run not vpon ground, and make shipwracke of faith and a good conscience ere wee bee aware: for we are very weake, and verie vnconstant of our selues, easily drawne away from our obedience to our God, verie apt to sin, if the Lord doe but a little leaue vs to our selues.
Thirdly, seeing wee are thus weake by nature, and so easilie drawn to sin against our God, and to breake  our couenant of obedience to his Word; that wee can stand no longer then he holds vs vp. As this should greatly humble vs, and break down our pride, and conceitednesse; so it should stirre vs vp to earnest prayer, night and day vnto our God, that hee would neuer leaue vs vnto our selues, that hee would not withdraw his fauourable presence from vs, and to leaue vs vnto our selues: for alas, then we shal quickly marre all, and cleane fall from God, and rush headlong into all sinne and wickednesse: for this is the nature of mankind, wee are all lyers, Truce-breakers, and Couenant breakers with our God, ready vpon euery occasion to fall into sinne, euery man by nature is lighter then vanity, most vnconstant in keeping our promises vnto God. Let vs then intreat the Lord that hee would knit our hearts vnto him, that wee might not starte aside,Psal. 119.8. Psal. 51. and with Dauid pray, O stablish mee with thy free spirit, that I may not moue through
 my owne weaknesse, from thee my God.



Euen there haue yee trespassed against mee.

HEre the Lord meets with these hypocrites, telling  them wherein they sinned; namely, in that they did most glory and most rely vpon,Wherein they sinned. their sacrifices and outward worship of God, wherein they did most glorie and boast themselues in, as a thing most like to please God. Euen in this they had fayled and transgressed and departed from Gods ordinances: For he did giue and prescribe vnto them these Ceremonies and Sacrifices, not as any part of Gods worship and seruice that could please him of themselues; but onely as helps of their weaknesse, and types and figures to lead them to Iesus Christ, the true propitiatory sacrifice, the onlie Lambe of God that takes away the sinnes of the world.
This was the very end of all those Sacrifices that God appointed them to offer, not that they could please God of themselues, but that they might be the meanes to bring them to true repentance: for when they should see their beast slaine, and their bloud shed, it might admonish them of their bloudie sinnes, and that they stood in need of the bloud of Christ for the pardon of them. This was the Lords Couenant, but they broke this, and euen in these sacrifices, the which they so gloried in, Euen there haue yee trespassed against mee, saith the Lord, euen there they failed, and abused Gods ordinances; and whereas they should haue beene helps to haue led them to true repentance, and faith in Christ Iesus, they now thought nothing lesse then of repentance, and of Iesus Christ, but perswaded
 themselues, that so long as they did offer their beasts, all was well, and the Lord was pleased with them, they had done inough to satisfie Gods anger for their sins. Thus they corrupted the true and onely vse of sacrifices, which were not to satisfie Gods anger for sinne, but onely to bring them to repentance, and to lead them to Christ Iesus.

Now wee come to the Doctrine.

 Hence mark a notable point of doctrine; namely, that that which is most excellent in the sight of Hypocrites and carnall men,That which is most excellent in the sight of an hypocrite is most abhominable in the sight of God. the same is most abhominable in the sight of God. And in that wherein they thinke they doe most please God, they do greatly sinne and offend him: As it is the nature of Hypocrites and time seruers, to glorie in their outward worship and seruice of God; they haue nothing to boast of, but that they bee Christians, are baptized, heare the Word, and receiue the Sacrament. Now marke what the Lord sayth, that euen herein they Transgressed against him, and sinned grieuouslie against him; why? namelie, because they performing these outward things, laboured not withall to find out the true vse and comfort of these things, as they boasted of their Sacifices; neuer looking to what end the Lord did ordaine them; namelie, as means to lead them to repentance, and so to Christ Iesus: Euen so manie as boast of their religion, how they bee Christians, haue been baptized: but alas, where is the true vse of Baptisme all this while? where is the death of sinne? the burying of sinne? the crucifying of sinne? which is the main end of Baptisme: this is neuer looked after of the greatest number: so men heare the Word, and they seeme to glorie in the same: but where is the power of the Word in working faith, repentance, obedience, knowledge, zeale, patience, humilitie? etc. And so for the Lorde Supper; but where
 is the right vse of this? how doe men grow in faith, knowledge, repentance, hatred of sinne, and care to honour God? Alas, these things are neuer thought of: so that here the Lord meetes with all these carnal Libertines and loose Professors; and shewes them that in that they do most glorie in, and boast of, euen there they sinne highly, and offend the Maiestie of God, so as hee cannot abide euen their best actions.
This truth is clearely to bee seene in diuers places of the Scripture: No doubt, but Cain pleased himselfe with his offering of sacrifice, but euen that was abhomination in Gods sight.Gen. 4.3. Pro. 15.8. Esay. 1.11 13. The sacrifices of the wicked are abhomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the righteous, is acceptable vnto him. Againe, the Prophet Esay doth notably set out the same: What haue I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices sayth the Lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, and of the fatte of fedde beasts, I desire not the bloud of Bullocks, of Lambs, nor of Goates. When yee come to appeare before mee, who requireth this of your hands to tread in my Courts? Bring no moe oblations in vaine: incense is abhomination vnto mee, I cannot suffer your New Moons, nor Sabbaths, my soule hateth them.
Behold here in this place, what esteeme these outward Ceremonies of Gods worship and seruice, were with the Lord; they thought themselues happy men in the performance of them, and hee most happy that offered most of them: but the Lord hee esteemes far otherwise of them; namely, being not done in faith, and true obedience, they were but abhomination in his sight, and were so farre from appeasing his wrath against sinne, as that they added vnto the measure of their sinnes. Againe, the Lord testifieth in another place by the same Prophet, saying, Hee that killeth a Bullocke is as if hee slew a man: hee that sacrificeth a sheepe,
 as if hee cut off a Dogs neeke, etc.Esay. 66.3. Psa. 66.18. Pro. 29.8. Io 9.31. Ps. 50.17. Micha. 6.6. If I regard wickednesse in my heart (saith the Prophet) The Lord will not heare me. Againe, Hee that turneth away his eares from hearing the Law, euen his Prayer shall bee abhominable. Again, God heareth not sinners. These places and the like, whereof the Scriptures are full, they serue to teach vs that what sacrifice soeuer the wicked offer, as prayer, thanksgiuing, receyuing of the Sacrament, hearing the Word, or the like, the same is abhomination to the Lord. So that we may hence safely conclude, the miserable estate of all wicked and vngodly men with that saying of the Prophet Hosea,Hos. 12.1. Ephraim is fed with the wind, and followeth after the East wind, hee encreaseth dayly lyes and destruction. So then, though the wicked say peace, peace, and thinke themselues sure, if they perform but the outward part of Gods worship and seruice:Psal. 2.3. yet Hee that dwelleth in Heauen, doth laugh them to scorne: for the Lord doth see that their day is comming.
 This may serue to condemne the Church of Rome, who thinke that they sufficiently please God, Ex opere operato, by the very deed done, though the same bee not done to the right end; nor in an holy manner in faith, repentance and true obedience, as their prayers in a strange tongue, sacrifice of the Masse, and a thousand the like; all which as they haue no footing in the Word of God; so they shall one day haue the reward of them, euen the portion reserued for hypocrites.
Secondly, this may seeme to direct vs to be wise,  neuer to content our selues to be baptized, to heare, to pray, to come to Church, receiue the Sacrament, and to perform the like duties of Gods worship and seruice; but that wee looke to the right vse of all these things, that we may find that worke wrought in our hearts* for which end the Lord hath appointed them, else alas wee shall but grieue the spirit of God, and euen
 our best actions shall bee but sinnes vnto vs, if wee beelike this people, to thinke it is inough to bee baptized with water, and not to feele the inward worke of the spirit; to heare the Word, and not to profit by it to faith and repentance, to pray with the lip, and not with the heart, to receyue the outward Sacrament, and not to feele our soules nourished by the body and bloud of Christ. Oh let vs not rest vpon such vaine things, such deceitfull vanity, such lying dreames, for they will deceiue vs in the end. And as for all wicked and vngodly men which rest so much vpon them, their trust shall bee but as the Spiders webbe, as Iob speaketh, which albeit to day is builded aloft,Iob. 8.14. yet to morrow is swept away. But of this before.






VERSE. 8.

Gilead is a City of them that worke iniquitie, and is polluted with bloud.

THe Prophet hauing in the former verse accused them to bee Couenant breakers with God, doth now proue the same by sundry examples of all estates amongst them, that as the Prophet sayth,Esay. 1.6. From the toppe of the head to the soale of the foot: All was out of order, and full of vncleannesse, So was it with this people here, from the Priest to the Leuite, and so to the common people; yea, euen the great men of the land, Ieroboam and his wicked Counsellers here are accused.

Gilead is a City of, etc.

Concerning this City wee read not much in the Word of God; but heere the Prophet doth note them to bee exceeding wicked people that dwelt in this City, full of sinne, deceit, iniquity, full of cruelty, and bloudy sinnes.
This City as wee may read, was one of the sixe Cities of refuge, whither, if a man had slaine a man at vnawares,Iosu. 20.8.9 and as wee say, by chance medley, then he was to flie thither, and there the Priests and Leuites making inquiry of the fact, if they found that the murder
 was of ignorance, and that hee hated not his brother in times past, but slew him against his will, then the murderer was to stay there til the death of the high Priest, and then he was at liberty againe.
Now this City,What City Gilead was. it was the place where the Priests and Leuites did dwell, which were set apart to teach the people, to instruct them, to offer sacrifice for them, and to pray for them; for they were to bee the light of the world: they must carry the Vrim and Thummim, light and perfection: And Gilead should haue beene as a speciall Sanctuary for holinesse, piety, and true religion, a Nurse, and Mother City to direct others, and as a fountaine from whence pure religion and the knowledge of God should haue beene deriued into all the land. But alas, the Prophet complaines of Gilead, that it was so farre from being a Nurse to Religion, that it was rather a cruell steppedame to banish Religion and piety; so farre from a holy City and Sanctuary of the Lord, that it was euen a denne of theeues, a harbour for all villany, impiety and prophanesse. Now this was a wonderful thing, that the Priests and Leuits, in whom there ought to haue shined great holinesse, that should haue bin an example to the common people, that all men seeing their good example, their holines and piety, might the rather haue followed them; that they should bee euen Captaines and ringleaders to all impiety, cruelty and miserable abhominations.
Then wee see why the Prophet is so sharpe to inueigh against Gilead, and to cry out against this City, namely, because it should haue heen a Sanctuary of the Lord, full of knowledge, piety and godlinesse: but the same was rather a denne of deuils, and an harbour for all manner of sinne and impiety.
Thus hauing seene the meaning of the wordes;
 now let vs see what Doctrines doe arise from them.
This is a grieuous accusation of the Lord, that that City of whom the Lord might expect most care, most holinesse and duties of religion, who should haue been most instructed in the wayes of God, hauing bestowed so many meanes vpon them, that they should thus degenerate and grow more vile then any other, to be the harbour of all sin and impiety.
 Then hence wee learne, that those places which haue great meanes of knowledge of instruction, and therfore should abound in all holy duties,Those that haue the greatest meanes of knowledge should abound most in holy duties. If they grow more wicked, and abound more with sin, their iudgement is fearefull and very grieuous. Wee see this in Gilead here, how the Lord complaines of it here, that those that should haue beene euen a Nurse to religion; yea, a Mother City from whence religion should haue flowed into the Country; was notwithstanding a wicked Citty, full of bloud, and full of all manner of iniquity. Euen so, whensoeuer the Lord comes to iudgement against a land, or against a kingdom, those Cities, Townes or Parishes, vpon whom the Lord hath bestowed most meanes, if they profite not by them, but bee like vnto Gilead here, full of bloudie sinnes, pride, swearing, lying, drunkennes, whoredome, couetousnesse, vsury, oppression, and the like; then the Lord doth shew his anger and displeasure most against them; as Gilead here, that should haue gone before others in piety and religion, hauing so many meanes, seeing they become so vile, as that they went before others in sinne, they went before others in punishment. And this wee shall find to bee most true by the course of the whole Scriptures, that those which haue had most meanes of knowledge and instruction, and so should goe before others in knowledge
 and Christian piety, if they haue not made a sanctified vse of the same, they haue euer receyued a greater measure of iudgement then others.
The Lord in the punishing of Ierusalem,Ezech. 9.7. bids them begin at his Sanctuary, because they should haue heen most holy, and were found to bee most wicked: So againe in another place, The enemy hath stretched out his hand vpon all her pleasant things:Lam. 1.10. for shee hath seene the heathen enter into her Sanctuary. Ierusalem that was called the beauty of perfection, and the wonder of the World, when shee became full of sinne and vncleannesse, then the Lord made her a spectacle of his iudgments aboue others.
This Doctrine is further cleared by the grieuous threatnings denounced by our Sauior Christ against those Cities where his Word had been preached and professed most, and the greatest part of his miracles had beene wrought and shewed:Mat. 11.21.22. Woe bee to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works which haue beene done in you, had beene done in Tyrus and Sydon, they had repented long agoe in sackcloth and ashes:Mat. 23.38. but I say vnto you, it shall bee easier for them in the day of iudgement then for you. And thou Capernaum which art lifted vp to heauen, shalt bee throwne downe to Hell, for if the great works which haue beene done in thee, had beene done amongst them of Sodom, they had remayned vnto this day. But I say vnto you, it shall hee easier for them in the land of Sodom in the day of iudgement then for thee.
These Cities of Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, they were such places as Christ had honoured aboue Tyrus, Sydon and Sodom, both in respect of the preaching of the Word, as also in respect of the myracles that were wrought amongst them: yet because they made no sanctified vse of them, but abounded in all manner of sinne and iniquity, therefore our Sauiour
 tels them that their iudgement shall bee heauier then those places that neuer heard the sound of the Word. And Gilead which before other Cities was honoured to bee a City of refuge, a Nursery of the Priests and Leuites, by which meanes the Lord might haue reaped much honour by it. Gilead being found a Citie of iniquity, must bee made a spectacle of Gods iudgement aboue other Cities.
Againe, let vs behold and marke where the  iudgements of God are in most grieuous manner executed, and wee shall see that in those places, especially which haue had more excellent meanes then others;Those places that haue had most meanes, shall bee most seuerely punished for the neglect thereof. where the Prophet of God and the Ministers of the Word haue a long time taken pains to instruct them in the wayes of God; there, I say, wee may behold the greatest calamity and distresses, because the Lord cannot abide that Gilead, that is, any place where hee bestowes much meanes, should so degenerate and grow worse then others; and that such places should abound in sinne. This is the reason, why the Lord taxeth Gilead here, euen because it was one of those sixe Cities of refuge,Mat. 23 38. Luk. 19. because it was the Nursery of the Priests and Leuites: This wee may see of Ierusalem, for there had our Sauiour bestowed his greatest paines, continually teaching and preaching amongst them in Ierusalem; he wrought there the greatest part of his wonderfull and heauenly miracles there, hither his Prophets and Apostles were sent to teach and instruct them in the Word of God, and to bring them home to Iesus Christ: yet for al this, our Sauiour was constrayned to weepe for the wofull misery of this City; yet for all this Ierusalem must be destroyed, defaced and extinguished, and made a spectacle of his wrath to all posterities for euermore. This is clearely to bee seene by those seuen Churches of Asia,Reu. 2.3. that
 sometimes were so famous in the world in the dayes of Saint Iohn. What is become of Ephesus, Philippi, Constantinople and Rome? so glorious Churches sometimes in the world? Are they not gone, and become the Cage of vncleane birds,2. Thes. 2.10. euen of Antichrist himselfe? who preuayleth in them that perish, because they receyued not the loue of the truth that they might bee saued. And therfore God hath sent them strong delusions to beleeue lyes. Surely, God in all ages of the world hath declared the same vnto vs, now peace, now persecution; peace being abused, the Lord hath not fayled to bring his iudgements vpon the sonnes of men. But of this before.
Well, seeing this is the righteous dealing of God  that those places which hee hath most priuiledged aboue others, and bestowed most meanes on aboue others, they shall drinke deeper of the cup of his anger, if they bee wicked and vngodly, liuing in sinne, then others that haue not enioyed the like fauours from God. Then it must teach vs all in the feare of God to looke about vs, that according to the meanes God doth bestow vpon vs, wee labour to bee answerable to the same in fruites, in knowledge, in faith, in repentance, and obedience, zeale, patience, etc. But aboue all things take wee heed, that wee doe not degenerate and grow worse then others to abound with iniquity, and impiety, with lying, deceit, swearing, couetousnesse, etc. For then let vs know that the Lord will make our punishment answerable to Tyrus and Sydon, yea to Sodom and Gomer; yea, their iudgements shall be lighter then ours, as our Sauiour sayth:Mat. 11.20.21 Ezech. 16.46.53. It shall bee easier for Sodom in the day of iudgement then for you. And the Lord by the Prophet Ezechiel threatneth thus, that because the iniquities of the people of Israel were like vnto the Sodomites; Therefore will I bring againe their
 captiuity, and the captiuity of Sodome and her Daughters: and the captiuitie of Samaria, and her daughters, euen the captiuity of thy Captiues in the middest of them. And surely, if wee shall grow worser then other places, and abound in sinne more then other men, how can wee but looke to reape a greater measure of punishment the^ other? There is no sin greater then the contempt of the Gospell, nor no mercy greater then the peaceable enioying of the liberty of the same, and therefore no punishment or reward of sinne shall be more horrible then the punishment that shall bee infflicted for the neglect or contempt thereof. Oh take wee heed then least we contemne the Gospell, and so being found guilty of one of the greatest sinnes, wee incurre Gods wrath against vs, and cause him to bring vpon vs his greatest punishments.
Secondly, seeing the Lord doth threaten heere,  euen Gilead, one of those sixe Cities of refuge, and the Citty that was inhabited with the Priests and Leuites,Religion is not tyed to one place. that euen Gilead should bee cut off and slaine, as in the fift verse going before; that is, that God would bring to passe vpon Gilead all those threatnings which his seruants the Prophets had denounced in his name. Hence wee see that Religion and the worship of God is not tyed to any place, to any kingdome, towne or City, no longer then they doe walke in the duties of Religion, and of the true seruice and worship of God; yea, if Ierusalem that holy City, the wonder of the world, that place which God himselfe had chosen; fall from God, and beginne to forsake his son Christ, and to contemn his sonne Christ: Ierusalem then must looke for heauy plagues, and grieuous iudgements: yea, if Gilead that was so priuiledged aboue other Cities and places of the world, will not walke holily and beare themselues thankefully in the daies of peace, the
 Lord will not fayle to bring, euen vpon Gilead, many plagues and grieuous iudgements against sinne. Oh then, if all things that are written, bee written for our learning, then let the iudgement of God vpon this City, bee a warning to vs all: Wee haue by Gods mercy the pure seruice and worship of God, his Gospell sincerely preached, and taught amongst vs, almost these threescore years together. Now let vs see, whether our case bee not like the state of Gilead: they were grieuous sinners, so are we; amongst them were found many great and grieuous sinnes; a Citie that abounded with all manner of iniquitie, as swearing, lying, deceit, murder, oppression, vncleanesse, etc. and are not wee guilty of the same sinnes? yes, yes, they were neuer more plenty in Gilead then they are in England; and therefore wee may well feare, that wee that haue beene like to Gilead in sinne, shall one day be like to them in their punishment.
The Lord by his Prophet Amos hath threatned there a great and a grieuous iudgement against the neglect and contempt of his Word, and other the gracious meanes that hee doth vouchsafe vnto vs for our good: Behold, the dayes come, sayth the Lord,Amos. 8.11. that I will send a Famine into the Land, not a famine of bread, or thirst of water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord. Oh it is greatly to bee feared, that wee may one day feele the smart of this iudgement, the want of the Word, and glorious Gospell of Christ, that made so light account of the same in the time of peace: then shall wee mourne, then shall wee lament, then shall wee lye in the dust, then wee shall weepe and wayle, and wring our hands, and wish that wee might heare, if it were, but one Sermon, to comfort our distressed Soules: And in very deed, if wee consider Gods dealing towards vs, wee may see that these blacke stormy dayes
 are drawing on: Doth not the Lord picke out from amongst vs, the most renowned men from Church and common wealth, the pillars of the Church, and stayes of Religion? doth not the Lord euen by this meanes giue vs a faire warning, that vnlesse we amend and become sincere Christians, and bee zealous in his seruice and worshippe, and more highly esteeme of his blessed Word and glorious Gospell, that hee will euen remoue all from vs, Shall we thinke, that the Lord, who thus seuerely plagued Gilead and Ierusalem, these Cities that were so famous in the world, that hee will spare vs, but that he will doe to vs as he hath done to them, and remoue the Candlesticke out of his place? For the Lord ca^not abide or indure to see his most blessed word and glorious Gospell to be contemned and troden vnder foot.
 Last of all, seing the Lord expects that those places which hauing great meanes, should bring foorth most fruit; let vs labor to answere the Lords expectation heerein. The Earth that drinketh in the raine that commeth oft vpon it,Heb. 6.7. and bringeth foorth herbes meete for them by whom it is dressed, receiueth blessing of Ged. But that which beareth Thornes and Briers, is depriued and is neere to cursing, whose end is to be burned. Oh then as wee desire a blessing and to be approued of God, let the fruit of our hearing and profession appeare that wee beare not Thornes, for then woe vnto vs: but that we,Tit. 2. Denie vngodlinesse and worldly lusts: and liue soberly and iustly in this present world.


And is polluted with blood.

THe meaning is as I take it, they were crafty to couer blood, for when as a Murderer had slaine a man euen willfully and of a set purpose he would then
 flie to this City, being a City of refuge, and there the Priests who were put in trust to examine the matter, how the murther was done, whether wittingly of purpose, and that vpon some old grudge, or whether of ignorance against his will. These Priests being couetous and greedy of gain, would for a peece of money, smooth ouer the matter, they would shelter the wilful murderer, and craftily hide his sinne, which ought to haue beene punished with death, because the Law was straight against this sinne; Hee that shedeth mans bloud, by man shall his bloud bee shed: But they being couetous, and not regarding Gods Law, would hide his murder, and shelter and shrowde it, and couer it so craftily, that hee should escape vnpunished, and neuer come to his answere. And for this very cause doth Almighty God charge this City with the bloud of these men, and cals it a City polluted with bloud.
So then this being the sinne of these Priests, for  gaine to iustifie the wicked, and to couer his sinne for a golden fee.For no worldly respect must men bee drawne to peruert iustice. Wee may conclude this third point of Doctrine, that for no worldly respect whatsoeuer, should men bee drawne to peruert iustice, to colour sinne. It was the sin of this City of the Priests and Leuites, those which were put in trust from God to enquire, and to finde out the wilfull Murderer, and euen to take Ioab from the ^ornes of the Altar; that they should for money shew him fauour, and couer his sinne, and let murder escape vnpunished.Deu. 16.8. It was a speciall precept that Moses gaue to the Magistrate, Wrest not thou the Law, nor respect any person, neyther take reward, for reward blind the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words of the iust, It was sayd of Balaam,Num. 2.3. That hee had the reward of Soothsaying in his hands. But Magistrates must not haue the reward of iniustice in their hands: for as the Apostle condemnes those that make Marchandize
 of the Word of God; so those are no lesse condemned that make Marchandize of Iustice: Woe bee vnto him that iustifieth the wicked for reward,Esay. 5. and taketh away the righteousnesse of the righteous from him. The Lord cannot indure that those whom hee hath placed in his stead as petty Gods vpon earth, that they should turn the sword of Iustice to the hurt of the innocent, and iustifying of the wicked.
We may note hence, that it is a fearefull thing when  men grow to bee cunning how to sinne, and to be their crafts master; for then men are boldned in sin, and sin without controlment; when they are so cunning that they can sinne smoothly, and none shall see it; that can steale, so as no man can perceyue, and commit whoredome vnder a Canopie; when men grow cunning and crafty to hide their sinnes; this is a dangerous thing, for this will embolden such men in sinne, it were farre better for a man if hee sinne, to sinne so, that hee know not how to couer it, or cloake it; for then hee will the sooner be brought to repentance, then that hee know how to cloake and to couer the same, and to keepe it from the knowledge of the world: for howsoeuer in the opinion of the world, they be the onely wise men that can smooth ouer their sins, and commit them so, as none can see them or know them, that bee their crafts master: yet indeed, of all other their case is most dangerous, and there is little hope that they will leaue their sins, and be ashamed for them, for that their cunning and crafty hiding of their sinnes, doth embolden them therein.






VERSE 9.

And as theeues wayte for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent: for they worke mischiefe.

HEre the Prophet proceeds to more particular euils, and taxeth the Priests who should haue been guides to the people, to instruct and direct them: that they became euen murderers of their poore soules. And after he comes to the people, and shewes that they were full of abhominable vices: and no maruell, Like Priest, like people; If the guides bee blind, they must needs rush both into the ditch: And if the Ring-leaders and Captaines bee so vile, so wicked, and so prophane, alas, what can bee expected of the common people, but ignoranee, and miserable blindnes.
Concerning the Priests, the Prophet speakes more sharply, that they were no better then wilfull murderers of the soules of the people, and that they were like to robbers, who doe deuise aforehand how they may bring their purposes to passe: Euen so these Priests, they mused how they might by false doctrine spoyle the people of God.

1 Reg. 12.31When Ieroboam came to bee King in the roome of Salomon, hee banished the Leuites, and made of the basest of the people, and the vilest of them, to be Priests in the seruice of God, and who would might be made a Priest of Ieroboam. And these fellowes being set ouer the people, they vvere no better then wilfull murdesers: for they did seeke to draw the poor people from God to Idolatry, and so murdered their poor soules.
Obiect. But vvhy doth the Ptophet here compare the Priests to open theeues, and common robbers?
Answ. First, because as theeues doe often pretend fauour and friendship, as though they would direct a man the right way, and yet prey vpon them, and kill them, to get their goods: Euen so these Priests they would seeme to bee as Fathers, and as guides to this people: but herein they sought only their own gain, though it were with the bloud of the people. Secondly, because as theeues are cruell and mercilesse; so these Priests, they were exceeding cruell, and vsed great tyranny, not onely by poysoning their soules by false doctrine; but if any did make conscience of the true seruice of God, they did cry out vpon him as an heretieke, worthy to bee punished. That this was the behauiour of these Priests, wee may reade at large in the Propesie of Amos,Amos 7.12. where wee may see, how Amaziah sent to Ieroboam, and makes a large complaint of Amos, as though the land were not able to beare his words; and yet hee spake no more then the Lord bade him, and hee is straightly commaunded to flie into Iuda and prophesie there: but to come no more at Bethel: For it is the Kings chappel and the Kings Court.
Hence then let vs obserue, that seeing the Prophet here compares these Priests which deceiued the
 people, and did not instruct them, to theeues and  murderers; What wee are to iudge of those, which hauing taken vpon them the care of soules,Ministers that teach not at all, or else teach erronious doctrine, no better then Theeues and Murderers. Ezech. 3.17. 1. Sam. 9.9. Esay. 58.1. Pro 9.4. Exech. 47. 2. Pet. 1.13. 1. Cor. 3. Luke 12.24. Mat. 23.24. 1. Pet. 5.1. yet eyther teach them not at all, or else teach them false and erronious doctrine. The Spirit of God doth call them here Theeues and Murderers. Their names in the Scripture doth teach their duties. They are called Watchmen: And thou Sonne of man I haue made thee a Watchman. They are called Seers, Trumpeters, Maidens, and the like.
And their Successors in the New Testament are called not onely the Eyes, yea, The Light of the body; but Remembrancers, Husbandmen, Stewards, Leaders, Elders, Salt, Starres, Angels, Shepheards, and the like: All which names doe import vnto vs, that their calling requires labour and industry: for wherefore are they called Watchmen, but to admonish, and to giue warning, it is their duty so to doe: Seers, but to foretell: Trumpeters, but to sound: Maydens, but to keepe pure the Word of God, and the Doctrine of Life: Remembrancers, to put in mind: Husbandmen, to prepare the ground of mens hearts, and to sow the seed of Gods Word: Stewards, to distribute to euery man his portion in due season: Leaders, to goe before their people in life and Doctrine: Elders, to gouerne: Salt, to season, Stars, to shine, and Angels, to declare.
Oh thus their very names doth put them in mind of their duty: but when men do take vpon them this holy Calling to Feed the flocke of Christ, depending vpon them, and they feed themselues, and not their Flocke: The Lord doth esteeme of them no better then theeues and murderers. And looke what charge Ahab had concerning Benhadab, the selfe same hath euery Minister concerning euery Soule
 committed vnto him:1. Reg. 20.39. Io. 10. Keepe this man, if hee bee lost and want, that is, by thy default, Thy Life shall goe for his life. And our Sauiour speaking of such Hyrelings as regard nothing but their gaine, not the peoples good; hee cals them Theeues and Robbers; all false Prophets, all idle Ministers, all carelesse Pastors, the Lord doth esteeme of them but as Murderers of soules, which is the greatest. Which being so, then let euery Minister stirre vp his watchfulnesse and care, and though the faithfull discharge of his duty cannot but purchase him the malice of many; yet let euery faithfull Minister bee content to make exchange of such friends for the fauour of God, that so hee may not be found in the day of Gods searching account to bee a Murderer of their soules.
 Well, this should admonish all that haue charge of Soules, to looke about them, to regard the soules of Gods people, to instruct them, and to teach them to take heed they bee not guilty of their bloud: for if thy people perish for want of thy helpe, Oh thou shalt answere for them. Now of all Murderers, Soule-murderers bee in a wofull case: It is a dangerous thing to murder the body, but it is a thousand times worse to murder the Soule for looke how much more excellent the soule is then the body, so much the more dangerous is the murdering of the soule then the body. Excellent is that exhortation of the Apostle Peter:1. Pet. 5.23. Feede the Flocke of God which dependeth on you, caring for it, not by constraine, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as though yee were Lords ouer Gods Heritage, but that yee may bee ensamples to the Flocke: And when that chiefe shepheard shall appeare, yee shall receiue an incorruptible Crowne of glory. If wee doe not thus labour but loyter in the Lords Vineyard, wee cannot assure our selues to bee the Ministers of the Lord, but
 with these Priests and Leuites here, Robbers and spoilers, nay Murderers and Manslayers, making a prey of the peoples soules, and expose them as a prey for Sathan: And what, wil the Lord put vp this sinne at the hand of such men? surely no; for when that great Shepheard shall appeare, they shall then beare the burthen, not onely of their owne sinnes, but of the sinnes of the people that belonged vnto their charge, and their bloud shall bee layde to their charge.
This should admonish all those which haue charge  of soules, to looke about them, to regard the soules of Gods people,2. Tim. 4.1.2 to Preach the Word is season and out of season; for, if we bee thus diligent, the greatest labour shall haue the greatest reward:Dan. 12.3. They that turne many to righteousnesse, shall shine as the starres for euer and euer. Those the which imployed so their Masters goods as that they gained by the same, were accounted faithful seruants, the ioy of their Master was their portion; whereas those that were loyterers, that would doe nothing but bury their Talents, vtter darknesse was their inheritance.
Oh that all that are called to this holy calling, would lay this to heart, the greater paines, the greater comfort; and howsoeuer wee may bee discouraged in that wee see so little fruit to follow our labours;1. Cor. 15. Yet our labour shall not bee in vaine in the Lord: for the faithfulnesse of a godly Minister in the discharge of his place, shall bee his comfort in life, his comfort in death, and his euerlasting ioy, and reioycing after death. And howsoeuer God doth not touch the hearts of our hearers at one time, he may at another, times and seasons are in his hands: Let vs vse the meanes to sow vnto them spirituall things, and commit the successe of our labours vnto God, seeing Paul planteth,1. Cor. 3.6.7. Apollo watereth, but it is God that giueth the encrease.

Thirdly and lastly, wee see what a heauy iudgement of God it is to haue such set ouer a people, as be rauening Wolues and cruell murderers of soules; for then it may bee sayd, Like Priest, like people: an ignorant, prophane, couetous Minister, a vile, ignorant, and prophane people; and therfore in the three first Chapters of the Reuelation, wee shall find, that what fault soeuer the Lord finds there with the Minister, the people are guilty of the same: If the Minister be reproued, they are reproued: If the Minister be praised, so bee they: And on the contrary, to haue a carefull Moses, or a painefull Paul to bee set ouer vs, it is counted a singular testimony of Gods loue, and a great mercy of God: for if the Minister bee painefull and carefull to teach in season, and out of season, it must needs be that the people will bee wise, full of knowledge, zeale, patience, and all heauenly graces: Oh then let vs pray vnto the Lord to remoue that iudgement, if it bee on vs; and intreat the Lord to shew vs that mercy, that we may not haue a cruell murdering Priest of Baal, but a true Prophet of God, that may watch ouer our soules, as one that must giue account of them at the last day,Io 21. Act. 28.20. Ezech. 34. that may feed the sheepe and Lambes of Christ with the pure and wholesome food of Gods word, and not with the stinking trash of mans inuention.
 Againe seeing those Priests of Baal which were but theeues and murderers in the sight of God, set themselues to inuent cursed councell against the Prophets and people of God,Nature of the wicked to deuise all the mischiefe they can against the godly. to deuise mischiefe against them, and then to practise it as occasion was offered: we may from hence obserue the nature of false Prophets, whom Christ cals theeues and murderers. They seeke to deuise all the mischiefe they can against the true Prophets of God, and to the vttermost of their power
 practise and effect it. That of Amaziah against Amos doth manifest the same,Amos. 7.1^. and that conspiracy against Ieremy, when no means else could serue; Come, let vs deuise some euill against Ieremy,Ier. 18.18. and smite him with the tongue. So they confesse,Dan. 6.5. they could find no fault against godly Daniel, vnlesse it were the worshipping of his God: they sought out many things against him, but nothing could they find, but euen his piety and religion; and when all other meanes fayled, that was matter sufficient to worke vpon; but their mischiefe fell vpon their owne pate, and they spunne a threed to hang themselues withall. Alike plotte and practise against the Church, wee see in the dayes of Mordecai and Esther, when Haman was exalted,Hest. 3.1.6.13. and his seat set aboue all the Princes of the Kingdome: hee thought it too little to lay hands on Mordecai, and therefore hee layde his plotte to destroy all the Iewes young and old, in one day. And this is plentifully taught vs in the booke of the Lamentations,Lam. 5.4. Our necks are vnder persecutors, wee are weary, and haue no rest, etc. These places teach vs, that the enemies of Gods Church (howsoeuer many times they couer the depth of their hearts) are full of all vnrighteousnes, wickednesse, enuy, murders, haters of God without naturall affection, mercilesse without humility and humanity. But of this else where.
Let all such men as be like to Ieroboams Priests, that  set their cursed heads a worke against the Lord, and against his true and faithfull seruants; let them know, that this mischiefe, the which they now so craftily deuise, is not so much against man, as it is against God; Hee that heareth you heareth mee, and hee that despiseth you, despiseth mee: So that they doe but striue against the streame, and shall in the end draw downe the heauie wrath of God vpon them.

And let it admonish all those which doe deuise euill against Syon, against Gods truth, and against his holie Seruants, and the professors of his name; let them know, that they doe it to the dishonour of God, and he will one day call them to account for it; Touch not mine Annointed, and doe my Prophets no harme. And this their mischieuous imagination against the Lord, and his truth, shal not prosper.
 Secondly, seeing this is the portion of Gods children to find such hard dealing from the wicked; wee are here to consider the cause of it, it is not for euill, but for goodnesse sake,Esay. 59.5. Whosoeuer refrayneth from euill, maketh himselfe a prey. This was the estate of the Church, euen from righteous Abel, whose bloud cried for vengeance. Consider then what manner of Religion it is that wee take vpon vs to professe, euen that the which hath the Sunne, Moone, and Starres against it: Our Sauiour himselfe telleth vs what will follow the profession of the Gospell: I came not to send peace into the earth,Mat. 10.34. but the sword: For I came to set a man at vaiance with his father, etc. We must take notice of this aforehand, before wee giue vp our names to Christ: that this must bee our entertainement in the World, and at the hands of wicked men; that so these crosses which shall happen vnto vs heere, may not any way daunt vs, but that wee bee still prepared for them.


By Consent.

 Note here, that it was not the sinne of one or two, or some few of the Priests,Councels may erre, and Magistrates and Ministers in matters of Faith and manners. that had thus sinned against the Lord, but it was the sin of the multitude of them; they all confederate together, and ioyne in one, both in condemning the innocent, and iustifying of the nocent. From whence wee learne, that Rulers and Ministers of a particular visible Church, may erre in matters
 of faith and manners, and that councels haue been against the Lord, and against his Church. Which Doctrine is very cleare by diuers places in the booke of God, as that of the Prophet Esay,Esay. 6.10. The Watchmen are all blind, they bee a sleepe, and delight in sleeping. Now in what state could this people be in, when their Watchmen were blind, those that were the heads and guides of the people. Againe,2. Chr. 36.14 All the chiefe of the Priests also, and of the people, trespassed wonderfully, according to all the abhominations of the Heathen, and polluted the house of the Lord, which hee had sanctified in Ierusalem. And this doth the Prophet Ieremy shew, when hee sayth;Ier. 3.5. I will get mee to the great men, and will speake vnto them, for they haue known the way of the Lord* and the iudgement of their God; but these haue altogether broken the yoake, and burst the bones. This is cleared by the Prophet Hosea,Hos. 7.7. when hee sayth, They are all hote as an Ouen, and haue deuoured their Iudges, all their Kings are fallen,Mich. 6.16. there is none amongst them that calleth vpon mee, sayth the Lord. This is that which the Apostle confesseth in his prayer. Why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vaine things?Ps. 2 1. Act. 4.25.26.27. Mat. 26.66. The Kings of the earth assembled, and the Rulers came together against the Lord, and against his Christ: For doubtlesse, against thy holy Sonne Iesus, whom thou hast annointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel gathered themselues together. In the daies of Ahab, did not all the men of Israel, euen the Elders and Gouernours thereof, the Nobles and others assembled themselues together, and pronounced death against innocent Nabaoth, for his Vineyard sake, the which hee had before denied vnto Ahab? surely, the Scriptures are full of examples, to confirme the truth of this point vnto vs. Now this thing so comes to passe in the wicked, because as our Sauiour sayth, No man can gather grapes of thornes, or figges of thistles; they
 themselues being euill, can they performe that is good? Surely, as Saint Iames sayth, Out of one fountaine cannot come sweet water and bitter. Besides this, our knowledge is but in part; now ignorance is the mother of error.
 The Doctrine being thus cleared as a certaine truth, that Councels may erre in matters of Faith, and Manners; this may serue in the first place to conuince the Doctrine of the Papists, which teach and maintaine, that their Church cannot erre, nor a Councell being the representatiue Church, as though the Spirit of God were at their commandement, and were tyed to places and persons, or being present, did lead them into all truth, as it did the Apostles; but what, did not foure hundred false Prophets aduise Ahab to that which was contrary to the Will of God? I but sayth the Iesuite, they were not assembled by the High Priest, but onely by the King: But what say yee then to that Councell that was assembled by the High Priest, and haue erred most fouly? In Iohn, we haue mention made there of a Councell that met together,Io. 9.22. Mar. 14.64. and decreed to excommunicate all that professed Christ Iesus. Tell mee, did not they erre? And therefore it is but a vaine thing of the Papists to say, and affirme, that the Spirit of God is tyed to the Church of Rome, and that shee cannot erre; but there was neuer so famous a Church since the Apostles time, but haue erred in some thing or other in Doctrine of Faith, or Manners; and therefore Rome hath no such a priuiledge as shee pretends to haue; but hath and doth erre most fouly; yea, as blinde guides, leading poore blind soules, shall at last (without Repentance) fall into the pitte of destruction together.
 Seeing that the wicked plot and combine themselues
 against the Church; Wee are taught here our duety, namely, to bee solicitors and remembrancers vnto God, in the behalfe of his Church; that it would please him to bee mercifull to his Church, and to bee vnto them a Tower of defence.
And surely, now is the time that wee are to ply the Lord with prayers, because wee see his enemies to increase dayly, the malicious and bloudy Papists, whose Religion, as it is a Religion of bloud, so is their practice, the practise of bloud. Yee shall know them by their fruites; a Religion to be abhorred of euery true Christian, being the Nurserie of Treasons,Gun-powder Treason. and the Mother of all abhominations: yet wee see how the number of them increase dayly, and wee cannot but for euer remember their horrible Treasons pretended against the Lord, and against his Church, and Gods mercy to vs in our Deliuerance. Well, it cannot bee, that they will bee quiet long, their good Maister the Deuill, or his deare Child the Pope, will haue some imployment for them; They cannot but go whom the Deuill driues.
Oh let it bee our wisedome, to intreat the Lord to stand still by his Church, and to giue vnto all Christian Princes the Spirit of zeale, and of courage, to rise vp against Antichrist and his followers, that so they may the better assure themselues of their owne peace, both with God and themselues; for sure it is the more strict a Papist, the more grounded Traytor.
Thirdly, and lastly: wee may hence obserue  the difference betweene the Elect and the Reprobate. The wicked doe not onely thinke euill, and deuise mischiefe, but they doe most eagerly practise
 the same. Now come to the Child of God, hee hath in him indeed wicked thoughts and sinnefull desires: yet so, as they doe bridle them, curbbe them, and restraine them, and not suffer them to come into action; they sinne not with greedinesse as the wicked doe, who are neuer well till they are eyther deuising mischiefe, or working iniquity. Oh then let vs take heed that wee commit not sinne with delight and greedinesse: for sure it is, this is a note of a gracelesse heart, and no better indeed then a brand of a Reprobate.






VERSE. 10.

I haue seene villany in the house of Israel: there is the whoredome of Ephraim: Israel is defiled.

THe Prophet now comes to the common people, and doth accuse them of villany and vile Idolatry against God: I haue seene villany in the house of Israel: there is the whoredome of Ephraim; Israel is defiled.
First, for the coherence of this verse with the former: When as the Lord had accused the Priests before to bee wicked, and exceeding bad men: And now comes to the common people, and layes open their sinnes to bee like vnto the Priests, ful of abhominable and vile Idolatry:
Wee learne hence, that if the Priests be naught, if they bee vile and filthy persons, Children of Belial, it is not possible the people should be as they ought to bee; for Like Priest, like people.As the Minister is, so is the people. This is clearely to bee seene in this place, the Priests were like to theeues and murderers, and the people were monstrous blinde and abhominable Idolaters: So
 hath it beene in all ages:Pro. 29.18. The words of Salomon are most true, Where vision failes, there the people decay. It is the Decree of God touching Priest and people,Mal. 2.7. The Priests lippes shall preserue knowledge, and the people shall heare the Law at his mouth. Now then, when this Priest is ignorant, blind and vaine, Alas, in what wofull estate must this people needs bee in? the Prophet Micha doth declare,Mich. 3.11.12. saying, The Priests teach for hire: And the Prophets prophesie for money: yet will they leane vpon the Lord, and say; Is not the Lord amongst vs? no euill can come vpon vs. This was the behauiour of the Priests in those dayes, their hearts were so set vpon Couetousnesse, that they spake pleasant things vnto the people, and layde to please them more then God: But what followed, they by this drew the iudgements of God not onely vpon their owne heads, but also vpon the heads of the people: Therefore shall Sion for your sakes bee plowed as a Field, and Ierusalem shall bee a heape, and the mountaine of the house, as the high places of the Forrest.
The false Prophets did not onely procure Gods wrath against themselues, but the common people were punished for their sakes. It is that which our Sauiour himselfe concludeth of, If the blind leade the blinde, they both fall into the ditch: And in the Reuelation,Reu. 3.14. that Church being committed to a wicked man, they were guilty of the same sinnes with their Pastour. And in those Epistles sent to the seuen Churches in Asia, where the Pastor is commended for any vertue: so are the people, and when the Pastor is reproued for any vice, the people also haue part in the same reproofe. For such as the Pastors bee, such bee the people; such as the Shepheards bee, such bee the Sheepe. In them lyes the bad or the good estate of the Flocke. For where the Minister
 is blinde, ignorant and dumbe, that neyther can nor will reach: where hee is carelesse and vnconscionable, liues solely and wickedly; how can it chuse but the people must needes bee ignorant, blinde and vnskilfull in Gods matters, prophane, wicked, and irreligious?
This is proued indeed by wofull experience in the World; Goe to any Towne or Parrish in the land, where there liues a carelesse and vnconscionable Minister, an ignorant sot, a beastly liuer, a miserable worldly man, that seldome or neuer preacheth, and when hee doth, so colde and so raw, as good neuer a whitte, as neuer the better: You shall finde generally sinne to raigne in that place, the people like their Pastor, blinde, ignorant, rude, so simple, and so ignorant in Gods matters, that they know nothing of the Scriptures, what Faith, Sacrament, Repentance, or New birth meanes; no, not the meaning of one Article of their Faith, or petition in the Lords prayer.
Seeing the state of a Congregation doth depend  so vpon the Pastor: This serueth to reproue all such Ministers as take this charge on them, and yet not as Gods Ministers to preach the Word, to bring good tyding of the Gospell, doe seldome or neuer preach the Word of God. These the Lord doth not esteeme as Ministers, but Murderers, not Shepheardes, but Wolues; they will take the dignity but doe no duty.
The Prophet Esay cryes out against such Pastors,Io. 21. Esay. 66. calling them Dumbe Dogges that cannot barke: They looke to the Fleece, but not to the Flocke.
Secondly, this reproues such as leaue the sincere Milke of the Word of God, and teach their own


 fantasies, their owne dreames, Toyes, and Fables, which doe not labour to make the people to vnderstand the sense and doctrine of the Scriptures; and hence it comes to passe, that though they teach and preach, yet they finde little fruit, few conuerted, because they teach not Gods Message, but their owne deuises.
Thirdly, such as are reprooued, as in bringing the Lords Messuage, and deliuering it to the people, seeke not the honour of God, and the credite of their Master that sent them, but their owne credite and honour: Neyther doe they desire to preach Iesus Christ plainely in the euidence of the Spirite, but in the intising Words of mans wisedome: Yea, whereas Saint Paul had rather speake fiue wordes in a knowne tongue to edifie,1. Cor. 14. then fiue thousand in a strange tongue: Some there bee who thinke they neuer speake wel, vnlesse they speake so as none can vnderstand.
And here also wee may note the folly of our common people, who doe they esteeme and account of as a good Preacher, but hee that speaketh eloquentlie in a strange tongue? him, whom they vnderstand least, they commend most: And no maruell, for they learne nothing at such a Sermon; therefore they admire it, and commend the man, least they should seeme to say nothing.
 Seeing this is so, Like Priest, Like People; Wicked Priest, Wicked people; carefull Pastor, good Sheepe; for Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, and Obedience. Then wee see that a good Gouernour, Pastor, and Minister is a singular blessing of God, that not onely can, but is willing to take all possible paines to doe good, to teach in season, and out of season, to bee like a Cocke, first, to awake himselfe, by reading,
 meditation and prayer: and secondly, the people by his Crowing, like a Candle that spendes himselfe to giue comfort to others: such a one is a maruellous blessing of God when hee is bestowed vpon a people: for when the Lord would shew his loue to the people, hee sayth; I will giue them Pastors after my owne heart, Such as should watch ouer their soules, to feed, to instruct, and to comfort them. Oh how should men with thankefull hearts blesse God, when they haue such set ouer them!
But on the contrary part, it is a feareefull iudgement of God to liue vnder such as bee blinde, ignorant, vnconscionable, prophane, wicked, and irreligious: for how can they teach and instruct others that are ignorant themselues? And how can they seeke to conuay grace to others,Mat. 18. Ier. 3.^4. that haue not tasted of the worke of grace themselues: If the blinde lead the blinde they both fall into the ditch together. And by the Prophet Ieremie, the Lord there threatneth this as a grieuous plague, to giue them naughty Ministers.
It seemes the Prophet had no reason to accuse the poore people, and to complaine of them: alas, they did but as the Priests taught them, they meant well.
Answere. Neyther the euill life, and ignorance of the Priests, nor yet their owne intent and purpose could any whit excuse them: so long as they liued in sinne: But wee see here that the Lord complains of them, that hee saw villany in the house of Israel: There is the whoredome of Ephraim, Israel is defiled.
Hence then wee learne, that neyther the wickednesse of the Priests and Gouernours, nor yet the good intent and meaning of the people can please God, or any way excuse themselues, if men liue in
 sinne, in impietie; and prophanesse. They are farre wide, that thinke their ignorance will excuse them.
 Ignorance may excuse indeede a tanto, but neuer a toto: Ignorance may lessen faults; but not change their natures;Ignorance will excuse none if they liue in sinne. sinne shall still be sinne, though a man doe the same neuer so ignorantly: for as men are commaunded to take notice of the Princes Lawes, and being found to trespasse against them, their ignorance shall not excuse them: so the Lord hath straightlie commaunded vs to take notice of his Lawes, that so we may performe our obedience vnto him. The Commandement of God to this end is very staight: These words which I commaund thee this day,Deu. 6.6.7.8. shall be in thy heart: and thou shalt rehearse them continually vnto thy Children, and shalt talke of them when thou tarriest in thy house, and as thou walkest by the way: when thou lyest downe, and when thou risest vp, and thou shalt binde them for a signe vppon thy hand, etc.
Behold here what a straight charge the Lord hath giuen vnto the people of Israel, and so vnto vs; all to this end, that no man should bee a Stranger vnto the Word: And it is the commandement of our Sauiour,Io. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for they are they that testifie of mee.
Act. 17.It was the great commendations of the men of Bereah, that they searched the Scriptures, to see whether those thinges were so as Paul deliuered; they would not presentlie entertaine that Doctrine of theirs vpon the first view, but brought the same to the Touchstone of Gods Word: neyther would they reiect it, though they had not before heard of the like.
2. Cor. 4.3.What meanes that place of the Apostle? Trie the Spirits whether they bee of God. And againe, If the
 Gospell bee hidde, it is hid to those that perish, in whom the God of this world hath blinded their minds.
So that it is most cleare, that Ignorance of the Word and glorious Gospel of Christ in such as ought to know it, is a most fearefull sinne, and a most certaine fore runner of destruction: for if this bee life eternall,Ioh. 17.3. To know thee to bee the true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent; Then on the other part it must needs bee the beginning of eternall death in those, especially in these dayes that are ignorant of the true God, and Iesus Christ whom hee hath sent.
So that wee see clearely, that it is not our good intents and meanings that will goe for payment at Gods handes, in that the Lord doth require, that all men should take notice of his Will, reuealed in his Word.
This condemnes the horrible practise of the  Papists, that maintaine all Idolatry and superstition, their Masse, Inuocation of Saints, Prayer for the dead, Worshipping of Images, etc. And they thinke that so long as they meane well, and haue good intents and purposes, all is well, God cannot but bee pleased with them: But wee are taught heere another Lesson; namely, that that is not good which we thinke good; but that the Lord allowes and aproues of for good: And therefore seeing the Lord abhors all Idolatry and superstition, as most abhominable in his sight, and that therein the whole seruice and worshippe of God amongst the Papists doth consist. It shall little auaile them one day that they stand vpon their good intents and meanings: All these shall not bee worth a button, if the Lord can say of them, as hree of this people, I see villany amongst them, Idolatry, worshipping stockes and stones, praying to Saints, etc.

This is villany in Gods account: and then what will their good meaning stand them in stead? Had not Vzza a good intent to stay the Arke from falling; but the Lord doth not so take it at his handes, for it cost him his life; And therfore sayth Samuel vnto Saul, To obey,1. Sam. 15. is better then Sacrifices; and to hearken, is better then the fatee of Rams.
Oh then remember that thy ignorance will not excuse thee, nor thy good meanings will not goe for payment at Gods hand; to say, though I doe this and this, I meane well as the best of them all: but if the Lord like not of it, nor approue of it, bee thy intent what it will bee, all is in vaine, the same is an abhomination to the Lord.
 Secondly, this may serue to condemne a great many amongst vs, that notwithstanding wee liue in such an age and time, that both knowledge and grace is euen thrust vpon vs: yet alas, doe not the very body of our Congregations remayne ignorant still? This is the condemnation that Light is come into the world, and men loued darknesse rather then light,Ioh 3.19. because their deedes were euill.
It must needes bee a strange darknesse that cannot bee driuen away by the bright heames of the glorious Gospell of Christ; And surely God doth euen now sitte in iudgement vpon such persons; and by this (their ignorance) especially in these dayes, makes knowne their reprobation and finall perdition.
The excuses of men are but vayne. I am not booke learned, and I hope God will beare with me; Thus I am taught and instructed by my Teachers: I. but what if thy Teacher bee a blinde Guide? wilt not thou trie the Spirits whether they be of God? Surely, such persons conclude their owne iudgement, and giue sentence against themselues, that they want
 grace, and are in a most fearefull condition: for now to bee ignorant in the cleare light of the Gospel, it argues that Gods wrath and vengeance hath taken hold on such persons, as the Apostle sayth:2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospell bee hid, it is hid to those that are lost, in whome the God of this world hath blinded their minds, that is of the Infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ which is the Image of God, should not shine vnto them. Oh then seeing it is so fearefull a iudgement of God, to be ignorant of his Word and Will, and that it will not excuse when God shall enter into iudgement with vs; Let vs (I say) seeke for knowledge, as for treasures: Let vs search the Scriptures, that in them wee may finde eternall Life: Let vs labour to haue the Word of God dwell plentifully in vs, which is able to make vs wise vnto saluation: Let vs vse all holy meanes both to begette, as also to increase this Knowledge in vs, that so wee may not bee ledde aside by blinde guides to commit Idolatry with this people here; but that God may bee still our God, and wee his People.



I haue seene the villany of the house of Israel, and the Whoredome of Ephraim.

Idolatry the sinne of this people.THe sinne that Almighty God doth heere accuse them of, it is Idolatry, and that in most vile manner, ouerspred generally the whole body of this people, euen all the Ten tribes, which sinne to shew the vilenesse of it, the Lord cals Villany and whoredome, things abhominable to the Lord, and such as hee loathes. And hee cals it Whoredome, because as an Harlot or an Whore doth forsake her owne husband, and commits filthinesse with another man: euen so Idolaters forsake God, and marry themselues to Idols. It is called the Whoredome af Ephraim, because Ieroboam which came of the Tribe of Ephraim had set it vp amongst them,1. Reg. 12.28. to worship the Calues in Dan and Bethel.
 Now the Doctrine wee gather hence is this, that it is a wofull and an heauy iudgement of God vpon a Country or Kingdome,It is a heauy iudgement of God vpon a people, when the chiefe gouernors bee Idolaters. 2. Sam. 6.1. when the chiefe Gouernours be men voyd of religion, and giuen to superstition and Idolatry. We see this in this present Text, for here the Lord complaines of Ephraim and the ten Tribes, because they were poluted with miserable Idolatry which was set vp by Ieroboam: for as the King is, so will the Subiects be: They are not onely to informe their inferiours, and giue direction vnto them by Word, but by their example and practise to go before them. Now then if they bee Idolaters, prophane and superstitious, you shall then see the whole Body of the people to follow them. Againe, if they bee religious and deuoute in the seruice of God, the whole people that are vnder them, in shew at the least, will bee the same. And as
 the oyntment that was powred on Aarons head, ran downe to his beard, and so to the very border of his garments: Euen so the impiety and wickednes of the Superiour runneth about through the whole Family; and all that are vnder them infecting and corrupting them.
This is cleare by diuers examples in the booke of God.Luk. 23.11. When Herod begunne to offer indignitie to Christ, all his traine were ready to doe the same. And when wicked Ahab desired to bee vpholden in his purpose to goe vp against Ramoth Gilead,2. Reg. 22.8. all his seruants were ready, and at hand to feede him in his humour; for when the King sent them to call Michaiah, they were readie to tell the Prophet what he should say to the King, All the other Prophets (say they) declare good to the King with one accord, let thy words be like theirs: and whe^ the good Prophet would not flatter, but tolde the King plainely the truth from the Lord; Zidkijah the Kings Chaplaine smote him on the cheeke: So true is that saying of Salomon: Of a Prince that hearkneth to lyes, all his seruants are wicked.Pro. 29.12. Their example is a Law, and by their lewd example they strengthen other mens hands in sinne: so that it is in a common wealth (as one sayth) as it is in a Fish; that if the head bee once corrupted and putrified, the whole body certainly is no lesse. And if a man would know, vhether the body of the Fish be corrupted or no, hee must smell the head: Euen so, if the heads of Church and common wealth be corrupted, the whole body of both must needs be infected.
And therefore what great cause haue we to blesse God, who hath set ouer vs a Religious King, a Fauourer of the Gospell, an enemy to Popery and superstion. Oh let vs giue God the honour of it, and let vs pray for him, that the Lord would vse him to
 bee a further instrument, vtterly to roote out all the Reliques of Poperie, and deface all the monuments of Idolatry; that Idolaters and those that haue giuen their names to the Pope, that Antichrist of Rome, may vtterly bee rooted out of this Land; that our Kingdome may bee disburdened of them, that wee may neuer see the fornication and Idolatry of the Whore of Rome set vp againe, that this Church of England may neuer bee polluted with it any more.
Secondly, this should serue as an instruction to all Princes, Magistrates and Mighty men, that they endeuour by all meanes possible, by their godly life, and good example, to draw on others that are vnder them to the knowledge and feare of God: for certaine it is, if great men bee backeward in good things, whole multitudes are readie to presume by their example. Wee see in our small Parishes and little Villages, if there bee but one or two that are of the chiefest in the Parrish, that are negligent and carelesse in the seruice of God, Children of Belial, Idolaters, Drunkards, or the like, what a poyson are they to pester a whole Congregation?
It is too apparant, The Lord lay not this sinne to their charge one day, that should haue giuen better example: for as there is a happie and blessed vnion in Religion, and Christian obedience, when Magistrate and Minister goe hand in hand to build vp an holy Temple vnto God,Note. and are both of one mind, and of one mouth to seeke to set forth the glory of God: so I haue found by my own experience, that though the Minister bee neuer so laborious in preaching the Word, yet when other Gouernors, and such as are the chiefe of a Parish, haue no sappe
 or seasoning of the feare of God in them, the hands of the wicked waxe strong in such a place. Oh that our Magistrates and great men would lay this to heart, that as their place is eminent in the common-wealth, that they would giue such good example by their godly and religious walking, their sanctifying of the Lords Sabbath, their countenancing of godly and painefull Ministers, that so they might prouoke and stirre vp others to godlinesse.






VERSE. 11.

Yea Iudah hath set a plant for thee, whiles I would returne the Captiuity of my people.

IN this last verse the Lord comes to shew the vile dealing of Iudah; that when the Lord purposed to bring again the captiuity of Israel, then Iudah laboured to conuey their Idolatry amongst them, and tooke, as it were, plants of their Idolatry, and set them vp amongst the Tribes of Iudah. For at this time, though Israel was polluted miserably with Idolatrie, yet the Lord had preserued Iudah from that abhomination: but as soone as the Lord had deliuered Israel out of Captiuity, then Iudah was infected and polluted with their Superstitions.
Hence wee may learne, how apt wee bee by nature  to sucke in Popery and superstition: Iudah was pure,Men by nature are apt to sucke in Popery and superstition. but so soone as the Lord brought Israel home againe, they beganne to take grafts of their idolatrie, and to ioyne with them.
So now, though wee are by Gods mercy freede from the filthinesse of Popery and superstition; yet if the Lord should returne it, and suffer it to bee
 brought in againe amongst vs, wee are by nature exceeding apt to receyue it, to take plants of it, and to loue and like it.
This is clearly to bee seene in diuers places of the Scriptures,Iudg. 4.7.32. and 4.1.2. especially by the example of the Israelites, in the Booke of Iudges: They committed euill againe and againe by Idolatry, they knew what that sinne was; yea, they had experience of the seuerity of Gods Iustice against it, and more still they confessed it, and cryed for mercy: yet the same people, and the children of the same people, not remembring their former fals, nor admonished by Gods former iudgements, fell a fresh into the same sinne, and prouoked againe Gods wrath against them. Againe, Moses laboured much vvith this people,Exod. 32.3. to peswade them to make a Couenant with their God, and to cleaue to him in faithfull and constant obedience: Yet when they had beene but a while out of the way, they would needs haue a golden Calfe in stead of Moses to goe before them: and therefore they came in all haste to Aaron, vrging him to make them one: Which in carnall policy hee sought to stay, calling for their golden Eare-rings, thinking indeed they would in no hand haue parted with them; But when it was to the erecting of Idolatry, he could no sooner aske for them but he had them.
This is clearely to bee seene by that of our Prophet Hosea; where hee shewes how bountifull the people were in bestowing their Corne and Wine,Hos. 2.8. and Oyle, together with their gold and siluer vpon Baal. They thought nothing good inough, that was giuen that way.
Now this is no strange thing,Gen. 6.5. considering that All the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts, are onelie euill, and that Continually: So that whensoeuer wee
 are about to commit sinne, especially to set vp Idolatry: Wee haue the whole streame and current of our hearts and nature with vs: and indeed wee are neuer exercised in things naturall vnto vs, till wee haue our hand in some plotte against GOD himselfe.
 Well, seeing wee are so apt by nature to set vp Idolatry and superstition; It stands vs all in hand to be acquainted with the vilenesse of our Nature herein, as also what the Lord esteemes of Popery and superstition: namely, Villany and Whoredome no better; and therfore howsoeuer the Papists stand vpon their good meaning, and their honest dealing; yet they worship the Deuil and not God, as Moses tels the Israelites, that they offered not to God as they intended, but vnto Deuils, euen the Idols of Canaan. Euen so the Papists though they brag of their good intents and meanings, the truth is, they offer not to God, but to the Deuill; neyther doe they worshippe God, but the Deuill: and therefore wee must take heed, that wee neuer take liking to Popery, though the same seem neuer so pleasing to flesh and bloud. For all men are naturallie most inclinable vnto that which is euill: And therefore most men being so prone vnto Popery, what can bee concluded but this, but that it is an euiil, and a damnable Religion?
Oh then let vs labour to bee rooted and grounded in the truth of God, to be builded vpon the rocke Iesus Christ; that wee may neuer put out the hand to entertaine, or to receyue any dregges of Popery and Idolatry: but euen remember what Christ sayeth:Reu. 18.4. Come out of her my people, least yee partake of her plagues. Oh, let vs euer stand out against their abhominable Idolatry, as no better then villany, and whoredome in Gods sight.

Secondly, seeing wee are so apt by Nature, to receyue Idolatry, and Superstition, and to embrace Poperie, it may bee a very good reason vnto vs, to prooue that all the Religion of the Papists is most wicked and abhominable, because it agrees so fitte to the corrupt heart and Nature of man; for since Adams fall, our Nature being corrupted, wee hate GOD, and hate his Truth.
Now touching the Religion of the Papists, there is nothing in it, but that which Nature it selfe doth desire: Let vs instant the same by one thing for all. What seemeth more against Nature practised by them, then their Whippings, and Scourgings, and that of themselues; This wee may thinke to bee against Nature: But yet if wee examine the end of this punishment, as rhe same is inflicted vpon them, it will appeare otherwise, that Nature it selfe may in some sort desire the same: for that man that shall bee taught and assured,Note. that when hee hath committed some great and grieuous sinne as Adultery, Theft, Drunkennesse, or the like, that after such a punishment inflicted once vpon him, his sinne shall bee done away, and neuer after layde to his charge: Who would not vndergoe such a punishment? better in reason vndergoe that for a time, then the guilt of an accusing conscience: For as Salomon sayth, A man may beare his sicknesse and infirmity, but a wounded conscience who can beare?
And therefore seeing that by Nature wee loue Popery and Idolatry, and that there is in the same nothing contrary to Nature, this proues that it is not the Religion of God, but the deuice of wicked men: for what can delight our corrupt nature more
 then to see a Crucifixe, the picture of Christ on the Crosse: To pray to Saints, Angels, the Virgine Mary, etc. all this is very agreeable to the corrupt Nature of man, and therefore cannot bee good.
Last of all, wee may here behold the nature of  sinne, it is like the plague, easily conuayed from one to another,Sinne is very fruitfull. easily scattered and spread abroad, as wee see a naughty and a stinking Weede, it is easily spread, and will runne abroad, so will Idolatrie: and of all other sinne, that is like vnto the Lappewing, it will runne as soone as it is hatcht; and as a man that liues in the house with them that haue the plague, is in exceeding danger to bee infected: so is it with them that liue in Idolatrous places, all to nothing they will bee infected.
The Istaelites when they came into Canaan, the Lord suffering a small remnant of the Cananites to remaine still in the land, for the tryall of the Israelites it is sayd,Psa. 81.They were mingled amongst them, and learned their works.
It is the nature of sinne to bee euer encroaching; giue it an ynch, and it will take an elle: It is like the Gangren or Canker, it fretteth, and eateth further and further as here, Idolatry was onely to bee found in Israel, and not in Iudah; but it quickly set footing there, and spred it selfe in a short time ouer all Iudah. Wheresoeuer it findeth entertainement, it enlargeth and spreadeth it selfe:Psal. 26.4. Bidde sinne home to thy house once, and like a bolde and shamelesse Guest,Psal. 15.4.^ it will come the second time vninuited.
How carefull then ought euery man to be, to shun and auoyd the company of Idolaters, and al other wicked men?Pro. 9.6. It is the graue counsell of Salomon, Forsake the wicked, and you shall liue. Yea, the Apostle
 labouring to confirme his new Conuerts, amongst many other his Exhortations, hee vrgeth this: Saue your selues from this froward Generation.Act. 1.40.
So then wee see how dangerous it is for men and women to bee present in places of Idolatry;  to liue and conuerse with Idolaters, it is very like they shal hardly escape from being tainted with Superstition: For, herein the Papists haue the aduantage against vs: If they perswade and intice, they haue our Nature to helpe them. And as wee vse to say, the Wife in the bosome is the best Sollicitor: But let vs deale with men, eyther to perswade or disswade, wee haue both Sunne, Moone, and Starres against vs: neyther Reason, nor Nature will take our part; till the Spirit of God doth strike the stroke to perswade the heart of man.
But Oh say some, this is too much nicenesse, I hope wee are not so weake, nor so simple, but we can chuse the best, and leaue the worst; bee present at the Masse, and yet keepe our hearts to God; Conuerse with Papists and Idolaters, and yet bee Christians still. But what, haue you so good a conceit of your selues? you doe thereby giue mee iust occasion to haue an ill perswasion of you, that indeede yee care not much what Religion yee are of, therefore they that can bee present at the Masse, and thinke they are so strong that they cannot bee taynted, such men doe no better then tempt God. Euen so for those that make choyse to dwell in houses knowne to bee infected with Popery, they shal easily bee carried away with the streame of Poperie. When Iudah conuersed with Israel, they were quickly poysoned with their Idolatry.
Then let vs take heed how wee conuerse with the
 wicked, and like of their Company: for we shall soone bee infected with their sinnes, but rather shunne and auoyde their Company, as noysome and hurtfull. The Father of all mercy, and God of all Consolation, strengthen vs with his grace, and keepe vs in his holy feare, vnto the End. Amen.

Gratias tibi Domine Iesu.


FINIS.




