The Ottoman of Lazaro Soranzo VVherein is deliuered aswell a full and perfect report of the might and power of Mahamet the third, great Emperour of the Turkes now raigning: together with the interestes and dealinges which he hath with sondrie other princes, what hee is plotting against the state of Christendome, and on the other side what we may practise and put in execution against him to his great damage and annoyaunce. As also a true description of diuers peoples, countries, citties and voyages, which are most necessarie to bee knowen, especially at this time of the present warre in Hungarie. Translated out of Italian into English, by Abraham Hartvvell. L'ottomano. English. Soranzo, Lazzaro. The Ottoman of Lazaro Soranzo VVherein is deliuered aswell a full and perfect report of the might and power of Mahamet the third, great Emperour of the Turkes now raigning: together with the interestes and dealinges which he hath with sondrie other princes, what hee is plotting against the state of Christendome, and on the other side what we may practise and put in execution against him to his great damage and annoyaunce. As also a true description of diuers peoples, countries, citties and voyages, which are most necessarie to bee knowen, especially at this time of the present warre in Hungarie. Translated out of Italian into English, by Abraham Hartvvell. L'ottomano. English. Soranzo, Lazzaro. Hartwell, Abraham, b. 1553. The Preface. E Ven as for Princes that would learne wel to gouerne and maintaine them selues, aswell in time of peace, as of warre, there is no one thing more necessarie, then the knowledge, first of their owne affaires, and next of the state of other principalities, (as those do write, who haue the greatest vnderstanding in ciuil causes, & as Experience it selfe doth manifestly declare:) so is it most fit and cōuenient for them, to vse their vttermost care & diligence, that they may haue perfect skill & discre∣tion to iudge betweene truth and falshood. For if the second part of their knowledge, I meane touching other mens states & Principalities: (for of the first it is not my purpose to dis∣course) bee not founded and established vpon truth, it will neuer be possible that their counsailes shall sort to any pro∣fite or aduauntage, because it is well knowne, that a false information, either of a speech, or of an Astion, or of a place, may oftentymes breed no lesse damage, and daun∣ger, then a Counseller that is either of small capacitie, or else a lyer, or a Captaine that hath neither wisdome nor ex∣perience. And therefore verie greatly are those Princes to be commended, who not onely endeuour to enforme them∣selues of the wittes and loyaltie of their owne seruants, but also for the more certaintie how matters do passe in truth, maintaine either at home in Court, or abroad in forreine places, Men of learning, and of practise: the one for mat∣ter of Historie, and properly appertaining to good ciuill go∣uernment, and the other for the knowledge of the estates, inclinations, designements, interests, treasures, armour, weapons, confederacies, preparations, and all the forces of other Princes: whereunto may be added also as a matter of great impertance to know those Countries, which haue not onely beene knowne many a yeare ago, but also those that haue beene lately dicouered, or may hereafter bee made knowne to the world. In respect whereof, assuredly aboue all other Don Iohn king of Portugall, and Isabell of A∣ragon, are most worthie of eternall memorie, for the dis∣couerie of the East Indies, and of the new world, which was performed by their fauour and assistance. And the rea∣son of that which hath beene said, is this, touching the first, because such matters hauing beene reported or written, for the most part either to please, or for some aduātage, or falsly penned by persons that neuer were present at the Action, or for feare haue concealed the truth, their reports and wri∣tings haue need of great caution & censure, before they be beleeued: and touching the second, because one eye-witnes, as the Poet sayth, is more certaine & worthy of beleefe, then a thousand eare-witnesses, as they do most manifestly approue, who by the view of their own eies, which they haue made in diuerse Prouinces, do find & acknowledge, that in bookes of Cosmographie, Geography & Chorographie, there be many faults and errors to be noted in the gouernement of sundry principalities, in the maners and customs of diuerse peoples, and in the true situation of seuerall places and Countreyes: besides many other tales and fables, which are here and there dispersed, as well in writers of old, as in writers of late times, and onely because the Authours of them haue writ∣ten and recorded either all these matters, or at least verie many of them, without euer seeing any part of them, but re∣ferring themselues wholy to the ancient descriptions, which in deed do not fully answere to the knowledge and experi∣ence of these dayes, and without iustifying the same by such persons as haue not onely seene them, which euery common Curseters and prating cousener, can also do: but also such as haue had the skill to obserue euery action, and an intent truly to report it againe. Homer called Vlysses a wise man, (which is the goodliest title that can bee giuen to a Prince, or to a Captaine) not because he had heard, but be∣cause hee noted and obserued the manners and customes of sundrie peoples, and sawe many Cities. And peraduenture it was the reason which moued Plato to make a law, that none of his Citizens should trauaile abroad before hee was xl. yeares olde, to the end that being growen wise by age, he might with more iudgemēt obserue the affairs of the world, and then report them to his Countrey for the common be∣nefite thereof. True it is that those Princes, which doe not willingly admit any trafficke with straungers, contrary to the law and course of all Nations, as for example the Mos∣couite, and Presbyter Iohn, but especially and aboue al other the Princes of China, who being strengthned by fortifica∣tions, and keeping continuall watch and ward for that pur∣pose, will not suffer their subiects to passe or trauell into for∣raine Countries, because they hold Platoes opinion to bee true, which he setteth downe in his common wealth, that strange fashions and customes may corrupt home-borne na∣tures: such princes (I say) haue no neede in deed, to be any diligent inquisitors or searchers of other mens actions. But for other states, that with all humane intertainment and entercourse do admit all forreiners, and cōuerse kindly with them, and embrace their enterests and confederacies, and therfore are more strongly & entirely enforced of necessitie to guard themselues from their neighbors that are of great power & might, to the end they may the better maintaine their owne seigni uries and dominions: for such states (I say) it is great reason & verie conuenient, that they should throughly informe themselues, & endeuour to their vtter∣most, not only ingeneralitie, but also in euery particularitie to vnderstand all matters whatsoeuer which may be refer∣red not vnto priuate Interestes and commodities, such as, matters of trafficke, and marchandizes be, but to the state of the whole common wealth, which are properly belonging to Princes themselues. For as we do read written Hystories to the end we may learne how to gouerne and manage mat∣ters, aswell present as to come, by vnderstanding and rea∣ding how things haue fallen out, that haue beene hereto∣fore recorded in particularitie: so ought we also to knowe how the affaires of the world do presently stand, to the ende we may prouide remedies in time, and meete with all in∣conueniences according to the generall knowledge which we haue learned by our reading: for such is the course and order of our knowledge, that by singularities we proceede to the notice of vniuersalities. And therefore the Venetian Magnificoes, who are not meanely exercised and experi∣enced in matters of state, do not onely send vnto other prin∣ces such Embassadors as are of quicke wit and conceit, ac∣cording to the custome of other principalities, but also haue established for a lawe, that at their returne they shall in the Senate make a true and particular report of the Prince and state, with whom they haue beene Ledgers during the time of their Embassage: and so by that meanes they shall in∣struct the yonger sort, which are trained vp in the studie of politike affaires, to be the better enabled for the seruice of their Countrey. And to the same purpose, that their Com¦mon-wealth may be also better gouerned, as well by the ex∣ample of such matters as haue alreadie passed, as also by the fresh information of things presently in action, they pre∣serue and keepe the said writings with great faithfulnesse and secrecie in a Register especially appoynted therevnto. And this was the cause, that I perceyuing how the actions of the Turkes, were publikely either too much extenuated and diminished, or else beyond all truth magnified, and enlarged rather vpon want of true instruction and information, then vpon any sting of passionate affections, which oftentimes make report of many matters to diuerse priuate persons ve∣rie indiscreetly, and inconsiderately, began to bethinke my selfe, that it could not choose but proue verie profitable to the state of Christendome, if I would take vpon me the care to examine the present estate of the Turkish Empire, and endeuour to discouer the disignements which that Prince hath plotted against the Christians, in the best manner I could. And forasmuch as it is not alwayes good, to giue too much credite to auncient Records, though they be neuer so true, because Principalities and states are easily altered and chaunged, either vpon the nature or disposition of the new succeeding Prince, or vpon condition and circumstance of time, or vpon some other accident: (yea and so much the ra∣ther, for that the Venetian records which were woont to be most faithfull and sincere, are not now imparted or com∣municated to any man by a speciall prohibition which they haue made amongst themselues, the auncient reportes also beeing now to no purpose, and the briefe that is ordinarily deliuered abroad, being rather imagined and full of errors then containing matter of truth) I haue resolued with my selfe, to be more diligently enformed, as farre as possibly I could, of all those particulars which I thought meet and ne∣cessarie to bee knowne in these times, because I am verily perswaded, that the present warre now in hand, is a matter of the greatest consequence that is at this time currant in the world. All which I haue done vpon speciall and priuate conference that I haue had with persons of great experi∣ence and iudgement, who are lately come out of those parts, not trusting mine owne selfe in such matters, which I haue heretofore seene, and oftentimes verie deeply considered of. And so at last I haue reduced the whole into a briefe or com∣pendious Method, for the benefit and seruice of Christian princes, & specially of those, who in regard of their interests with the Turke, haue greatest neede of such information. For seeing I was not able, by reason of mine infirmitie, to follow the warres, as I ought to haue done, after the exam∣ple of Benedict Soranzo my father, who died at the con∣quest of Gorzolari in fighting against the Turkes, yet had I a desire at the least to doe some seruice to the common-wealth, which alloweth it to be a matter lawfull for euerie man to labour and write, as Polyaenus of Macedonie writte to the Emperours Antoninus and Verus, rather then by choosing to liue idle and free to my selfe, I shoulde seeme altogither vnprofitable and vnfruitfull to all others. So did Diogenes, when the rest of the valiant and cou∣ragious Citizens were verie busie in defending the walles of their Countrey, he went vp and downe in the Market place, rolling his Tunne to and fro, because he alone would not be idle (as he said) whiles other were valiantly labou∣ring with their weapons. And therefore in this discourse or report, I will entreate of the Ottoman Empire and specially vnder Mahamet the third, vntill the yeare 1597. The time I do of purpose set downe, because I know verie well, that the euent and suc∣cesse of warre may alter many things, according to the mu∣tabilitie of the Prince, or necessitie of sundrie occasions, which euen to this houre haue altered and changed sundry matters. And this will I doe principally and chiefly regar∣ding that which apperteyneth to the knowledge of this pre∣sent warre, which the Turke now wageth agaynst the Em∣perour, and the Transiluanian, or any other matter, which by occasion of the same warre may fall out to be conside∣rable. For if I would haue vndertaken a longer course, I should haue too much enlarged this volume, peraduenture to the griefe and tedious conceits of other men. Besides that a great part of the remnant of this hystorie, I haue at large extended in other my writings, and part thereof I may perhappes performe in other occasions. Howbeit I will not forbeare to tell you of many matters, especially of such as may be at all times profitable and beneficiall to all Chri∣stendome: to the ende, that aswell those which liue at this day, as also those which shall succeede vs in posteritie may in some sort reape some benefite and pleasure of this la∣bours, wherein that I may proceed methodically, and or∣derly, I will distinguish and diuide this present relation in∣to three parts. In the first it shall be entreated of the Head, of the Members, and of the forces of the Ottoman Empyre. In the second, of the Cogitations and Designements of the Turkish Prince: of the causes of this present warre, to∣gether with the beginning and proceedings thereof: where∣in for the better vnderstanding of euery thing, the original of the said warre shall be fetched and repeated, euen from Amurath, father to this liuing Mahamet. In the third and last, it shall be discoursed, that suppose the Grand Turke will be reconciled, whether it be good for the Emperour, and the Transiluanian, to entertaine peace wiih him. Wherein also many matters shall be discouered, which (if the warre shall continue) may be plotted agaynst him by the said Princes, and which at all times may bee practised by other Christian Princes, to meete with such perils and dangers as are now imminent, or any other which may hereafter light vpon Chri∣stendome by the Ottoman forces. An aduertisement to the reader. C Ourteous Reader, if in all this discourse you do not reade, that Mahamet Satarz∣gi, (of whom mention is made pag. 9.) is now become the General of the Tur∣kish campe. That Sinan Cicala (pa. 6. b.) beginneth to recouer the fauor of the Emperor Ma∣hamet. That Hassan Bassa, who had the gouernment of Constantinople in the absence of the great Turk (pag. 6.) was first created chiefe Visier, and af∣terwardes put to death: And lastly, that the Prince of Transiluania hath surprised Feulac, and Canaal, and such other like matters. And especially, that the Christian Emperour hath recouered the strong Fort of Giauarino, chiefly through the grace and fauour of God, and next by the notable valour and labor of Adolph Baron of Schwartzenberg, most worthy of eternall memorie: I pray you remember how the Authour in his former Preface doth pro∣test, that touching certaine accidents he writeth no further then till the yeare 1597. wherein hee also dealeth like a Politician rather then like an Historio∣grapher: & therefore referreth those matters to some other workes which he had then in hand. Farewell. Errata. page 21. b, 3, & 4, as the Dutch do Kiocai in Beluacensis. pag. 28. b, lin. 10. drinke for the Turkes, considering. pag, 34. li. 1. for Gally-slaues, read pilots. pag. ead. li. 3. for row them, read guide them. pag. ead. l. 21. three hundred thousand. pag. 37. b. li. 1. goodliest. pag. 40. li. 9. Fortes therein, which should be scited pag, 55. b. li. 23. the Turkes make euery day. THE FIRST PART, Wherein is treated of the head, of the Members, and of the Forces of the Ottoman EMPIRE. I N the Ottoman Empire, Mahamet, a name dreadful to Christians, and fatall to the Turkes. there new raigneth, Mahamet the third of that name: a name veri∣ly no lesse dreadfull and terrible vnto Christendome, if ye obserue and marke the actions of the o∣ther two former Mahamets, then fatall to the Turkes themselues, euen in their owne opinion: for they doe greatly feare, that as the Citie of Constantinople, had her second beginning and in∣crease from one Constantine, and afterwards was lost and destroied vnder another Constantine, both being the sonnes of two Helenes: and likewise the Empire of Rome, began in one Augustus, and ended in ano∣ther Augustus; so this Citie shall be lost againe vnder a Mahamet, euen as it was with armes conquered by Mahamet the second. §. I. THe now liuing Mahamet, Emperour of the Turkes, The nature & conditions of Mahamet. is by nature wittie, and by disposition fierce and cruell: but by accident myld, timo∣rous, and greatly effeminated, as hereafter shall bee shewed plainely, by certaine examples of diuers matters that haue beene done by him, both before he came to the Empire, and also after. Mahamet, Why he hated Nasuf-Aga, the Dwarfe. while he was but young, being shut vp into the Serraglio, and bearing great hatred against the Dwarfe Nasuf-Agà, for the many fauours which he continually receiued at the hands of the Empe∣rour Amurath, endeauoured so diligently to pry in∣to his actions, as hauing obserued, that euerie day he sent out of the Serraglio, a basket of flowers, hee imagined with himselfe, that vnder those flowers, hee conueied forth some things of greater moment. And thereupon, one morning hauing staied the Ca∣rier by force, and powred the flowers out vpon the ground, he found the basket full of Gold, and with exceeding indignation, accused him to his Father, telling him, that he was lesse fauored then his slaues: For (quoth he) they abound in that which is denied vn∣to me. And this he spake, because hee found his Fa∣ther to be verie couetous. Moreouer, Who were his grand-mother, and Mother. hee was so haughtie and disdaine full, as he could not endure that his grand-mother, who was (if all be true) a Gentlewoman of Venice, and of the house of Baffo, should domineere in the Court, and ouer his Mother, who was born at Rezi, The suspition that Amurath had of him. a towne in the mountaines of the Ducagini in Albania. In so much, as quarrelling with his Father for the same verie oftentimes, and ministring dayly vnto him new oecasions of dislike and feare: (for the Ottoman Emperours are so iealous of their owne life and safe∣tie, as both in regard of the common ambition of as∣piring minds, as also, and much the rather of their owne particular and peculiar crueltie, they will not pardon nor spare their owne bloud.) After hee was circumcised according to the Lawe of Mahamet, (wherat were present the Embassadours of the Em∣perour, of the Moscouite, of the Persian Sophi, and for the State of Venice, Giacomo Soranzo my vnkle, who in that businesse, had the chiefe place aboue the Christian Princes.) presently he was sent by his Fa∣ther into Magnesia, there to abide and keepe his resi∣dence. But when he did there euerie day more and more discouer his fiercenesse and crueltie; Examples of Mahamets cru∣eltie. by cau∣sing (sometimes in deed of an indignation and rage, but sometimes of a fantasticall humour) the teates of women to bee pinched off with hote burning tongues: by putting to a most cruel death, two thou∣sand Softì, (that is to say, Schollers) onely because they had made a signe vnto him of some vnchast co∣gitation: and by killing many other persons, vpon verie light and slender occasions: and finally when he shewed himselfe to be vtterly alienated from ve∣nereall and wanton pleasures, and wholly occupied in Martiall actions: His Father grew into such a conceite against him, as adding thereunto sundrie other weightie suspicions of secrete intelligences, which vnder the colour of friendship hee entertay∣ned in the Court with Sinan Bassa, (he that surprised Giauarino, and died the last yeare:) entred into a co∣gitation with himselfe not onely to haue him better guarded, but also to depriue him of his life, if he did not change his course. Whereof being oftentimes aduertised by the Ladie Sultane, his mother, and al∣so aduised by her to plucke this suspition out of his fathers head by addicting himselfe to pleasure, hee was obedient vnto her therein. And afterwardes he was so farre giuen ouer thereunto, as either altering or dissembling his proper nature, hee is by this acci∣dent, and of his owne accord growne to bee a most sensual Prince: and whether it be by habite and cu∣stome, or by enchaunting besotment, as some think, (wherein the Greeke, Hebrew, and Turkish Ladies are most cunning and skilfull,) hee cannot now liue, no not when he is in armes amongst his Souldiers, without those pleasures, not without communica∣ting the most important secrets of his state with his Fauourites and Miniones: Then which there is no∣thing more dangerous and pernitious to Princes. Not∣withstanding, I cannot agree in opinion with those who doe attribute the cause of this late going forth into the warres in his owne person, to this his sensualitie: for there are diuerse other truer reasons, that may be alleadged of that his lingering. § II. FOr Mahamet being now become a new Prince, VVhy Maha∣met lingred his going to the warre. determined to informe himselfe first before all other things, what were the forces of his state. Hee did well know the dislikes and braules which were amongst the Bassaes, and especially betweene Sinan and Ferat: in whose handes remained at that time the whole management of his Empire, as in due place we shall shew hereafter. There was in Constan∣tinople, a verie great dearth of all things necessary for vittaile, and specially of bread. He perceiued that the subiects were much discontented for many debts, which his father had not payed, but afterwards he satisfied them himselfe. He was not fullie perswa∣ded, what stirres the Persian might make, for the death of the young hostage Haidar, sonne to Emir Hamze, who was eldest sonne to Mahamet Coda∣banda: which was thought to haue happened not without some suspicion of poysoning. Besides that his principall Captaines promised, that they would follow the warres without his presence: (for they thought, that so they might the more easily enrich themselues.) He gaue exceeding credite to the im∣portant counsel and aduise of Sinan, who had vowed the vtter ruine and destruction, not onely of the Prince of Transiluania, but also of the Emperor with∣out any great difficultie: (and all this, because by continuing still in that supreme degree of gouern∣ment which he then enioyed, hee might make his persō the greater.) Moreouer, most true it is, that Ma∣hamet loueth peace: for that fiercenesse and crueltie which is naturall in him, and yet mollified by plea∣sure and ease, as Iron is by fire, Why he killed one of his dearlings. is rather the disposi∣tion of a tyrant, then the hardinesse of a true warri∣our. And that was manifestly declared on a time, when one of his dearest women, with teares & most affectionate praiers besought him in his gardens, that he would not go forth to the warres, by reason of a certaine strange and wonderfull dreame which she had the night before: but hee, growing into a great rage, for that shee went about in such sort to hinder the glorie, or rather, (as he said himselfe) the safetie of his state, He threatned his mother. with his owne hand slue her: and did not sticke likewise to threaten his mother, that he would also kill her, though otherwise shee was greatly esteemed and dearly beloued of him. True also it is, that it was most conuenient for him to applie himselfe to the necessitie of the time, How the au∣thoritie of the visiers was diminished. because he was but little esteemed, and not so wil∣lingly obeyed by his subiects, as the most part of the former Ottoman princes were: by reason that the authoritie, which in times past was wont to be in the chief Visier, he suffered to be communicated and di∣uided among the other Visiers: so that whensoeuer any fauour or benefite was graunted to any by one of them, it was verie often repealed and reuoked by the rest: A course that of all other doth soonest abate loue, and ingender contempt. And so much the rather, for that his father Amurath had taken order that the Visiers might bee remooued vpon euerie light occa∣sion, and had also brought vp a new custome to create many for money, and increased the number of them from foure to nine. Lastly, hee was enfor∣ced thereunto by the often chaunge and altera∣tion, which he vsed to make of his Heades and Cap∣taines, either vpon some wrong information, that he had of the state, and of their natures, or else be∣cause it is a naturall propertie belonging to the Turks to chaunge their honours, and also their purposes, according to the euents of fabulous Fortune. For hauing receiued diuerse and sundrie discomfitures, he was of opinion (and indeed he doth alwayes put it in practise) that with the alteration of the head, hee shoulde make the members more couragious and hardie. But against all these reasons aboue rehearsed, How he gay∣ned the good will of the Souldiers. there were other respectes that preuayled indeede with him, and caused him to goe forth to the warre: and in particular, because the Souldiours being poore, newe, and discontented with the auarice of the former Generals, desired greatly the presence of their Lord and Emperour: and that principally for the largesse and giftes, which hee vseth to be∣stowe vpon them, when hee is in the campe him∣selfe. Where hauing now at the last appeared in person, hee hath obteyned great reputation, hee hath cancelled the dishonourable opinion that was conceyued of him, and he hath yeelded a singular satisfaction to his subiects: and so much the more, for that he endeuoured himselfe to gaine the bene∣uolence of his Souldiours, by shewing himselfe not onely verie liberall in bestowing largely vpon them, but also prouident and circumspect in walking on foote and visiting their lodgings. For which ac∣tion being reprooued by some of his Counsellers, for that hee exposed and offered himselfe too much to manifest daunger, contrarie to the custome of his predecessours, hee aunswered them with the wordes of Cyrus, That all those which followed him in seruice being his brethren, it was fit he should make as good account of them as of himselfe. Another action of his there was, which did greatly reconcile their loues vnto him, viz. that being in his iourney, one Euening hee mounted vp to the top of his Paui∣lion, and espied two Tentes of Spahogl ni, disunited from the rest of the Campe, to murther and rob such as scatteringly went abroade from their lod∣ginges: whereof being certainly assured, hee gaue them for a pray to the Gianizzaries, and afterwards caused their bodies to be fixed vpon stakes in the Campe. Nowe to referre other matters to a more fitte place: How the Turkes call their Emperor. hitherto it hath beene discoursed of the nature and conditions of the now liuing Empe∣rour of the Turks, whom they call Sultan Alem that is to say, The Lorde of the worlde, or (as others in∣terprete it) The Emperour of all, and King of Kinges: and therefore they call him also, Vlu Padi-Schach, that is to say- The supreme or Soueraigne Emperour: and to be short you haue here heard of the Chiefe head of the present Ottoman Empire: For as tou∣ching his Children, although they doe also some∣what appertaine to the Head of this Empire, yet I doe not intend at this time to enlarge this discourse about them. § III. ONely thus much I will say, The sonnes of Mahamet. that hee hath two Sonnes: For his first and eldest dyed not long agoe. The eldest of those that are aliue at this day, is of the age of 14. yeares or there abouts, and hath not as yet beene seene: When they may be seen o∣penly. for the sonnes of the great Turke may not be visited nor seene a∣broad publikely, vntill they be circumcised. And it is verie likely, that keeping companie (as hee doth) with many women, (among whome his greatest Fauorite and chiefe Dearling, Who is Maha¦mets chiefest Minion. is one La Flatra a Gentlewoman of Ciprus) he is to leaue behind him vnto his successor, many other children, for matter of the vsuall and wonted Tragidies of the Ottomans. But now I come to the mēbers, and first to the Principals. §. IIII. MAny men hold an opinion, Whether the Ottoman Em∣pire want good Captains or no. that this Empire wanteth verie good Captaines. Whereunto they are peraduenture induced, because they haue vnderstood, that there are now dead, Piali, he that attempted the Isle of Malta: Mustafa, he that suppri∣sed Cyprus, Pertaf, Ali, and Vlucchiali, who were o∣uerthrowne in the Sea by the League of the Chri∣stian Princes, in the yeare 1571: afterwards Osman, Ferat, and Sinan, who performed memorable ex∣ploites in Persia, and else where: and hereupon they do thinke that together with these, there are wan∣ting some valourous persons among the Turkes. A suspition verily, not altogether varying from the truth. For most certaine it is, that the long and trou∣blesome warre in Persia hath depriued this Empire of many warriours, that were of credit and valour: howbeit the power and mightinesse of this state be∣ing at the first instituted, and sithence encreased by Armes, How the Turks arise to militarie ho∣nours. and hauing maintayned it selfe hitherto rather by force then by loue, all such as haue any spirite of glorie among the Turkes, applie them∣selues to warrefare, hoping thereby onely to grow rich, and honourable aboue the rest. For they are not the most noble among them, but ordinarily the most valourous (excepting those that serue in the Serraglio, and in the Chamber of the great Turke) that are aduaunced to honours, which necessarily must haue infinite riches waying vpon them. And thereof it followeth that this Prince can neuer want Captaines of approued experience and valour: and so much the more, because euen euerie priuate Souldiour may mount from one degree to another, yea, and sometimes also per Sal∣tum, by Skipp, to the verie chiefe Generalship. But for as much as it is an ordinarie custome, that in all Armies the glorie is not giuen to any other, but to the chiefe Captaines, hereof it commeth, that because the most famous and best knowen Cap∣taines were wanting, all (as it were) at one time, it is commonly reported, that this Empire wan∣teth other men, that are worthie of Militarie go∣uernment. But I will put downe the names of the principals, which gouerne at this present: to the ende, that if perhappes they should die, or be depriued of their charges and places, yet in regarde of that, where of they shall giue mee occasion to speake, the memorie and mention of them will serue mee to good pur∣pose in this present discourse. § V BEfore that Mahamet the Emperour departed from Constantinople, in the most important go∣uernment of that Citie, which is full of sundrie Na∣tions, and humours, and is the seate of that most huge Empyre, hee set Hassan Bassa, the Eunuch, by Countrey an Albanian, of a towne of the Cica∣lessi, in the territorie of Elbasana. This man was Bassa of Cairo, in Egypt in the yeare 1582. at what time beeing recalled to the Court, because he was accused of diuerse misdemeanours, hee was in a great doubt with himselfe, and almost indeede resolute, eyther by fight to saue himselfe, or else to retyre towardes Ormuz, and so to passe into the Indies, but yet at last to Court hee went: where beeing imprisoned, and afterwardes raunsomed, by his Stewarde for fiue hundred Crownes, and nowe againe by his witte remounted to so high an honour, he will (in mine opinion) passe a great way further, if he liue. He is a man verie wise and gracious: a great enemie to the Iewes, and a friend to the Christians. § VI. THe chiefe Generall in the Campe before the battaile at Agria, Hibraim and his toi s. was Hibraim, borne in the pro∣uince of Herzecouina, and cosin to the grand-Turke. Hee is a man of small braine, and most vnfit for any commaund: but liberall, and pleasant, or rather fantasticall and ridiculous. He calleth the Sate of Venice, and the State of Ragugia, his Cousins. He sayth he will take Milan with an Armada or fleet of shippes: and surprise the Isle of Malta, by making a mine vnder the Island: with diuers other such like fooleries. He sheweth himselfe greatly inclined to peace, not onely because he is verie timorous, but because he would please the Ladie Sultane, Mother to the great Turke, and also his owne wife. §. VII. TO Hibraim, there succeeded Sinan Cicala, for that in the last fight with the Christians, as the one shewed himselfe verie vnfit for so principall a gouernment, Sinan Cicala. why he succee¦ded: Hibraim in the general∣ship; and chief Visiershippe. so was this man iudged to be very va∣lourous euen by the Turkish Emperour himselfe, because he had brought backe the Armie, saued him his life, and left the issue of the battaile, doubtfull. Whereupon he thought him worthie not onely of such a charge, but also of the chiefe Visiership. Yet at the last he was depriued both from the one office and from the other, because he went about (some∣what too boldly) to aduise and counsell the Empe∣rour, Cicala degra∣ded and con∣fined into Bursia. that he would not giue so much credite to the Sultane Ladies, and especially to his mother, who, because they would not loose his companie, sought by all possible meanes to make him an effeminate and cowardly person; and in the end hee was bani∣shed into Bursia a Cittie in Asia, sometime the seate of the Ottoman Princes, where hee remained not without danger of his life. For the mother (as wo∣men are wont to do, which either loue or hate extreamly) ceased not daily to entreate her sonne, that he would cause him to be put to death, because shee could not endure that a slaue should be so bould, as to goe a∣bout to bring her into disgrace. This did Cicala feare, and great reason he had so to do, not onely in regard of the vnstayednesse and inconstancie of the Prince, and the great affection which he bare to wo∣men, but also because he knewe, that Hibraim being now returned to Constantinople at the instant suite of the Sultane Ladies, and especially of his wife, (for the chiefe Visier, being once displaced, cannot re∣turne againe vnlesse he recouer his former degree,) he would continually persecute him, and foster the quarrels that were lately picked against him, by the adherents and followers of Ferat, who was an ar∣rant enemie to Sinan, with whome Cicala had com∣bined himselfe, euen to his death. Notwithstan∣ding Cicala being verie rich, of a good wit and great valour, and especially verie skilfull in Land warfare, as one that was trayned and brought vp in the wars of Persia: it is to bee thought that if hee can escape these first violences of his Lorde, he will with such dexteritie manage the matter as he will recouer that which is lost. For so did hee, after his depriuation from the Generalshippe of the Sea which was ta∣ken from him, not so much in regard of the suspiti∣on conceiued for his brothers going to Constantino∣ple, as to giue satisfaction to the State of Venice, whome the Turke himselfe was verie willing to content. The malice, that Cicala bare to that com∣mon wealth, beganne and was grounded vpon a discourtesie, Why Cicala is no great frend to the Veneti∣on state. that he tooke against them, whiles hee was but yong and a Christian, onely forsooth, bee∣cause the Venetian Galeyes had detained a Galeon of his fathers. He is by his fathers side a Genowaye, but his mother was a Turke of Castelnuouo: and him∣selfe was borne in Messina. He is verie respectiue of courtesies, and reuengefull of iniuries offered vnto him. He hath to his wife a Neece of the daughter of the late Rustem Bassa, and of a daughter of Sultan Soliman, shee that not long agoe, with incredible expences made a verie long conuayance of water in the desertes of Arabia, for the benefite and ease of the Pilgrimes, Mecca in Ara∣bia. that go to the Mecca or Macca, as the Arabians tearme that Cittie, which ioyntly they call Medina Alnabi, that is to say, the Cittie of the Prophet, meaning thereby that Impious Seducer Ma∣homet. Which Gentlewoman being now mother-in-lawe to Cicala, is verie famous in these times, One occasion of the present war in Hun∣garie. for that she was the chiefest perswader of the last Em∣perour Amurath to moue warre against the Christi∣an Emperour, for the death of her onely deare Son, who was slaine with Hassan Bassa in the battail at Cupa. §. VIII. THere was Generall or rather Lieutenant for all Hungarie, Giaffer, why degraded. from Belgrado hetherwardes, in the yeare last past one Giaffer the Eunuch, by Nation an Hungarian. He was depriued of that charge for the same reasons, for which Hibraim was depriued. He hath warred in Persia vnder Osman, Sinan, and Ferat, vntill he was made Bassa of Tebrisio, Tauris. now cal- Tauris: where being besieged by the Persians, hee shewed great valour, wisedome and liberalitie. § IX. HAssan Bassa, borne at Herzecouina, sometime the Dukedome of Santa Saua, Hassan (Sonne to Mahamet Socoleuich,) Beglerbey of Grecia. is now the Begler∣bey of Grecia, as we call it, but of Rumelia as the Turkes tearme it: for the Greekes call that , which we call Europe, by which name [Romania] not onely Asia was called (as we reade in histories) after the translation of the Romane Empire to Constanti∣nople, but also Europe, and particularly Grecia. This Herzecouina is a part of the Prouince of Bossina, which stretcheth it selfe towardes Ragugia, in the high way that leadeth to Constantinople. How the Turks cal him that is chiefe next after the great Turke himselfe. The fore∣saide Hassan, was sonne to Mahomet Soculeuich, so called of Socol, a place in the same Prouince of Her∣zecouina, and was sometime Visier Azem, that is to say, the head of the counsell, and chiefe gouernour of the Ottoman. Empire vnder three Emperours: which office or charge the Mamalukes in the go∣uernment of the Souldan of Cairo do call Diadar or Deuidar, and the Grecians call it Protosymbolo. Hee is verie well beloued of his Souldiours for his great pleasantnes & iollitie. The state of Hassan. Hee leadeth with him conti∣nually many women, and through his great expen∣ses is halfe banckroupt. Hee hath beene in Persia, and was also in these warres of Hungarie: and being the greatest person among the rest of the gouernors of Prouinces (for dignitie and authoritie, and bee∣cause his iurisdiction stretcheth into Bulgaria, Ser∣uia, and Albania ) he keepeth a verie great trayne. First he was employed by the greate Turke at Ras∣grad in Bulgaria, aswell to hinder the Walachians and Transyluanians from passing ouer the riuer Danowe, as also if occasion should so require, that hee might be there readie to passe it ouer himselfe. But now he hath hand-ouer-head and verie rashly without a∣ny consideration sent him to Vidino, Vidino. sometimes cal∣led Bidene, a Sangiackshippe, not subiect to the Begler∣bey of Temesuar, as some haue written, but to him of Graecia. If hee liue, he will proue without doubt the greatest Captaine of that Empire. § X. HAfis Hacmat, Hafis Hacmet why degraded. sometimes Bassa of Cairo, and Eu∣nuch and an Albanian of the towne of Vonari, not farre from the Cicalessi, was Generall in Croatia and Bossina: but being accused of default for not hauing recouered Petrina, hee was degraded: yet now he is returned into fauour againe, and is in Sco∣pia. He is a iust man and a wise, and one that for re∣ligion, or rather superstition accepted this charge. He was at the first a Mahometane Preacher, (for so signifieth the word Hafis. ) He was the first man, that waged Turkish souldiours on horse-backe, with pay and prest-money: in which point, no doubt if the Ottoman Princes would resolue themselues to imi∣tate our Princes, they might haue (as it were) an in∣numerable company of horsemen and footmen. §. XI. THere were also in the Campe of Persia, Sinan, Sinan. Bassa of Buda, an Albanian of the Mountains of the Ducagini, a man esteemed among the Turkes to be wise and valourous: And Mahomet Satarzgi, Mahamet Sa∣tarzgi. an Albanian also: for the most valiant Captaines of the Turks are for the most part of that Nation. This Mahomet was a long time Bassa of Caramania, where he made himselfe knowne to be a man of great wis∣dome: but now soothing (forsooth) the humors of the Ladie Sultane -Mother his countrey woman, Why fauou∣red by the Sul∣tane mother. by shewing himselfe to be desirous of peace, hee hath not onely obtained the office of Tzader Mechei Bas∣si, that is to say, Chiefe Master of the Pauilions, but it is also thought that through the same fauour hee will be aduanced to greater dignities. They say, Why called Satarzgi. that while he was Peich to the great Turke, that is to say, his Footeman, hee beehaued himselfe so well in a fray that happened not farre from the olde Serra∣glio, where the Regall Palace is, as hauing hardly hādled his aduersaries with a Butchers knife, he was thereupon called Satarzgi, or rather because indeed he was a slaughterer. §. XII. THere was also one Haidar Bassa, Haidar Bassa. hee that beeing Beglerbey was sent by Amurath into Moldauia, who by his maner of proceeding there was in a cer∣taine sorte the occasion, why the Polonians resol∣ued with themselues to pay a yearely Donatiue or Beneuolence to the Turke, and so to bee agreed with him. He is now in Persia. .§ XIII. THere were likewise in Belgrado, Odauerdi & Velli. Odauerdi and Vel∣li, Bassaes both, the one of them well tried in the warres of Croatia and Bosna, the other in the recoue∣rie of Madauia out of the hands of Srenipetro, who with a band of Cosacthi had gotten possession there∣of, rather by rash temerity, then by any great wisdō. There are also in the Campe many other Sangi∣acchi and ordinarie Bassaes, whose names, because they are men of no great fame, are not yet come to our knowledge. §. XIIII. MOreouer, it is reported, Hassan: why he stirred vp the reliques of Mudahar to an insurrectiō. that there is recalled from Gemen or Gimin in Arabia Felice, one Has∣san an Arabian, a Foster-childe and kinsman to olde Sinan. This Hassan hauing cunningly procured the reliques of the kindred of Mudahar, to rise vp in a commotion, who had also before rebelled against Osman, he obtayned ouer them a very honourable victorie. And because he is verie rich, he will haue also some good meanes to maintaine himselfe, euen with the satisfaction of the souldiours. §. XV. HAlil Bassa, Generall of the Sea, Halil Bassa ge∣neral of the sea & his simpli∣citie. second Cousin to the now liuing Grand-Turke, is of Bosna or else of Hungaria, a Fresh-man, and such a one, as ha∣uing hetherto had no more skill but to collect and take vp the donatiues and beneuolences of the Ma∣ritine Capes of the Arcipelago and of Morea, and this last yeare to set on fire the Monasterie of the Calogi∣eri in Striuali, called in times past Strophade, because they had entertained the Spanish Armada: is held in no great estimation. And therefore it is supposed, that he shall be discharged of that office, Giaffer. & perhaps there shall be substituted in his place one Giaffer a Calabrian, brought vp by Vlucchiali: who although he fled at the ouerthrow in the yeare 1571. yet is he esteemed to be a man, that will proue well in Mari∣timall warfare. §. XVI. OVt of all questiō, Captains at sea that Empire wanteth men that are excellent in the profession of Sea-matters, for so much as the Turke hath not since the yeare 1572. hetherto made any Armada or Fleet of any ac∣account: and when occasion of imployment faileth, no meruell though men of worth and valour be not known, nay though they do wholy want indeede. And yet when soeuer he shall be peraduenture en∣forced to set forth a good bodie of an Armada, hee may take that course which his Predecessors haue done, that is to say, he may vse the seruice of the vali∣antest Pyrats, that he entertaineth in Tunise, in Bona, Famous Pirats in Busca, and elsewhere. Among whome the most fa∣mous that liue at this day are Cara Deli, Amurath Bei, Mahamet Bei, the three Memi, (whereof two are Al∣banians and the third is of Corsica.) Sala Bei & others. There is a certaine French politike author which writeth, that Ariadino Barbarossa, the famous Pirate, was allured by Soliman into his seruice, with verie honourable rewards, Why Soliman vsed the ser∣uice of Ariadi∣no. euen with the chiefe General∣ship of the Sea, aswel to adde strength to his Empire with the great riches of Ariadino, as also to the end that Ariadino should thereby bee weakened in such sort, as he should not be any more able to annoy the Ottoman State. And now after this discourse of the Captaines, I will speake of the common souldiours, and such members as are not so principall. § XVII. THe great Turke hath two sorts of souldiours: that is to say, Two sortes of souldiours of his owne and Auxiliarie. souldiours of his owne, & souldi∣ours Auxiliarie. 1. such as come to aide and as∣sist him. The souldiours, that are his owne, be either horsemen or footmen. Souldiours of his owne. I will therefore first treate of the former, because the verie sinews of that Empire consist wholly in the horsemen: and afterwardes I will speake of the rest. The best horsemen, The Spahi. that the Ottoman Empire hath, are the Spahi, who liue vpon their Timari. For the great Turke giueth two kinds of wages to his soul∣diours: one is called Timaro, and the other Vlefe. VVhat wages the Timari are The Timaro is properly a certaine pension or an assigne∣ment of rents, which for the most part are leuied out of the lands that are gotten in war, and are pro∣portionately distributed amōg the souldiors that are of good desert, & do answer in some sort to the anci∣ent Colonies and to Fees, or rather to Commendams. The reward, which the Romanes bestowed vppon their valiantest souldiours to enioy during life, was called Beneficium, and those Beneficiarii, that were so prouided for: the Greekes call it Timarion, and those that enioy the same Timarati, and Timarioti, deri∣uing the tearme from the Greeke worde , which signifieth Honour. Wherevpon we do read of Theo∣dorus, (not the Tiro, but the Stratelates, that is to say, the Pretor or conductor of the souldiours,) that Li∣cinius Augustus the Emperour, gaue vnto him a Ca∣stle in Heraclea for a Timaro, long before he was wic∣kedly martyred by his owne band of souldiours, as it is written in Phile the Greeke Poet, Damascene, and Nicephorus Calixtus, and as it is read in the Menaco, that is to say, in the Monthly Register of the Greeks. The said word Timaro may also be deriued, Niceph. Call. Eccles. Histor. Lib. 7. Cap. 44 and per∣aduenture more truly from the Turkish it selfe, whereby is signified a certaine kinde of procuration or prouision for some charge or gouernment, which the Timarioti are bound to haue ouer the lands that are graunted vnto them. The Vlefe is a payment, What wages the Vlefe are. which is daily disbursed by the Treasurers to the Souldiours that serue for pay, and to those of the Turkes Court, who are therefore called Vlofezgi, or rather Olophagi, that is to say, proui∣ded as it were only for their diet, deriuing that term from the Greeke worde , The Timari, which the Turke hath in Europe, may bee some sixteene thousande? Euerie Spahi, that hath from three to fiue thousand Aspres, of yearely rent, is bound to go to the war with one horse: from fiue to ten thousand, with two horses, and so by proportion to a certaine determinate quantitie: and some there bee that will carrie moe or fewer, according to their abilitie, and the desire which the haue of honour. The greatest part of these Spahi are subiect to the Beglerbey, and may con∣tayne some nine thousande Timari: the rest are vnder the Bassaes of Bassina, of Buda, and of Te∣mesuar. § XVIII. BEsides these Spahi, The Spaho∣glani. there are also the Spahoglani, who beeing such as commonly come out of the Serraglio, are some what more daintie and delicate, and are neatly apparraled like Courtiers after the Persian manner. They ride (like the Asians ) vpon little Saddles, so that they may easily bee vnhorsed. In times past they were not bounde to go to the warres without their Emperour: but at last many of them were (as it were) enforced to goe forth by Sinan and Giaffer, for verie want of good Souldi∣ours: who afterwarde wintered in Seruia, and Bel∣garia, did so destroy and consume the Countryes and the Peasants thereof, as they did more harme to the Turkes themselues, then if they had beene the verie Tartarians, whose apparell also they counter∣feyted, to the ende they might easily and handsomly couer theit misdemeanours. Among the Spahoglani, are accounted those also which are of the great Turkes Court: who are di∣stinguished into foure orders, viz. the Selectari, Vle∣fezgi, Guraba, and Spahoglani. But because the num∣ber of the Spahoglani is the greatest of al the rest, they are all generally and indifferently called Spahoglani. The Selectari and the Spahoglani, The selectari. are diuided into troupes▪ v z. the Selectari of the right side, and the Selectari of the left side: and so the Spahoglani of the right, and Spahoglani of the left: and different badges they haue one from the other. These foure troupes of Spahoglani and Selectari, with the two troupes of the Guraba and Vlefezgi, make vp sixe in all. The Guruba. The Vlefezgi. Guruba is in the Turkish speech the Plurall number of Ca∣rib and signifieth Poore and naked soules. And Vle∣fezgi is as much to say, as Hyred, or waged, as we haue tolde you before. Euerie one of these orders hath his Aga, which commaundeth two or three thousand horse. § XIX. THe Acanzii, The Acanzii, The Heduc∣chi. are for the most part Countrey Clownes, and are not like the Hayducches of the Hungarians, as some haue written: for the A∣canzii serue on Horsebacke, and the Hayducches on foote. And peraduenture Giouius, and other writers of our time do not well to call them Venturieri, or Voluntaries: for in cōsideration of some exemptions, and priuiledges which are graunted vnto them, they are bound to goe to warre. True it is, that somtimes they will stray abroad, and robbe the Countrey, as the Zingari and Tartars vse to doe. They are men of small woorth. They dwell for the most part in Dobruccia, a Prouince of Bulgaria, towards the Ri∣uer Danow. The Gionli are Venturiers, The Gionli. or Voluntaries, in deed, who togither with sundrie others, The Baratli. whom the Turks call Baratli, that is to say, such as liue in expectancie, doe goe to warre euen of their owne meere good will. The Mutefe∣raga. Among these, as also among the Muteferagà, (which are of the principall Courtiers of the Court, not bound to go to the warre, but only with the Sul∣tan himselfe,) there are many Christians that serue voluntarie. They haue speciall exemptions and pri∣uiledges. They go wandring abroad euerie where with great libertie, alwayes preuenting the armie, like Out-runners: but they giue the fift part of their bootie to their Lord. The other Baratli are compre∣hended in the families of the Bassaes, and Sangiacches, and in the number of the seruants to the Spahi. §▪ XX. THe Timari of Asia, The Timari of Asia. may bee about some fiftie thousand: and so by consequent about a hun∣dred and fiftie thousand horse and foote, and ser∣uants: that is to say▪ two thirds more then the Ti∣mari of Europe. But they are vnarmed, of small va∣lour, and not apt for warre, excepting onely some few of them that keepe vpon the Sea coastes, and serue in the Galleis. § XXI. THe Beglerbeyes of Asia, The Begler∣beyes of Asia. of Africa, of Europe. before the last warres of Persia, were thirtie: but since there are some moe added vnto them. In Affrica there are three: the kingdomes of Fesse and Marocco are rather tributa∣ries to the Turke: And in Europe there are sixe. But because I haue made often mention of this worde Beglerbey, I thinke it will not be amisse to tell you what it signifieth. The Turkish word Beglerbey, signifieth a Cap∣taine of Captaines, What Begler∣bey signifieth. or Prince of Princes: for the Be∣glerbeyes are the Supreme Lordes ouer all that haue any militarie commaund in the Prouinces which are subiect vnto them: and are the verie same, that the Melicul Vmerca be with the Arabians, and , with the Greekes. Three Beglerbeyes there be, that are in authoritie aboue the rest, and sit in e∣quall place with the Bassaes, whome the Turkcs call Visiers, when they sit together in the open Diuano, The Diuan▪ that is to say, in the Counsell or Court of audience in the presence of the Great Turke: some doe verie ill and corruptly call it Douana and Tiphano. The first of them is the Rumeli Beglerbeg, The Rumeli Beglerbey. that is to say, the Beglerbey of Romania, or of graecia, or (as I tould you before) of Europe. He resideth in Sophia, which peraduenture may bee the auncient Tibisca: but it is not (as some write) the Metropoliticall Cittie of Bolgaria or Volgaria, so called of the people that came thither from the riuer Volga: nor yet is it Nico∣polis, which is so famous for the victorie which Tra∣iane the Emperour had ouer Decebalus King of the Dacians. Neither is it true that Sophia is the same that Scopia is, which is a Citie either of Dardania or of Macedonia, as other some haue written: nor was it Sardica, which is famous for the Synode there kept vnder the the Empire of the Sonnes of Constantine: For at this day that is not called Sophia, but Triadit∣za. The Anatoli Beglerbeg is the second, The Anatoli. Beglerbey. that is to say, the Beglerbey of Notalia, otherwise called Asia the lesse. He resideth in Cutheia, in former times called Cotyaio, a Citie of Phrygia. Some call it by another name, The Denizi Beglerbey. and seate it (peraduenture amisse) in Galatia. The Denizi Beglerbeg is he that is the Beglerbey of the Sea, otherwise called, the Captaine Bassa. Hee resideth for the most part in Constantinople, which the Turkes by a corrupt word call Stamboli: and hath the chiefe charge of the Arsenall, or Store-house for shipping. Before that Soliman made him a Begler∣bey, he was called the Sangiacch of Gallipoli. He hath for his maintenance, the Reuenues of the office of the Subassi of Galata, that is to say, the Treasourer of Pera, which office is let to ferme, for the yearly rent of about some sixteene thousand crownes: he hath also the reuenues of the nine Islands that lie in the Arcipelago, the chiefe whereof is Nixia. And now, seeing we haue tould you of the horsemen, let vs tell you likewise of the souldiours that serue on foote. §. XXII. THese are for the most parte Giannizzaries, which are drawne out of the Masse or compa∣ny of the Agiamoglani, The Agiamo∣glani. that is to say, vnexpert youthes culled out of the tenthes of the Christians. The rest of the Agiamoglani do serue in Serraglioes to row in the Caicchies, which is a kind of Boate, and to dresse their gardens, and to do such other serui∣ces. The greatest part of them haue not aboue one Aspro a day. The Grecians call Aspro (and not Aspero, The Turkish coynes. as some would haue it) the verie same money which the Arabians call Osmannes, and the Turks Asce, so termed for the white∣nesse of it, Aspri. because it is made of siluer. Of Aspres there bee two sorts, the lesser, and the bigger. The lesser are but of small goodnesse, and beautie, though they be most in vse, and common among the people. The bigger are of better siluer: and with them are payed the wages of the Souldiours, and the fees of the Courtiers. They are by some writers called Siderocapsia▪ of Siderocapsa, a Castle in the Prouince of Thasso, which is neere to the famous mountaine Athos in Europe, called by the Greekee , Mons Ae∣gaeus, the Goat-hill, either because it reacheth into the Aegaean, sea, or because it is full of Goates and Kids: or ra∣ther, , the Holy hill, commonly called by the Turkes, Seitbag, because there are on it three and twentie Monasteries of Calogieri, or Monkes, that loue to liue in the Wildernesse. One Aspro is worth 24. Manguri. Manguri: (the Manguro is a Brasse-Money, and is worth as much as the auncient Nu∣mulus. ) Fiue good Aspres in weight make a Dramma, Dramma. or Drachma, (seuen pence sterling:) twelue Drammaes make a Taller, Tellero. (or a Doller: ) and one Taller and a halfe make a Venician Cecchino, Cecchino. which is as much as a Tur∣kish Sultanine being a coine of gold, and the greatest price that the Turkes haue, Sultanino. and is worth some sixteene Paules of Rome, or much there about. The Soltanine or Soldano, (as others tearme it) is truly so called of the Sultanes, that is to say, of the Ottoman Emperours, euen as the Cecchi∣no is called a Dukate, Brizantini. of the Dukes of the Venetian estate: and as the Bizantii, or Bizantini, in the times of the Gre∣cian Emperours, were so called of Bizantium, now Con∣stantinople: and were euen as much worth as the Sul∣tanini. Some writers there be, The diuerse values of these coynes at se∣uerall times. that haue set downe diuerse opi∣nions of this foresaid account, because they haue had a con∣sideration of their seuerall prises at seuerall times For some times the Aspro hath beene worth no more but onely eight Manguri, the Dramma but foure Aspres: Nine Aspres made a Taller: and so the Cecchino, as also the Sultani∣no, were no more but 54. Aspres the peece. But now all these Moneyes are altered: For the Taller is worth seuen∣tie, or 80. Aspres: the Cecchino 110. 120. and 125▪ And this came to passe especially by reason of the heauie imposi∣tions that were imposed in Constantinople, by occasion of the Persianwar. The auncient mony also that went currant in the Ottoman Empyre was prohibited, because it was stamped with sundry Images vpon it, which was forbidden by the law of Mahamet: but rather in deed, and in verie truth, because it was good siluer, and so by coyning it againe somewhat baser, the Treasurie and the Officers did gaine greatly thereby. But now (forsooth) they are not so supersti∣tious as they haue beene: for they do holde that money onely to be good and lawfull, which is of the best allay. This little I haue thought good to set downe touching their money, to the end ye might haue a perfite knowledge of the true wa∣ges, which the Ottoman Princes doe giue to their Souldi∣ours. The rest of this matter, togither with the Aegyptian, Arabian, Sorian and Persian coines, that run currant tho∣rough all this Empire, ye may haue (with the licence of the Venitian superiors) out of a late moderne writer: who if hee had not shewed himselfe somewhat irreligious, no doubt hee would haue deserued great commendation for the know∣ledge that he hath disclosed in many Turkish matters. The Giannizzaries then (as it hath beene sayd) are the best souldiors on foot, The Giannez∣zaries. that the Turkish Empire hath. They serue as the Praetorian souldiours did, and the Mamulukes, for the sauegard of their Lord, and as did those valiant youths that alwayes accom∣panied the kings of Persia, who were called also Iani∣tores, or Porters, as saith the Authour of that booke, whose title is De mundo, amōg the works of Aristotle. And thereupon it pleased some peraduenture to think, that the Giannezzaries were so called of Ianua: i. a Doore, Not so called of the worde Ianua. alluding to the word Porta▪ that is to say the Court of the great Turke, because his Court of Audience is ordinarily kept in the gate of his Palace. But in truth, they are greatly deceyued therein: for a Gate in the Turkish language is called Capi, and so is not Ianua. i. a Dore: and therefore the chiefe Por∣ter is called by the Turkes Capisi Bassi. The word Gi∣annizzaro is compounded of two Turkish wordes, The true Ety∣mologie of the Giannizzaries. Iegni-Zeri, which signifie Noua Militia, a new Soul∣dierie: New, not because it was newly brought in, (for it was instituted euen by Osmanne Gasi, other∣wise called Ottoman, and renued, or rather bettered and enlarged by Amurath the first, vpon the aduice and counsell of Cara Rustem, who was then helde by the Turks to be a verie holy man:) But new or fresh they are called, because the Giannizzaries are the sonnes of Christians, taken from their fathers whiles they are but children, by the Officers of the great Turke, as it were for a tribute, euerie fift or seuen yeare, and sometimes oftener: beeing of the age some peraduenture of eight, some of ten, some of twentie yeares, and some aboue. And afterwardes they are for the most part destributed among the Turkes in Natolia, to the end they may be instructed betimes in the lawes of Mahamet, learne the fashions and language of that Nation, and accustome them∣selues to labour and hardnesse, and then are they called Agiamoglani, as it hath beene told you before. When they are growne fit for the warres, then they are sent to the Court, to be admitted into the order of the Giannizzaries. Those that are not found fit for the warres, are sent to the Shippes, and to the Gal∣lies, that they may be employed in the Arte of Sea-faring. But they that are of a pregnant wit and good Spirit, are at the verie first shut vp in one of the Serraglioes of Andrinople, or of Constantinople, or of Pera, and so by means they come to be employed in the seruice of the great Turke about his Cham∣ber, vnder the rule and subiection of certaine parti∣cular gouernours. The Giannizzaries haue for their stipend betwene fiue and sixe Aspres a day, The Gianniz∣zaries wages. &c. and so haue the Agiamo∣glani likewise: but they are distinguished by liueries. For the Giannizzaries haue two liueries euery yeare, and the Agimoglani haue but one. The Giannizzaries doe handle the Arquebuse very well, and are pro∣perly called the Arquebusiers of the great Turkes guard. They will fight resolutely for honour. Some of the Giannazzaries remaine in the frontiers, and in Garisons: some of them also keepe on the sea, and serue in the Gallies, but the greatest part of them are resident, where the great Turke is: and hereupon it commeth that there are so many in Constantinople, where principally they may sooner become Gian∣nizzaries. But those that are made Giannizzaries at Damasco at Cairo & elswhere: perhaps, when they come to Constantinople; vnlesse they be there confir∣med, may not wear the Coyffe, which is called Zarcu∣la: the last time that they wēt out to wars with their Aga (a thing not verie vsual) they rather caused great disorder, thē did any seruice: partly because they do not willingly obay their Generall Captaine, Their Captain Generall. (whō by the Persian word they call Ser-Dar, and by the A∣rabike Ser-Asker: ) and partly because in our times their order is indeed imbasterdized, and nothing so valourous and faithfull, as it hath beene heretofore. Aga, is the name of the Giannizzaries Captaine, What Aga is▪ and what A∣galari are. and is the chiefe of all the Agalari, who are principall Horse∣men, that alwaies accompanie the person of the great Turke, and are so called of the word Aga, which signifieth a staffe, and is a token of the authoritie which they haue o∣uer the Chiliarches, the Tribunes, and the Droncarii or Troncarii, so tearmed a Tronco, of a Bastone or Tron∣chion which they carie in their hand. Moreouer the Giannizzaries are verie insolent, The insolence of the Gianniz¦zaries. not onely towards priuate persons, who greatly re∣spect them per-force, but also towardes the great Turke himselfe. For hauing in their hands all the principall forces of the Ottoman Empire, and being verie seldome, or verie sclenderly chastised for any fault and thereupon knowing themselues to be very mightie and greatly feared, they haue not forborne many times to threaten, that they would depose their great Lord and Maister, and set his Son in his throne: yea and verie oftentimes they haue violent∣ly with most barbarous furie enforced their Empe∣rour to yeelde vnto them in most vnrighteous cau∣ses: As for example, (to leaue those that are aunci∣ent,) they so dealt with the last Amurath, as they compelled him to giue them into their handes ei∣ther quicke or dead, the chiefe Dephterdaro, and Ma∣hamet Bassa the Armenian, (a man whome hee loued beyond all measure,) accusing them, that through their fault, they were not payed their wages by them with good monies. These Dephterdari or treasourers are three, The Dephter∣dari. one is the chiefe, and as it were the President of the chamber, the o∣ther two are as Collegues or Assistants in the Exchecker. It hath fallen out also, that they are thus become the more sedicious and insolent, because the num∣ber of them is greatly encreased and multiplied, and that through the default of the officers that are sent to make the choice of the youthes: for they doe not choose the best and the most able for warfare (as it was wont to be vsed in times past,) but such as they may haue for want of better men, shuffeling in of∣tentimes, by fauour and bribes, many natural borne Turkes, and sonnes of the Giannizzaries themselues: as indeede it came to passe in these last yeares, wher∣in they haue had no consideration of any other thing but onely of the disposition of bodie, and ripenesse of yeares, to the end they might the soo∣ner shew themselues in the warres, and so passe for old and experienced souldiours, though in truth vtterly voide of any militarie discipline. §. XXII. SOme Spahi there be also, that serue on foote, Footmen of the Spahi. as those which are at Negroponte, Misitra, and o∣ther maritimall places, and are emploied for ouer∣seers, of the Gallie-Slaues: they are subiect to the Captaine of the Sea. There is likewise an Infanterie or company of footemen in the Garrisons, Asappi & Bes∣ly footmen. which is comprehen∣ded vnder the name of Asappi and of Besli. The Asap∣pi or Asepi, are not the same, which the Hungarians call Hussaroni, as one Greek author hath written: for the Asappi go to warre for wages on foote, but the Hussaroni on horsebacke. §. XXIII. FInally the last Amurath, The Culcar∣dasi. perceiuing that he had not such a number of souldiours of action and seruice as that Empire was wont to haue in times past (for the reasons which I will touch hereafter) hath brought in a new kind of souldierie, both of foote and horse, consisting of townesmen and pea∣saunts being naturall Turkes: and hath granted vn∣to them many priuileges of profite and honour, cal∣ling them Culcardasi, a word that signifieth, brethren to Slaues, proper onely to the Slaues Rinegate and is a most honourable tearme among the Turkes. §. XXIIII. IN Africa the Turkes haue either no horsemen at all, Souldiours in Africa▪ or else verie few: but some footmen they haue, which remaine in the Garrisons of Algieri, of Tuni∣si, of Tripoli, of Goletta, and of other places on that coast: where for feare of the Spanyardes, who are verie well fortified with Garrisons, and strongly fensed in those parts, because they are afraid of loo∣sing that which they haue there in possessiō, it is ve∣rie necessarie & behouefull, that they should conti∣nually reside and stay. And these are the Souldiours aswell horsemen as footmē, whom the Great Turke may vse in his warres as souldiours of his owne. Touching whom I am to aduertise you, some∣what of mine opinion. §. XXV. FIrst, The Authors Aduertisemēts touching the Turkes soul∣ours. that the said souldiours are rather in opinion and fame, so great a multitude as verie many haue reported them to be, then in truth they are: for as much as good souldiours there are but few: meane souldiours not many, and of such as make a multi∣tude, namely seruitors, victualers and others that fol∣low the armie, a mā shold make but small reconing. Secondly that the horsemen, in whome principally consisteth the power of that Empire, are not at this day so lustie, resolute, and painfull, and to be shorte nothing at all such as they were wont to be, for that they haue been greatly wasted and consumed in the warres of Persia, and particularly in this war of Hun∣garie, where barley was so scant, and all other kinde of victualles, for men, horses, cammels and other cattell verie deere. Thirdly, that the Spahi, who are the best horsemen that the great Turke hath, haue not had any meanes to buy good horses, not only by reason of the dearth of all things, (which I tell you was verie great) but also because all their good horses are spent and con∣sumed, neither haue the Spahi any commoditie or benefit to maintaine them withall, or to buy them any new, but only that which they defaulke out of their Timari. Moreouer, they beeing become men now a dayes greatly giuen to ease and to gaines, do not sticke to take money to interest, rather to the end they may buy some Timari withall then buy any horse-flesh with it, yea and to lend it out at vsurie to others that afterwardes become banckrouts. And although peraduenture it may seeme to some, that in these last yeares, the horses were many: the cause thereof was this, that the Turkes are now become so tender and effeminate, (especially since the Delica∣cies of the Persians haue wrought euen the very selfe same effect in thē, which riot and excesse wrought among the Grecians and the Romanes ) that euery man (for sooth) will carie with him to the wars, so many easments of bedding, kitchen & victual, that they are enforced to vse many horses for those purposes: nei∣ther is there any horsemen; (be he neuer so arrant a clown or peasant) but he carieth more thē one with him: & yet all of them (God wot) stark nought, very leane, & altogether vnseruiceable, as we haue tould you, & as the experience of the battail of Agria hath manifestly proued. But forasmuch, as touching the diminution of the Ottomā armies, diuers men do diuersly reason, it will not be perhaps far frō the purpose, or at least not incōuenient, if I tel you al∣so what I thinke of it. §. XXVI. VVIthout all question the Ottoman Empire doth want of that number of souldiours which it was wont to haue in their armies. The Authors opinion tou∣ching the de∣creasing of the Ottoman Ar∣mies. And the reasō of it is this: 1. that the Turkish estate being now greatly enlarged, those Turks, who in times past for the straitnes of rowme & narrownes of the countrie, ran all to the wars like the Tartarians, haue now got∣ten more ease, greater pleasure, & better countrie thē they had before, so that they do not verie willingly resolue with thēselues to leaue their own houses, & to go to the Campe. 2. Moreouer the countrey by reason of the largenes thereof is so far distant & as it were diuided frō the places where they must fight, that it breedeth great tediousnes in thē to go to the wars: & to people or to replenish it al with inhabitāts it is a very hard matter, especially cōsidering that the Ottomā Princes haue alwaies vsed to extirpate & (as a man may say) vtterly to root out the ancient inha∣bitants, of any new Prouinces, which they haue cō∣quered & gotten into their possession: or at least to transport thē into some other countries. 3. Ye may also adde hereunto, that the Cōmoditie & encrease of the countrey hath opened a way to the Turks for diuers other, and greater traffiques then they had in times past: wherin the greatest part of thē being em∣ployed, they cannot so easely bee resolued now to leaue thē & to go to fight, vnlesse they bee enforced to it against their willes: because by that course they must seeke to enrich themselues with more in∣certaintie and greater hazard of their liues, then by this of traffike. 4. Besides all this the Turkish armies consist (for the most part) onely of Rinegate slaues, and those, Christians: for the Turkes doe not make any slaues of the Persians or Tartarians, be∣cause they will not part or diuide with them their Militarie honours and aduauncements, wherein all the riches, credit and authoritie of their estate doth wholy consist, and wherewith that Empire doth counterpoise the perill and daunger, whereunto it might bee subiect, if they should admit so great a number of armed Rinegadoes. 5. Those of Asia, who in times past were wont to execute all Militarie func∣tions, are now held in small reputation, or none at all, euen as the naturall Turkes are, and esteemed to be verie base minded and cowards, no lesse tender and effeminate, then the auncient Asiatici were thought to be: and therefore they graunt vnto them onely the honours of Cadileskieri and Cadi: excepting some few, that are admitted to be souldiours, and do serue the Sangiacchi, and the Bassaes, who ordinarily and for the most part are themselues slaues of Europe, and sent to be gouernours in diuerse places of Asia. The Cadiliskieri (or as the Arabians call them) Casiaskeri, The Cadiles∣kieri, and the Cadi. that is to say, chiefe Iudges in the Ottoman Empire, and the ordinary Iudges of causes both Ci∣uill and Militarie, are two, the one in Natolia, and the other in Romania. He of Cairo is not properly called Cadiliskiero (as some haue written) but the Graund-Cadi, and was instituted by Selem, after that he had subdued a great part of the Armenians, the Aegyp∣tians, the Sorians, and the Arabians. And although there be some, Why Greece is not now so well peopled as it hath bin. that do attribute the want of Turkish Souldiers, to the diminishment of men, by example of the Arcipelago, and of Greece, which is for the most part disinhabited, and of all Macedonia, which is the best part of the Turkes pos∣sessions: it may be answered, that Greece euer since those times wherein the flower of her greatnes and Maiestie was extinguished, hath also remained so barren & void of men, that it was neuer so reinhabi∣ted as it was before. Paulus Aemilius in one onely day destroyed threescore and ten Cities in Epirus: and many Ilandes there be, which are vtterly waste, and not habitable for barrennesse. Besides that, the Ciuill warres of the Romans, the simplicitie of the Greeke Emperours, the Armadaes, and fleetes of the Sara∣cens, and also of the Latines, and last of all of the Turkes, togither with the notorious iniuries of ro∣uers and Pirates, haue neuer suffered those Ilandes, and the rest of that most populous Countrey, so much as to take breath. True also it is, How it com∣meth to passe that the Turks countrey is so much disin∣habited. that a man may walke many a mile through the Turks Countrey, and find neither men nor houses. But the reason of this is, for that the In∣habitants hauing left the townes and walled places, which are situate either vpon the beaten and com∣mon high wayes, or very neere vnto them are eloy∣ned afarre of, and haue scattered themselues further within the countrey, and retired into places among the Mountaines that are more strong, where they haue setled themselues in verie populous numbers, because they would be safe & secure from the mur∣thers, and robberies of the Souldiers: who are wont euen among the Turks (I would to God it were not so also among vs Christians) to liue at their owne dis∣cretion, without all discretion, spoyling and wasting whatsoeuer they can attaine: for such is their vse and wickednesse, not the profession of true Souldi∣ers, as more at large I haue shewed in my booke cal∣led Militia Christiana, Christian Souldierie. And these are in mine opinion, Why the Turks armies are so full of poore rascals. the most certaine and true reasons of the Diminution of the Ottoman armies: but why they are now so full of people that are poore, and as it were vtterly spoyled, this reason may be yeelded, viz. for that onely men of euill dis∣position, and such as are the basest persons, and of no woorth, runne headlong to their warres. And so much the rather, for that the Spahi themselues doe send thither in their owne rowmes their seruants & knaues, who togither with the rest of the Souldiers, haue no sooner taken a bootie (or peraduenture no sooner want an occasion to catch a bootie) but they will flie out of the campe, and returne home againe. As for example, the souldiers of Sinan did in Wala∣chia the last year, who hauing nothing left, but their shirt-sleeues, and being almost vtterly spoyled: be∣cause they would not die for cold and hunger, and because they found nothing to steale for their relief in the fieldes, began almost euen at the first to for∣sake him: yea and at the returne of the great. Turke himselfe from Belgrado to Constantinople, all the soul∣diers almost would needes follow him, and none of their Captaines were able to hold them. Now that I haue tolde you of the Souldiours, which the Great Turke hath of his owne, I wil tell you of his Souldiers Auxiliarie. § XXVII. AMong all the Auxiliarie Souldiers, Souldiers Auxiliarie. whose ser∣uice and helpe hee vseth in his affaires, without all doubt, the chiefest, the most in number, nay the onely men are the Tartarians: the knowledge of whom, because it is not peraduenture so manifest to euerie man, I will truly and faithfully display, as I haue done in all thinges before, and will doe also in those matters which are to bee set downe here∣after: following that which I haue learned and vnderstoode from many persons that are verie wor∣thie of credite, and haue had long practise and traf∣fike with the Tartarians themselues, and auoyding especially those fables, which diuerse men haue written of them. I will adde also thereunto some∣what of the Circassians, as partly depending vppon them, and likewise of the Curdians, of the Drusians, and of the Arabians. But because there be diuerse sortes of the Tarta∣rians or Tartars, so called peraduenture, because they are the Reliques (as the worde in deede signifieth in the Syrian tongue) of those Isdraelites, that were transported beyond Media being then not inhabited: I will treate but onely of those that serue for our purpose. And those bee they, which are subiect to a King that keepeth in Taurica. Whereof some doe dwell in Europe, and some in Asia, betweene the Poole Meotis, called at this day Mar Delle Zabacche: the Riuer Tanais, called by the Tartarians Don: the riuer Volga, which they call Rha, and Edil, and the Mengrellians, and Circassians: and all these are called Nogai. For the other Tartarians, on this side and beyonde the Volga, betweene Mos∣couia, and the Sea of Baccu, that is to say the Cas∣pian Sea, and the Georgians are partly subiect to the Moscouite, partly free and of themselues, and partly vnder the iurisdiction of the Turke, there where Demir Capi standeth, sometimes called the Caspian or Iron Gates. This foresaide King is called the Tartar of Crimo. Crimo. Iegnibasca. Nowe Crimo or Kriim (call it as you list) is the chiefe and principall Cittie of all the King∣dome, although hee bee resident for the most part in Iegni Bascca, a place in Chersonesus Taurica, called at this day by the Polackes and Russians, Pe∣rocopska. The Crimo is beyonde that, neere to the Ditch, Why the Tar∣tarians are called Preco∣pisi. whereof the Tartarians, especially by the sayde Polackes, and Russians are called Precopisi, which is as a man may say Zappahsi innansi, Dig∣ged or delued foorth, so tearmed of the worde Procop, which signifieth a hollowing or a digging, and not of a certaine King of theirs, whom some will needes haue to bee one Procopio. Neither is it true (as others affirme) that such a Ditch was made but of late, as it appeareth by Herodotus, there where hee maketh mention of the Market of Cremne. The tytle of the Tartarian King, is Han, (which signifieth a Lorde) and not Chan, vnlesse wee will pronounce C. for H. as the Italian vseth some∣times to doe in certaine Latine wordes: The title of the Tartar king. Han. Kiocai. Zar. or with a more harde pronounciation as the Dutch doe Kiocai, in Beluacens is signifieth Kioc-Han, that is to say, Gog-Han, a worde familiar and welknowen in the holie Scriptures. Ezekiel. 38. and 39. Reuel-20. The Polacckes call him Zar, that is to say, Caesar. The Familie or house of the Tartar King, The surname of the Tartar King. which giueth him his Surname, is Kirei: whereuppon they haue beene called Mahomet Kirei Han, Is∣lam Kirei Han, Hassan Kirei Han. The King nowe liuing is called Alip: So that by his stile, you may call him, Alip Kirei Han. i. Alip Kirei the Chan, as in Fraunce Hugh Capet the king, Henrie Valois the king, Henrie Burbon the king, &c. The coast of Taurica, Which part of Taurica be∣longeth to the Turke, and which to the Tartar. that is watered with the Blacke Sea, till yee come to the streyte of Os∣phorus, (which is the Cimmerian Bosphorus ) at the entrance of the Poole Maeotis, belongeth to the Turke: But betweene the Continent, and that part which is watered with the sayde Poole, be∣longeth all to the Tartar, although many Christi∣ans that vse the Greeke rites and ceremonies, doe dwell there also. Of these Tartarians, VVhy the Moscouite feareth the Tartarians. the Moscouite standeth in greate feare, because with sundrie In-roades they enter into his Countrey, and carrie away ma∣nie of his Subiectes, to sell them afterwardes to the Turkes, and others: and in the yeare one thou∣sand fiue hundred and seuentie: they burnt the very Cittie of Mosco it selfe: howe much more then woulde hee feare them, if hee shoulde goe out of his owne Countrey? In deed the Moscouite may annoy the Tartarians that dwell in Asia, and keepe them from dooing any hurt to the Christians vp∣on the banke of Volga, where they are to bee founde as soone as they haue passed ouer the Riuer. And herevppon it commeth to passe, that they goe out but in a small number. and that in this present warre, the report of their multitude is farre greater then in truth it is. These Tartarians that are vnder the Mos∣couite, Tartarians vnder the Moscouite. are those of Cassan, Asdrahan, and Ci∣trahan: of whome, because they serue not to our purpose, I will not say anie thing at this time. The Tartarians of Europe, Tartarians of Europe. that dwell in Tau∣rica, and out of Taurica, from the Poole Maeotis, to the greate Sea, can not bee hindered by the Moscouites, without the good leaue and pleasure of the Polaccke. For they must needes passe through his Countrey, eyther by the way of Smo∣lensko, or else somewhat lower, by the way of Tanais, neerer to the Poole. But those wayes are verie difficult, both in regarde of the Riuers, and also of the Fennes and Marishes: and besides that, they are verie long. The Tartari∣ans are Sar∣matians. And these are the ve∣rie selfe same Sarmatians, which are of Sarmatia in Europe and Asia: For the Auncient Wri∣ters doe make Scythia, and Sarmatia, to bee all one. The Weapons of the Tartarians are Scimitarres and Bowes. The Tartari∣ans weapons. And because they want that quan∣titie of Steeles both of wood and Iron, whereof they haue great neede to make their arrowes withall, they make them of Reedes, whereof they haue great aboundaunce. They are ve∣rie keene and sharpe, which they can handle verie well and nimbly, as well in shooting them foorth outright, as also backewardes, when they make as though they woulde retyre and flie away: which kinde of fight they vse more like to theeues then souldiers. They all ride on Horsebacke: their horses are small, and vnshodde: when they passe ouer the Ices, which in those partes are verie great, they driue a crooked nayle into their horses feete, to auoyde the daunger to slipping: couragious they bee, and verie apt to labour, and take paynes. § XXIX. THe Turkes vse the Tartarians in their warres, Why the Turkes vse the seruice of the Tartarians. both because they are all of one offspring, (for Mahometanes they bee all:) as also, and especiallye because they shoulde not vnite them∣selues with their enemies agaynst them: for they are the onelie men whome the Turkes doe greatliest doubt: and the rather, for that (as Sultan Soliman saide once in a Counsell which hee helde in his owne presence, The opinion of Sultan So∣liman. touching those Princes whome the Ottoman Empire ought chiefly to feare:) the Tartarians may of a soden runne with infinite numbers euen to Constantinople it selfe, and arriue there, before that euer the Turkes can be pre∣pared for defence against them. Why the Turke and O∣ther Princes seeke to keepe friendshippe with the Tar∣tars. And hereupon it commeth to passe that the Turkes do endeuour by all kinde of good offices to hold them in friendship, and to be allied with them in mariage: (for in that respect Solimans mother was maried to his father, she being a Tartarian, and the daughter of Mehe∣met Kirei: ) the Turkes also for the same reason doe bestowe diuers contributions and beneuolence vp∣on the Tartarians, yea, such and so great, as in the time of warres a Leauie of the Tartarians is verie costly to the great Turke, because hee must of ne∣cessitie giue them so much, as may bee sufficient not onely to maintayne themselues, but their wiues also and children which they leaue at home: so that to tie them the faster and safer vnto them, besids the bonds of alliance and kindnesse they are enforced to vse this necessarie exigent, whereas on the contrary side, in the time of Soliman the Tartarians were en∣forced vnder Sedac Kirsi to gratifie the Turke. The Moscouite and the Polack likewise do bestow great gratuities vpon the said Tartarians, for feare of their soden in-roades which they may make vpon them in the time of haruest. The Moldauian also, although hee pay tribute to the Turke, yet is he bound in many respects to gra∣fie the Tartarians, who are in those parts none other∣wise held to be friends to any, then the Switzers are to the Princes in our countries But because the passages of the Tartarians into Hungarie in this time of warre, The voyage that the Tarta¦rians may make into Hungarie. are diuers and vncer∣taine, and so may also be in times to come, it shall not bee vnfruitfull and inconuenient, if I touch the courses and voyages, which they may take, to the end that we on our side may the more easily en∣deuour and prouide either altogether to hinder them, or at least to make their arriuall there to bee more difficult vnto them. .§ XXX. THe Tartarians, Through the Polack coun∣trey inhabited: when they will ioyne thēselues with the Turkish armies, must needes of neces∣sitie passe through the Polack countrey, either inha∣bited, or wast and desert. By Russia and Podolia. The countrey inhabi∣ted, is Russia, & Podolia, two Prouinces which are on their right hand. They may passe also on a soden vn∣der Premisla, By Premisla. by the vallies that lead into vpper Hun∣gary. But both these former waies may be easily stop∣ped by the Polackes, and the last also by the Imperi∣alistes, and the Transyluanians. They may likewise passe at Sumber, By Sambur. or somwhat neerer to Transyluania: but this is a more difficult way then the rest. Through the wast or desert countrey, Through the wast Polack Countrey. they may passe two wayes, the one farre from the Sea, the o∣ther nigh to the Sea. If they will go that way which is farre from the Sea, they arriue at the Riuer Nie∣stro and so enter into Moldauia, and from thence trauersing Walachia, By Seuerino. they come to Zuerin or Seuerino (so called by the christians in memorie of Seuerus the Emperour:) but this may be stopped by the Polac∣ches, the Moldauians and the Walacchians. At Seue∣rino, if they had the countrey friendly and fauoura∣ble vnto them, yet they may peraduenture haue somwhat to do, before they can passe ouer the Ri∣uer Danow: but now forasmuch as that place is at the deuotiō of the Transyluaniā, they shal be enforced to passe it, & to make way to thēselues by force & arms: which will proue no lesse difficult vntō them, then if they should haue attempted the voyage by land. The Tartarians also may come to the Niestro, By Acherma∣no. by the way that is nigh to the Sea: for they may passe to Achermano, (which the Polacckes call Bialogrod, the Moldauians Cittat-Alba, and the Hungarians Nestor Alba, ) a territorie and Sangiacche-ship belonging to the Turkes, at the mouth of the said Riuer Niester, and not at the mouth of Ister or Danubius, as some haue written: and it is neere to the Sangiacche-ship of Bendero, By Bendero. called by the Polackes and Moldauians Tegina, and is a place in the Prouince of Maldauia, but subiect to the Turke, through the default of that Aaron the Vaiuode, who in this present warre, thinking to reconcile himselfe, for the reuolt which he made from the Turkes, would not surprise it, when he might. In the said Sangiacke-shippes, the Tartarians may take two wayes, the one by passing the Riuers of Pruto and Sereto, and so annoying Walachia: the other without passing the saide Riuers, and by go∣ing ouer the Danowe in Bulgaria, which is a countrey belonging to the Turke. This last way, though at this time it would be the safer, yet for all that it would not be without great difficultie, yea, and so∣much the rather, for that the Turkes themselues will not willingly yeeld their consents that the Tar∣tarians shall take that way, for feare least they should wast their countrey. Which way the Tartarians went & came to and from this presēt war The first time, that they pas∣sed to this present warre, they tooke the way of Pre∣misla, and in their returne they went home by Seue∣rino: but after that they were discomfited and ouer∣throwne by the Walachians and Transyluanians, to the end they might more easily saue themselues in their returne homewardes, they tooke the way last before named. §. XXXI. BEsids the Tartarians aboue mentioned, The Giebeli Tartarians, their weapons & habitation. there are also certain other Tartarians called Giebeli, which may be to the number of about two thousand, they handle the Scimitarre and the Bow: they weare a Salate and a Iacke, whereupon they haue gotten the name of Giebeli, that is to say, men of armes. They dwel commonly in Dobruccia, between the Danowe, and the Ruines of the wall, that was caused to bee made by the Greek Emperours, from Gorasui, neere to Silistria, as far as Constane, vpon the banke of the Greeke Sea. Why the Turkes vse them. These Tartarians do the Turkes ve∣rie often vse, because they would make the worlde beleeue that the Tartarians of Crimo, are come to as∣sist and succour them: and so causing these few Tar∣tarians to passe ouer on this side of the Danowe: (for they dwell in the vttermost parte of Moldauia, bee∣tweene the Niestro and the Danowe, ) euen vntil they come to the great sea in the Sang ack-ships of Bende∣ro and Achermano (whereof I tould you somewhat but a little before,) they doe mightily encrease the rumor of them, and breede a great feare in our peo∣ple. Lastly, The voyage of the Tartari¦ans of Europe into Persia in old time. I will conclude this discourse touching the Tartarians, with a conceite worthie of conside∣ration and memorie, and it this, that as the Tartars of Europe in the time of the Romanes went euen as farre as Persia, by the way of Demir-Capi, that is to say, the iron gates, a place verie famous and renow∣med in regard of Alexander the great, passing through the countrey of the Georgianes: euen so the verie selfe same way was taken in our daies, particu∣larly by Osman Bassa, who therein did greatly labour to imitate, And of Osman Bassa of late time. or rather to ouergo Domitius Corbulo, and Pompeius Magnus, as yee may reade in Tacitus and Dion. §. XXXII. THe Circassians, sometimes called the Zighi, The Circassian are by the Polackes named Pientzcorschii, that is to say the Inhabitants of fiue mountaynes, and therefore they are also tearmed Quinque-Mon∣tani▪ i. Fiue-Mountayne-men. They doe not reach to the Caspian Sea, as some haue written, but only to the Cimmerian Bosphorus, to the Poole Maeotis, and to the great-Sea. Their maner of life. Some of them are Freemen: but some of them are tributaries to the afore named Tartar of Crimo. They liue all after the Supersti∣ons and rites of the Graecians. They goe with the Turkes to warre, but they serue them euen for poore pouertie. They vse to sell one another of themselues: and many of them are become Sclaues, as well by the way of Mengrellia, and by the Tarta∣rians, with whome they haue to doe sometimes, as also by the meanes and conueniencie of Asaf, which is a Forte belonging to the Turke at the mouth of the riuer Tanais. They are well accoun∣ted of, for their good disposition and liuely cou∣rage. In the time of the Souldanes all the Mama∣lukes almost were Circassians, and thereupon came the Mamalukes to be called by the Turkes, Osman ouer∣thrown by the Cassacchi in Circassia. Zercas. In Circassia was Osman heretofore ouerthrowne by the Cassacchi: (what they are, it shall be told yee in due place:) in his returne from Persia to Constantino∣ple, after he had passed the Riuer Phas or Phasis, (which is so famous for the Golden Fleece) in Men∣grellia, The Godlen Fleece. which is vpon the great-Sea in the confines of Trabisonda, a Riuer which Pompey durst not passe ouer, when he pursued Mithridates, for feare of the Tartarians, the Circassians, and other people neere thereaboutes. And let thus much suffice to be spoken of the Tartari∣ans and Circassians. The Turke is also wont sometimes to inuite the Curdians or Gurdians to his warres: The Curdians who are Maho∣metanes, and liue like Freemen, and are verie coura∣gious. They dwell in the region of Bagadat, and in that part thereof, which now is called Curdistan, that is to say, Chaldaea, named by the Arabians Kel∣dan. Some are of opinion, that they may one day do great hurt to the Turkish Empire. Some thinke the same also of the Drusians, The Drusians who are souldiours by profession, and dwell in the Mountayne Libanus: as also of the Arabian Bandoliers, The Bādoliers of Arabia. who are Lordes and Maisters of the Champeine, as sometimes our Fuo∣rusciti or outlawes are wont to be among vs. But in trueth I do doubt, that the Maiestie and State of that Empire shall haue small cause to feare either the first, who do inhabite but a small countrey, or the second, who are but some few Mountaine people, or to be briefe the last, who are indeede a confused number of theeues. Now lastly, it will bee verie conuenient, that I shewe vnto you, Victuall, Ar∣mour, & Mu∣nition of the Turke. the strength and forces of that Empire, that is to say, how the great Turke is able to prouide himselfe and his Armies with victualles, with Armour, and with Munition, aswell by land as by Sea. For in vaine were it to haue an Armie, and not to be able to arme and feede both men and cattell, or to make an Armada without timber and people. I will also by the way touch vnto you, how these prouisions of the Turkes, may bee either stopped, or verie hardly be brought vnto him: and by the knowledge thereof it will the more easily ap∣peare, what the enimie can by all likelihoode doe a∣gainst vs. § XXXIIII. ANd to beginne with victualles, Corne in Asia. as a thing more necessarie then any other prouision whatsoe∣uer, for the maintainance of an Armie, most cer∣taine it is, that the Turke wanteth not corne: For he may haue great store of it out of Asia, and to con∣uay it into Hungarie, The wayes to conuay it into Hungarie. he hath many diuers and sun∣dry wayes. But that which is by the great Sea at the mouth of the Danow, hath no good free passage, in regard of the Walacchians, who do now depende vpon the Transyluanian. That by Constantinople is to long a iourney, and yet there can none be caried that way neither. The most free and easiest way of all the rest for this purpose, is that by Sea to Salonic∣chi, and from thence by the way of Scopia to Belgra∣do, where the countrey being verie plaine and euen, the Turkes may verie commodiously make their conuoyes, and much better they might do, if they had any cartes. In Europe, Corne in Eu∣rope. the Turke hath not now any great cō∣moditie of victualles. For Maldauia and Walachia, although they be Prouinces, that are by nature ve∣rie fruitfull of Barley and Wheate, yet by the oc∣casion of this present warre, they are beecome al∣most altogether vnfruitfull, not onely because they are not now sowed as heretofore ordinarily they haue beene, but also beecause that little which the grounde yeeldeth, is purloyned by men, and trampled with horses. Beesides that, the Walachian and the Moldauian, who beeing as tributaries to the Turke, ought to minister vn∣to him all the helpe that possibly they can, yet at this present they will faile to doe it: the Walachian, beecause hee is vtterly alienated from him, and the Moldauian, because hee hath e∣nough to do to furnish himselfe. The Turkes may also conuay some vittailes out of Macedonia, Corne in Ma∣cedonia and Seruia: and how to con∣ueigh it into Hungarie. and Seruia, (two Prouinces that are woont to bee verie plentifull of corne:) which they may easily do, because the Country is partly plaine, and partly hilly, but without any stones. They may also take the same way of Salonicchi, by passing through the Champaines of Moraua in Seruia, not farre from the most fertile plaines of Cossouo, which our writers do call the Champaines of Black birds, by reason of the great multitude of them that were seene there before the battaile, wherein Amurath the first was slaine. Whereupon I do note by the way, that the ancient writers were in an errour, An errour of the auncients touching Ma∣cedonia and Seruia. whiles they thought, that a man coulde not possibly passe through all the Mountaines of Macedonia and Seruia,: considering that they are verie easie to bee passed, excepting onely that part of them, which out of Epirus entreth into Macedonia, for that is in deede vnpassible with carriages. Now touching the point, How the Turk may be hin∣dered from his vittailes by sea. how to hinder the Turkes vittailes, that they may not be conueighed and brought into those Countryes, where the wars now are. I doe thinke that it will proue a verie diffi∣cult and hard matter for vs Christians to bring it to passe, either by sea or by land. The vittailes of Asia, which come out of Aegypt, and are embarked at Alexandria, Damiata, and other places, cannot be im∣peached or stayed, without an Armada, or a fleete of shippes, nor without fighting also with the fleete of the enemie. Besides that the Arcipelago, where this must specially and principally bee attempted, hath many channels. And by land, By land. they can be stopped but in one on∣ly case (vnlesse the Turke might bee debarred and kept out of his owne Countrey, which is the hardest thing of all.) And this onely way is for the Transil∣uanian, togither with the Walachians, to passe ouer to the hither side of the Danowe, and interpose them∣selues betweene Bulgaria, and Seruia, which in times past were called the two Misiaes. And yet when all comes to all, there is no remedie but we must looke to fight, and therefore it will behoue vs to haue a ve∣rie mightie armie in a readinesse. Moreouer, What vittaile the Spahi; the Sangiacchi, all villages, and Belgrado do furnish. euerie Spahi, is bound to bring to the campe, one load of corne for his owne vittaile. All the Sangiacchi doe send thither, Meale, Barley, and Graine, when and as much as they can. And all the villages also are bound to send a certaine quantitie of Barley, whensoeuer they are commaunded. And in Belgrado, there is ordinarily made great store and prouision of Bisket, Meale and Barley. § XXXV. IT is verie true, Why the Turks cannot set forth to warre in the beginning of the yeare: nor keepe long in one place. that the Turke cannot set forth his armie towardes the warres before the grasse bee growen, or rather not before haruest-time as well in regarde of the prouisions (as I haue told you) which the Spahi & others are bound to bring to the camp, as also because it is necessarie, that both men and cattell should haue good meanes to maintain them selues in the field, yea and so much the rather for that the armie is verie populous, as indeede all the Turkish Armies are for the most part, of people, of horses, and of Camels: whereupon it falleth out also, that that they cannot long bee maintained nor stay togither by great heapes and multitudes in one place by reason of their great expences. Out of Scopia, they haue some little store of Rice, Rice from Scopia, Alex∣andria, &c. whereof the Turkes doe make themselues a pecu∣liar kinde of pottage: they haue also some quantitie of it out of Alexandria, and other places, whither our Marchants do vse to transport it. § XXXVI. THey haue great aboundance of flesh-meates, al their Countrey ouer (specially where their soul∣diers meete togither, Great store of flesh meate, mutton and beefe. and goe to warre:) namely of Muttons, and of Beeffes, which are (as a man may say) innumerable in those huge and wide Cham∣paines where they feede and pasture: yea and so much the more store of them they haue: because the Moldauian is content that the Turkes shal passe through their Countrey, with their cattell, their ho∣nie, and their Butter, in regard of the great custome and toll which they gaine of them for the passages therof. Although (to speak the truth) there doth not now passe that way, so great a multitude of Muttōs, as in time past there hath done, because there was not heretofore so good a riddance of them into Po∣lonia, as now there is. Which in deede is no small griefe and displeasure to the Turkes, who doe vse to eate the flesh of Muttons with great delight and ve∣rie sauourly, whereas on the other side they do not so greatly care for the flesh of Beefes. The Turkes also vse to carrie with them a certaine kinde of salt poudred flesh, which being beaten into powder, serueth them for a verie great nourishment, especially if they mingle it with their pottage, or broath: and this meate they call Tzorba. § XXXVII. ANd now to their drinke. Their drinke. It is most certaine, that there want no good waters ouer al the country where the warres are. Water. And for water, it ought not to seeme a straunge drinke: for the Turkes considering that by their law they are bound to drinke it, as the Carthaginians also do: and as for Religion sake like∣wise it is vsed to bee drunke by the inhabitants of the Kingdome of Tarsus, which on the East con∣fineth and bordereth vppon Cataio, and is famous in the holy Scriptures for the three wise kinges, The Country of the 3. kings that came to worship Christ that came from thence to worship Christ. But what a great aduauntage it is to the Turkes to haue this commoditie of water, let them consider that haue conuersed and practised with the Dutche, (al∣though at other times also, as Tacitus writeth, they vsed to drinke at the Well-head.) certaine it is, What meanes Mahomet vsed to make his followers to be souldiers. if we mark the matter well, that Mahamet their Law-giuer, did for none other cause so straitely commaund his followers, that they should so precisely abstaine from wine, but onely because that hauing throughly re∣solued with himselfe to haue his law defended with force & armes, he thought it conuenient by meanes of sobrietie to make them as fit and apt for the wars as possibly he could. And besides that also, he did in∣thrall them to the imaginary opinion of the gouern∣ment of Destinie, to the end hee might make them the more obedient to their Captaines, and the more resolute in fight. He also ordained, that they should often wash themselues, to the ende, that his Armies might the more easily bee kept cleane and free from those euils and diseases, which do ordinarilie breede of filthinesse, and likewise make them the more able to endure the hardnesse and distemperature of the weather, with other such like policies. The Turkes also haue a certaine kinde of Breu∣uage or drinke (which they call Tzerbet, A drinke cal∣led Tzerbet. and wee S rbetto, a Soupe or Broath:) and it is made of Raisins and water, sometimes mingled with the iuice of Lemmons, and with Muske: most daintie and delicate it is, to the taste, and will often strike vp into the heade like Wine. Whereof also if any of the Turkes are desirous to drinke, The Turkes especially the Giannizzaries will drinke wine. especially the Giannizzaries, who will swill of it beyonde all measure, they may haue some in Hungarie, and chiefly in vpper- Hungarie, where the wine of Toccai is verie famous. § XXXVIII. LAstly, the Turkes cannot want prouision of wood and timber, Prouision of tymber. which (as Cyrus sayth) is as ne∣cessarie for an armie, as any other thing whatsoeuer. True it is, that in some places of Seruia there is no great store of it: but there is as much as may be desi∣red, in the rest of the voyage from Constantinople to Belgrado: and in the way of lower Hungarie, on this side of the Danow, euen vnto Vesperino: but specially in Bazca, Basca & Srema plentifull of wood. & also in Srema, which is a Prouince so cal∣led of the Cittie Sirmio, so noble and renowmed, principally for the Councill that was kept there. These two Prouinces doe lie on this side of the Danow, betweene the Danow it selfe, and the riuers of Draua and Saua, and haue great abundance of wood and timber, by reason that they haue not felt the miseries of the warre, because the Turkish ar∣mies haue not taken that way, but onely in the be∣ginning vnder the conduct of Sinan. And now that we haue discouered whatsoeuer is neces∣sarie for the vittaile and foode of their men and cattell: Armour of the Turkes. it followeth also to be considered, how the Turkes are at this present armed, and how they may haue munition sufficient for the warre, whether it be Defensiue, or Offensiue. § XXXIX. THe Spahi of Europe, to strike a farre off, Armour of the Spahi, Launce. Pusdogan. Scimetarre. doe vse to weare a light Launce with a pommell, and to strike at hand, an Iron Club or Mace, which they call Pusdogan: or else a Scimitarre, or Cimitare: for so by a barbarous worde they call that weapon, which by little and little groweth crooked towards the poynt, and is like for all the worlde to the Knife, that Xenophon attributeth as proper to the Persians, called by the Turkes Cedare, by the Ara∣bians Seife, and by the Dutche Sabell, a corrupt worde taken from the Hungarians, and Sclauoni∣ans, who call it Sabla. Some of them doe also weare an Axe, and a short sword. Some few Iacks, and Targates they haue: Axe. Short sword. Iacke. Targate. Dart. but the rest of all their bo∣die is vnarmed. None of them doth handle the Pi∣stoll: and many of them doe onelie vse the Dart. The greatest part of those Spahi, that kept in the frontiers of Croatia, and of Hungarie, had Cuirasses, and Corslets, but they are almost all extinguished, & those that are of late gone thither in their roomes are not accustomed to such armour. All the Giannizzaries, and some of the Asappi, Armour of the Giannizzaries and some Asappi, Arcubuse. handle the Arcubuse, but for the most part not so wel as it is handled by vs Christians. Which what ad∣uauntage it may be vnto vs, let those iudge that saw the handling of the Arcubuse, Da posta: that was so profitably vsed in the actions of that most glorious Gentleman Alexander duke of Parma. The Acanzii, the Spahoglani, Armour of the Acanzii, Spa∣hoglani, Chi∣aussi, &c. Armour of the footemen. the Chiaussi, (which vse ordinarily to go as Messengers or Embassadors) and other Caualieroes of the great Turkes Court, do handle the Dart, and some of them the Launce, after the Asian maner. To be short, all the footemen almost go with a Scimitarre, and without any Mur∣rion, but the most part of them with Daggers after the Greeke fashion. Horsemen of Asia. The horsemen of Asia doe car∣rie, as it were, half Pikes. Many of them are Archiers: they ride vpon low Saddles, so that they may easily be ouerthrowen to the ground. §▪ XL. THere are also in the Turkish armies diuers Of∣ficers or seruants, Armourere▪ Gunners. as the Giebegi, that is say, Armourers, that surueigh their Armour. The Topigi or Bombardieri, Armenians. that looke to their Guns: whereof some haue pay, and some haue none, but diuers fees and recompences they haue. The Armenians for the most part do serue for Pioners, and do such workes among the Turks, as our Spazzacamini or Chimney-sweepers doe among vs Italians, and thereupon are in scorne called Bochgi. Voincchi. There go also with the camp many Voinicchi, who are villaines or slaues. They liue after the Greeke maner: they serue for any vse, and dwell in Seruia and Bulgaria. Vonicchi is a Scla∣uoine worde, signifying Bellicos, warlike men, because in times past they were much imployed in the warres. Sarchor. Many other there be likewise, that voluntarily follow the Armie to be Pioners, and to doe such other base ser∣uices, and are called Sarchor. And here in this place I will omit at large to entreate of the Militarie discipline of the Turkes, Militarie dis∣cipline of the Turkes. because that point hath beene better examined by others then I can do. One∣ly I will tell you some speciall matters, because I will not leaue the Reader fasting and vnsatisfyed in this be∣halfe, as peraduenture in other poyntes I haue alreadie glutted him. § XLI. VVIthout all doubt, Qualities re∣quired in Christian Souldiers. the Turkish souldiers are farre inferiour to our souldiers that are ex∣ercised. By our Souldiers, I doe vnderstande not onely the Italians, but also those of Spaine, of France, of Hungary, of Germany, & of other natiōs that vse to go to warfare in our armies. And by exercised soldi∣ers, I mean such as haue not only bin wel instructed in the arte of warrefare, but also such as haue beene accustomed with the exercises of a Christian souldi∣er, to the end that accompanying valour and vertue both together▪ they may the more surely in the ser∣uice of our Princes become victorious, although they be peraduenture farre inferiour in number to our enimies. Most euident and plaine are the ex∣amples of the victories obtayned by a few Christi∣ans vnder Marcus Aurelius, Constantinus, Victories of the Christians against the Infidels. Theodosius the elder, Theodosius the yonger, Honorius, Aetius and many others: but more particularly ouer the Sara∣cenes, vnder Pelagius the first, King of Castile, who with one thousand slew twentie thousand of them: and vnder Charles Martell, who at one onely time ouerthrewe and vanquished three hundred, three∣score and fifteene thousand of them: I leaue to tell you what the Christians also did, vnder Alfonsus the Chast, Ranimiro, Ferdinando, and Waltero the great Master of the Duch order, who slew a hundred thousand Tartarians with the death of one onely of his owne souldiers: and Corui us, who after hee had obtayned seauen victories against the Turkes, with fifteene thousand onely, Victories of the Christians against the Turkes. most valourously fought the eight battail against eightie thousand of them, as (among others) Thomas Bozius writing against Mac∣chiauel hath at large described. Moreouer, euerie man that hath warred with the Turkes doth know well enough, that they lodge at large: and that in their marching they go verie con∣fusedly, so that they may verie easily be endamaged in the tayle of their Armie. George Castriota, was one of the most famous Captaines, that euer fought with the Turkes, Scander-Beg. and was otherwise called Iskander-Beg, i. the Lord Alexander, a name that was giuen him by Sultan Amurath, when being his Hostage or Pledge he caused him to bee circumcised at seauen years of age: (for the Turkes at circumcision change the name, as we vse to doe at baptisme.) This man fighting thus with the Turks being in this disarray, had such victories of them as were most worthie of triumph. Besides all this the Turkes, when they do fight, put more confidence in their Multitude, in the o∣pinion that they haue of Destinie, in the noyse of their warrelike instruments, and in the horrible cry of their barbarous shoutings, Good gouern∣ment among the Turkes. then they haue in any good order, or in true discipline. And yet many good things they haue, as namely, a Supreme au∣thoritie in their Captaine Generall, an obedience in the souldiers, though now it be somewhat dimini∣shed: forces alwayes readie, A fault in Christian Prin¦ces. so that they shall not neede to go about, begging of souldiers, as our Princes doe, who verie oftentimes make more ac∣count and better reconing of other mens forces, thē they do of their own, and to make a leauie of souldi∣ers, are enforced to euacuate and emptie their trea∣suries and to consume the greatest part of their time vnprofitably. The Turkes spend their treasure either in matters of greatest importaunce, Good quali∣ties in the Turkes. or in be∣stowing liberally vpon their souldiers: which is a most sharpe spurre to animate and encourage them to battail. They neuer attempt any enterprise at a iumpe or vpon a soden. They do not employ their forces in matters of small moment. They vnder∣take no action, but with order and great militarie preparation: and for the most part they fight not out of season. And although some be of an opinion, Engyners. that the Turkes want Engyners, yet it is daily seene, that with great facilitie and ease they ouerthrowe the greatest fortes and fortresses of the worlde, whereof they make no account at all: for sometimes they will cor∣rupt the enimies officers, with honours, with gifts, and with prouinces, and sometimes they will make breaches into the walles with continuall batteries, working with the mattocke, filling vp the trenches, and other whiles also ouerwhelming Citties, either with huge artificiall mountaynes of earth, or with vndermining: and lastly, disquieting the inhabitants with perpetuall and importunate assaults and neuer giuing ouer the enterprise till it be performed. Moreouer, they do not want any munition, Bullet Artillarie. of Bullet, Artillarie, Powder. For Bullet, they alwaies make it when they haue neede of it. For Artillarie, they haue great quantitie of it, at Constantinople, at Pera, at Belgrado, and at Buda: the most part of it ta∣ken from the Christians. They haue also learned to cast Artillarie: the more shame for vs, who haue not beene contented to transport our arrant cruell enimies out of Asia into Europe in Amurathes time, but haue also become Maisters vnto them in this Arte: and I would to God, that we did not likewise carrie them great store of Armour and weapons be∣sides: nothing regarding or fearing the wrath of God, the excommunication of the Popes, nor the vtter ruine of our selues. And as for Powder, Powder▪ it is made at Cairo, and at Acque Bianche. i. the white∣waters, (which is a place not farre distant from Con∣stantinople: ) and elsewhere in great aboundance. The Turkes do also greatly practise militarie stra∣tagemes, Stratagems. or wilie pollicies in warre, whereby they do vse to mingle deceite with force, according to the commandement of Mahomet their law-giuer: neither do they want meanes and ministers, that are cunning and skilfull to practise the same, both because all such, as among them do attend the Arte of warrefare, do endeuour themselues to learne and knowe whatsoeuer is necessarre for the good ma∣naging of an exployte, and also because fraud and deceite is a thing most proper to the Turke. Much other matter might be set downe touching this poynt: but if any bee desirous to vnderstand more hereof, let him read, (among others that haue writ∣ten of the Turkish affaires,) the discourses of Renato Di Lusinge, Lord Alimes, in his booke intituled, Of the beginning, conseruation, & decaying of States. And now that I haue shewed you the Land-Forces of the Ottoman Empire, it is also verie fit and conuenient, that I should, likewise shewe you, the forces thereof by Sea. §. XLII. THe great Turke hath many Tersani, Storehouses for shipping in Asia. that is to say Arsenales or Storehouses for shipping. The Arsenal or Storehouse of Sinopoli neere to Trabisonda is one of the best. At Constantinople there are a hundred & thirtie seauen roomes in one vaulte; and at Midia and Achilo they haue space enough to make some if they will. Besides that, the Turkes do vse also to make Galeyes in such places, where they may most commodiously haue timber for them: the charge and care whereof they lay most commonly vpon the Raislari or Raisi, that is to say, the Captains of the said Galeyes. Moreouer they haue great a∣boundance of timber in many places, & specially in the golfe of Nicomedia in Asia, ouer against Constanti∣nople: and in the mountaines of the Ducagini, Europe. from whence they may conuay it by the Riuer Drino vn∣to Alessio a territorie of Albania: in which prouince also they haue some quantitie at Velona, and at Polo∣na, which is verie famous by Augustus, who was there studying, when Caesar was killed. The great Turke hath also an Arsenal or storehouse in Africa at Suez, Africa. in the mouth of the Red Sea, with certaine Galeyes, which were made heretofore a∣gainst the Portingales, for the enterprise of Diu & Or∣muz: but it is of small reconing because in that coun∣trey there is no store of timber, and to bring it from the portes of Bithynia and Caramania to Cairo by the riuer Nilus, and so to Suez vpon Camels is a matter of great difficultie and expense. §. XLIII. IT is most certaine and true that the Turkes do put their timber to worke, Timber and Gallies. Their Gallies not very good. so ill seasoned, so greene, & so fallen without any obseruatiō of the course of the Moone, that their Galleyes cannot proue very good & durable: and the rather, because they vse to make them for the most part in great hast: besides that the houels or vaults, that are made to couer them, are not so well fitted, nor safe from the raine. Pitch hard and soft. Tallow. Hempe not much. Sayles why scant. They haue Pitch, both hard and soft from Velonae, and from Rissano in the golfe of Cathare: the one out of the mines, the other from the trees. And tallowe they want not, by reason of the great aboundance of Beefes and Muttons, that are in those countres. But they haue not hempe enough, and so by conse∣quence they are not well prouided of Sayles: and so much the worse, because the Sultane Ladies (who haue thirtie Galeons of a thousand & fiue hundred tunne a peece, and eighteene great Hulkes, The Sultane Ladies Ga∣leons. which they send into Alexandria with diuers marchan∣dise,) do draw out of the Arsenal, with the good li∣king and pleasure of the Grand-Turke, sayl & chor∣dage, asmuch as is requisite for the seruice of their said vessels. Besides that the officers, who haue the charge of the said Sayls, & such other like furniture for ships, do keepe them but ill fauouredly and lend them out easily for gaine. The Turks do also want nayls, so that very often in steed therof, they are fain to vse sharp wooddē pins. Nailes scant. Of Mariners they haue great store. They enter∣tayne the Asappi principally to serue them in Sea actions. Marriners And if they should happen to want any, they would compell the Candians to serue in their Galeyes (for there is alwaies a great multitude of thē in Constantinople ) & other Graecians that are their sub∣iects, which do wholy attend that trade. Gallyslaues. To this pur∣pose also they keepe many boies exercised that way, in their watch-Gallyes, in their shippes, and other Boats. But gally-slaues they want which is a matter of great consideration: for vnprofitable are their Gallies, without people to row them. And neither will the Christian slaues be enough for that seruice, nor yet those that are supplied out of Barbarie. Besids that the Turkes do not make any slaues of the Tarta∣rians, of the Persians, nor of the Georgians, because they will not admit thē into their militarie gouern∣ment, which wholly resteth in the handes of their slaues, as it hath bin somewhat touched heretofore, and more at large shall be hereafter in the third part of this treatise. Sometimes they will also command the Asappi to go and serue for Gally slaues, as a base kind of people and of no worth: and sometimes o∣thers of the countrey: An Auariz; or exaction rai∣sed vpon the Christians for the mainte∣nance of Gal∣ley-slaues. for whose stipend and wages there was applied in times past, an Auariz, that is to say, an exaction layd vpon the christians of Europe, which amounted to the summe of three hundred thousand Cecchinoes or Duckats: but now it is em∣ployed vpon other land-matters. In their great ne∣cessities they vse also some of the Armenians, some of the Iewes, and some of the Christians, euen by force & compulsion, as namely Cicala did in the last yeare of his generalship. The Spahi likewise go for souldi∣diers in the Gallyes, that are kept for the defence & safegard of the Islandes of Barbarie, and other places, but without any other pay, sauing only the profite of their Timari: and thereupon they growe wonder∣full greedie to robbe and spoyle. If they make a fleete of a greater number of Gallyes then ordinary, (which may be about some thirtie,) they will send some Giannizzaries into them. They make great aboundance of Bisket, Bisket. at Velona at Lepanto, at Negroponte, at Volo in the gulfe of Salo∣micchi, whether the wheate is brought and conuay∣ed, that is gathered out of Macedonia and Seruia in Zataraes or Lighters by the Riuer Vardaro, which in old time was called Auxius. And thus much let be sufficient to haue spoken of the Turkes forces by land and by Sea. But for as much as ac∣cording to the opinion of some auncient Captaines, Gold is the Sinewes of warre, The riches of the Ottoman Empire. and (as it were) the Spirite and Soule, that quickeneth and giueth life to an Armie: I will briefly adioyne hereunto some matter touching the Ottoman riches: Wherein a great parte of the For∣ces of that Empire and of other principalities doth con∣sist. §. XLIIII. FIrst, His Timari. if wee doe consider the value and account of the Timari, it is manifest and playne that the Great Turke, is the richest Prince, that is vpon the earth: because hauing bounden vnto him by his Timari, moe then three hundred persons, to serue him in his warres, without any interest, hinde∣raunce or charge of his owne, it may easily bee perceyued, what a great matter it would bee for him to maintayne so many Souldiours, with his owne pay. Moreouer, The Turkes Hasnads or Treasurie. the great Turke hath two Hasnads, (or as many do pronounce it with a stronger aspiratiō, Gas∣nads ) that is to say treasuries whereof the one is called the outward or cōmon treasury, the other the inward or priuate Treasurie. The common or publike Treasurie. The priuate Treasurie. Giftes. The former hath about some nine or ten millions of yearly reuenue, which is wholy imployed in the expences that are need∣full and necessarie for the state. The later is excee∣dingly rich, by reason of the many and great giftes or presents, which are giuen to the grand-Turke by sundrie Princes, and specially by the Christians, by his owne seruiters and subiects, and by all such as haue any thing to deale with him, not permitting any person to come before his presence with emptie handes, for hee doth attribute that, which indeede turneth to his chiefest gaine, rather to be a signe of his great pompe and Maiestie. And truly if yee shall well consider the nature of the whole generation of the Turkes, ye shall find all of them to attend none other thing, but onely to gather that they may giue it afterwarde to the great Turke: so that by this meanes, all the riches of that large Empire doe passe through their handes, as it were through water-pipes, into the huge Ocean of their Emperours couetousnesse. Into the same priuate Hasnad, or Treasurie, Reuenue of Cairo. there runneth also the yearely reuenue of Miszir (for so the Arabians and Turkes doe call the ancient Mem∣phis, that is to say, Cairo, by a corruption from the Hebrew worde Mizraim ) which reuenue amoun∣teth to the summe of aboue one Million. There runneth thither also, In heritances. the yearely value of all the in∣heritances of the richest persons in all his Empire, whose heire he maketh himselfe to bee, euen at his owne pleasure. For all the wealth of those, which beare the title of slaues, doth wholy depende vpon his supreeme will and disposition. Thither come likewise, all confiscations and forfeytures, Confiscations, fines, &c. all fines and amercements (which are verie many) all the goods of such as are condemned by law, all the Re∣uenue that is gathered of Custome and Impost: all the rent of the Salt-pits, and the Tithe and tents of all prayes that are taken by land or by sea, of all cat∣tell, and of all Haruests in the fields: the profite also of the Mines, Mynes. whereof there are verie many in Ser∣uia, (insomuch as it is called, Prouincia d' Argento, 1. the Prouince of Siluer) in Bosna about Iaiza, in Ma∣cedonia, and elsewhere. All which ioyntly togither, amounteth to a most huge quantitie of golde more or lesse, according to the greedie auarice of the Prince, and to the diligence, or rather insaciablenes and extortion of his officers. Besides all this, Tribute of the Christians. the Turke doth also leuie a tribute vpon the Christians, which is a Sultanine vpon eue∣rie Head, or Poll of them, assoone as they are aboue xiiii. yeares olde: which tribute is now encreased to a higher rate, Tribute of the Turks them∣selues. by occasion of this present warre. There is likewise a certaine redemption of that, which is payed by the Turkes according to the rate of fiue and twentie Aspres a peece, and is called a Gift, because it is expressely forbidden by their law that the Turkes shoulde take any tribute of the Turkes. Lastly, Treasure left. the now liuing great Turke, did finde in this priuate Hasnad or treasurie, great store of gold, but not in that excessiue quantitie, as some haue bin bolde to write, which was gathered togither by his father, who was very auaricious and greedie beyond all measure, and as insatiable and carefull to hoorde vp, as he was miserable and sparing in spending and giuing. The couetous∣nesse of Amu∣rath the third. He was of the minde that he would sell euen the flowers of his owne Gardeines: hee payed no debts: he gaue nothing, or at least verie little to his souldiers: a thing that was farre different from the custome of that Empire. To bee short, he was most respectiue and heedie in all his expences as well or∣dinarie as extraordinarie, those only excepted which he laide out vpon his women, who (although they were his slaues) yet was it his pleasure, that when they departed from his entertainement, and em∣bracement, they should bee greatly enriched, and well furnished with Iewels. To all these things before rehearsed, there may be added a matter, Yearly Tri∣butes of Chri∣stian princes to the great Turke. which without teares cannot bee remembred, and that is, the tributes (or rather to vse a more modest name for it, the Beneuolences and Gra∣tuities ) which the Christian Princes do vsually giue to the great Turke. The memorie whereof ought to enkindle, yea and enflame them with a most iust disdaine and indignation against so barbarous and vniust a tyrant, and to cause them, that (as indeede they doe in their consciences acknowledge it to bee more profitable for Christendome, and honourable for themselues:) so they would all ioyne togither with one consent to spend the same money for the glorie of Christ, and for there owne safetie. § XLV. THe Christian Emperour payed vnto the Turke for Hungarie, The Emperor and to haue peace with him (if I do well remember my selfe) fortie and fiue thousande Dallers. The Vaiuode of Moldauia paieth one and thir∣tie loades of Aspres, The Vaiuode of Moldauia. or little lesse. A hundred thousand Aspres make a loade, which at the time of the imposition make two thousand Crownes, eue∣rie Crowne being worth fiftie Aspres, which is now worth more then a hundred. And besides, he payeth also to the Tartarian twentie Cart-loades of honie, with foure Oxen in euerie Cart, and fiftie Mares be∣sides. but it may be that by some new composition he payeth now somewhat more or lesse. The Vaiuode of Walachia, before it was at the de∣uotion of the Transiluanian Prince, The Vaiuode of Walachia. paied fiftie loads. Such is the information that I haue had from such as haue seene the bookes of Moldauia, and Walachia: and therefore I do differ somewhat from those, that haue written otherwise hereof. The Prince of Transiluania, The prince of Transiluania. payed to the Turke before this present warre 15000. Cecchinoes or Duc∣kets. The state of Ragugia payeth. 12500. The state of Ragugi. The state of Venice. Cecchinoes. The state of Venice, for the Iland of Zante (i. Za∣cinthus ) 1000. Cecchinoes: as Selem also chalengeth a certaine summe of money, before it was bereaued of the Kingdome of Cyprus, because the Ottoman Empire was somewhat entered into the Soldanes accounts and reckonings. The Moscouite also gratifieth the Tartarian for Taurica, The Mosco∣uite. to auoyde the incursions, which the Tarta∣rians are wont to make into his Countrey, either of themselues, or at the instance of the Turke. The Polack payed to the Turke in the yeare 1591. so many furs of Sables, as were worth 25000. crownes of gold: but it is not a yearely tribute, as some haue written. Indeed hee giueth to the Tartarian euerie yeare a certaine summe of mony, to buy Scimitarres, and apparell withall, by an auncient capitulation or composition, as it is read in the Histories of Polonia. I haue noted also the giftes which some Princes do bestow vpon the Tartarian, which although they began at the first indeed, before the Turke had any thing to doe with the Tartarian, are yet still conti∣nued by the said Princes, principally to please the Turke. There be also certaine tributes and giftes, which the Princes of Africa, and of Arabia, The Princes of Africa, Ara∣bia, and Geor∣gia. and the Ge r∣giani, and others do vse to giue, but I wil omit them, because they are not of any moment, nor serue any thing to this present purpose. Finally, there be also many Rewardes and Gra∣tuities, Gratuities ex∣traordinary to the Turke and his Officers. which the foresayd Princes do bestow extra∣ordinarily vpon the officers of that barbarous Prince to keepe them to bee their friends: and which vpon diuerse and sundry occasions they bestow also vpon himselfe, either to holde him in friendship, or to pa∣cifie his rage and furie (which is sometimes eager in deed, and somtimes but counterfaite) or else they giue it for a certaine Ceremonie: because (as I haue signified before) he doth account this kinde of pro∣fite to be verie honourable vnto him. Besides that all such as desire Offices and Dignities, or returne from the gouernments of Prouinces, or from some notable enterprice, do bestow vpō him (as it were by bond and dutie) the godliest and most precious things which they haue gotten: Neither is there any other cause why his pleasure is that all the pre∣sentes, which are offered vnto him, should thus o∣penly and in publike view be presented to his owne presence, but onely with this barbarous pride and ostentation to enflame and prouoke both his owne subiects & strangers to bestow the more vpon him. The end of the first Booke. The second part. Wherein is treated of the purposes and Designments which the Ottoman Princes haue towards other princes: Of the cause of this present warre in Hungarie; the begin∣ning and proceeding thereof: wherein for your better vnderstanding, the originall of the said warre shall be fetched, euen from Amurath, the father of this now liuing Mahomet. N Ow that we haue seene the nature and conditions of Mahomet, the heade and chiefe of this Ottoman Empire, and what are the members, strength, and forces of this most monstrous bodie, as I may call it: fit and conuenient it is: that for the full and perfect knowledge thereof, we should goe about to search the purposes and designements, which the said Mahomet hath against other Princes, and specially against the Princes Christian: to the end we may the better vnderstand the true causes of this present warre, togither with the beginning and pro∣ceedings thereof. But forasmuch as this warre be∣gan, euen in the time of Amurath, father to the now liuing Emperour, it will be necessarie for our better intelligence to speake somewhat of him, and to fetch the true originall of the said war euen from thence: wherewithall there shal be also discouered vnto you more plainly, all the greatest interests and dealings which hee hath with the rest of the Princes in the world. § I. ANd to begin the same accordingly Amurath, the Lord and Emperour of the Turkes father to the now liuing Mahomet, The nature and conditi∣ons of Amu∣rath the third. was a prince (of a Ma∣hometane) verie tollerable and discrete. He was a zealous obseruer of that most vaine superstition of the Mushaphum, (for so the Turkes call the Booke of their law, The name of the Turkes Law-booke. as the Arabians tearme it the Al-koran: that is to say most wickedly, as it were by excellen∣cie, , the Scripture, as though there were none other Scripture like it: euen as the Iewes and Hebrewes call the holy Scriptures, Kara. ) He took great delight also in reading the Hystories of his predecessours, as Selim the first did the Hystories of Alexander the great, Why Amu∣rath was cal∣led Bongi. and of Iulius Caesar: and be∣cause he was so studious in Philosophie, he was cal∣led by the Turkes in mockage, Bongi, as Baiazet the second was also called in the same respect. Hee was no drinker of wine, as his father Selem was. In the pleasures of sensualitie, which are so familiar and tol∣lerable among the Turks, he was rather cōtinent, thē otherwise, especially in that most abhominable sin of lecherie, and chiefly for many yeares before the end of his life. Moreouer, if a man that is a niggard & a∣varicious, may be called a louer of iustice, he was a great louer of that iustice which is known amōg the barbarians: very careful & desirous he was likewise to vnderstand al the affairs of other princes, but aboue all other things, most exact & perfit in the knowlege of his owne estate: insomuch as he had a perticular memoriall of all his businesse, of all his reuenues or∣dinarie and extraordinarie, and of all his expences, which he kept in a booke appointed by him for that purpose, and layd continually vpon a little table in his owne priuie Chamber, and came (as it were) by inheritance to the now great Turke, euen as that of Augustus came to Tiberius the Emperour. And it may be peraduenture, that by reason of these his too diligent occupations and businesses, or rather in deed by his naturall inclination, he was for the most part verie full of melancholie: which besides that it made him somewhat still and sparing of speech, and oftentimes irkesome and tedious to himselfe, it also procured him to be exceedingly suspitious of any matter: Why he did sometimes take Opium. so that to lighten and quicken himselfe, hee did vse sometimes to take Opium: for the Turkes do hold opinion, that the said Simple or Drugge doth breed a good colour, and reioyce the heart, as also that he who hath once eaten of it, cannot any more abstaine from it. He entertained likewise in his Ser∣raglioes many Dwarffes and many dumbe persons, whom hee would cause to fight togither one with another, to the end hee might take some pleasure in the sight of so vaine a pastime. Hee made warre ra∣ther for religion and exercise of his people, then for that he was giuen to warre by Nature: and that also he folowed not by himselfe, but alwayes by his Of∣ficers. For he would still glorie to himselfe, that hee had enlarged the confines of his Empire, euen as farre as the Caspian sea, only by his owne wit and ad∣uise, and by the execution and exployte of his saide Captaines: a matter which his predecessors could neuer performe or bring to passe in their owne per∣sons. He warred for the space of fifteene or sixteene yeares with Mahomet Codabenda king of Persia, sonne to Sha Tamas, who was the sonne of Ismael: and with Abas, that liueth at this day, whom some doe falsly call the Miriza: What Miriza is. for Miriza is the proper title of the eldest sonne to the king of Persia, called Sophi, but is not in deed the title of the king himself. He was wont to say that he had fully resolued with himselfe neuer to cōclude peace with him, vntil he had takē Casbin, which now is the seate royall of the Persian kinges: The true cau∣ses why hee warred with the Persians. & that for two causes. One was to recouer the ashes of that Baiazet, who was sonne to Sultan Soliman, and fled to Tamas to auoid the indignation of his father, but was put to death by the same Tamas, to the end he might by that meanes be reconciled to Soliman. The other cause was to ruinate and vtterly destroy the Sepulchre of Arduelle, father to Ismael, the Au∣thour of the Persian sect or religion: Why Ismael called Sophi. who was called Sophi, either of the Greeke worde (that is to say wise ) as though he had beene discended from the auncient Magi, or Wise-men of Persia: or because he was accounted and esteemed to be a Wise-man, (as also for the same reason Sempronius was so called) or else of the Arabian worde Sophi, which signifieth wooll, because all the Persians doe weare a Tulpante on their heades, not of verie fine linnin cloath as the Turkes doe, but (to make shew of greater reli∣gion) made of Woll, The Persians called Kesel∣bassi. died into a red colour, where∣vpon they are by the Turkes tearmed in mockage, Keselbassi, that is to say, Red-heades, or Red-Cappes: that thereby they might make a difference from the Tartarians of Zegatai, in times past called the Bactria∣ni, and dwelling beyond the Caspian sea, who be∣cause they professe themselues to be of the right and true discent of Mahomet, The Tarrari∣ans of Zegatai called Ieschil∣bassi. doe vse to weare it of a greene colour, and thereupon are called Ieschilbassi, i. Greene Cappes. Now by the way: A Tulpante, and a Tocca is all one, and signifieth that Globe or Sphere, What a Tur∣bante is: and what it may signifie. full of Circles, great and small, which are in the many turnings and wreathings of those Linnen Rolles, which the Graecians of this time do call , and serueth them both for a Cap, and a Hood. And indeed properly it should be called a Turbante, of the round shape thereof, tearmed by the Greekes growing sharpe in the top like vnto a Sugerloafe, or a Cypres tree, as the Turkes were wont to weare it at the first: but now they weare it more round. And thereupon it may be peraduen∣ture called in the holy Scriptures Pomum (that is to say, an Apple) namely in the 79. Psalme, where King Dauid bewayling the taking of the Citie Ierusalem, sayth, The Temple of the Lord was giuen into the custodie of Apples according to the vulgar and common translation, which place certaine Writers not without some reason haue interpreted to be ment of the Turkes. And so likewise it may be, that not of Constantinople, but of the Persian Kingdome, the Red-Apple is to be vnderstood, which the Ottoman Emperour shall bring into his subiection, before he be vtterly subdued by the sworde of the Christians, as is to be red in the Turkish Oracle or Prophecie (if so it may be called) and is now a long time knowne to euery man, An exposition of a Turkish prophecie. and is by diuerse men diuersly interpreted Others there are, that would expound the Turbante to be a Symbole or token of Fortitude: whereby those that do weare the same should be admonished, that when they go to the warres they should not thinke to returne; but therein gloriously to die, whiles they may remember that they carry with them the Syndon or winding sheete, wherein they vse to wrap their dead car∣kasses. The Giannizzaries do not weare the Turbante, The Iannizza∣ries Zarcola. but a Zercola, which is of white Felt, and is iumpe of the same fashion and shape, as may be seene in diuerse pictures, to make a difference from the rest of the Turks, that weare it of a red colour. § II. ANd now to returne againe. Why Amu∣rath was con∣tent to be at peace with the Persians. At the last Amurath was pacified with the Persian: but weary he was and so were his people also, of so long a warre, and therefore he might be well contented with this pa∣cification considering especially that hee had con∣quered so much Countrey, and atchieued so great glorie withall. Moreouer he thought also, that by ths meanes hee might the more soundly establish his state, and better secure the new Inhabitants, which he had planted in his new conquered coun∣treyes, by distributing among them all the Timari, that were to be raysed thereof, and by building di∣uerse fontes therein, which should be cited and sea∣ted in such maner as one of them might easily helpe and succour the other. §. III. VVHiles Amurath thus enioyed this peace, from which as being a man giuen to stu∣die and Melancholie, he did not of himselfe greatly abhorre, he was counselled and aduised by his Visiers to renue the warre. Now these Visiers are the chiefe counsellers of warre, Who the Vi∣siers be. and of estate: and the councell or assembly of these men, is called by the Turkes Diuano, as hath beene before de∣clared, and not Capi, What the Porta is. that is to say, the Porta, which pro∣perly is the Court; wherein is also in diuerse other thinges the Turkes do imitate and follow the Persians, who (as ye may read in Xenophon ) did call the Court by that name. The reasons wherby they moued & aduised him to renue the warre, The reasons of the Visiers to moue A∣marath to make warre. were these. Namely, that great Empires & states cānot be maintained without the helpe of force and armes: that as long as the com∣mon wealth of Rome kept warres with the Carthage∣nians, and the Emperours of Rome in Germanie, that Empire lasted and continued. That so likewise had the Ottoman Emperours done in times past, who doe not holde the end of warre to bee peace, as the Princes of Christendome, and other weake princes doe, but they take the onely ende of warre to bee warre, whereby the Turkes haue not onely ampli∣fied and enlarged their Empire to that huge great∣nesse, wherein now it is, but haue also kept their sub∣iects occupied and busied: and so haue diuerted them from ciuill seditions and insurrections, which for the most part are bred & nourished by ease and idlenesse. To be short, that the subiects, whiles they continue in peace, some grow to be cowards, some apply themselues too greedily to trades and traffike, and some to spoyling and robberie, insomuch that thereby there will be vtterly lost the knowledge of the Sea-warres, which hath now a long time beene almost abandoned, and of the land-warre also, if for any long space they should ceasse to make warres. And consequently they should want Captaines, and valiant or hardie Souldiers, because the onely vse of war doth inure men to become good warriours, and maketh them exceedingly couragious. And certaine it is, that matters which are atchieued and gotten, are preserued by the same meanes whereby they be gotten. Besides these Visiers and Bassaes, that laboured to perswade him hereunto, in regard of their owne interest and benefite, especially the two concurrents and opposites Sinan and Ferat, who without warres were held in no great credite, or account, nor could enrich themselues according to the greedie desires of the Barbarians: their were also the Agentes of Fraunce, of England, and of the Prince of Geilan, which endeuoured to perswade the same, by such reasons, as shall be tolde you in due place. § IIII. BVt Amurath would not resolue vpon any thing: The reasons why Amurath would not resolue vpon warre. not because he was not perswaded to make war, but because hee was not throughly certified, what aduantage would grow vnto him by mouing war, rather against one prince then against another: & so much the rather, for that the Visiers did differ in their seuerall counsailes and aduises among themselues. And for as much as their sundrie opinions did com∣prehend the chiefest and most principall interests of the world and specially of Christendom: I thought with my selfe, that it woulde bee a matter not dis∣pleasing to such as willingly shal read this discourse, to relate them all in particular, and with such good order and facilitie, as the reports themselues, and the pronunciation of that barbarous tongue will suffer me. And so by that meane I shall giue you a more full and certaine knowledge of the Ottoman affaires, A note for Christian Princes. and therewithall note also vnto our Princes the pur∣poses and designements of that tyrant, not onely to the ende that they might in time looke about them, and bethinke themselues of fit remedies for the same, but also the sooner resolue, valiantly to band themselues togither in one, for the vanqui∣shing and ouerthrow of him. § V. THeir opinions were eight in number. The first: The 8. seuerall opinions of the Visiers. that in any case the warre should be renued a∣gaynst the Persian. The second: that they should rather bend their forces against the king of Fez, and Morocco. The third: against the Isle of Malta. The fourth: agaynst the king of Spaine. The fift: against the state of Venice. The sixt: agaynst Italie. The seuenth: agaynst Polonia. And lastly, the eight a∣gainst the Emperours. § VI. THe reasons of their seueral opinions were these. The first opi∣nion, to moue warre against Persia: and the reasons therof And first, touching the renuing of the warre a∣gainst Persia (a kingdom which the Turks comprise vnder the name of Azemia: ) they argued, that when soeuer the king should see the great Turk entangled in other enterprises, he wold surely break the peace, as well for the recouerie of his Country, which was lost with smal honour & credite, as also to be reuen∣ged at one time or other, of all the olde griefes and iniuries that he had receyued of the Ottoman Em∣perours. That hee should be prouoked thereunto and assisted therein by the Christian Princes, and specially by the king of Spaine, who could verie wel doe it by the way of the Indies, and by sending vnto him (as at sundry other times he had done) enginers, Gunners, and such other helpes. That the Countrey was not yet well setled, the fortresses were new, and the Inhabitants (lately planted) in great danger, and somewhat too farre off, to be relieued in time. That if the Persians would do nothing else, but ransacke and forrage the Champaine, the said Inhabitantes should be compelled and inforced to yeeld and giue place, vnlesse they would perish for hunger. That not to atchieue or obtaine, but to prosecute and fol∣low a victorie, is the true glorie. That the Turke should take good heede, not to offend the great pro∣phet Mahomet, nor to moue him to indignation or wrath, considering that he had obtained greater vic∣tories agaynst the enemies of his Religion, then euer his predecessors had obtained in former times: and therefore it was fit and conuenient, and it was also the dutie of a religious and thankefull prince, not to omit the iniuries that were done both to God and man. There was added to this, that Vsbegh-Han had voluntarily offered to serue him in this warre, and so had the prince of Geilan also. This Vsbegh-Han, is the Prince of those Tartarians, Who Vsbegh-Han is. that dwell at the furthest ende of Persia, in that part which the Turkes do call at this day Bahera, in olde time Bactra, and are called Ketzie-Bassi, What Tarta∣rians are called Ketzie-Bassi and why? because they weare Caps co∣vered with felt. It is not long ago since the said Vsbegh died, and left behind him a sonne, who may now be about some twelue yeares of age. Where Geilan is. Geilan, is also a Countrey more toward the East of the Caspian sea. Moreouer, that he need not to make any doubt of victorie, considering the good successe that he hath had heretofore. That hee had no cause to feare their Harquebuses: for they had but few, and the Turkes can better handle them then the Persians: nor yet their horses, although they were of the Arabian and Caramanian race, the relikes of Amurath the second, for they had many times and often bin put to flight for verie cowardise. And lastly, that hee could not doubt, least the Gurgini (so doe the Turkes call the Georgiani, The Georgi∣ans. in times past the Iberi ) should make any stirre in aide and fauour of the Persians. For part of them are his owne Subiects, and vnder the iurisdic∣tion of the Bassaes of Teflis, and of other places there∣abouts, after they were made Bassalucches by Musta∣pha: part also of them are his tributaries: and it is well knowne, that the rest are contented to liue vn∣der their Lordes, Simon and Alessandro, without at∣tempting to seek better fortunes, but to defend their owne Countrie. Which although it be but small, and not verie hard to be kept and defended, yet is it verie strong by situation, and almost vnpassible, for the Mountaines, for the Woods, and for the straite places that compasse it about. § VII. TOuching the second opinion, The 2. opi∣nion to make war vpon the king of Fez and Morocco, and the rea∣sons thereof. which was for the bending of their forces against the Siriffo in Africa, it was thus debated. That it was a great dis∣honour to the Ottoman Empire, that they had not as yet ouerthrowne and subdued those Moores. That it was as great a shame, that they had so small a por∣tion in Africa, considering that it was the third part of the world, and being so neare vnto Italie, did so greatly vexe and trouble the Romanes. That Algier and Tunise would neuer be secure, nor the Subiects and Sea-rouers thereof satisfied, vntill they had got∣ten the full rule and dominion of that kingdome. The cape of Aguera. The hauen of Araza. That if they wholy reduce into their power and possession the Cape of Aguero, and the Hauen of Araza or Larace (which indeede is situate without the straite, and not within it as some haue written) places verie fit and conuenient for the English, that get many booties in those seas, as also for diuerse o∣thers both friends and enemies to the Moores, the Turkish nauigation should be thereby the more se∣cured. That this king of the Moores, although he be a Mahometane, and a Tributarie to the Ottoman Em∣pire, yet verie lately he had held secrete intelligence with the King of Spaine, and also with the knights of Malta, who by means thereof were like to to haue taken Tripoli: and that hee had likewise maintained and assisted the insurrection of Marabut, and of his successour. The rebellion of Marabut. That though he were mightie for men, yet he was poore in mony. And lastly that although the Spaniards do holde in Africa, Certaine pla∣ces which the Spaniards hold in Africa. Maraschebir, Oran, the Pegnon, Tanger, Arsilla, Mazagan, and Ceuta, or Septa and therefore may combine themselues with the Moores to the great domage of the Turkes: yet notwithstanding they might bee brideled with an Armada of shippes, and by passing also if need were, euen into Spaine. Tunise and Goletta. And withall, that the examples of Tunise, and Goletta, which was held to be impreg∣nable, and yet was taken by Sinan, to his exceeding glorie, were so fresh in memorie, that they could not choose but remember them. § VIII. TOuching the third opinion, The third opi∣nion to con∣quer Malta, and the reason thereof. which was for the sending of an Armada to conquer the Isle of Malta, it was said: that considering the Mahome∣tanes, both in their traffikes, and also in their pilgri∣mages, Pilgrimage to Meka. as they went to Mecca, receiued most nota∣ble losses by the Gallies of those knightes: the great Turke ought to commaund that in any case order might be taken to secure that voyage, not onely for religions sake, but also to bee auenged of the trespas∣ses and wrongs alreadie done vnto them, or rather to recouer the glorie of Soliman, who in vain, and with∣out any good successe attempted to surprise it. That all the Subiects cried out and Exclaimed for the in∣larging and deliuerie, some of their friends, & some of their kinsfolkes that were there in captiuitie: say∣ing, that so did their forefathers, The Isle of Rhodes. when they spoyled and depriued the same knights of the Isle of Rhodes, the chiefe fortresse and defence of the Christians in the East. Moreouer, that they deserued due chastice∣ment also, aswell because they had furnished those that rebelled against the grand Turke in Africa, with munition of warre: as also because they endeuou∣red to surprize Modone on a sodaine. § IX. TOuching the fourth opinion, The fourth o∣pinion against the king of Spaine: and the reasons thereof. which was to moue warres against the King of Spaine, it was said: that if the Ottoman Empire were de∣termined to attaine the Monarchie of the whole world, it was not possible to be atchieued, vnlesse the mightines of that Prince were first weakened, who without al doubt was the greatest both for state and riches that Christendome had. That it could not be feared least the said King of Spaine should assault Algieri, Algieri. for that it was now a great deale better forti∣fied then it was in the time of Crai the Spaniard: (for so by a Sclauoinetearme, How the Turks call Charles the fift. the Turks of the Court do call Charles the fift.) That although Spaine should take courage to enterprise such a matter, in regarde of the losses which it receyueth continually by the Pyrates of Africa, yet it would be restrained from so doing for verie feare, least it should bring an Arma∣da of enemies into those seas, who might peraduen∣ture endomage it greatly. That the Spanish Gallies would not hazard themselues to come into the Le∣uante, because they woulde not bee so farre from home. Moreouer, that the resolutions of that King, either in regard of his many businesses, or in some other respect are verie slowe. And as it is manifestly seene by that which they did at Preuesa, and Naua∣rino, the Spaniards doe vtterly refuse euen for their owne commoditie and benefite to encounter with the Ottoman forces. That the said King of Spaine walketh with great cōsideration: for (if it be true) in the latter end of the Persian war, he denied to aid the king of Persia, when hee might haue succoured him as before he had done. That although he would per∣aduenture stirre in defence of himselfe, and his state against the Turkish forces, yet he could not so doe in deede: considering that he is so greatly occupied in the maintenance of Flanders, How greatly the king of Spaine may be troubled with the Moores, the French, & the English. and recouerie of the lowe Countries▪ which are verie strong both in re∣garde of the Sea flouds, and of the many riuers that are therein: and so much the more troubled hee is, by reason of the obstinate and constant resolution of that people, for the preseruation of their libertie and religion: and likewise in respect of the great en∣mitie which is betweene that king and the Queene of England, who doth greatly ease that warre, by troubling him in his state of Portugall, by intercep∣ting his treasures of the Iudies, and by sacking his kingdomes, as particularly she did at the Groine, which is a place of verie great importance to annoy Spaine, to disturbe the nauigation of the Indies, and also to attempt diuers other places in that other nauigation of the Ocean. Moreouer, that he was so farre interessed in the wars of France, that he could not wholy turne himselfe any whither else. How the king of Spaine may be diuerted to the Persian Gulfe. To bee short: that suppose he be reconciled, and at peace with the said princes, so that with more safetie and ease hee might attend this principall enterprise in tended against him, yet might the Turke damnifie him in his Spices and other Marchandizes, yea, and (if neede were) he might diuert him into the Red-sea, otherwise called the Persian Gulfe, by meanes of the Gallies, that lie so conueniently and commodi∣ously for that purpose at Suez: or hee might sur∣prise some good fortresse of his, as was attempted a∣gainst the Portingales for Diu, and Ormuz, and as Alfonso d' Albuguerque, the Portugall Viceroy in the Indies, thought once to haue done, Alfonso d' Al∣buquerque. when he meant to haue stollen away the bones of Mahomet, by a sodaine incursion into the Countrey with certaine light horsemen, euen as farre as Mecca: and as it was done at other times, while the Soldans reigned: and also as Tratan the Emperour was minded to haue done in his time. Againe, that the passages into A∣frica might be much troubled, especially if the Turke would set vpon the Spanish coast in the Mid-land sea, which would bee a great contentment to the subiects, who doe continuallie make humble peti∣tion and supplication for it, as well in regard of the safetie of their traffique and pilgrimages, as also that the poore Moores might once bee deliuered from the dominion of the Spaniard, The Moores wearie of the Spanish go∣uernment. as Selim at the lest was perswaded to haue done. And so much the ra∣ther, for that the said Moores, who are now multi∣plied into a great number, although they keepe close both for feare, & also for their traffique, where∣by they are growen to bee verie rich, yet as well by nature, as also for Religion, doe beare a mortall ha∣tred against the Spaniards. Moreouer, that this course might easily bee performed by reason of the conueniencie of the hauens in Africa, which lie neer at hand: and also because the said Princes of Fraunce and England, haue offered to continue their warres, with him: the King of France, by disquieting him in the parts of Nauarra, for the chalenge which hee hath thereunto: and the Queene of England (as it hath beene said) not onely by setting vpon him in the West Indies, and in the Ocean, which she may doe both by North and by West, but also by raising againe some new stirres in Portugall, where there doth not want great store of Mal-contents. For that people doth thinke, that with the losse of their last king, they haue also lost all their wealth and prospe∣ritie: because that as vnder his gouernment they grew rich by the peace that he intertained with the said princes of France and England: so vnder the Spani∣ards dominion they do find, that by the warres they liue in continuall perils and daunger. Againe, there be many banished and discontented persons, not onely of the kingdome of Portugall, but also of the kingdome of Aragon in France, in England, and in Constantinople, who togither with many Moores, (which also were in Constantinople) haue offered many aydes and helpes both secretly and openly: and haue promised that the enterprise will be verie easie, when so euer Spaine shall be set vpon, especi∣ally if it bee done vpon a sudden. For the greatest part of that kingdome doth want the vse of militarie knowledge: Spaine not well exercised in militarie knowledge. because the people of that Countrey do not applie themselues to armes, neither are there a∣ny ordinarie bands of Souldiers ouer all the realme: and but a small number of horses neither. Moreouer, that the Subiects, which Spaine sendeth forth into the Indies, into Flanders, and into Italie, are so ma∣nie in number, Spaine wan∣teth men. as they doe greatly weaken it: yea, so much, that if occasion should so fall out, it should not onely want helpe of their owne, but also should stand in need to be relieued with the ayde and assi∣stance of other states that are neere vnto them, and subiects of the same crowne, who peraduenture would proue to be of no great good seruice, and so much the lesse, because they may easily be stopped, and diuerted some other way. § X. THe fift opinion, The fift opi∣nion, to break peace with Venice: & the reasons therof. was to breake the peace with the state of Venice: For this said they, which en∣deuoured to perswade the great Turks mind there∣unto, rather with apparent reasons, then with such as were true in deede: (though peraduenture, euery man easily beleeuing that which he desireth, they might seeme verie probable and likely to the Turkes:) that no enterprise happily would proue lesse hard and difficult then this, as it might be found by the expe∣rience and examples of such actions as had passed heretofore: especially seeing the Turkes not many yeares agoe hauing warred with the Venetians, and surprised somewhat of theirs, had receiued many and great satisfactions at their hands to make peace with them. That the said Common-wealth & State of Venice, accounting peace to be the end wherat it shooteth, it should seeme that the people is time∣rous and cowardly, and by their ancient ordinances and customes, do neuer prepare themselues to war, but when they are drawne vnto it by force: that per∣aduenture they will thinke to be ouercome, before they looke for it, as it fell out with them for the king∣dome of Cyprus. That if the said state would make resistance by it selfe alone, perhaps it hath not forces sufficient: if ioyned in confederacie with others, The king of Spaine cannot helpe Venice against the Turke. it could not performe any great matter in haste, by reason of the many difficulties, that depend vppon leagues: and namely of the seuerall cogitations and interestes, wherewith the Spanish king is now in∣tangled: in regard whereof it was inforced at last to make peace with Selem. Moreouer, that it was a hard matter, if not impossible, that the said king, being so greatly occupied in his other warres, could at this time ioyne in league with that state: and also that without him all other confederacies, to ake warre by Sea, were of no importaunce or consideration. And as for the Pope, though it be very likely, that he will do al that possibly he can do, What reliefe the Pope can yeeld to Venice. to keepe the Chri∣stian princes from annoying the said state, but ra∣ther will aduertise and admonish them to ayde and succour it: yet the most that he can doe himselfe is onely that he may yeeld it some assistance, either of moneys, or of some Ecclesiasticall profites, or else peraduenture hee may send to ioyne with their Ar∣mada, his fiue Gallies, which togither with the Gal∣lies of Malta, of Sauoy, and of Florence, can make no mo but twentie in all, at the most. And besides, that the said state of Venice hath not happily that good intelligence, with all the rest of the Christian prin∣ces, which in such a case were needfull for it, (but the Turkes are therein greatly deceiued.) And to be short, seeing it hath spent great store of golde in dis∣charging the debtes of the Treasurie, whereinto it had runne by the last warres, and by building many fortresses, it will be found peraduenture not so well prouided and furnished with money. And last∣ly, that all that state being verie full of forts, it is im∣possible at one time to keepe them all well fenced, and sufficiently strengthned. Diuersitie of opinions a∣mong the Bas∣saes, how and where to an∣noy Venice. But for as much, as it seemed, that the greatest part of the Visiers did concurre in this opinion, but yet varied a∣mong themselues, how to attempt this enterprise: I will set downe their differences in particularitie. Sinan the Albanian, Sinan and his death. of Topoiano, a town of the San∣giaccheship of Preseremo, who died the last yeare of a naturall death, but peraduenture somewhat dis∣contented, because the warre of Hungary succeeded not according to his mind: (and yet some thinke ra∣ther that he died of poyson:) hee perswaded, that Corfu should be attempted, vnder the pretence of 3. hundred Duckats a yeare, due to the Emperiall Chamber of Turkie, He perswadeth to attempt Corfu. euer since the yeare 1537: for La Bastia, because it was yeelded to the Corfiottes but vpon that condition. La Bastia is a wast and desert place, being vnder a towne of the Turkes in Epirus, La Bastia. twelue miles right ouer a∣gainst Corfu, neare to the Salt pittes, which are in the Turkes possession at the mouth of the riuer Calamatta: and is the principall port and Staple for the Marchan∣dizes, which come from a great part of Greece, to bee im∣barked at Corfu. But in verie deed Sinan endeuoured to perswade this attempt, because the Fortresse of Corfu was thought to be vnuanquishable, both by Nature and by Arte: and hee being exceedingly ambicious to atchieue the name and title of a great Conquerour, was so bold and hardie, especially vpon the exployte which he did at Goletta, as to promise to himselfe a verie easie conquest of this also: as in truth hee did not sticke to vaunt that he could performe it, when he passed by Corfu, Goletta ▪ in his victorious returne from the enterprice of Goletta. Ferat, who was called Carailam, that is to say, the Black-Serpent, Ferat Bassa, & his death. and died also the last yeare, being by Mahomet caused to bee strangled: (how wisely and considerately, I leaue to the iudgement of those that vnderstand matters of state better then I do.) For he was accused to haue practised intelligence with the Tartarian of Crimo, that he should refuse to come to the Turkish campe, because Ferat himselfe was not Generall thereof: and to haue endeuoured also a reconciliation for Michael the Vaiuode, and the Trāsiluaniā, both at one time, by giuing the court to vnderstād that they had not rebelled for any hatred which they caried indeed against the Turks, but ra∣ther vpon an indignation conceiued agaynst Sinan. Al which he laboured onely of purpose to bring the said Sinan into disgrace, whom hee helde to bee his most capitall enemie, because hee was made Masul, Ferat degra∣ded. that is to say, hee was degraded, for the tumult and stirre that fel out betweene the Iannizzaries and the Spahoglanes, at the circumcision of the now-reigning Turke. This Ferat aduised, that Catharo should bee conquered, He aduerti∣seth to attempt Catharo. because he thought that the saide For∣tresse did keepe Castell Nuouo (as it were) in bon∣dage, and that it was the principall key of Dalmatia, of the Adriatike Sea, and of Venice. Andronig. And also that hee being borne at Adronici, a Castell of Albania, could verie well know euen from his yongest yeares, that the said Fortresse, which is famous in that prouince, was of so great importance, as in truth it is. I haue somewhat inlarged this Discourse of the parti∣culars touching Sinan and Ferat, because I haue had oc∣casion many times (as I shall also haue hereafter) to make mention of them, as the most principall men in this Em∣pire, and in this warre. Sinan Cicali, Sinan Cicala perswadeth to attempt Cerego. an errant enemie to the state of Ve∣nice, for the reasons which we haue aboue alledged, he perswaded that Cerigo should bee attempted, for the selfe-same causes, for which he calleth it the Lan∣terne of the Archipelago, and the spie of the Turkish actions, especially for that it is manifestly perceiued and seene: how the Christians may easily passe ouer into Morea, out of this Island. So did Damaratus king of the Lacedemonians, Demaratus K. of Lacedemo∣nians. when he was banished out of his kingdom, aduice and counsell Xerxes, that if he would attaine to the Lordship and gouernment of Greece, hee must possesse himselfe of this Island which at this time was called Cythera. Other Bassaes there were, Other Bassaes perswade the attempt of Nouigrade and Zara. which held opinion, that to be reuenged of the spoyles and robberies committed by the Vscocchi (of whom I will speake somewhat hereafter) and to meete with other their wrongs and iniuries, they should surprize Nouigrad and Zara: or at the least, that the Venetians should be inforced and of necessity constrained by that means to be bound, to pay al the losses and damages which those rouers and theeues had wrought against the Turkes, both by land and by sea. For the Venetians had denied to be bound to make any such recom∣pence, because in the publike Bookes and Registers of Constantinople, there was not to bee found any a∣greement, or any payment for the same, as in truth there was not. The fishings of Butintro. The same Bassaes also were of opini∣on, that it were fit the Venetians should bee spoyled and bereaued of their Fishings at Buthroto, which at this day is corruptly called Butintro, (a place di∣rectly ouer against Corfu, and ten miles somewhat more West of La Bastia. (Wherunto they were mo∣ued, not because the Turkes were neuer heretofore possessed of them (although the Venetians had pos∣sessed the same, long before the Turkes had any pos∣session in Albania ) but onely because there runneth a rumour among them, that the said fishings are ren∣ted at a hundred thousand duckats, where as in deed there is no more payed for them, then six thousand or thereabouts. Some other Bassaes were of opinion, that the Turkish fleete should vpon a sodaine go forth with a good wind, Others per∣swade to at∣tempt the coasts of the Adriatike sea. either from Morea, or from the gulfe of Lepanto, or from Preuesa, or else from Velona, and run all along the coastes of the Adriaticall sea, with a full resolution to surprise that part that should bee found most cōuenient and commodious for them. Which course they did thinke would very easily sort to verie good purpose, because they presumed, that all the places which lay vpon the sea, might verie fitly bee annoyed also vpon the land, for that the Turkes haue almost all that Countrey in their pos∣session. These Bassaes likewise aboue all other at∣tempts, Others Pola. propounded the easinesse and also the great importance of possession Pola, and Ragugia. The one because it is a Citie, which is altogither disinhabi∣ted, and hath a verie faire hauen, and is situate in Istria, and is also a prouince not verie wel furnished with Souldiers and inhabitants, nor greatly streng∣thened or fenced with Fortresses: and principally, be∣cause it seemeth that the said City of Pola, is not di∣stant from Venice, aboue a hundred and twentie miles. And the other, that is to say Raegugia, because it is (as it were) the second Gate, Others Ra∣gugi. (for the first and chiefest is thought to bee Corfu ) whereby you may enter into the Maritimall and Sea-state of the Venetian Common-wealth in the Adriaticall sea, and also because the situation therefore, is most fit and conuenient for preparation to be made there∣in, for annoying of Italie, if they should meane so to do in good earnest: especially, for that the state of Rugugia hath within it most safe and spacious portes and hauens, whereof indeed the Turke hath great want in that quarter of the sea. For Durazzo hath not any hauen able to receiue foure Gallies, What ports the Turke hath in the Adriatike sea. and also in the entrance thereof, there are many flattes and shelfes which are verie daun∣gerous. Twelue miles beyond Durazzo, vnder the Cape or Promōtorie of Lacchi, there is an other har∣borough for twenty gallies, or there aboutes, but it is not verie safe: neither are there any great good wa∣ters about it. In the Gulfe of Velona, there is also an other harborough vnder the land for so many gal∣lyes likewise. Somewhat nearer on this side, about some eight miles, is the Hauen called Porto Raguseo, where may lodge some thirtie Gallyes, but not verie safely on the North, on the Northwest, nor on the West. Without the Gulfe, at least in the coast of Albania, or rather within the Gulfe (for the ancient Authours doe bound the Adriaticall Sea with the mountaines of Cimmeria ) there is first the Hauen of Santi quaranta (i. the fortie Saints) where likewise they may entertaine some few Gallyes. And a little on this side of that, is Neribo, sometimes called Orico: where the Romanians touched, when they depar∣ted from Ottranto, to the end they might afterwards saile all along that coast. And this Hauen is able to receiue fortie Gallies: but it is not verie safe. The onely hauens of Ragugia, which be fiue or sixe, The hauen of Santa Croce. are of the greatest receyte: in three whereof especially in the Hauen of Santa-Croce, there may be intertained and harboured all the Armadaes of the world, much more the fleete of the Turkish Shippes. The same place also is verie fit and conuenient for the Turkes, because they may easily conueigh thither their tim∣ber for ships, from the Mountaines of the Duca∣gini in Albania: which cannot so commodiously be brought into the other portes aboue mentioned as I haue somewhat more at large declared in other writings that I haue penned vpon the occasion of this warre. But the greatest part of the Visiers enclined most to the attempt of the Isle of Candie, Others per∣swade to at∣tempt the Isle of Candie. for (said they) seeing it is most necessarie to secure the nauigation, which the Turkes continually make from Constan∣tinople to Alexandria, for Marchandises, and for de∣uotion to Mecca, that they might bee safe from the Gallies of Spaine, of Malta, and of Florence, it could not otherwise bee brought to passe, What the E∣mirs are, and why they wear a greene Tur∣bante. but by one of these two wayes, as a captain of the Emirs once said. ( These Emirs professe thēselues to be of the right & true descent from their Law giuer Mahomet, and therefore they weare a greene Turbante:) that is to say, eyther by binding the Venitians, that they shall not onely for∣beare to giue entertainment to the saide Gallyes within there Seas, but also make satisfaction for all losses, that the Turkes shall sustaine, as often as they shall not safely guarde their said ships from all such dangers. Or else by causing the Venetians to suffer and permit a good companie of Turkish Gallyes to be resident at Candie for that purpose. Herevnto they added also, that this attempt would proue the better, & come to good successe, because that king∣dome is diuided in it selfe, by reason of the diffe∣rence which is betweene the Greeke Religion, and the Latine, and for the great discontentments, which some (but falsly and vainly peraduentur) do report, to be growen betwene the noble men of Venice, and the Noble men of Candie, betweene those that are priuiledged persons, and those that are tied to impositions and taxes, and betweene the Clownes and the Gentlemen there. And so much the rather, for that it is a verie easie matter to set vpon it with a Turkish Armada, seeing it is (as it were) compassed about with Natolia, with Caramania, with Barbarie, with Alexandria, with Morea, and with the Arcipela∣go, which are all Countreys belonging to the Tur∣kish Empire: so that they may easily from hand to hand ayde and succour those that should first at∣tempt to disturbe therein. Moreouer, that by the purchase and winning of this most fruitfull Island, they should obtaine the absolute commaund and rule of the Sea, for that it is (as it were) the verie Cen∣ter in the middle of the Mediterranean Sea, or ra∣ther of the world, considering that it is almost equal∣ly distant in situation from Asia, Africa, and Europe, so that it was by the auncient Authours adiudged the most fit and conuenient seate of all the worlde. And this also might so much the more easily bee brought to passe, for that thereby the number of the Venetians Galleyes should be diminished, and the Ottoman Empire should encrease the meanes to make many moe Gallyes, then now they haue. Last∣ly, seeing there are many Candiotes remayning in Constantinople, they may haue good information, and some aide also of them, and so much the more, because many of them are banished persons, and haue eyther withdrawne themselues into that Citty to get their liuings, by labouring in the Arsenall, and in Pera, or else are come thether with marchandises, and specially their most pretious wines, which they bring thorough the Greater Sea▪ and from thence to the mouthes of the Danowe, and so to Chilia, The waye how the Mus∣cadels of Can∣die are con∣uayed into Po∣lonia, Mosco∣uie & Germa∣nie. to Ga∣laz, to Rene, euen to the Floz in Walachia, and then in Cartes into Polonia: For into Germanie they are brought, not by that way (as some write) but by the Ocean to Hamburgh, and to Lubeke, and some fewe to Danske: and yet there are some carried thether also by the way of Venice. §. XI. THE Sixt opinion was, The Sixt opi∣nion to attēpt Italie, and the reasons there∣of. that leauing all these o∣ther courses and enterprises, all the Forces, that the Turkes could make aswel by Land, as by Sea, should be sent against Italie: And the reasons were these, That if they were minded indeed to attempt the conquest of the Monarchie of the worlde, the Turkish Empire should neuer attaine vnto it, vnlesse it first obtayned the Rule and Lordshippe of Italie: because out of that Prouince, as from the Centre of the vniuersal world there doe proceed all the coun∣sels and principall assistances, that may hinder and crosse the proceedinges which are attempted else∣where. That the Romanes became to bee Lordes and Maisters of the world, because they had the go∣uernment of Italie in possession. That the Hunnes did alwayes direct all their designementes to that onely end, when they passed into Italie out of Hun∣garia, by Dalmatia, and by Carso. That the Alanes and the Gothes, The Romans. The Hunnes. The Alani. The Gothes. The Vandales. aswell those that dwelt on this side, as those also on the other side of the Danowe, after they had conquered Grecia, entred into Italie by the waye of Bosna and Croatia. That the Vandales also, ha∣uing subdued Spaine, went thether with an Armada of shippes out of Africa: And lastly, That the Ger∣manes, the Frenchmen and the Spaniardes, The Dutch. The French. The Spanish. The Saracens. had often∣times done the like. Moreouer, that the Saracens (of whome it was wont to bee said in the Romanes times, that it was very conuenient either not to haue them enemies, or to keepe them friendes,) had o∣uerrunne it all thorough, kept it a long while in their possession, and sacked Rome it selfe, the Ladie and Empresse of the world: A Citty, which (as Sultan Soliman very fondly sayed according to the reporte of Iouius ) did of right belong to the Ottoman Em∣pire, The foolish speech of Soli∣man touching Rome. because it was alienated by Constantine, to the great preiudice of his successors. To bee short, that there could no enterprise be attempted, either more glorious or more profitable, then this of Italie, for that it is the Prouince, which is Queen of al the rest, The praise of Italy. for conueniencie of scituation, for temperature of ayre for fruitfulnesse for all thinges necessarie for mans life, for the maiestie and beautie of so many most famous and noble Cities, for riches, for the ve∣rie Sea, and seate of the Christians religion, for the auncient Glorie and mightinesse of that Empire, and for many other respects. That it would also bee a verie easie matter to bring to passe, for that Italie is at this day ruled and gouerned by manie Princes which are diuided among themselues, as well in re∣garde of their owne priuate interestes, as also of se∣uerall nations, whereof they are proceeded: and that peraduenture they are not all verie willingly and lo∣uingly obeyed of their Subiects and peoples, who by reason of the peace, which they haue so many yeares enioyed, will proue to be but cowards and weakelings: and for that also they are growen to such a huge multitude, as if entraunce should bee made into the Countrey, either in one part or in many, at such times as their corne were yet ripening in their fields, as the Turks should on their behalfes want no vittailes, so should the Italians be of neces∣sitie constrained either to shut vp themselues within their fortresses, or else to perish for hunger. Which thing will be made more manifest and cleare, if yee shall consider, that now whiles they liue in peace, they haue not corne sufficient for their sustenance, but are enforced to prouide the some abroad, and to cause it to be brought to them from Morea, How the Ita∣lians prouide themselues of Corne. from Constantinople, and euen as farre as from the Ocean. Moreouer, that the Italians are accustomed for the most part to procure their liuings with handi-crafts, or with traffique, in such sort, as if their trades were hindered, they should bee compelled so much the rather to yeeld to such conditions as the conquerour shall impose vpon them, or at least to become tribu∣taries, and acknowledge the Ottomans power. And besides, that the Turkish Souldiers would willing∣ly goe thither, because they are not to passe through Countryes, which are barren, frozen with Ice, and disinhabited, or through thicke bushes and woods, or mountains vnpasseable, but as it were in the sight of their own houses, and through their own proper Countryes. And lastly, that if the Turkes haue ente∣red therinto at other times, when their borders and confines were not so conuenient, nor so near as now they are: much more may they, or rather ought to attempt the same at this time, seeing they haue them now so nigh and commodious. § XII. THE seauenth opinion was that they should make war first in Polonia, The seuenth opinion, to warre against Polonia, and the reasons thereof. and then afterwardes in Hungarie and Germanie. The reasons thereof were these: That forasmuch as it did not stand with the dignity of the Ottoman maiesty, to suffer the king of Polonia so often to refuse the payment of his Tribute, it was very fitte, that all forcible meanes should bee vsed to recouer the same. That for the many discontentmentes, which haue passed in that Kingdome, there was very good hope that hee might the more easily bee enforced to pay it. That the warre should be verie conuenient and commo∣dious for the Turkes, because Polonia was so neare, & bordered vpon Moldauia, and vpon the Tartarians, and also vpon the Sangiackeshippes of Achermano, & of Bendero, and vpon Vosia. Againe, That the en∣tier and quiet possession of Moldauia, and Walachia, could neuer be kept & maintained, vnlesse the har∣die boldnes of the Polackes were brideled: and so much the more for that the Vaiuodes of those pro∣uinces, although they were greately enriched, yet could they neuer recouer thēselues in any distresse, nor bee relieued any where but in the Turkes king∣dome. That by these meanes also the iniuries might bee reuenged, which were wrought against the Turkes by the Cosacchi, when they sacked Coslou, The Cosacchi Coslou. a place in Taurica belonging to the Turkish state: that therby likewise the passage should be eased for their Marchandises, that goe from the Turkish States into Moscouie: that the Moscouite himselfe should bee put in a bodily feare, (and that peruaduenture to his great losse and domage) because his Countrey laye so neare, especially, considering that hee was the im∣pediment, why the Ottoman Empire atchieued not the to rall conquest of Persia. That growing in this sort so nigh unto Germanie, it may bee that one onely discomfiture would vtterly ouerthrow the Emperour, for that hee should see his Countrey the more easily compassed about with the Ottoman For∣ces: That to bee short, all the Countrey of Polonia is very open and without Fortresses, and that the Polackes themselues were not now to bee accounted any great warriours, because they haue liued so long in peace. For the wars which they made with Maxi∣milian were but of small continuance, and the other warres which were made before by King Stephen with the Muscouite, were made by him as hee was an Hungarian, and rather with Hungarian Souldiers, then with Naturall Polackes, and rather with besie∣ging, then with fighting. § XIII. THE eight and last opinion was, The eight o∣pinion to war against the Emperor: and the reasons thereof. that warre should bee made against the Emperour, whome the Turkes call, The King of Betz, that is to say, of Vienna, in times past peraduenture Vin∣doniana. Those which were of this opinion, were moued thereunto: for that the Vscocchi were be∣come so insolent in praying vpon the Turkes both by land and by sea, The insolen∣cies of the Vscocchi. as not only in regard of the losses, which they continually wrought, but also euen for the honour of the Ottoman maiestie, they could no lōger be endured: & so much the rather, for that the marchants subiect to the Turke, both to the publike and to their owne priuate detriment, haue beene constrained to change the Port of Narenta, and to go to Spalato, a Countrey belonging to the Venetians, to the end they might carrie their Marchandizes in∣to the Christians Countryes, and bring backe other Marchandizes for them into Turkie. And yet they could not by that course goe and come safe, neither notwithstanding the peace, that hath beene conti∣nued with the Emperour and the Venetians. More∣ouer, that they also ranne vp and downe by land, stealing mens cattell, burning townes and villages, and taking children euen out of the verie armes of their naturall mother. So that there is great reason to feare, least in time they wil be able to become the Lordes and maisters of some neighbour-Fortresse, which would be a matter that might turne, not on∣ly to the great losse, but also much rather to the ex∣ceeding shame and dishonour of the Ottoman Em∣pire. Againe, that forsomuch as the Emperour had carried so slender a respect towards the grand-Turk, whiles he was busied in the warres of Persia, as that he delayed in deed for a long time to send him his tribute: The easinesse of this warre. (for so the Turkes call it) hee made shew thereby that hee was rather minded to breake the peace, then to maintaine it. That the victorie would proue both easie and certaine, for that on the one side he might be assaulted in Croatia, and on the o∣ther side in Hungarie, and in Austria. That the coun∣trey was fruitfull and abounding in all things, verie commodious and fit for the Souldiers, both in re∣gard of the neerenesse thereof, and also because they should passe thither (almost all the way) by their owne houses. That the principall Holdes of the Kingdome of Hungarie, namely Belgrado, Buda, and Alba-Regale, and the rest that are of the greatest im∣portance, were possessed and garded vetie well with the Turkish garrisons. And that although some dis∣comfiture might peraduenture happen, yet would they be most conuenient receits for the Reliques of the armie, where they may be as well defended and preserued, as also repaired and renued with such helpes and aydes, as are there nigh at hand. That the Emperor seemed to be inclined rather to peace then to warre: and it may be also, that hee is not so well esteemed and obeied by all the Princes of Ger∣manie, as his degree requireth. That all the Princes of Germanie were diuided, as well in regard of their interest in Religion, and in state, as also particu∣larly in respect of the election of the Newe King of Romanes. That they are almost wearie (as some of the Protestant Princes doe seuerally reporte) of the gouernement of the house of Austria: and that they are also too much giuen to the loue of their treasures and riches. And finally, that seeing there are many yeares passed since the Germanes haue handled neither Launce nor Arcubuse, they cannot now tell how to take Armes, nor to vse them: be∣sides that they will hardly bee obedient to their Ca∣pitanes. Lastly, That euen as the saide Almanes themselues would alwayes dwell in murmur and distrust with the Hungarians, with the Italians and with the Spaniardes, as often as they should goe to the warres together, because those nations are natu∣rally not well liked, (I will not say hated) by them: So the sayde Dutchmen, being enemies among themselues for the diuersitie of Heresies which they follow, will alwayes bee afrayde, least if the Empe∣rour should obtaine the victorie and remaine Con∣querour, that then they shall bee compelled to for∣sake their licentious liberty, and to obey the Pope: So that there is no doubt, but that they will rather forbeare to fight, then to helpe their prince and themselues. The Empe∣rour can haue no aid of other Princes. To bee short, that there could be no feare of any aide or succours, which the Emperour might haue of other princes. Not of the Polacke, nor of the Transyluanian, aswell in regarde of the peace, which is between the Great Turke and thē, as also for that they will be in doubt, least they shold drawe all the tide and force of the warre into their owne States and Dominions. Besides, that the one of them would be afrayde, least hee should bee enforced to abandon the Frontiers, and retire him∣selfe to the frozen Sea, and the other least he should bee depriued of that Estate, which hee possessed by the Graunt of the Ottoman House. Moreouer, that the King of Spaine, who is the onely Man that can helpe the house of Austria in deede, is otherwise im∣ployed and busied. That the pope cannot yeeld sup∣ply for all, that shall bee needefull in this busines. That the Italian princes will not runne in haste to spend their Treasures, nor consume their subiectes for an other mans benefite. And for conclusion, That the State of Venice, doubting that it shoulde thereby prouoke the Ottoman Forces against it selfe, would rather stay to see the issue and successe of the warre, then it would put it selfe to a certaine, or at least to a doubtfull danger of ouerthrowing it selfe. And these were the seuerall opinions of the Visiers, inconsiderate no doubt for the most parte, and agreeable to their barbarous temerity and rash∣nes, whereby they faine vnto themselues that those thinges are easie, which afterwardes by experience they proue not onelie to bee difficult and hard, but also very dangerous and pernitious. § XIIII. BVt for as much as my meaning is to satisfie those also, that may in any sort doubt of the varietie and truth of the things, which I haue spoken, I will adde hereunto in briefe, how the Turkes come ac∣quainted with our matters, and how wee come ac∣qainted with theirs: though it be most certaine, that the like consultations are proper to all Princes, The consulta∣tions of Soli∣man & Selim. and particularly to the Ottoman Princes, as among other examples, we know that Soliman, and the last Selim, did vse the same, the one of them by exami∣ning with his Bassaes the forces of all the Princes of the world, and the other by aduising with them, which might be the most certaine way to conquer the Christians. Without doubt the great Turke, How the Turks come to the know∣ledge of our affaires. and the great men of that Courte are verie well informed and ad∣uertised, aswell of all actions that daylie happen, as also of the designementes and purposes, yea and of the most secret counselles of our Princes, some∣tymes by the merchauntes, Marchants slaues. which of all nations are at Constantinople, and sometymes by the Slaues, whom the Turks euery day. A great number wher∣of, doe also verie oftentimes most impiously denie and renounce the faith and religion of Christ, either for rewards that are propounded and offered vnto them, or else to auoyd the most horrible and cruell punishmēt, which they had before endured at their barbarous hands, or peraduenture for some other end and purpose, as did of late yeares one of the Emperours Secretarie, who was resident at Con∣stantinople. The Emperors Secretarie be∣came a Re∣negado The Jewes. Besides that the Hebrues, who are the most cunning and craftie searchers and inquirers of matters, and most mortall enemies to the Christi∣ans are dispersed in great number ouer all the Tur∣kish dominion, especially by reason of the traffique which they vse continually in the Ottoman Market townes, and also for the tolles and customes which are almost wholy in their handes, through all that state. And they thinke, that by seruing the Turkes for spies and priers into our actions and affaires they shall not only secure themselues of their goods, their owne persons, and their children, but also that they shall reape great gaine and commoditie of impor∣tance, whereby they doe much gratifie and pleasure the great estates of that Empire. The last war which the Venetians had with the Turke, was much occa∣sioned by one Iohn Miches an Hebrew, Iohn Miches a Jew. who was dis∣contented with them, because hee could not by stealth conueigh away certain marchandizes, which vnder a forged name he had caused to be brought to Venice. John Lopes a Jew. Of one John Lopez, an Hebrew also (whose pic∣ture by order of the holie Inquisition was of late yeares burned at Rome ) it is most certainly knowne for a truth, that hee imparted and commnnicated with Amurath many secretes of Pope Xistus Quintus which he by espiall had found and learned whiles he remained in Rome. Lastly, it is not to be doubted, but that the Turkes doe also keepe diuerse Spies in pay, Spies among Christians. that are neare to al the Princes in Christendom: yea (and that which is a great matter, but yet it is true) euen among the Zwitzers, and Grisons of purpose to vnderstand what leuies of Souldiers are made of those peoples. § XV. ANd as touching our Christian Princes, How we come to the know∣ledge of the Turks affaires the ex∣pences are most notorious and well knowne, which they bestow, not onely to learne the counsels one of another, (and that oftentimes to the great shame and domage of those that serue them in these actions) but especially and principally to vnderstand the counsels and designements of the Turke their common enemie. For those Princes which haue the greatest interest and entercourse with him, do keep (euen within the Citie of Constantinople ) many Spies in pay, Spies, Jewes and Turkes. yea giuing wages and stipends to the verie Iewes, and also to such Turkes, as are most in trust, and neerest in credite with the chiefe Bassaes, besides the large gifts which they liberally bestow vpon o∣thers, when they haue any matter of moment com∣municated vnto them. Moreouer, The Bassaes. the Bassaes them∣selues will not sticke sometimes to impart to our Embassadours such matters, as are propounded a∣mong them in their secrete and priuie Councell be∣fore the great Turke himselfe: although he doth vse verie oftentimes to call his Councell into the fielde, taking occasion to go on hunting, to the end it shuld not bee so easie for any particular persons to sound the depth of his deliberations. Why the Bas∣saes disclose the Turkes secretes. But the Bassaes are hereunto moued vpon diuerse and sundrie conside∣rations: sometimes vpon affection, as heretofore did Mahomet Socoleuich the chiefe Visier of Selim, and the Muphti of that time, What a Muphti. to the Agents of the state of Venice. Muphti is the chiefest man among the Turkes in their spirituall Superstitions, & the chiefe Interpreter of the law of Mahomet, and is of so great authoritie in shew and ap∣parance that in matters of counsel his opinion is neuer con∣tradicted or gainsaid: I say in apparance, because when the Turke is disposed to haue any matter goe forwarde in deed, the Muphti either for flatterie, or for feare, is the first and chiefest man to commend it. Sometimes the Bassaes are moued so to doe, for that by quarrelling and iarring among themselues, they thinke by these meanes the more easily to di∣sturbe the designements and purposes of their op∣posites, as peraduenture the aforesayde Bassaes did, and as Sinan and Ferat at last were wont to doe. Or to be short, they are verie oftentimes moued there∣unto, because all Turkes generally are beyond all measure greedie of bribes and gifts: as for example among the Bassaes, that same Hassan shewed himself to be, The cunning knauerie of Hassan Bassaes who was a Venetian of the Cilestri, and Gene∣rall of the Sea before Cicala. For when one of the Visiers had offered in Councell to the great Turke that he would surprise the Citie of Venice, and was not hearkened vnto, but rather reproued for his ri∣diculous vanitie, hee went straight to the Venetian Bailo, or Agent, and told him, that whereas such a matter was propounded in the Councell by others, he withstoode it, for the naturall affection which he carried towardes that Common wealth: for the which he receiued a most rich present. Lastly, it is true also, that the Ottoman Counsellers do rewarde their seruants, and enrich them by imparting their secretes vnto them, to the ende that they may after∣wards acquaint such withall, as vse to bee most libe∣rall to them. The Ladie Sultanes. And so doe they likewise to their wo∣men: whereupon it commeth to passe, that the Sul∣tane Ladies (who are either the Kins-folkes or the fa∣uorites of the great Turke, dwelling continually in the Serraglioes, where al principall businesses are ma∣naged and handled) become acquainted with these secretes, which afterwardes for verie rich gifts and presents that are sent to the said Ladies, from the of∣ficers and Agents of such Princes as the secretes doe concerne, by the Eunuches that wait vpon them and keepe them, are verie easily disclosed and reuea∣led. Moreouer they do sometimes indeuour with all their studie and industrie, to performe some notable seruice towards some Prince, to the end they might receiue the oftner and richer Gratuities from him. The mother of the now reigning Turke, pretendeth to honour the state of Venice, and craueth of it verie many times some reward for the same. It is not long ago since all the Sultane Ladies requested of the sayd state, Feathers made of Glasse. that it would forbid the carrying out of certain feathers that are counterfeited and forged of glasse, at Murano: which being ioyned and set togither, do much resemble the plumes made of a Herōs fethers. And this request they made, because the said coun∣terfeit or forged feathers, were sold so good cheape at Constantinople, and yet did so please and satisfie the people, that the said Sultane Ladies could not sell at so high a rate, as before they did, the goodly bun∣ches and bundles of feathers of seuerall birds, which were sent vnto them for Presentes, from diuerse quarters in great quantities: The vse of wearing fea∣thers, how and where it be∣gan. for it is the vse not onely of men, but of women also, to weare such feathers on their heades: following therein the manner of the Tartarians, (from whome it came to the Turkes:) for that Zingi Chan (who by some is not rightly called Chan-gio, ) was saued aliue by the meanes of an Owle: for this Birde hauing a∣lighted vpon a certaine thicket of young trees, a∣mong which Zingi had hidden himselfe, for feare of his enemies that pursued him, they did verily thinke that there could not be any body there, because the Birde remayned there so quietly. Whereupon the Tartarians (sayeth Haytho ) do holde the sayde Birde in great reuerence, so that hee, which at that time could get any of her feathers, accounted himself a happy man. And euer after, all the other Tartarians from hand to hande haue still continually vsed to weare the like feathers on their heades in me∣morie of that action, and for a kinde of Re∣uerence. § XVI. BVt to returne to our discourse where wee left it: Amurath re∣solueth to make warre v∣pon the Empe∣rour. Amurath, after hee had floated and wauered certaine dayes betweene the contrarieties of these his Visiers Opinions, resolued with himself to moue warre against the Emperour, hoping in this part of the world also to surpasse the memorie of his prede∣cessors, as hee thought hee had done in Persia, and so much the rather, for that hee was to make warre in a Countrey adioyning to his owne, and conse∣quently very conuenient for Vittailes, and not in∣conuenient for his Subiectes. Incouraged thereunto by Sinan Cicali. Hereunto hee was also encouraged and heartened by Sinan Cicala, after that hee perceyued hee had not perswaded the en∣terprise of Corfu: hoping withall to obtayne the Generalshippe, whereby hee might put downe his Opposites, and purchase greate riches: especially hauing authority, as indeede for the space of seauen yeares hee had, to doo whatsoeuer the Great Turke himselfe might haue done, if hee had beene present in the Campe. By Hassan the Bassa of Bosna Moreouer Hassan the Bassa of Bosna, a man rather temerarious and headdie, then valo∣rous: (if yee consider what he did in Croatia ) con∣tinuallie solicited Amurath to the same purpose: both for the selfe same end, which is common to all the Turkes, that is to say, to enrich himselfe by the meanes of warre, and also because hee verilie beleeued, that by this course he should safely attaine and come to those supreme honours and dignities, which were foretold him by the superstitious South sayers. For beeing the Great Turkes chiefe Cut∣throte or Executioner, he was a most vaine obseruer of such diuinations: Whereupon to satisfie Sinan and himselfe, hee did continually aduertise and in∣form the Turke of the losses and domages that were wrought by the Vscocchi, and by the Subiects of the Arch-duke, and of the burninges and spoiles that they committed whiles they ouerranne the Coun∣trey: wherewith he did also assure him, that the best course hee could take, was to beginne the warre in those partes, and afterwardes pursue the same ei∣ther against the Emperour, or against the Venetians, or else passing ouer on a sodaine into Italie (as was done in the dayes of Mahomet, of Baiazet, and of Soliman ) to put all the princes of that Prouince into an exceeding feare, and so to reape and bring home most rich and wealthie spoyles. Yea he solicited him so farre, that at the last hee obtained licence of the Turke to begin the warre, by making himselfe to be seene and knowne that hee was in the confines of the Emperour: but yet with secret commission, that he should not say he did it vpon his commaun∣dement. He erected the Fort of Petrina vpon the ri∣uer of Cupa, The fort of Petrina. which he called of himselfe Hassan Grad: a place from whence he might easily runne ouer the Countrey, and bridle Carlistod, Zagabria, Metlica, and all the Countryes round thereabout: and spoy∣ling the villages euerie where, hee filled all places with terrour, with teares, and with lamentations. And one thing I will note by the way, A Parallele of two Bassaes. which is me∣morable, and notable, Namely, that the first man al∣so, that ouer-ranne the Countrey in the confines of Persia at the last warres, in token that the Turke had broken the peace with him, was called euen by the same name Hassan, being the Bassa of Van, which is a Citie either of Medea, now called Seruan, and Vaas∣pracan, or in the confines thereof, and was somtimes the vttermost place that the Turkes had toward Per∣sia: and the same Hassan was none otherwise ouer∣throwen by the Persians, then as afterwardes it happened to this Hassan, in fighting with the Empe∣rialistes. § XVII. BVt because I haue oftentimes made mention of the Vscocchi, What the Vs∣cocchi be. it will not be farre from the purpose, before I passe to other matter, briefly to tel you, who they be, and so much the rather, because they were the occasion of so great a warre. It is not true, that those whom wee call Vscocchi, (which signifieth by the Sclauoine worde Scoci, Skippers, or Leapers, be∣cause they skip and leape like Goats, with their cor∣ded shooes vpon the toppes of the Mountaines.) It is not true (I say) that they are Inhabitants of Chi∣mera, as Iouius and others that follow his opinion do beleeue. For the Vscocchi do dwell about fiue hun∣dred miles distant from the Chimeriottes (and yet they are both people of Albania ) in the Mountaines that The Vscocchi and the Chi∣meriotti not all one people. are called Acro-ceraunii, in the mouth of the Gulfe, right against the Cape of Santa Maria, the vttermost Promontorie of all Italie. The Vscocchi speake the Sclauoine speech, but the Chimeriottes the Albanian: The one liue after the Romish rite, the other after the Greeke. The one are a companie gathered togi∣ther, and that but of a few, the other naturall by coū∣try, and many in number. Among the Vscocchi there bee many Murlacchi, which cannot stay vnder the Turke, and many that are banished by the state neer to the Venetians and other Princes therabouts, and fled to the Vscocchi for verie pouertie. What the Mar¦telossi are. There are also among them many Martelossi, that are Spies, and theeues in those quarters: for so in deed signifieth the worde Martelos, so that it is the name of a profes∣sion, and not of a Nation, What the Mur¦lacchi are. as some haue thought. And because I haue also made mention of the Mur∣lacchi, I will not omit to tell you what they be. The Murlacchi are called in those partes all the Christi∣ans that dwel in the Mountaines, but specially those that inhabit the mountaine Lica, which is betweene Nouigrad and Segna. The originall of the Sclauoine worde Moralacchi, was at the beginning, when the Barbarians came into Italie, because after that they had passed Walacchia, they called the peoples that dwelled at the Adriatike Sea by that name, as if they would say, Dwellers on the Sea. For euen as the Turkes do call all the Italians by the generall word Franchi, of the particular nation of the Frenchmen, so did the Barbarians terme all Italians likewise by that tearme of Vulacchi, or Vuloschi, as though they were Walacchians. The Vscocchi doe dwell vpon the Sea at Segna, Where the Vs∣cocchi do dwel and Buccari, and within the land of Othozaz, and ouer all Vinodol, which is a territorie belonging to the Conte of S rim. And although they runne vp and downe all those quarters, spoyling and robbing, and stealing all that they can get, no otherwise then the Turco∣manni did in times past among the Grecians, yet are they tollerated by the Imperiall Officers, because they would not loose the deuotion and beneuo∣lence of that people, who without any expences or charges of those estates, and with great brauerie de∣fend those Frontires, euen as the Cosacchi do in Polo∣nia, Why they are tolerated by the Imperia∣lists. of whom I will speake more hereafter. But be∣cause they are thus tollerated and also protected, contrarie to the couenaunts and agreements that haue passed betweene the Imperialistes and the Turkes, The Turkes greeued with this tolleratiō. and also concerning the sea betweene the Venetians and the Turkes, they haue oftentimes gi∣uen occasion to the Turkes to put handes to their weapons, for the defence of their subiects and of their marchādises, which they carry to Ancona, & to Venice: The Veneti∣ans greeued at it also. yea & the Venecians thēselues haue bin oc∣casioned to do the like, as wel for the maintenāce of the iurisdiction which they pretend to haue in the Adriaticall sea, as also because they would take away al occasions frō the Turks to come with an Armada, for reuenge of the iniuries and losses, which they haue receiued by thesaid Vscocchi: and finally, be∣cause they would not bee troubled with the great Turke, as alwayes they are, when his subiectes are spoyled, by demaunding amendes for the same. Moreouer, the Vscocchi haue within this little time laid their hands to robbe the Christians also of their marchandizes, and particularly the Venitians, not (as their Vaiuodes and Arambassi do say) for the los∣ses which they receyued these last yeares, whiles they were besieged in Segna, but in truth to enrich themselues, by all the iniurious wayes and meanes they could. Wherevnto they doe the more willing∣ly applie themselues, because they know verie well that they cannot be hindred or at least verie hardly, by the said Venetians, for that they come backed and assisted by the Imperialistes, and can quick∣ly recouer their owne home, as in deede they doe both safely and securely, and whensoeuer they list. These Vscocchi, may come forth into the Sea, to pray and spoyle by foure wayes: that is to say, betweene Fiume, Veghia, and Cherso: How many wayes the Vs∣cocchi may come forth to the Sea. betweene these Islandes and Arbe, betweene Arbe and Pago, and betweene Pago, and the firme land of Zara. This last passage hath somewhat a straite Channell, and may bee of some 100. paces. The Venetians do keepe diuerse Gallyes, and Barkes armed, How the Vs∣cocchi may be hindered from their Theeuing. that walke continually vp and down these Channels to hinder the Vscocchi, but by reason of the many disorders, that haue hetherto hapened, there are now but some Gallyes onely, or at least ac∣companied with a fewe Barkes of small auaile. It were verie necessarie, principally to multiplie the number of Barks, which being backed behind with Gallyes, might easily set vppon the Vscocchi: and then without all doubt they might make the passage for Marchantes to bee more safe and secure: and so∣much the better if there were appointed certaine watches, euen in such places as were fittest for that purpose. And although to doe this, the costes and charges would be of some moment, yet they might well bee borne, considering they shall bee vsed but for a small time: for the Vscocchi being once seue∣red and scattered, they cannot so easily vnite them∣selues together againe: And the Marchants also no doubte, would willingly contribute to the charges, forasmuch as it concerneth their benefite and inter∣est principally. There might also a remedy be had against their Theeueries in another sort, that is, by contributing to the chiefe Captaines of the said Vs∣cocchi, a certaine summe of money competent, to the end they should abstaine from doing any domage by Sea, eyther to the Turkes or Christians. For to hinder theeues from robbing, especialy such as these bee, who are very couragious and hardie, is a thing almost impossible, vnlesse it might bee performed in deed by an open warre. And if any man should thinke, that this course would displease the Turke, for that hee could not but suspect that the Venetians did not effectually employ themselues against the Vscocchi, so long as their owne Marchants did passe to and fro in safety: and forasmuch also, as this deli∣beration and agreement could not be kept so secret, but that it must needes come to the knowledge of the Turkes: I doo thinke verily, that it may be pro∣uided for by one of these two meanes: eyther by signifying so much to the great Turke himself whose satisfaction is principally respected, or else by ma∣king supplication to the Pope, that in regarde of the publike quiet he would enterpose himselfe to cause payment to bee made to the said chiefe Captaines, with the monies of the state of Venice, or of the Mar∣chantes, to bee deliuered to his Holines secretlie. Moreouer the Emperour himselfe might be treated withall, that his Emperiall Maiesty would bee plea∣sed to accept of a conuenient Garrison for the de∣fence and custody of Segna, and of those Confines. Or rather, which would be the true remedie indeed, they might by generall consent and agreement bee driued quite out of those Countryes, considering that they are publike and common theeues, and au∣thors of the greatest troubles in Christendome: yea and so much the rather, for that otherwise they can neuer be diminished, much lesse vtterly extinguish∣ed, aswell because they are not forbidden or hinde∣red from multiplying themselues, and receiuing new supplies dayly into their troupes: A law among the Vscocchi. as also and principally because they haue a law, that when the husband dieth, the wife remaineth heire of all, and he that afterwards taketh her to wife, becommeth Lord and Maister of all that she possesseth. And hitherto let it be sufficient to haue spoken of the Vscocchi, and of the meanes how to represse their insolencies: wherein I referre my selfe, as also in all other things which I haue heretofore sayd, and am hereafter to say, to better iudgements then mine owne, and to persons that are better informed then I am. § XVIII. AMurath then hauing moued warre agaynst the Emperour, Sigismundo Battori, the Prince of Transiluania, Sigismundo Battori the Transiluanian declareth him∣selfe an open enemie to the Turke. shewed himselfe openly to be agaynst the Turke a matter verily not expected by him, and little hoped for by those that examined things one∣ly by reason, and according to state: for assuredly it was the worke of the onely prouidence of God. For by this open declaration of this prince, there is arisen without all doubt, the securitie and safetie of Germanie ond Italie, with the most notable diuer∣sion of the warre, that euer hath happened hitherto against the proceedings of the Turks, by all the prin∣ces Christian that haue fought with them. The offer of Sinan. Where∣upon Sinan hauing offered himselfe, after the death of Hassan, to goe in person for the recouerie of that which was lost, and to restraine the tongues of such as did sting and backbite him to his grand Seignieur as being the Authour of this councell, and being gone forth in deed with supreeme and soueraigne authoritie, there happened betweene the one side and the other, all those actions, which shall be parti∣cularly written by the Historiographers. And behold, The death of Amurath and his sepulchre. whiles this Sinan was at Belgrado, the Emperour Amurath died the 9. day of Ianuarie in the yeare 1595. and was buried at Constantinople, in a Meschita, or Meszita, which he had made in his life time, Why the Turks temples are Moschee. and dedicated to Bahalzebuf, that is to say, to the Idole of Flies: for thereupon peraduenture such fabrikes or buildings are either corruptly or in mockage called by vs Christians Moschee, of Moscha which signifieth a Flie. Prince Mahamet being retur∣ned frō Magnesia to Constantinople, after the death of his father, Mahamet succeedeth. by the great carefulnes of Ferat, who pre∣sently dispatched a Gally vnto him, and being in∣thronized according to the accustomed Ceremo∣nies of the Ottomans, the deliberations and consulta∣tions touching the war, were renued. It was thought at the first, that Mahamet was rather inclined to peace then otherwise, hauing found (as it was noted vnto you in the beginning of this discourse) the Citie full of dearth, his subiects not well pleased with this warre, The pretence of Sinan to be chiefe Visier. the Bassaes diuided among themselues, and specially the two chiefest of them, Sinan and Ferat: for the one chalenged the chiefe place, because hee was alwayes most louing towardes him, and had dis∣swaded his father from a certain determination that sometimes he had to put him to death, for iealousie of the state, and had euer aduertised him from time to time, whatsoeuer had happened in the Empire The other thought that he had purchased great me∣rite, The pretence of Ferat to be chiefe vtsier. because he had in so short a time brought him into the possessiō of his Empire, that he had so great∣ly desired, and that at such a time, as was most im∣portant for the estate of all his affaires. In such sort, The death of them both. as for these causes, and for others also which I haue told you before, they iustled lustily one agaynst the other till in the end they were both brought to their deathes. Notwithstanding Mahamet, The reasons that moued Mahamet to go forth to the warre in person. after that hee had somwhat setled his houshold & domestical affaires, was of necessitie constrained to go forth to the war in his owne person: and principally besides the rea∣sons before alledhed, because the Souldiers did not sticke openly to giue him to vnderstand, that to the camp they would go no more without the presence of their great Lord: for that they were greatly dis∣contented with the former Generals, Sinan and Fe∣rat, who had intreated them verie hardly. Besides that the seedes of ciuill discords, did as yet remaine aliue, in those that were affectionate, some to one of them, and some to the other: And lastly because Cicala had promised him assured victorie, if hee would so doe. § XIX. IN this yeare, which was the first yeare of his go∣ing foorth, The taking of Agria and the importance thereof. hee surprised Agria: a place which al∣though it bee not verie strong in regard of the hill, that commandeth it, yet is it of great inportance for the situation, because the vniting of the Transilua∣nians forces with the Emperours will be now more difficult, for that the Turkes will continually haunt and beate the way that leadeth from Toccai to Casso∣uia: for the other vpper way of Sacmar, is much longer. And it is so much of greater importance, be∣cause if the walles of Agria bee repaired, the Turke may there maintaine a puissaunt armie, betweene both his enemies. § XX. IN this yeare also happened the battaile, A doubtfull battaile. whereof without doubt it may be said, that either both the armies remained victorious, the Imperiall in the be∣ginning, and the Ottoman in the end: or else that nei∣ther of them was vanquished by the other, seeing both of them retired vncertain of their owne estates or how the matter had gone with them. And so do we read, that it happened euen alike in the battaile betweene Lewes the xi king of Fraunce, Lewes the 11. Charles duke of Burgundie. and Charles Duke of Burgoine: to leaue the examples of the Greekes and Romaines, that are more auncient. Whereupon it was, that both the armies following the aduise and counsaile of Leo the Emperour, did rather giue encouragement to their seueral peoples, with signes of apparant ioy on both sides, then con∣fesse their losses. The flight of Mahamet. True it is in deed, that Mahamet saw with his owne eyes, that at the beginning his ar∣mie was so discomfited and confounded, as greatly fearing his life, he fled to a hill in the sight of Agria, accompanied with some few of his Agalaries, and there dryed and wiped his eyes with a peece of Ma∣homets apparrell, Hee dryed his eyes with a peece Maha∣mets vesture. which for reuerence hee carried a∣bout him. Trne it is that our Men had shewed ve∣ry great valour: for lesse then 50. thousand Soul∣diers▪ (so many iumpe, as Francisco Maria, Duke of Vrbino required, for the extirpation and rooting out of that tyranny,) went to meete with the e∣nemie, fought with him, and discomfited an Armie of 300. thousand persons, euen in the presence and viewe of their Prince, who had gathered the same together, almost out of all the Forces of his Em∣pire. Insomuch as it cannot any way bee doubt∣ted, but that if our men had been lesse greedy, more vnited, better aduised and instructed, and aboue all if they had beene the friends of the Lord of Hostes, they had obtayned one of the most singular victo∣ries, that peraduenture was euer obtained by the Cbristians, yea and had taken Mahamet prisoner, as Baiazet the first was at Mount Stella, by the Greate Tamur Chan, that is to say, an Iron Lorde, who is otherwise by some corruptly called Tamerlan and Tamburlan. Tamerlan. In briefe, to conclude this parte, the Turkish Captaines hauing shewed small knowledge and little valour, and therefore many of them were degraded and put to death, and almost all the com∣mon Souldiers hauing likewise shewed great cow∣ardize and astonishment of mind: it is very likelie that their Great Lord and Maister will thinke bet∣ter of his businesse in the yeare to come, eyther by making peace, or by continuing the warre with lesse daunger. Whereupon, whiles Christendom attendeth and waiteth in great perplexitie of her doubtfull cogitations, peraducnture it shall not be vnprofitable, if (asmuch as shal lie in me) I go about a little further to search out the thoughts and coun∣sels of our enemies, and examine what may or ought to bee done by our Princes Christian to ad∣uance their businesses, to the glory of God and man. The end of the Second Part. The third part. Wherein is treated, That suppose the Turke will growe to Peace, whether it bee good that the Emperour and the Transyluanian make peace with him: with a discourse of such matters, as if the warre continue, the said Princes may worke against him: & what the other Christian Princes may also doe, to meet at all times, with such daungers as may alight vppon Christendome by the Ottoman Forces, I N this last Part then, I will shewe first, That let it be supposed, Ma∣hamet the Emperour of the Turkes, hath a desire to grow to a Peace with the Christian Em∣perour, and with the Transylua∣nian, whether it be good that those Princes should make peace with him: and secondly I will discourse vpon such matters as the great Turke feareth, if the warre bee continued, may bee wrought against him, as wel by the said Princes, as by the other Prin∣ces of Christendome. Wherewith I will also ende∣uour my selfe to giue you such notice and know∣ledge of peoples and places, as peraduenture this my trauaile shall bee deemed altogether vnpro∣fitable. § I. EVen from the verie beginning of this warre, Aduice giuen to Mahamet to make peace with the Em∣perour. A∣murath refused to treate of peace, whereunto he was greatly solicited by the Embassadors of France, and England: to the ende they might haue procu∣red him to make warre by Sea, (as before I noted) against the king of Spaine, of purpose to diuert him from the warre, which the said king continued a∣gainst their Princes. Their instant motions they re∣inforced againe after the two ouerthrowes giuen to the two Hassans, the one in Croatia, and the other in Hungarie: and a while after that, the stirres and tumults of almost an open rebellion that were per∣ceiued in Constantinople, which after the death of Amurath, were much more renued in Mahamets time. They did also most manifestly set before his eyes the difficulties of this present warre, & brought him to a consideration how much more easily the other might be effected. Moreouer, they considered also the open declaration, that the prince of Transil∣uania had made, whereby without all doubt the difficulties of the warre might grow greater to the Turks: for that the said Prince being a yong man & valiant, and hauing gained a verie great reputation among diuerse peoples and nations, as well friends, as enemies, he would neuer be drawen backe by a∣ny other meanes, but only by necessitie: wherunto it would be the hardest matter in the world to driue him, as long as there was no peace made with the Emperor, which peace could not by all likelihoods be hoped for at that time, considering the common interestes of both the said Princes, the new confede∣racie concluded betwixt them by their late alliance, the insurrection of the Ra cians (of whom I will speake in their due place) the rebellions of the Vni∣uodes of Moldauia and Walacchia, and lastly the feare which all the Turkes had, least the Transiluanian should be the man, that was to bring low, The Turkes feare the Tran¦siluanian. or perad∣uenture quite to ouerthrow the vnmeasurable huge¦nesse of the Turkish Empire. Insomuch as Mahamet giuing eare to the foresaid reasons, & fearing aboue all thinges to prouoke and raise against himselfe a league and confederacie of the Christian Princes, (a matter greatly feared of all the Ottoman Princes) it seemed as well by the answere which hee caused to be giuen to the said Agents, as also by that which he went about to worke, Mahamet cō∣tented that peace betrea∣ed of. that hee had a minde not alto∣gither alienated or estraunged from peace, and so much the rather, for that he permitted the Beglerbey of Grecia to negociate and treate with the Agents of the Emperour, of the Transiluanian, and of the Walacchian. § II. HOwbeit, the truer opinion was, that this Ma∣hamet was encouraged to warre, Mahamet re∣solued to con∣tinue warre. The presage of Ferdinando. Why the Turkes nego∣tiate peace. yea neuer a whitlesse then his father Amurath was, especially af∣ter the ouerthrow which he receiued in Croatia, to recouer the reputation that hee had lost: for so was it the opinion of the olde Archduke Ferdinando, that it would come to passe. But in deede it was thought, that he rather negotiated the peace (besids those reasons that are aboue specified) as well to fol∣low the vse of all warres, and specially of the Otto∣mans, as also by that meanes to make vs Christians, the more negligent and carelesse in our resolutions and preparations: hoping aboue all other things, that we while peace was intreating, would walke more fearefully and warily in annoying him, least we should thereby prouoke him further: Euen as it fell out (iust) to the Emperour Maximilian the se∣cond, Why Maxi∣milian the 2. did not sur∣prise Alba-Regale, when he might. who for none other respect forbare to surprise and reduce to his subiection Alba-Regale, but onely because he would not anger Soliman, with whom he was then in treatie of peace: which although it was indeed concluded, yet was it afterwards broken with the great losse of the said Emperour. But let vs suppose, that Mahamet either desired at that time to make peace in good earnest, or at least desireth it now at this time, Points of con∣sideration. it is fit and conuenient to consider verie well, whether in regard of the pre∣sent state of our affaires, we on our behalfes ought to make peace with him, I will report the principall points, whereupon in mine opinion this whole bu∣sinesse, and the resolution of so important a matter dependeth. Of which poynts some doe belong to the Emperour, and to the Transiluanian, and some others to the honour and interest of all Christen∣dome: leauing the same notwithstanding to the iudgement of other men. § III. THE first thing to be considered is, Conditions of peace, which the Turke will looke for. that we may probably beleeue the Turke will neuer make peace, vnlesse on the one side the Emperour, and the Transiluanian doe make restitution vnto him of all his places which they haue surprised: and on the other side, he must remaine free and vnbound from making any restitution, especially of any thing that is of moment. A law of the Turkes not to restore any thing once gotten. For the Turkes holde it for an inuio∣lable law, that the ground which is once troden with the feet of their horses, & takē into possession, ought neuer to be restored: & specially if they haue built any Meschites, or Temples therein, or else when the places which they haue gotten, be conue∣nient for them, and for their aduauntage. And al∣though we do read that Amurath the second▪ after he had spoyled and depriued the Despote, George Woco∣uiche of Seruia, yet hee restored him to his estate which he had lost: eogie Wo∣couich Dis∣pote of Seruia, father in law to Amurath the second. yet ye must vnderstand that A∣murath did so, because hee was desirous to make peace with the Hungarians, whose valour hee great∣ly feared. Besides that he was also his father in law, because he had a daughter of his to his wife, althogh shee were of the Greeke Religion. One of those sinnes, for which it hath pleased God to spoile and depriue many Rulers of those Countries, George Woco¦uich tearmed an Infidell be∣cause he ma i∣ed his daugh∣ter to the Turke. Cephalonia recouered by the Venetians. euen of their States and Liberties, as it happened to the said George himselfe, after the last ouerthrow of Laodis∣laus: whereupon in their Sclauoyne songes, hee is to this day called Heuiernish, that is to say an Infidel. True it is also, that Cephalonia the Island, belonging sometimes to the Turke, is now in the possession of the State of Venice, after it was conquered by the helpe of Consaluo di Cordua, called the Grand Cap∣taine, eyther because the Turke thinketh it is a mat∣ter of no moment, Selim restored diuerse places to Giacomo Soranzo, for the behoofe of Venice. or els that it is not very easie to be recouered. So Selim in the last peace that he made with Venice, was contented that there should be re∣stored to Giacomo Soranzo Commissioner for that State, by Ferat Bey, (he that of late yeares dyed Bas∣sa of Buda, ) thirteene villages that were by the bor∣dering Turkes, surprised in that warre, in the territo∣rie of Zara: foureteene more in the territory of Sebenico, and somewhat also in the territorie of Spa∣lato: For by that meane hee thought he should bee the better assured of the breach and dissoluing of that League, whereof at the last hee was greatlie a∣frayed. The Restitution, which wee may feare, that Mahamet looketh to haue from the Emperour will be in Croatia, of the contentious Fort of Petrina, What restitu∣tion Mahamet looketh for of the Emperour and of all that which hee hath surprised vpon the way of Canisa, beyond the riuer Draua, euen as farre as Ba∣boz, which is neare vnto Zighet his Frontier. In the lower Hungarie hee looketh for the restitution of Strigonia, and Vicegrado: and in vpper Hungarie of Vaccia, Filec and Nouigrad. And it may be more∣ouer, that hee will challenge the repayring of the burnt walles of Attuan, or some encrease of Tribute, (as hee calleth it,) for his expenses in the warre. Of the Prince of Transyluania, What restitu∣tion hee loo∣keth for from the Transylua∣nian. hee will challenge the restitutition of Walacchia, and require that hee deuest and depriue himselfe of all pretenses and ty∣tles, which hee sayeth hee hath thereunto. More∣ouer that hee restore vnto him Lippa, which is of great importance to Transyluania, because it is in his confines, and within the Bassanate of Temesuar vpon the riuer Marisso: And finally, that the Sangiacke-shippes of Ianoua and Bezcherech with diuers other places of lesse name which hee had burned may be repayred, or els that hee may be well payed for thē: besides some other giftes and yearely augmentati∣ons, which he looketh for. What places the Turke for his part wil ne∣uer restore. On the other side, yee may almost be assured that there will neuer bee gotten of Mahamet the Countrey of Tureuopolie, which is betweene Saua and Cupa, What a Bano is. now vnder the iurisdiction of the Bano: Bani are certaine Gouernors of Prouinces, but are of lesse autho∣ritie then the Beglerbyes, though some haue written other∣wise. Neither shall ye euer get of him Biz, or Bicagi, a place of some importance, because it is more to∣wardes the Sea coast, neare to the territorie of the Venetians to come to Nouigrad: nor in Hungarie on this side of the Danowe, Vesprino, and Giauarino, with the Castles neare adioyning, and beyond the Danow Agria, the last place that he hath taken. I haue thought good to set downe the said pla∣ces by their particular names, to the ende that by knowing what matters of greatest moment and im∣portance are in the possession of either side, my nar∣ration and discourse may proue the plainer. § IIII. THE second thing to be considered is this: what danger if both Em∣perour and Transiluaman do not ioyne togither to make peace with the Turk if the Turke refuse to make peace ioyntly with the Emperour and the Transiluanian togither, whether these Princes ought to agree to a peace the one with¦out the other. Certaine it is, that to doe it seuerally and disioyned, would bee to the great daunger of him that is the weaker, or of him that is excluded out of the peace, and also it would bee agaynst the confederacie, against the couenants and conditions wherunto they haue sworne, and against the promi∣ses, which they haue both made to the Pope. More∣ouer, who can doubt but that it would also bee a∣gainst all law and dutie of gratitude on the Empe∣rours behalfe, Ingratitude in the Emperor▪ in regarde of the singular benefite, which hee hath receyued by this open declaration that the Transiluanian hath made against the Turke? and on the Transiluanians part, Breach of faith in the Tran∣siluanian. would it not bee a∣gaynst the obseruation and keeping of his worde, which he professeth to be inuiolable, and quite con∣trarie to that which he hath hitherto refused to doe, although he hath beene therunto required, both by the last, and also by this now present Emperour of the Turkes, with most ample and large conditions of benefite, of hononrable tytles, and of perpetuall protection? Which if the Emperour Ferdinand had regarded, most certaine it is, that little lesse then all Hungarie had beene at this day in the possession of our enemes. Moreouer, No faith in Infidels▪ who can euer promise to himselfe a∣ny faith in an Infidell, without feare, that he will not breake the bonds of all lawfull peace at his pleasure? considering that princes, & specially the barbarous Princes neuer wanted plausible and likely pretenses so to do as the Venetians do know verie well by the faith and promise, that Selim did breake with them, in the yeare 1570. besides almost an infinite number of examples, that might be alledged thereof. Which point of breach of faith, although in truth no prince can in reason feare, yet certaine it is, The Transil¦uanian is to feare breach of faith in the Turke. that the Tran∣siluanian Prince hath an exceeding great cause to feare it, because the Ottoman house thinketh, that from him onely it hath receiued all the iniuries and al the losses of this present warre, and that by his onely Rebellion (for so doe the Turkes call this his iust and lawfull desire, which he hath to withdraw himselfe from the Turkish soueraigntie) all their de∣signements and complots haue beene interrupted and frustrated, and the course of their hoped victo∣ries vtterly stopped: and so much the rather ought he to feare it, for that if the whole tide and force of the warre should come vpō him alone, hardly could he defend himselfe from so mightie an enemie, if he should not be ayded and succoured, neither by the Polacke, nor by the Emperour: for of himselfe alone he is but a poore and a weake Prince. And al∣though it may seeme, that he hath a state fortified by nature, and therefore might peraduenture be defen∣ded for some time, yet in the ende he should of ne∣cessitie be constrained, either willingly or by force to yeeld to that power, which is now growne to be so terrible and fearefull to the whole worlde both for number of people, and also for treasure, and in re∣spect of all maner of furniture for warre, almost in∣uincible. Neither should the Emperour be free from feare in this point, The eare the same if the Transiluanian should be at peace with the Turke: because it would be inough for the Ottoman Emperour onely to haue these princes dis∣armed for a time. For hee knoweth verie well with how great difficulty Souldiers are brought togither againe vnder their ensignes, after that they are once returned home: and especially how hard it is for the Emperour, who is constrained to make warre rather with auxiliarie Souldiers, then with his owne, who also cannot come to succour him without some time, and the meeting togither of circuites and dietes, which are to be holden, before any thing can be done. And thus vpon these reasons that haue beene set downe, it may be concluded verie resolutely, that to make peace on this fashion, would not onely not be helpefull to the two Princes, but also much more daungerous and pernicious to both their estates, for that the enemie may shortly after take vp armes a∣gaine, and renue the warre with greater aduaun∣tage, whensoeuer hee shall thinke it fit and conueni∣ent for him. § V. THE third and last consideration, which apper∣taineth not so much to the aforsaide Princes, Where it is likely the Turk will bend his forces next. but to all Christendome togither, is, that suppose the Turk do make peace, and keepe it for a while, where may we thinke in reason, that hee will hereafter di∣rect his arrowes? For we haue established this for a most certaine ground and foundation, that the Ottoman Empire doth keepe her Subiects alwayes occupied and emploied in new warres, against some state or other, as hauing had her originall and main∣tenance by force and armes. Of truth it is not to be thought, that he will renue the warre against the King of Persia, Not against the king of Persia. at the least as yet, and not being prouoked thereunto: because the Souldiers of Europe, who are the sinewes and strength of his Armies, doe abhorre to go thither, by reason of the length of the iourney, the want of vit∣tailes, the roughnesse of the wayes, and the braue valour of the Persians. And so much the lesse is it likely that he will renue the warre there, because it is but a while agoe since hee made peace with that king, and for that he hath not as yet fullie established the foundations of his new Fortresses. And to bee briefe, the Persian indeed wanteth no Souldiers for there are three sortes of Souldiers that goe to warre vnder him: The Turcomanni, who are vnto him as Feudataries be with vs, and hold their landes of him. The Corizzi, or Coridschi, who are sti∣pendaries and waged by him: and Auxiliaries, who are such as come to ayd and succour him, and name∣ly, the Armenians, the Georgians, and others all ve∣rie valiant and hardie, especially those that goe to warre on horsebacke, as all of them for the most part doe, which is the greatest imperfection in the Per∣sian Armies. § VI. NEither is it to bee thought, Nor against the king of Fez and Maroc¦co. that hee will moue warre in Africa, against Mulei Ameth the king of Fez and Marocco, The Siriffo of Africa. whome the Moores call the Siriffo, which signifyeth as much with the Turkes, as the title of Sultan, vz. King and Lorde. For in so doing, hee shall get but little, and much hee may loose, besides that, hee shall be somewhat too farre from home. Moreouer Mulei Ameth, who was the Brother of Abdala and of Mahamet, is a man very hardy and warlike: insomuch as although to di∣uert the suspition, which his Brother Abdala had conceiued against him, whiles he raigned, and was King, hee shewed himselfe euen for all the worlde as the Ottoman Mahamet did, to auoide the wrath and displeasure of his Father, altogether geuen to pleasures and sensualitie, The kingdom of Gago. The finest gold. yet did hee afterwardes conquere the Kingdome of Gago, towardes Guiney: from whence there is brought the most fine & pure gold xxiiii. Caractes: and holdeth in possession al that parte of the Countrey, which is more then a hundred dayes iourney from the Ocean sea, euen aboue Tripoli. § VII. NOr against the Isle of Malta, because (as A∣murath was aduised by Sinan Cicala, Nor against the Isle of Malta. whilest he was Generall of the Sea) it would turne to the smal credite and reputation of the Ottoman Empire, to imploy so huge Forces against so small an Island, & so much the rather, because it might peraduenture fall out, that hee should neuer obtaine the possessi∣on thereof, or at least it would bee verie hard to get it, aswell in regard that it is now much better forti∣fied and strengthned then it was in the dayes of So∣liman: as also because it would bee very couragi∣ously defended by the auncient brauery of those most valiant knightes, and sooner relieued and suc∣coured by the Christian Princes, who are now well taught and instructed thereto by their former experience. § VIII. NOr yet against Spaine, Nor against Spaine Insurrection of the Mores∣coes. vpon a vaine hope, that the Moores which are there, woulde make an insurrection and rebell against the King: For it is not true (as some thinke) that they are so readie to put in execution, as indeed they are all confedera∣ted to desire innouation, yea so much the lesse may the Turke hope for any such insurrection, for that the said Morescoes are diuided in many seuerall places, which places are also verie open and with∣out strength: they are also vnarmed, and a people of no certaine faith: and therefore in such a case they will not be ouer-hastie, and specially for feare of loo∣sing their wealth and riches. Portingals & Arrogonians. As concerning the Portugals and the Aragoni∣ans, of whom also according to the opinion of the Bassaes, it seemed that the King Catholike might stand in some feare: the truth is, that they are not onely humbled by a tollerable kinde of inforce∣ment, but euen of their owne selues they haue ap∣plied and setled their mindes to an honest necessitie. Moreouer, those that haue good intelligence in matters of state, doe knowefull well, that to lend the eare to the aduices and encouragement of Out∣lawes and discontented persons, is a verie vaine thing, and oftentimes proueth verie daungerous. Besides it is verie likely and credible, that the Turke will verie well bethinke himselfe, before hee will rashly run to prouoke and stirre vp the grea∣test king in the world against him, notwithstanding that hee bee greatly busied and occupied in other wars: as wel for that if he should be molested by the Ottoman forces, he may very easily cōclude a peace, or at least suspension from warres with his enemies, as also because he is so mightie a Prince, that he may wel quite himselfe against the Turks, especially with his Armada, and Fleete of ships, which without en∣crease of any expences vnto him, he may cause eue∣rie yeare in good time to scoure the Ottoman Seas. For out of all doubt, he is not inferiour to the Turk, The Turkes Empire. neither in forces, nor in greatnesse of Empire. Con∣sidering that the Turkish Empire (if notwithstan∣ding it be lawfull to call that state an Empire, which is vnduly vsurped and kept from the lawfull Empe∣rours) is in deede verie huge and great, for that in Asia it possesseth all that is betweene the greater Sea, In Asia. and the Ocean of Arabia and Persia: and from the Caspian Sea, and the riuer Araxis, and the other more Easterly confines of the Kingdome of Persia, euen vntill the Mediterraneall Coastes of the Helles∣pont as farre as Nilus. And in Africa, In Africa. all the coast of Nilus, till ye come beyond Algieri, and also a great part within the land of this prouince, where it bor∣dereth vpon Egypt, In Europe. and the red Sea. And in Europe, all that Countrey which is from Buda euen to Can∣stantinople, and betweene the riuer Niestro, and the Danow, and the AEgean Sea, In Islands. and the Adriatike, with all the coast of the greater Sea, as farre as Tana. Be∣sides all the Islandes of Asia, and the greatest part of the Islands of Greece. And yet notwithstanding, the Empire of the most potent king of Spain is nothing inferiour vnto it, The Empire of the King of Spaine. for it stretcheth her power and iu∣risdiction in the West, it inlargeth the confines of her most mightie estate in the East, and passing o∣uer the new world, and arriuing euen to the Islands of the Moluccaes, the vttermost part of the Orientall Islands it reacheth (like a true Monarchie indeede) ouer all those maritimall or Sea-parts as farre as the straite of Gibraltar. Neither truly is it likely (as some thinke) that he will moue warre against the Polackes, or against the Tartari∣ans, or against the Moscouites. § IX. NOt against the Polackes, Nor against Polonia. because they are (as a man may say) in the verie bowels of the Turkish estate. They are verie wel armed both with men and horse: and if they doe possesse Moldauia, and Walac∣chia (as easily they may doe) and then passe ouer the Danow into Bulgaria, they may fortifie the banks of Danow as the Romans did, and hardily pierce with their Armes, euen into Constanstinople, which is the verie heart of his Empire, and so vtterly ruinate and destroy all his Country, with the same brauerie and valour which the Polackes haue sundry times shewed when they warred with the Turkes. § X. NOt against the Tartarians, Nor against Tartaria. because they are of the selfe same Religion with him, and also his confederates: with whom if he should warre, hee should gaine either little or nothing of them, be∣cause they are but poore, and for the most liue a∣broad in the fieldes, so that whensoeuer they shall perceiue the approach of their enemie, they may ea∣sily retire themselues, and when the enemy is depar∣ted, recouer that which was lost. And finally, if the Turke shall keepe and maintaine them as his friends, he may reape many and great seruices at their hands, whereas on the contrarie, if hee hold them his eni∣mies, they may worke him much harme. § XI. AND lastly, not against the Moscouites, Nor yet against Moscouit. because they dwell among frozen Ices, and fennie Marrishes, in a barren Countrey, farre distant and diuided from all his estates: whose Prince is con∣tinually enuironed and garded with a great number of Horsemen and Footemen, who are also very well trained and exercised in managing and hand∣ling the Arcubuse. If then it be a matter in reason not to be feared, But either a∣gainst Venice or against all Italie. that though he should conclude a peace, he would moue warre a∣gainst any of these aboue mentioned, yet of a certaintie we may greatly feare, that he will resolue to bend his forces, either against the state of Venice, or against all Italie. § XII. IF against the state of Venice: If against Ve∣nice: thē what trouble to Christendome in verie truth, the troubles of Christendome, would then be grea∣ter then now they are, because the nearer the daun∣ger would thereby be vnto Italie, and vnto the verie state of Religion, so much the more considerable and troublesom would it be. The Princes of Greece because they did not succour the princes that were their next neighbours, By example of Grecia. who were exposed and open to the Ottoman forces, all of them wholy lost their estates: God himselfe in the meane while permit∣ting the same to be effected, not onely for their riot and voluptuousnesse, and for the ciuill discords that were among them, but also yea and much more for the Schisme, which the Greekes had made in the holy Church, so that first by the Gotthes, then by the Bulgarians, afterwardes by the Sarracens, and last of all by the Turkes, they were brought to that lamentable miserie wherein now they are: euen as Pope Nicholas the fift foretold, when he writ to the Emperour Constantine, surnamed the Dragon, as Gennadius the Patriarke of Constantinople hath obser∣ued, and I in another place haue touched more at large. Cardinall Bessarion writing to the Princes of Italie, sayeth, And of Con∣stantinople. that because they would not in time relieue Constantinople, onely with 50. thousand Crownes, they were the cause and chiefe occasion, why the Turkes afterwardes, hauing gotten posses∣sion thereof, with a continuall course of perpetuall victories, subdued Trabisonda, Sinope, the Islande of Metelino, (i. Mitylene,) La Morea, Caramania, and the Countries adioyning, Bossina, Bulgaria, the Lower Hungarie, Epirus, and a great part of Dalma∣tia, of Albania, and of Sclauonia, and lastly of the Island of Negroponte. But forasmuch as the worlde ringeth to this day with the wordes, Pope Vrbanes exhortation to moue christen¦dome to the recouery of Ierusalem. which the Great Pope Vr∣ban vttered, when in Cleremount of Aluernia, he mooued and encouraged the Christian Princes to the glorious conquest of Ierusalem, which is cal∣led euen by the Turkes Cuzzimu Barec, that is to say, The famous and holy place, for the reuerence which they beare to the Sepulchre of our Lord, & in that respect is visited (as Bethlehem likewise is,) by their Chazilarii, that is to say, their Pilgrimes, in their returne from Mecha: And forasmuch al∣so, as euery man dooth well know the godly and wonderfull entreatie and perswasion made to the saide Christian Princes, by Petrus Heremita, Petrus Hermi∣ta. and the Sermons of the blessed Fryer Iohn Capestrano, Iohn Capestra∣no. who had already gathered together 40. thousande signed and marked with the Crosse, to goe against the Turkes, euen in the very selfe same countryes where now the warre is: And lastly, forasmuch as besides the holy and very zealous exhortations of many Popes, and other holy Men, (whereof there is great store to bee founde in the Councels, and ecclesiastical Hystories) there resoundeth now in our time ouer all Christendome, Pope Clement the eight. the liuely voyce of the now liuing Pope Clement, who like another Iacob, watching day and night, without any tyring or wearinesse, for the seruice and maintenance of Labans sheepe, that is to say, of the faithfull flocke of Iesus Christ, cryeth out with a loude voyce, by his holie prayers and deuoute teares to the Lord for mercie towardes our saluation and safegard: It shal bee sufficient at this present, briefly to recount the substance of those matters, which pope Pius the se∣cond, (euen the same that wrote a long letter to Mahamet the second Emperour of the Turkes to con¦uert him vnto the Catholike Faith) being full of the holy Ghost, vttered at the Councell of Mantua, in presence of the Christian Princes, after hee had bewayled the ruine of the Greeke Empire, and of other kingdomes in Christendome, that were fallen into the Turkes power, vz. Surely, The substance of the speech of Pius the se∣cond in the Councell of Mantua. it would bee a verie righteous aud religious matter, O yee most generous and Noble Princes of Chri∣stendome, if once at the last yee would waken your selues, & enter into an earnest cogitation, not to suffer those poore & dismayed reliques of Christians, vtterlie to bee lost, that are forgone into the most cruell rage of the Barbarians, which of you, in good sooth doeth not clearely and mani∣festly see the common and imminent daunger, that han∣geth ouer our heades? Andrinopolis, and Nicopolis, (because I will not at this time remember so many other most goodly and rich Countries, which most vniustly that most cruell and outragious Tyrant doth now possesse) were of no long time heretofore, Cities further distant, then were those Christians that haue beene lately taken, and are now most cruelly and miserably tormented by our enemies. Oh that you might bee moued, yee religious and godly Princes, with the incomparable bond and obligation, wherein yee are bound to Christ our Lord, who hath not onely freed and deliuered you from the iawes of the auncient Serpent, but also hath appointed you to be Princes of his people, to the end that like watchfull and charitable Pastors ye should coura∣giously keepe the same from the mouth of the Wolfe. The blessed God hath put into your handes the Scepter, and the sworde, because it should bee your care, as well by doing iu∣stice, and shewing mercie to maintaine his people in peace, as also by warre to deliuer those that are vnduly and vn∣iustly oppressed. Let your perticular interestes cease, when the Interestes of God commeth in place. Let the discourses of mans wit giue place to the cause of God. Nay rather, euen your owne peculiar and proper interestes, and humane respects also do perswade you of themselues to take weapons into your hands, and to represse and daunt the pride of this most cruell and fierce wilde beast, who like a Lion raungeth about continually, ouer all the Champeine and field of Chri∣stendome greedily to deuoure some part either of our owne Countries or of our neighbours. Alas, let vs learne by o∣ther mens expences and losses. Let vs quench the fire of our brethren, least we burne vp our selues also with them: Let vs in time meete with this great tide, that like a headlong streame is like shortly to surround all our Countreys. Vp ye generous & noble champions of Christ, resolue couragiously with your selues (to the end that our age be not thought to be lesse glorious then former times) in some sort to imitate & follow Godfrey, Baldwyn, Boemound, and those other famous Argonautes, who to recouer out of the prophane handes of the enemies of holy fayth, the sacred Sepulchre of our Redeemer, sold their owne proper goodes, abandoned their landes and houses, passed ouer the Seas, and for a long time endured exceeding great trauailes and troubles, be∣cause they thought that they could not better employ their treasures, ther weapons, and their valour, then in so holy and laudable an enterprise, who then will bee the first man that will take the Crosse, and giue example to others? Who will he be, that will be Captaine and guide herein? Where be the Souldiers of Christ, that will follow this glorious standard and Ensinge? And finally who will shew him∣selfe so impious, that he will not lay aside all priuate iniu∣ries and hatreds, for the common safetie? But hereof let it be inough for me to haue spoken, being carried therunto out of my determinate discourse and nar∣ration, by a iust zeale that I beare towardes the honour of God, and the saluation of so many soules, which are redee∣med by the bloud of Christ, and liue at this day in the most miserable thraldome and slauerie of the Ottoman Empire. And therefore if the great Turke shoulde mooue warre agaynst the Common-wealth of Venice: Why Venice should bee re∣lieued. (which God forbid, because the saide estate of the Venetians doth deserue to bee kept and preserued a perpetuall Virgin through all ages, as well for the comfort of her subiects, for the ornament of the worlde, and for the defence of Christendome, as also for the pietie thereof, and for the excellent manner of gouernment therein vsed) the daunger would be of great importaunce, and it would then bee verie necessarie (if the loue of my Countrie doe not deceiue mee:) that all the princes of Christendome should earnestly and throughly aduise themselues, how to maintaine it in her former estate, so that no notable damage may light vpon it: and so much the rather, for that enioying her lawfull and auncient libertie and neutralitie, with her pub∣like consultation it doth neuer offend any Prince in the world. And aboue all the rest, Specially by the king of Spaine. it behoueth the king Catholike so to doe, either by combining him∣selfe with the Venetians, or by succouring them o∣therwise: as well because it is verie likely, that the Turke will not imploy his forces, onely for the sub∣duing of the Venetian estate: but thereby to haue a more easie way to attempt Italie, wherof the crowne of Spaine dooth possesse the fairest and goodliest partes: as also because the other Princes are not peraduenture altogither sufficient by Sea to van∣quish the enemie with any securitie, vnlesse they shall helpe one another with monies, with vit∣tailes, with Souldiers, & specially with Gally-slaues, and Marriners, which certainly is a matter very con∣siderable: For without doubt the true way & means vtterly to defeate and destroy the enemie, The true way to ouerthrow the Turke, is by sea. will bee to vanquish him by Sea, especially in these times, wherein hee hath not an Armada of any account, and is also greatly destitute of Marriners, and men of commaund, that are skilful and couragious in that profession. Moreouer, the Turkes do abhorre these battailes by Sea, both because they are most cruell and daungerous, and also for that in such fights they are alwayes discomfited and ouerthrowne, and doe know full well, that afterwardes they shall bee the more easily vanquished and ouercome by land. So Euagoras of Cyprus, and Conon of Athens counselled the kings of Persia to doe against the Lacedemoni∣ans. So Augustus hauing defeated Marcus Antonius by Sea, subdued also his olde and victorious armie consisting of eightie thousand footemen, and two & twentie thousand horsemen, without any fight. The like was done by Roger the Calabrian, Admiral to the king of Aragon, who notwithstanding that his king was vppon the land ouerthrowne by the king of France, yet assaulting the French Armada by Sea, discomfited the same, recouered that which was lost, and carried away the fruites of both the victo∣ries. And who knoweth not, what might haue beene done, after the Turkish fleete was dispersed and o∣uerthrowne in the yeare, 1571. And when it ranne away of it selfe in 1572. If at the first occasion and oportunitie that was then so happily offered, there had beene made a choise of the best Gallies, to haue gone presently and met with the enemie in the Ar∣cipelago, and in Morea, and euen as farre as Cyprus: and if in the second good oportunitie we had follo∣wed the happie and iudicious courage of Soranzo, the generall Prouidatorie of Venice? Verie true it is, The strength and power of Venice. that the state of Venice is at this day become so potent and mightie, not onely in re∣spect of the great store of golde which it hath ga∣thered in this long peace, and of the debts payed, whereunto it had runne in the last warre, and some∣what before that time: but also in regarde of the manie Gallyes, munitions, and other preparations for warre, which it hath prouided in this time: that if occasion so fall out, it will peraduenture bee well able to defend it selfe of it owne selfe: and specially, if it would resolue it selfe at such time, as it dooth little feare the enemie, to bee the first that should assault and strike him, yea and to doe it in∣deed, (as Alcibiades was wont to say to the Atheni∣ans) by sending forth a mightie Armada to annoye him, and vpon a sodaine to surprise some of those places, which I will name in the ende of this thirde Parte. Moreouer it hath also at this present so wel fortified her estate, that in all reason it neede not greatly doubt the conceites and designementes of the Ottoman. Corfu. Catharo. Zara. Corfu, Cathara and Zara are among o∣ther Fortes esteemed to bee inexpugnable, and so much the rather, for that by reason of their mode∣rate and reasonable distance from Venice, they may easily bee succoured and relieued, and being as it were the keyes of the Adriatike Sea, they may also hinder the entrance of the enemy, or enforce him of necessitie to returne backe with all speed, least hee remayne entangled and caught in the nette. Candie. The Isle of Candie is likewise so wel prouided for defence and is thought to bee so strongly guarded with Garrisons and Munition, as it cannot bee attempted by the Turke, without incurring his great hazard and daunger, yea and so much the more, for that if the enemy shoulde endeauour to disbarke his peo∣ple there, one great part of the Island hauing no hauens or Harboroughes, is defended by nature it self & the other part may be so well kept both by the valour of forrain souldiers, and also by the braue manhood of the Countrey-inhabitantes, who are no lesse tender and carefull of their owne wel-fare, then faithfull to their prince (prouided alwayes that they bee by iust proportion and good aduise distributed and deuided, some for the defence of the Hauens, and some for the defence of the shore,) that hee shall neuer bee able to disbarke there, or if hee doe, it will bee to his great losse. In which accident it will bee an easie matter to disperse the Reliques of the enemies armie, partly because they can very hardly bee succoured by the Turke, in regarde of the farre distance of his Countrey and States? and partly because his Fleete of Shippes cannot well brooke those Seas, eyther without daunger of breaking and rending in pieces, or fighting with the Venetian Armada. Lastly, the Forte of Palma, Palma. which is also built by the Veneti∣an Common wealth, with as religious as iudici∣ous an aduisement, will not onely serue (if it please GOD) at all times for a secure and safe defence against the enemie, if hee shoulde bee so bolde as to trouble Istria, and to passe to Friuli, but it will also bee a continuall and most neces∣sarie a Bulwarke, against all the Barbarians, which may attempte to come and annoy Italie. And thus much let bee saide touching the State of Venice. If against all Italie, then which way the Turk may come thether Now touching Italie, forasmuch as I haue already heretofore touched the reasons, which might one day moue the Ottoman to thinke of such a course, I will in this place set downe the most principall wayes, whereby he may come thither, and that to answere to such persons as doe thinke the same not onely to be a verie difficult matter, but almost altogither impossible. § XIII. THE Turke hath two wayes, Two waies for the Turke to passe into Ita∣lie by land. whereby he may passe from his owne Countreys and States into Italy by land: one is (and that is the better way for the ease of his horsemen) by departing from Bel∣grado through the higher way, which is betweene the riuers of Draua and Saua: the other on this side of the Saua. Both of these wayes doe meete at Lu∣biana, called by the Dutche Luback, and in olde time Nauporto, a Countrey of great abundance in all thinges, and most fit to bee (as it were) the seate of the warre. The Citie it selfe is verie easie to bee surprised. From hence they may goe to Goritia, or rather by Piuca to passe by the Carse aboue Mont∣folcon: both these wayes likewise doe meete at Li∣sonzao, which the Turkes cal Ague-bianche, or White waters, a riuer that is verie memorable for the bat∣taile of Theodorico king of the Gothes, and of Odoacre king of the Heruli, and also for the last approach of the Turkes, when they arriued euen as farre as San-Cassano in Mesco vpon the Campardo, burning and spoyling all the Countrey with most barbarous crueltie. That way which leadeth to Goritia, is for vittaile and for horse, more commodious then this of Carse: which for all that, though it be verie sto∣nie and rockie, and also that in the Piuca there bee some wooddes and straits, not so easie to be passed, being neare to Scelescnytabor, which is a holde kept by a few Clownes, yet notwithstanding the saide way is not vnpassible for horses, Why Theo∣dorico builded Montfalcon. and was made by Attila, when he came to Trieste, and passed on to A∣quileia. And hereupon it came that Theodorico, after he was become the Lord and conquerour of Italie, was moued in this way to fortifie Mont-falcon euen as Gradisca, And Odoacre Gradisca. a little while before, was erected and builded in the other way by Odoacre, when hee lor∣ded it in Italie. A fortresse which was afterwardes surprised by the same Theodorico, when he was sent against Odoacre, And the Ve∣netians, Palma. by Zeno the Emperour, and which was also erected for the selfe same ende and pur∣pose, for which the Seignieurie of Venice haue now builded Palma against the Turkes. The Turkish Armies, departing from Constanti∣nople, without comming to Mandor-Alba, or Alba-Graeca, Another way for the Turke to come into Italie. (which is called Belgrado, and in times past Taurono ) may also come into one of these wayes, by passing through the townes of Nis, and Precup, where are certaine straites on this side of Sophia, and leauing Belgrado on the right hand: or else without touching Sophia to meete in any sort at Nouibazar, and from thence through the Dukedome of Herze∣gouina in Basna, at Bagnaluca, to meete at the last euen in the high way, a little more then two dayes iour∣neyes distant from the territorie of Venice, and very neere vnto those places, where somtimes the Turks made their musters when they came into Italy. This is a verie plaine and euen way, fit also for carriages, and for conueying of stuffe and artillarie. Where∣vpon Ammianus Marcellinus reporteth, that by the same way Gallus the brother of Iulian was carried in a Chariot from Betouia to Pola. § XIIII, MOreouer, the Turke, to the ende hee might the more grieuously vexe and trouble Italie, How the Turk may annoy Italie both by land and sea at one time. may at one and the selfe same time, sende an Ar∣mie by land into one part of it, and an Armada by Sea into another. So thought the other Mahamet to haue done, & this Turke also that now is, was there unto perswaded the last yeare by Sinan, of purpose by that meanes the rather to diuert the king of Spaine, and the State of Venice, that is to say, by his fleete troubling and molesting the Adriatike Sea, euen iust in the same sort as is afore declared, Ottranto. and his armie assailing the coasts of Sicilie and Naples, or of a Calabria and Puglia, replenishing all those quarters with feare and dommage. There is yet fresh in memorie the surprising of Otranto by the Turkes, in the dayes of the other Mahamet, and the fearefull fright which the Court of Rome did sometimes take at the arriuall of the Ottoman nauie, in the Tyrrhene sea. For costing all along Italie with the land windes, the Easterne winde, the South-East winde, and the South winde, and comming out of Barbarie with a North-east winde, and a Westerne winde, hee may most easily ouerrunne all, Examples of Augusto Cotrone, Re ∣gii, & Sant-Angelo, euen as farre as Ciuita Vecchia. Besides that it is well knowne what the Turks haue done diuers times at Augusta, at Cotrone, at Reggio, and in more auncient times what the Saracens did at Mount Gargano, now called Sant-Angelo. I know verie well how hard a matter it will be for the Turkes to put in execution those Designements, The pleasure strength, and gouernment of Italie. which I haue touched before to that purpose in the second Part of this Discourse: for that (to be briefe) this most noble Pro∣uince of Italie, being the Garden and pleasure of the world, is without all doubt so well fortified both by Nature and Art: so full of Gold, and people, and vittailes also: (especi∣ally if by Gods punishment, or by some other accident the haruests do not proue so barren as they haue beene these last yeares:) and lastly so carefully kept and gouerned by her Ca∣tholike and valourous Princes as a man may resolutely con∣clude, that if the Turke do come thither, either he shall re∣tire and returne, as heretofore diuerse his elders and prede∣cessours haue done, or else Italy shall become his Graue and Sepulchre, euen as it hath alwayes beene to all Barbari∣ans. But for as much as it is the office of true Politike prudence to feare an enemie, not thereby to become a Da∣stard, The aduice of Thucydides to thinke vpon daungers. or a Coward (as Thucydides sayd) but with all di∣ligence and circumspection to procure and prouide such remedies, as may vanquish and ouerthrow him: I will briefly set downe, how wee may diuerse wayes meete with those and such other daungers, that may hang ouer Italie by reason of the Ottoman Armies, and also what reme∣dies may be most profitable and effectuall in this present warre, and therefore are greatly feared by the Turks them∣selues. § XV. AMong other remedies, that were proposed, when Mahamet the second surprise Ottranto, (as I tolde you) to diuerte him from Italie, The opinion of Martin de Segoni for di∣uerting the warres from Italie. one Mar∣tiu de Segoni Bishoppe of Dulcigno, as wee reade in a Treatise that hee wrote thereof to Pope Sixtus the Fourth, propounded this present remedy, which it delighteth mee to report in his owne ve∣rie wordes. Pannonum Rex (sayeth hee) cum suo Exercitu, confederatisque populis, praesentet se ad Danu∣bium, fama praecedente quod in Rasciam sit traiecturus: futurum inde omnium Turcorum multitudine sibi obuiā ad I strii traiectum progrediente, Gentes nuper Valonam & ad alia Epiri maritima loca missae, ad Italiam trans∣fretandae, statim ob metum Pannonum ad castra Turchi reuocentur. That is to say, Let the King of Hunga∣rie with his Armie and Confederates present him∣selfe at the Danowe, with a fame and rumor first geuen out, that hee is minded to passe ouer into Rascia: and thereupon will it come to passe, that al the Turkes multitude proceeding to meet with him at the passage of the (Danowe where it is cal∣led) Ister, the souldiers which were lately sent to Valona, and to other maritimall places of Epirus, of purpose to bee transported into Italie, presently for feare of the Hungarians, shall be called backe to the Turkes Campe. Now wee hauing in steade of the king of Hungarie, the Emperour, and the Prince of Tran∣syluania, I will discourse to the same purpose, as well of the one as of the other, so far forth as shall bee sufficient most clearely to make knowne, what hinderance and detriment it would bee to Chri∣stendome, if these two Princes, Counsell to make a diuer∣ting warre. should make peace with the Turke, at the least so speedily as it is doub∣ted they will: because among all the good meanes that may bee vsed to secure a state from their most mightie enemies, there is none so safe and approued by great Captaines then this course of diuerting warre. Hannibal. As among others Hannibal told Antiochus when hee aduised him to set vpon Macedonia, to the end King Philip might not send ayde to the Ro∣maines: K. Hieron. and Hieron King of Syracusa, when hee aduised the Romanes to set vpon Africa, to the end the Carthagenians might not send succours to Han∣nibal in Italie. § XVI. THE Emperour hath already his weapons in hand: Why the Em∣perour should not make peace with the Turk and although indeed hee haue lost some places, yet hee hath also gotten some others. The warre is not altogether inconuenient or incom∣modious, by reason of the nearenesse thereof. The Souldiers haue now begunne to enure themselues to the warres, and to take courage against the hor∣rible shoutinges and outcries of the Enemie, and are alreadie accustomed to endure cold and frost. The Captaines haue learned the Militarie Discipline, and the manner of fighting with the Turkes: if our Souldiers issue foorth into the field before our enemies, wee may attempt to recouer eyther by siedge, or surprise some of those places that haue beene lost: yea and so much the rather, for that it will bee a harde matter for the Turkes to succour it, because those that are gone home to their hou∣ses, cannot in time returne in so great a multitude for want of grasse and vittailes: and those that remaine in the frontiers are not able and sufficient both to offend and defend. Moreouer, there is not a small number of those, that haue refused to stay in Hun∣garie, because they had not wherewith to liue, and because they would auoyde the distemperature of that colde ayre, which will vse all their arte and cun∣ning to stay at home. Let vs adde hereunto, The Princes of Germanie to ayde the Emperour. that now is the onely time, wherein it is to bee hoped, that all the Princes of Germanie, both great and smal, wil waken and rouse themselues in earnest, because it is not now so much in question to defende the Hungarians, who are na∣turally hated by the Dutch (as many other Nations doe also hate one another) as it is to defend them∣selues, their wiues, their children, and their owne riches. In which point, if they conceyue peraduen∣ture, that they might keepe and enioy al these things aforesaid, more safely and securely vnder the go∣uernement of the Turke, they may bee verie easily certified of the truth of this their conceit, when they shall beholde the Tragicall spectacles of Greece, The lamenta∣ble state of Greece. which since it hath beene vanquished by the Turks, hath remained like the Iewes, without King, with∣out Scepter, without libertie, without titles, with∣out riches, yea, and (a most horrible matter to re∣port) euen without the comfort of the tender em∣bracements of their owne naturall children. Whereas, if the warre continue, who can with any reason doubt, Reasons to continue the warre. but that the Princes of the Em∣pire shall of necessitie be enforced earnestly to assist and ayde both the Emperour and themselues? be∣cause it is in all likelihoode to be feared, that Maha∣met will set forward his Armie either towards Toc∣cai, Toccai. Vienna. of purpose to hinder the vnion of the Emperour and the Transyluanian, or to Vienna, as he was per∣swaded to haue done, not long ago by Sinan, who shewed vnto him the easinesse of winning it, the glorie that would redound vnto him thereby, and the great importance of the enterprise: Why the Turk withdrew his armie out of Croatia. And also for that from the languishing of the head proceedeth the weaknesse of the members. And it may be, that he com∣maunded his armie to retyre out of Croatia, not one∣ly because he knew the iealousie which the Italian Princes doe carrie of their owne affaires, and speci∣ally the Venetians, who in that respect haue put themselues in defence with their new fortresse of Palma: but also because hee would vnite all his for∣ces togither, & so become the stronger to performe the said enterprise. But howsoeuer it bee, certaine it is that he hath not withdrawne it for any giftes or rewardes which he hath receiued from the Veneti∣ans, as some haue falsly beleeued. Againe, that wee may thinke the better of this daunger, it is a matter worthie of good consideration, that Mahamet was enclined to this enterprise from his childhoode, in so much as euen at that time hee made humble sup∣plication to his father, that hee would reserue that glorie for him: which without all doubt, if (as God forbid) it should so fall out and come to passe in deed, would not onely proue to bee a most notable losse to the Empire, but also in particular to all Italie. For so hauing gotten the possession of that key, which is of greatest importaunce to open him the way into the entrance of all those Countries, he shall also haue a more readie and easie passage into the fairest and goodliest part of the world, which is the verie vttermost scope and end of all the Ottoman de∣signements. The way for the Turkes to come to Vi∣enna. For that, euen as he hath a free way to come to Vienna, by passing betweene the Danow and the Draua, in lower Hungarie, and so without any impediment to Giauerino (a Fort, that by the aduice of Alfonso Duke of Ferrara was caused to be made at the verie selfe same time that Soliman arriued there by the selfe same way, and where at this day also, be∣ing possessed by the Turks in maner and sort (as Phi∣lippo Pigafetta hath written) they may easily passe to trouble and vexe both Astria, and Stiria. ) Three other wayes for the Turke (if hee obtaine Vi∣enna) to come into Italie. So if hee should be possessed of Vienna, hee may without all doubt the more easily assault Italie by two other wayes, which I haue not as yet named. The one is, by the way of Tiroll, descending by the Alpes of Trento into the Champaignes of Verona, where Ala∣rico entered: or by those of Bassano, which is a way that hath beene often vsed by the Dutche: the other is, that of Villaco, wich commeth directly from Vi∣enna, and meeteth either at Frioli, or at Venzone, or at Ciuidale. The Turkes also in such a case may take another way, which was heretofore made by the Barbarians, that is to say, the way of Tolmezo in Car∣nia, which may also meete at Cadore: but that shall not be to any great purpose for them. But for as much as among those things, which hinder the Emperour from such aydes and succours as he desireth and as without all doubt would be most sit and conuenient for this present businesse, there are three especially that are worthy of greatest consideration: it shall not be amisse to touch them. § XVII. THe first thing is, The speches that hinder the Emperour from necessary aydes of the Christian Princes. the voice that runneth amongst the many Protestants of the Empire: that if his Emperial Maiestie should become the cōqueror of the Turke, they shall bee of necessitie enforced to yeeld obedience to the Pope of Rome (as they call him) a matter that is abhorred by the common sort of people, but much more by the great Princes and Potentates there: by the great Princes especially, be∣cause they haue vsurped a dominion vpon the grea∣test Ecclesiasticall liuings and reuenues: by the com∣mon people, because they are perswaded therevnto by the Protestant Ministers, as namely by the Cal∣uinists and Lutherans, who doe resolutely aduise them rather to obey the Turke then the Pope, and therefore Caluanisme is a kind of disposition to Mahame∣tisme, as many very learned men haue written. Besides that both the great Potentates, & also the common Subiects there haue suffered themselues most easily to be perswaded to this impietie and vngodlinesse, onely in regarde of the most sensuall and licenci∣ous life, which they are thereby permitted to lead. The second thing is (which is so peremptorily dis∣puted by many) that the Emperor is to make peace with the Turke, because the Empire sheweth it selfe so backewarde and faint to relieue him: as well for that it feareth to spend her treasure to no purpose, as also for that it being of it selfe enclined to peace, The backe∣wardnes of the Empire in re∣lieuing the Emperour. it doeth willingly take aduauntage of this occasi∣on: which also ministreth matter to many Chri∣stian Princes, especially to the Polack, and to the Venetians, that they doe not stirre eyther little or much against the Turke, because they suspect they shall bee abandoned and forsaken, when the cause is at the best, and that they shall spend them∣selues without any gaine or profite. And it seemeth that it is made the more credible by this, for that it is malitiously giuen out and published to the world by those Imperialists, which haue no greate inclination towardes that most religious house of Austria, vz. That the Emperour is not greatly in∣clined to warre: That hee keepeth himselfe con∣tinually retyred in Bohemia, in Prage, in his pallace because hee feareth some violent death? whereun∣to hee is the rather induced eyther by reason of the conspiracie which was lately discouered, or of that which a certaine Englishman called Dee, M. Iohn Dec. foretold him (a matter in sooth no lesse superstitious then vnworthie to bee apprehended and beleeued by a Prince that is so wise and feareth God.) But cer∣tainely if it were true, that the Emperour either for these or for som other reasōs did now incline toward peace, it had beene more safe counsell and aduise for him, to haue resolued on it, euen in the begin∣ning and at the first, rather then at this time, in re∣garde of such reasons as I haue heretofore declared, and also more at large in a certaine discourse, which I haue made vpon this point euen to this day. And thus also was Archduke Ferdinando aduised by Pe∣ter the Vaiuode of Moldauia, The aduise of Peter the Vai∣uode of Mol∣dauia. who if he had not dy∣ed in the yeare 1594. in the mountaines of Bolzano was vtterly resolued (though hee was a man of the Greekish sect and religion) to haue come and kissed the feet of our Pope, as I haue declared in due order and place. The thirde and last thing is, That if the Empire on the one side bee not willing to contri∣bute to so great expenses, The difficultie of the requests made by the Imperial prin∣ces. vnlesse the Conquestes that may bee made and atchieued, become vnited to the Empire it selfe: and if the Emperour on the other side will not consent thereunto, by reason of the pretenses and challenges, which hee hath to Hungarie, being a state of his own, it seemeth that both the one partie and the other, doe propound matters so difficult, that none of them are likely to bee effected. True it is, that wee ought to thinke and belieue that the Emperour knoweth full well, if hee should shew himselfe contented to doe that which the Imperiall Princes doe request at his handes, hee should thereby preiudice himselfe, & yet those Princes would afterwardes forbeare to doo that in deedes, which they offer in wordes. And thus much let bee sayde touching the Empe∣rour. § XVIII. NOw touching the Prince of Transyluania, The Prince of Transyluania, and his valor. who may now serue (as the Second Champi∣on) in stead of the former King of Hungarie, there is no doubt to be made, but that hee is both in religi∣on and in heart a most fierce and eagre enemie a∣gaynst the Turkes. That which hee hath done hi∣therto, (say what they list of him, such as either are not well informed or too affectionate and passio∣nate in the cause) doth yeeld vnto all the world a most cleare and manifest testimonie, that hee is no lesse braue in bestirring himselfe to fight, and reso∣lute in his courses, then fortunate in his actions, and euen such a one as the auncients required a Cap∣taine to be. And this not by the fauour of fabulous fortune, but in truth by the grace of that Lord, who in the holy Scriptures is called the Lord of Hostes, by whom like a new Dauid or Iudas Machabaeus, hee is louingly defended and protected. Why the Turks feare him. He is also great∣ly feared of the Turkes by reason of certaine popu∣lar and common predictions of theirs, which al∣though they be in deed but light and vaine, yet doe they make a great impression in the mindes of bar∣barous and base people, and specially of the Maho∣metanes, who do absolutely beleeue Fatum, or De∣stinie. Among these their diuinations and Foreboa∣dings, A Prophecie of the Turkes for Transyl∣uania. they hold this one to be of great account and reckoning, which saith, That from the cliffes of the Mountaines of Transyluania, there shall one day come forth a Prince, who shall ouercome and bring to nothing the Ottoman Empire. So saith Flauius Vopiscus, in the life of the Emperour Florian, That in his dayes it was prophecied of an Hungarian prince which in time should reduce all the Barbarians vn∣der his commaund and gouernment. And the like also is read in Suetonius Tranquillus of the Emperour Galba (For neuer yet did Princes want their flatterers.) Moreouer the Turkes doe also constantly beleeue, Another pro∣phecie tou∣ching the end of Mahamets sect. Musulmani. that the Sect of Mahamet is not to last any longer then for a thousand yeares, which tearme according to our computation cannot be farre of: and that the Musulmani, (for so the Mahametists doe call them∣selues, that is ( Truly religious people which beleeue a∣right ) are not to haue aboue fourteene or fifteene Emperours: and therefore they do greatly erre, that recken seuenteene of them at this day. This Maha∣met, who now liueth may bee reckoned the foure∣teenth or fifteenth: for Mose or Musa (as they call him) some doe reckon him among them, and some doe not. Lastly it is also most true, that the Turkes doe greatly feare the Transyluanian, and in that re∣spect doe diuerse and sundrie wayes endeuour, Why the Turkes do go about to be∣reaue him of his life. not onely most diuelishly to weaken that valorous cou∣rage, which he sheweth against them, but also to de∣priue him of his life: persuading themselues for cer∣taintie (besides all that which hath beene touched before) that he hath secrete intelligences, euen with in the Citie of Constantinople, to ouerthrow that estate: & that if his glorie & renown do encrease, the matter will easily be brought to passe, for that he is so willingly followed and accompanied by the Tran∣syluanians themselues, who doe most readily obey him, and for that also hee is greatly desired and wi∣shed by the Walachians, the Rascians, the Bulgari∣ans, the Sicilians, and all other warlike and hardie Nations to bee their Lord and Maister. And that this is true, I will briefly declare, because I do thinke that for the better vnderstanding of the state of this present warre, it will bee verie necessarie to know what these peoples are. § XIX. THe Transyluanians without all doubt are estee∣med to bee the most warlike people of all Eu∣rope. The Transyl∣uanian Na∣tion. These togither with the Moldauians, and Walachians, are the auncient Dacians, Why the Ro∣mans paied tribute to the Dacians. whom the Romans so greatly feared: insomuch as when they had ouerthrowne the Armies of the Emperour Do∣mitian, the Romanes were forced to pay them tri∣bute vnder the same Domitian, vnder Nerua, and in the beginning of Traians Empire, vpon condition that they should not passe ouer the Danow to annoy and endommage their Countries. This is manifest∣ly made knowne to the Turkes themselues, by the discomfitures which many times haue beene giuen them by Coruinus, by the two Battories, and lastly by this third man, who at this day is in warre agaynst them. Moreouer, Michael the Vaiuode of Walacchia, Michael the Vaiuode of Walachia. although in times past he held that gouernement of the Turke, yet now he is vnder the obedience of the Transyluanian: and withour doubt it standeth him greatly in hand to cōtinue in that protectiō, because hee may not now any longer trust the Turkes, who haue beene so oftentimes displeased and disconten∣ted with him, and specially for the slaughter which he made of those, that vnder his promise of peace were sent by Hassan Bassa into Walacchia. Besides the Walachians, whose valour is verie well knowne to the Turkes, when they serued vnder the conduct of Dracola their most valiant Captaine, the said Vai∣uode is attended for Souldiers with many Hunga∣rians and Transyluanians, Captaine Dracola. some few Albanians, Gre∣cians, Bulgarians, and Rascians. The Vaiuodes souldiers. Hee hath not many Arcubusiers, as also the Transyluanian himselfe hath no great store of them. For all these Nations, and especially the Hungarians doe vsually fight at hand, and on horsebacke with Launces, and with a won∣derfull courage shew their faces to their enemies. The Rascians, The Rascians. who in the Councill of Constance be called Sirfi, are a people that haue their originall offspring, from the vpper Misia, which now is cal∣led Seruia and Rascia. They by reason of the Turkish wars did heretofore retire thēselues to the further side of the Danow, and not to this side, as some haue writtē: & at this present they dwel nigh to Temesuar, Lippa, & those parts. They did in times past rebell a∣gainst the Turke & now do serue the Transyluanian. The Bulgarians, The Bulga∣rians. some do inhabite all that Coun∣try which was called the lower Misia, euen to the Danow, ouer against Walachia: some inhabit Thracia, togither with the Grecians, and others in Macedo∣nia, which now also is inhabited with Grecians, with Seruians, and with Albanians. The Bulgarians are a braue and valorous people. Some of them that haue fled out of their owne Countrey, doe serue the Transiluanian, and no doubt many others woulde runne also vnto him, if he had sufficient meanes to entertaine them. They are verie apt to make a tu∣mult and insurrection, as well in their owne Coun∣trey, as also among their neighbours, if they were cherished and heartned thereunto, especially by the Transyluanian, The Prince of Transyluania compared to Alexander the Great. whome they do admire no lesse, then that Alexander the Great, who was halfe their Countryman, that is to say, Pella, a place of Macedonia: and vnto whome hee hath with great iudgement beene likened, by Girolamo Frachetta in those orations, which he hath written to this valourous Prince. The Siculi or Sicilians, The Siculi or Sithulians who inhabite the mountaines towardes Polonia and Moldauia, and that parte of the Countrey which is somewhat more hilly, are fierce and sturdie Clownes, re∣sembling the Tartarians, more then any other Christians of those quarters: and therefore they should bee called Sythuli: They are rather foot∣men then horsemen, and haue also some Arcubu∣siers. They followed the Prince of Transyluania in the yeare 1595. when hee passed into Wala∣chia against Sinan, at which time the said Sinan did most shamefully run away: Why the Sicu∣li rebelled. But hauing receiued a promise of the Prince, that their Noblemen should bee exempted from some subiection, in regarde of an offer, which they made to conquere as much Countrey more, as that was which they did en∣ioy: when they perceiued that their intention & his promise was not kept and performed, they re∣belled and made an insurrection, while the prince was at Prage: but afterwardes with the punish∣ment of some of the Principalles, and two hun∣dred others, they were well quieted and pa∣cifyed. § XX. THE prince of Transyluania doeth not enter∣tayne and receiue vnder his Enseignes, The Prince of Transyluania wanteth mo∣ney. all those peoples that doe thus admire him, and so greatly desire him to be their Captaine and Lord: because he hath no good meanes for money to pay them: for without stipends or wages, it is not possible that souldiers can bee satisfied and maintained: neither are their spoyles, prayes, and booties sufficient to feede them, and keepe them contented, nor their Haruestes and Collections, to supply the wantes of so great a number, especially in the times of warre, wherein all things grow from worse to worse. How his want is to be sup∣plyed. In such sorte as I doe conclude, that forasmuch as our Christian Princes haue no better means to maintain this warre against the Turke, and that in some re∣mote place, and farre distant from their own coun∣tryes and States, nor a more easie and safe waye to ouercome him, then by obeying and following e∣uen the very selfe same counsell which Demosthenes gaue to the Athenians, The Counsell of Demosthe∣nes to the A∣thenians, apply¦ed to this pur∣pose by the Author. when the people of Olinthus (a Cittie of Thracia ) craued their aide and succours against Philip, the Father of Alexander, and King of Macedonie, at such time as hee went about to assaulte them: I will bee also so bold (though not in such e∣loquent termes as that most famous Oratour did vse) to tell them, that the fittest and meetest counsell which can be giuen them for the common good, is with all speede to succour and relieue this couragi∣ous youth (as in part the Pope, & the most religious king of Spaine haue done) with some part of those treasures which they haue receiued from God, to be spent in the seruice of his diuine Maiestie, and their owne saluation. For there is no one thing that doth more hinder the propagation of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, and the good successe of their actions against the cōmon enemy, then to want money suf∣ficient for his necessities, or rather not to make some greater preparations and prouisions for so weightie an enterprise. And so much the more, for that hee is compelled to spend a good portion of that little, which he hath in mainteyning his forces that are di∣uided, partly in Walachia to keepe them in awe for feare of their reuolt to the Turkes, and partly in di∣uerse places of Transyluania towards Moldauia, for feare of the Moldauians, of the Tartarians, and of other his enemies. The Transyl∣uanian may peraduenture be forced to take some o∣ther corse that may be dan∣gerous to Christendom. Besides that it may be with great reason suspected and feared, least if this Prince shall want meanes and habilitie to maintaine himselfe with forces in the field against the enemie, rather then he will yeeld and submit himselfe againe to an Infidel Prince, he wil resolue vpon some such course as he thinketh more godly and pleasing to God, and more safe and secure for himselfe: which peraduen∣ture may redound to the great damage and hinde∣rance of Christendome, for the losse that it should receiue in those partes of so valiant a Prince, as (I feare mee) it hath some sauour and taste of it al∣readie. And now for as much as I haue shewed, that it is not good for the Emperour and Transiluanian to make peace with the Turke, I will for the last poynt discouer vnto you, What thinges the Turke especially feareth. the thinges which the enemie doeth greatliest feare, and what may be performed on our behalfe to annoy him most. § XXI. FIrst the Turke feareth least the Princes of Italie will resolue in earnest to succour the Emperour and the Transyluanian either with men, The Princes of Italie. The Duke of Florence. The Pope. or with money. He seeth, that the great Duke of Tuscane hath sent his brother and his Neuewes to the one, and Capitaines and presents to the other. That the Pope sent the last yeare his Neuew with a good ar∣mie into Hungarie, by meanes wherof the Garrison of Strigonia and Vicegrado was the sooner yeelded: and moreouer that he furnisheth both the one and the other with money: yea, and likely it is, that as he is able, he will do so still, vntill the warre bee en∣ded. He perceiueth also, that the going of the Duke of Mantua into Hungarie made his Souldiers be∣leeue, The Duke of Mantua. The Venetians that the other Italian Princes would likewise make some stirre. He doubteth, least the Venetians will be at the last of necessitie compelled to take vp armes against him, either for their owne proper in∣terest and benefite, or by the continuall and instant motions of the Pope, as they did in the times of Leo the ix. of Nicholas the 2. of Gelasius the 2. of Alexan∣der the 2. of Galixtus the 2. of Clement the 3. of Ni∣cholas the 4. and of other Popes: so that not onely for the singular benefites which they haue done to Christendome, they haue deserued and obtained verie great preheminencies and priuiledges, at the hands of the Emperour and the Popes, but also for their pietie and obedience to the Sea Apostolike, but also by common consent to bee called the de∣fenders and fortresse of Christian Religion. And hereupon it commeth that the Turke dare not at this time minister vnto them any occasion of the least discontentment in the world, but doth readily satisfie them in any matter, which they request of him. § XXII. MOreouer hee doubteth that Polonia also will rise vp against him: Polonia. knowing for certaintie, that the Pope offereth to furnish it with good store of money, whereof the meaner and poorer sort of the people in that kingdome are verie greedie, and desirous. For they think, that they cannot in any bet∣ter sort purchase desert to themselues from their Prince, for which they may afterwards in conueni∣ent time craue reward at his hands, thē to serue him in his warres. This suspition and doubt of his, is the more encreased in him, because hee knoweth that the king of Spaine did not answere the letters of the King of Polonia, but vntill now at the last, when hee was somewhat discontented with the peace which Maximilian had concluded with that kingdome. And further, Three reasons why if Polo∣nia rise against the Turke, hee shall be forced to make a de∣fensiue warre. the Turke knoweth full well, that if Polonia, should once in earnest resolue vppon this point, he should of necessitie be compelled to make a defensiue war, rather then an offensiue, to his ex∣ceeding great disaduantage, and that for 3. reasons. 1 The first, because thereby he must needes loose Moldauia, Hieremie the Vaiuode of Moldauia. for that the Polack hath appointed for Vaiuode of that prouince, one Hieremie, who is a man that sheweth himselfe not altogither alienated misseaffected towards our affaires of Christendom: and who also in respect that hee may in good time vnderstand any stirres that the Turke shal make, and minister good store of vittailes to the campe is one, that will be worthie of no small regard and consi∣deration in this present warre. And therefore I may not forbeare in such an important poynt to tel you, that it shall alwayes be good for our Lord and his Ministers to maintaine good intelligence with the said Hieremie, and that they be carefull to looke what sort of persons they send to treate with him, and how they write vnto him: for these people, who be the verie Daui & Getae in Terence, are by nature most suspicious. It will be good also to honour him greet∣ly and to seeme most willing to visite such as he shal send either to Rome, or to treate with the Nun∣tioes Apostolike. For the Turke endeuouring by diuerse and sundrie meanes to bind him to himselfe, or wholy to alienate him from vs, or else at the least to cousen and deceiue him: (all cunning fetches much vsed by the Ottomans) it cannot bee but verie helpefull and beneficiall to vs, to maintaine him, as much as may be, in good loue and amitie with vs. 2 The second reason is, The Cosacchi because thereby, he shall haue the Cosacchi more openly to oppose them∣selues against him, as wel for that they be subiects of the K. of Polonia (as the Vscocchi be of the Emperour) and receiue their Generall from him, whome the Souldiers doe ordinarily obey: as also for that they may at their pleasure burne and destroy Vosia, which is a Fortresse of the Turkes, Vosia. Boristhenes situate at the mouth of the Riuer Boristhenes, called by the Polackes Occhiacouia, and by the Moldauians Dassoua: as in the yeare 1583, they burnt Bendero, Bendero. their Generall being then Ianzo the Hungarian, Ianzo. who was appointed ouer them by K. Stephen of Polonia. Many other harmes and annoyances they may also doo vnto him, as they did vnder Suita the Russian, Suita. Gonte Ianus. and vnder Conte Ianus sonne of Basilius the Duke of Ostroua, and other their Captains, which they likewise receyued from the Polonians. These Cosacchi doo dwell in an Island of Boristhenes, almost foure dayes iourneyes aboue Vosia. The Island is called Chirches, and the Riuer Boristhenes is by them termed Nis, which is the Niepro. They are Arcu∣buziers, and excellent Archers, and both by nature and open profession verie greate enemies to the Turkes. Many of them doo serue at this day the Transyluanian, the foresaid Hieremie and Michael. Others doo attend and goe with the Chanceller of Polonia: and others are also dispersed and scattered in Podolia. But all of them with great courage doo shewe their faces to the Tartarians, and Turks. 3. The last reason is, because the Polacke onely, The passage more easie to Constantino∣ple. or at least more then any other Prince, is able to make the passage to Constantinople more easie for our people: for that is the place, whether we must needes goe at the last, if we meane to doo any good in deed. And so much the more, for that if the Po∣lack, doo shew himselfe to bee an enemie to the Turke, then the Transyluanian shall not neede to feare the passage, which his Armie must make in∣to Walachia. For the way of Moldauia without touching Walachia, would bee verie incommo∣dious for it, aswell because it runneth too neare vnto the sea, as also because if hee would passe into Bulgaria, hee must returne backwardes to goe into the Countrey, that they may keepe and feede his horses, and to auoyde the vnlucky place of Varna. And here by the way, I will not forbeare to aduer∣tise you of an errour, which is of no small moment, as I haue also endeauored my selfe to doe, in sundry fitte places of this narration, of diuers others which peraduenture will not proue altogether vnprofitable, to such as are delighted with the like studies. Errors touch∣ing Moldauia, and Walachia. And the error is this, that P. Iouius describing the said Prouinces of Wala∣chia and Moldauia, beeing deceiued by the ambiguous and doubtfull worde of Polackes, confoundeth the one of them with the other. And so are others also decey∣ued who doo thinke that to bee Walachia, which the Hungarians call Transalpina the lesser, whereas in comparison of Moldauia, it should bee called Transal∣pina the Greater. Those are likewise in an error, who do hold, that walachia called by the Turkes Islakia, deri∣uing the name from the ancient Romane Flacci, is also ter¦med by them Bogdania & Cara Bogdania, Islakia. Bogdania. Cara Bogda∣nia. for by that name they terme Moldauia (and not Walachria ) eyther because it is very plentifull of that kinde of graine, which wee call Saracino, and Formentone, that is to say, Wheat, whereof Formentie is made, Or because one of those Prin∣ces of Moldauia, with whom the Turkes had some long warre, was called Bogdano, that is to say, Deodato. i. Gods gift, adding therevnto for his praenomen or fore∣name Cara, which signifieth Blacke. And it is called also Moldauia of the Daui, who were the frist inhabiters ther∣of, and rather for the softnesse and fatnesse of the moulde of that soyle, then for the blackenesse of it, as he thought, that called it Mori-Dauia. But returning backe againe to Polonia, I will here set downe also the aunswere, which the Chanceller of that kingdome made to Sinan Bassa, at such time as he required and demaunded the tribute, which he wrongfully pretended to bee due to his Lord and maister: to the end that thereby may be knowne the benefite and profite, that in all reason is to bee ex∣pected of this cōbination, if the Polonian will yeeld vnto it. The answer of the Chanceller of Polonia to the demaunds of Sinan. Sinan caused a message to be deliuered to the Chanceller, that without delay hee should pay the said tribute: or else he would force him to leaue the Frontiers, and to retire to the Icie Sea. The Chanceller caused answere to bee redeliuerd backe vnto him, that hee would not stay for him in his owne Countrey of Polonia, but that he would enter into the Ottomans Territories, and proceed with all speed euen to the banks of the Danow, & fortifying them on both sides, would make the place more ea∣sie to passe vp further into those Countreyes of the Turke. This is Dacia Ripensis, Dacia Ri∣pensis. Constantine the Emperour. which as you may read in Procopius, was fortifyed by the Romanes. Zozimus doth greatly blame Constantine the Emperour, be∣cause he forsooke and abandoned the Fortes of the Danow: the reliques whereof are yet to be seene in Roscic, Vidim, Nicopolis, Silistria, and other places that are possessed by the Turkes. § XXIII. MOreouer, Why the Turke feareth Moscouia. the Ottoman not only esteemeth the Pope to be the head and chiefe of all the prin∣ces Christian, so that by his auctoritie hee may easily vnite now some, and then some of them against him but also accounteth him to be as a temporall prince, in regard of that which he possesseth in Italie: By whar names the Turkes, and Persians call the Pope. and thereupon he calleth him Franch-Beg, the Prince of Italie, or of the Italians, and Rum-Beg, the prince of Rome, whom the Persians call in their language Rum-Schach. The Califa. The Czar of Moscouia. Halife and Califa the Turkes call the Vicar of God, a title, which most impiously the an∣cient Agarenes began to appropriate to themselues. So that the Turke dooth greatly feare, least the Pope should send some person of credite into Mos∣couia, to solicite the vnion of that prince with the Emperour, which would bee a matter of great losse vnto him: or at least that he should perswade him to let or hinder the comming foorth of the Tarta∣rians: as we haue shewed before, how hee may ea∣sily doe it. He also feareth the armies and power of the Czar or Zar of Moscouia, for so the Moscouites doe call their prince: besides the reasons before alledged, as well for that he doth absolutely commaund and go∣uerne his subiects, and therefore it seemeth that a∣mong al the princes of the world, he is the only man that may compare with him: as also for that he doth verie well remember the discomfitures which the Moscouites haue giuen to the Turkes (for the Tur∣kish princes doe vse to record in writing the actions of their ancesters) and in particular, when thy went about at the last to draw the Tana into the V lga, they were by the Moscouites (who had vnited themselues with the Tartarians of Precop, ) scattered and put to flight. Hee feareth the Czar likewise, The Turke feareth the v∣nion of the Moscouite with the church of Rome▪ because hee doubteth least vpon this occasion there followe a treatie of the vnion of that prince, with the Church of Rome, as it hapned in the times of Adrian the 6, of Leo the 10. and of Clement the 7. Popes of Rome, in maner and sort as it is written by Albertus Campensis, and as it is more at large recorded in the Moscouia of father Antonio Posseuino, a greate minister of the seruice of God, sent of late for the same purpose by Gregorie the 13. to Iohn Basi∣lius, vpon occasion of the warre, which the said Iohn had with Stephen king of Polonia. Or rather he fea∣reth the Moscouite, because hee suspecteth, that if he should become the head and chiefe of all the Greci∣cians, He feareth the Moscouits attempt to trouble his state. it would so much the more encourage and hearten that Nation to make an insurrection and rebellion in the Ottoman state. These are matters that might peraduenture be brought to passe and sort to good issue, if among the Moscouites there were lesse ignorance in matters appertaininh to God, so that a man might freely conuerse with them, A wish of the Authors, that these things may come to passe, & how. and preach the worde of Christ: and in briefe, if these vnions were not of purpose negociated and handled, rather by such cunning and craftie deuises the more easily to enlarge Dominion and Schisme, then for any thing else: euen as the Turke vnder the amitie and friendship, which hath beene sought and offered vn∣to him by many Princes, hath entred and pierced into the bowels of Europe. But of this point we doe not nowe stande in feare: and therefore I wish that we would hope in the Lord, and pray that he would take away from their eyes that vaile of obstinacie, which hath hindered them from seeing the goodly light of the euangelicall truth, and that he would re∣nue in the great duke now liuing, or in his successors those spirites, Basilius. which were in that same Basilius, who by the meanes and mediation of Iohn king of Den∣marke, requested of Pope Iulie the second, that hee might send his Ambassodours to the Councell, not for any ambition, or ostentation, or priuate in∣terest, but onely to humble himselfe in truth, and sinceritie vnder the mightie hand of God, and to vi∣site the Pope. This suspition is increased in the Turke, The submis∣sion of the Ma¦roniti to the Church of Rom. by the late humiliation, which was made to the Church of Rome by the Maroniti, (who (as Haythone writeth) doe inhabite about the Mount Libanus in Soria ) pro∣cured and wrought by the Iesuites, and by Vecchi∣etti, with the protection and patronage of pope Gre∣gorie the 13. and of Ferdinando the great Duke of Tuscane. The submis∣sion likewise of the Russiou Bishops. But much more is he dismayed at the obe∣dience which those Bishops of Russia haue of late yeelded, who in the names of themselues, and of the Russians which are subiects vnto them, by the zeale of Sigismond king of Polonia, haue humbled themselues to Pope Clement the viii. whereof Car∣dinall Baronius hath more particularly written in his learned Annales Ecclesiasticall. And this matter is so much the more considerable, for that especially by the meanes and helpe of the Russi∣ans, the conuersion and vniting of the Moscouites, may exceeding easily bee procured: and also for that with lesse expenses and danger, passage may be made by Moscouia into Asia, for the sowing and planting of the Faith of Iesus Christ, then by all the other parts of the world besides. Lastly, the Turke feareth the Moscouite, The Mosco∣uites Embas∣sadors to the Emperour. be∣cause he suspecteth, that hee will-dispose himselfe to moue warre against him, as often as hee seeth the Emperour and Empire to doo the like in earnest. And in this point consisteth the whole matter, as it was signified to the Emperours Maiestie by the Embassadors of Moscouia, that were last sent vnto him from the Prince of Moscouia with verie rich presentes, at the instigation and exhortation of Ales∣sandro Cumuli the Popes Agent. § XXIIII. THE Ottoman likewise feareth, Why the Turke feareth Tartaria. that his Holines will send Agentes, especially men of great au∣thority and good iudgement to the Tartarians, as∣well those that are free, as those that are subiect to the Tartar of Crimo, to the end that by offering & giuing Money to certaine chiefe persons, which are of greatest reputation among them (as it is vsed al∣so among the Swizzers ) they should prouide, that they stirre not out of their own Countrey: with an open publication of the Popes name, as at other times it hath beene done. For all the Tartarians are of an opinion, that the Pope hath exceeding store of treasure, and is a man of great power and authority, Why the Tar¦tarians haue come in so smal a number to aide the Turke. and therefore they will bee very readilie resolued to pleasure him in any thing. And it is holden for certain among the Turkes, that the Em∣perour and the Transyluanian did so this last yeare, because the Tartarians came vnto them in so small a number, and not in that multitude, as they had prouided, and as some of vs (Christians) did vainely and falsly belieue. And so much the more is our vaine opinion confuted, because it is notoriously known, that Alipe Chan, treating with Visconte the Nuntio for some aide, that hee might bee preserued in his State against his Brother Hirach, was not a∣ble to procure many of his owne people to be sent foorth out of his owne Countrey. I know it wel that some haue attributed the cause of this defect of the Tartarians to the discontentmentes, Why the Tar∣tarians were disconted with Amurath. which they haue conceyued against Amurath, for the peace which hee made with the Persians: For (say they) they had thought to haue gotten vpon the Persi∣an, before this peace had beene concluded, so safe a passage to goe to Mecca, as without passing tho∣rough the Turkes Countrey, they might freelie haue gone thether. But I know that these men are greatlie deceyued. For they were not the Tar∣tarians of Crimo, that were so greatlie discontented with the Turke: but those that were vnder the o∣bedience of Vsbeg-Chan (of whome I haue some∣what spoken before:) and those also not for that cause which they alledge. For (if I be not in an er∣rour) although they would haue gained and gotten into their handes all the whole Persian Estate and kingdome, yet they must algates of necessitie passe through the Countrey of the Turkes, when so euer they would go to Mecca. But the reason thereof was because Amurath had concluded a peace with the Persians, without making them acquainted there∣withall, and to the exceeding great detriment of their designements and affaires. And in sooth euen as true is it, The difference and quarrell betweene Alip Chan, and his brother Hirach that the Tartari∣ans did forbeare to come to the Turks in so great a multitude as they expected, because they were kept backe by the Moscouite, although the Tartarians themselues did vse it for an excuse: but the verie truth is, that the Tartarian two brethren being be∣come great enemies, the one to the other. Alipe Chan to maintaine himselfe in the state, and Hirach to driue him out of it, they held all the Countrey in a faction, and busied wholy in the defence of their owne priuate quarels, as yet they doe. For Alipe though he be the King now reigning, is not obeyed by all the Tartarians: and Hirach is acknowledged to be king, onely by such as haue serued him as ge∣nerall in this warre. Who although it is verie likely that in the end hee will get the victorie, because the Turkish Emperour Mahamet hath commaunded them all to obey him, and acknowledge him for their king, and the greatest part of the Souldiers doe follow him: yet is the contrarie opinion holden by such as haue the best intelligence of the Tartarian affaires, not onely because euen among the Bar∣barians. Ius Naturae, i. the right of Nature cary∣eth a great stroke, but also because Hirach is lesse be∣loued, more auaricious, and esteemed among them to be a man of small braine and valour. § XXV. LAstly, The Turke feareth to be troubled by the Pope, and the king of Spaine. the Turke feareth that the Pope and the king of Spaine are minded to trouble his state and Countrey, both by sea and by land, and by that meane to diuert him from his purposed designmēts. But forasmuch as this may bee done by diuerse and sundrie wayes, it will not be amisse in plaine and di∣stinct maner to tell you, what I thinke. Conditions re∣quisite to be in such as should be sent to trou¦ble the Tur∣kish state. The Christi∣an princes, and especially the pope, may send diuerse Agents into the Turkish Empire, who (that they might haue the more credite) would be of the selfe same Countreys, wherein such a trouble and insur∣rection should be attempted. It were verie fit also that they had the tongue, to the ende they might both vnderstand, and be vnderstood: and lastly that they be men of good cariage and iudgement: but aboue all other thinges, that they haue conuenient supplie of money, to spend vppon such chiefe men and Captaines as are of greatest credite with the people, and that they haue authoritie withal to pro∣mise to such as are the mightiest among them, What pretense or colour they may vse. that they shall be well rewarded and recompensed. Fi∣nally, it shall bee verie needfull, that for their more easie admittance and intertainment in the Country, and not on a sodaine to be driuen away, they should couer all their treaties with the couer of Religion, not to couch the Snake vnder the grasse, as our naughtie Polititians do, but (if so it may please the Lord) among the thornes of their errours to sowe the seede of Gods worde, making shew for the time that they wil reforme and repaire the Churches that are in Tartaria, Circassia, Bulgaria, Walacchia, Mol∣dauia, and Graecia. Moreouer the territorie of the Turkes, Howe the Turke may be ouerthrowen by his owne nation. and espe∣cially that part which the Turkish Empire doth pos∣sesse in Europe, inhabited partly by Turks Natural, partly by Rinegados, and partly by Christians, the Ottoman Prince may with great reason feare, that if either his Armies shall receiue an ouerthrow, or some of his principals be corrupted, his peoples wil make an insurrection and tumult to his exceeding great losse, yea, and peraduenture to his vtter ruine, euen as Caesar wrought and effected against Iuba. But because the knowledge of these peoples is verie ne∣cessarie, for the better vnderstanding of this point tou∣ching these insurrections and rebellions, I will enlarge the matter somewhat farther. § XXVI. THE Turkes naturall, that is to say, The naturall Turkes. those that be Turkes of the auncient ofspring, although they be by nature not of so euill a disposition and inclina∣tion, as the other Rinegate Turkes are, yet bee they as greatly discontented and displeased as the Rine∣gates are: so that it will be no great matter for them one day to make a rebellion, especially if they shall find a Head, or a Captaine fit for the purpose. Why the natu¦rall Turkes are disconten∣ted. The occasion of their discontentments springeth from hence, that they see all the militarie charges and of∣fices, whereon only the profite, commoditie, & ho∣nour of that Empire doth chiefly depende, (as it is before partly touched) are giuen and bestowed vp∣on the rinegate Turkes, those few onely excepted, which are graunted to some of the naturall Turkes by exceeding great fauour, or to the children of the Sultane -Ladies. And herevpon it commeth, that a∣mong the Musulmani, there is no terme or title more honourable, What the word Turke signifyeth. or more in request, then to be cal∣led Schiauo del Gran Signore, the vassall or slaue of the great Lord: nor any more infamous and more ab∣horred, then the worde Turke: for Turke in their tongue signifieth a villaine: as among the Greeks Nomade doth not signifie onely a man of Numidia, but a Sheepheard, and therfore Strabo calleth the Scythians, Nomadi. And hereof likewise it is, as it hath beene also obsetued by a late moderne wri∣ter, that euen as the Italians doe in their Comedies bring on the stage a Zani, which is a Bergamaske slaue or villaine, so the Turks in their playes do bring vp a Turke, that is to say, a rusticall or rude Clowne. Others there are, which deriue the worde Turke from the Hebrew, and wil haue it to signifie an Exul or a banished man, for the selfe same reasons, for which we told you before, that the Tartarians cal∣themselues Reliquias, reliques. The rinegate Turkes, out of all question it is cer∣taine, The Rine∣gados. that when by the grace of God they shall feele and vnderstand the benefite which they haue lost, they will easily ouerturne that state vp-side downe, with the totall and vtter ouerthrow of that Empire: considering that they haue in their hands (as it hath beene tolde you) all the reputation and riches, which are the thinges whereon both Credite and Obedience do necessarily depend. But for as much as they are men of a most vitious and wicked na∣ture, and are tollerated in all kind of beastly inso∣lences, so that they dare doe any thing that them listeth, they are willing and content to liue in that infamous liberty, without attempting any inno∣uation. The Christians, The Christi∣ans called by the Turkes Ghiauri. who by the Turkes are called Ghiauri, that is to say, Gentiles and Infidels, euen in regarde of the diuerse and sundry Rites that are a∣mong them, especially in the Turkish Countrey, (not knowing poore vnhappy soules, that there is but one onely true Church, one Baptisme and one true Faith) they are eyther of the Greeke Sect, or of the Latine Rite. I doe not entend at this time to discourse particularly of althose that haue strayed from the purity of the Greeke sect, as the Geor∣gians, the Armenians, Georgians, Armenians, Aethiopians the Aethiopians, the Iaco∣bites and many others, that dwell (as I told you) in the Ottoman Empire, aswell in Europe, as in Asia, and Africa, both because it hath beene diligently & curiously done by others, and also because it is a very intricate and difficult matter, by reason of their differences in opinions, and distances of Country∣es, and for many other respectes, to bring them to conspire together in one, (without the great mira∣cle of GOD,) for the subuersion and ruine of that Empire. Heretikes. I ouerpasse also the Heretikes that are a∣mong them, for that although they doe remaine in the Ottoman State, eyther as Reliques of their an∣cient Forefathers, or else of late retyred into diuerse partes of that Countrey, to liue the more licenti∣ously, or like the Sonnes of Sathan, to disperse their poyson euen among the Turkes: yet being so greatly abhorred of them, Sultan Soli∣man to the Widdowe Queene of Transyluania. as disturbers of the pub∣like peace and tranquilitie (as Sultan Soliman wrote to the Queene Dowager of Transyluania.) They cannot bee permitted to make any great trayne, or worke any innouation among the people. I wil one∣ly speake of those Greekes, which serue best for this our purpose, not regarding them for this time tou∣ching their Religion, but considering them for so much as in policie may bee expected and hoped for at their handes, in this particular point of re∣bellion and insurrection. Greekes. The Greekes without al doubt, are by a certaine pricke and eagre desire to dominere and rule, which they haue had by nature most desirous of Nouelties: and because the Turks doe so greatly tyrannize ouer them, they doe willingly and readily embrace any alteration or tumult, hoping by that onely meane to shake off the heauie yoke of their most miserable slaue∣rie. And this is chiefly and especially desired by the Greekes of Morea and of Thessalie, and by those rather which dwell towardes the sea, because for∣raine aides and helpes may more easily bee sup∣plyed to them, then to those that dwell within the land. But farre aboue all others, it is most desired by the Seruiani, being a Nation that inhabiteth in the mountaines of Albania, euen to the Danow: a∣mong whom those that are in Dardania, and most neare vnto the saide Mountaines, are best able to make the greatest stirres. And they be the Piperi, the Cucci, the Clementi, the Bellopauligi, and others in the Countrey of Plaua, and among them there are ma∣ny Albanians that liue after the Romish rite. And these be they, that because they haue a strong site for dwelling, and are by nature verie fierce and hardie, haue not as yet suffered themselues to bee subdued by the Turkish forces. And therefore they did (at the last) attempt to withdraw themselues out of the Ottoman tyrannie. Rebellion of the Greekes in Plaua vnder Gardan Vai∣uode. For hauing vnderstood that Ma∣hamet was discomfited and slaine in the battaile at Agria, they all arose in a tumult vnder the com∣maund of Gardan Vaiuode, and made a great slaugh∣ter of the Turkes that were in their Countrey: but when they were minded to passe further, they vn∣derstood the contrarie, and so in a discontented ma∣ner retired themselues into their mountaines. And for as much as these poore miserable Greeks haue endured so seuere chastisement at the handes of the Turkish officers, that they remaine not onely most pitifully afraied, but also most grieuously op∣pressed, their chiefe heades and gouernours being cruelly put to death, their children taken from their parents, some killed and slaughtered, and almost all of them bereaued and spoyled of that little which they had, and brought to extreame miserie: a man may verie plainely and clearly see and know that to be most true, Iohn Botero Antonio Bruni. which is written by Iohn Botero in his Africa, and more at large by Antonio Bruni in his treatise of the Beglerbey-ship of Graecia, Caution to be obserued in rebellion. that is to say, That it is not good to attempt such enterprises and insurrections, but with a strong resolution, and for∣ces sufficient to bring the intended purpose to passe. For otherwise they waken and arme the enemie, and serue to none other end, but to worke losse to the Authours of them, and to themselues that are in the action: and so much the rather because such re∣bellions (for the most part) are not throughly con∣sidered of, Why the Turk tooke Berne∣gasso from Prete Iani. nor well aduised, nor raised in fit time & oportunitie. And that this is true, it may bee percei∣ued & known by that which the Turke did, whē he vnderstood that the Armadaes of the Portugals had oftentimes entered into the redde sea, and were there entertained by the Officers of Prestre-Ian, and that they also gaue ayde to the Portugals agaynst him. For thereupon he tooke away from Prete-Ian almost all the Prouince of Bernagasso, and made the Arabians to fortifie their hauens, which alwayes be∣fore were wont to be open and common. Moreouer, the Chimeriotes, of whom I haue spo∣ken somewhat alreadie, Rebellion of the Chimeri∣otres. hauing lately made a rebel∣lion, by some perswasions giuen vnto them (and spe∣cially by the meanes and helpe of Athanasius Bishop of Ocrida, who made them beleeue that hee had intelligence with the Emperour, Athanasius B. of Ocrida. and that he expec∣ted aydes from the king of Spaine) were enforced to reconcile themselues to the Turkes, as diuerse o∣ther times they had done before, with such conditi∣ons as were of great disaduantage vnto them: which likewise (to leaue now al older examples) happened in our dayes to the Ducati their neighbours, who after they were well chastised by Pirri Bassa, Pirri Bassa. then being the Sangiack of Deluino, and brought not to many mo then two hundred housholds, were trans∣ported to Neriho. Lastly, The taking of Clissa. the taking of Clissa (to leaue those of Co∣rone, of Castle Nuouo in the time of Charles the fift, and others) which fell out now last of all, hath not wrought that benefite and profite, which was high∣ly desired by the popes holy minde: and principal∣ly because the Murlacchi, by whom the imperialists did verily beleeue they shoulde haue beene ayded against the Turke, Why the Mur¦lacchi went a∣gainst Lenco∣uich. perceiuing so small a number of them to come, quite contrarie to their hope and ex∣pectation, because they would not make their estate worse with a greater affliction & punishment, came downe from the mountaines and fought on the Turkes side, who did helpe them to defeate Lenco∣uich, telling him plainly that they would be true and faithfull to the grand-Turke. But returning to those peoples, that dwell in the Turkish Country, The Latines The forren Latines. it remaineth now to speake of the Latines. Some of them dwell there as forreiners and straungers, and some make their continuall abode there. The forreiners attend and employ themselues vpon trades and trafficke, either by themselues, or by others for them: and little harme can they doe, hauing neither a Head or Captaine to guide them, nor weapons sufficient to fight withal, especially be∣ing in number so few, and dispersed scattringly here and there ouer all that state. Some there be that ma∣king these Latines to bee all one with other Christi∣ans, that are of a seuerall sect, do hold opinion, that they which dwell in Constantinople, by conspiring to∣gither, vpon any occasion of some notable tumult and vprore raised by the Turks thēselues, may make some stirre not vnworthie of good consideration. For they do think, that the Latines being (indeed) of greater number in Constantinople, then in the other most populous Cities of that Empire, such as are Cairo, Aleppo, and Tauris, adding Pera therevnto, where all the Latines almost do remaine, those few Caffaluchi excepted, The Caffalu∣luchi. which keep in Constantinople after they were transported thither from Caffa by Mahamet, they may the more easily confederate themselues togither, and be prouided and furnished with armour, whereof the Turkes are wont most strictly to spoyle the Christians in other places, therby the more to strengthen and secure their own estates. Why Amu∣rath meant to put to death certaine Chri∣stians of Con∣stantinople, & yet did not. And hereupon Amurath the last, hauing ac∣cused the Christians that they had set on fire certain streetes in Constantinople (euen like for all the worlde as Nero did, when hee accused the Christians that were in Rome in his time of the like crime) & therfore had giuen order, that the Iannizaries should hew them in peeces, he reuoked that commaundement, when he was aduertised by the Aga, that in regarde of their multitude it could not bee put in execution without great daunger: besides that it would breed an exceeding notable losse of his customs, and great∣ly disturbe the trafficke which would bee a thing a∣gainst reason, and the law of all nations: and there∣fore he caused diuerse Iewish women to be put to death, that had counsailed and aduised him there∣vnto. Others are of opinion, The meanes to raise ciuill warres among the Turkes. that some persons might bee vsed without any suspition of the Turkes, who vnder the colour and by occasion of traffique, in the Ottomans Dominions, and speciallie in Constanti∣nople, might eyther by large bribes, or by soothing and fostering the ambition or discontentmentes of the chiefest great men, ouerthrow that Empire with a ciuill warre, and the rather for that their Prince is a man of small witte or forecast: as per∣aduenture it had fallen out, if wee Christians had furthered the discontentmentes and iealousies of Ferat, Iars betweene the Great men of Turkie. of Hibraim, of Pirri, and of Mustafa, and of Mahamet Bassa, and lastly of Sinan and of Ferat, and those iarres that are not yet appeased betweene Ci∣cala and Hibraim. And this matter might the more safely bee brought to passe, if any occasion should fall out, that diuerse Brethren should meete in pretense and challenge of the Empire, as it hap∣pened among the Children of Mahamet, of Baiazet, and of Soliman: or if the Empire should chance to want a Naturall Successor. And forasmuch as the will of Man, That the Tur∣kish estate may be ouerturned rather by lear∣ning then by Force. may bee wonne and bowed two manner of wayes, that is to say, eyther by force or by reason: Some thinke that the Turkish State may bee ouerturned not on∣ly by such meanes as are aboue mentioned, but al∣so by discouering vnto the Turkes, and particu∣latly vnto the Ianizzaries, on the one side their birth and ofspring, and the Baptisme which they haue had, and on the other side the fables and mad fooleries of the Alcoran, which are verie learnedly declared by Cardinall Cusanus, and other writers But the more auaileable course would bee, Iohn Andrea Alfacqui of Sciatiua. to make some easie and witty bookes of this matter in the Sclauoyne tongue, and in the Arabike, as in particu∣lar hath beene alreadie done by Iohn Andrea, Bookes to bee dispersed in Turkie, to ad∣uertise the Turks of their errors. som∣times a Moore, and Alfacqui, of the Cittie of Sciati∣ua: and the bookes of the one language to bee dis∣persed and scattered in Europe, and the other in A∣sia, causing them to passe from the Indies, to Mo∣zambique in Africa, and from thence to Zofala & Quiloa which are in Asia: Or to the Moluccoes, to Gouien, Goa, Diu, Ormuz and other places where the Turkish merchantes doe haunt and frequent: or els to Oran, to Arzide, and to other places subiect to the King of Spaine: or lastly thorough the Countryes of the Gentiles and Heathen, that are in amity and confederacie with the Christians, as Calicut, Zeilam, Cambaia and others, and ouer all the partes of Eu∣rope, that confine and border vppon the Turkes. which course in mine opinion, although it will not peraduenture worke that which such like bookes doe vsually worke among vs Christians, being sow∣en and scattered abroade for the most part by men, that are desirous of Nouelties, especially for that the Turkes are as farre from employing themselues in reading and studie, as wee are too much addicted thereunto, and curious therein: yet notwithstan∣ding, it may peraduenture one day worke some great good, if some Great man among them should become the Head of a new sect: The Sophilarii. for thereby it may easily come to passe, that hee should bee fol∣lowed by the multitude, as it hath happened in Germanie, in England, and in France, and oftentimes among the Turkes themselues in Africa, where lear∣ning flourished for a long time, Erdeuil. and in Persia among the Sophilarii, who are the followers of the Sect of Hali, one of the fower companions of the seducer Mahamet, which sect was afterward rather renew∣ed then inuented by Erdeuil, whome Paulus Ioui∣us calleth Arduel the Father of Ismael the Sophi. And here I cannot but vpon this occasion re∣count vnto yon a matter most worthie to be recor∣ded in Historie, A notable hy∣storie of the Confession & death of a youth of the Serraglio. that happened in the life time of the last Emperour Amurath at Constantinople. And thus it was. That one of those youthes which are brought vp in the Royal Serraglio, hauing leasure & conueniencie to reade the Holy Bible, and there∣vpon by the mediation and working of the grace of God, being brought to the knowledge of his error wherein hee liued, caused himselfe to be carried in∣to the Presence of the Great Turke, and there with a Christian courage and boldnesse told him, That if he would preserue his soule from the eternall fire and damnation, hee must surcease from following that impious superstition of Mahamet, and humble himselfe vnder the obedience of the true law of Ie∣sus Christ the Sauiour and Redeemer of the whole world. But hee was for the same, as though he had committed a most heynous and grieuous offence, condemned publikely to bee spitted aliue vppon a stake, where hee iterated and repeated the same words to all the people, with such effectuall termes replenished and enflamed with the fiery spirite of the holy Ghost, that many of the beholders feeling themselues inwardly inkindled therewith, did burst foorth in commiseration of his death, into verie disdainefull and despitefull speeches against Amu∣rath: and if the tumulte had not beene appeased at the first, by the Praetorian Bandes, certainelie there had followed thereupon a most daungerous and perilous sedition. So that in truth, Commendati∣on of the D. of Florence for printing in the Arabike tong. the Great Duke of Tuscane, deserueth exceeding prayse and commendation, for causing many good and godly workes to bee im∣printed in the Arabike Character or Letter, of purpose to disperse them afterwardes, as hee doth in Africa, and else where. A course out of all que∣stion, that although it was heretofore disturbed and hindered by the Siriffe of Africa, vpon the in∣sinuation of Antonio di Flores, a Neapolitane, yet one day perhappes may bee so happily promoted and furthered, as it will bring foorth that fruit which was affected & desired by Pope Gregorie the XIII. a man in that respect worthie of euerlasting memo∣rie, and is also at this time greatly endeauored by the Pope that now liueth. But forasmuch as the greatest part of those Chri∣stians, which doe continuallie dwell and remayne within the Turkish dominions, are Albanois, I will somewhat insist vpon telling you somewhat of them. § XXVII. SOme of these Albanois or Albanians do liue ac∣cording to the Latine rite, The Albanians others after the Gree∣kish rite: but all of them dwell not onely in that part which is called Albania, beginning on the west at Dulcigno, and the lake of Scutari, Their habitati∣on. and ending on the East at Bastia, which I tolde you was right ouer against the Island of Corfu: but also in other places of Morea, and of Grecia, where they haue with∣drawne themselues eyther by occasion of the wars, or beene transported thether by the Emperours of the East, thereby to remedy their often rebellions. Touching these Albanois Latines, Their Condi∣tions. the same Bruni their Countryman in his Treatise before alleadged doth write, that as they are the best armed people so are they the most true and faithfull Christians in all the Ottoman Empire, holden also to be the most valiant and greatliest feared for their continuall in∣surrections, raysing trouble and tumult vpon any the least occasion that they can catch: and this is the qualitie both of those that dwell in the playne Countrey, and also of those that keepe in the moun∣taines. Howbeit they are constrayned in despite of their teeth to submit and humble themselues, Their weake∣nes. because they are not able alone and of themselues to resist the Turkes, and much lesse their neighbour Christians, by whome they are verie many times more vexed and troubled for their rapine and spoy∣ling of Christians, then for fayning themselues to be faithfull towardes the Turke. Besides that of∣tentimes the Sangiackes doe minister good cause vnto them to rebell, eyther because they vse to praye vpon them, or for that they would be reuenged on them, or else that they might haue a likely excuse for not going abroad to any warre a farre off. The Sangiacks of the Ducagi∣ni. And for the same purpose the Sangiack of the Ducagini doth neuer depart from thence, like as also he of Castell-Angelo doth, The Sangiack of Castel-An∣gelo. who vnder the colour and pretense of defending that Countrey from the Christian Armadaes, stayeth alwayes at home. These Ducagini do dwell in the mountain Scar∣do, The Ducagini. at the confines of Preseremo, called in times past Parrecopoli, or Perenopoli which is in Dardania vpon the borders of Albania, inhabited more by the Al∣banois, then by the Seruians: Preseremo is not Iustendili. neyther is it that which is called Iustendil, as some doe think: for the one Cittie is distant from the other by the space of three dayes iourneyes, and yet they bee in one and the selfe same Prouince. Iustendil is not Instiniana the first. They are are also greatlie deceyued in my iudgement, which are of opinion, that Iustendil is Iustiniana the first, and not the se∣cond, and that Preseremo or Iustendil, was the natu∣rall Countrey of Iustinian the Emperour, and not O crida, which is in truth Iustiniana the first, and was called in the old time Lycbindo. Those that do dwell somewhat farre off out of the common high∣way, doe pay no tribute, because they are defended by the rough and craggie passage of their moun∣taine scituation. The mountaine is called Nero, Blacke, and so are many mountaines in Turkie, cal∣led likewise by the same name. Albania de∣scribed. This Albania at the Adriatike Sea is compassed about by verie high mountaines. A plaine coun∣trey it is, and watered with many very great riuers, so that they debarre passage for footmen to trauell to those Christians that inhabite the other partes of the Countrey. They haue no Horse, neyther haue they any meanes to make Bridges. Those places that are inward and inclosed within the waters are in the possession of the Turkes: and although they be not all garded with Garrisons, nor strongly kepte, yet the principall of them are verie safe, Antonio Brun so that they cannot couertly bee robbed or spoyled by the Chri∣stians: which point (sayeth the said Bruni ) I thought good to note vnto you, in regarde of the opinion, which is, conceiued of these peoples, that they are able of themselues to performe soome good, with∣out the helpe and succours of any forraine Nation: and that the fame and rumor onely of the aides that should come from Italie and Spain, with a shew likewise but of one Regiment vnder an Ensigne, (e∣uen as the Embassadour of Lewes Duke of Myllane, Lewes D. of Milan. Charles the VIII. K. of France. told Charles the VIII. King of France, ) is sufficient and enough to stirre them vppe to an insurrection. But God graunt that the vnhappy wretches be not brought into daunger hereby, and that by these o∣pen and publike treaties, there bee no losse indeed of the oportunity of some good, that may be expec∣ted in times to come. And thus much bee spoken of the Turkes naturall, and of the Rinegadoes, and of the Grecians and Latines, that dwell in the Turkes dominions. § XXVIII. AND lastly the Turke considereth, The Turke feareth the ioy∣ning of the Popes Gallyes with the Spa∣nish Gallyes. that if the Gallyes of the king of Spaine, that is to say, the Guardes of Naples, Sicilie and Genoa, should ioyne themselues with the Gallyes of the Pope, of Malta, of Florence, and of Sauoy, they would make so good a bodie of an Armada, that being assisted by fauou∣rable winds, they may very easily on a suddaine as∣sault, either Castle-Nuouo, or the Velona, and other places of Albania: or else if they forbeare so to doe in regard of the Common-wealth of Venice, who chalengeth iurisdiction in the Adriatical sea, for such reasons as are at large displayed by Girolamo Bardi, they may assaile Morea, and perhaps also the Darda∣nelli, or some other notable place of his Empire to his exceeding losse. Which poynt being verie considerable and of good con∣sequence, How the pla∣ces possessed by the Turkes on the seacoast may be as∣saulted. it will not be amisse, for the better information of such, as shall courteonsly reade all these discourses, aud doe not so well know the particulars of those places which be∣long to the Turke, and may by vs Christians be easily as∣saulted, that I tell you somewhat in particularitie, and spe∣cially touching their situation, and the manner of win∣ning them, whether it be likely to proue well or no. Castle-Nuouo is within the Chanell of Catharo called in olde times the auncient Ascriuius. Castel-Nouo. The en∣trance therevnto is verie hard and difficult, by rea∣son of the straites in the mouth of it, where Iacomo Soranzo the general Proueditorie for the Venetian Armada, The Fort of Varbagno de∣faced by Ia∣como Soranzo had made the fort of Verbagno euen with the ground, which was there built by the Turkes. To get that place, the spade may worke much, but it may easily be succoured by land. It was somtimes possessed by the Spaniards, who although they did not maintaine and keepe it against Barbarosso, for the reasons that are most manifest, and knowne, yet are they greatly commended by the Turkes in their Chronicles. Velona, called in times past Aulon, is situate at the mouth of the gulf of the Sea Adriatike, Velona▪ The Promon∣torie of Santa Maria. ouer against the promontorie of Santa Maria, in old time called Iapygia, in Pulia, not aboue threescore miles from O∣tranto. This place hath no conuenient Port or Ha∣uen for the Gallies, but some three miles off: the en∣trance thereof, being well defended, and barred with marishes, with Pooles and Saltpits. It is not verie strong, and yet if you should be minded to conquer it, you must batter two Castels, the one, which is in the plaines and almost conioyned with the Burgo, and built in times past by the aduise of Pignatello an Out-law of Naples: Pignatello an Out-law of Naples. and the other, which standeth aloft, lesse then a mile distant from the Citie, and is called Canina, now inhabited by the Turkes, who had driuen the Christians from thence, vpon a sus∣pition, that they had taken of them in this present treatise of reuolt. Touching the rest of Albania or Arbania, Why the Ar¦menians can∣not doe that which they did in times past. the places which may bee gotten, are within land, and those that are on the sea-coasts haue no Hauens. Be∣sides that the Inhabitants are for the most part verie base and cowardly people. And although the time was indeed, wherein the Albanois did shew them∣selues verie valiant against the Turkes, and specially in the dayes of George Castriotte, yet now they cannot shew themselues to be the same men, George Ca∣striotta. because they haue their enemie not onely their absolute Lord and Maister at home in their houses, but they haue him also on their backes, as in tymes past they had not: to which calamitie they haue been subiect, euer since the Turke hath gained their Countrey, and the Countrie adioyning vnto them. Moreouer, the Albanois are greatly diminished, and want such a couragious Captaine as Castriotte was, who had good intelligence of the Turkish affaires, well experienced in the Countrey and highly belo∣ued and admired of the Countrey inhabitants, and also of his souldiers. Dulcigno, Dulcigno▪ called heretofore Olcinio, or Colchinio, may be assailed by an Armada. For although it want a Hauen, yet in good weather the Fleete may dis∣barke vpon the shore. It is by situation verie strong, but a great part of it is fallen by an earthquake: and therefore if it should be wonne, it wil be most need∣full for the maintaining and keeping of it, to fortifie it anew. Scutari. If Dulcigno be wonne, Scutari, in times past called Scodra, may peraduenture be woone also. For although it bee fortified in a situation that is by Na∣ture most strong, yet is it so ill guarded by the Turkes as it may easily bee entred in the night time vpon a sodaine. Durazzo, Durazzo. of old called Dyrracchium lieth in the plaine Countrey. It is not strong, but in trueth it would be the aptest and fittest of all other places to make entrance into the enemies Countrey, bee cause it is situate in the middle, and neare vnto Italy, although it bee very subiect to the expectation and feate of the enemies assaults. The Turke may also be greatly damnified, Morea. by en∣tering in Peloponesus, which is at this day called Mo∣rea, either for the many Mulberie trees which are there, or because it hath the shape or forme of a Mulberie leafe. This prouince lying in the midst of the states, which the Turke hath in Europe, if it were entred, The true way how to warre with the Turk wee should make warre with him at home within his owne Countrey: which is indeed the true Art of warfare: for so did Cyrus, Caesar, and Hanniball, and so haue the most famous auncient Captaines aduised to do, whatsoeuer other moderne men of later times do say to the cōtrarie. Moreouer, by this meanes he should easily be diuerted and tur∣ned away indeed, and his Armada hindred from go∣ing any further. Lastly, Salonicchi. if Salonicchi, sometimes called Thessalonica might be gotten, it is most certaine that it would be verie auailable for the forwarning of our affaires. For our people and Souldiers being disbarked at that place, they may afterwardes very conueniently and commodiously passe vnto such places as lie vp∣on the high way which leadeth to Constantinople, and cut out a way into Greece, as did the Romanes, and Alaricus king of the Gotthes, Alaricus king of the Gotthes who with thirtie thousand men onely, subdued and conquered the Romanes themselues. And so much the easier will it be, if at the verie selfe same time the Polack and the Transyluanian be pricked forwarde to passe o∣uer the Danow, and so going on through Bulgaria, to annoy the enemie in earnest, euen to the Citie of Constantinople. § XXIX. BVt most true it is, Aduertisemēt how to bring their matters to passe. that it will be verie necessarie for the safe and sure effecting of these other like resolutions, if our Princes shall happen to bee resol∣ued to put them in execution in deed, that they vse the greatest secrecie that may be. Secre e. One thing (sayeth Haytho the Armenian, writing vpō the iourny to the Holy Land,) among others. I dare bee bolde to put you in mind of that in any case, Haytho the Armenian as soone as the Christians shall bee resolued to doe any good, they doo warily and curiously keepe secret their intents and counsels, to the end that the enemie be in no wise informed or acquainted with their purposes. For the Christians in times by-past, because they would not conceale their designementes, found by experience, that they fell into many disaduantages, whereas on the contrarie side, the enemie hath auoi∣ded many daungers, and so bereaued the Christi∣ans of their opportunities, to bring their wished desires to effect. To leaue the examples of the Gentiles, when Iudith was resolued with a coura∣gious minde to goe and kill Holofernes, for the deli∣uerie of the Cittie of Bethulia, it is written in the Holy Scripture, that shee would not make any par∣taker of her purpose, but sayde to two onelie, Iudith. cap. 8 and afterwardes to the Priestes: Vos nolo vt scrutemini actum meum, & vsque dum renuntiem vobis, nihil ali∣ud fiat, nisi oratio pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum: I will not haue you to enquire of my Act, and vntill I declare it vnto you, Let no other thing be done, but prayer for mee to the Lorde our God. This course if it were practised in our times with true de∣uotion and Faith, certainely it would not fall out, that our Princes should haue any neede at all to feare a happy and prosperous issue of their coun∣sels and deuises, and thereby they might also more curiously search and find out the designementes of their enemies. For euen as God doth neuer aban∣don or forsake those, that with pure zeale do fight for his most holy name, so dooth hee well know, how to find good and conuenient meanes for the discouerie of all the secrets of his enemies vnto the true ministers of his Holie will, as hee did to Eli∣zeus, Elizeus. 4. King. 6. cap. when hee disclosed vnto him the Counsels of the King of Syria, although hee vsed all the care and cunning that hee had to conceale them from him. Knowledge of the Countrey. Knights of Malta. Moreouer it would bee also necessarie to haue such persons in the Armada, as are verie expert in the knowledge of the Countryes, least it happen to them, as it happened to the Knightes of Malta, who fayled in the surprise of Modone, because they did not know at the first that there was a Bridge to bee passed ouer, presently after they had made their first entrance. It were likewise very fitte and conuenient, Languages, Iudgement, Credite. Vnderstanding and desire to praise God. that the saide persons (as I haue told you alreadie) should haue the language, a sound iudgement, good credite, and quicke vnderstanding, but especially, and aboue all, that they haue a desire to doe good to Christendome. Qualities (no doubt) that are to bee found in plentifull manner in some that liue at this day, and would be verie apt and meet instrumentes to bring greate enterprises to good passe, if our Princes by their good seruice and meanes would resolue themselues to doe it in deed as did Pope Iuly the II, by the helpe of Constan∣tine Cominianus, and Pope Pius the V. who cal∣led Fryer Gasper Bruni, the commendatorie of Ieru∣salem from Dulcigno, of purpose to vse him in the Armada against the Turke and other matters of mo∣ment appertaining to that warre. Why Princes do oftentimes entertaine the opinions of such as know least. But the mischiefe is, that for the most part our Princes doe giue cre∣dite to such persons, as neither know nor vnder∣stand the mysterie and Art of warrefare, either be∣cause those places are carried away by fauour, yea and verie oftentimes disposed vpon those that vn∣derstand least: or because they make a promise to performe the enterprise with lesse charges and ex∣penses then others will doe: or by flatterie, or by ambition, or rather (as I thinke) to make a gaine thereof: wherevpon there ariseth great losse and shame, both to the Princes themselues, and to the Promoters and furtherers of such goodly instru∣ments. § XXX. TO be briefe, the Turke is afraid, least the Arma∣da of Spaine, The Turke feareth the as∣saulting of the Dardanelli. or any other fleete of ships might depart in Iune with some North-westernly windes, not to goe (as it went the last yeare to sacke Pata∣rasse ) or into Alexandria (as it thought to haue done long ago) or into Africa (as peraduenture it will be no difficult matter for the Spanish Armada to doe) or lastly to endomage and annoy some o∣ther place both within and without the Adriatike Sea, which I will not name, because I will not disco∣uer or disclose that which is not so well knowne in Hystories, as some other things also are (that I haue touched) and which peraduenture may one day be happely attempted: but to goe, and vpon a sodaine to assault the Dardanelli, called in auncient times Sestus and Abydo, which are (as it were) the forewals and the first hate of entrance into his pallace, and Mahamet the second fortified them as soone as hee had gotten Constantinople. And so much the rather, for that if they haue the said windes fauourable, the voyage will be but of a fewe dayes iourney: and by sayling to the Gulfe Lanciato, the passage will be al∣so more safe from the enemies Armada. For al∣though our Armada should bee perceiued by the Turkes that keepe on the sea coasts, yet would they thinke that it were the Turkish fleete. And therefore it will bee verie needfull for those that desire to at∣tempt this enterprise, that they would remember, not to put this deuise in execution, vntill such time as they shall know for a certaintie, that the enemies Armada is gone forth. By taking the Dardanelli the entrance into Turkie will be easie. And yet I do not say, that when the Dardanelli are surprised & taken, Constantinople will presently be got∣ten, as some haue written: but this I say, that it wil put that Citie in such a fright, as it will be no great matter, if any tumult be raised to make the entrance into it, verie easie of it selfe and open, especially if they shall haue before hand entertained some intel∣ligence within the Citie, or that the Turke shall haue receiued some notable ouerthrow, eyther by land or Sea. The distance of the Darda∣nelli, the one from the o∣ther: and from Gallipolis, and from Constan∣tinople, The Dardanelli, that is on Europes side, hath a hil that doth wholy commaund it. The other which is in Natolia, or Asia, as they call it, lieth in the plaine. They are both easie to be gotten, because they are built after the olde maner. Against that which stan∣deth in Asia, the Abbay may also bee vsed, and so by making great hilles of sand (for it is built vpon the shore) it may be vndermined, as the Turkes vse to doe. They are in breadth distant the one from the other more then a mile: and in length from Gallipoli, thirtie myles, and from Constantinople about a hun∣dred and threescore. § XXXI. THere are likewise many other wayes, How the Po∣lonians, Hun∣garians, and Trausyluani∣ans may make outroades into the Turkish territories by diuerse waies▪ whereby the Polonians, the Hungarians, and the Tran∣siluanians may attempt also by land with diuerse outrodes in the time of Haruest to gaine vpon the Turke some place of good moment, and so enter within the enemies Countrey, by some way which they would little dreame off, and specially by kee∣ping themselues towardes the Sea, to the end they may be succoured by our Armadaes, if need should be. The Taifali, what they are, For so we reade, that heretofore fiue hundred Taifali alone (as Zozimenus writeth) which now are the Transyluanians, and Walachians, made an in∣cursion vnder Constantine, euen as farre as Constan∣tinople, to the exceeding affrightment and terrour of the inhabitants of that Cittie. The wayes which the Turke chiefly feareth. The wayes, whereof the Turkes are most afrayed, are those of Sophia, of Andrinopolis, of Philippo-polis, and of those quarters. But to the ende that our Princes may bee as∣sured, The reading of hystories in this point ve∣rie auailable. how after their departure from Italie, they may enter a great way within the Ottomans Coun∣trey, and passe euen to Constantinople it selfe, let them reade the voyages of Constantine and Licinius, of Constantius and Magnentius, of Iulian and Theodosius, of Eugenius, of Arbogastes, of Theodoricus king of the Gotthes, of Odoacre king of the Heruli, of Alaricus king also of the Gotthes, & of Attila, of whō I haue before made mention. And lastly let them very well consider, of the purposes and deuises that Mithrida∣tes had to come into Italie, when he departed from Pontus, and Scythia, that is to say, from Circassia and Tartaria: The Designements of Philip king of Ma∣cedonie to passe into the Adriatike sea. The disbar∣king and landing of the Romanes vpon the Mace∣donians, and the returne which the Captaines of Vespasian, of Antonie the first, and of Mutianus made into Italy out of Soria, and also the iourney of Boe∣mond, and others, when they went to the conquest of the holy land, and other such like voyages, that may be collected out of Histories. § XXXII. FInally, I will set downe for the last poynt, The consulta∣tion of Pope Leo the tenth, about the at∣tempt of ma∣king warre a∣gainst the Turke. as it were for a Conclusion or Epilogue, of so much as hath beene spoken, what Francis Guicciardin wri∣teth of Pope Leo the tenth, when he greatly feared, that Selim would haue passed into Italie, not vnlike to that which other Popes haue done, as P. Iouius writeth in his counsell giuen for the warre against the Turke, and sundry other Authours likewise. The Pope (saith Guicciardin ) like an vniuersall father, Frances Guic∣ciardin. be∣thinking himselfe of the Common good of Chri∣stendome, after hee had first caused verie deuout prayers and supplications to bee celebrated to God, whereunto hee went himselfe bare-foot: he sent writtes or Brieffes to all the Princes Christian, warning them of the great daunger that was im∣minent and at hand, and comfortably exhorted them, that laying aside all discordes and contenti∣ons, they would readilie attend vpon the defence of religion, and their owne common safety, by vni∣ting their mindes and their Forces against the Turke, and by going to assault him, euen at his own home: Hee published vniuersall and generall truces betweene the said Princes, with the punish∣ment of the heauiest censures of the Church to be inflicted vppon such as gainesaide the same, to the end, that onely such matters as belonged to so great an enterprise, should bee entertayned and handled. He dispatched vnto them for the same purpose diuerse Legate-Cardinals, men of great au∣thoritie, and renowned aswell for their experience in this businesse, as also for their opinion of lear∣ning. He aduised and consulted with the Em∣bassadors of euery Prince, and examined the se∣uerall conceites and iudgementes of militarie men, and of such persons as were well acquainted with the Countryes, with the disposition of the Prouinces, and with the Forces and Armes of that Empire. Last of all hee resolued with himselfe, that it was most necessarie to prouide a very great summe of Moneyes, partly by a contribution vo∣luntarie to bee made among the saide Princes, and partly by an vniuersall Imposition to bee leuied vpon all Christian Nations: and therevpon the Emperour accompanied with the Hungarian and Polonian Horsemen (who are verie warlike Nati∣ons, and well exercised with continuall warres a∣gainst the Turkes) and with such an armie of Dutch Horse and Foote, as were requisite for so great an Enterprise; to sayle by the Danowe into Bossina: (hee would say into Seruia, for so was the vpper Mysia called in auncient times) and so to goe from thence into Thracia, & approching neare vnto Con∣stantinople, the verie seate of the Empire of the Ot∣toman: Secondly, that the king of France with all the Forces of his owne kingdome, of the Venetians and of other Princes of Italie, accompanied with the Footemen of the Swizzers, should passe from the Hauen of Brindes, (aunciently called Brundusium, ) into Albania (an easie and very short passage) to assault Grecia, which is full of Christian inhabitants who both in that respect, and in regarde of the crueltie of the Turkish Empire, are very ready and well disposed for a rebellion. Thirdly, that the Kinges of Spaine, of Portugall, & of England should ioyne their Armadaes together at Cartagena, and at other Hauens thereaboutes, and so with CC. shippes full of Spanish Footemen, and other soul∣diers, addresse themselues to the Straites of Galli∣poli, of purpose to assault Constantinople it selfe, after they had wonne the Dardanelli, otherwise called the two Castles, situate in the mouth of the saide Streytes. In the which iourney the Pope himselfe would sayle likewise, taking shippe at Ancona with C. Beaked shippes (hee would say Gallyes) in his Companie. So that the State and Empire of the Turkes being assaulted both by land and by Sea, on all sides, with these preparations, (especially for that the Turkes doe principally build vpon this foundation, to defend themselues in the open field:) it were likely (chiefly by Gods helpe and assistance) that a happie end might be expected and atchieued of so pitifull and lamentable a warre. § XXXIII. I Would to God it might please his Maiestie, that euen as the vniting togither of all the Princes Christian agaynst the Turke, ours either by a proportio∣nable contributing to the expenses of so vniuersall and holie an association, or else euerie one of them by himselfe (I speak of such as are more conueni∣ently able to do it then the rest) by setting vpon the enemie all at one time, as this (I say) is thought to bee a matter in the eye and iudgement of man, surely not altogither impossible, but in deed verie hard and difficult, especially in these dayes, for the sinnes of the world, which require wrath and cala∣mitie: So hee would vouchsafe with the eie of his iustice to looke vpon the Ottoman, that he bee no longer the rodde and scourge of his Diuine furie against vs, but like an vnprofitable wretch, and proude Colossus, he may at the last bee broken in∣to verie small peeces, by the stone of his Diuine power: or at the least, with the eye of his mer∣cie, to beholde the Christian Princes, and to en∣spire into their heartes a minde and desire to binde themselues togither in one, with the bond of true Charitie, euen as there is but one faith which they professe, and one Church wherein all true belee∣uers do liue, (and therfore is called a cōgregation:) to the end that leauing those subtill cōsiderations of their priuate interests and commodities, either in re∣gard that their states are verie neer vnto the enemie, or in respect of the power of some, and the weaknes of others, or because the gaine and profite can not be equall and alike to euerie man, without any gree∣dinesse of commaunding, and without ambition of reigning, one in the East, another in the South, they would vnite themselues, not (as it were) for cerimo∣nie & fashions sake, (for so Guicciardin himself saith) as these matters and practises haue heretofore been handled. But with effect, and in the zeale of true re∣ligion and pietie, with the glorie of his diuine Maie∣stie, and their owne saluation, against al the enemies of his most holy name: Imitating therein, Godfrey of Boleine. that great Godfrey of Boleine, not onely in resolution, but also, (if need should so require) in alienating their owne proper states & dominions, as he did with the duke∣dom of Boleine, that so he might haue means to make & maintaine war against the same tyrant: as many o∣ther of those Lords did, that concurred in that holy league, whereof we haue told you before. Where∣vpon it pleased the Lord of Hoasts, either for our instruction, or for our shame and con∣fusion, so to work with them that they recouered the holy Sepulchre, and with verie great glorie subdued all the East. FINIS.