




CHAP. I. 

That God by meanes of her Maiesties gouernment hath bestowed many benefits vpon the realme of England, as well in establishing true religion, as otherwise: and that our aduersarie in his first encounter sheweth himselfe both shamelesse in denying it, and vngratefull in refusing, and not acknowledging the same.

ALbeit the malice of papists is great in defacing her Maiesties actions, and slandering her gouernment; yet who so listeth to consider the same with indifferencie, cannot choose but acknowledge her to bee an excellent and singular woman, to bee parangoned with the famous women of ancient time, if not preferred before them. Osorius albeit for his religion opposite to her, yet could not choose, but highly commend her, both for her manly constancy, and mature wisedome, and singular modestie. Quid admirabiliusIn prafat. ante lib. 3. de religione. saith he, quam in foemina virilem constantiam, in virgine senilem prudentiam, in summa opum affluentia summam modestiae laudem eminere? Hee praiseth also her witte, her learning, and her clemencie. Es singulari ingenio praedita,Ibidem. saith he, and magnarum artium disciplinis erudita: laudibus mansuetudinis and lenitatis, quae cum istius formae venustate consentiunt, excellis, nec eas laudes, quae ex constantiae magnitudine oriuntur, tibi repudiandas existimas. Peter Bizarus by chance mentioning her in his storie of the state of Genua, dothLib. histor. Genuens. 23. call her Lectissimam Heroinam, and nusquam satis amplis laudibus celebrandam;
 and doubteth not for her rare indowments both of the body and the minde, and for her clement, and wise gouernment to compare her to a bright starre, excelling the splendour of other princes of her time. And that these praises proceeded not of flatterie, not onely their country, the men being strangers to her, but her noble actions do declare.
All this notwithstanding the papists, albeit tied to her by diuers obligations both of subiection, and extraordinarie fauor, yet cannot endure to heare her praised. The Noddie our aduersarie although he plead for her fauour, yet could not vouchsafe her one good worde. His consorts they haue loaded her with many lend, and slanderous words. Nicholas Sanders and Harpsfield, of whom she deserued better, began to collect slandrous accusations against her. Edward Rishton whom she deliuered out of prison, and set at libertie, loosed his toong to raile against her, by whom hee receiued life. From th^se fountaines B^zius, Ribadineira, and diuers other railing friers haue borowed matter, and published diuers libels to her dishonor. Neither may it seeme marueilous, if malicious men haue spoken maliciously, or if her enimies haue declared their ingraffed hatred against her.Prouerb. 29. The wicked do abhorre those that walke aright, or as the old Latine interpreter hath: Abominantur impij eos, qui in recta sunt via. King DauidPsal. 72. saith, That he was accounted a woonderment, or as a monster of manie. Prodigium saith hee, factus sum multis. Shee hath beene a nursing mother to Gods church, and therefore the enimies of Gods church hate her, and speake euill of her. Nay they speake euill of her, and persecute her without a cause. Clement the seuenth began the persecution against her in the person of her parents, declaring the mariage of her father and mother vnlawfull. Paule the third, when shee was yet an infant, did seeke her destruction, as did Herode the destruction of the innocent children in Bethlehem. Harke how he thundreth out his sentence against her, declaring her vnable to succeede her father in the crowne of England. Omnem Henrici ex praedicta Anna Bollena subolem, saith he,In Bullae Pauli 3. Cont. Henr. 8. fautorumque suorum liberos iam natos, aut nascituros vsque ad eum gradum, ad quem iura huiusmodi poenas extendunt, omnibus possessionibus, dominijs, libertatibus, priuilegijs; honoribus, officijs, bonis mobilibus ac immobilibus, quouismodo obtentis priuamus, ac infames
 esse decernimus. See he persecuteth the king and his children, and all that fauour them, although they were not yet borne into the worlde. Oh what mischiefe woulde hee haue done, if hee had had power and authoritie, that thus without all authoritie and meanes to wreake his malice, sheweth the bitternesse of his choler! the popes adherents neuer ceased, vntill they had brought her most innocent mother to her end: which was the greatest greefe that tormented the king lying on his death bedde, and sore repenting himselfe for the wro^gfull shedding of that innocent Queenes bloud, as many then present did testifie; and Theuet a frier, a man not suspect, doth leaue recorded in hisLib. 16. Cosmogr. vniuers. Historie, of which we shall report the testimonie heereafter. Neither did they onely murder the innocent mother, but also sought by act of Parliament, to disable and from the succession to exclude the daughter. In Queene Maries time by diuers practises they sought to kill her. When their malice tooke no effect, pope Pius, Gregorie the 13. Sixtus quintus, and diuers other popes by warres and rebellions, haue attempted to depriue her of her kingdome. It may also bee probably suspected, that they suborned diuers to kill her, or poison her. Howsoeuer they were acquainted with these practises, certaine it is, that diuers of the popish faction haue conspired either by sworde, or poison, or other meanes to destroy her. And now when they are not able to do her other hurt, they persecute her with their toong. So wicked men Do scorne the simplicitie of the iust, as the holyIob. 12. Scripture teacheth vs. They publish infamous libels against her person. This our aduersarie doth slander her gouernment, as if this land had receiued no benefite by that reformation of religion, which God wrought by her meanes. But the testimonie of enimies and traitours by all lawes is repelled.
That God hath by her mea^es greatly blessed this land it doth appeere first by testimonie either of her aduersaries, as of Osorius; or of stra^gers, as of Petrus Bizarus. Quid magis obstupendu^ saithIn praefat. ante lib. de relig. Osorius, quam mollem and delicatam mulieris natura^ tantis esse virtutibus ornatam and instructam, vt totu^ regni pondus sustineat, in eoque munere maxima cum lande versetur: quod vix multorum hominum excellentium consilio, virtute, fide, authoritate conficitur. Bizarus preferreth the
 happinesse of England vnder her gouernment, before all happinesse of former kings, and ages. Illud duntaxat, saith hee,Lib. hist. Genuens. 23. obiter adiecero, Britanniae regnum nunquam ab vllo (pace aliorum dixero) vel retroactis seculis, vel patrum nostraque memoria maiori cum prude^tia, nec minori foelicitate fuisse administratum. This he saith of her Maiesties gouernment, writing about the 21. yeere of her raigne.
But what should testimonies of men neede, when her noble and famous actions do sufficiently commend, and set foorth the praises of her gouernment? First as it pleased God by the hand ofIudges. 4. Deborah to deliuer his people from the tyrannie of Iabin and the Cananites, that some yeeres had oppressed them: so it pleased him likewise by this our Deborah to breake the yoke of the pope, and to deliuer the people of England from the tyrannie of the Cananites the papists, that had diuers yeeres oppressed vs and tyrannized ouer vs.Psal. 123. Anima nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium: laqueus contritus est, and nos liberati sumus. Our soule (that wee may vse the prophets words) like a sparrow is deliuered from the power of hunters; the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Now how great this blessing is to be esteemed, wee may easily iudge by these particulars. First wee were deliuered from the heauie burthen of the popes decretales, of his excommunications, and his taxes and exactions, of which the very papists themselues haue long complained, and yet finde themselues therewith much agreeued, but that they dare not complaine. FrierPetrus de Alliac. de reform. eccles. Humbert affirmeth, that the exactions, excommunications, and constitutions of popes, were the cause of the schismes of the eastern and western churches. Dicit quod causa dispositiua schismatis Graecorum inter alias vna fuit propter grauamina Romanae ecclesiae in exactionibus, excommunicationibus and statutis, saith Peter de Alliaco, who doth shew many particulars of these greeuances. The Princes of Germany in a certaine diet at Nuremberg100. grauan. Germ. in Fascic. rer. expet. and fugiend. did complaine, that the popes did offer the^ A hundred greeuances and wrongs not sufferable, which they declared by the particulars. And yet none of those concerned corruptions of doctrine. By her Maiestie we became free from all the popes pillages and exactions, from the iniustice of his censures, from the bondage of his decretals, farre more greeuous then the ceremoniall lawes of Moses, whose
 yoke notwithstanding, as theAct. 15. apostle testifieth, was so heauy, that neither the people then, nor their fathers were able to beare it.
Secondly, where in Queene Maries time the people had the Scriptures taken from them in their mother toong, and liued in great ignorance of matters of saluation, as seldome being instructed in matters of religion; not onely the word of God began againe to be publikely read in Churches, but also more sincerely expounded, then before: neither were any excluded from the knowledge of the same.
Thirdly, the true administration of Christs Sacraments, which by the abominable masse had beene abolished, was restored, and Gods people made partakers both of the Sacrament of his body, and of the cup also; and withall, the true doctrine of Sacraments was publikely deliuered vnto the people of God.
Fourthly, Gods true worship was againe restored according to his most holy worde, and the practise of the Catholike church of Christ; which before that had beene most shamefully corrupted with popish traditions, and humane inuentions.
Fiftly, the rodde of the oppressor by her peaceable gouernment was broken, and the fires quenched, that had burned so many innocents, and true martyrs; and the tortures remooued, wherewith many honest men had beene greeuously afflicted; and peace was giuen to the church, so that all true Christians might without feare make profession of their faith, and publikely meete to celebrate the name of God. Those that were exiled returned, and such true Christians as kept themselues secret, did manifestly shew themselues.
Finally, shee did not onely restore true religion, and the right administration of Sacraments, and Gods true worship, but also abolished the manifold heresies and corruptions of popish doctrine. Shee shut the mouthes of priests and friers preachers, not of peace nor sent from God, but sent by the pope and his adherents, to maintaine heresie and faction, whose preaching notwithstanding as saith Stapleton,In praefat. ante relict. princip. doctrin. Is the foundation ofViz. according to the pope^ definition. Christian religion. Is it not a braue religion, thinke you, that is built vpon impious popes, frier fraparts, and massing priests mouthes? Quomodo Christus saith hee,
 ciusque doctrina, Christianae religionis fundamentum est; sic alij nunc a Christo missi, eorumque doctrina, praedicatio, determinatio fundamenti apud me locum habebunt. AndIbidem. againe, In hac docentis hominis authoritate, in qua Deum loquentem audimus, religionis nostrae cognoscendae fundamentum necessario poni cernimus. Note, I pray you, how he saith most blasphemously, that God speaketh by the popes mouth, and by the mouthes of such friers and priests as he sendeth (for of them he speaketh) and how vpon their preaching he buildeth his Romish religion. Well, this abusiue foundation is nowe discouered, and we are taught to builde, not on pope, nor on friers, nor on legends nor lies, nor vncertaine traditions; but vpon the word of God. Now also by her Maiesties authoritie, the most blasphemous and idolatrous sacrifice, and seruice of the masse, and the priests of Baal with their Balaamiticall friers are remooued out of the church. The same is also purged of idols and idolatrie, and men from worshipping of stockes and stones, and rotten ragges and bones, and from adoration of angels and men departed this life, are brought to worship the true and euerliuing God. Finally where heeretofore men were taught to seeke remission of sinnes by masses, indulgences, iubileies, holy water, and other humane deuises; and beleeued, that if they had not remission heere, they shoulde at the least finde it in purgatorie: nowe these abuses were quite remooued, and men taught, that Christ Iesus without these ceremonies was the onely way to heauen; and that Christians obteined remission of sinnes by faith in him; and that no workes pleased God, but such as he commanded. This then is the first and principall blessing which by her Maiesties most happie gouernment this land enioieth; a blessing I saie farre excelling all others, as farre as spirituall and eternall happinesse excelleth temporall commodities. And yet, as appeereth by the confession of strangers, that woondred at the happinesse and tranquillitie of this state in the troubles, and turmoiles of all our neighbors round about vs, God hath accumulated vpon this people of England, by the meanes of her gouernment, diuers temporall blessings also.
Wee are therefore secondly to consider, what temporall graces we haue obteined by meanes of her happy attaining to the crowne, and by her gouernment, albeit I make no doubt,
 but that all these latter graces do flow from the first, as from a fountaine. For God saith1. Sam. 2. expresly, That he will honor those, that honour him: and experience teacheth vs, that God blesseth those nations, which giue harbor to his church, and with a true hart receiue his worde, and serue him duly according to the same. First then we may remember, that by her meanes we were deliuered from the thraldome of the Spaniard, and the feare of forraine lords, into which dangerous state Queene Marie with her poperie had brought this lande. Now how great a blessing this is, we may easily vnderstand, if we do but looke either into the miserable bondage of our neighbours of the low Countries, or else of the Spaniards themselues. And better then these we coulde not hope for; but many reasons might mooue vs to feare woorse, of which we shall haue occasion to speake heereafter. In the low Countries during the time of Charles the fift, it isHist. Belgi^. Meterani. lib. 2. reported and prooued by record, That aboue fiftie thousand were done to death about the cause of religion onely: and yet then neither was there any inquisition established, nor did the Spaniard command so absolutely, as sithence he hath. Since that time all the priuileges of the countrey haue beene broken, and such intollerable wrongs offered, and impositions and taxes laide vpon them, that the most aboundant countrey in Europe is now consumed, and brought to nothing. In Spaine the people liueth in exceeding feare of the Inquisition, and paieth the tenth of all things bought and sold in the market, and beside that diuers customes, and whatsoeuer burthens or impositions else the Princes can with any colour lay vpon them. So that nowe notwithstanding the riches of the Indies, the people of Spain for the most part are brought to beggerie.
Secondly by the abolishing of the popes vsurped power, his extreme exactions ceased, and the publike treasure of the kingdome, which by his meanes was woont to be exhausted, began to encrease; at the least it was kept within the kingdome.
Thirdly her Maiestie restored peace vnto vs, which Queene Marie intricating her-selfe in her husbands quarrell, did exchange for warres, and lost Calice, and all the remainder of her ancestors possessions in France. This peace, but that the papists haue gone about by diuers attempts at home
 and abroade to trouble it, hath now continued two and fortie yeeres and vpward. So it appeereth what troubles, wants, warres, rebellions, losses, or disgraces haue hapned now this many yeeres to this nation, or else are intended against vs, that the same haue wholy proceeded from the popish faction, and their abominable and cursed idolatrie and superstition, as all blessings that haue beene bestowed vpon vs, haue issued from the fountaine of Gods fauour for the maintenance of his truth, by meanes of her Maiesties gracious gouernment, and of her fathers and her brothers noble purposes and deseignements. Neither did her Maiestie restore peace to vs, onely with forreine enimies, but restraine the cruell rage of popish butchers that murdered Gods saints at home, and made warres vpon them. shee, I say, restored peace, and gaue rest to Gods church.
Lastly by meanes of her Maiesties gouernement, the strength of this land is growne great. Neuer were there more valiant men of warre, nor better men at sea, then now. Her Nauie is exceedingly encreased: her munitions and furniture for the war is exceeding. Neuer was there in England greater store of learned men, nor more cunning artificers in al trades. There is no countrey better peopled: nor was euer prince more reuerenced, or beloued of her subiects.
These blessings God hath bestowed on her people by meanes of her gouernment. It hath pleased him also singularly to blesse her both with spirituall, and temporall graces; and to make her reigne farre longer, then of most of her progenitors, and to multiplie her daies aboue ordinarie. Shee hath also seene the miserable endes of most of her enimies, and of such traitors, as haue sought her hurt; and long may shee continue, and see the confusion of the rest, to the comfort of all her louing subiects, and griefe of her wicked enimies. As for those, that haue either by open force, or priuate practise sought to destroie her, they are all perished, and come to confusion: euen so Lord let them all perish, and come to confusion, that hate thee, and thy truth, and the maintainers and professors thereof.
At this happinesse of the English nation, by the happie change of religion made by her Maiestie at her first entrance into her kingdome, it is no maruell, if this our aduersarie, and his consorts be repine: for that is the nature of enuie, to bee
 sorie, if shee see no cause of others sorrow: Vixque tenet lachrymas, as the PoetOuid. Metamorph. 2. saith, quia nil lachrymabile cernit. It is the propertie also of busie fellowes to be quarrelling, and accusing of others: they feede on accusations as daintie meate. (...), as saith Pindarus. They looke not into their owne myseries and calamities, but curiously looke into other countries, not vnlike hungrie Grammarians, that are descanting still of the calamities of Troie, and yet see not their owne domesticall miseries, that more neerely concerne them. But it is true, as one saith, That he that is curious in other mens causes, is also malitious. Which appeereth true in this our aduersarie: for gladly woulde he, by ripping vp our estate, make the worlde beleeue, that we haue receiued no blessing, nor benefite by change of religion: but he demonstrateth nothing but his owne folly, ignorance, and malice.
HeP. 1. beginneth with a long tale of flatterie, and the harmes ensuing thereof; and at his first setting out entreth into a common place, as it were into a common Inne, pleasing and resting himselfe, but tyring and harrying his reader with his needelesse fooleries. For what skilleth it, I pray you, to know what a dangerous beast, a flatterer is? Againe who denieth, but that flatterie is an odious thing? But what is this to vs? Can he shew that sir Francis is a flatterer? no: nay he doth not so much as go about to prooue any such matter: nor doth he applie his common place to his purpose, but leaueth it as a fragment borrowed out of some frierlike declamation, without any coherence to the rest of his long speake. Wherefore to helpe him foorth where he faileth, we confesse that flatterie is a foule fault; and are content, that he should speake his pleasure against flatterers. For whatsoeuer he saith against them, falleth right vpon him and his consorts, who albeit they raile starkely against honest men, yet are still clawing the pope and the king of Spaine, and their adherents, shewing themselues to be clawbackes, parasites, and flatterers. what the pope saith, that they say all; what he denieth, they denie. They are of neere kinred to Gnatho, of whomIn eunucho. imperaui egomet mihi, omnia assentari. Terence speaketh, That had no power to gainsay any thing, which his master said. so saithIn praes. in relect. princip doctrin. Sapleton, That the popes determination is the foundation of his religion. They are also like the parasite in Plautus, whose belly taught him to speake strange thinges:
 for these good fellowes for their bellies sake speake, raile, holde their peace, write, faune, flatter, and vnto the popes pleasure turne their stile and their teaching. Mutato iudicio ecclesiae, saith theEpist. 2. ad Lo^emos. Cardinall of Cusa, mutatum est and dei iudicium. Now by the church he vndersta^deth his holy father the pope, who asDe princip. doctrin. passim. Stapleton holdeth, is the principall subiect of Ecclesiasticall authoritie. him a multitude of parasites doth most palpablie flatter. Augustin Steuchus doth honour him as a God. audis saithContr. Donat. Constantini. he, Pontificem deum appellatum, and habitum pro deo? Gomesius writing vpon the rules of the popes chancerie, saith That the pope is a certaine visible God. Papa, saith he, est quoddam numen, and quasi visibilem quendam deum prae se ferens. Stapleton like a shamelesse parasite dothIn Epist. dedicat. ante princip. doctrin. worship him, as his souereigne God on the earth, Tanquam supremum in terris numen. Iohn Andreas in c. quanto. de translat. episcopi. and Abbas Panormitanus in c. licet. de electione, saie, That he and Christ haue but one tribunall seate betweene them.In breuiloquio. In praef. ant. lib. de pontif. Rom. Bonauenture calleth the pope The onely spouse of the church, and Christs vicar generall. Robert Bellarmine, who now in reward of his flatterie is made a cardinall flatterer, doth smoothly callIbidem. the pope The corner stone of the church, and accompteth himLib. 2. de pont. c. 31. not onely A stone most precious, and approoued, spoken of by the prophet, but also as the sunne in The firmament, and the head and spouseC. solitae. ext. de ma. and obed. of the church. Others aduance him aboue the moone: others say, he so farreLib. 3. summae. c. 9. excelleth the emperor, as the sunne in the firmament doth excell the moone. Simon Begnius in the Councell of Laterane, doth call Leo the tenth, The Lion of the tribe of Iuda: and doubteth not to name him his sauiour: Ecce, saith he, venit Leo de tribu Iuda, etc. te Leo beatissime saluatorem exspectauimus. Another in the Councell of Trent saith, The pope was that light that came into the world, abusing the words of the scripture to flatter him: Papa lux, saith he, venit in mundum. TurrecremataLib. 2. sammae. c. 26. doth call him King of kings, and prince of the church, and saith, He hath more perfection in him, then all the residue of the body of the church. To recite all their flatteries, were infinite: neither is it needfull, seeing these are sufficient to declare them in this kinde singular. Beside termes, they do fall downe before him, and adore him, as an idole: they carie him about vpon mens shoulders, and omit no kinde of
 seruile flatterie.In epist. ant. lib. de Caluino-turc. Gifford calleth Philip the second king of Spaine, The greatest monarke vnder the sunne: to shew himselfe to be one of the grossest flatterers vnder the moone. And this Noddy to shew himselfe a noble parasite, vpon whom the rigour of his whole inuectiue against flatterers doth most fitly fall,P. 90. calleth the pope of Rome and king Philip the second of Spaine, The greatest monarkes of Christendome: of which two, the first is no lawfull monarke, nor prince, but an vsurping tyrant, and that of more malice, then might. The second, while he liued was a seely old man, neither in his dominions, nor in his actions deseruing any extraordinarie praise, nor being in any sort comparable to Christian princes, of whom we read in stories. So we see that all this common place of flatterie, as it is farre from the matter, so it fitteth this Noddie and his consorts very properly.
Afterward drawing neerer to his purpose, hePag. 2. telleth vs in very tragicall termes, That notwithstanding her Maiesties good intentions, there is none so simple that discouereth not, nor so euill affected, that rueth not the difficulties that growe, and are growing by alteration of religion. but his matters are so well handled, that his aduersaries do easily discouer his notorious impudencie, and his friendes do rue his simplicitie, seeing him to take as granted, and boldly to affirme, That all men see and acknowledge the difficulties that arise out of alteration of religion; when none either seeth, or iustly can affirme any such matter. This, if he were not a stranger, or rather an enimie to his countrey, he might know, that all honest and true harted subiects, and not onely true Christians do holde, and willingly acknowledge, that the reformation of religion wrought by her Maiesties meanes, is the principall fountaine, from whence diuers blessings haue issued, and flowed out to the great benefite of many. Neither doth any ampl^^ie these pretended difficulties and dangers, and holde our case ruthfull, but such rinegued English, and traiterous priests and fugitiues, as himselfe and his consorts are, who repine and grudge at nothing more, then our well dooing and prosperitie; and whose traiterous practises, they being combined with forreine enimies of the state, are the onely cause, from whence either any suspicion or feare can proceed. Beside this, if anie calamitie did proceed from this alteration of religion, then
 should her Maiestie deserue most blame, by whose authoritie the same was wrought and procured: and so should this parasite, that would so willingly insinuate himselfe into her fauor, spill all fauour, by imputing to her all our pretended feares and calamities. To cleere himselfe he saith, That this alteration did not proceed from her owne inclination at the first. But while he would seeme to excuse her, he doth greeuously accuse her, as if shee had done contrarie to her owne inclination, and had by chance, as it were, and without any knowledge or firme resolution entred this course. He doth also depriue her of the most principall part of all her glorie, which rose especially vpon her zeale in reforming religion. Further he telleth a most shamelesse vntruth. for who knoweth not, that this reformation of religion did wholy proceede from her owne most earnest zeale? did not shee her selfe, when any difficulties were surmised vpon this alteration, neglect them all? was shee not alwaies taken for a professor of Gods truth? was not this the onely cause of Winchesters, and all the papists hatred and practises against her? finally, where he would gladly yeeld her Maiestie some praise for her good inclination, he doth like a noddie dispraise her, and charge her to haue wrought that, Which all true affected men may rue.
But to passe ouer his follie, and vndutifull behauiour towards his prince, to whom he oweth all honor and reuerence, and yeeldeth none; that which he talketh of our estate, which he imagineth to be miserable and ruthfull, deserueth more consideration. For gladly would he worke a dislike of the present gouernment in mens mindes; and principally he desireth men shoulde beleeue, that all supposed dangers proceed from the alteration of religion at her Maiesties first comming to the crowne. But for the first, the state of things themselues will answere. Lawes are ordinarily executed, no man is wronged either in his person, or his lands, or his goods, but he may haue remedie. Religion is truely preached and professed: and if any complaine, it is bicause such malcontentes, as mislike, and oppugne the gouernment, are too much fauoured. Against forraine enimies we want neither meanes nor courage to resist. And if nothing would mooue vs to like the state present, yet the malice of traitors, and enuie which they beare against it, may perswade vs, that it is well founded and setled. For if it
 were otherwise, they woulde then as much reioice, as now they sorrow.
For the second we say, that howsoeuer we stand, true religion is neither the cause of trouble, nor of danger. For if that were so, then were all princes and states, that professe religion, in the same case. Againe, then should all that enioy popish religion enioy peace also and prosperitie: which experience teacheth vs to be most vntrue. For the Portugals albeit extraordinarily popish, yet are oppressed by the tyrannie of the Spaniards, and the popish prouinces of the low Countries liue in great slauerie. The French king Henrie the third, notwithstanding his deuotion to the pope, was in the end excommunicated, vexed with rebellions, and most shamefully murdred by a Dominican frier. Don Caesare d'este duke of Ferrara was not, I trow, of our religion; yet did the pope excommunicate him, and most wrongfully take his state from him. Lastly, if religion now professed were the immediate cause and originall of any trouble like to ensue; then should not the papistes haue beene the principall meanes to mooue warres, and rebellions against the state, nor the onely practisers against her Maiesties person and safetie, as we haue found them to haue beene. Wherefore, if we will rightly esteeme, we shall finde, that as true religion is the cause of all those blessings we enioy: so poperie, and the faction that maintaineth it, is the cause of all practises against her Maiestie and the state, and of all rebellions, and warres, and mischiefes entended against vs. Againe, as we were without danger, as long as God was truely worshipped, and idolatrie repressed, and Iesuites and priests, and their abettors diligently sought out, and punished according to lawes, and all concurred resolutely to maintaine true religion and the state: so since Recusants began of some to finde fauour; and masse-priests and Iesuites haue beene suffered to practise without punishment, and idolatrie is begun to be priuily erected, and some mens mindes grow colde in maintaining true religion, and the present gouernment; it is no maruell, if some inconuenience be feared. But remooue this, there is no cause, why any shoulde either doubt, or feare. For the pope hath businesse inough to maintaine his owne state; and no meanes to worke vs trouble, but by English traitors. In times past he was Stupor mundi, the woonderment
 of the world; now he is Fabula mundi, that is, a matter for idle priests and friers to prate of, but not to be feared, vnlesse wee liste. The Spaniard hath more reason to feare vs, and our associates of the low Countries, that may be lordes of the sea, if we please, and may take what part of the Indies we list; then we to feare him. Sure if his force had beene such as is pretended, neuer would he haue suffred such scorne, nor descended to such dishonorable courses, as he hath done. Both the pope and Spaniard depend vpon the aide of English fugitiues and malcontents. Draw from them this hope, then haue you the end of these supposed feares, and a full answere to this traitors painted tales and fables.
Thus you see this noddy hath neither reason, nor truth in his discourse. And yet that is not all the fault it hath. For it is also impertine^t to the purpose. For what if there were some cause of feare, or doubt? doth it therefore follow, that we haue receiued no benefits, nor blessings by her Maiesties most happie gouernment, and the abolishment of idolatrie, and restoring of true and catholike religion? If then there be no iust cause of feare, and onely certaine pusillanimous companions, quake at the popes thundring, and Spanish bragging, or else pretend to do it, bicause they looke backe to the fleshpots of Egypt, and glory of Babylon; then are we to acknowledge Gods fauour, that hath not onely giuen vs many graces by her Maiesties meanes, but also meanes to maintaine them, and to secure our selues. And for such cowards as feare forreine enimies, we are to put them into the next ranke to English traitors alreadie conspired with the enimie,
Hee telleth vs further, That by alteration of religion in England; Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, and France, haue tasted of many miseries, tumults, calamities, and desolations. Hee should haue said of many blessings, and friendly fauors. For kindnesses and fauours, all our neighbors haue receiued from vs: but those calamities and desolations that he speaketh of, haue proceeded from the popes furie and malice, and from his adherents, persecuting quiet people for the profession of true Christian religion. But let vs heare the rest of his wise tale.
Beside battels, murders, destructions of countries, prouinces, townes, cities, houses, and particular men, saith hee, three
 Princes, two Queenes, and one King, haue beene all brought to their bane, by this occasion. He saith further, That the noble houses and linages of Hamiltons, Douglasses, Stuardes in Scotland, of Desmondes and other peeres in Ireland, haue been thereby ruinated: and finally, That in France and Flanders, there is no end of the accompt of those, that haue beene destroied by this change of religion: as if we had procured all these battels, murders, destructions; or as if wee, or our religion, were the occasion of the destruction of princes or kings; or as if the massacres of France, and those bloodie executions, had beene committed by vs. What a shamelesse fellow is this to impute the cause of warres and troubles to vs, that euer auoided warres as much as we could, and offered force to no man, nor euer stirred, but as defendants for sauegard of our liues? Are lambes the causes of the crueltie of wolues? or were Christians the authors of the bloodie persecutions of heathen Emperors? all these bigge wordes therefore are nothing else, but arguments of the Noddies distracted mind, and furious hatred against truth, that exclameth and crieth out vpon religion, and imputeth al calamities vnto it, whereas in truth all the cause of this wracke and destruction both of states and priuate families, proceeded wholy from want of conscience, and hatred of true religion. For if wee will looke backe, and search the histories of our times, wee shall finde, that all those tragicall stirres, and hurly-burlies, that haue brought not onely millions of christians, but also a great part of Christendome to destruction, haue taken their beginning from the implacable hatred of popes and papists against Christian religion. Paule the third enflamed the warres against the princes of Germanie, which consumed a great part of that countrey: himselfe sent thither great forces, both of horse and foote, fearing not a little, least Charles the fift should make any composition with the Germans.
In the low Countries the people liued in peace and obedience to their gouernours, vntill such time as the popish faction, fearing the ruine of their Babylon, beganne not onely to make cruell edicts and decrees against the professors of true religion, but also by force of armes sought to establish both the Spanish inquisition, and an absolute tyrannie.
Vita de Pio. quinto.Pius the fift, when the kings of France and Spaine
 grew wery of troubles, sent his messengers to negotiate with king Philip, and the Cardinall of Alexandria, to set forward the French king against his subiects. He sent also money and soldiers to aide the king, to destroy his subiects.
In king Henrie the eightes daies, Paul the third; in this Queenes daies, Pius the fift, and Gregorie the thirteenth, and other popesSanders de Schism. stirred vp diuers rebellions in England and Ireland against lawfull princes.
By the solicitation of the popes agents, many thousands of innocent people were massacred in France, contrarie to faith, and promise. These therefore are the murderers, and massacrers of Gods saints: these are they which haue occasioned the ruine of diuers noble houses and personages. In England the erles of Westmerland and Northumberland harkening to the seditious motions of the pope ruined themselues, and their houses. By the same occasion the house of Desmond, and other houses in Ireland were ouerthrowne. Why the ruine of these houses and men should be imputed to religion, there is not any colour. In Scotland the houses and linages of the Hamiltons, Douglasses, and Stuardes do yet stand, and if any of these houses haue runne headlong into their owne destruction, it is no fault of ours.
The Queene Douager of Scotland, that was sister to the Duke of Guise died of sicknesse. How the last Queene came to her end, I report me to publike actes and histories. Her husband was not slaine by men of our side, but of theirs: not for matter of religion, but for other causes. Our aduersary therefore dealeth absurdly and like himselfe, that imputeth the faults of Popish religion, that teacheth murder of christians, deposing of princes, subuersion of states and kingdomes, and all manner of perfidious and cruell dealing, to vs. But suppose some error had beene committed in France, and the lowe countries, why is the same mentioned here, where we dispute about matters in England? can he not content himselfe to vtter vntruthes, but he must also speake impertinently, and so far from the purpose?
To amend the matter, he deuideth all blessings into spirituall and temporall, and denyeth that by change of religion we haue receiued either the one, or the other. For before this alteration, saith he, one God was adored not onely in England,
 but also throughout all Christendome, and after one manner. He saith further, That there was one faith, one beleefe, one forme of seruice, one number of sacraments, one tongue in celebration, one sacrifice, one head of the church, one obedience, one iudgement, in time past; and that now all is altered, the people of England being diuided not onely from the rest of catholikes, but also from Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists abroad, and among themselues at home. But dealing with an aduersarie, and in matter so controuersious, if hee had beene wise, hee woulde haue brought either better proofes, or more modestie. To lie notoriously, must needes worke discredite to his cause. First most vntrue it is, that before this alteration one God was worshipped throughout all Christendome, and after one manner. For to speake truely, the most part of those, that called themselues Christians, liued without all knowledge of God, or of Christ Iesus, hauing nothing of Christianitie, but the very name, and the outwarde Sacrament of Baptisme. The rest, some fewe onely excepted, whom God enlightened with more knowledge, for God, worshipped angels, and saints, and the blessed virgine. Nay they worshipped crosses, and crucifixes with diuine worship, and fell down before stockes and stones, and rotten reliques; some worshipped the pope as God, and by him hoped to haue plenarie indulgence of their sinnes. Their manner of worship was so diuers, that euery parish almost had their peculiar saintes, seruices, festiuall daies and ceremonies.
Secondly ridiculously hee doth distinguish faith from beleefe, and most vntruely surmiseth, That there was in time past but one faith and beleefe, and that euery Christian held that faith. For in some ages before Luthers time the common people knew not what to beleeue, nor vnderstood any one article of the faith. And as for the doctors of schooles, they differed in infinite points one from another, and all of them from the Greeke churches, but especially from the true faith of Christendome taught by Christ and his apostles.
Thirdly it is a palpable vntruth, to say, That before this alteration there was one forme of seruice, one number of Sacraments, one toong, one sacrifice, one head of the church throughout all Christendome: wherein so many vaine vntruthes are conteined, that it is not possible to vtter them redilie




 with one toong. For not onely the Greeke liturgie doth much differ from the Latin, but also the Latin liturgies doe much differ from themselues, and were so full of abuses, that the Councell of Trent abolishing a number of old missals and portuises, was constrained to make new, and yet all naught, being nothing like the liturgies of the apostolike church described by Iustin martyr, Dionyse of Athens, and diuers other fathers. For those of S. Iames, S. Basill and Chrysostome are plainly counterfeited.
The number of 7. sacrame^ts was not certainly established nor receiued before the late councell of Trent. In theC. firmiter. de sum. trin. and side cath. Councell of Lateran vnder pope Innocent there is mention made onely of two Sacraments, which we reteine. In no ancient father, that treateth of Sacraments can this number of seuen be found. The apostles deliuered vs but onely two Sacraments, that is of Baptisme and the Lords supper.
In ancient time it was neuer thought vnlawfull to celebrate diuine seruice in any toong vnderstoode of the people. The Greekes euen to this day reteine the Greeke toong. The1. Cor. 14. apostle doth directly condemne toongs vsed in diuine praiers or praises, if they be not vnderstood of the people.
The popish sacrifice of the masse, and all that abomination was not knowne of the ancient fathers, nor instituted by Christ. Then all Christians did communicate, and receiue both kindes, and were otherwise taught, then now they are. The Greeke churches also much differ from the church of Rome: and diuers formes of sacrifices haue beene vsed in this church, vntil of late the Councell of Trent went about to establish an vniformitie, or rather difformitie of religion.
Finally as the popes headship is now denied of the easterne churches, and so was for many ages; so was the ancient church vtterly ignorant of the matter. If this Noddy will persist in his error, and mainteine the contrarie; let him shew, if he can, that in ancient time the bishops of Rome made lawes to binde the whole church, and were supreme iudges, and not iudged of others, and made bishops throughout the world, and had that authoritie to dispense, and pardon which now the pope craueth.
Fourthly where he saith, Wee are diuided not onely from the generall body of catholikes in Christendome, but
 also from our selues: hee telleth vs his owne dreames and fancies fleeting in his idle braine without any grounde of truth. First it shall not bee prooued, that we haue diuided our selues from the catholike church, or any catholike societie. Nay wee offer to prooue, that the papists haue by their nouelties and heresies deuided themselues from the catholike church; and say, that therefore wee haue left them, that wee may returne to the ancient apostolike and catholike church, and catholike faith of Christ. Secondly the churches of Zuizzerland, Germanie, France and England do neither holde of Zuinglius, Caluin, nor Luther, nor pope of Rome, as do the blind papists, but of Christ Iesus, and of the apostles, and prophets. Neither do they disagree among themselues. Nay the contention betweene Caluin and Luther is not so great, but that popish doctors haue greater. As for our selues, all of vs professe the doctrine of Christ Iesus according to that rule, that was established by common consent of the church of England: from which if any digresse, he is no more to be accounted of our societie then the papists, that are of the popes retinue.
Lastly where he calleth our religion, Parliament religion, hee speaketh like himselfe, that is, falsely and slanderously. For albeit the same be receiued by authoritie of the prince and state, yet is it Christs religion, and not the princes.
TheL^unctos. Cod. de summ. Trin. and sid. Cath. emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, decreed, That all people of their gouernment should hold the doctrine of Peter the apostle, taught by Damasus bishop of Rome, and Peter bishop of Alexandria, and that they should beleeue one God, and three persons: and yet, I hope this Noddie will not call the faith of the Trinitie, An imperiall faith. And thus much in answere of his obiection of parliame^t faith, and of supposed diuisions amongst vs. But if hee had considered, how that all the authoritie of their Romish faith, as it differeth from ours, standeth vpon the authoritie of late popes, and of the late conuenticle of Trent, and that both the grounds and positions of it, are either nouelties, or old condemned heresies, and was in Queene Maries times established more by parliament, then by authoritie of the apostles, and how many and diuers sectes they haue among their monkes and friers, andAbout the matter of the sacrament of the Lords supper they haue not so few, as 200. diuers opinions. diuers opinions among their schoolemen, and how their late writers dissent both from fathers, and schoolemen, and
 among themselues; I thinke hee woulde haue spared either to haue obiected vnto vs our dissensions, or to haue talked of the authoritie of our religion.
To discredite the report of spirituall blessings bestowed on vs, heP. 5.6. saith further, That before this change, we beleeued the catholike faith of Christendome deliuered by the vniuersal church, and grounded vpon that rocke, that cannot faile, and now beleeue onely either other mens opinio^s, or our owne fancies, which choice is properly called heresie: and heere hee thinketh to haue argued like a great doctor. But first as his doctrine is strange, so his stile is new and fantasticall. For although hee sweate hard in seeking, yet shall hee not finde, that any one doctor saith, That the vniuersall church doth deliuer to euerie priuate man the catholike faith: for as schoolemen might teach him, Actiones sunt suppositorum: and it is not the whole kind, but some one, or other that doth this, or that action. Secondly most vntrue it is, That either poperie is the catholike faith of Christendome, or that the apostles, or their catholike successors taught those errors of poperie, which wee condemne.
Thirdly he doth vs wrong where he saith, That our doctrine is diuers from the catholike faith of Christendome. For whatsoeuer Christ or his apostles taught, or is deliuered in the confessions of faith or creedes generally receiued of Christs Catholike church, that wee beleeue and receiue, refusing no point of catholike doctrine: and all priuate fancies, opinions, and heresies, whether of popes, or other heretikes, and false teachers, we renounce, condemne, and anathematize.
Heereof it followeth, that the doctrine and faith of the church of England is most catholike and certaine, being grounded vpon the apostles, and prophets, Christ Iesus being the corner stone; which is a firme rocke against which the gates of hell cannot preuaile. Grounded it is, I say, vpon the writings of the apostles and prophets, endited by Gods holie spirite, and thereunto not onely Councels and fathers, but also the aduersaries themselues, for the most part, giue testimonie. But the blinde papists haue deuised and receiued both new grounds, of their religion, and new doctrine, which standeth onely vpon the authoritie of this pope, and that pope, whose fancie and opinion is all the certeintie they haue.
 This is that rocke, or rather banke of sand, whereon the miserable papists faith is built. For what the pope determineth, that they hold to be the determination of the vniuersal church. vpon his credite they receiue the scriptures. Nay without his determinationStapletonde author eccles. they denie the scriptures to be authenticall.Princip. doct. lib. 9. c. 12. Stapleton teacheth, that the church (that is, the pope) at all times hath power to approue and taxe and consigne the bookes of holy scriptures. In another place heIbidem lib. 11. c. 4. holdeth, that vniuersall tradition is the most certaine interpreter of scriptures. Generallie they hold, that the pope is supreme iudge in all controuersies of faith and manners, and that he is the iudge that cannot erre. Hereof that followeth, which this noddie obiecteth to vs, That the faith of papists is built vpon the popes fancie and opinion; which altering from time to time, the faith of the Romish church, is variable like the moone, and vnstable as the sea. Trusting to the popes determination from the Angelickes, they haue receiued the worship of angels; from the Collyridians, the worship of the holy virgin Marie; from the Carpocratians, and Simon Magus, and their disciples, the worship of images; from the Manichees and other heretikes, prohibition of meates, and dislike of mariage of priests; and from other heretikes, other damnable opinions. So that their faith is not the catholike faith of Christendome, but meere heresie grounded vpon the fancie and opinion of most wicked and vnlearned popes.
ButP. 6. saith this Noddie, Why should you beleeue more your owne opinions, then Caluin concerning the Queenes supremacie, Luther concerning the reall presence, and Beza in the church gouernment? I answere first, that these mens priuate opinions concerne not fundamentall points of faith. And therefore that they are not to bee brought foorth for instance in this cause, where we talke of the foundations, and reasons of Christian faith. Secondly I deny that Caluin did deny the Queenes supremacie in ecclesiasticall matters, as we hold it. For neither did he subiect princes to popes or priests in matter of their royall gouernment, nor did hee denie princes power to establish ecclesiasticall lawes, nor to command for Gods truth, or to prouide for the setting foorth of true religion, or redressing of disorders in churches or priests; which are the principall points of supreme gouernment of princes in their
 realmes and dominions. Neither do I thinke, that any ancient father of the church did euer denie this power to princes. Sure I am, that many haue allowed it. The reason why Caluin did once mislike the title of king Henry the eight, was because hee was perswaded, that hee had challenged all that power, which the pope arrogateth to himselfe, as head of the church: wherein after that he was better informed, he changed his stile, and retracted his opinion. Thirdly I say we suspend our opinion, and giue no approbation to Luthers opinion concerning the carnall presence of Christs body in the Sacrament, for that we see that doctrine to be new, and not taught by the apostolike church. Nay we finde it to be repugnant to the apostles doctrine deliuered in Scriptures, to the doctrine of the ancient catholike church, and to the analogie of faith. Lastly I say, that in external gouernment it is not necessarie, that all churches should concur and agree, seeing not onely the east churches differed from the west, but the western churches also from themselues. The churches of Afrike had diuers customes differing fro^ the churches of Italy, andI ib^d. sa (...). Ambrose in his church at Milan thought it not necessary in al things to follow the church of Rome. Further I say, that it is not to be doubted, but that it is better in matter of externall gouernment, to folow the consent of antiquitie, and succeeding ages, rather then any mans priuate humour and opinion: and therefore I doubt not, but our cause is better, and our grounde more certaine, which in searching out the doctrine of Christian faith, do build our selues vpon Christ and his apostles, and vpon holy Scriptures, approoued by consent of times, descent of holy fathers and bishops, testimony of the most ancient church, which all appeereth in ancient symboles of faith, then that of the papists, which in doubts and controuersies runne to this pope, or that pope, which for the most part is but a blocke or a sot, and a man ignorant, not onely in the controuersies, but often in the grounds, and principles of Christian religion. Now what assurance the papists can haue of their faith, that haue no ground, but in the determination of the pope, I report me euen to the papists themselues, that condemne priuate opinions, and singuler mens fancies, and in externall termes yeeld all, not to this man, or that man, but to the iudgement of Christ his vniuersall church.

Another spirituall blessing,P. 6. and 7. saith our aduersarie is, when good works follow faith, as meeknes, penance, mortification of the flesh, continencie, virginitie, fasting, praying, almes, voluntarie pouertie, renouncing of the world. And that mens sauage natures should be altered by Christs doctrine, he prooueth out of Isay the 11. where it is saide, That the woolfe shall dwell with the lambe, and the Pard lie with the goate. And the calfe, lyon, and sheepe abide togither. Lastly hee asketh Whether our doctrine hath wrought these effects of peace and meekenesse, of penance, and mortification, and the rest. I answer, that the doctrine of the Gospell hath wrought good effects in all true Christians. And that all such do good workes and liue according to their profession. And albeit euerie one do not so square their liues according to Gods law, as they should do, yet compare our people with the papists, nay with the priests and popes themselues, whom they call most holy; and I make no question, but they do farre excell them. In Queene Maries time this land flowed with bloud of innocents. Vpon her Maiesties entrance these cruell executions ceased. Such was her clemencie, that shee would not shed the blood of those woolues, that had shed the most innocent blood of many others. Nay albeit during the time of her sisters reigne shee had receiued many wrongs, yet did shee forget al. So rare was her clemencie, that euen strangers commend it. Tanta eius animi extitit moderatio, saithHistor. G^nuens. lib. 23. Peter Bizarus, atque inuata clementia, vt non immerito de illa dici possit, quod veteres de Seuero Alexandro Mammea matre genito posteris tradidere; nempe anaematon, hoc est, citra sanguinem gessisse imperium, cum suapte natura semper a caedibus and crudelitate abhorrens nunquam adduci potuerit, vt aliquem nisi publico iudicio damnatum, ad supplicium rapi pateretur. Her people likewise did folow her steps, and neuer sought the blood of papists, though the world knoweth, they seeke ours. In France and Flanders our side neuer tooke armes, but in defence of their liues against those, that sought to murder them. In our victories likewise great clemencie hath beene vsed. The king of Nauarre now king of France was euer admired for his great clemencie. The English entring perforce into Caliz, and other places shewed great moderation in their victorie. In diuers places where religion is professed, adulterie is punished
 with death, fornication with corporall punishments, other vnnaturall filthinesse is not named. No where are stewes accompted lawfull. Neither do we accompt any man a true professor, that doth not moderate his affections, and absteine from swearing, drunkennesse, pride; and deale mercifully with the poore, and conscionably with all. If any man do otherwise, he may liue among vs, but he is not of vs.
But the whoorish synagogue of Rome she is redde with the blood of saintes. No tigre was euer more fierce or cruell. This farre surpasseth the bloody city, whereof the prophetNahum. 3. speaketh. the gouernours of this synagogue like wolues haue deuoured the lambes of Christ, and not spared his flocke. they imprison the true professors, they spoile them, torment them, and kill them. Innocent the third caused many thousands to be slaine in France. Iohn the two and twentieth didIo. Villan. hist. fiorent. 11. persecute the poore Christians of Armenia, and hired the Saracens to war vpon them, and all, because they would not acknowledge his authoritie. Martin the fift and his successors with fire and sword sought to ruinate the Bohemians, onely for seeking reformation of abuses, and redresse for the cruell execution of Iohn Husse murdred at Constance, contrarie to the emperors safe conduct. To forbeare to speake of former times, the world knoweth, that the warres of Germanie against the protestants, as they are called, were stirred vp by Paul the third and prosecuted with great rigour. By the instigation of bloody priestes of the Romish synagogue the innocent christians of Cabriers, Merindole and the villages neere adioyning were most cruellie slaine without respect of age, sexe, or qualitie. These be the wolues, that in the time of Queene Mary made such hauock of Christs flocke in England: that haue caused millions of christians in France, Flanders, and other places to be slaughtered.Lib. hist. 24. Natalis a popish writer saith that threescore thousand were murdred in the massacre of France anno 1572. Cum amirante saith he, Lutetiae Parisiorum, and in omnibus prope Gallicis ciuitatibus caesa fuisse dicuntur plura sexaginta millibus hominum factionis Vgonoticae, nouae religionis. And therefore he doubteth not to cal this execution Cruell and bitter. The numbers of those that haue beene secretly murdred by the bloodie Inquisitors in Rome, Italie, Spaine, is exceeding great, the crueltie of the persecutors strange, the patience
 of saints admirable. Neither doe they onely practise crueltie against such, as they accompt heretikes, but also against men of their owne religion.Theodor. a Niem. de schism. lib. 6. c. 36. and Plantina. Innocent the seuenth caused the principall Romaines to bee murdered, that seemed studious to defende their libertie. Vrbane the sixt tormented and killed diuers of his owne Cardinals.Platina. Iohn the 22. drew off the skin of the bishop of Cahors being aliue.Idem. Paul the second by diuers torments vexed diuers learned and good men for small causes. Alexander the sixt For euerie light word against him put men to death, as saithIn Alexandro. 6. Onuphrius. His base sonne Caesar Borgia passed all tyrants of former ages in crueltie.De asse. Budaeus called Iulius the second for his crueltie, Sanguinarium cleri magistrum. Leo the tenth, among whose praises aposted flatterers accompted clemencie the cheefe, committed many cruell executions. The cruell murders of Paul the third, and succeeding popes are innumerable. Bartholomew de las casas in his relation to king Philip the second concerning the state of the Indies, calleth the Spaniards Tigres, lupos and leones crudelisimos, and sheweth that through their extreme crueltie the people of Hispaniola from three millions were reduced to 300. Omne ius, saithIn prologo. he, ludibrio habentes effusi humani sanguinis stillantibus riuis delectantur.
Neither haue the papists more cause to bragge of their virginitie and chastitie, then of their gentle conditions and clemencie. Their priests forsweare mariage, but few obserue the lawes of chastitie. Sacerdotes fornicationibus coinquinantur,C. 23. saith he that wrote Onus ecclesiae, curati sordescunt in co^cubinatu.Lect. 182. in lib. sap. William Holcot therefore calleth them Priapus his priests and priests of Dagon. Petrus de Alliaco confesseth in his treatise of reformatio^, That the whole order of the popish clergie is corrupted with luxuriousnes and other vices, to the great scandale of the people. Long it were to recount all their abominations, not onely now publikely knowne, but also whilome testified to the worlde by Picus Mirandula, Baptista of Mantua, Palingenius and diuers others. Boccace testifieth, that in the most holy citie of RomeNouell. 2. From the greatest to the least, they offended in luxuriousnes, and that not onely naturall, but also against nature: which testimonie for very shame they haue of late corrupted, and razed. The popes that should bee examples of holinesse, being termed Holy fathers, are more
 defiled then the rest of that synagogue with all carnall beastlinesse. Themselues in their stories do not dissemble the filthie liues of Iohn the 12. Clement the 5. Iohn the 22. and 23. Sixtus the fourth, Alexander the sixt, Iulius the second and third, Leo the tenth, Paule the third, and diuers others. Neither is it to bee doubted, but that the rest were like to these. Iohn the eight being a woman plaied the whoore in the papacie, to declare, that the synagogue of Rome is the whoore of Babylon.
The monasteries of women are little better then common stewes.C. 2^. Veneris prostibulo, saith the authour of Onus ecclesiae, sunt similiora, quam dei sacrario. Virginum septa in meretricios fornices and obscaena latibula conuersa sunt, as saith PicusIn orat. ad L^on. 10. Mirandula. Palingenius of monkes saith,In leone. they are Raptores, moechi, puerorum corruptores. Petrus deDe reformat. eccles. Alliaco complaineth of their beastly manners. And this experience teacheth to be most true. Publikely in Rome, and other cities of the popes communion, there are publike bordels. Yea and popish priests as saithDe arte lenon Agrippa, are woont to set out three or fower women to hire, for encrease of their reuenues.
Is it not maruell then, that these fellowes are not ashamed to talke of mortification of the flesh, penance and continency, when they wallow in such filthinesse, and commit such abominations, as with modestie may not be named?
The papists also praie, and do almesdeeds: but sure they haue no reason to proclaime them. For vnder colour of their praiers, the monkes and friers deuour the houses of widowes and orphanes. Nay simple people praie they know not what, and call vpon mortall men, that cannot helpe; and before stockes and stones, that cannot heare. Besides that, their almesdeedes being bestowed vpon monks and friers, that liue in all licentiousnesse and voluptuousnesse, and are now become the onely practisers either to ouerthrow princes and their states, or else to bring them in slauerie of Antichrist, are woorthie no reward.
Neither do papists either keepe better houses, or take lesse fines, or vse lesse swearing and forswearing, then other men. For with vs most of them breake vp houses, and binde their tenants to as great inconueniences, as any men. Now of their othes to their princes and others, they cannot make any
 great reckoning, when they are taught, that othes to princes binde no longer, then it pleaseth the pope; and in so manie places haue rebelled against their lawfull magistrates.
The Noddy hee braggeth also of marying poore mens daughters. But yet is not able to tell of so many maried, as dishonested by popish priests, and papists. Now if he please to name the one, he shall heare the names of the other.
Most absurdly also doth hee take on him to talke of penance, mortification of the flesh and fasting, when popish penance is nothing, but externall punishment consisting for the most part in lashing of the bodie, and other workes either veluntarilie performed, or by the priest enioined. Neither is their mortification of the flesh any thing, but hard lying, going, as they call it, woolward, wearing haire-cloth, and such like afflictions of the body. Fasting likewise with them is nothing but eating of fish. But such penance, such mortification, such fasting is no where enioined. Besides that, Christ no where commandeth any to forsweare mariage, or to keepe themselues virgins, but such as haue the gift thereof. Neither doth hee command any to giue away his goods, and creepe into a monasterie. Nor may wee thinke, that they renounce the world, or embrace pouertie, that as the Iesuits, and other friers do liue in goodly palaces, and haue all things which they wanted before in great abundance. If this were the way to heauen, the way thither were verie plaine and large, and most pleasant and easie.
Wherefore if wee may iudge those to be blessed of God, that liue according to true religion; and those vnhappie, whose actions are fierce and cruell, whose liues are filthy and abominable, and farre disagreeing from the truth of Christian pietie: then wee haue reason to lament the damnable estate of papists; and to reioice, that God hath giuen vs better grace, then to follow them in their filthinesse, sauage cruelties, and notorious impieties. Our aduersarie saith He hath touched before the bloody tragedies raised in France, Flanders, Scotland, and might adde Swizzerland and Germany, where aboue a hundred thousand were slaine in one yeere, in the rebellion of the countreymen against the lords about religion. But the more hee toucheth these matters, the more shame hee shall bring vpon himselfe, and the synagogue of Rome. For not
 any of our communion, but the cruell popes of Rome and their agentes haue caused these tragedies. They stirred vp the French King and Spaniard to make wars vpon their quiet subiects, that desired nothing but peace. Nay when a solemne peace was concluded, they made that a trappe to catch a number of noble men, and others, to murder them. True christians haue still suffered: and yet this sauage companion imputeth vnto them the tragicall murders committed by papistes. In Scotland the people neuer stirred before their liues were sought: the insurrection of the rusticall people in Germany was forSleidan. greeuances offered them by their Lords, and not properly for religion. They were not of our religion but rose against lords as well of our religion, as papists; and by our side were both by word, and force suppressed. But the warres in Bohemia, and Germanie, and Swizzerland, were indeede raised by the popes and their agents, and all the worlde seeth that all their studie is to raise warres and tumults, and to trouble all Christendome. And yet Christian princes will not see; neither will Christian people beware of such vnchristian courses. As for the people of England, they are to shewe themselues thankfull, not onely for the restoring of true religion, but also for the fruite, that hath thereof ensued in all true religious Christians.
After his talke of spirituall blessings, hee passeth to speake of temporall benefits, and saith, that If her Maiestie, as she entred by generall consent, and was promoted by the forces of papists especially, and shewed herselfe in all points of religion and behauiour a papist, and was crowned at a masse, so had continued, then had shee and her realme beene most happy, and first shoulde haue had a most florishing kingdome vnited both to her, and among themselues in religion, iudgement, affection, fidelitie and friendship. But his tale consisteth of diuers foule leasinges, and his coniecture is vaine and improbable. For albeit shee entred with consent of all good men, yet it greeued the papists exceedingly, insomuch that shee could not get any one popish prelate to execute the ceremonie of consecration but onely one, and hee one of the meanest. The rest like traitors refused. Secondly it is false, that shee was promoted by force of papists. For what needed force, if all were willing shee shoulde bee crowned? and if the papists were
 vnwilling, it is not likely, they would vse force, vnlesse it was to force their owne wils.
Thirdly it is most false, that shee shewed herselfe in all points of religion and behauiour both in her sisters daies, and at her coronation a papist. For if shee had so done, why should the popish prelats feare any alteration, seeing shee gaue no signe of any, as this babling companion prateth? And why should they refuse to sacre her, if shee ment to obserue all popish ceremonies, vnlesse they doubted of her title? Lastly it is most false, that shee was crowned at a masse. For shee declared plainly, shee woulde no masse, which was a great occasion, why the popish bishops refused to consecrate her.
But were this true, yet his coniecture of happinesse, that would haue ensued of continuance of the masse, is most vaine and foolish. For albeit the French kinges Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third continued the masse, and all popish ceremonies; yet neither did the kingdome of France flourish in their times, nor were their subiectes eyther vnited to their princes, or at vnity among themselues. Likewise they of the Low countries haue long continued in great troubles and dissensions, and beene forced to defend their liues and liberties against the violence both of the king of Spaine himselfe, and of his agentes; albeit the king alwaies seemed a sworne seruant and vassall of the pope of Rome, and a firme papist. The Portugals also neither greatly affect the Spanish king, nor do well sort with the Castilians, or those that fauor them, and haue now lost their ancient glorie and libertie, albeit their princes haue still continued vassals to the pope. Why then, notwithstanding the continuance of popish religion, might not dissension as well haue hapned in England betwixt the prince and people, and among the people themselues? do we thinke, that our nation could still haue endured the vnsatiable crueltie of popish prelates? or is it likely, that a free people could haue endured the slauish yoke of the pope of Rome?
But bee it, that our countrey-men could haue swallowed all; yet must wee vnderstand, that the pope of Rome woulde neuer haue suffred her Maiestie to reigne, whom both Clement the seuenth had declared illegitimate, andSanders de schism. Paul the third pronounced vncapable of the crowne. This coniecture therefore
 of a flourishing kingdom, in case poperie had continued, is nothing, but a vaine flourish of a foolish discourser. And so much the rather may we thinke so, because no kingdome can florish without true religion: nor can they long agree among themselues, that haue no attonement with God, nor consent in true faith.
Secondly he imagineth, that great securitie woulde haue ensued of the co^tinuance of popish religion. For saith he, Then none of these feares and terrors of inuasions, conquests, treasons and conspiracies had euer come in consideration. But hee much mistaketh the knights meaning, if he do suppose, that hee either feareth the force of forreine enimies, or the secret practises of traitors. For hee feareth them not, but exhorteth his countrymen to prepare themselues to repulse the forreine enimie, that is so busie, and to watch, that they bee not intrapped by secret practises of pretended friends. True it is, that the rinegued and Hispaniolized English do by all meanes seeke to draw forreine enimies into the countrey, and to practise mischiefe at home; but hee is very blinde, that seeth not, that we are as well able to resist such attempts, as euer our ancestors were, and he is a bastardly and dastardly Englishman, that feareth to encounter the Spaniard in so good a cause, or is afraid of the Spanish brags. In the meane while it is woorth the marking, that this Noddy doth signify that either by force, or practise the papists meane to haue their will. And yet some men there bee, that will not see their malice, and thinke it needlesse to take any course to resist, and encounter their practises.
But suppose poperie had heere continued, how coulde this Noddy haue giuen vs warrant, that we shoulde haue beene neither oppugned by enimies abroad, nor by traitors at home? was not Henrie the third of France excommunicated by the pope, oppugned by his subiects, and murdred by a Dominican frier, notwithstanding his zeale in poperie and all his seruice done to the pope? Did not the Spaniard inuade Portugall, albeit the people were all of one religion? Nay he that casteth away gods true seruice, can neither be secured abroad, nor at home. Nor may we thinke that the pope woulde haue liked her Maiestie with any condition, vnlesse shee woulde haue receiued her crowne from him: which is a matter most dishonorable
 to imagine, and abominable to vtter.
P. 8. Thirdly he telleth vs that if her Maiestie had embraced poperie, Shee had been by all likelyhood maried, and mother of many faire, and prince like children. As though if shee had pleased, shee might not as well haue maried, continuing in true religion, as in any other religion: or as if none coulde haue faire and princely children, but women of their faction. He imagineth, that difference of religion hath hindred her mariage, but if he were as well acquainted with matters of state as he doth pretend, he might haue knowne, that diuers great princes of a diuers religion haue sought her, yea that the great monarke, whom he so highly extolleth would gladly haue matched with her, and promised to procure a dispensation to that purpose. Neither was religion any hinderance to the mariage of the present French kings sister. But suppose no papisticall prince woulde haue maried with her; yet might shee haue matched with kings and princes of true catholike religion, if so shee had thought conuenient. Againe, suppose shee had maried, was not Queene Marie also maried? yet was shee not mother of many faire and princely children. And the three last French kings died al not onely without faire children, but also without issue. This is then a meere toie and vaine fancie, to talke of children before mariage, seeing God doth often denie this blessing to diuers maried folkes, and often taketh awaie children, that are otherwise likely to liue.
Fourthly he supposeth, if her Maiestie had bene pleased to haue vpholden the masse, and to continue popish religion, and married, that then the succession of the crowne should haue beene established in her issue. But he should haue remembred that God saith by his1. Sam. 2. prophet, that he will honor them, that honour him, and despise them, that despise him. As for idolaters, and maintainers of strange religions, they shall not prosper. Beside this, who knoweth not, that the fruite of the womb is the blessing of the Lord: and that god doth often dispose of kingdomes according to his diuine will, and pleasure? Finally the pope that taketh on him to be Christes vicegerent would haue had a great stroke in this matter, especially if shee had acknowledged his vsurped authoritie. Neither is it likely he would haue allowed her, and her issue, whom diuers of his ancesters by their definitiue sentences had both shamefullie
 dishonoured, and iniuriously disabled. And to bring so great a prince to submit her selfe to so base a slaue, and of him to receiue her right to the crowne, were a matter dishonorable to her Maiestie and intollerable to the state, and a frierlike fancy not to be imagined of any, but of Parsons the Iesuite, and such like trayterous rinegued fugitiues.
But let vs suppose, that her Maiestie should leaue no issue behind her, is she the first, that hath beene in that case? and is there no remedy eyther by lawes already prouided, or by wise men to be deuised, but that we must needes fall by the eares together about this matter? This is the supposition of the noddy our aduersarie: and this garboyle percase he desireth, to gratifie the Infanta, and the Spaniard, whose slaue hee is: but our trust is in God, and in the resolution of honest men, that I hope, will prouide for the safetie of the state, and looke to preuent the malice of those, that are so desirous of our trouble.
Fiftly hee telleth vs of the popes excommunication denounced against her Maiestie, and maketh a great matter of it. And saith, That if religion had not beene changed, we shoulde haue had no breach with Rome, nor needed to haue feared this terrible thunderbolt of excommunication. But what more absurd, then to obiect the breach with Rome, and the popes exco^munication, when we esteeme that to be one of the greatest blessings that euer hapned to this lande, being thereby freed from the slauerie of Antichrist, and the darknesse of Egypt, and do no more feare the popes thunderbolt of excommunication, then a flash of light out of a lantern. Wee know what the pope is, and how little power he hath to excommunicate any Christian, being himselfe excommunicate, and vnwoorthy the name of a bishop. But to let passe all this which the Noddie our aduersarie passeth by, and shall neuer prooue; I say, that princes that continue in popish religion, haue notwithstanding felt the sharpenesse or bluntnesse of the popes boltes, I would say buls, and continued long in the popes displeasure. The ancient Germaine emperors Henry the fourth and fift, and the two Fridericks and diuers other that succeeded them, knew no religion, but that which the pope taught, which no doubt was a goodly religion; and yet hee thundred out his excommunications against them, and persecuted diuers of them to the death, yea and after death. Betwixt Lewis the 12. of France, which
 for his bountie was called The father of his countrey, and Iulius the second, there hapned a great breach, and out came excommunications against him, and against his followers; albeit about matters of religion there was no different betwixt them. No man was more superstitious in popish religion then Henrie the third of France; yet was he slaine by a Dominican, and excommunicated by the pope. The same may be confirmed by the late excommunication of D. Caesare da Este duke of Ferrara, and infinite examples. Suppose then the Queenes Maistie coulde haue liked of the sect of Antichrist, and his abominable religion; yet woulde he haue disliked and looked to haue had some finger in disposing of the crowne: so that all these supposals rest vpon weake groundes, which by no reason can well stand.
Sixtly hee saith, That if this breach with Rome had not hapned, then England had continued in her old ancient amitie with Spaine and Burgundie. As if it were not more hurtfull to the Spaniard to breake with vs, then for vs to breake with the Spaniard. Surely if her Maiestie woulde haue taken her aduantage either in the Low Countries, or in the Indies, and if the pensioners of Spaine had not beene more happie in breaking all enterprises against king Philip, then men of seruice incouraged to attempt them; hee shoulde well haue perceiued this to bee true long ere this. And therefore among diuers instructions, which the emperour Charles the fift left his sonne, this was one principall; That by no meanes hee should breake with England. But admit this were a matter dangerous, to fall out with Spaine, howe coulde wee haue auoided it by continuing in popish religion, seeing the Portugals, that are perfect papists coulde not by any mediation keepe their countrey from his vsurpation and tyrannie? Naie pope Paulus the fourth claiming somewhat, that the Spaniard was vnwilling to yeeld, coulde by no terror of excommunication hinderHistoria Adriani. king Philips armie, but it entred vpon the popes countrey, and prosecuted his holinesse with great rigour. So likewise in Iuliers and Italy the Spaniard hath iniambed vpon others right, notwithstanding consent in Religion.
Further hee doubteth not to affirme, That the warres and tumults in kingdomes rounde about vs haue principally proceeded
 from alteration of religion in England. Which is but a ridiculous conceite, and a vaine imagination. For when as yet England continued in popish superstition, the pope and his agents stirred vp Charles the fift to persecute the princes of Germanie, and Francis the first his officers to murder the poore inhabitants of Cabriers and Merindol. And when her Maiestie came to the crowne, all the worlde knoweth, that her studie was rather peace then warre, as her agents can yet testifie, that often mooued both the Spaniard to cease his warres in the Low Countries, and the French to desist to persecute his subiects, that except in matters of their conscience promised al obedience. Beside that it is a fond imaginato^ to thinke, that her Maiestie or her agents had that credite in other countries, that shee coulde make them take armes at her pleasure. No, no, the worlde is witnesse, that it is the pope, that is the firebrand of the warres throughout all Christendome. Hee stirred vp Charles the fift against the Germaines, as appeereth both by his letters, and negotiation with him, and by the aide hee sent to him against them. Hee enflamed the warres in France, and neuer woulde let matters settle, as appeereth by the negotiation of his legates, and by infinite testimonies. When as yet her Maiestie did not so much, as proceed against any papist for religion; then did Pius the fift that furious frier publish his shamelesse and railing bull against her, and sent Nicholas Morton to perswade the Earles of Westmerland and Northumberland, and their followers to rebell against her. And so hee declareth himselfe to be Antichrist, that shall cause all to bee slaine that will not admit his religion, and that is figured in the second beast, Apocal. 13.
This companion therefore that doth impute the cause of warres vnto vs, is like that good fellow, that saide the cause why hee robbed and spoiled, was because men carried money with them vpon the high way. Wee cannot hinder the malice and ambition of the pope and Spaniard, that prosecuteth warres against innocents. But they are to be blamed, that offer violence to the peaceable, and defende open wrong, and not they, that mainteine their right.
Lastly hee telleth vs, and that in a lamentable voice, That if this alteration had not hapned, wee had not seene the depriuation of all the sacred order of bishops in one day togither
 with their perpetuall imprisonment, nor so many noble houses ouerthrowne, nor so many troubled for persisting in their fathers faith, and not consenting to this change, nor the torturing, hanging, and quartering of a hundred priests, most of them gentlemen, and youthes of rare witte. Percase he is hired to shedde some few teares. Assuredly hee weepeth without iust cause. For neither were all the popish prelates depriued in one day, nor were they co^mitted to perpetuall imprisonment. Nor was any papist heere directly troubled for persisting in his fathers faith, nor haue any noble houses bin ouerthrowne by religion, but rather by rebellion. Neither were those simple and vnlearned youthes, whom the popes agents haue sent into England, to prepare the way to rebellion, hanged and quartered for religion, but for treason. Further we say for answer, that those prelates whom he talketh of, were no bishops nor teachers, but woluish murderers of Gods saints, and hirelings of Antichrist, whosemarke they bore: and yet diuers of them were suffred to runne away. Some of them were neuer imprisoned; others were onely restrained, and that either to their owne houses, or to places, where they had all things in abundance. Nay albeit they refused to consecrate her Maiestie, and denied her right; yet shee did not, as shee might lawfully, vse force against them. But if any shoulde denie to consecrate the pope, albeit no prince, yet shoulde it cost them their liues. Further the worlde knoweth, how much her Maiestie hath fauoured her nobilitie. Shee coulde not doe more honour to any, then to the duke of Norfolke. Yet coulde shee not mollifie his hart toward her. She neuer thought euill of the earle of Westmerland and Northumberland; yet did they seeke her destruction at the solicitation of a wicked priest called Nicholas Morton. Henrie Earle of Northumberland albeit farre engaged in practises of rebellion, yet was he suffred to enioy his honour and liuing. And diuers that were farre interessed in that action, were not called in questio^. If then any perished in those practises, the fault was wholy their owne. Her Maiestie was sorrowfull for their wilfulnesse, rather then cause of their ouerthrowe. As for wilfull Recusants they were not once called in question, before that the pope vsed their obstinacie, as a meanes to worke the ouerthrow of the state. And now notwithstanding they do adhere to the pope, her Maiesties
 enimie, and will not disauow his authoritie in depriuing her of her right, which is a matter of great consideration; yet all their punishment is onely a mulct for not comming to church; and restreint, that they doe not easily ioine with forraine enemies. They enioy their landes, their goods, and most of them too great libertie, albeit euill affected to the state, and wholy addicted to a most abominable and damnable religion. Our brethren in other places onely for professing the truth without other cause, loose not onely goods, landes, and country, but libertie and life also. Wherefore if they be wise, let them acknowledge, that they liue vnder a gratious Princesse; and see, that such leud proctors as this, leaue prating in their cause, least they heare that, which shall make them seeme vnworthy all fauour in all indifferent mens iudgment.
Against the poore yoong men, that haue died for their practising for the pope, I wil not say much. I do rather lament, that they should be so abused, as to be drawne out of their countrey to forreine enemies, and to be emploied in their seruice, either to their owne destruction, or to the hurt of their countrey: but most of all, that they shoulde, to the finall losse of their soules, yeeld themselues thrall to Antichrist, and embrace his damnable doctrine, and heresies. Onely thus much, being vrged by this Noddies importunitie, I could not choose but say in defence of our religion, and the present gouernment, that they were executed for treason and not for their heresies, or false doctrine. Which appeereth notoriously by their enditements, by the euidence, by the iudgement and manner of execution. That the sentence is most iust, it is euident both by the ancient lawes of this lande, and by the lawes of all nations. By the25. Ed. 3.2. statute of Edward the third, it is adiudged high treason, To imagine the death of the prince, or to stirre vp warre against her, or to be adhaerent to her enimies. But there is no one of these, but is adherent to the pope the publike enimie of her Maiestie and this state: all receiue authoritie and instructions from him, and sticke not to defend his authoritie. Most of them are his salaried schollers, or agents. Manie of them haue receiued stipends of the Spanish king, and some were emploied in his nauie anno 1588. and sent against England. All of them desired warres to be raised against England, and some of them were agents to enduce the Spaniard
 to make warre vpon vs. That the pope is enimie to her Maiestie and this lande, I thinke no man will make question, seeing he seeketh to depriue her of the crowne; raised the rebellion of the north, and in Ireland; and stirred vp the Spaniard to take armes against vs; and himselfe armed ships and soldiers to fight against vs, and sought in plaine termes to depose the prince, and as theyIn vita Pij 5. terme it, L' abbattimento di quella reina. That this is treason and a capitall crime by rules of state, and lawes of all nations, it is apparant by diuers arguments. Maiestatis crimen est, saithl. Proximam. ad l. Iul. Maiestatis. Vlpian, quod aduersus populum Rom. aut eius securitatem committitur. And hee pronounceth them guiltie, by whose procurement Either forreine enimies are stirred to take armes; or seditious persons caused to rise; or by whom any attempt is made against the prince: or that shalll. Lex vbi supra. runne to the enimies: or that shall sweare men to attempt against the prince, or state: or that shallL. quisquis Cod. ad l. Iul. Maiest. take on him a note of faction. The same lawes are also practised both in France and Spaine and other countries. Alfonso the 9. king of Spaine, in his first booke Del fuero real, tit 2. by strict lawes prouideth for the safetie of the prince. And most stra^ge it were, seeing lawes prouide for the securitie of particulars, that the law shoulde not take holde of those, that practise against the whole state. If then these yoong men had beene of such wit, and learning, and other good parts, as this fellow pretendeth; they woulde neuer haue suffred themselues to be drawne into a faction against their prince and countrie; and others heereafter, if they be wise, wil take heed, how they abuse the princes clemencie. In Ireland sufferance and impunitie of such fellowes hath wrought euill effects. He that is not blinde may also see, what they entend in England: and, if he be wise, will not suffer such vipers to gnaw their mothers bowels. So then it appeereth, that no great incommoditie, but rather great blessings haue hapned to this lande by the abolishing of poperie and superstition.
But suppose some temporall discommodities had ensued of this abolition of the masse, and of restoring of christian religion: yet most absurd it were for temporall commodities to forsake our christian profession. He that taketh not vp his crosse and followeth me, saith our sauiourMatt. 10. Christ, is not woorthy to be my disciple, and not onely externall temporall commodities,
 but our kindred and neerest bloud is to be forsaken for Christes sake. He that loueth father or mother more then me, is not woorthy of me,Ibidem. saith our sauiour.Daniel 3. Sidrac, Misach and Abednago chose rather to be throwne into the fierie furnace, then to worship an idoll. And shall we for any presupposed feares forsake our God, and his truth, and fall downe before idoles, and yeelde our selues slaues to Antichrist? a glorious thing it is to attaine wealth and honour in this world, and to be made generals and heads of societies of friers and monkes, and to be made cardinals: but what shall it auaile a man, to winne the whole world, if he loose his soule?
Whatsoeuer therefore may happen, let vs cleaue to the truth of Christ Iesus, and hold on our profession vnto the end. No man is crowned, but that striueth vntill he haue obtained victorie. If wee loose goods, landes, wife, children, father or mother or friend, God can restore them to vs againe. Nay if wee die in this quarrell, God can giue vnto vs a farre better life. Wherefore then should we doubt, or feare?
Suppose, I say, the woorst, yet haue we no cause to doubt. But if we will rightly consider the present state of things, we shall finde, that wee haue great cause to reioice, and hope the best. Our cause is iust and honest. For we stande for our religion, our prince, our countrey, our reputation, our wiues, our children, friends and whatsoeuer else is deere to vs. Neuer had this countrey more men, nor better meanes either to defend, or offend. The cause is not ours alone, but of manie others. The enimie neuer was weaker, then at this instant. Onely this wanteth, that we deale boldly and resolutely in so honest and godly a cause, and neither feare the vaine brags of forreine enimies, nor trust the smooth gloses of trecherous friers, popish priests, and rinegued English.
Now her Maiestie is surely possessed of the crowne, and so well beloued of her subiects, as shee can desire. Take away the practising priests, and malcontent traitors, and at home shee hath no cause of feare. In time past the popes of Rome had a strong faction within the land, and diuided halfe of the regall authoritie with the prince. The clergie and people, for the most part, were his vassals. The countrey paide a great tribute to him. The treasure of the lande was caried out at his pleasure. Many ranne to him both for preferments, and
 iustice. now all this vsurped power is abolished, and the people wholy dependeth next vnder God, on the prince: so that her authoritie and force now is farre greater, then in time past. Shee wanteth neither men, nor ships, nor ordinance, nor munitions of warre. If then her Maiestie would be pleased to make an establishment for the warres; and seriously to consider, how to resist these, that now seeke her hurt, and the destruction of her people; we shoulde soone cause such rinegued enimies of the countrey to change the note of their song concerning dangers and feares; and force forreine enimies to thinke more, howe to defende themselues, then to offende and offer violence to others. Such is the state of our countrey, and such are our meanes. Great cause therefore haue we, to giue God thanks, that hath bestowed vpon vs so many spirituall and temporall graces. And if we do not vse them to his glorie in exterminating the wicked reliques of Antichristianitie, and defending that truth, which we professe; we shall shew our selues vnwoorthie of both, and hazard that which now we quietly possesse.


CHAP. II. 

That the papists, as they are charged by sir Francis Hastings, do hold diuers absurd positions and principles in their religion.

TO recount and declare all the absurdities and heresies of the popish faction, woulde require both time and labour: they are so many, and so intricate. In number they passe the sande; they are (...), as saithI'iad. 1. Homer. And no maruell, seeing they are builte on the pope, which albeit he beSanders rocke. reputed as a rocke, yet is nothing but a banke of sande, whereon the papists haue wracked their faith. But of the rest, I shall haue time to speake heereafter. Now I will onely mention those, which sir Francis Hastings doth obiect, and which his
 aduersarie goeth about to remooue.
I say therefore, that it is most true, which he doth obiect, diz. That the papists hould ignorance to be the mother of deuotion. D. Cole a man of no obscure note among the papists in a certaine disputation at Westminster, did openly affirme it. I tell you saith he, ignorance is the mother of deuotion. neither is he singular in this point.Aduers. proleg. Brent. l. 2. f. 71. Hosius saith, that ignorance is not onely woorthy pardon, but reward also. The sameIbidem. l. 3. fol. 146. man also commendeth the Coliars faith, which vnderstanding nothing said, he beleeued as the catholicke church, and being further demaunded, what the church beleeued, said, as he beleeued: and so persisted in that circle. And in anotherConfess. Petricou. de fid. and symb. f. 17. place he affirmeth, that Nihil scire est omnia scire, and that it is sufficient for a man, to beleeue that which the catholicke church beleeueth, albeit he be not able to shew what it beleeueth. And that the synagogue of Rome holdeth this opinion, albeit not in plaine termes, it appeareth by their practise. For they do not willingly suffer the scriptures to be translated into vulgar toongs, nor permit lay men to read them without licence, which is not easily obteined. Further their publike praiers and liturgies are all set foorth in vnknowne toonges. The people vnderstandeth neither what they pray, nor what they beleeue. The priests for the most part are blind, and so is the people; and so the blind is set to leade the blinde. Paule the second did so hate knowledge, that he pronounced them heretikes, which should once mention the word Academie. Paulus haereticos eos pronuntiauit, saithIn Paulo 2. Platina, qui nomen academiae vel serio, vel ioco deinceps commemorarent.
Likewise they hold, that princes are not to meddle with the externall gouernment of the church, nor to make lawes for the establishment of faith, and manners.Lib. 5. de pont. Rom. cap. 7. Bellarmine doth distinguish ecclesiastical gouernment, from ciuill gouernment; whereby it may appeere, that he woulde not haue the temporall magistrate to meddle with the church. And in another place he directlyLib. 1. de pont. Rom. c. 7. saith, That the gouernment of the church was committed to bishops and priests, and not to princes, and that princes ought not to determine a cause of the church.
Generally they all holde, that the prince is not to reforme abuses in doctrine, but the councell of priests: which is
 a position very absurd. For first wee see, that vnder the law kings reformed abuses, and established orders in the church, as appeareth by the example of Hezekiah, Iosia, Dauid, and others. Likewise among christians Constantine, Valentinian, Gratianus, Theodosius, and other princes did not onely reform abuses, and condemne heresies, butCod. de sum. Trin. and fide cath. and titulis sequentib. establish orders, and promulge the articles of christian faith. Nay some there are that thinke it a matter vndecent, and vnnecessary either to vnderstand or to argue of matters of religion. Charles the fift, as Meteranus in his story testifieth, commaunded, that no lay man should dispute of religion; and many were executed for that cause onely. The Italians say, that it is matter for fryers to reason of religion. E cosa da frati, etc.
They hold and teach further, that the pope determining matters of faith is to be beleeued, vnder paine of damnation, and this is that, which Sir Francis meant, and which both Bellarmine, and all the popish crew writeth, and beleeueth. And yet we find, that he approoueth many damnable heresies, as that of the Angelickes, Collyridians, Staurolatrians, Manichees in ministring the communion vnder one kinde, the Pelagians in extolling the merits and force of works, and diuers others. Boniface the eight holdeth, that none can be saued, but such as be subiect to the pope. And BellarmineLib. 2. de Pontif. Rom. c. 12. co^cludeth, that it is a point of faith, to hold that the bishop of Rome hath succeeded Peter in the vniuersall regiment of the church. So that whatsoeuer he commandeth, that must bee beleeued. Neither may priuate men dispute of the popes power. For that, they say, is sacriledge, and no lesse, then To open a mans mouth against heauen. And yet his determinations wee finde to be hereticall, and his commandements wicked, and vnlawfull.
Lastly they teach, that the pope hath power to pardon all sinnes. And that is so true, that it cannot bee denied. For they giue him all Christes power in earth. And in the taxe of penances there is set downe a taxe for indulgences for all sinne, yea for Iudaisme, apostasie, Turcisme, Maranie, Paricide, Sodomie, and whatsoeuer heinous sinne else. And albeit the more learned distinguish betweene mortall and veniall sinne, betweene culpam and poenam; yet if ^he pope can forgiue all the punishment, then sure can he forgiue any sinne, and the
 rude papists vnderstand no such subtilties. If then sir Francis hath auouched any such matter against the papists, hee hath done them no wrong. Neither hath this Noddy any sufficient skill to shift off the matter. Much be braggeth and faceth; but what shoulde wee respect wordes, when we see no truth in his meaning?
To acknowledge Gods fauour towards vs in deliuering vs both out of the spirituall thraldome of Antichrist, and the temporall slauerie of strangers, and accumulating vpon the people of this land, diuers other both spirituall and temporall blessings, hee esteemeth to bee but flatterie and faire glosing: and to charge the papists with ignorance, and strange opinions, hee counteth no better then cogging and lying, mixing a number of wordes borrowed partly of cheating companions, with whom it should seeme hee hath much conuersed, and partly of railing sophisters, among whom hee hath long triumphed. But as I haue wiped away the accusation of flatterie, so I doubt not, but I shall easily answer this cogging mates brabling about lying and cogging.
Hee taketh in great scorne, that it shoulde bee saide, That a darke and mistie cloud of ignorance did couer the lande in Queene Maries time; and saith, That it was as wise and learned, as Italy or Spaine is at this day, where our teachers if they shoulde appeere, dare not open their mouthes in schooles, or matters of learning. And therefore at his pleasure hee calleth them Sunshine doctors, and inlightened, and sunne borne ministers. Finally hee telleth vs, That in Queenes Maries time there was as learned a clergie, as in many ages before, and that our bishops, which in contempt he calleth poore creatures, are no way comparable, to Tonstall, Watson, Christopherson, Fecnam, Gardiner, and White that then liued. But wherein he thinketh most gloriously to triumph, there hee sheweth most follie. For first admit these men, that hee nameth, were great doctors, yet it followeth not thereof, but that the people liued in great errour and blindnesse: which is a matter so apparant, that it cannot bee denied. For few could say their Pater noster and Beleefe, and of those that coulde by hart say them, not one among twentie vnderstoode them. Like parates they said, Credo in Deum, but vnderstoode not what they saide. They praied likewise, but vnderstoode not, what they praied. Nowe
 what auaileth it to pray with the lips, if the hart vnderstande nothing? Likewise they came to church, and heard Mattins, Euensong, and Masse in Latin. But what were English people, that vnderstoode no Latine, the better? They were likewise taught to praie not onely to angels, saints, and to our Ladie, but before stockes, and stones, little vnderstanding the schoole distinction of Doulia, and Latria, without which they coulde hardly auoide the crime of idolatrie. The preachers asCant. 29. Dante said Preached old wiues tales and legends, and scriptures were then not suffered to be read of the vulgar sort. How then was it possible, that this people should vnderstand any thing? Secondly wee do very well know, what kinde of men these were which the aduersarie nameth. Their writings are yet extant, and nothing singular. And when in the beginning of this Queenes daies they were chalenged to dispute, and felt their owne weakenesse, they vtterly refused. Procure vs the like libertie to dispute in Seuill, or Paris, or Milan, and see whether we wil refuse to dispute with these great Rabbines. Now wee confesse indeed, we are not open our mouthes in schooles in Spaine, and Italy. But the reason is, for that it is death to defend truth. But if we were no more afraid of their swords, then their arguments, they shoulde soone perceiue, that wee both durst, and woulde open our mouthes against the proudest of their Iesuits, and woulde either shut their mouthes, or make it appeere, that they crie and speake without reason. Wherefore let this lunaticall or extaticall frier either forbeare to bragge, or else procure vs libertie to dispute: and then hee shall see, how hee is vnable to match those, whom heere he reiecteth with scorne, gibing at their lawfull wiues and children, when he and his consorts, and all the rable of priests and friers walloweth in all filthinesse and abominations, making no conscience of whooredome, and publikely maintaining bardassaes and concubines, and a race of bastardes about them, and many of them dooing woorse: all which shall be iustified by particulars, if our aduersarie desire triall in this point. Lastly it is not the learning of fiue or sixe, that can make all the rest of the clergie seeme learned. It may bee, these fewe were tolerablie learned. But certes the ignorance of the other masse priestes was exceeding great. Now in Spaine and Italie not euery tenth man vnderstandeth his Portuis or Missal,
 and in matter of religion little or nothing. Wherefore if the pastor be so ignorant and blinde, it is no maruell though the people be farre more blinde, rude and ignorant.
He telleth vs, That it is no haeresie, nor neuer was so accompted, to read on the Bible in any language whatsoeuer. And yeeldeth this reason, For that by licence of the ordinarie it is permitted to infinite lay people to read Scriptures in vulgar tongues. Secondly hee saith, That none was euer called for this fault onely before the Romish clergie, and branded to the slaughter. And because sir Francis Hastings doth holde the contrarie, hee doth giue him the lie, and with very braue wordes make shew, as if hee woulde challenge him into the field, facing and brauing like a false shamelesse frier. But when it co^meth to the point, hee passeth ouer the matter with a fewe railing wordes, shewing himselfe a cowardly challenger, that hauing giuen the lie, runneth out of the field without daring to abide other triall, then by the toong. In which also I doubt not, but to giue him the foile. For the first is very euidently disprooued by diuers examinatio^s in king Henrie the eight, and Queene Maries daies; where it was obiected to lay men, that they read the Scriptures in English: which should not haue beene done, vnlesse by that article they should haue beene conuinced of heresie. The second is likewise disprooued by diuers precedents and records, whereby it appeereth, that poore people were both called, and condemned for reading of the Scriptures. In the beginning of king Henrie the eight his reigne, certaine were condemned for reading the Epistles of saint Paul in English, as appeereth by the registers of Lincolne diocesse: and bishop Longland preaching at their burning, saide That they were damned that mooued their lippes in reading those chapters of Scripture, for which those martyrs were condemned. Diuers were abiured for reading scriptures. One of them was burned with a bible in English about his necke, to declare the cause of his burning. Both those points are also prooued by the prouinciall constitutionConst. pro. c. praeterea. de haeretic. of Thomas Arundell. Statuimus, saith he, vt nemo textum aliquem sacrae Scripturae authoritate sua in linguam Anglicanam, seualiam transferat, nec legatur aliquis huiusmodi liber, etc. vel publice vel occulte sub poena maioris excommunicationis. qui vero contra hoc fecerit, vt fautor haeresis, and erroris similiter puniatur. So it appeereth, it
 was vnlawfull to read scriptures in vulgar toongs, and that such readers were punished as heretikes, or suspect of heresie: and that the challenger our aduersary lieth notoriously in both these points. Further hee maketh a third lie, where he saith, that Infinite lay people are by the ordinarie permitted to read the Scriptures translated into vulgar toongs. For in all Spaine I beleeue hee cannot name three that haue this permission, and very vnlike it is, they meane that the people shall read Scriptures translated, when they will not translate them themselues, and forbid all other translations, but their owne. Besides this, who dare desire leaue to read Scriptures translated, when it is a note of heresie with them to desire such a matter?
But least we shoulde mistake this cholericke gentlemans meaning, that is so readie to giue the lie, and the stab for euery worde, let vs heare him declare his meaning concerning reading of translations of Scriptures in his owne termes. First saith he, most certaine it is, that no man or woman was euer forbidden to read any part of the holy scriptures in any of the three learned languages, wherein they were written, to wit, Hebrew, Greeke or Latin. Secondly hee declareth vnto vs, That the restreint of vulgar translations was made onely to this end, that no translations shoulde be vsed, except it were first examined by learned men, by order of the bishop and ordinanarie: and then he saith, That such lay men were permitted by the ordinary to vse the saide translation, as were thought fit and able to profite by it. And this hee beareth vs in hande to bee the ordinance of the catholike church. But first hee shoulde haue done well to haue shewed vs, what catholike church did so ordeine. For if hee meane the conuenticle of Trent, hee is an absurd fellow to thinke that scum and sinke of priestes and friers, which there gathered a councell against Christ and against his church, to betray the same to Antichrist, to be the catholike church. Beside that, their determinations were not onely contrarie to Christs doctrine, but to the authoritie and practise of the church, and namely in this, that they limited the reading of Scriptures in vulgar toongs.
Secondly it is most ridiculous to permit lay men or women to read the Bible in Hebrew, Greeke or Latin, when so few of them among the papists vnderstand those toongs, and
 this permission is nothing, but an excluding of vulgar translations, and barring the people from reading scriptures.
Thirdly it is great ignorance to say, the scriptures were first written in Latin, and vnreasonable to permit the Latin vulgar translation more then others; and ridiculous, to call these three toonges learned, seeing in times past vnlearned men vnderstood them, and now diuers learned do not well vnderstand them. Neither is it materiall, that some hold, that Saint Markes gospell was written first in Latine. For their proofes are weake, and that is but one part of scripture. But here wee talke of reading all the scriptures.
Fourthly it is most plaine, while they allow no translations, but such as themselues make, and either seldome make any, or making any do most shamefully corrupt the text, as the Rhemistes haue done in the translation of the new testament, the Iesuites in their translation of the bible into French, and lately printed at Lyons; that they seeke either to exclude the people from reading scriptures, or else to giue them poison for Scripture. That is apparant, for that hitherto they haue not translated the Bible into Italian, Spanish, or Dutch: nor greatly allow the French. This is most euident by the wicked peruersion of the text, and that both by wrong translations, and also by peruerse annotations, as shal be shewed fully, if God send me life, and in the Rhemish Testament hath beene already shewed by doctor Fulke.
To prooue that the order of the Romish church in prohibiting reading of vulgar translations is good, hee alleageth further, that forasmuch as many translations are false, it is fit to examine them, Least for Gods word the simple might embrace mans worde. Againe hee saith, That albeit the translation bee true, yet vnlesse the reader can gather out of it a true sense, it is not fit hee shoulde be permitted to read that translation of Scripture. And this hee beleeueth to bee meant by saint2. Cor. 3. Paul, who saith, That the letter killeth, and the spirite quickneth. But if translations bee false, why are not some true translations published, that the vulgar sort may haue benefit by them? Againe, if onely translations for their falshood bee condemned, why doth the wicked synagogue of RomeIn indice. libror. prohib. condemne most true translations? Do they not shew, that they hate the light of the Scriptures? Thirdly if none may read vulgar translations,
 but such as are able to drawe true sense out of them; why are all suffred to read the Latin being not able to drawe true sence out of it? This assuredly is a course to debarre all men from reading of Scriptures, and the Romish synagogue especially, for that the same draweth most peruerse interpretations out of Scripture, and vnder the name of wholesome Scriptures giueth to the people most poisoned doctrine contrarie to Scriptures. Besides it is a course contrarie to the exhortation of our Sauiour, that speaking to the people saide; Scrutamini Scripturas; and contrarie to antiquitie, that exhorted the people to read the Scriptures. Finally hee doth shamefully abuse the wordes of S. Paul. 2. Cor. 3. to the condemning of reading of Scriptures. For if because the letter killeth, the lay people are not to read the scriptures; then none is to read them, seeing reading and not vnderstanding killeth: which is most absurd. Secondly if the apostle did meane the outward letter without sence, yet woulde it make nothing against reading of Scriptures. For if the bare letter without the sense killeth, then ought euery man to read diligently, that he may vnderstand the sense. Thirdly this interpretation condemneth the practise of the papists in reading the Scriptures in an vnknowne toong in the church. For if the letter kill without the meaning, then do the papists kill Gods people, that read Scriptures in Latin to the people, which vnderstand nothing of the sense. Fourthly the apostle cannot probably by the letter that killeth vnderstand the scriptures, for then shoulde they bee verie vnprofitable, contrarie to the saying of the apostle that saith,2. Tim. 3. The Scripture is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct and instruct in righteousnesse. LastlyLi. 1. de verb. dei. c. 3. Bellarmine his companion may instruct him, that none but the Zuencfeldians, and Drigenistes, by the letter that killeth, vnderstand Scriptures, as this Noddie doth, shewing himselfe therein a plaine heretike, and enimie to Scriptures. The true meaning therefore of Paules wordes is, that the outward preaching of the worde, being destitute of Gods spirite working internally, doth kill: to the profite or disprofite of reading Scriptures, they make nothing.
He telleth vs further, That the vnderstanding of Scriptures is a particular gift of God reserued to Christ especially, and by him bestowed on the church: which he prooueth by this place;
 Tunc aperuit illis sensum, vt intelligerent Scripturas: and by the example of the Eunuch, That without Philip the apostles helpe could not vnderstand the prophecie of Isaie. Beside all this, hee telleth vs, That dim sighted people cannot discerne things without a guide. All which reasons do shewe, that notwithstanding his faire shewes, hee hath but a dimme sight in diuine matters, and is but a blinde guide, that woulde drawe Gods people from reading of Scriptures, and percase leade them to the reading of lying legends, and such like fantasticall writings of the Romish synagogue. Against the reading of holy Scriptures his fond reasons conclude nothing. For if Christ bee the best interpreter, where shoulde wee better vnderstand what his interpretations are, then in holy Scriptures? And if hee haue bestowed the gift of interpreting scriptures on the church, how shoulde the people be better assured of the excellencie of the churches interpretation, then by seeing the same confirmed by scriptures? For which cause the Bereans red the Scriptures, and are therefore commended.
Secondly if the men that went toLuc. 24. Emaus, and the EthiopianAct. 8. red the Scriptures, albeit they vnderstood them not at the first: why shoulde Christians bee barred from reading such scriptures, as they vnderstand? What more simple argument can be deuised, then this; because an interpreter is necessarie, that we may not read what hee interpreteth in a toong which we vnderstand?
Thirdly Philip that taught the eunuch was not the apostle Philip, as the Noddy our aduersary supposeth, shewing by example of himselfe, that scriptures are not much to be red; but Philip the deacon. Lastly it is a matter most ridiculous, because some places are hard to be vnderstood, to debarre the people from the whole body of scriptures, especially seeing many thinges are plaine and easie. Nay this reason may better be retorted vpon our aduersary; because diuers places are hard to be vnderstood, that wee should diligently read them, and heare them expounded, that we may both by these, and other places reape profit. And thus it may appeere, that euen simple women, whome this scoffing mate calleth proud protestant people, and scorneth at them for reading holy scriptures, would be much ashamed, if they could not reason better of these matters, then this great popish Rabbin, that taketh on him so boldly to
 determine matters.
Hauing thus fondly reasoned of reading of scriptures he co^cludeth forsooth very wisely, that falsehood and heresie is engendred of reading of scriptures. And goeth about to prooue it first, by the example of William Hacket, William Ieffrey and Ioan Burcher; the^ by experience, for that as he beleeueth, more heresies are sprung vp within these 50. or 60. yeeres since scriptures began to be red in vulgar toongs, the^ in many ages before. But his conclusion is nothing, but a wicked calumniation of gods holy scriptures: and his proofes consiste of a packe of lies, and both declare him to be a sclanderous lying enymy of Gods truth. For it is not reading of scriptures, which he stileth rash reading, beeing vsed by lay people, but neglect of scriptures, that bringeth foorth error and heresie. Philosophers therefore that contemned scriptures were called patriarkes of heretikes; and heretikes byDe resur. carn. Tertullian are called Lucifugae scripturarum, for that they fly from the light of scriptures. And that is proued euen by the examples produced by the aduersary. For those blasphemous heretikes did not fall into their impieties and heresies by reading scriptures, but by gyuing heede to fond reuelations, and renouncing scriptures. experience also teacheth the same. for while the light of Gods word was couered, and scriptures neglected, and heede giuen to popish decretalles, and Mahomets reuelations; all the heresies of papists and impieties of Mahomet, and many other errors, haue beene receiued by people ignorant of scriptures.
And that reading of scriptures is not cause of heresies, it appeareth first, for that not simple people reading scriptures, but great clerkes reading philosophie, and popish Decretalles, and schoole Doctors, haue beene authors of heresies. Secondly in the Apostles times, when all might reade scriptures, then fewest heresies sprung vp.
That Ioan Burcher conueied bibles into the court, or had any acquaintance with Anne Askeugh, which this fellow reporteth, is a lie deuised by himselfe. Let him shew his author, if he can. that which he talketh of Anne Askeugh is impertinent. But such is his blindenesse, hee will needes haue all the world see the cruelty of papists, that burnt that innocent woman for denying their transubstantiation, which, if hee were wise, he would haue either denyed, or dissembled, albeit some other
 should haue spoken of it. And so it appeareth, that Sir Francis Hastings had reason to charge the papists with hiding the scriptures from the peoples eyes, and keeping them as it were couered in toonges vnknowne, contrary to Christs doctrine, and precedentes of antiquitie. And no lesse reason haue christians to detest the boldnesse of this frapling frier, that calleth preaching, reading, and reasoning of scriptures, clouting of scriptures. And thus much may serue to shew, that the papists deale iniuriously, in taking away translations of scriptures out of the hands of the multitude.
It is also most apparent, that they rather perswade ignorance, as fit for their blind deuotion, then knowledge: neither is this Rabbin able to shew the co^trary. He alledgeth Thomas of Aquine for his warrant; and saith, that he disputing of deuotion, maketh ignorance neither to be mother, nor daughter, nor sister of deuotion. But what if Thomas of Aquine doth not so teach, doth it therefore follow, that no other teacheth ignorance to be mother of deuotion? who would reason so simply and ignorantly, but he? beside this, albeit his master Thomas doth not directly teach it, yet in effect he teacheth as much. For first he sheweth,2.2. q. 82. art. 3. that deuotion doth most abound in simple people, and in women. And secondly he2. 2. q. 2. aut. 6. teacheth, that it is inough for the simpler sort, to haue fidem implicitam, and to beleeue as the church, or as their superiors beleeue, which is a meanes to bring in ignorance. Finally I haue shewed, that diuers others haue gone further in commending ignorance.
He saith further, that all hold what Thomas holdeth, and so beginneth to make a long speake of the nature, cause, and effectes of deuotion. But first albeit we graunted, that all held that, which Thomas holdeth, yet it doth not hereof follow, that the papists hold no more, nor otherwise then he holdeth. For then what needed so many later bookes? and therefore this answere is not to purpose. Beside that, it is false. For the Scotistes in most points dissent from him, and in many points of schoole Diuinitie later doctors do contradict him, as namely in his opinions of the proceeding of the holy Ghost principally from the father, of the conception in originall sinne of the virgine Marie, of the tormenting of soules in purgatorie by diuels, of Christs locall being in the sacrament, and infinite
 other matters.
Hee alleageth also a saying of Saint Augustine concerning deuotion, and To make the wilfull malice of these good fellowes appeere, saith hee, Thomas of Aquine maketh this obiection to himselfe. As if either Thomas of Aquines obiections to himselfe, or else saint Augustines wordes could ascertaine vs, what these fellowes hold, or hold not, seeing they dissent from Saint Augustine in many things, and in all things doe not iumpe with Thomas; and haue infinite nouelties more then either of these. Wherefore vnlesse this fellow can shew, that doctors Cole neuer vttered any such saying, and that the practise of papists is not, to nouzell their people in blindenesse and ignorance; hee doth but trifle, and sheweth himselfe fitter to sit in the alehouse among the goodfellowes he speaketh of, then to dispute in schooles.
Lastly hee braggeth much of the learning of papists, and telleth what monuments of learning they haue left behinde them, and what vniuersities they haue built. All which maketh nothing to the purpose. For albeit there bee many learned men among them, yet their common people may be very vnlearned and ignorant notwithstanding: which is that, whereabout we contend. Againe if their learning be so great, the greater shall bee their condemnation, which in the knowledge of Christ Iesus are so ignorant themselues, and suffer also the people to liue in ignorance. Lastly albeit we will not deny them to be learned, yet we doubt not, but to match them with men of our profession; and if we compare them with the ancient fathers, they will be ouermatched. But whatsoeuer their learning is, good it were for them, if they would vse it not to their owne, but to Gods glory.
Likewise they teach, That lay men may not meddle with matters of religion: that is, that Princes haue no power to reforme the church, nor to make ecclesiasticall lawes. And our aduersary confesseth, That onely priests haue authority to define and determine matters of religion. What reason then hath hee to quarrell with sir Francis Hastings, seeing in effect he confesseth as much, as hee laieth to his charge? Forsooth saith he, Because these words; To meddle with matters of religion, may haue a double sence. But what if they might receiue a treble sence, if the papists doe so remooue lay men from gouerment in
 ecclesiasticall causes, that they neede not to care how God is serued, then are they not wronged by him. For hee doth not meane care in their owne behalfe, but in respect of others. And therefore his example of ministers wiues is very impertinent. Neither hath hee reason to condemne lawfull mariage, when he and his consorts wallow in all filthinesse, to condemne, I say, the apostles doctrine, which alloweth a bishop To be the husband of one wife, when hee teacheth the doctrine of diuels, that forbiddeth to marrie. Finally Parsons the Iesuite hath no reason to condemne priests wiues, when his true father (as they say) was a parson of a parish. his mother also had beene more honest, if shee had beene maried to the parson his father. These iestes therefore, if hee looke no better to his businesse, may prooue him to bee irregular, and vncapable of priesthood. But what is that, may hee say, when a bastard maketh as good a Iesuite, as hee, that is well borne?
Where wee say, that the papists stande more on externall complements, and ceremonies, then inwarde faith and other vertues, onely requiring an outward profession, and outward obseruations of going to masse, to shrift, and such like; hee is much displeased with the matter, and saith, That his aduersary hath neither eies nor witte. And yet this is the doctrine of the Romish church. Vt aliquis absolute dici possit pars verae ecclesiae, saithLib. de ecclesia. c. 3. Bellar. non putamus requiri vllam internam virtutem, sed tantum externam professionem fidei, and sacramentorum communionem, quae sensu ipso percipitur. And albeit he shoulde not so say, yet it is apparent, that those are accompted good Cacolickes, that liue in obedience to the pope and obserue his lawes, whatsoeuer they are otherwise. Nay of late time they haue canonized murtherers, traitors, and rebels, as for example, Iames Clement that murthred Henry the thirde of France, diuers of the rebels that rose with the Earles of Northumberland and Westmerland in the north, and such trecherous priests, as came from the pope to betraie their countrey to strangers. In times past also Thomas Becket was canonized for a saint, albeit he was a traitor to his prince and countrey, stirring vp forreine enimies against them, moouing the pope to depriue his prince of his crowne, running to professed enimies, and consulting with them to the hurt of his
 prince, causing the land to be enterdited, and giuen as a spoile to forreine enimies; which neither Iohn Baptist, nor the holie fathers Athanasius, Ambrose, Hilary or Chrysostome either did, or allowed to bee done. And therefore as these examples fit not Thomas Beckets cause, so Thomas Beckets example doth fitly shewe, how loose men, and disobedient subiects, are enterteined by the pope, and made saints in heauen, albeit they deserue not to liue on earth. Lipomanus and Surius and others, I know, tell many goodly tales of this saint, but wee must remember, that all the grounde they haue is their lying Legend, and percase the popes sentence grounded vpon hearesaie.
Sir Francis saith further, that Albeit the pope and his clergie commanded blasphemies and disloialties, yet blind papists were made beleeue, that the pope must be obeied vpon paine of damnation: And his meaning is most true. For although popes command matters impious against God, and disloiall against princes; yet their friers and flatterers do co^mend them for glorious merits woorthie of celestiall glorie. Iames Clement the Dominican frier that murdred king Henry the third of France, is esteemed a martyr of the popish synagogue. PopeThe oration of Sixtus quint. and la fulminante. Sixtus quintus in the consistory of Cardinals commended this detestable act, as A worke of God, a miracle, a rare exploit of Gods prouidence, and compareth it, to The most excellent mysteries of Christ his incarnation, and resurrection. Cardinall Como in his letter to Parry, that went about to murder her Maiestie, calleth the worke Meritorious. Sanders doth greatly commend the rebels of the north that vpon the popes commandement went about to depriue their liege Souereigne of her crowne, and kingdome. And what hath either Parsons the Iesuite, or this personate Noddy (be hee what hee will) to obiect against vs in this point? Hee saith it is a shamelesse slander, to say The pope commandeth either blasphemies against God, or disloialties against princes. And for the rest hee telleth vs, That obedience to the pope is a commendation to catolike religion. But the first is prooued by his decretales, legends, missals, portuisses, and other rituall bookes full of blasphemies. The second is manifest by their practise. There hath no such treason almost beene wrought against princes of late time, but the same hath proceeded from the pope, and been
 managed by Iesuits, and other friers and priests. All the rebellions in England against Henrie the eight, Edward the sixt, and Elizabeth now reigning, had no other cause, nor originall. The late league, or rather late rebellion of France against Henry the third, and Henrie the fourth, was made by the pope, and enflamed by the vermine of friers his agents. The Iesuites professe obedience to the pope, as to Christ. Boniface the eight maketh subiection to the pope to be a matter of saluation.De eccles. milit. c. 2. Bellarmine maketh it an essentiall part of a Cacolike, or true member of the popes church. And such trust haue papists in his iudgements concerning matters of faith, that they thinke hee cannot be deceiued. Nay if hee once either command, or determine any thing, they accompt it no better then sacrilege to dispute of his dooing: andC. si papa. dist. 40. holde, that if hee shoulde leade multitudes of soules to hell, yet no man must say to him, Domine cur ita facis? that is, Sir, why do you so? So generally the papists doe beleeue the pope, and obey his commandements. Which obedience and beleefe no man commendeth, but those, that embrace all his heresies, and are readie to execute his treasons. For although wee are to obey our superiors, and that not for feare, but for conscience sake, and ought to harken to our pastors: yet this is nothing to the pope, that is not our superior, nor a true pastour, but a woolfe, a hireling, and antichrist, or as some terme him, The head of antichristes kingdome. Beside that, wee are not to beleeue euery thing that our pastors teach; but asMatth. 28. farre, as they teach the doctrine of Christ Iesus. Nor are wee absolutely to obey, but when they command according to lawe. O thrise vnhappie they, that take these woolues for true pastors, and beleeue their heresies and treasons to be true faith, and obedience!
Finally it is most true, that the papists, when they haue committed most abominable offences, and liued in all filthinesse, are notwithstanding taught, that the pope hath power to pardon them, and absolue them. BellarmineLib. 1. de indulgent. c. 10. faith, That indulgences are profitable for all manner of persons: and highly he extolleth the Iubiley, and generall indulgences granted by the pope. And for this cause many sillie soules with labour, charge, and danger trauell to Rome, and all with great hope to haue their sinnes pardoned. This therefore is
 no calumniation, nor forgerie, nor iugling tricke, as this ingling companion telleth vs, who himselfe hath many yeeres wandred vp and downe in forreine lands, like the Egyptians, or Cingari, and hath in his time plaied many tricks of legierdemayne, and thinketh by his hopping, skipping, and other apish trickes, that he can make flesh and blood of a peece of bread, and therefore imagineth others to bee like himselfe. But saith hee, The indulgence is not auaileable to remooue mortall sinnes, but onely to take away the punishment either in this life, or in the life to come. And so the schoolemen commonly dispute. But what is that to the purpose, when the common people beleeueth otherwise, and when in the indulgences they vse not so to distinguish? Nay in the taxe of the popes indulgences it appeereth, that for money they dispense with all sin. For money they pardon Murder of children, of men, of women, of wiues, of neere kinred, fornication, adulterie, incest, and all vnnaturall abominations. As for all irregularities they make small difficultie. Nay they giue licence for Iewes to builde synagogues, where Christ is blasphemed, and pardon those that fall into Iudaisme and Turcisme. Pro licentia erigendi de nouo publicam synagogam, sayTaxa poenitent. they taxa est Turon. 60. ducat. 15. Againe, Marrania in amplissima forma componitur, pro clerico Turon. 15. ducat. 15. pro laico Turon. 4. ducat. 10. So those, that will not suffer Christians to liue and to breath, giue priuileges and pardons to Iewes, and dispense with apostataes, maranoes, and rinegued Turkes. Neither do they distinguish so subtilly, as our wise aduersarie woulde haue them. Nor doe the papists respect more, then that they may haue plenarie indulgence vnder seale. But suppose that the pope shoulde onely take on him to remit the temporall punishment of mortall sinnes, and to forgiue veniall sinnes; yet that is contrarie to Christes doctrine, to the apostles practise, to the ancient orders of the bishops of Rome, and of the catholike church, and maketh carnall men more licentious in sinning, when the penaltie is so easily redeemed; and spoileth many poore Christians, that giue al, rather then they will endure the supposed extreme torments of purgatorie. O miserable and simple papists, that suffer your selues to be so deluded, and take paines, trauaile far, and powre out your money, and all to get nothing, but vaine
 wordes, and bare lead and paper, without any profite.
He telleth vs further, That the popes pardons differ from absolution of priests by the keyes. And therein taketh some paines to relate the schoolemens opinion: as if it were materiall, what such doting diuines, and iangling friers do babble without all ground of scripture, or allowance of fathers. This is certaine, that both the pope himselfe, and all other priests do challenge their authority by one commission, and by vertue of the keyes. How then commeth it to passe, that the popes power and authority is so ample and large, and other inferior priestes so straite and restreintife, both beeing ioyned in one patent? heere the Noddy will be intricated, if he shape not a better answere, then any is heere declared.
Hee standeth also vpon this,P. 26. That it is not more capitall to transgresse the ordinances of the pope, then to transgresse the lawes of God. But what can impudent denialls auaile, when the shamefull practise of the Romishe synagogue declareth the contrary? doth not the whole faction hould, that the popes lawes bind in conscience? and is it not apparent, that murders, adulteries, vnnaturall abominations, yea Paganisme, Iudaisme, Turcisme, and all atheismes are pardoned, where such Christians as eate flesh on fasting daies, and refuse to worship idoles, and to fulfill other the popes lawes, are declaredC. ad abolendam. de haereti^i^. heretikes, and burnt without remission?
Finally he saith, It is a hard matter to frame his aduersaries ould head, to vnderstand the depth of their catholicke religion. Which I do beleeue, seeing there is no bottome of their turning deuises. But if he were wise, he would rather seeke to defend himselfe, then to teach his aduersaries. We desire not to learne of any such ignorant masters. He and his consortes flye to our Lady, to Saintes, to Angels, to stockes and stones, to rotten reliques, to the pope, and his pardons, and trust by scourging themselues, and by eating salt fish and playing vpon holy daies to be saued; and this they learne out of the popes decretales. Our onely hope is in Christ and his merits; and all the doctrine of saluation, we beleeue, is contained in holy scriptures: as not onely our Bishops and priestes, but also all auncient bishops and fathers of the church haue taught vs.



CHAP. III. 

That the Pope, and his adhaerents both elsewhere abroad, and also heere at home are most dangerous and malicious enimies, to her Maiestie and this state, and so haue alwaies declared themselues to be.

IF this aduersarie of ours had either bin a good Orator or a wise proctor; he woulde haue taken great heed, how he had touched any matter, that beeing opened might haue hurt his Clientes cause; especially where his aduersarie doth not greatly vrge him. But what should we looke for better handling of so foule a cause? sir Francis Hastings ayming at other matters, doth but lightly touch the continued malice of the popish faction against her Maiestie, euer since her first comming to the crowne, and that rather to warne the carelesse subiect to take heede of such an enimie, and to point at such pernicious traytors; then to hurt such, as haue beene, and yet are abused by the craft and practise of others, and are not themselues actors, nor factious, nor malicious to their countrey. To hurt quiet men, albeit abused by false colour of old religion, it was no part of his purpose. But seeing this simple Noddie hath no more reason, but to bare and touch that wounde, which beeing seene and touched must needes greeue many, and shame all the faction of papists, that haue shame to heare their owne, and their consorts most abominable practises discouered; I am content to meete him in this encounter, and examine, whether it bee true or no, that is commonly reported concerning the practises of papists against her Maiestie, and this state. If any mislike this course, let him deale with the Noddie that drew mee into it. For mine owne part I was vnwilling to quarrell with them, but seeing they will needes stande vpon termes, and challenge others; I coulde not choose but answere.
Neuer any thing in this Realme did more displease the
 papistes, then the match betwixt king Henry the eight, and her Maiesties mother the Lady Anne Bollenne. for thereby not onely the popes authority to dispence in causes of Matrimony, but also to iudge in causes of princes was called in question. Further they beganne to feare, least the king, that was a prince of heroicall courage, would haue taken occasion vpon this abuse offered him, to haue looked into the whole cause of religion. Here began the hatred against her Maiestie, which this faction hath borne her euer since, and which by many attempts against her parents, and her selfe they haue declared. Clement the seuenth albeit he had receiued many fauours from king Henry, and had promised otherwise; yet whether wonne by perswasions of Charles the fift then beeing emperor, or else mooued with the interest, that himselfe had in it, declared the kinges mariage to be voide, and the issue of that mariage vnlawfull. The which sentence was giuen Anno 1533. some little tyme before she came into the world. So that it is no maruell, if now they hate her, which not onely in her parents, but also in her lawful right was persecuted before she came into the world.
Not long after Paul the third did furiously thunder out a sentence of excommunication against Henry the eight, depriuing him of his kingdome, and againe declaring the mariage with the Lady Anne Bollen to be void, and her children to be illegitimate. With that fury did he prosecute that innocent lady and her children, sparing nothing, which might serue to worke both their destructions. And when he could do nothing of himselfe, he neuer ceased by Winchester, and other his agents to pursue the cause, vntill such time, as they had caused an act of Parliament to bee made against both the mother and the daughter, and brought the innocent Ladie her mother to her end; and, which is more greeuous, they loaded her with many slanders, and reproches, not onely in her triall, but also in an act of parliament. How vniustly God best knoweth, and the king himselfe acknowledged with great griefe at his death, asCosmograph. lib. 16. Theuet a writer no way partiall hath testified. Plusieurs gentils-hommes anglois, saith hee, speaking of king Henry the eightes death, m'ont asseure, qu'il eut belle repentance des offenses par luy commises, estant a l'article de la mort: et entre lez autres choses, de l'iniure et crime commise
 contre la dicte roine Anne de Boulan, faulsement vaincue, et accusee de ce qu'on luy imposoit. It suffised not the enimie, to take away an innocent ladies life, but they tooke away also her honour and good name by diuers imputations, which God the most iust iudge knoweth, and, I trust, one day will more plainly declare. Afterward it pleased God to put in the kings minde to reuerse the act that debarred her Maiestie of her right, which hee did by his last will. This so neerely touched the papists, that, as it shoulde seeme, they haue abolished it, thereby endeuoring to take away all monuments and records, whereby her right might bee prooued. This rancor of theirs did especially shew it selfe against her during the raigne of Queene Mary. For although her beautie, vertue, good carriage, and many excellent parts, wherewith God had endued her, might haue mooued any to loue her; yet in these men these excellencies, and especially her religion wrought contrary effects. For doubting least Queene Mary hauing no issue should leaue the kingdome to her, and fearing that shee woulde asswage their pride and tyrannie against Gods saints, and abolish their superstitious abuses, and hereticall doctrine; they sought by all meanes to cut her off from the crowne. The pope hee coulde not suffer his sentences and decretals to bee reuersed; his adherents coulde endure no reformation of religion to bee established. Gardiner charged her as an abbettor to Wyat, and said shee had intelligence with him. And this our aduersarie doth also signifie by his Mysticall bracelet, and other darke surmises. As if it were likely, that a poore yoong maiden destitute of friends and meanes, and in the handes of her enimies, could helpe them any thing: or that Wyat would communicate a counsell of such danger to her, that percase might vtter it, and no way coulde helpe him. Howsoeuer it was, he practised with diuers to accuse the innocent Lady, and percase, if God had not holpen her, had effected his purpose.
That she held Queene Mary and the state in suspence and care, our aduersary denyeth not. What then more probable, then that they should seeke to disburthen themselues of that care and iealousie? There are diuers that testifie, that they had diuers consultations against her. Doctor Storie shewed plainly, That the papists committed a great error, in that
 cutting of the boughs, they had not strooken at the roote.
When either for shame, or else because they could finde no probable cause against her, they could not spill the innocent Ladies bloud, it is certaine, that they fayned Queene Mary to be with childe, to the intent that some supposed childe might be found to succeede Queene Mary, and to preuent the Ladie Elizabethes right.
All this notwithstanding it pleased God, many of her enimies being taken away, that shee shoulde possesse the crowne. at what time a man woulde haue thought, they woulde haue ceased to pursue her, against whom they coulde not preuaile. Yet euen then did they also shew their malice: and first they caused the Queene of Scots to claime the crowne, and to beare the armes of England. Then by the way of Scotland the French began to threaten and to inuade her countrey, and had proceeded further, but that her Maiesties forces did shut them vp in Leeth.
Not long after followed the excommunication of pope Pius the fift, and the rebellion in the north parts of England. After that Nicholas Sanders stirred vp a rebellion in Ireland. And this N. D. their proctor albeit hee woulde excuse and cleere the papists of all euill meaning, yet coulde hee not forbeare to praise the rebels, and lament their death; which sheweth how well rebellion and treason doth please this faction, and howe little hee loueth her Maiestie, with whose capitall enimies hee is so neere consorted.
When by sedition and rebellion they could not preuaile, hey stirred vp Philip king of Spaine to make open warres vpon her Maiestie, to depriue her of her kingdome. Neither did either respect of alliance, or shame, or danger drawe him backe from this enterprise. The duke of Alua had giuen the first attempt, had not the vnexpected troubles of the low countries hindred him. And Don Iuan D'Austria had not failed to make warres vpon vs, but that God cut him off in the midst of his deliberations. The yeere 1588. the Spaniard brought a great fleete vpon this coast; and to correspond with it, there were great lande forces prouided by the duke of Parma in the Low countries. Cardinall Allen was then readie also to vtter and throw abroad his excommunications, and slaundrousHis letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland. libels against her Maiestie, and the state. Neither
 could the euill successe of that iourney make the Spaniard giue ouer his determination.
Beside rebellion and warre, they haue attempted poyson and secret practises to destroy her. Iohn Someruile was perswaded to kill her, by a seditious priest. The same execution did William Parry take vpon him perswaded by Benedict Palmio, and Aniball Codret two Iesuits. Ballard a priest by his lewd perswasion drew Babington, Sauadge, Tichborne, and their companions to conspire her death. By the meanes of Holt a Iesuite, Gifford, Worthington, and of certaine priests, Yorke, Williams, Patrick Collen, and others were sent ouer vpon the same errand. And when with the sworde nothing coulde bee done, Lopez by certaine traitors was hired, and Squire by Walpoole was perswaded to poison her. And no question, but many other attempts haue beene made against her, although they are not come to light hitherto. Neuer I thinke was one poore Ladies life more sought, nor by more meanes. They haue left neither force nor fraud, nor any course vnattempted.
Nay not content heerewith, They haueIn Bulla Pi^ v. and Sixti. v. cursed all her subiects and friends, seased the persons and goods of such as they coulde come by, and by all meanes sought to ouerthrow the state. anno 1588. diuers rinegued English, and among the rest the traiterous Cardinall Allen, came with the Spaniards to fight against their countrey. From time to time they runne to the enemie, bewray their countries secrets, and diuers of them euen now intertaine intelligence with the Spaniard.
And little it is, God wot, that our aduersarie, notwithstanding all his great shewes, can allege in his clients the papists defence. First hee is offended, that sir Francis Hastings should say, That by Gods goodnesse onely her Maiestie was preserued, her life being maliciously and with great cunning shot at by the Romish clergie, and Spaine against her. And thereupon alledgeth three reasons of her Maiesties deliuera^ce. First saith he, King Phillip and the Spaniards specially fauoured her for her yoong yeeres, beautie, felicitie, and other her good graces and talents. Secondly hee saith, Shee bore her selfe for a papist, and heard two masses a day, one for the quicke, and another for the dead, and receiued no seruant into her seruice lightly, but with expresse condition, and many signes, that he
 enclined that way. Thirdly he imagineth, That shee was kept aliue to barre the next praetender, that then was wife of the Dolphine of France, which for some reasons neither Spanish, nor English could endure. And these reasons hee esteemeth to bee Very potent, and pregnant: for so hee calleth them. But if wee will rightly esteeme them, wee shall finde them to be built on false grounds, and to bee very impotent, barren of reason, and ridiculous.
For first most false it is, that the Spaniards so fauored her, that they would either hazard their state, or loose a kingdom for her sake. All which was like to come to passe, if the ladie Elizabeth should atteine to the crowne. And very vnlikely it was that the Spanish king, That spared not hisVita di Pio quinto. owne onely sonne, nor bloud, nor those that were far neerer to him, then the Lady Elizabeth, woulde encurre the popes displeasure, and loose his footing in England to spare her. But what neede wee dispute of the Spaniards care and affection to her, when they suffred her to be imprisoned, euill intreated, and called in question for her life? As for the Count of Feria, hee came to her indeede, but not for any good intended to her, but either for a complement of curtesie, or to aske such a question of her, as her manly and stout answer maketh this Noddie, albeit hee knew it, ashamed to report.
Secondly her comming to masse, if I may so call it, when masse was saide before her, that vnwillingly heard it, was rather of constraint, then otherwise. As for seruants, good Lady, she had no power to entertaine any, but her ould seruants were remooued, and certaine were forced vpon her, and commaunded to attend her, that she liked not. But be it, she had for sauing of her life, giuen some hope of inclining to popish religion, as the aduersary falsely and dishonorably imagineth; yet papists are not so simple, as to trust such, as are newly conuerted. Againe seeing the pope had pronounced diuers sentences against her, to frustrate and make void her right: it could not auaile her any thing to turne to the papists, vnlesse either the pope would reuoke his sentences, or she take the crowne at his hands, which I doubt whether he would haue giuen to her, if it had beene in his power to dispose. King Henry the third of France though superstitiously popish, yet might he not liue, for that he was not for the humour of the pope. Antonie
 likewise king of Portugall was put beside his crowne, notwithstanding his religion, to gratifie the king of Spaine.
Thirdly seeing Queene Mary was like to haue children at the first, it is more likely, that the papists sought to establishe the kingdome in Queene Mary, and her succession by the innocent Ladies destruction, then to barre another pretender, which could claime no interest before Queene Maries death, not then looked for so soone. Besides it is not likely, seeing the papists sought onely to establish their owne kingdome, that they should exclude one, that was wholy deuoted to their religion, for one either contrary, or much suspected. And if the Spaniardes did respect the Lady Elizabeth in regard of matter of state: then did they it not for loue, as is pretended in the first potent reason. Lastly it is most-false to say, that the papistes sought to preferre Queene Elizabeth before the Queene of Scotts. For why then did they set her title on foote at the beginning of the Queenes reigne? why haue they continuallie sought to preferre the Scottish title, and to dishable her Maiesties right? To conclude, why did theVita di Pio quinto. pope and his adherents declare the Scottish Queene to bee the true and lawfull enheritour of the crowne? So it appeereth; that these reasons are of no force to conclude, that the papists ment her Maiestie any good.
But why they should purpose her hurt and destruction, diuers most forcible reasons may be alleadged. First they knew, that her title, right and reigne could not stand with the popes authority, which is the onely line and leuell of the actions of papists, and especially in matters of faith. They knew, I say, that pope Clement had pronounced sentence against her mothers mariage with the King; and that pope Paul the third had seconded him, and declared her illegitimate: which sentences could not well be retracted. Secondly they considered, that she had alwaies beene brought vp in true religion, and hated Romish superstitions. Thirdly diuers feared to be called to accompt for their iniustice and cruelty shewed to Gods saintes, if she should once attaine to the crowne. Fourthly they feared, least she would remember the wronges, which they had offered to her selfe during hir sisters raigne. Fiftly they saw they should either turne from their Romish religion or forgoe their honors, and liuings, and that they meant not to do: they had
 so farre engaged themselues already. Lastly the Spanyards, and Italians, and all the popes agentes saw, that if she succeeded, their hopes were ended, and that they must be packing out of England. Other reasons also may be alleaged to this purpose. but what should we search out reasons to prooue, that a thing was likely to be done, when it plainely appeareth it was doone?
Secondly he much misliketh that Sir Francis Hastings should say, that Her Maiestie came to the crowne with the good liking of all true harted Englishmen both clergie, nobles, and commons, and that then satan and his ministers beganne to fret and chafe. And what reason hath he so to do, trow you? Forsooth because, as he saith, Papists placed her in possession of the crowne. Which is nothing else, but a plaine confession against himselfe, and his clients the papists, that they are no true harted Englishmen. For if her Maiestie were placed in her seat by all true harted men, then albeit the papists concurred in that action, yet hath this Noddy no reason to take exception to these words of his aduersary. But percase he is offended, that Sir Francis should say, that the papists were angry and fretted inwardly, when they saw Queene Elizabeth established in her kingdome. As if it were not apparent, how much it greeued them. Cardinall Poole and some other popish bishops seeing how matters went, died for sorow: others fled beyond the seas; the rest hung downe their heads being sick for extreme greefe. Neither of al the popish prelates could any one be founde to celebrate the act of consecration, but one, albeit it was no small danger and disloialtie to refuse to performe it. Hee that had seene their faces and countenances that daie, woulde haue easily coniectured, how much it greeued the papists inwardly, and how falsely this false frier N. D. auoucheth, that they Placed her freely and willingly. So willing they seemed, that nothing greeued them more, then that they had suffred her to liue. To make his tale seeme better, hee saith, That most of the nobilitie and commons, and all the bishops were papists, when the Queene came to the crowne. But hee fouly mistaketh the matter. For the Papisticall prelats were no true bishops, but woolues and hirelings hated for their crueltie and abominations, of all the people generally; and those of the nobilitie that were in opinion addicted to popish religion,
 yet were not then factiously combined with the pope.
Thirdly hee goeth about to answere for doctor Story, who vpon the Queenes first comming to the crowne, did much repine at it, togither with other papists, and saide, If they had followed his counsell, they had strooke at the roote: meaning no doubt her gratious Maiestie. But if hee had ment to put in an answer, that might haue caried colour, and cleered his client from suspicion of treason: hee ought to haue vnderstoode the mans faults and cause better, and to haue answered particularly to euery point of his accusation. But that, as it seemeth he cannot doe, that acquiteth himselfe so badly in this one. First he saith, These wordes were neuer spoken by doctor Storie, to his knowledge. As if nothing coulde be spoken by doctor Storie, which came not to his knowledge. but saith he, doctor Storie neuer confessed these wordes. As if it were necessarie or likely that euery traitor and malicious enimie of the state shoulde confesse his treasons, and malicious purposes: or as if it were not sufficient, that being examined vpon these words, hee did not denie them, but refused to answere: which refusall in that case purporteth as much, as a confession. But suppose hee shoulde haue denied the wordes, yet might he haue beene conuinced by diuers witnesses that heard him speake them. Hee saith further, that doctor Storie had no reason to speake any such wordes. As if a man neuer did, nor could do any thing, but by reason.
Secondly hee woulde willingly mollifie Stories wordes by a gentle interpretation, and woulde make vs beleeue, that By striking at the roote, hee ment not rooting out of Queene Elizabeth, but rather punishing certaine great men fauorers of heretikes (for so they terme true catholikes) and for proofe of this hee alleageth, how Story on a certaine time was in a great chafe, because hee coulde not bee suffred to apprehende a certaine gentleman, and cut his throte at his pleasure, and saide, hee woulde no more serue as an Inquisitor, if he shoulde be so crossed. But both the answere and the proofe is nothing, but vaine trifling. For who can doubt, but hee ment her Maiestie, seeing otherwise hee had giuen counsell to take away her life; and at that time talked of no other? Againe, what roote coulde hee vnderstande but her, that was the roote and foundation of that state, which coulde not stande with the kingdome
 of poperie and Antichristianisme? As for those gentlemen, that this fellow speaketh of, they were neither the roote, nor the great boughes of our religion.
Lastly granting that Storie had so spoken and ment, yet he saith That there was no reason, why he should therefore be executed as a traytor, for that he spoke those wordes, as a counsellor to his prince. But first he must vnderstand, that the question is not, whether Story was iustly executed, or no; but whether the papists did not seeke the Queenes most innocent blood. And this wise disputer doth in effect yeelde so much, and confesse that Doctor Story spoke these wordes, and that this was consulted vpon in councell in Queene Maries daies.
Secondly it appeareth by the story of Doctor Stories triall and arraignment, that he was not called in question for these wordes, but for high treason: and that most iustly. For first he ranne ouer to the D. of Alua, and other the Queenes enemies, and sought how to stir them vp to make warre against his prince, and country. Secondly he practised with one Preston and Paine how to make some insurrection in England. Thirdly he entertained intelligence with fugitiue rebels, and knowne enemies of this state. Beside treasons there was obiected to him, that he had by vertue of his inquisitors office in Flanders brought diuers of his countrymen in danger, and made great spoile of their goods. And so euident and plaine were the matters obiected against him, that he had no other shift, but to denie himselfe to be a subiect, and to refuse to be iusticed by the lawes of this land; which pleading, I thinke, his aduocate here will confesse to be most ridiculous.
Thirdly it cannot be denyed, but the wordes were spoken not onely in Queene Maries time, but also in this Queenes time. For he was not charged with saying, If you shall follow; but, if you had followed mine aduise: Lamenting, that when they might, they had not followed his aduise in destroying the Queene.
Lastly albeit he had beene charged onely with those words, which by his enditement, by the euidence then giuen, and by diuers witnesses yet liuing is refuted; yet to imagine or conspire the princes death, is treason by all lawes. This our aduersarie therefore, that saith, doctor Storie was condemned by shoutes and clamors, as Christ was before Pilate: blasphemeth
 in comparing a notorious traitor, and a bloudie persecuter of Christs flocke to the most meeke and innocent lambe of God Christ Iesus. And where he confesseth, that The papists thinke that Storie for his zeale in Queene Maries time, is to receiue a great crowne of glorie, and fame vpon earth: he sheweth both his owne, and other papists most cruell and bloodie minde, that allow of doctor Stories murdrous and cruell intentions both against her Maiestie, and other godly men: and declareth what fauour we are to looke for at his hands, if once hee and his consorts coulde haue but a finger in gouernment. As for doctor Storie, hee hath now receiued his rewarde, but not of glorie, vnlesse hee did repent himselfe of his heresie, and crueltie; of which he gaue small tokens at his death.
After doctor Stories matter, he toucheth the cause of Pius quintus his presumptuous excommunication denounced most iniuriously against her Maiestie: but very daintily and nicely, not daring to mislike it for offending his holy father the pope; nor daring to allow it, least hee shoulde seeme to concurre with those publike enimies, that seeke to take away her honour, crowne, and life. Gladly hee woulde excuse the papists his clients, but his pleading is so fonde, and foolish, that their enimies cannot desire plainer euidence to accuse them and conuict them. First he sheweth, and woulde, if hee coulde tell howe, complaine, That the bull of Pius quintus the pope is made a common bugge against papists euery where, as if they were guiltie in allowing his fact. And so hee thinketh to shift off a foule matter with a fewe faire wordes, and with a finta, or fained shew of a downe, right blowe, to bobbe or rather abuse his Reader, that looketh for sound reason. But hee may not thinke, seeing hee is come into the fielde, to make a challenge, that hee shall so escape our fingers. First hee saith, That papists albeit they admit the popes iurisdiction, yet are not participant of the offence giuen by the pope. But howe doth hee prooue that? Forsooth you must take it of his owne bare word. For other law or reason he alleageth none. So ridiculous an aduocate doth hee shew himselfe, in the greatest heat of his clients cause. Hee confesseth that papists allow the popes iurisdiction; and needes must hee so do, or else they shoulde not bee papists. Heereof wee say, that it is necessarily inferred, that they are as farre guiltie, as the pope; and no lesse to be reputed
 enimies of the prince and state, then the pope himselfe. Pope Pius, as the world knoweth, disabled her right, pronounced her excommunicate, depriued her of her kingdome, exhorted not onely forreine princes to make warres, but all her subiects to rebell against her: finally all such, as should obey her lawes, or helpe her, hee doth no lesse anathematize, then the Queene herselfe. Praecipinus and interdicimusIn Bulla aduers. Elizab. saith hee, vniuersis and singulis proceribus, subditis, populis and alijs praedictis, ne illi einsue monitis, mandatis, and legibus audeant obedire: qui secus egerint, eos simili anathematis sententia innodamus. Neither did hee onely giue sentence against her, but also practise to depriue her. For this cause hee practised both with French and Spanish, and sent Vincent Lauro bishop of Mondeui into Scotland, and Robert Ridolphi to make some stirre in England. Hee raised men and sent money into England, and other places for this purpose. So it appeereth that the papists must necessarily allow yea and further the popes hostile act, if they ment to acknowledge his authoritie. For otherwise themselues were excommunicate. Besides, they must necessarily obey the popes commandement. Neither is it to bee doubted, but that diuers principall papists haue entertained intelligence with the pope, and his agents. Lastly it is folly to dispute what papists do meane, when wee see euidently what they do. Vpon euery occasion they are ready to rebell against their princes, when the pope commandeth. They haue shewed it in Ireland, in Scotland, and in England. In France they rose against king Henrie the third, that was a man of their owne religion. They professe they are members of the Romish church; which doth necessarily include obedience to the pope. And to conclude, this Noddie confesseth they allow of the popes authoritie in depriuing of princes of their kingdomes. Wherefore not onely all lawes of nations, but also all reasons of state condemne such for enimies and traitors to the state. And strange it is, that any prince or state can suffer such, as either adhere to forreine enimies, or else beleeue that a forreine enimie hath power to dispossesse the supreme magistrate of his crowne.
He scorneth Sir Francis Hastings for saying, That no child of mortall man, hath power to dispose of kingdomes, or to depose princes, or to dispence with subiectes for not obeying their
 prince. And maketh shew of pleading for the popes authoritie in deposing princes. But first we do not here reason, what the popes power is; but whether the papists that allow his iurisdiction are traitors. Secondly admitte that were the question heere: yet, I say, that the saying of sir Francis, as he ment it, is most true. For his meaning is, that the pope, that is not onely the childe of mortal man, but a childe of perdition, and the aduersarie of Christ Iesus, hath no such power, as papists pretend, to depose princes. And the same may bee prooued euen by the examples alleaged in this place, by the Noddie himselfe. For neither did Peter nor Paul, which notwithstanding had a farre greater authoritie, then any pope of Rome, depose Tiberius, Caligula, or Nero: nor is it founde in holy Scriptures, that any high priest of the Iewes deposed any king, or discharged any subiects from their obedience. If hee knew anie such matter done, why doth hee not alleage his author, and the names of the parties? Nay it is not to bee prooued, that anie mortall man can dissolue the bond of a lawfull oath, or disannull that obligation, that is mutuall betwixt princes and subiects. Neither is the knight to bee condemned for a prince-idolater, for so saying. But the knaue his aduersarie, and his consorts are iustly to bee condemned, as pope-idolaters. For not onely theyC. satis dist. 96. call him in expresse termes God, and giue vnto him diuine power in translating of kingdomes; but also they acknowledge his iudgements to bee infallible, and say that the pope and Christ haue but one Consistorie, and the same authoritie and power. At Rome the people and priests like beastes fall downe and worship him, euen as the idolatrous Israelites worshipped the golden calfe in the wildernesse. Do you then thinke this man to bee wise, that so slenderly and barely toucheth so great a matter, which the grand masters of the Romish synagogue with all their learning are not able to prooue? Or may hee bee thought very sober, where hee taketh on him to shew, that papists are her Maiesties good friends, and neuer sought her destruction, euen there to iustifie pope Pius his hostile actes, that not onely sought to depriue her of her state, but also to destroy her; and to confesse that they are the popes adherents, and allow his iurisdiction? howsoeuer wee are to thinke of others, this assuredly is most apparant, that the author of this railing treatise is a professed enimie of the state.
 For hee doth not onely disallow all courses taken for her Maiesties safetie, and the safetie of this kingdome, but taketh on him to iustifie rebels, and to defend publike enimies. Do you not then take this fellow to bee a woorthie mediator to obtaine grace for Recusants and papists? But to leaue to shewe his malice and treason, that euery where is apparent, and to proceede in our discourse, after hee had in a sleight manner touched the popes act, hee denieth, that English papists so soone as her Maiestie was in full possession of the crowne, began to fret, and chafe, and consequently to practise against her. And his reason is, For that it was twelue yeeres, ere the excommunication of Pius Quintus came out against her. But his defence is voide of truth, his conclusion voide of reason. The first is apparent not onely by the writings of the papists oppugning her gouernment, and by their flight ouer seas, but also by the obstinacie of the prelates, all refusing to crowne her but one; and by their secret conferences and packings both amongst themselues, and also with the pope and other forreine princes. Neither may wee thinke that the Queene of Scots did then claime the crowne of England, or that the French sent ouer forces into Scotland without their priuitie. But of this wee haue alreadie spoken. The second is prooued, for that the exco^municatio^ of that impious pope was not the first cause, but the extremitie of the rancor and malice of papists. Neither was the same procured, but by great sute and labour, and when all other practises failed. Lastly it is certaine that the rebellion, that after broke foorth in the north was long before plotted, and diuers consultations had, how to dispossesse her Maiestie of the crowne, and to alter the estate. Sanders in his slanderous and lying treatise of SchismeLib. 3. de schism. confesseth, that the popish prelates vpon the first alteration of religion, Had determined to excommunicate the Queene, and enterdite the land; and that afterward misliking that course, they referred the matter to the pope, who vpon their solicitation proceeded to excommunication and open hostilitie.
To prooue that the papists were not cause of the popes hatred against England, he is not ashamed to say, That the Queene began with the pope, and not he with her; and that the pope was incited by English protestants, and not by papists, to proceed against her. He affirmeth also, That hee had great
 reason to take this course against the Queene and this land, and that first, for that not onely the body of religion was changed, that had endured a 1000. yeeres before, and that contrarie to expectation and promise, but also diuers statutes made against him in opprobrious termes, and the catholike body of England forced to sweare against him: and secondly for that the prelates adhering to the pope were therefore all depriued, and some of them imprisoned. And Thirdly, for that papists were inhibited to flie the realme, and these that remained were enforced to participate not onely these othes, but also to eate new sacrament-bread against their consciences. And Fourthly, for that the pope was traduced in pulpits and schooles as antichrist, and scoffed at in plaies as author of many ridiculous fooleries. And last of all, For that this change was an example to countries round about vs to attempt the like. In which discourse there are many weake reasons, and diuers strong and impudent leasings. For first albeit some occasion had beene giuen by vs to mooue the cholericke popes to anger, yet doth it not follow, that they had iust cause of anger: nor that the papists did not stirre vp the coles, and enflame their wrath against vs. Secondly admit princes shoulde offende either against Religion or iustice; yet neither hath the pope, nor any bishop any authoritie to depose them from their kingdomes. Christ gaue his apostles no such power. Nay himselfe challenged no earthly kingdome. The apostles taught no such doctrine. Nor did the holy bishops of the ancient church euer claime any such iurisdiction. Nay the popes themselues before Gregory the seuenth did not presume either to depriue princes, or to meddle with their kingdoms. But if the tyra^ny and impietie of princes grew vnsufferable, the^ was the same either redressed in the parliament, and assembly of the estates of the realme, or else by some yt had lawful power by the custome of the countrey. As for the popes claime, it is not onely contrary to all antiquitie, but to rules of state; and so absurd, that men in greatest blindnes of antichrists kingdome could not endure it. For what can be deuised more absurd, the^ that a ribald frier, or a humorous Italian, should take on him to depose princes of other countries? Thirdly what reasons soeuer forreine tyrrants pretend to offer violence to christian princes, yet that is no excuse for the subiects, either to enter into disloial
 practises, or else to allow their tyrannicall and vniust pretenses. And therefore all this talke about the popes furious excommunications, and other acts of hostilitie is meerely impertinent, where the encounter and contention is about the practises of papists, that shoulde shewe themselues subiects. Fourthly the pope had no reason to complaine, that popish prelates for adhering to him were restreined. For no state may suffer such to enioy their libertie, as adhere to forreine enimies. Nor do the popes suffer their Cardinals or friers to adhere to others, whom they accompt their enimies. Fiftlie what had the pope to do withall, albeit the Queene for causes did forbid her subiects to depart the countrey? Hath the prince no interest in his subiect, but he may forsake him at pleasure? The pope will not I thinke giue his people that libertie. And if he will not giue that to his owne subiects; what reason hath he to require it in other princes subiects? Lastly the pope seeing his authoritie refuted in disputations, he should rather in schooles and pulpits haue taught the truth, then with armes in open fielde sought to ouerthrow the truth, and the state both togither. If hee were prooued to bee antichrist by scriptures, he shoulde by like course haue answered. The apostles neuer sought to establish their authoritie by force of armes, nor by violence to plant religion. The pope therefore doing contrary, sheweth himselfe to be antichrist, and Mahomets, rather then the apostles successor.
The leasings contained in this allegation are likewise diuers, and shamelesse. To say that the Queene began with the pope, is not onely false, but also a most vaine and ridiculous conceite. For it is well knowne, and testified by record, that he did persecute her in the person of her parents, when she was yet in the wombe, when she was newly borne, and sithence continually: whereas her Maiestie onely medled with her owne kingdome without respect to the pope, which hath no more power ouer her Maiestie or other christian princes, then the great Turke. For both their authorities are alike forced and vsurped.
Secondly it is a shamelesse vntruth to say, That the body of religion that had endured here aboue a thousand yeeres, should now be changed by vs. Let the Noddy, or because he is but a silly diuine, and taketh vp all at the second and third
 hand, let the proudest of that side shew, if they canne, that we haue altered any one article of the christian faith, or abolished one iot of the apostles doctrine. As for the priuate masse without communion, and the communion vnder one kind, and the doctrine of transubstantiation, adoration of the sacrament, worship of angels, saintes, images, and rotten bones and rags, and other heresies and nouelties which the papists haue more then we; they are not onely beside, but also contrary to Christ and his apostles doctrine, and the faith of christes church, as our teachers haue heretofore shewed, and we shall be able sufficiently to iustifie in any free and lawfull councell and meeting against the stoutest champions of the popes side.
Thirdly eyther must he bring proofe of a promise made to the pope, that no alteration should be made in religion by her Maiestie, or else he will rest conuicted of another grosse lie. As for the woluish prelates it is not greatly materiall, what they promised. For in king Henry the eight his dayes they promised to maintaine the kings royall authority against the pope. Wherein Gardiner, Bonner, and Tonstall were principall agents; yet did they respect their honest faith, and true promise no more, then if they had sayd nothing.
The fourth lie made here, is, That statutes were made against the pope with the most spitefull and opprobrious words that malice could deuise. For those statutes which he meaneth were made rather for restoring the princes right vsurped by the pope, contrary to law, and reason; then directly against the pope. Againe albeit some tearmes vsed in the statutes seeme sharpe, yet come they short of the popes desert. To accuse the whole state of malice, and spite for inueighing against the pope, this fellow had no reason, were he not a professed enemy of his country, and a slaue to the pope, and Spanyard, and other publike enemies of this state.
The fift lie is, That the whole body of England was forced to sweare against the pope. For not any one man (so farre is he short of the whole land) was forced to sweare against the pope, albeit he was neuer so worthy to be abiured, and detested. Onely those that desire either dignities in church and schooles, or publike offices in the common wealth are commaunded to take the oathe for the mainteinance of the Queens




 regall authority. And if they list not, yet may they liue priuate, albeit they take not the oath. Nay the oath is not tendred to them.
The sixt lie is, That all the popish prelates and clergie were depriued of liuings and libertie, and committed to prisons, and there continued to their dying day: His owne conscience, if he haue any conscience, can conuince him of it. And infinite witnesses testifie, and diuers records prooue the contrary. For diuers of the popish clergie fled-ouer sea, as Cutbert Scot, Goldwel, Maurice elect of Bangor and diuers others. Some changed copy and reteined their liuings. Diuers died before they were depriued, as Hopton of Norwich, Christophorson of Chichester, White of Winchester, and many more. Of the rest some were neuer in prison, as Oglethorp, and Poole, others were restreined to their own houses, as Heath of York, Bane of Lichfeld. Thurlby and Watson remained in the archbishops house at Lambith. Bourne and Troublefeld deliuered out of the Tower died at their friends houses. Such is the clemencie of her Maiestie, and the mildenesse of our religion.
The 7. lie is, that papists that Did not flie the land, nor were imprisoned, were forced to participate our sacraments, Which this impious co^panion calleth New deuised sacrament bread: and saith, It was anathematized by the Lutherans the first founders (as hee writeth) of our religion. A lie composed of diuers vntruths. For first wee enforce none to our religion: Nay there is no penall statute against those, that receiue not the Sacraments: the more pittie. Secondly hee cannot shew where the churches of Germany haue either anathematized or condemned our co^munion. Lastly wee do affirme and offer to prooue against the whole rable of Iesuits and friers, that the sacraments of our church which this scornfull wretch so impiously reiecteth, are most consonant to Christ his institution, and the practise of the apostolike and catholike church. But the blasphemous masse, the halfe communion, the idolatrous worship of the bread of the altar, the abolishing of bread out of the sacrament, the popish priesthoode, the popish sacraments, neither can they bee prooued, nor will they be so defended, but that the doctrine of papists and their practise will alwaies appeere to bee contrarie to Christ his institution, and the doctrine of the catholike church: and therefore most woorthie to bee
 abolished and anathematized.
It is false also, That the pope was by vs made a matter of scorne, or that this proposition, viz. That the pope is antichrist, and such like, are matters ridiculous. For such propositions we take to be most true, and dare alwaies maintaine them against more valiant disputers, then this Noddy euer will be. And therefore we do not thinke the pope a man to bee scorned, but a tyrant to bee seriously shunned and abhorred of all christians. Let this then make the eight lie.
This is also a lie most palpable and grosse, That other princes fearing harme, that might ensue of the alteration of religion in England, complained heereof to the pope, and that hee proceeded against the Queene vpon their complaints and instance. Let him if hee can shew these pretended complaints. If hee cannot shewe them, let him at the least prooue them, by some witnesse, or record. If not then do I not doubt, but hee will prooue himselfe a vaine iangler. Which appeereth also by this, that SandersLib. 3. de schism. saith, The pope proceeded at the instance of English prelates, that referred the matter to him. Beside that, the pope is not so dull in working mischiefe, that hee needeth the solicitation of others to stirre him. Nay it is cleere, that pope PiusVita di Pio quinto. stirred vp both Philip of Spaine, and the French men against vs. And the like industrie did Paul the third vse in stirring vp warres and rebellions against Henrie the eight king of England, and drawing troubles vpon the princes of Germanie. No man therefore hencefoorth can iustly doubt, but that all those practises, which haue beene lately made against her Maiestie haue proceeded principally from the popes malice and rancor against true religion, and the professors thereof; and next from the malcontentment, and trecherie of papists and their agents. These are the two fountaines, from whence all our warres, rebellions, treasons, attempts to murder and poison princes, and other great persons, and other such like vilanous practises against the state haue flowed.
Now least any scruple might remaine in mens mindes, hee endeuoureth to shewe how farre the excommunication of Pius quintus toucheth the papists in England, and saith, that They are not to discusse the question betwixt the Queene and the pope, but to loue the one and the other. But this resolutio^
 is so vnsufficient, that it doth rather encrease, then diminish our doubt. For how can any good subiect loue him, that seeketh the destruction of his prince? How can a man serue, not two masters, but two masters so contrarie, and adhere to a religious Queene, if hee bee a vassall to antichrist? Beside this, seeing papists make the pope the souereigne iudge of these matters, what a ridiculous conceit is it to thinke, that a papist can iudge otherwise, then the pope iudgeth or sentenceth? His reasons also are such as can satisfie none of any meane vnderstanding. First saith hee, This excommunication is an act of iurisdiction betwixt two superiors. As if it were not meere foolerie to say, that iurisdiction can bee exercised betwixt superiors, or betweene equals. And if papists grant that the pope is superior to the Queene, then must they adhere to him, and forsake her. Which no doubt they will do, and must doe, if order bee not taken with them. Besides wee deny that this excommunication is an act of iurisdiction, or iustice. Nay the worlde seeth, it is a meere act of vilany, and presumptuous tyrannie, for a ribald like companion, and a lousie frier to attempt to depose a prince; and a most notorious foolerie to imagine, that the popes of Rome who haue no right in that, which they iniuriously possesse, haue power to take away the right which belongeth to others.
Secondly hee saith, That vpon the popes excommunication against a prince, the subiects consent was neuer asked nor admitted. Why then doth the pope excommunicate all those, that after his excommunication adhere to her Maiestie? Are not hisIn bulla Pij ^. aduers. Eliz. wordes plaine? Howbeit I confesse, that if rightly we will esteeme of matters, the popes excommunication is no excommunication, he being an vsurper and no iudge in this case. And therefore all true subiects are to account of his excommunication, as of a denuntiation of his malice, and an argument of his shamefull dealing against Christian princes contrarie to all precedents of antiquitie: and to esteeme them all not onely slaues of Antichrist, but enimies of the estate, that shall not plainly condemne it, as wicked and vnlawfull. But if the excommunication shoulde bee lawfull, yet are Christians to know it, and allow it, for that it bindeth not, before it bee published, and allowed.
Thirdly he saith, It is no new thing for popes to excommunicate
 princes. And that the subiect is not to be troubled for his old receiued beleefe about the popes authoritie. But hee is much deceiued, in things new or old. In faith and beleefe all is new, that is not taught by Christ and his apostles. Wherefore vnlesse hee can shewe this authoritie to be giuen from Christ, hee must needes confesse the Romish faith therein to be new. Nay hee cannot shew, that the popes either claimed, or practised any such power, as to excommunicate and depose princes, before Gregory the seuenth, that was therefore rightly called Hell-brand, or the firebrand of the diuell, to set discord betwixt Christian princes, to the weakening and vtter ouerthrow of Christendome, and enlarging of the Turkish empire. Otho Frisingensis, and Trithemius, and hee that wrote the life of Henry the fourth emperour, do all testifie, that hee was the first that attempted to excommunicate princes, and that at the first his excommunications were little regarded.
Fourthly hee telleth vs, that The subiect is not to discusse, whether the pope had iust cause to excommunicate the prince: which altogither ouerthroweth his clients the papists cause, and declareth them to be vtter enimies to the prince excommunicate. For if they may not discusse the popes proceeding, but to beleeue, that in his iudicial sentences hee cannot erre, especially in matters of faith: then must they of force beleeue, that the pope hath done well to excommunicate their Queene, and must aide him to execute it without further enquirie; which teacheth vs without further enquirie also, that all papists that allow the popes authoritie in excommunicating the Queene are enimies, if they bee forreiners; and traitors, if they be subiects.
Lastly he referreth his clients the papists of England, to consider what the papists of France did of late, when their kings were excommunicate; and to English, that liued in king Iohns time. Which plainly argueth, that though hee woulde haue them looke smoothly for the time; yet when occasion serueth, hee closely signifieth that they ought to rebell against their princes. For so did they of the league in France: and so did the subiects heere in England against king Iohn. And generally all papists are bound to beleeue, that the popes excommunications are to bee executed; and this is their common
 doctrine. But suppose our aduersarie shoulde teach papists to contemne the popes authoritie, which hee is not like to do; yet would not his exhortation worke any effect. For alwaies vpon the popes excommunication haue wars and rebellions ensued, where the pope hath had any authoritie. This was the beginning and motiue of the bloody warres of the popes against Henry the fourth and fift, and the two Fridericks, and against Otho, Philip, and Lewis of Bauier emperours of Germanie. And no other cause can be assigned of the insurrections against king Henry the eight, and other excommunicate princes. In vaine therfore doth this Noddy go about to reconcile the subiects obedience with the exco^munications of the pope. They neuer did, nor euer coulde agree hitherto. Fire and water may percase bee reconciled; but these two cannot. Neither do I thinke, that hee meaneth to reconcile them. Onely hee desireth some respite, vntill by our negligence, either the papists may get a head, or forreine enimies haue made their prouisions ready. For how little affection hee beareth to the prince and state, it appeereth throughout all his defence.
In this place hee goeth about to smooth, and as farre as hee dare with the safetie of the cause in hand, to defende the insurrection in the north of England anno 1569. the rebellions in Ireland, the practises of Charles Paget, and Francis Throgmorton, and diuers other attempts against her Maiestie and the state. Whereas the earles of Northumberland and Westmerland rose in armes in the north, and spoiled all that quarter, and purposed not onely the destruction of the prince, but also the subuersion of the state, and the bringing in of strangers, as appeereth by the negotiation of Ridolpho, as it is set downe in pope Pius the fift his life. hee saith, They onely gathered ^heir tenants togither, and without battaile or bloudshed retired. As if they had ment nothing, but to meete at an ale-stake or May-game. Doctor Sanders raised a rebellion in Ireland. Francis Throgmorton not onely reuealed the secrets of the state to Bernardin Mendoca, and practised with him, how to draw in forreine enimies; but also had his finger in other treasons. Charles Paget began a practise about the coast of Sussex, and was the ouerthrow of Henry earle of Northumberland, and afterward continued practising what mischeefe he could against his countrey. The late earle of Northumberlandes
 actions were openly declared in the Starre-chamber to be dangerous. The last earle of Arundell was taken, as hee was passing ouer to the enimies. And yet all these treasonable and dangerous practises are by him either lightly passed, or else coloured.
Hee saith, that Francis Throgmorton died for hauing a description of some portes in his chamber. But his owne confession testifieth, that hee was touched for far greater matters: and I haue partly pointed at the same. Hee saith The earle of Arundell was condemned onely for hearing of a masse: and that he had cause to reioice, that he was condemned for such a treason. As if it were so spirituall and glorious a matter to heare a masse. Assuredly in times past masses were no such glorious matters, when they were solde to all commers for three-halfe-pence a peece and vnder. As for the earle, hee had great cause to commend the clemencie of this gouernment, or else hee had well vnderstoode, that hee had committed greater faultes then hearing of a masse: all which I forbeare to relate for the respect I beare to his house.
The iustice that hath beene doone vpon papists that haue beene conuicted eyther of rebellion, or secrete practises with forraine enemies, or other kindes of treason and felony, he calleth Pressures, vexations, dishonors, rapines, slaughters, and afflictions: Dishonoring her Maiestie and the state, and calumniating the iudges. And yet were more true catholickes and religious christians executed within one yeere in Queene Maries time, then trayterous papists since her Maiestie came to the crowne.Histor. Genuens. lib. 23. Bizarus and other strangers do greatly commend her Maiesties clemency, her very enemies could neuer appeach her of cruelty. The papists most cruelly murder those, that are of a diuers religion. albeit they yeelde obedience to their prince, and desire to liue quietly. Her Maiestie executeth none to death for popish religion. nay least she should seeme to touch any for religion, she doth oftentimes spare offendors guiltie of dangerous practises and treasons. Likewise in drawing the obstinate to the church there is great moderation vsed. Many offend: few are punished, and that very gently. The papistes haue the greatest part of the wealth of the land in their handes. Diuers rayling companions are still publishing libels to the dishonor of her Maiestie, and the whole gouernment;
 neither can this Noddy represse his malitious affection, but he must needes allow their dooings. And yet the papistes are spared; although neuer the more for his wise pleading.
Finally he commendeth the papistes for their patience. But I thinke he meaneth the patience rather of Lombardes, then of christians. For they neuer had yet patience, but when they were vnable to resist. In king Henry the eightes dayes they made diuers insurrections in England. The trumpets of sedition were monkes and friers. In king Edward the sixt his daies they stirred in Deuonshire and Cornewall, and all for want of their masse, and holywater, and such like trinckets. The cheefe moouers thereof were likewise priests. in Queene Elizabeths time they made head first in the north parts, and afterward in Ireland. by the seditious practises of priestes and Iesuites either most, or a great part of that country is in combustion. Neither haue they omitted any opportunity, to mooue new rebellions in England. In Fraunce they conspired together against their lawfull kings Henry the third and fourth; and neuer gaue ouer, vntill they were ouercome by famine, sword and other calamities. and this is the patience of papists. nay they say, that if the first christians had had power, they would haue deposed Nero, Dioclesian, and other persecutors.Lib. 5. de pontif. Rom. c. 7. Quod si Christiani olim, saith Bellarm. non deposuerunt Neronem and Dioclesianum, and Iulianum apostatam, ac Valentem Arianum and similes; id fuit, quia decrant vires temporales Christianis. So when papistes are too weake to resist, then they are content to obey: but giue them head; and then beware. Compare now the dooings and proceedings of our side with our aduersaries: I hope there shal be no such wickednes found in our hands. Diligently doth this fellow search matter against vs, but findeth none.
To iustifie his consorts, he telleth vs of Goodman: but we do not allow his priuate opinion. Beside that, he doth not like rebellion, but misliketh womens gouernment, which opinion since himselfe hath retracted. Secondly he obiecteth against vs Wyats rebellion. But that was not for religion, but for matter of state: not against Queene Marie, but against strangers, whose tyrannie hee abhorred. Thirdly he telleth vs, and that in very tragicall termes, Of armies, campes, battailes, insurrections, desolations caused in Germanie, France, Flanders,

(...)

 she practise of the world, he was thought not vnworthy to be emploied in publike causes. His body was mishapen, especially his toes, and feete, which declared that he was ex (...) genere: that is of the kinde of crooked clawed beastes, but that was couered with his gowne and slippers. His first step out of the vniuersity was into the Cardinals house, where he learned the Cardinals pride, and vanity. His first employment was in the negotiation at Rome about the kinges mariage with the Lady Anne Bollen, who sent him thither together with Edward Fox to solicite her cause. For his wit and experience, he was thought fit to be employed, and specially named by the Queene: but his false and treacherous dealing in that cause, did much hinder the kinges proceeding, as afterward did manifestly appeare. Notwithstanding because the Queene thought he had taken paines, and dealt faithfully with her; she was the cause, that he was nominated by the king, and so preferred to be bishop of Winchester. The which that he might seeme to deserue, he did publikely defend the kinges supreme authority against the pope, and by an oath, whereof there is yet a publike act remayning, he forswore and abiured the pope. afterward taking the opportunity of the kinges humor, he wrought an alienation of the kinges minde from the Queene, and neuer ceased, vntill he brought that innocent Lady vnto her end. and not content herewith he was a speciall instrument of that act of parliament, that was made against her mariage, and her issue. Thus this viper rewarded that good Queene, by whome he was aduanced. Nourish vp dogs and they will bite; saue the life of a serpent, and he will sting. Now hitherto Gardiner in outward shew was a great oppugner of the popes authority, but whether vpon hope of greater preferment by the pope, or displeasure to some about the king, afterward he began to harken to the pope. Beeing sent with Sir Henry Kniuet to Ratisbone to a certaine diet holden by the Emperor there, he was discouered to haue made a packe with Cardinall Contarene, and from thence wrote letters to the pope. Which the king tooke so offensiuely, that in all pardons commonly granted in parliaments, he excepted treasons done beyond the seas: meaning no doubt this treason of Winchester. Returning home now reconciled to the pope, he proued a great persecutor of true christians. He was the cheefe
 moouer of the king to set out the act of six articles, which was the occasion of so many innocents death; and in execution thereof this wolfe was alwaies most forward; as contrarywise, if the king was aduised to reforme any abuse, he was alwaies most backeward. In the latter time of the king he was so out of his fauour, that he came not in his presence. And where beforetime he was made one of the tutors to young king Edward, and an ouerseer of king Henries will, he was quite dashed out, and by no meanes could bee admitted again, either to his place, in the kings fauour, or in his will Which proceeded, as may probablie bee coniectured, for that hee was the cause of Queene Annes death, which the king toward his latter ende so much repented. In the beginning of king Edwards daies hee hindred the iourney into Scotland, and whatsoeuer might make for the honor of the yoong king, as appeereth by his letters to the Lord Protector. And yet in open termes acknowledged the kings supremacie, and once moreThe acts are extant. denied the pope. But vpon the Protectors death, the man seeing a storme comming, did obstinately resist the kinges proceedings, and so was woorthily depriued of his bishopricke, and committed to prison. But beeing deliuered from thence by Queene Marie, hee raged against the flocke of Christ like a woolfe famished, and long restrained. And as before hee had caused Queene Anne to loose her life, so hee sought to bring the ladie Elizabeth her daughter to destruction. Hee was the onely instrument to examine and entrap the innocent ladie, and by diuers meanes sought to suborne false witnesses, to accuse her, as an abbettor of Wyats insurrection. And so farre hee preuailed, as a warrant was brought to Master Bridges then lieutenant of the tower, for her execution. Thus had the hope of her happie gouernment beene cut off, if God had not stirred vp the lieutenant to make staie of executio^, vntill the Queenes pleasure was further knowne. Hee was also the onely man, that prosecuted bishop Ridley, and bishop Latimer to death: insomuch that expecting newes from Oxford of their execution: hee woulde not dine before hee had heard, that fire was set to them. But see Gods iudgements vpon the cruell tyrant: euen that selfe same dinner, in the midst of his meriment, God so strooke him, that hee was carried from the table to his bed, and neuer rose vntill hee died. So hee raged while hee liued,
 and raued when hee died. His actions in his life time were odious, his body dying did stinke so odiously, that his seruants could not endure it. He woulde not suffer the holy martyrs to speake at their death, and therefore God stroke him so in his toong with swelling, that sometime before his death he was not able to vtter one word. and this was the life and death of this monster. Of other qualities I will not speake. One of his men set out a treatise against the mariage of ministers; wherein it seemeth his finger was. But much more honestie it had beene for him to haue beene maried. Hee wrote diuers things, but hee wrote not onely contrary to himselfe, but also both to papists and protestants, which his workes now extant do shew, refuting notoriously the vaine brags, which our aduersarie maketh of his learning.
William Allen was borne I know not where, but he was brought vp in the vniuersity of Oxford, from whence either discontented with the present gouernme^t, or else induced with hope of better preferment otherwhere, he fled into the low countries, and there became a reader of the popes broken diuinity. Afterward beeing nouzled among rebels and traytors, he began to teach positions of rebellion and treason to his countrymen, that came ouer, and so instructed them, that diuers of his scholers prooued maisters in wilfull disobedience and treason against their prince and country. himselfeJn his answere. ad per seq. Aug. c. 5. saith, That it is not onely lawfull, but glorious for subiectes to take armes against princes, that will not admit popish religion. He alloweth and commendeth not onelie the rebellion in England, but also in Ireland, that was raysed for that cause. Neither should it seeme, that any practise was made against her Maiestie by the papists, but he eyther was a plotter of it, or had vnderstanding of it. When her Maiestie sent aide to the distressed people of the low countries, he by his pestilent perswasions caused Stanley and his regiment most shamefully to betray Deuenter, nay to betray the honour of his country, and his prince, and to turne to the enemy. And that it might appeare to be his act, he was not ashamed publikely in a booke written, to defend this treason, and dishonour. For which cause king Philip gaue him liuing and pension, and the pope at length gaue him the title of a Cardinall, and called he was Cardinall of Saint Martin in Montibus, to shewe that he
 sought no low matters, but would flye to the top of the hilles. He was also called Cardinall of England, for that he meant to be legate of England, and to betray it to the pope. For these base seruices he was esteemed both of the Spanish king and pope, but alwaies as a traytor and perfidious enemy to the prince and state. Which as it appeared alwaies, so especially in anno 1588. For then was he appointed to come into England with the Spanish army for the subuersion, and vtter desolation of that, which should haue beene his most deere country. Nay it is apparent, that this war was especially stirred vp by him and his consortes at home and abroade. Sixtus QuintusThe declaration of the sentence of Sixtus Quintus. saith he, Solicited by the zealous and importunate instance of sundry the most principall persons of English catholikes hath dealt earnestly with diuers princes, and specially with the potent king catholike of Spaine, that he will emploie his forces to the deposition of the Queene, and correction of her complices. HeeIn his letters to the nobles and people of England. sheweth that diuers English Did come also in the Spanish armie, and nauie, and that hee himselfe woulde be present to mediate, that the English might bee well entreated of the conquerors: at the least, that they might haue their throtes cut gently. HeeIbidem. curseth all those, That shoulde fight for their prince and countrey, and not take part with forreine enimies. He exhorteth all to rise and fight against the Queene. If you should,Ibidem. saith hee, sit still, or refuse to helpe the Spaniard, or seeke to vphold the vsurper (so he calleth the Queene) or her complices, you shall encurre the angels curse and malediction vpon the land of Meros, and be as deepely excommunicated as shee is. He discourageth and fraieth all those, that woulde fight for their countrey, andIbidem. saith, Fight not for Gods loue, least you be damned. And to the entent to make her Maiestie and this gouernment most odious, hee hath published against her the most execrable and malicious libell, that either by malice coulde be deuised, or by wordes vttred. Naie he raileth against all honest men, that were likely to take her part. And of these libels hee had caused whole barrels to bee embarqued for England. But God ouerthrowing the Spanish nauie, hee thought it wisedome to conceale the malice of the popish faction, and to trusse vp his fardels, and sende his libels backe to Rome, least the libell might worke a contrarie effect, then that for which it was deuised. This expedition
 dissolued, this hungrie cardinall returned to Rome loden with shame and reproch, for that his wicked counsels tooke no better effect. In the end the pope perceiuing he could do no more mischeefe to his countrey, and that he was rather a burthen, then otherwise, made small account of him. Whereupon ensued his death either vpon greefe, or percase some other secret occasion. So hatefull was his life, and his death miserable and shamefull. In all his life he sought the ruine of his natiue countrey, and therefore Gods will was, that he shoulde die inglorious in a strange countrey. Seeing then these were the qualities and proceedings of Gardiner and Allen, who doth not detest the memory of two such wicked monsters? The Noddie in this encounter saith what he can both in their excuse and praise: but if he had thought that any woulde haue come against him, I beleeue he woulde haue kept silence.
Hee saith first, That none was further from blood and crueltie then Gardiner; and to prooue it, alleageth That it proceeded onely from his gentle nature, that some of the greatest protestants in Queene Maries time were not called to accompt: and that he laboured to saue the Lord Sturton condemned for murdring of Harguill, and the Lady Smith burned for killing her husband, and the duke of Northumberland condemned for rebellion. Further he telleth vs, How a certaine bracelet came to his handes containing the secret of Wyats action, and yet that he neuer vrged the knowledge gotten thereof to the Lady Elizabeths perill, she beeing then an obiect of loue and compassion, rather then of enuy and hatred. And much idle talke he spendeth about these matters, but his pleading is of that nature, that his owne friends must needes acknowledge that he wanteth shame in auowing notorious vntruthes; and common reason in alleadging such matters as either make against him, or at the least nothing for him. For wherein could he shew himselfe more shamelesse, then in praysing Gardiner for his mildenesse and gentle nature, when so many particulars, as we haue before set downe, do declare him to be most cruell and sauage, not sparing any, that stood well affected to that religion, which he hated? Beside that, did he not seeke the death of the Lady Parre last wife of king Henry the eight, and the Lady Tyrwhit, the Lady Lane, and Lady Harbert her three wayting women? Did he not procure the king to set his hand
 to the articles against the Queene, and meant to haue proceeded further, had not she by her modest cariage and answers pacyfied the kings anger? It is also euident, that he pursued doctor Barnes, and diuers other good men euen to the very death. Neither was Anne Askew tormented first, and then burned without his priuity. Wherefore if diuers principall protestantes, as they are called, or rather Christians were not called to accompt; it was rather want of ability then will, that was neuer wanting in Gardiner to shed innocent bloud. For he that caused one Queene to be slaughtered vpon false criminations, and sought the death of an other, especially ayming at the greatest, while Bonner and his companions were butchering of the lambes, and lesser sheepe of Christes fold, we may not thinke, that he meant to forbeare any. No either it was the kings pleasure, that would not haue his seruants butchered, or else the strength, or the wise cariage of the parties, that kept them out of Gardiners hand, that delited in nothing more then bloud.
Likewise it is a notorious vntruth, that eyther by a bracelet, or by any other signe Gardiner was able to prooue the Lady Elizabeth consenting to Wiats attempt. But if he had but had the least argument of disloyalty against her, she could not haue escaped his hands. For albeit there was no colour, yet did he seeke to suborne witnesses against her, and promise life to Wiat, if he woulde accuse her. What likelyhood is there then, if he sought witnesses against the lady, and that most greedily, that he should conceale an euidence beeing happily found, especially such a one as might reueale hidden mysteries?
Thus our aduersary groundeth his defence vpon vntruthes. Besides that he rayseth his building vpon thinges very impertinent, and which make little for Gardiners credite. He saith, He entreated for the life of the Lord Sturton, the Lady Smith, and the Duke of Northumberland. As if Phalaris and Dionysius and the most bloudy and cruell tyrantes, that euer yet liued, did not spare some offenders, to whome they bore affection: euen wolues agree with wolues, and serpents do not sting one another. If then Gardiner fauoured malefactors, whoores, and rebels, and such like, and without remission prosecuted true Christians; it is apparent, that he was extreamely cruell, and that his cruelty was extended against the
 best men. Sure if this discourser, had beene wise, he would not haue mentioned the Lord Sturton, or the Lady Smith, seeing no man beeing such as Gardiner was, could with any honour speake for them, the one hauing committed a most execrable murder vpon Harguil, the other hauing killed her owne husband. No doubt she was an honest woman, that Winchester would speake for.
He saith that The Lady Elizabeth was then an obiect of loue and compashion, rather then of enuy and hatred. The which doth argue Gardiners extreame cruelty, that had no remorse of conscience to shed so innocent a Ladies bloud, forgetting all naturall pitty and compassion that was due to a woman of her yeeres, and quality, and in that case.
Where sir Francis saith, That recusants ca^not professe more loyaltie and loue to Queene Elizabeth and to the state, then Gardiner did to king Henry, and his sonne king Edward, and to the state then; and yet in the daies of Queene Marie betraied the Queene, and realme into the popes, and Spaniards hands, pulling off his vizor of loue and loyaltie, and shewing himselfe in his naturall likenesse and qualities: The wise N. D. taketh exceptions to his sayings, and telleth him, that either hee is ignorant of matters then passed or else willingly telleth vntruthes: and so hee entreth into a long discourse concerning Gardiners fall, as he calleth it; and the matching of Queene Mary with king Philip, and the comming in of the Spaniards, excusing Gardiner for writing against the pope, and flatly denying, that hee consented to match the Queene with the prince of Spaine. but first this talke of Recusants is impertinent in this place, and argueth nothing else, but that this point charged vpon Recusants, is a bone too hard for him to gnaw, and a matter which had bin better concealed then mentioned in this place; declaring plainly, what we are to expect at their hands, if time serue.
Secondly it is most false, that either Gardiner did then fal, or commit a fault, when hee stoode for the princes supremacie against the pope, or else that hee condemned his dooing therein during king Henries daies. Nay when his Secretary Germaine Gardiner was executed; he had like himselfe to haue passed the same way, had he not confessed his fault to the king, and desired pardon with promise of amendement. Likewise
 in king Edwards daies being examined first, Whether hee did not beleeue, that the king was iustly and ought to bee the head of the church of England, and of the synode or conuocation: and secondly, Whether hee had not authority, to make ecclesiasticall lawes, for church gouernment; hee answered to both affirmatiuely. Which sheweth, yt this Noddy was ignorant of matters of those times, and not his aduersarie. But if i^ writing against the pope he did euill, sure in nothing did he well. For this was the onely act, for which he deserued commendation. To write for the pope, or to acknowledge the popes authoritie, is nothing else, but vnnaturally to subiect this countrey to a stranger, and to acknowledge the vsurped power of a tyrant, that is vndoubtedlie Antichrist.
In this place also the Noddy heapeth vp other lyes vpon the backe of the first, adding lies to lies. Hee saith, That Gardiner was one of the chiefe of sixteene Counsellers, that were appointed by king Henries testament, and earnest charge of mouth at his last howre, to gouerne his sonne and realme, and that the king earnestly gaue charge, that no alteration of religion shoulde be made during his sonnes minoritie. But neither was hee one of the chiefe, nor any gouernour at all. For the king long before his death had dashed him out of his will, as a turbulent fellow, and not woorthy to haue such a charge committed vnto him. Neither would he be induced at sir Anthony Brownes request to admit him againe to that place. Secondly this Gardener was neither present when the king died, nor many daies before, being commanded out of his sight. Thirdly it is most notorious, that ye king dealt most earnestly with Annibault the French kings ambassadour a little before his death to perswade his king to establish a reformation of religion in France. And therefore this tale of forbidding alteration, is a meere fiction. Whatsoeuer the king commanded, that certes was to Gardener vnknowne, being forbidden the kings presence. Fourthly how absurd is it to thinke, that Gardiner durst plead the popes right to the king, when for this onely suspition, that he enclined to the pope, hee had, no doubt, beene called in question, had hee not submitted himselfe to the kings mercy? That hee did so, is a most shamelesse lie; as also that hee denied the Kings supremacie in his sermon preached before king Edward, which this
 Noddy affirmeth contrary to all truth. And therefore doth farre better deserue the title of Steelebrow, then his aduersary. sure, if he had not beene both steelebrowed, and beetilbrowed, yea and beetilheaded; hee woulde neuer haue beene so bolde in affirming so many vntruthes without grounde or witnesse; nay contrarie to all record of storie, and testification of witnesses.
Thirdly it is most true, That Gardiner was a principall actor in matching Queene Mary with Philip of Spaine; which our aduersarie denieth: and most false, that the Counsell was deuided about this matter, some fauoring the earle of Deuonshire, others the prince of Spaine; which he affirmeth. That is prooued, for that hee wrote and receiued letters from Charles the emperour to this purpose; and also in that he was a chiefe dealer about the articles agreed vpon, at the time of the mariage; and last of all for that the prince of Spaine came first to Winchester, and was maried by the bishop, as a man specially fauoring that match. The second point is prooued first by the testimonie ofLib. 2. de schism. Sanders that saith, that all the counsel liked this match in regard of bringing back the church of England to the church of Rome. And secondly for that the Queene made choice of the earle of Deuonshire herselfe; and such was her affection, that shee had maried him, but that all her Counsell resisted it, and deuised most slanderous letters in the emperors name against the yoong man. And lastly for that the yoong earle was suspected for religion, and so giuen to his affectio^s, that he did not himselfe desire any such matter, nor if he had desired it, could he haue bin liked by Winchester. Neither skilleth it whether Winchester called him his spiritual childe, or no. If he did, then was hee an vnkinde spirituall father, that gaue counsell to sende his childe away into Italy, where by a most shamefull practise of this wicked generation he was poisoned and made away. Resteth then that this practise of Winchester to bring in the authoritie of the pope, and tyrannie of Spaniards was most dangerous to this state, and ought to be most hatefull to this nation. If he did not please the pope nor emperor neither, as this our aduersarie pretendeth; then was he odious to all the worlde.
His sermon certes preached at Paules crosse before the king and Queene, and popes legat, declared, that as in times
 past he had vsed his authority to persecute poore Christians, so here he did abuse gods word to please the popes agent, and those that fauoured his faction. His text was, Hora est iani nos de somno surgere; which is taken out of Saint Paules epistle to the Romaines. And out of this he went about to shew, that since the church of England had departed from the subiection of the pope, the people had continued, as it were, in a sleepe: therefore did he conclude, that euery man must awake, and returne againe to the pope. as if the apostle in those wordes had willed men to submit themselues, and to returne to the obedience of the pope, and to embrace his most vaine superstitions and his fantasticall and impious traditions: which, god wot, was no part of the apostles meaning. Nay he rather speaketh of the pope 2. Thes. 2. where he mentioneth the man of sinne, that shall sit in the temple of God, and aduance himselfe aboue all that is called God. And in this place he rather exhorteth worldlinges that are drowned in sensuality and pleasures, and forget God while they follow the vanities of this world, to awake and call themselues to a serious cogitation of spirituall matters. For security and sencelesse stupidity is an image of sleepe, or death rather. And it may very well be applyed to those, that eyther are besotted with popish ignorance, not knowing any point of Christian faith, or that walke in darkenesse of popish errors, and will not awake out of their sencelesse sleepe, and come to the light of Gods word, that is offered to them. For to speake truely, the doctrine of popery is nothing, but a doctrine of darkenesse, of sleepe, of death. But let vs see how our aduersary defendeth this noble sermon. first saith he, It was preached before the king and Queene, the popes legat, the embassadors of diuers princes, and a great audience. As if many great fooleries, and vaine toyes had not beene declared before great princes, and many auditors. The more were present here, the more witnesses there were of the mans great simplicity, in mistaking; and shamelesse impudency, in peruerting the scriptures.
Secondly he telleth vs, How Gardiners discourse was to shew, how long the people of England had runne astray, and beene in darkenesse of diuision and strife. But first he seemed himselfe to be as it were in a sleepe, when he talked of darkenesse, and should haue spoken of sleepe. For betweene these two
 there is no small difference. For many awake in the night, and others sleepe at noone daye. Secondly he committeth no smal error, where he calleth the separation from popery, Darknesse of diuision and strife. For he that is ioyned to Christ, walketh in light, and they that liue vnder the pope continue in Egyptian darknesse. Beside, this darknesse doth rather worke confusion, then diuision.
Thirdly he saith that Gardiner vttered two thinges that greatly mooued the whole auditory. The first was the harty accusation of himselfe for his booke de vera obedientia. Which he vttered weeping like a great calfe, and as our aduersary telleth vs, With such vehemency as he was forced diuers times to make some pauses. And that these teares were not feyned, saith he, It appeared in this, that drawing to his end, he said, negaui cum Petro, exiui cum Petro, sed nendu^ amare fleui cum Petro. The second was a relation how king Henry a litle before his death dealt with him secretly and seriously, to go into Germany to a certaine diet, and there to take some course, that he might be reconciled to the pope. But what maketh all this to the true expounding of this text, Hora est iam nos de somno surgere? Surely no more, then if he should haue talked of clypping of goates, or shearing of swine, and such idle fancies as be represented to men in their sleepe. Besides that here are many vntruthes conteined, of which I haue great cause to doubt, whether euer they were vttered in so famous and publike an auditory, or no. First it is a most shamelesse vntruth, to affirme, that euer the king desired to be reconciled to the pope. his words, his actions, yea all his proceedings, tended to the contrarie: and of this point he was so well resolued, that rather he sought to perswade others, to renounce the pope, then determined himselfe to returne to the pope. Finally what coulde be deuised more absurd, then to feine that such a noble and magnanimous prince did voluntarily submit himselfe to a base enimie, which by no force nor perswasion, he coulde bee induced to do. Secondly, it is an absurd thing to thinke, that if the king meant to do any such matter, he would impose the charge vpon him, that had written against the popes power, and forsworne it, and vntill the protectors death in king Edwards daies did acknowledge the princes supremacie. Thirdly it is apparent, that the king long time before his death
 suspected him for a secret traitor, and coulde no way abide, that he shoulde come in his presence, as the Lord Paget, and sir Anthonie Browne, the Duke of Suffolke and diuers others testified. And therefore if any such thing had beene in the kings head, he woulde rather haue vsed any other, then him. At least he woulde haue declared his minde to some of his Counsails beside Gardiner. Fourthly I cannot learne, that euer the bishop of Winchester did speake these wordes at Paules crosse. And therefore most like it is, they haue beene forged since, and fathered vpon him. Lastly if the king woulde haue any such matter handled, he woulde not haue sent into Germany, but to Rome: neither needed hee to haue doubted, but hee shoulde most willingly haue bin receiued, if he had entended any such submission. Al these points therefore seeme to haue bin deuised by some lying companion, and stand onely vpon the bare credite of this our wise aduersarie, without proofe of any one witnes or record: and therefore we may well conclude, that the second thing which he fathereth vpon Gardiner is a meere lie.
In the relation of the first thing also there are many vntruthes. First whether the auditory were mooued, or no, at the bishops sermons; it may be some question. That the same was not mooued to beleeue the bishop, if he said as much as is here written, it is most certaine, seeing the vntruth of his bragges of the kings fauour was so notorious. Secondly that Gardiner should weepe for denying the pope, is a most ridiculous fiction. Nay rather it seemed he wept, that for sauing his temporal honors, was here constrayned publikely to deny Christ, and to adhere to Antichrist. Thirdly it cannot be, that Gardiner beeing neere his end should say those wordes, that are set downe by this reporter. For his toong was so swolne sometime before his death, that he was not able to vtter one plaine word. And if he did sometimes before his death lament his denyall with Peter, yet could it not be, that he meant of his abiuring the pope (for Peter denied Christ, and not the pope) but of his plaine renouncing of Christ, to please the pope. Fourthly it is ridiculous to thinke, that Gardiner was a sleepe when he wrote his booke, De vera obedientia. Nay it was more likely, that he was brought a sleepe when he listned to the popes enchantements, and forgetting Christ followed the course of the world. Lastly all his weeping, sobbing, and sighing was counterfait,
 and his sorrow feined onelie to please the popes legate.
But saith our aduersarie, If euer man might take vpon him to talke of a sleepe or dreame in matters of our common wealth, then might Gardiner do it. As if it were so great a matter to talke of sleeping. Sure Gardiners and this fellowes talke is so euill fitted, that they seeme to dreame, while they reasoned of sleeping; and come not neere that sleepe, of which the apostle speaketh. Philosophers say that sleepe is a binding of the senses, and that it is rather a time of rest and quiet, then of trouble and tossing too and fro. Further in sleepe men oftentimes do thinke they see and feele, which they see not, nor feele not. Absurdly therefore shoulde the times of king Henry and king Edward be compared to a sleepe, if there were in those times such stirres and troubles, as this fellow surmiseth. Beside that, when More and Fisher lost their heades, it was no idle fancie, such as is represented vnto vs, when we sleepe. Neither if the king was so much troubled about matters of religio^, as this sleeping Noddy, or Nodding sleeper pretendeth, then was he not in a sleepe. So then the similitude of sleepe and a troubled state was very vnfit. And yet to fit the same he feineth, I know not what, troubles in the kings minde about his diuorce, and matters of religion, most falsely. For excepting those troubles which the pope stirred, and Gardiner by his euil counsel procured, there hapned to the king nothing more then ordinary. Nay after his diuorce from his brothers wife his mind was setled, and after the abrogation of the popes authority, both he and his subiects receiued great contentment; and his state, great assurance.
He telleth further, How Gardiner was wont to say of the king, that leauing to loue her, whom by gods and mans lawes he was bound to loue, he neuer loued any person hartily afterward. But this is not likely, seeing Gardiner was a principall agent in the kings diuorce, and knew that neyther gods law, nor mans law was against it. Nay he knew, that it was directly against gods law for a man to mary the relict of his brother, and that mans lawes also forbid it. Lastly it is apparent, that all that allowed this mariage, stood onely vpon the popes dispensation, which now all men know not to be worth a straw. Beside this, all this talke concerning the kings diuorce
 is impertinent to the sermon, and more impertinent to Gardiners text, about which the question is betwixt vs: and argueth nothing, but the extreame hatred and malice of the popish faction against the noble king Henry the eight of famous memorie, whom vpon euery occasion, yea and without occasion they are alwaies ready to traduce: and all because he dispossessed the pope of his vsurped authoritie. This is also the roote of their malice against Queene Elizabeth, which hath mooued them to publish so many scurrilous libels against her. Neither haue they spared that innocent king, the hope of our time so vntimely taken from vs, king Edward the sixt, vnto whom most impudently this railing companion doth impute the tumults and rebellions that were raised in his time by certaine seditious priests and papists in Deuonshire and Cornewall. He vttereth also diuers reprochfull speeches against the Protector, and vainely braggeth of the antiquitie of popery, whose nouelties are now apparent to all the worlde. But what maketh all this either for the defence of Gardiners sermon, or else for the iustification of Gardiners cruell murdring of Gods saints, or for the cleering of him for diuers practises both against the Ladie Elizabeth now Queene, and also against the state of religion and this realme? Is it not apparent, that this Noddy in the midst of his long discourse hath lost himselfe, and forgot the matter in hand? The matter it selfe doth shew it. But no doubt we shall heare of him againe shortly in some new practise, or rebellion. In the meane while let vs heare what he hath to say for his copartener in all treason the Cardinall Allen.
He saith, That the Cardinall, albeit he wished moderation in yoonger men, yet himselfe might speake his minde freely concerning the popes excommunication against the Queene. As if that were not vnlawfull for him, that was vnlawfull for others; or as if it were not the part of an vnnaturall, disloyall and impious traytor, so to rayle and reuel against the Queene, his country, the state of religion, and all that loue her and the state, as this rinegued and infamous wretch doth in the declaration of the pope Sixtus Quintus his bull against his Queene and country, and in his libels directed to the nobility and people of England and Ireland, which he meant to haue published anno 1588. I need not to touch other writings of his, for
 that this passeth all. nay therein he surpasseth himselfe, and all that wrote before him. The Queene he calleth at his pleasure, and doth not onely by manifold reasons disable her right, but by infinite calumniations endeuour to make her odious to all posterity, and not onely to her subiectes, that now liue. He setteth foorth the Spanish forces, and stirreth vp all papists to take part with them vpon paine of the popes curse. He rayleth at all those, that eyther loue religion, or liue in obebience, or fauour the state. And yet this discourser doth defend his dooing therein, and saith he might do it freely. And no doubt, but the papistes that adhere to the popes authority are of his opinion. But will you heare his braue reasons? As in a great and noble house saith he, Iarres and breaches falling out betwixt the goodman and the goodwife, their eldest children may declare what they thinke with reuerence to both parts: so in the church her Maiestie beeing our mother, and the pope the spirituall father to all cacolikes, Cardinall Allen, Sanders, Bristow, Stapleton and such like, as elder children may speake their mindes as well of the causes of the breaches betweene them, as of the right of both parties. This is the summe of his defence; but how vnsufficient, you shall easily iudge by the sequele. First it standeth on false groundes. Secondly it conteineth ridiculous matter. Thirdly it maketh against him that made it. For first we denie the pope to be any christians spirituall father. For hee begetteth none by preaching, but destroieth infinite soules by maintaining false doctrine, and ruinateth christendome by warres, murders and trecherous practises. We deny also, that Allen, Sanders or any such trecherous companion hath any prerogatiue of birthright either in church, or common-wealth. Nay they haue declared themselues to be traitors, and strange children, enimies to their prince, and countrey. We say further, that no lawfull bishop, much lesse the pope, that is onely a bishop in name and title, hath power to depriue a prince of his state. We say finally, it is a malepert part for a childe, to determine that the father may put awaie his mother, and such a one with a little helpe will declare his father a cruell husband, his mother a dishonest woman, and himselfe a bastardly sonne.
Secondly it is ridiculous to compare the pope to the goodman, and princes to the good wife of the house, seeing these two
 do neuer keepe house togither, and considering that the pope doth in his owne order vtterly condemne lawfull mariage. Againe what more fonde, then to compare the popes hostile proceedings, to iarres that fall out betwixt man and wife in a priuate house? Doth the goodman vpon euery iarre damne, and curse his wife? Doth he seeke to cut her throte, as this good fellow doth the Queenes? Lastly how ridiculous is it to compare Allen, Sanders, Bristow, Stapleton and such like to children, when they haue declared themselues old knaues ouergrowne in all trecherie and villanie, and run out of their natiue countrey? Do children runne from their mother, and forsake her house, to follow a reputed father, I knowe not where? Is not this the part of bastardes, and not of children?
Thirdly if children ought with reuerence to respect their mother, then is this Allen a most vnnaturall sonne, that hath with all villanous and reprochfull termes railed against his mother. Then are the rinegued priests, and Iesuites, and their consorts murdring parricides, that by all meanes haue sought the destruction of their mother, nay of the most kinde mother, that euer this people of England had. Againe if shee be as the good wife, and the pope as the good man; yet must not he take vpon him to be iudge in his owne cause. Nor ought any woman to be dispossessed of her right, but by lawfull iudges, and orderly proceeding. It is a strange kind of diuorce that is made by force of armes. But what eyther Parsons the Iesuite talketh of the affection of parents, that neuer knew his right father; or bastardly traytors talke of the right of princes, of which they are ignorant, it greatly skilleth not.
Wherefore seeing nothing is more apparent, then that Cardinall Allen conspired with the pope and Spaniardes to worke the destruction of his prince and countrey, and came with them anno 1588. ready with fire and sworde to destroie this lande, and when hee coulde do no woorse, barked out a multitude of hellish slanders against the prince, the state, and all goodmen; among all the traitors and enimies of this countrey he deserueth to be in the first ranke. The same accompt also we are to make of N. D. and all his consorts, that allow his villanies, and treasons. And thus much may suffice to answere our aduersaries in wordes. The rest I referre to
 those that carry the sworde, which no doubt will prouide, as in such time of danger the magistrates of Rome were woont, Ne quid resp. detrimenti ab istis capiat.


CHAP. V. 

Of Iesuites, and their disciples, and consorts, against N. D. his fift encounter.

THe dispute and controuersie betwixt our aduersarie and vs beeing heere about Iesuites, and their leud and bloudie practises, I woulde gladly knowe the reason, why he runneth out into so large and ample a discourse of his father the pope in this chapter: and the rather, for that he hath reserued for him a proper and a peculiar tract, and a place of great dignitie in that part that foloweth heereafter. Was it not, thinke you, to let vs vnderstand howe nobly the Iesuites are descended, hauing Antichrist for their father, and the whoore of Babylon for their mother? If this were not the cause, then let Parsons the Iesuite, the author of the Wardeword, I trow, and one that for want of a father is constreined to runne to the pope, that is now the father of all ribaldes, traytors, murderers, empoisoners, and enimies to this state; let him I saie shewe me, what is the true cause. He may do well also to shew vs in what bordell he left the honest woman his mother, and to set downe his whole petigree, that hee may cleere himselfe of irregularitie, and let his friendes vnderstand his descent and high nobilitie. In the meane while let vs see what he hath to say, first for his holy father, and next for himselfe, and his consorts.
First he is much offended, that the popes doctrine is called, Dregs, poison, and superstition: but assuredly without iust cause. For who seeth not, that the principall ground of poperieis tradition? Themselues say, that traditions are of equall dignitie to the Scriptures. If then it be drawne out of cisterns






 of traditions, and not out of the pure streames of gods word, it is no maruell, if in these cisterns there be found much dregs and corruption. Now adde vnto traditions all the popes decretals, and scholasticall fancies and subtilties of friers and their followers, and then the filth of popish doctrine must needes seeme much greater. Againe seeing they haue drawne into their synagogue many customes, whereof some are Iewish, other prophane and heathenish, they haue no wrong to bee charged with superstition. From the Iewes they draw their Leuiticall priesthood, the formes of their sacrifice, and all the furniture of the masse, their paschall lambe, their Iubiley, and popedome. From the heathen they borrow their sacrifices and praiers for the dead, their purgatorie and the parts thereof, their stationarie obambulations about the limits of parishes, the canonizing and worship of saints departed, their holy water, and many such like ceremonies. Lastly they haue translated many points of old condemned heresies into their cacolike religion. With the Simonians they buy and sell freely, not onely benefices, and things annexed to spirituall things, but also sacraments, not sparing their holy God of the altar. Deteriores sunt Iuda, saith Christ in SaintOnus ecclesiae c. 23. Brigits reuelations, qui pro solis denarijsme vendidit, illi autem pro omni mercimonio. She speaketh of priests, that trucke, and barter masses for all manner of commodities, yea to whoores, for a nights lodging. With the Angelicks they worship angels; with the Staurolatrians they worship the crosse, and crucifixe, giuing to the same diuine worship. With the Collyridians they worship the virgin Marie. With the Manichees they bring in halfe communions or communion in one kinde. With the Carpocratians, and Simonians and heathen idolaters they fall downe and offer incense and worship dumbe images. With the Pelagians they beleeue merits and iustification by workes. And almost out of euery heresie haue taken a peece, as hath beene lately (they say) iustified against Giffords treatise intituled Caluinoturcismus. Well therefore may it be saide, that popish doctrine is full of poison: and vnaduised was our aduersarie to charge vs with heresie, or to mention any such matter, seeing the blame must needes redounde vpon himselfe, and vpon his consorts of the Romish synagogue.

Secondly he telleth vs, That ecclesiasticall supremacy ouer all Christian nations is proper and essentiall to the popes office; and that to his apostolicall authority is annexed the office of preaching. But that should more properly and substantially haue beene prooued. This beeing graunted doth shew, that the pope doth faile in his apostolicall or rather apostaticall office. For if preaching and feeding Christes flocke belong to the popes office, why doth he not preach? Why doth he not feede? Nay why doth he famish Christes flocke by murdering all true preachers, that come within his danger? He answereth, that The pope is obliged to preach by himselfe, or by others. But Saint Peter a farre greater apostle, and greater man in apostolicall gouernment, then the pope, preached by himselfe, and put not ouer his charge, as the pope doth, to Iesuites and Friers, that preach more heresie and sedition, then true doctrine. The old bishops of Rome also, which were honester men then these late popes, put not ouer their charge, but preached themselues, and in their owne person executed all bishoplie functions. Yea and saint Paule telleth vs, that the office of a bishop is a good worke, and not as the popish bishops make it, a naked bare title. To conclude, this is also the iudgement ofIn 1. Tim. 3. Ambrose, Chrysostome, Theodoret, and all that write on the third of the first to Timothie; from whence our authoritie is drawne.
He proceedeth notwithstanding further, and professeth openly, That when the pope leaueth his supremacy, and embraceth that religion, that is preached in England, he ceaseth to be pope. Which I do in part also confesse to be most true. For antichrist shall in the church of God exalt himselfe, and clayme not onely supreme, but also diuine power. He shall also defend manifold heresies, and abhorre all true doctrine, that may concerne his supreme title. And if he should not so do, he should not shew himselfe to be antichrist. Herein therefore the Iesuites and he may be conioyned, and march together hand in hand. For all of them haue shut their eies and hardened their hartes against Christes true doctrine: although it be to their shame in this life among all godly Christians; and if they repent not, shall be to their euerlasting confusion in the life to come. Yet this hard faced Sycophant sticketh not to glory in his shame, and to reioice, that the pope and his children the




 Iesuites are matched togither.
At the length our aduersarie hauing highly extolled the father of heretikes, and traitors, the pope, he descendeth to discourse of the popes darlinges begotten by him now in his declining state, and decrepit age, the Iesuites: and saith, They haue many enimies. A matter true, and by vs confessed, and by them well deserued, being a sect new vpstart, and openly professing obedience to antichrist, and enmitie to Apostolike and true catholike religion; a societie conspiring mischiefe against al such as they hate, practising diuision in priuate houses, sedition and trouble in common-wealthes, treason against godly princes, and leauing the markes of their abominations, and wicked actions behinde them wheresoeuer they come. A generation stirred vp by Sathan to disturbe the peace of Christendome, and to scourge all those, that are not thankefull for the reformation of Gods church, nor studious in sea^ching the truth, nor zealous in rooting out of heresies and planting true religion. What maruell then, if they haue many enimies, among those especially, that beare good mindes either to true religion, or to the state where they liue? As for the example of Christian religion, and of the first Christians, and Christes disciples the holy apostles, which were euery where spoken against and persecuted, which the discourser our party pretendeth and alleageth, to iustifie the generall opposition of al sorts of men against the Iesuits, it fitteth his purpose nothing. The example likewise of godly men, that are often put to their trials, is exceedingly euil applied to this sect of vngodly fellowes: and most absurdly doth he compare these Antijesuites to Christ Iesus, that was, as it were, a marke set vp to be contradicted, and was hated and persecuted of those, that were of most eminent authoritie among his nation, borrowing, as it shoulde seeme, a peece of some olde declamation vttered in the college of Iesuites, or else where in praise of this sect, and thrusting it in heere. His defence I say, is absurd, and his comparisons most odious.
First Christ Iesus, that I may beginne with him, that is the beginning, and fountaine of all spirituall graces, and whom these Antijesuites do seeme in some things to counterfait, and yet in most things oppugne, came from God, and did teach no doctrine, but which he had receiued from his father;
 humane traditions, and pharisaicall boasting of workes of the law he disallowed and condemned. These Antijesuites, that I say no worse of them, come from the pope, and teach his decretalles and doctrine, grounding themselues vpon mens traditions, and vainely bragging of their owne merits and workes. Christ Iesus loued his owne and was beloued of his owne. These vsurpers of the name of Iesus loue none but the^selues, and were charged by their owne friends, and were accused of heresie, schisme, and many grieuous crimes, as witnesseth Ribadineira that wrote the legend of his father Ignatius. Our sauiour ^or determining controuersies, and finding out the truth, sent vs to the law, and the prophets: these destroyers of soules send vs to the pope, and his tribunall, and most vaine decretalles. Iesus Christ, though Lord of heauen and earth, taught obedience to Caesar, and earthly princes: these fellowes albeit neither lordes, nor princes, yet teach disobedience to princes, and dissolue the bond of obedience, that tyeth subiectes to their superiors. Christ Iesus was the true shepheard, and sought the saluation of his flocke; and albeit iniuriously apprehended and cruelly doone to death; yet like a lambe did he suffer, albeit he had power to execute vengeance vpon his persecutors. But the Antijesuites are like wolues in sheepes clothing, that practise nothing more then murder of good men, and subuersion of states, and albeit no man touch them, or wrong them; yet are they vpon euery excommunication or commaundement of the pope ready to assassinate and murder princes, and whosoeuer else shall stand in their way. Christ Iesus was without sinne, and a perfect patterne of righteousnesse, these Antijesuites are slaues of their affections, and wheresoeuer they come, theyHazenmiller, and Simon Lithus, and Arnoldus, and Doleus in actione aduers. Iesuit. leaue behinde them a filthie odour of their couetousnesse, rapines, pride, vaine-glory, lecherie and all vilenie and beastlinesse: of which they are perfect precedents.
Secondly the godly christians of ancient time receiued no doctrine, but of Christ Iesus, and his apostles: but these antichristian sectaries haue all their rules from the pope of Rome, and his agents, and not from Christ nor his disciples. Their doctrine, although it seemed new, yet was it indeed very ancient: but the rules of the Iesuites are all confirmed within these threescore yeeres, and all that filth and corruption of poperie, which they with their barking and bauling defende, is
 but a packe of nouelties, or rather newe heresies, inuented by diuers false apostles and teachers raised vp by sathan, and commended by the authoritie of antichrist the pope. The first christian were men of peace, and estranged themselues from princes courtes, and seldome medled with publike affaires; these sectaries are like the frogs of Egypt, that leapt into all Pharohes chambers and closets. They insinuate themselues into princes courts, and enter into their secrets; they swarme euery where like lice; they stirre vp warres, and preach slaughter of true Christians, wheresoeuer they come The apostles and first Christians neuer taught rebellion, nor murder and empoisonment of princes, nor slaughter of se^ly foules, that woulde not beleeue their doctrine, though most true; neither did they publish Christs Gospell with fire, and sworde. But these apostles of satan preach sedition and rebellion, and perswade desperate and lost companions to murder, and empoison innocent princes, and promise them for their wickednesse rewardes in earth, and eternall blessednesse in heauen. They murder such as will not hearken to the popes lawes, and as Mahomet did in times past, so do these plant their sect, with fire and sword, and all manner of violence.
Finally all the godly both of ancient and late times by their godly life and fruites issuing of their Christian faith shewed themselues to be the true members of Christs church, and true Catholikes, and by their meekenesse, humilitie and patience wanne to themselues a good name and opinion euen among their enimies. But the rustling and antichristian Iesuites through their impieties, heresies, pride, couetousnesse, crueltie, filthie life and rebellious practises are suspected ofRibadineira, in vita Loiolae. friends, abhorred of enimies, and generally hated of one and other, those onely excepted, that either know them not, or know what gaine they get by their desperate teaching and aduentures. There is no truth in their doctrine, no humilitie in their conuersation, no honestie in their forced chastitie, no Christian charitie or vertue among the companions of that sect or societie. And that shall well appeere by diuers particulars, notwithstanding all the faire glosses of this discourser.
Gladly woulde he perswade his Reader, That those that oppose themselues against the Iesuites are either Iewes, Turks,
 and Infidels and such like; or those that make diuision, saying, I am of Caluin, I am of Luther; or those that haue made shipwracke of faith; or false brethren, such as loue preeminence, as did Diotrephes; or else worldlings, that follow the world, as did Demas. But in this diuision or at least enumeration, there are two grosse ^ults committed by the Noddy. First manie things therein are confidently auouched without proofe, that are either very false, or very doubtfull. For first the Iesuites haue good correspondence with Iewes, Turkes, and Infidels, and neither do the Iesuites persecute the Iewes, that are maintained publikely at Rome; nor the Turkes or Infidels, that bende their forces to roote out Christian religion, and extinguish the name and memory of Christ and Christians; nor do Turks and Iewes hurt the Iesuites. Nay with the Iewes they haue good dealings deliuering the^ their money to put out to interest. And so haue Iewes with the Iesuites. When the Iesuites of Rome made petition to Sixtus Quintus for some helpe, to finish that sumptuous colledge, which they had begun for the vse of their societie: hee bad them content themselues with the interest of their stockes of money, that were in the handes of banquers, and vsurers. Likewise the Iesuites suffring the Turkes to enter into Transiluania, Hungaria, and frontiers of christendome, do not onely not oppose themselues against them, but also seeke to set Christians at variance, and to murder and empoison princes, that should withstand them. Neither do the Iewes or Turkes maligne or speake euill or hurt of Iesuites. The Iewes trade with them. The Turkes suffer them quietly amongst them.
Secondly he doth ridiculously and falsely suppose, that some among vs say, they are of Caluin; others, that they are of Luther. Hee shoulde do vs a pleasure to shewe, who they bee. For wee neither holde of Caluin nor of Luther, no nor of pope Clement, nor any other, saue Christ Iesus. If hee cannot produce the parties that are guiltie, wee must tell him that hee is a ridiculous accuser, that obiecteth that to vs, wherein wee are cleere, and wherein hee and his consorts are most guiltie and criminous. For the papists are diuided, and some hold of Ignatius Loiola, some of Francis, some of Dominicke, some of Brigit, some of Clare, and all of the pope: and such holding and pulling there is among them, that they haue pulled Christs
 cote a sunder, and diuided themselues from his church, holding of antichrist, and such rules as they haue receiued from him.
Thirdly hee doth but speake his pleasure, where hee saith, that Such especially, as haue made shipwracke of faith, and ambitious and carnall worldlings do oppugne this sect of Iesuites. For they haue no better friendes, then the ambitious and luciferian popes, the carnall Cardinals, the fleshly friers and priests, and popish atheists, that haue no God but the pope and their bellie; men in condition swinish and brutish, and in their religion hellish. The first author of their sect was a cruel, proud, and impious hypocrite. Paule the third, that first confirmed the rule and order of Iesuites, was a carnall and bloodie man. His sensualitie appeered in the number of his whoores and bastardes. His crueltie in the persecuting of innocent Christians in his warres in Germanie, and rebellious practises in England. Of later popes Gregorie the thirteenth was their best friend, and gaue them diuers priuiledges, and built them an house. Yet was hee a carnall fellow, and a meere politicke. Hee kept certaine women, and his bastardes in his time bore no small swaie in Rome. One of them made loue to a mans wife of the house of Glorieri. Of whom receiuing some indignitie, he brought the Glorieri into hatred with his father. Who picking a quarrell to them fined Caesar Glorieri, him that set his hand to the sentence of excommunication against the Queene, 100000. ducates, and another Glorieri, that was clarke of the popes checker chamber he put out of his office, and solde it for diuers thousands of duckats. So you see much money made of a baudie matter, and you woulde woonder whether all this money went; and I beleeue hardly coulde you gesse it. I will therefore assure you, that all this money went to the Iesuites, and was most of it imploied in the building of their colledge at Rome. O holie societie, and thrise holy colledge erected for the most part by baudrie, and maintained as pope Sixtus said, by vsurie! This may serue for a taste to shew, that the best founders that Iesuites haue, are carnall and sensuall men, that rather then they will frie in purgatorie, will giue the Iesuites most of that they haue.
The second fault of this enumeration is this, that it is defectiue. For not so many atheistes, carnall worldlings, and heretickes,
 as christian and catholicke princes, zelous and godly bishops and pastors, and honest and religious Christians do detest and abhor this wicked generation. Princes, for the hazard that they haue incurred of their liues and states, haue eyther expulsed them and banished them their countries, as the French king, the Transyluanian, and those that professe true religion; or had them in iealousie, as the king of Poland, and diuers papisticall princes. Godly Christians haue reason to suspect them, and detest them for their abominable doctrine, and treacherous, and murderous practises. Fathers feare them in regard of their children, whom they inueigle and steale away. The Venetians dissolued a colledge in Padua, where gentlemens sonnes were wont to be brought vp, for that the Iesuites taking vpon them to teach there, corrupted their youth with their vnnaturall lasciuiousnes: and restrained them from teaching others, then such as were of their own society. Husbandes haue them in iealousie for their wiues, wiues for their husbands. For it is no rare matter for these subuerters of all humanity to draw wiues from husbandes, and husbandes from wiues, yea sometimes through too much familiarity with women, they spoile the men. A certaine Magnifico in Venice perceiuing his wiues iewels to be wanting, in the end learned that the Iesuites had gotten them. To conclude this point, I thinke the Iesuites will not deny, but that the Carmelites, and Franciscanes, and Dominicans, and othe orders of fryers are as honest men, as themselues; yet all these do inwardly hate them. At Vienna they thrust out the Carmelites, at Mentz the Dominicans, at Trier and Bransberg the Francisca^s out of their houses; which maketh these orders to hate them. In Bauier the priests beeing brought to pouerty and shame by the Iesuites, haue no reason to loue them. And thus we see that many honest men do eyther suspect or hate the Iesuites; and some also which they themselues cannot take iust exception against.
Let vs therefore now consider, whether the causes, that haue mooued and occasioned this hatred against the Iesuites, be iust or no. The discourser saith, They are had in hatred, and emulation eyther for their rule and profession, or for their learning and doctrine, or for their life and conuersation. But first the parts of this diuision are imperfect; next the same conteineth
 diuers vntruthes, and more are added in the declaration of it. Lastly the whole defence parted in this diuision is not sufficient to iustifie the course and actions of the Iesuites, the imperfection may be prooued by diuers particulars. For they are not onely hated for these three causes, but for diuers others. As namely for that they do many things both contrary to their owne rule, and contrary to the rule of Gods law, and Christian religion. They professe obedience, but they practise sedition and rebellion. Claudius Matthew a Iesuite and king Henry the third of France his confessor, was the most principall author and agent in the league of papists against him, and the peace established a litle before. Parsons and Campian were sent into England to make a faction for the papistes. which appeared in this, that they procured a faculty to suspend the bull of Pius, as farre as it concerned papists no further then, Rebus sic stantibus. These fellowes are the principall agents and stirrers of the rebellion in Ireland. Iames Gordon, Creichton, and Hayes Iesuites laide a plot not onely for a rebellion in Scotland, but for an inuasion in England. Neither hath any warre or tumult beene raysed of late in any part of Christendome, wherein the Iesuites haue not borne a principall part. They professe chastitie, and the law of God forbiddeth all vncleannes. but how these obserue this profession and law, I report me to their owne consciences, to the Iesuites of Rome and Padua, and to their practise in allowing, and now and then frequenting bordelles. They talke much of voluntary pouerty, and Christ saith, all should be left for his sake. But these good fellowes leaue Christ for the wealth and ease they find in the order of Iesuites. They dwell in costly pallaces, their dyet and apparrell is more dainty and braue then ordinary. The furniture of their houses and churches is gorgious and princely. Their armes are placed aboue the armes of princes. most couetously they scratch and scrape from the orphane, widow and poore, and put out their mony to interest their rule and outward profession is to gaine soules; but their practise is to kill soules. They promise to teach without reward, but if a great man will giue them a million, they take all. Nay they pretend to begge for banished English, but take most themselues, and by all practises seeke to enrich themselues by bribes and rewardes. They professe religion, and
 the name of Iesus, but they are the slaues of the pope, and oppugne the faith of Iesus, preferring the decretals before scriptures in certainty, and make a scoffe at religion. In Venice they painted the virgine Mary like a Lady in the city, whome they loued: and asVita Pij Quinti. Pius Quintus cast an Agnus dei into the riuer, so these vse the same practise in their coniurations. Nay they administer the sacrament to those, that go about to murder princes, as Walpoole did to Squire. First then they are hated for dooing against Gods law, and their owne written rules. Secondly for their ignorance in true religion. Thirdly for that they peruert others by their leud perswasions, and euill example. Fourthly, for that they peruert youth and teach them euill manners. Fiftly for that they are not ashamed to defend any old condemned heresie, or grosse new error holden by the pope. Lastly for that they peruert scriptures, and corrupt the fathers and other auncient writers, both adding and taking away, and altering the text. Which power Gregory the thirteenth in a bull bearing date Anno 1575. seemeth to haue giuen vnto them.
That this diuision containeth diuers vntruthes, it will appeare by these arguments. Where he saith, They are hated for their rule, which notwithstanding is the same in substance with other religions, and a way to perfection, there are three apparent vntruthes. First true Christians rather abhorre them for their vnruli^es, then for their rule; and other sectes albeit they loue their rule, yet hate the men for their leud conditions; and their friendes in regard of their rule that agreeth so well with the popes humor, do loue them. Secondly this rule is diuers from Christes rule, which is the onely true and direct rule of religion. It varieth also in infinite pointes from the rules both of monkes, and begging friers. Neither canne this be denyed. For if it were the same, yea euen in substance, what should we neede this new rule, hauing Christes rule? Beside, what meane the Iesuites to adde a fourth vowe and so many strange constitutions and lawes? If the profession of Iesuites be the same, that the ancient eremites or monkes professed, why do they tie themselues with such othes, and practise in matters of state, and thrust themselues into the prease of people, which the first monkes did not? Thirdly it is most absurd to affirme or thinke, that Ignatius Loyola could
 deuise a more perfect rule, then Christ Iesus; or that Christ deuised not a perfect rule, but that we should neede Ignatius a lame soldiers, and blind guides helpe. The Iesuites therefore are hated not so much for their rule, as for other iust causes. And no more doth the commendation of ancient monkes belong to them, then the prases of the ancient people of Israell to the obstinate Iewes that crucified Christ, or of the old Romaynes, to the scumme of the world, that doth now inhabite Rome.
It is also most vntrue, that they are hated for their learning. for not their learning, but the abuse of their learning which is wholy employed to maintaine heresies, doth make honest men to suspect them, and abhorre them. Would they teach the catholicke faith as this man pretendeth they do, they should be beloued, and embraced. But he must know, that their doctrine of the popes power and supremacy, of the sacraments of the Romish church, of purgatorie and infinite other points is not catholike. Much therefore is hee deceiued that thinketh wee account the name of a Iesuite to bee a crime. for both master Topcliffe whom hee bringeth in to witnesse this point, and many others can tell, that their treasons, practises, and lewdnesse haue made them odious, and not the name of Iesuites onely.
Lastly the defence of this discourser is very vnsufficient. For it is not inough to say that they haue a rule, and learning, and liue orderly, but they must haue their office and calling allowed by Christ Iesus, if they meane to take vpon them the office of pastors, teachers, and gouernors in Christes church. Wherefore eyther let them shew themselues to haue a lawfull calling, or let them not thinke much, to be thrust out, as intruders. We do not finde either in the epistle to the Ep^esians chap. 4. or the first Epist. to the Corinthians chap. 12. any such extrauagant friers. Neither in ancient writers is any precedent of their Loyolian profession to be found. Nay we do not read, that Christ commaunded any to forsweare mariage, or to giue away their goods to idle vagabondes, or to obey the rules of Ignatius, but rather the contrarie.
Further it is not sufficient in termes to praise the doctrine and manners of Iesuites, vnlesse this discourser were able to iustifie the same by the rule of Christes doctrine, and example
 of Christ and his apostles, and the holy fathers of the church. But that will be very hard for him to do. Christ neuer taught, that princes were to bee deposed by the apostles or their successors, or that it was lawfull to kill excommunicate persons. These teach, that it is lawfull for the pope to depose princes, and that it is lawfull for the subiects to rebell against such, as the pope shall excommunicate, and to kill them. Benedict Palmio,Parries voluntary confession. and Annibal Codret two famous Iesuites did not onely teach William Parry, that it was lawfull to kill the Queene of England, but also that it was an act very meritorious, Varade a Iesuite of Lion in confession did absolue Peter Barriere, that went about to murder the French king now reigning, and did assure him, that it was a most noble and Christian act, for which he shoulde obteine celestiall glorie, as the saide Peter being executed at Melun for the saide attempt, confessed: who likewise affirmed, that another Iesuite whose name he knew not, did concurre with Varade in the same opinion. In Paris the Iesuites not onely resolued, that it was lawfull to kill king Henry the third, but also by their perswasions did induce Iames Clement to effect the same. Richard Williams, Edmund Yorke, Patricke Ocollen, Iohn Sauage, and diuers others, that haue beene at seuerall times executed for attempting to kill the Queene confessed, that they were perswaded to it by Holt, and other Iesuites; and were also made beleeue, that it was a most meritorious act. Lately one Edmund Squire confessed, that hee was induced to empoison the Queene by Walpoole an English Iesuite in Spaine. Peter Panne confessed before his execution at Leiden, that hee was hired to kill the Count Morice the terror of the papists, and a great protector of the oppressed in the Low countries. Neither is it to bee doubted, but that this is the common resolution and iudgement of all Iesuites. For if it be lawfull for subiects to rebell against their princes vpon the popes warrant and commandement, as they holde; then is it also lawfull to kill them, and murder them. For armes are not taken vp for other end, then to force, and kill all that resist. Secondly it is not likely, that so many woulde concurre in this perswasion, if they did not like it. Thirdly they woulde not teach it openly, as did Comolet in the last siege of Paris, saying That there wanted an Ahud, meaning there wanted one to
 kill the king. Fourthly they woulde not otherwise in their colledges dispute and resolue, that it was lawfull to kill princes exco^municate by the pope. And this is prooued first by the confession of one Chastel a scholler of the Iesuites, that wounded Henry the 4. of France, and purposed to haue killed him. And secondly by ye writings of one Ghineard a Iesuit of the colledge of Clermont in Paris.In the register of the court of Parliam. of Paris. Chastell being demanded Whether this question, viz. whether it was not lawfull to kill the king, was not ordinarily talked of and disputed among Iesuites; answered, that hee hath oftentimes heard them say, that it was lawfull to kill the king, for that hee was out of the Romish church, and that it was not lawfull to obey him, nor holde him for king, vntill he shoulde be approoued by the pope. Hee affirmed the same likewise in his second examination: and for that wicked attempt was executed. Ghineard did not onelie allow and praise the execrable murder committed by Iames Clement a Dominican frier vpon Henry the third, but also affirmed That Henry the fourth if hee were not killed in the warres must bee killed otherwise, and in diuers bookes and papers written by him, prooued, That it was lawfull to kill kings, declared by the Pope to bee out of the church. Finallie for this wicked doctrine the Iesuites wereIn the monument erected in Paris. banished France, As a pernitious sect teaching, that it was lawfull for any to kill kings, and as it is conteined in the arrest against them, As perturbers of peace, and enimies of kings.
Christ neuer taught subiectes to breake their faith giuen to their princes, nor to rise in armes against them. nay the ancient Christia^s, albeit they neitherTertullian apologet. and ad Scapulam. wanted meanes, nor opportunity; yet did they neuer go about to take away the crowne from eyther infidels, or apostataes, or heretickes, but rather obeyed them, and prayed for them. But Iesuites they hould, that it is lawfull for subiectes to take armes, and to rebell against their princes, and teach, that the pope hath power to loose them from the bond of their allegiance. This doctrine Parsons and Campian meant to haue practised in England. And Claudius Matthew anno 1585, did practise in France, being a principall worker of that rebellion, that was made against Henry the third. The rebelles of Paris that held out against their kings, were principally directed and comforted by Comolet and other Iesuites. Nay when mony and victuals
 grewe scarce in Paris; yet woulde not the Iesuites suffer the rebelles to giue ouer, but rather came into the trenches, and brought with them of their owne store to giue to the soldiers. By the practises of this seditious sect the cities of Perigueux, Agen, Tholose, Verdun, and diuers others tooke armes against the king.
In Scotland all late stirres haue beene raysed by the practise of Crichton, Gourdon, and Haies Iesuites. Neyther is any thing doone in the rebellion of Ireland, but by their direction and counsell.
Christ neuer taught children to shew themselues vnnaturall and vnkinde to their parents; or women froward and rebellious to their husbandes. But these steale children from the parentes, and conuey them, where they are neuer more heard of, as is apparent by the example of Airault of Angiers his sonne and infinite others. In Friburg they perswaded the women to deale with their husbandes, to entertaine a practise against the cantous of contrary religion; and when they could not otherwise obtaine it, by the counsell of Iesuites, they refused to lye with their husbandes.
The first Christians were examples of meekenesse, bounty, liberality to the poore, of gentlenesse and clemency, and all virtue. These counterfeit Christians, that call themselues Iesuites, are proud hauty, disdainfull, couetous, cruell, vindicatiue. While they perswaded the Duke of Bauier to go on foote to visite the reliques of some saint, these gallantes road in wagons. The princesse of Tyrole built the Iesuites a house hard by hers; but it was not long before they had gotten into the princes palace, and thrust her into their owne meane house. Likewise did they exclude the bishop of Herbipolis out of a church, which himselfe had built for them. They encroch not onely vpon the liuinges of secular priestes, and take away their tithes and prebendes, but also vpon all other regular orders. They aduance themselues and despise others. those that confesse themselues to other priestes, they accompt litle better then Atheistes. In Milan they onely beare the sway in hearing womens confessions, and did the like at Venice, vntill they were forbidden.
By meanes of their confessions they haue drawne to themselues exceeding great riches, empouerishing many rich


 houses, and leauing little to the widowes and orphanes. Maldonat a Iesuite of Paris caused the president Monbrum S. Andre, through his perswasions in confession to giue the, Iesuites all his mooueables, and halfe his reuenues. The president Goudran of Dijon making his testament by their practises gaue onely halfe a crowne to his sister, and to the colledge of Iesuites seuen thousand pounde French money in rent. In Bordeaux they haue ruined the house of Bollans, and impaired the state of the house of Large baston. They haue gotten into their societie the onely brother of the Marques of Canillac, lieutenant of the king in Auuergne. In the countrey of Grisons they haue perswaded a seely old man called Lamberting to sell all hee had, and to take their habite, who gathering twentie thousand duckats, ment to giue all to them from his onely daughter.
So cruell they are, that they spare none, that is repugnant to their purposes. Maffaeus complained that the elder Iesuites managed all matters absolutely: but hee was sent for his labour into Portugall. They brought Harbort, and Glisel two famous preachers in Vienna in danger, onely enuying their excellencie. How many they haue vpon small causes brought into the Inquisition, the recordes testifie. It is death to speake a word against them. One Lupus a Franciscane in Milan calling them False prophets escaped hardly with his life. Cardinal Borrhomeus restreining their encrochments was by them accused before the pope.
Of their forced chastitie what fruites insue, I referre me to the report of Hazenmyller, and others that haue liued amongst them. I hope they do no otherwise, then other monkes before them. And if they had beene so chaste as they pretend, the Venetians woulde not haue dissolued the colledge of yoong gentlemen in Padua, where these fellowes were teachers and regents, for auoiding of publike scandale.
Neither hath the Noddy our aduersary either iust exception to auoide this accusation, or witte to cleare his Clients. Gretzerus hath long trauailed to purge his companions of this slaunder, but all in vaine. And therefore small reason hath this petit companion to attempt that, wherein his betters haue failed. But seeing he hath gone about to face out matters, let vs consider of his allegation. In defence of the Iesuites of
 Paris charged with the allowance of the act of Iohn Chastel that attempted to murder king Henry the fourth, he saith, That the said Iohn Chastell examined vpon the torture constantly denied, that any Iesuite liuing was priuy to his intention of killing the king, or had giuen him therein counsell, courage, or instruction; and that his father beeing examined did likewise deny it. But the recordes of his examination which are yet to be seene do affirme flat contrary, as before I haue shewed. And the sentence of the court of parliament of Paris doth plainely porport, that this fact was attempted by the Iesuites counsell and instruction; and therefore was it ordered, That they should depart out of Paris within three dayes, and out of France within fifteene dayes after notice to them giuen, as corrupters of youth, perturbers of publike peace, and enemies of the king and the state. Iohn Chastel also himselfe co^fessed, That Garet a Iesuite did teach him these lessons, which made him resolue to kill the king. Yea and that the father and sisters of the young man with teares and bitter tearmes detesting the Iesuites did declare further that it might appeare to posteritie, that this was the doctrine of Iesuites, that they taught the saide Chastell, a pillar was set vp in the place, where this desperate murderer and parricide dwelt, testifying the same, and mentioning that this was the cause of their expulsion out of France. In that Monument the Iesuites are called Mali magistri, and their colledge Schola impia, and their religion called Noua and malefica superstitio. Further the Iesuites in a certaine apologie published presently vpon their expulsion out of France, do not denie Iohn Chastels attempt to be lawfull or contrary to canons, but rather conformable vnto them; and that they endeuour to prooue by Sixtus Quintus his bul against the king, and refute the sentence of the court against the saide Chastel, as vniust.
He proceedeth further in cleering the Iesuites and saith, That Iohn Garet Chastels master being tortured denied, that the Iesuites were priuie to this fact, and that thereupon by publike testimony of the magistrate he was declared innocent. Wherein he declareth himselfe very impudent, howsoeuer the other was declared innocent. for I haue shewed before by diuers arguments, that the Iesuites were both priuie to this fact, and did publikely defend the doctrine. Nay theOf the parliament of Paris. register, wherein
 his confession is recorded, and the sentence of the court doth declare, that the said Garet being a Iesuite was the teacher of that wicked doctrine, which Chastell ment to execute, and therefore by publike sentence Was hee banished France, and his goods confiscated. Let it then bee considered, with what conscience this woorthy Warder affirmeth, that Garet was declared innocent by the magistrate.
Hee saith also, That Iohn Ghineard Iesuite was put to death for that in his studie this question, Whether it be lawfull in any case to kill a tyrant, was found disputed on both sides without resolution. But theIn the processe against Ghineard. register of the court of parliament of Paris doth conuince his impudent lying. For there it is testified, that The saide Ghineard was founde seazed of diuers bookes composed by him, and written with his owne hand conteining the approbation of the inhumane murder of Henry the third. Beside that the court of Parliament of Paris enioined him to confesse, That hee had wickedly spoken, and determined, that if Henry the fourth was not slaine in the wars, hee must be slaine otherwise. Finally his owne hande writing, which hee acknowledged vpon his examination doth shewe, that he did not onely propound the question in Thesi, but resolued it in Hypothesi.
Neither doth our aduersarie doubt to accuse the Parliament of Paris of great iniustice for executing the saide Ghineard, Seeing he saide no more, then Thomas, Caietan, Sotus, and other scholasticall diuines, and Philosophers in times past. As if scholasticall diuinitie, and Philosophers fancies were warrant sufficient for men to kill princes, or for Christians to attempt any thing. Beside that, the case of the Iesuites, and of ancient writers is diuers. These onely thinke it lawfull to kill such tyrants, as by oppression and force inuade a kingdome. The Iesuites account all tyrants, that resist the popes tyrannie, and are by him excommunicate. Olde writers, for the most part, speake in Thesi against vsurpers. But Ghineard the Iesuite spoke in Hypothesi, and determined,In papers of Ghineard. That it was lawfull to kill Henry the 3. and Henry the 4. which all the world acknowledgeth to be lawfull kings, the popish faction onely excepted. The fact of Iames Clement, that murdred Henrie the third, this Ghineard calleth Heroicall, and a gift of gods spirit. Speaking of king Henry the fourth he saith thus, If he
 die not in the warres, let him be slaine some otherwaies.
Hauing done with the Iesuites of France, he goeth about to answere for the Iesuites of Doway and the low countries, that, as Peter Panne confessed himselfe, Perswaded and hired, and furnished him with a knife to kill Count Morice. And this action he calleth a fiction, denying that euer the Iesuites had any such intention. But the matter is all too plaine to be faced out with flearing wordes. The poore man was taken seased with a strange fashioned knife. beeing examined he voluntarily confessed both his owne fault, and by whome he was induced to do that wicked act. He continued in his confession, and was executed for his treason at Leyden. The magistrates of Leyden do testifie so much, and there is no cause, why any part of this narration should seeme vntrue. For no man hath reason to accuse himselfe, or others vniustly, especially where it goeth vpon the perill of a mans life. Nor is it likely, that any should suffer death for matter feined, and supposed, and without proofe. Certes, if any doubted of the matter before,Sica tragica. Costers and this Noddies defence is so simple, that it may greatly confirme him in this truth. They alledge certificates to disprooue Peter Pannes confession. But what credite can such writinges deserue, that may bee forged, for any thing wee knowe, and beeing admitted to haue beene written, yet appeare to haue beene extorted by the Iesuites, and made by men fauouring their faction? Beside that they seeme to bee graunted without due proofe, and proceeding, and yet neither conclude against Peter Panne, nor his confession. First it is alleaged, That hee was no papist at all. But that is a fiction without all colour. For why should not he be reputed a papiste, that was continually among them, and neuer had tast of any other religion? Secondly our aduersarie saith, He was a drunken, vagrant and madde fellow. As if he were not therefore more likely to enterprise such a made action. He telleth vs further, That Peter Panne was a man extreamely well affected to Count Morice. But how canne this be prooued, seeing it appeareth by the processe made against him, that he neither knew him, nor euer had seene him before his comming into Holland? Is it not extreame folly to imagine any such extremity of affection without cause or proofe? Fourthly he would beare vs in hand, That the Iesuites had no cause to
 desire Count Morice his death. Why then did the Iesuites seeke his fathers death, and perswade men to kill the Queene of England, and the French king? Do not men of euery faction desire those taken out of the way, that are opposite to their designes? Fiftly he denieth, that Peter Panne euer prouided butter for the colledge of Iesuites, as is conteined in Peter Pannes confession. But what reason had hee to confesse it, if the matter were not true? These fellowes haue reason to denie it for their owne credite. Hee denieth also, That the Iesuites had any seruant called Melchior du Val. But that is not materiall, seeing there are fewe Iesuites, but they haue two or three names, and it may bee, that this Melchior also going about so wicked a purpose, changed his name. Further hee saith, That there was neuer any speech had with Peter Pannes wife in Ipres about this matter, and denieth that euer shee had any acquaintance with any Iesuite. But hee must bee very well acquainted with her, that knew both what shee did, and what shee saide, and what not. This Noddy, if hee had beene wise, woulde haue alleaged some reason of his saying. His companionSica tragica. Costerus for proofe alleageth her examination. But how shoulde wee beleeue, that euer shee was duely examined, or that shee saide, as is alleaged? Againe if beeing induced by Iesuites, shee shoulde speake any such thing: yet who woulde not rather beleeue her husband vttring matter against himselfe, then such a light huswife speaking vntruth without danger, or controlement, and percase beeing hired? Lastly whereas Peter Panne co^fessed, That in the rogation weeke next before, he talked with the prouinciall, and others of the colledge of Iesuites at Doway; and told, that they promised him reward in earth and blisse in heauen for executing that act; this discourser telleth vs, That the Prouinciall that weeke was 60. miles from Doway, and that there passed no such conference with Peter Panne. And this hee saith Is prooued by witnesses, and certified by cacolike magistrates. But hee shoulde haue vnderstood, that witnesses examined in the absence of parties, and percase neither sworne, nor duely examined, prooue nothing. Beside that, wee haue good cause to except against such iudges, and such witnesses, as our professed enimies do choose, and produce. But suppose all their relation were true; yet such certificates prooue nothing, but that Peter Panne either mistooke
 the names, or qualities of some persons named in his examinations: and it may be, that the Iesuites made him beleeue, he was brought to the prouinciall and cheefe of the colledge, when hee was onely before some other base companion of that societie. That hee shoulde charge the Iesuites wrongfully being to die presently, it cannot bee presumed. Neither is it strange for Iesuites to worke cunningly and vnderhand in these cases, that whe^ they come to light, may prooue so odious.
This Noddie therefore was not wise to say, What hath beene found against the Iesuites? or to wish, that it may bee laide open to the worlde: which wordesApologet. c. 8. Tertullian vsed in the defence of Christians in his time. For wee haue founde matter sufficient against them, and little hath hee alleaged in their defence, which wee haue not auoided. Moreouer wee doe not read, that Christians in Tertullians time taught this omnipotent power of the pope, which the Iesuites defende; nor beleeued, that all that woulde not submit themselues to his iurisdiction, shoulde bee slaine. Among them certes there were no assassinors, and murderers of kings, nor practisers against princes states; nor such proude and cruell sectaries, as are the Iesuites. And albeit Iesuites eate no children, which crime was imputed to ancient Christians, yet they haue occasioned the death of millions of men, women, and children, that in the stirres and tumults raised by them, haue perished: and daily more and more matter we finde against them.
Further, hee woulde haue such, As haue abandoned the societie of Iesuites, to be examined what they haue heard, and seene during the time when they abode among them. Which to gratifie him, wee haue done, and in oneHistor. Iesuit. Hazenmyller and Paule FlorenColloq. Iesuit. and Simon Lith, we find that they are the corrupters of religion, the firebrands of sedition, perturbers of Christian common-wealthes, and the ruine of Christendome. In outward semblant they are sheepe, but inwardly they are goates, or rather woolues. They professe pouertie and chastitie, but abound in wealth, and liue licenciously and wantonly. They take to themselues the name of Iesuites, but are the onely vpholders of antichrists kingdome. And if they will not beleeue them which haue left them and their societie; let them listen a little, what some of their owne friends report of them. One Iohn Cecil a popish priest in his Discouerie of errors
 committed by William Criton Iesuite,Fol. 14. saith, That his practises made many widowes and orphans in Scotland;Fol. 16. and that hee was taken with plats for the inuasion of England. Hee chargeth him withFol. 10. Machiuilian practises,Fol. 4. making satirs and pasquinadoes,Fol. 27. and irreligious and vnconscionable calumnies. And finally hee calleth the IesuitesFol. 18. turbulent spirits. and saith they hinder the popes cause with their Libels, schismes sedition and plots of inuasion.
Another priest In his discouerie of Dolmans conference,P. 6. chargeth Parsons directly with A practise and confederacie against the bloud royall, and saith,P. 12. That his drift is to disinherite true heires, to alter the common lawes, and to bring in strangers into England:P. 19. yea to bring in mischiefes on mischiefes, andP. 33. ciuill warre. Finally heP. 70. chargeth him with monstrous absurdities and blasphemies against kings: andP. 43. saith That he calleth her Maiesties title in question, and that the Iesuites haue made diuers practises against her. Thus while traitors fall out, true men come to vnderstande the truth.
This discourser telleth vs, That the chastitie of Iesuites must imitate the puritie of angels. But vnlesse by angels hee vnderstand wicked angels and diuels, the Iesuites will come farre short of their example, which they propose to themselues to imitate. The angels of God certes neither burne in lust, nor abandon themselues to the delites of the worlde. He saith further, That they shoulde abhorre all those things, which the world doth loue and esteeme. But that is nothing else, but a sentence of condemnation against the whole societie of Iesuites, that so much loueth the worlde, and delighteth in honors, pleasures, large pallaces, goodly gardens, pleasant fountaines, good furniture of housholde, aboundance of daintie viandes, rich clothes, and such like worldly vanities. After this hee runneth into a large discourse of the martyrdomes, and voluntarie suffringes of the Iesuites in the Indies, purposing percase, if any entend to trace him in his lying, to make him trauell a great iorney. But suppose they shoulde suffer death and tortures, yet that is a matter common to them, and to rebels, traitors, malefactors; yea to such as fall into the hand of barbarous people, that respect not whom they massacre. Ghineard in France, and Campian and other Iesuites in
 England haue suffred, butSee the conclusion of the 4. encounters ensuing. not for the testimonie of truth. Euill therfore are those words of Iustine apolog. 1. concerning the patient suffering of Christians applied to Iesuites, that are neither martyrs, nor good Christians, nor suffer for other cause, but their offences; and that most vnwillingly, and vnpatiently, as by Campian and by diuers examples may bee prooued. The comparison likewise betwixt the first Christians, that were charged to be Syluestres and Syluicolae, and the Iesuites, is most improper. For Iesuites neither liue in woodes, nor holes, as did the first Christians, but in princely pallaces, and kinges courts, and in the presse of people. Neither are they retired for meditation, but runne disguised ouer the worlde, and thrust themselues into all companies, to practise them wicked treasons, and to execute their holie fathers desseignements.
Hee braggeth very much of the Iesuites teaching and of their reading artes, toongs, and sciences. As if artes, toongs, and sciences were not as well taught before the name of this sect was heard of, and shall not bee so againe, when the whole order of them shall be extinguished. As for their teaching, it should bee much more commendable, if with truth and knowledge they did not mingle falshoode, heresie, and poison; and their toongs were more to bee esteemed, if they did not teach them to spread lies and slanders. But whatsoeuer their teaching is, they enter vpon the pastors office, and intrude themselues into it without commission and authoritie. Nay they enter by other waies then the dore, and in the folde make hauocke of Christes lambes.
Hee compareth them also to saint1. Cor. 15. Paule, that saith, Abundantius omnibus laboraui; and to the rest of the most holy apostles. Nay in the end hee doubteth not to iustifie the turbulent proceedings of the Iesuites, by the example of Christ Iesus, who was charged with troubling the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, as hee saith. but the difference and oddes is so great, as may make a man woonder, why hee compared things so vnlike togither. The apostles were makers of peace, most humble and meeke men, true disciples of Christ, and most painfull laborers in planting true religion, and drawing men to Christ. But these false apostles are sowers of sedition, trumpets of warre, proud braggers and boasters of their
 angelicall holinesse painfull labours, and profound learning; conterfect Christians and true disciples of Satan. Painefull labourers, but to ouerthrow rather then to build; to drawe men to antichrist, and not to Christ; not seeking to win soules by teaching the meanes of saluation, but to destroy soules by teaching false doctrine, vaine traditions, and by bringing men into the thraldome of antichrist. Christ and his apostles were accused most vniustly. These most iustly, as hath beene verified. Christ made a diuision in the world, making good of bad, and separating the good from the bad. But the Iesuites make of good, bad; and set diuision where there was peace before, as appeereth by their whole proceeding. Yea and our aduersarie confesseth, that of colde cacolikes, they make hot recusants. Therefore may they bee iustly called Rerump. incendiarij, that is burners of common-wealthes, and fire-brands of Satan, that of good subiects by their reconcilements make seditious leaguers, desperate murtherers, busie practisers and perturbers of states.
ButP. 69. saith he, It appeareth not, that the Iesuites haue sought her Maiesties bloud; especially not Parsons, that was neuer accused by Parry, Sauage, Ballard, Babington, Hesket, Daniel, Polwhele or others. As if any thing could appeare more cleare, then the murderous minde of Iesuites, both against al princes excommunicate by the pope, and namely against her Maiestie. Do they not teach, that the subiectes are to rise against their princes, when the pope commaundeth? Did not Ghineard resolue, that it was lawfull to kill princes excommunicate by the pope? And was not he therefore executed at Paris anno 1594. And haue not diuers Iesuites sent men ouer into England, and perswaded them to murder her Maiestie? And haue not diuers witnesses testified so much, as before hath beene declared? And hath not Ribadineira or rather a ribaldy lying frier, a Portingale Iesuite by all meanesThis Ribald hath set out Sanders booke of schisme in Spanish with many additions, and falsification^. sought to dishonour her Maiestie, to stirre her subiectes, to seeke her ouerthrow in his most slaunderous booke of schisme? Finally we must not thinke, that the Iesuites haue had eyther other purpose, or desire this many yeeres, then to stirre vp sedition and warres against her, and to bring the realme vnder the pope and Spanyard, whome they serue; which cannot be done without the destruction of her person, and the desolation
 of this realme.
Neither may we thinke, that Parsons the Iesuite, albeit for some purpose, percase, he hath kept himselfe from open managing of treasons, is better disposed towardes her Maiestie, and the state, then the rest of his companions. For all Iesuites allow the popes power in deposing princes, which cannot be without their destruction. Yea and Parsons himselfe hath not dealt so closely, but that there are many great and euident proofes of his disloyalty and trechery. For not onely the booke set out vnder the name of Dolman concerning the succession to the crowne of England is his; but also diuers otherAndreas Philopater: Leycesters common wealth, a confutation of causes. etc. treasonable bookes and pamphlets, whereby he goeth about, not onely to stirre vp troubles in England, but also to conuey the title of the crowne to the infant of Spaine, and to bring in strangers: for which he is reprooued by a certaine popish priest not altogether so leud as himselfe in aPag. 12. and passim. treatise printed at Collen anno 1600. and intituled, A discouery of a counterfait conference, etc. Published by one Parson, that dare not auow his name. Yea and so farre hath he intricated himselfe in these matters, that the generall of the Iesuites is ashamed of him, and hath therefore called him out of Spaine, and made him rector of boy-priests in the English colledge at Rome; as being a person blotted with notorious treasons. Secondly in this treatise, which is either Parsons his deuise, or at least allowed by Parsons, not onely the cause of rebels and traitors, that haue sought to destroy her Maiestie, is pleaded, but also the fact of Ghineard the Iesuite, that exprestyHis notes appeere in the registre of the court of parliament of Paris, and in the sixt recueil of matters of the league. determined, That Henrie the third of France was iustly slaine, and that tyrants (in which degree hee putteth all princes excommunicate by the pope) may lawfully by any be slaine. Thirdly he is a factor for the pope and Spaniard nowe professed enimies of her Maiestie, and this kingdome. And all the worlde knoweth, that they haue nothing more in their vowes, then her Maiesties ruine. Fourthly hee is a Iesuite, whose oath and profession is to do whatsoeuer his superior commandeth. If then the pope commaund, as no doubt, but hee hath and will, there is no question, but he must also come togither with his consorts, and with fire and sword oppugne this lande, and destroy the prince. Fiftly it is ridiculous to dispute of his intention, when wee may see his hostile and traytorous minde by his actions. He hath
 abandoned his prince and country, he adhereth to her Maiesties professed enemies. In times past he and Campian came into this country with instructions and authority from publike enemies, with a resolution to see the popes pleasure executed, and to make a side for his holy father. Let him deny any part of this, if he canne. Nay let him but answere first whether he brought not a faculty from the pope giuing leaue to papists to obey her Maiestie, so long as the state stood in tearmes, as then it did: and vntill the popes bull could be executed: and next, whether the popes sentence beeing declared and published, he and all papistes were not purposed, and bound to do their worst against her. Sixtly, he was among the Spanyardes, that in the yeere 1588, came in hostile aray to cut her Maiesties throte, and to destroy her people, if they had could. Lastly he alloweth the dooings of Cardinall Allen, that the same time stirred vp all papistes to lay hands on her Maiesty, and perswaded them to take armes against her, and to assist the Spaniards. Hee also knew a certaine Englishman, that came into England, with full resolution to murder her Maiestie, and neuer reuealed so much. If then hee take the Queene for his mother, and the mother of her countrey, as this discourser signifieth, then must Parsons confesse, that he is a parricide, that seeketh to lay violent handes vpon his mother. And if hee call this an odious and heinous crime; as indeed it is; then is hee guiltie of a most odious crime, and is a most odious rebell. This being his charge, let vs see his defence. Let the examinations saith hee, of Parry, Sauage, and such others be viewed ouer, and see whether any of them do accuse father Parsons. As if none were guiltie of these treasons, but such as were named by their consorts. Beside that, suppose Parsons were no open stickler in these actions; yet it is sufficiently knowne, that such subtile practisers do deale by second, and third persons. Furthermore albeit hee coulde cleere himselfe of Parries, Sauages, and Ballards treasons; yet can hee not so easily auoide the suspicion of Heskets practise. For hee is charged byA discouery of a counterfeit conference, etc. one of his owne religion, to bee a practiser to set a foote the late Earle of Darbies title, in which Hesket and others were agents. Neither can hee answere his treasonable purpose inIbidem. Dolmans booke, Where he endeuoreth to conuey the crowne to strangers; and his practises with priestes
 come into England to aduance the Infantaes title. Nor can hee cleere his handes of the most execrable treasons contained in Andreas Philopaters discourse either written, or published by him and Creswell his factor in the court of Spaine. Secondly hee telleth vs, How Parsons protesteth, that hee was neuer giltie, nor priuy to any attempt made against her Maiestie. But his owne friendes, as himselfe confesseth in a letter to bee shewed, trust him not, saying hee is a Machiuilian. andIn the discouerie of a counterf^ct conference p. 34. one chargeth him That hee vseth dissimulation, doubling and redoubling. And the faction of priestes opposite to Iesuites now in England doth vtterly condemne the trickes, equiuocations, and coloured dissimulation of Iesuites, as is noted in seueral notes and letters to be shewed against them. If then his owne freendes trust not his promises, and othes, how shall we beleeue his protestations? Certes hee that will most wickedly practise such wicked actions, he will also boldly denie them. Yea and this foolish Noddy, where he woulde cleere him, doth cleerely conuict him. For he denieth not, but that Parsons was acquainted with a gentlemans purpose, that resolutely ment either to take away the Queenes life, or to loose his owne. So it appeereth, that such matters are consulted vpon, which is the thing we say; and that Parsons was acquainted withall, which is by our aduersarie denied. Indeede, I confesse, that wee are tolde, that Parsons disswaded the foresaide murdrer. But that are not wee bounde to beleeue. Nay albeit hee had so done, yet that is not sufficient, to excuse him. For such treasons are to bee detected, and not onely hindred, by all honest men. Againe it may bee, that Parsons either in regard of the gentleman, that shoulde haue executed this murder, or because such executions woulde bring domage to their cause, and not for loue to her Maiesty, did disswade this shameful murder, and assassinate. For it appeereth both by his dealing with Hesket about the Earle of Darby; and also by his practises with the yoong priests, that come ouer out of Spaine, for the preferment of the Infant of Spaine to the crowne of England; and by his most scandalous writings vnder the false names of Dolman and Philopater, which shall bee prooued to his face by witnesse to bee his dooings, that hee seeketh nothing more, then her Maiesties dishonor and destruction. And that in treason hee is not inferior to Allen the Cardinall, or any
 traytor these many yeeres executed at Tyborne.
Finally heP. 71. compareth her Maiestie to Saul, whom God declared vnwoorthy to reigne, and from whom hee gaue the kingdome to Dauid. Which sheweth plainly what a leude conceite this generation hath of her Maiesties title, and gouernment. But that they woulde spare her, as Dauid spared Saule, is a matter most vnlikely. For it appeereth, that the pope, and the Iesuites and priests his agents, and al their consorts haue by secret assasinors and empoisoners, and also by open murdrers, and cutthrotes sought her death and destruction.
And shall such agents of the pope and Spaniard, as these, bee still suffred to liue, and bee still maintained in diuers principall places of this lande to practise? Shall not wee take a course with Iesuites, and priestes and their consorts, that are thus bloodily minded against the prince, and all that loue her, or stande well affected to true religion? Shall wee suffer them through our remissenesse, or rather stupiditie to make a head, as they haue done in Ireland, where they are the onely originall causes of the reuolt, albeit other matters are pretended, and so to bring all in combustion heere, as they haue done there alreadie? Consider the sequele of these matters, my deere countrymen, and looke well to your owne safetie. and if you respect not your selues, nor your owne particular; yet haue regard to the church of God, and his true religion, which you professe, and shoulde defende, if you bee truelie religious. Respect the honour of your prince, your nation, your countrey. Will you abandone your selues to the spoile of proud enimies, that seeke your destruction? Will you giue credence to those, that are by the Italian and Spaniard hired to speake? Behold your wiues and children and deerest friends that depend vpon the valor of your harts? Will you giue them as a praie to the cruell enimies? Represent to your selues the miserable estate of this lande, if once the forreine enimie getteth footing. Your lawes shall bee abolished, your yoong men shall bee slaine, the rest shall bee vsed as slaues to serue the conquerors pleasure. Who then will not haue care to preuent these dangers? Who will not beware of those false rinegued English fugitiues, that seeke to bring these troubles vpon vs? Who had not rather die, then either suffer, or see
 these calamities to happen to his country and nation? In Iuliers, and the borders of Germany not long since the Spanish soldiers entred as friendes; yet such barbarous cruelties and outrages they committed, that they exceeded all enemies. How then do you thinke they would behaue themselues, if they should set foote and beginne to domineere in England, that haue so rauaged countries, that eyther were friendes, or neutrales? The onely way is to secure your selues of false harted Iesuites, priestes and their consorts. These Iesuites are vntollerable in states that professe popery, much more therefore ought they to be suspect and odious to vs. The parliament of Paris by a solemne arrest or decree didRecords of parliam. of Paris. banish the whole society or rather verminaille of Iesuites out of France, As corrupters of youth, perturbers of publike peace, and enemies to the king, and to the state. The colledge of diuines in Paris by a solemne act of all the company did condemne this order, as dangerous both to church and common wealth. Haec societas say the doctors of Sorbone, videtur in negotio fidei periculosa, pacis ecclesiae perturbatiua, and magis in destructionem, quam aedificationem. The reasons why they descended to pronounce this hard sentence against them, deserue much to be considered. The first reason was, Because they admitted bastardes (a matter much for Parsons his aduantage.) the second, For that they obserued no rules of auncient religions, nor canons of the church. The third, For that they yeelded no obedience to ordinaries; the fourth, For that they depriued as well ecclesiasticall Lords, as temporall of their rightes, and troubled both ecclesiasticall and ciuill pollicie. The last, For that they raysed diuers quarrels, contentions and schismes among the people. The senate also of Venice perceiuing their encrochements in Padua,The decree of the senate of Venice. Forbad the Iesuites to read publikely, and commaunded them onely to read to their owne societie, and that within the walles of their owne colleges. Monsieur de Matignon perceiuing, that the Iesuites vpon the rising of the league, or rather rebelles, that conspired against king Henry the third, went about to stirre sedition, and to deliuer vp Bourdeaux to the leaguers, draue them like a packe of seditious rebelles out of the city. For their seditious and mutinous behauiour they were lately expulsed out of Transyluania, and had beene out of Poland, had their side not beene stronger. And yet all these




 that thus proceeded against them, were men of the same religion, and acknowledged the authority of the pope. How seriously then ought we to proceede against them, and their adherentes, that do know not onely their treasons and seditious practises, but also the manifold corruptions and abominations of their hereticall and false doctrine? Shall their owne sort and companions driue them out of their states, and shall any honest man make question, whether it be lawfull to make lawes against them, and to proceede against them? Why do we not looke vpon Scotland, and see both the mischieuous plots of Iesuites there, and their condigne punishments? If that Iesuites and priests had not beene suffered to range vp and downe Ireland without punishment, neither had this rebellion beene there raised, nor woulde it so long haue continued. And who doubteth, but that this is their deseignement in England, if they may be suffred to execute it: This I doubt not, but our superiors see, and consider, and will remedie; and therefore fewe wordes may serue. This I thought good to speake to iustifie sir Francis Hastings his accusation: and more shall bee said, as occasion serueth. Some priuate men, percase, thinke the Iesuites to be no such dangerous beasts, and some sticke not to recount many fauors done by Parsons to English prisoners in Spaine. But if wee consider, that the Iesuites do not suffer any man of meane spirite to returne, before they haue either entangled him in some trecherous practise, or tainted him with the leuen of their heresies, or both; we shall easily perceiue, that this milde course and enlargement of prisoners was rather to worke a correspondence with vs, and a remissenesse in our soldiers, and mariners, that they shoulde not aduenture, as in times past, knowing that they should bee sent for England, and also a maine mischiefe to the state; then to do our people any fauor, or kindnesse. And thus much of the Iesuites crueltie and trecherie. Of their false doctrine and heresie this Noddy shall heare sufficiently in some other place.



CHAP. VI. 

What is either to be expected, or feared in Recusants and practising papists: and what credite is to be giuen to the aduersaries sixt encounter.

ALthough true Christians finde small fauour, when they come within the danger of our professed enimies the papists; yet do wee not thinke it fitting to follow them in their bloodie crueltie. Nay wee had rather learne ofMatth. 11. Christ, that was most meeke, and gentle as a lambe, then of these sauage men, that in their crueltie exceed woolues, and shew themselues most vnlike to Christ, or catholike Christians. God forbid therefore, that we should perswade, or like any rigorous course to bee taken with such papists as offend onely of simplicitie, and neuer knew any other religion but poperie; and neither practise against her Maiesty, nor the state, nor true religion, nor adhere to those that doe it. Howbeit, if any abuse their libertie, and this rare clemency of the state to maintaine a faction, and either seeke to stirre vp sedition, or to oppresse true religion, and those that maintaine it, or else adhere, receit, and fauour such: it shoulde not onely not sauour of clemencie to fauour such, but also worke a dissolution both of ecclesiasticall and ciuill gouernment, to suffer them. For to suffer gods worship to be abrogated, and idolatrie and false religion to bee established, and Christs people to bee seduced by false teachers, is plaine impietie: to giue way to rebellious and seditious practises against her Maiestie, or the state, or to winke at them, or neglect them, is plaine disloialty, and vnnaturall trecherie: to nourish in our bosomes such, as either woulde bring in strangers vpon vs, or else seeke opportunitie to cut our throtes themselues, is brutish stupidity.
For the first point wee haue these reasons First God commandethDeut. 13. vs strictly, that wee shall not suffer either prophet or dreamer of dreames to liue, that shall goe about to drawe vs from God to serue other gods. Neither may wee
 thinke, that either this law is abrogated standing vpon morall equitie; or that the popish friers and priestes, that teach the idolatrous worship of angels, saints, crosses and images, and of their God of the altar, are without the compasse of this lawe. SecondlyIsai. 49. God appointed Christian princes to bee Foster fathers, and Queenes to be nursing mothers to his church. And therefore may they not see either God dishonored by false religion and idolatrie, or true Christians oppressed with force, or trecherie. They carrie not the sword for nothing, and God requireth the maintenance of his truth at their handes. Hee that honoreth me, saith the1. Sam. 2. Lord, him will I honour; and he that despiseth me, shall be despised. No policie therefore will serue, where Gods religion, and his true honour is little regarded. Thirdly the apostleRom. 16. would haue those That cause diuisions and offences to be marked and auoided; and1. Tim. 1. giueth Timothy charge, not to suffer such, as woulde teach an other doctrine. How then may they be suffred, that would teach a co^trarie doctrine to yt of Christ? Fourthly it was euer the custom of christian princes to punish false teachers, as appeerethL. Quicunque Cod. de haeretic. by the law of Valentinian and Martian emperors. Vltimo supplicio afficiantur, say the emperors, qui illicita docere tentauerint. And that Hierome writing vpon the fift to the Galathians doth allow, misliking that Arius escaped so long vnpunished. Lastly the aduersaries will not suffer true preachers to teach truth. Why then shoulde their priests and friers be suffered to teach heresie and falshoode? Will they giue lawe to others, and not endure themselues to be ordered by lawe? Nothing can be deuised more vnreasonable, or more repugnant toL. 1. ff. quod quisque iuris. lawe. Whatsoeuer libertie therefore is granted to simple people abuse by false teachers; that concerneth Iesuites, priests, and other false teachers nothing.
The second point is prooued by lawes of nations, and necessary rules of state. For all nations do punish such as practise against the princes person, and the security of the state, as offending in the highest degree of treason: and mere simplicity it is reputed, to suffer any to liue in a state, that entendeth, or practiseth the destruction of the state. By the25. Edw. 3.2. lawes of this realme it is accompted treason To compasse, or imagine the death of the prince, or to adhere to his enemies. By the Romayneff all Iud. m^ (...) l. ^. 2 3. lawes it was treason, To runne to the enemies, to assist
 them with armes, or meanes, or intelligence; and much more to stirre vp sedition, or to draw enemies vpon the state, or to practise the destruction of it. All which seuerall lawes do shew, that it is not possible to maintaine this state, vnlesse such traytors be punished seuerely, that either attempt against the princes sacred person, or seeke to stirre sedition to alter the gouernment, or that adhere to the pope or Spanyard; or that endeuour to depose the prince from her gouernement, and to ouerthrow this state; or that intertaine intelligence with forraine enemies; or that are eyther ayders or abettors, or allowers of any such actes, or treasons. Neither is it materiall, that these practisers, be they Iesuites, priestes, or whatsoeuer else, do pretend a certaine kinde of religion, seeing their end is war and rebellion; their meanes, faction and diuision; and their maintayners, and vpholders, publike enemies of the prince and state.
The third point is taught vs by the instinct of nature. For euen light of nature sheweth euery liuing creature, how to prouide for his owne safety, and to decline and auoide such things, as may seeme hurtfull. And reason teacheth man to draw himselfe into some society, and common wealth, whereby he may be in safety from his enemies. For this cause euery man, that is not transported with strange passion loueth to liue vnder law and gouernment, and to hate those, that would dissolue lawes and lawfull gouernment. Howsoeuer then we fauour seduced papistes, yet vnlesse we will shew our selues deuoide of naturall reason, we may not shew our selues negligent in seeking the safety of our selues, and the mainteinance of lawes, and gouernment, wherein our safety in part consisteth. We may not neglect the safety of those, that depend vpon vs: but euery man according to his place is to resist such, as seeke our liues, and the liues of those, that are committed to vs, or do depend vpon vs.
In these three pointes or any of them it is not lawfull to offend by any law. The papistes, I thinke, will not say, that any man, that eyther teacheth false religion, or practiseth against the prince or state, or by sedition seeketh to hurt his countrymen, and to murder them, is to escape vnpunished. Wherefore then should they mislike any, that teacheth, that such offendors are to be punished? If, I say, all were punished
 within these cases, yet were it good iustice, and very necessary.
Howbeit such is the clemency of her Maiesties gouernement, that she spareth Iesuites, priestes, and such false teachers (as some thinke) but too much. Obstinate recusants if they be not taken in some practise of treason, are not in danger eyther of life, or landes, or liberty: they are not banished, nor rigorously punished. Nay their onely punishment is a pecuniary mulct, and that of few exacted. The poorer sort escape almost without punishment: the richer do auoid the punishment by trauersing the enditement. In Spaine and Italy our brethren would accompt such punishments great fauour.
Wherefore seeing this Noddy our aduersary knoweth the rigour of popish inquisitors against true Christians, and by this may well perceiue her Maiesties great clemency extended, not onely to quiet papistes, that liue priuate without scandale, but also to obstinate and factious recusantes, yea and to notorious traitors; hee was not wise either to challenge his aduersarie for speaking of Recusants so moderately, or to accuse this state of iniustice, that sheweth such extraordinarie fauour towards them, that so little deserue it.
Hee chargeth his aduersarie With playing the Herodian, bicause he saith, that diuers Recusants vnder a visor of ciuill honestie do couer disloyall harts. But if hee had done him right, hee shoulde rather haue thanked him for commending their ciuill cariage, which is more then their insolencie of late much encreased, deserueth. That it is true, which sir Francis Hastings affirmeth, if his face were not armed with a visor of impudencie, hee woulde not haue denied. Both reason and experience doth teach it to bee most true. For if hee bee a true papist, then must hee liue in subiection to the pope, and acknowledge his authoritie.C. vnam. extr. de Maior. and Obed. Boniface the eight teacheth, That it is a point necessarie to saluation, to bee vnder the pope.De ecclesia militante. c. 2. Bellarmine holdeth him out of the church, that is not vnder the popes obedience. Nostra sententia est, saith he, ecclesiam vnam and veram esse caetum hominum eiusdem christianae fidei professione, and eorundem sacramentorum communione colligatum sub regimine legitimorum pastorum, ac praecipue vnius Christi in terris vicarij Romani Pontificis. This is likewise Turrians, and Stapletons opinion. If then a papist or cacolik must needes obey the pope, then must he necessarilie both
 allow his sentence of excommunication against the Queene, and ioine with him in deposing her, or else they are no partes of the Romish church. But if they shall either so thinke, or do; they can bee no true subiects. SecondlyLib 2. de Pontif. Rom. Bellarmine teacheth, that it is a matter of faith, To beleeue that the pope by Christs ordinance hath succeeded Peter in the vniuersall gouernment of the church. But hee that beleeueth so much, as all papists are bounde to do, cannot acknowledge the princes royall authoritie in ecclesiasticall causes, nor exclude the pope from it, and per consequent, must needes bee but a sorie subiect to her Maiestie. Thirdly all papists areBellar. lib 4. de Pontif. Rom. bound to beleeue, That the popes sentence in matters of faith is infallible, and that, what hee iudgeth, is done by Christes authority, in whose tribunall seate hee pretendeth to sit. Necessarie it is therefore, that all papists allow the popes sentence of deposition against her Maiestie. If they denie it, they are not of the right touch of papists: if they grant it, they are euill qualified subiects. But what shall wee neede arguments to prooue this, when as experience doth euidently prooue it vnto vs? Is it not apparent, how little reason her Maiestie hath to trust them? In the beginning of her reigne the popish prelates refused to crowne her, one onely excepted. Afterward the popish clergie for the most part fledde out of the lande, and left her. By their solicitation, the pope began to stirre against her. Presently vpon his excommunication the rebellion began in the north. These kinde of men stirred vp diuers rebellions in Ireland. Neither haue they ceased at any time, to enterprise either one deuise, or other to hurt vs here in England. Sir Francis therefore doth greatly diminish their deserts, and spare them where hee saith onely, They haue deceitfull harts. And most fauorablie doth the state deale with them, for refusing to come to church to serue God, seeing their consorts do burne and murder godly men, for not comming to their idolatrous seruice, and abominable masse.
He calleth those, that refuse to go to our churches, The better and more religious sort of catholickes. But he is not of God, that refuseth to heare his word. Neither are they to be tearmed catholickes, that haue a priuate religion to themselues deuised by the pope, nor are they truely religious, that vnderstand not the principles of Christian faith, nor will receiue
 true holesome and apostolike doctrine. Now if any desire to know what they are; by the markes of Antichrist in their whole life, and profession he may vnderstand it.
Where it is said, that some papistes Shew foorth a good outward ciuill cariage, this Noddy wisely concludeth, That sir Francis maketh light of good life, and thereupon taketh occasion to runne out into a common place of good workes. But heere was no place for him to trie his skill. For sir Francis doth neither condemne good workes, nor good life, but rather the hypocriticall shewe of both, where indeede neither is to bee founde. Nay poore soules, the papists do not so much, as vnderstande, what workes are good, what not. They say their Oraisons, and Credo, and Aue Maria in Latin; and vnderstand not, what they say. They creepe to the crosse and kisse it. On fridaies they eate fish, and absteine from white meates in lent. They crosse themselues, confesse their faults in the priestes eare, put on haire cloth, and follow such like fancies; refusing to heare true doctrine, and Gods truth. AndMatth. 15. and 23. So they make frustrate Gods commandements by their owne traditions. Nay sometime they rebell against their lawfull princes, and murder Gods saints, and blaspheme his truth; and yet thinke they do God good seruice, when most plainely they transgresse his lawes. As for our selues, albeit wee do not attribute merite or iustification to works; yet wee exhort all men to shew foorth their faith by their workes, and to lead a holy life according to their holy profession. Neither are we so barren of good workes, but that we dare compare either with the glorious Iesuites, or with the most perfect men of the popish faction: or with their most holy popes.
As for Recusantes I know no works they do, but such, as if they were wise, they would be ashamed of them. Sir Francis Hastings, as a true and honest patriote, and like a religious gentleman, noteth three pointes in Recusantes worthy consideration. The first is The hurt they do, the second is The hurt they would do, if they were not restrained, the third is, Their deepe dissimulatio^. He might also haue noted ye hurts, which already they haue doone, and ioine their leud opinions with their wicked actio^s. And vary euery seueral point with manifold arguments, and examples. But this which he hath alreadie brought is more, then our aduersarie doth well answere.
 Nay hee answereth almost nothing, vnlesse wee take gibes and scornefull reproches for paiment. Where sir Francis saith, That the yoonger steere learneth of the elder oxe; He saith, It is a verse drawne from his plow, and stall of oxen. As if it were not lawfull and vsuall by naturall similitudes to expresse things morall, or as if his holy S. Thomas did not sometimes draw similitudes from oxen and asses. It is written inI^b. 1. Iob, That the oxen were plowing, and the asses feeding by them. That is, as he2. 2. q. 2. art. 6. and Gregor. moral. 2. supposeth, The ruder and inferior sort of people, which are represented by asses, must beleeue as their prelates do, which are signified by oxen. The similitude vsed by sir Francis is very fit. For commonly Recusants are as rude as oxen and steeres, and as the Psalmist saith, Vnderstand no more then doth horse or mule. Nay as it is in the first of Esaie, The oxe knoweth his owner, and the asse his masters cribbe; but these ignorant Recusants know not their God, but for their gods adore angels, and saints, yea stockes and stones, vnderstanding no more what they pray, then do oxen and calues. Beside that the confessors and yoong priests are so familiar with their wiues, that they are made liker oxen, then lyons. But this idle vagabond frier, that liueth idly vpon the sweate of other mens browes and disdeineth to labour, scorneth al husbandry, and honest trauaile. So strange is their doctrine, that they woulde alter not onely Christes religion, but also rules of state, and houshold.
Where sir Francis telleth vs, That he knoweth by experience, what hurt womens perswasions haue done in hardening their husbands harts in matters of religion, and saith, That the night crowes perswasion preuaileth much. Hee gibeth at the terme of Night crowes, and chargeth the knight with Playing the part either of Iudas to betray Recusants, or of Pilate to condemne them, or afflict them. But first there is great oddes betwixt the recusants, that haue nothing either of Christ, or of good christians, but the bare name; and Christ Iesus our sauior. Hee refused not to come into the temple though abused, nor sought to betray his nation into the hands of high priests, and forreine enimies. These refuse to come to Gods church, and are the high priests of Romes seruants, and many of them haue too great affection to forreine enimies. Secondlie euill do our Iustices deserue these reprochfull termes of Iudas, and
 Pilate for dealing against euill affected subiects,Iustices and other her Maiesties officers stirred vp to do their duties against priestes and recusants, by the reproches of the aduersarie. and woorse affected Christians; and may learne to execute the lawes more exactly, seeing for their remissenesse they are called carpet knights, and for dooing nothing railed at, as if they were as euill as Iudas, or Pilate. In the meane while wee giue this Noddy to vnderstand, that his consorts may much better bee termed Pilates, that murder Christ in his members, and condemne infinite innocent Christians; and therefore in the end they are to looke for the end of Pilate. The Recusants likewise may rightly bee resembled to Iudas, that woulde so willingly betraie their masters brethren, and their owne friendes and countrimen. And it is no new thing for sacrificing priests, that continually betray and kill or immolate Christ, as they say, to be called Iudasses.4. Brig. 133. and onus eccles. c. 23. Bridget saith, they are woorse then Iudas. Corpus meum, saith Christ in Brigits prophesies speaking of priests, amarius crucifigunt, quam Iudaei. And againe, Maledicti sacerdotes ad me simulatorie accedunt quafi proditores. Thirdly most true it is, that simple men are often misledde by the subtile perswasions of peeuish women. And therefore may they wel be resembled to black night crowes, that are still croking in their husbands eares, and entising them both to opinions and workes of darknesse. Beside this these nightcrowes are too familiar oftentimes with night walking priests and Iesuites, that teach them new fashions of shrift, and draw them into euill opinions, and dangerous practises. In Venice they encroched so farre vpon the womens fauour, that their husbands forbad them to come any more neere the Iesuites. Like fauour haue the Iesuites obtained at the handes of the goodwiues of Milan. By meanes of the wiues of Friburge the Iesuites attempted to set dissension betwixt the Cantons of Suizzerland. We may not therefore thinke it strange, if trecherous priestes worke their feates by the meanes of women.
Where it is saide, that by the leud perswasions of Recusant women many fall away, our aduersarie asketh, Whether they fall to enormitie of sinne, or wickednesse of life. As if the Recusants were such saints, that they coulde not fall to sinne, or wickednesse. Certes the common opinion is otherwise. For commonly Recusants make lechery and ribaldrie to bee no great sinne. And their women make it more nice to go to
 Gods church, then to go to strangers beds. It is well knowne, that papists allow of bordels, andC. at si clerici. De iudi ijs. account adulterie and fornication small faults, and easilie they dispence with them. Heerein England the priests corrupted the Gailors daughter of Wisbich, and another priest ranne away with one of Bellamies maides. Nay there is a priest in England, that confessed how hee shriued fewe women, but hee lay with them. And yet the simple Recusants neither feele their owne shame, nor prouide remedie against these priests of Baal. Beside that, Recusants are often drawne into strange and disloial practises, as appeereth by the examples of Arden, and Someruil, Babington, Tichborne and many others. But to omit filthinesse of life and trecherie; it is fall great inough, that simple men oft by leud perswasions fall into the errors and heresies of poperie, so many and so greeuous; that popery, as it conteineth nouelties aboue the doctrine which wee professe, is nothing but a packe of heresies: as wee shall particularly shewe heereafter.
But saith the discourser, They are catholikes, and haue a scruple to go to the Protestants churches, because they thinke their religion is naught. And thereupon hee concludeth, That religion and conscience is cause of their refusall, and not euill will or rebellion. But the poore idiots are much abused, where they are perswaded that either their owne religion is catholike, or that ours is not catholike. This is a common song, which the popish priests sing in their eares, but the note is iarring, and the dittie can neuer bee prooued. Catholike religion was that which the apostles taught generally throughout the worlde; and that is the religion which wee professe in our Creede, and finde written in holy scriptures. All which we holde, and refuse all doctrine contrarie to the same. But the papists in their schoolemens commentaries and popish decretals, and wicked missals and portuises, and such like bookes of Romish deuotion, haue brought in, not onely a faith diuers from the apostolike, and catholike faith, but also contrarie to the same. Much therefore do we pittie the blindnesse of Recusants, that not onely shut their eies against the light, and condemne that for heresie, which indeede is truely catholike, but also embrace falshood and heresies for true religion, worshipping angels, saints, and the virgine Marie, yea stockes,
 rotten bones and rags, in stead of one true God, and embracing antichrist in stead of Christ. And all this they do, building themselues and their religion either vpon lying legends, or popish decretals, or vncertaine customes neuer vsed in the catholike church. So that heerein there is neither one scrpule of true religion, nor any dramme of conscience, but onelie blindnesse and wilfulnesse, of which afterward ensueth vnnaturall vnkindnesse towards their prince and countrie, and wicked practises hurtfull to themselues and their deerest friends and countrimen. Neither can it excuse them, That they are so perswaded in their conscience. For all conscience ought to bee grounded on right reason, and not vpon this, or that fancy. Therefore theThomas aq. 1. p. q. 79. art. 12. and Siluest. in verb. conscientia. schoolemen say, Quod conscientia est actus synteresis. But this synteresis is nothing, but a facultie of the minde, wherein are principles naturally knowne preserued. SaintLib. 2. de lib. arb. c. 10. Augustine saith Quod in naturali iudicatorio adsunt quaedam regulae, and semina virtutum, and vera and incommutabilia: which are the groundes whereby conscience concludeth. And this properly is conscience. But there is also another conscience, when wee conclude not from the light of naturall reason, but from the knowledge of Gods worde. And this conscience concluding from rules of true religion is most resolutely to bee followed. But if it conclude otherwise, it is no conscience, but rather an opinion and fancie, and priuate humour, and pretense of conscience.
But saith this discourser, A man is to follow his conscience, though it do erre, and afterward hee telleth vs, That an erronious conscience doth both binde, and excuse: and this he goeth about to prooue, and maintaine. But his dispute of conscience is such, as he sheweth himselfe to bee ignorant both of reason, diuinitie, and conscience; and that he knoweth neither what is truth, nor what his owne consorts teach. That an erronious conscience is not to bee followed, it is apparent, for that our conscience is not a rule of our actions, but the lawe of God. For that is A lanterne to our feete, and a light to our pathes. AndIn 2. sent. dist. 39. Thomas Aquinas doth in expresse termes determine, Quod conscientia non ligat, vel obligat virtute propria, sed aliena, id est praecepti diuini. So that it alwaies tieth vs to the law, and not against the law. Secondly it is the lawe, that teacheth vs what is sinne, and what is not sinne, Ex lege
 saith the apostle, cognitio peccati And sinne is defined by saint Iohn, to be a transgrestion of the law. So that the lawe must binde the conscience, and not conscience dissolue law. Thirdly grant this, that an erronious conscience is to bee followed, and then it will follow, that idolaters are to worship idols, and heretikes to continue in their errors, and Mahometans to followe the impieties of Mahomet, for that the conscience of euerie of these erring, doth perswade them, that they are in the right. Lastly if an erronious conscience bee to bee followed, then were not an erronious conscience to bee changed, but we were still to continue in error. But contrary to this do schoolemen determine. Quaeritur, saithSum. Syluest. in verb. Conscientia. Syluester Prierius, vtrum homo teneatur erreneam conscientiam deponere, and to this question hee answereth, quod tenetur.
That an erroneous conscience should excuse any, is yet more absurd. For first we are not to be iudged according to our opinion of matters, but according to Gods law. Secondly if euery man were to be excused vpon his owne perswasion, then neyther should idolaters, turkes, nor heretikes be condemned. Thirdly1. 2. q 19. art. 6. Thomas Aquinas doth determine, that an erring conscience excuseth not: Voluntas saith he, Concordans rationi erranti potest esse mala. To conclude this point, the same is prooued by reason. For if a conscience erring excuse, then if a man should thinke he might do well to kill his freind, or brother, or to betray his countrie; he were to be excused.
That an erroneous conscience bindeth not vs, to beleeue that which we thinke to be true, and is not, nor to do that which we thinke to be good, and is not; is prooued, for that, if this were granted, diuers inconueniences would ensue. For then it should follow, that the Turkes that are perswaded in their conscience, that it is not good to beleeue in Christ, were bound not to beleeue in Christ, and that such as in their consciences are perswaded to kill any body, or to commit any flagitious act, are bound to do it; and finally our consciences and priuate opinions should be the rule of our actions, and not the law of God.
Neyther are our aduersaries reasons of any force to co^clude ye contrary. He saith first, that our co^science is nothing, but the determinatio^ of our reason about matters to be done or not to be done. But his definition is very imperfect, for co^science as
 well concerneth beleefe, as action. Beside it concerneth thinges past, as well as to come, as his owne schoole doctors could teach him, if he had read them. Thirdly it is not properly the determination of euery mans owne reason, but of true reason according to the generall rules, that are kept in Synterest, and (if we vnderstand conscience generally) according to the rules eyther of Gods law, or the gospell. Lastly albeit conscience is the determination of reason, yet are we not bound to folow that reason, be it right or wrong, as he doth thereof inferre; but rather we are bound to change our erroneous conscience, and to learne what the law of God is, that we may onely beleeue and do that is right, and auoyde the contrary. And this law is such, that euery one is bound to take notice of it; so that he cannot pretend ignorance, or that he hath no light, but the light of his owne blind reason.
He saith further, That the quality of mans will is measured according to the obiect, that mooueth the will: as for example, saith he, He that thinketh he killeth his enemy, when he hitteth a beast in a bush, sinneth. But while he thinketh he speaketh like a schooleman, and a great clerke, he speaketh, if not like a beast in a bush, yet like a weake diuine. For first there is great difference betwixt the will and the conscience, and therefore his purpose of will, fitteth not the matter in hand, that concerneth conscience: neither doth the example fit the resolution of conscience, beeing onely concerning the purpose of a mans will, that bindeth according to the fact intended, albeit the effect ensue not. Againe if by this example he be able to prooue, that a wrong conscience is to be folowed, then might a man lawfully shoot at his enemie in a bush, like a foxe, because his erroneous will, or as this Noddy termeth it conscience leadeth him vnto it. Finally Thomas1. 2. q. 19. art. 6. Aquinas doth teach direct contrary, viz, That a mans will agreeing with a false reason or ground may be naught.
Thirdly he alleadgeth out of Saint Paul. Rom. 14. and 1. Cor. 8. That to eat meat sacrificed to idols, simply without enquiring, whether it was such meat or no, is no sinne. But this is nothing to our question, that is about an erroneous conscience. For he that eateth such meates simply, seemeth to make no conscience of that matter. And albeit Saint Paul condemneth him that eateth such sacrificed meat contrary to conscience;
 yet doth he not speake of a mans owne conscience, but of an other mans conscience. Conscientiam,1. Cor. 10. saith hee, dico non tuam, sed alterius. and Rom. 14. he saith, it is good not to eate or to drink any thing, wherein our brother may be offended. Againe there is great difference betwixt him, that maketh a conscience to absteine from things in themselues not simply vnlawfull, and him that resolueth to do things vnlawfull, or to leaue things commaunded vndone. The apostle speaketh of the first, our question is of the second kind of conscience, as is euident by our aduersaries wordes, who teacheth, that if our consciences perswade vs to do any thing; that we are bound to do it, although our reason lead vs wrong. Which is contrary not onely to the apostle, but also to the schoolemen. The apostle saith, Whatsoeuer is not of faith, or a good conscience, is sinne. And the schoolemen teach, as I haue shewed, that an erroneous conscience is not to be folowed, but rather forsaken. So that if we folow the apostles rule, then those that vpon false perswasions abstaine from hearing Gods eternall word, and co^municating with vs in the sacraments, and that go to idole seruice, and eat bread, that is made an idole, do offend greeuously; for that this cannot proceede of conscience, but rather is against good conscience.
Fourthly he assureth vs, That the conscience of papistes, that refuse to go to the church is grounded vpon so sure and euident groundes, as any demonstration in the world can lay downe. And his ground is this, That the religion professed by papistes is true, and that therefore they may not seeme to professe any other. And here he thinketh he standeth firme and immooueable. But if this be his ground, his building is founded vpon sand, and vpon a cleare vntruth. For neither shall he euer be able to disprooue that truth, which we professe, nor to iustifie those pointes of popish religion, which we condemne. If he will promise to do it, I will giue him what tearme he pleaseth. And to the entent all deceiued papists may see his vanitie, I will shewe himSee the 4. encoun^^ following this treatise. heereafter, what the points are that hee cannot prooue. In this place it is sufficient to shewe, that his popish positions are contradicted in the greatest part of christendome. But no firme demo^stration can be grounded vpon vntrue, or doubtfull propositions. AristotleAnalyt, post. 1. telleth vs, that demonstrations are syllogismes, That worke certaine
 knowledge. But this demonstration of his is nothing but a mist, or rather darknesse, to deceiue ignorant people. Wherefore let all papisticall Recusants beware, what they beleeue vpon others credite. The Iesuites teach them lies for truth, heresie for faith, antichrist for Christ, superstition and falsehood for true religion, and draw from them all meanes of their saluation.
Fiftly hee telleth vs, That wee do greatly discredite our doctrine, which wee were woont to teach, viz. That no man shoulde be forced in matters of his conscience. But the discredite is rather his, that either vnderstandeth not our doctrine through his dulnesse, or else cauilleth about this matter of forcing the conscience without iust cause; then ours, that teach as wee did euer, and vary not from our doctrine in our practise. Wee say as wee did euer, that the conscience neither ought to bee forced with tortures and terrors of death neither can be forced. For faith founded vpon sure groundes surmounteth all violence of tyrants, and crueltie of persecutors, which terrifieth and discourageth none taught rightlie in Christs schoole. As for the sauage and barbarous crueltie of the popish synagogue, and that purple whoore of Rome, WhoseApocal. 17. vesture is red with the blood of Saints, and which without difference of age, sexe, or qualitie tortureth, hangeth, burneth and killeth true Christians, it is odious not onely to those that vnderstand the truth, but also to the milder sort of the aduersaries. Further albeit no man can bee forced to religion; yet all gentle courses are to bee vsed to draw men to religion. For this cause wee exhort the weake and ignorant, and with pecuniarie mulctes wee represse those, that are wilfull and obstinate. And this is all the punishment, that her Maiestie vseth against recusants: too little certes, if wee respect either their deserts, or the malice of our enimies: neither do we thinke it either vnlawfull to proceed further against hereticall teachers, that corrupt Christs doctrine with their leuen; or sufferable, that notorious blasphemers and railers at religion shoulde escape vnpunished. So then wee beleeue, that religion is to be taught, and not by terrors, thrust vpon the people: and yet denie not, but that such as bee wilfull disturbers of the state of the church, or common-welth ought to bee punished. Neither is there any repugnance betwixt these two courses. Onelie
 let papists absteine from practises, and for the rest they are secured both of life and libertie, lands and goods. We seeke them and not theirs, and onely proceede against such, as shew open contempt against our religion; and yet vse all c^emencie, vnlesse their vntollerable abuses against church and state vrge vs to extremitie.
Finally he doth preferre the orders of the popish synagogue that burneth not onely those, yt forsake their religion,The papists cannot dissemble their bloody crueltie. but such also as will not come vnto their religion. The popes religion he calleth, The faith of all Christendome, and saith, That such as thinke hardly thereof, ought rather to be barred from comming to the church, then drawne thither. Wherein he sheweth first his cruelty and bloudy humor, that seemeth to reioyce in slaughter, and commendeth the woluish nature of the Romish synagogue. Secondly his folly and treacherie, that betraying his clients cause, would haue them punished with death. For if all that forsake the faith of Christ and his apostles be to suffer death, then will it go hard with his clients the recusantes, who pretending catholicke faith, indeede do embrace the priuate doctrine and faction of popes. Thirdly his impudency, that dare auouch the popish religion to be the faith of all Christendome, which notwithstanding is contradicted by the easterne churches, and forsaken of a great part of the west church, and is onely maintained by fire and sword and cruelty. Lastly his ignorance in teaching religion, that would haue such as do not like all points of faith, to bee barred out of the church. Which course neither by our Sauiour, nor by his apostles nor by any true teachers of Christianitie was euer practised. Nay our Sauiour inuiteth all to come to him, and when hee had made readie to feast his friends, woulde haue guestes compelled to come in. Likewise the apostles taught all that came, and opened their armes to embrace all, that were desirous to learne. The ancient fathers by all meanes sought to draw people to the church, and shut the doores against none, that was willing to come in. What then shoulde we thinke of the aduersaries, but as of enimies of Christ and true religion, that seeke to murder and famish Christs flocke? In the meane while let vs holde on our course, and with our Sauiour call al men, and refuse none that are willing to heare. And thus an ende of the first consideration that concerneth the hurt that
 popish Recusants do.
Next we are to consider, What hurt they would do, and that briefly. Now that is apparent, First by their hatred against religion, and all that professe the same. And Secondly by their affection toward forreine enimies, and cold deuotion to her Maiestie and the present gouernment. Their hatred against religion is so extreme, that they will not suffer any to liue, that professe the same. Their affection to ye pope is exceeding, when for his sake they forget their loue to their countrie, and duty to their prince, as appeereth euidently by many examples. and as they hate true religion, and the present gouernment; so they seeke the establishment of idolatrie and other points of poperie, and the whole alteration of the present state. Of which the first cannot bee done without the subuersion of the church, nor the later without the desolation of this countrey. Two points so materiall, that no true Christian can endure the first, nor true Englishman the latter. Our aduersarie supposeth, that the masse and the popes gouernment may well stande with her Maiesties securitie. But popish religion hath many tricks, beside the masse; and the popes gouernment, if it were receiued as the Iesuites teach it, admitteth no other soueraigntie either in ecclesiasticall, or politicall affaires, beside the popes. Neither masse nor pope can come into England, either with the safetie of her Maiestie, or the state. And this wee do not speake by guesses at the wishes of papists, as our aduersarie supposeth; but by experience of former practises, and reasons deduced out of the grounds of Romish religion, and the practise of Romish proceedings. Of which wee haue spoken heeretofore, and shall also haue occasion to speake more at large heereafter.
The thirde point to be considered is, Whether the Recusants do not dissemble deepely, and in hart stand euill affected to her Maiestie, their countrey, and all that professe the Gospell. In handling whereof our aduersarie passeth a little the limits of patience, and giueth sir Francis euill language, andP. 80. chargeth him, That he hath no care, nor conscience in accusing so many cacolike men of England, and that of such heinous crimes. But high treasons are not answered with high wordes. Neither can heinous crimes bee dashed out with flat and bold denials. We find by experience, that all the troubles,
 that since the beginning of her Maiesties reigne vnto this time haue happened to this state, haue proceeded wholie from the malice of papists. The rebellion in the north parts of this realme was raised by Nicholas Morton and other priests, when as yet there was almost neither act nor lawe made against papists. When they coulde not preuaile in England, they raised great broiles in Ireland. Beside domesticall rebellions they haue stirred vp forreine enimies and warres against this state. Philip of Spaine at the instance of English traitors determined both by sea and land to make warre vpon vs. By procurement, and practise of this faction the Duke of Alua, the Duke of Guise, and Don Iuan d'Austria became our enimies. Likewise if wee looke into secret practises, either against her Maiesties life, or against the state; wee shall finde, that all the plots were contriued and determined to bee executed by papists. William Parry, Somerfield, Arden, Babington, Ballard, Patrick Ocollen, and all those murderers, and empoisoners, that of late time haue practised against her Maiestie were papists, and set on by papists. Onely Lopez, as is said, was a Iew. So papists and Iewes conspire iointly against this state.
Of their hatred against religion, and the true professors thereof there is no question to be made. Darkenesse cannot stand with light, nor canne the sonnes of Beliall abide Christs true disciples. No papist will endure to be excommunicate by the pope; but if hee shoulde not persecute Christians vpon his commandement, he shoulde bee excommunicate and accursed. Nay albeit they woulde be content to liue in peace, yet will not the Iesuites and seditious priestes suffer them to rest. These raised the league, or rather the rebellion against the French king, and warres against the professors of true religion. These are the agents of antichrist to mooue princes to warre against the lambe, and those that follow him.
Neither is it to bee presupposed, that they can continue in their allegiance to her Maiestie, when they acknowledge the popes authoritie. Praecipimus saithIn bulla Pij 5. aduers. Elizabeth. Pius Quintus, and interdicimus vniuersis and singulis proceribus, subditis, populis, and alijs, ne illi eiusue monitis, mandatis and legibus audeant obedire. How then dare they obey her Maiestie, when hee commandeth them not to obey? The traytorIn his letters to the nobilitie and people of England and Ireland. Allen hee doth not
 onely exhort her subiects to forsake her, but to take armes against her. If you should either sit stil saith he, or refuse to help (the Spaniard) etc. or any of you seeke to vphold (which God forbid) the vsurper, or her complices being thus cursed, you shall first encurre the angels curse, etc. and bee as deepely excommunicated as shee is. Seeing then, that papists of our times bee like to their predecessors, and seeing they cannot choose, but obey the popes command; what is to bee looked for at their handes, but sedition, rebellion, and cruell execution of the popes commands? They may now temporize. So do also all rebels, vntill their matters grow ripe. They may likewise professe and protest deepely. For so did Parry, Lopez, and the earles of Westmerland and Northumberland. But why shoulde any thinke our papists to be of other nature, then the papists of France, and other countries, that neuer cared for promise, nor oath, so they might attaine their purpose? Shall not wee while wee haue meanes, prouide for our safety, and the safetie of the state? Our aduersarieP. 78. and 80. talketh much of the Conscience of papists, and setteth them foorth, as Examples of good life, and modest behauiour, and diuers other vertues: and no maruell, seeing apes seeme faire to apes, and serpents to serpents, and affection maketh foule thinges seeme faire, (...), saithEclog. 6. Theocritus. But hee that nourisheth vp woolues, must looke well to his sheepe. Wee are well acquainted with their conscience, and knowe they make no conscience to obey the popes commands, though neuer so cruell. Their behauior is such, that wee finde no men more backewarde in publike seruice. Wherefore as one saide:
(...),(...): So wee may say, the Spaniards are dangerous enimies, the pope and his agents more, the Recusant and domesticall malcontent is most dangerous. Neither are they hard harted men, and without piety and conscience, that so thinke of them; but these rather, that oppugne true pietie and religion, maintaine idolatrie and superstition, and preferre strangers before their owne countreymen, hazarding the destruction of their owne nation and countrey, that is like to ensue, if the popes purposes, which they do fauour, and vnder paine of his curse
 must fauour, take effect.
And that they are not so honest men, as is pretended, appeereth in part by our aduersaries discourse, who either betraying his clients, or bewraying his owne trecherous humour, or or a foolish humour of contradiction goeth about to prooue, that a man may keepe a good conscience to God, and yet not keepe faith and allegeance to his prince; or to vse his owne words, That a mans conscience to God may be seuered from obedience to his prince: and this hee woulde iustifie by the example of Abraham, Lot, the ten tribes that left Roboam, Iehu, Hieremie, Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis, Hilary and others. But as his position is strange, so his proofes are most weake and simple. Our Sauiour Christ commandeth vs to giue to Caesar that which is due to Caesar. But no question, but allegeance and obedience is due to Caesar. TheRom. 13. apostle saith, Wee must bee subiect, not for wrath onely, but also for conscience sake. And the apostle saint1. Pet. 2. Peter commandeth vs, To submit our selues to the king for the Lordes sake. Neither was it euer heard, that any godly bishop did take vpon him to release the oath made to kings, or to dissolue the obligation, that tied subiects to princes. The examples alleaged to prooue that conscience and obedience to princes may be seuered, are much mistaken. Abraham and Lot dwelling in Chaldea were not subiect to other princes, but were princes themselues ruling their owne families as kings, for that as yet kingdomes, and common-welthes were not established. But suppose they had beene subiect to some king, yet were they not forbidden to leaue their countrey, or if they were, yet might they depart seeing GodGen. 12. commanded Abraham out of his countrey. But English fugitiues flie hence contrarie both to gods ordinance, and the princes commandement. The tenne tribes rebelled against Roboam, and set vp a strange king; beside that, forsaking true religion, they1. Reg. 12. set vp idols in Bethel; so papists rebell against their princes, and English fugitiues woulde set vp a strange king, and seeke by all meanes to set vp their idols and golden calues, or at least woulde haue men like calues to worship golden images. But God neuer allowed rebellion, or idolatrie.2. Reg. 9. Iehu killed Ioram king of Israell, and his mother Iezabel: but that was by speciall commandement of God. But our rinegued English contrary to Gods ordinance
 seeke the destruction of the prince and mother of their countrey; and this vnnaturall traytor doth wickedly compare her to Iezabel. Hieremy did attempt nothing against the life of his prince, nor did hee any thing, but declare the message of God to his people. Wherefore either let this Noddie bring foorth some message from God, to commaund vs to submit our selues to the pope and king of Spaine, or else his defence is not woorth a daisie.
Athanasius, Eusebius Vercellensis and Hilary forsooke their country for safegard of their liues, and refused to obey their princes commandement, that sought to establish the Arian heresie. Yet did they not rebell against their prince, or seeke to depose him or murder him, or to giue his kingdome into the hand of strangers. But our fugitiue English albeit no man forceth them to embrace heresie, or seeketh their life, yet flie they like traytors to forraine enemies, and there conspire against the prince and state; and al to establish their popish heresies, and to erect idolatry.
His authorities likewise are impertinent to this purpose. The prophet Psal. 44. where hee saith, Obliuiscere populum tuum and domum patris tui, woulde haue the church and euery one of the church to forget his kinred and people, and to follow Christ. And ourMatth. 17. Luc. 12. Sauiour woulde haue vs forsake our father and mother for his sake. But where there is no opposition betwixt Christ, and our countrey and people, there this rule taketh no place. What do those then deserue, that not onely forsake their countrey and kinred, but Christ also, and true religion? Againe albeit wee may not forsake Christ though wee shoulde loose countrey, kinred, life and all; yet may not godly Christians seeke the destruction of their prince and countrey, nor to bring in strangers. This is altogither without the compasse of the text; and English rebels, that flie to the enimy, haue no warrant so to do in these words. As for Wyats enterprise wee are not bound to defend it. And yet it is cleere, that hee ment no hurt to the Queene, or to the realme, but good rather, seeking to driue out strangers, whose comming coulde not choose but bee hurtfull to this land, and dangerous. In France and Scotland those of the religion did onely seeke to defend themselues against force, and not to hurt their princes; they repelled those that pretended the
 princes authoritie, and yet went about to disannull the princes act and promise; and sought not to murder and driue their princes out of their kingdomes, as the factious papists haue done, where they haue beene stronger.
But saith the Warder, TheAct. 5. apostles chose rather to obey God, then man. And holy martyrs are commended, Quod contempserunt iussa principum. And finally hee calleth them Herodians, that obey their princes; and saith, They make the princes will the platforme of their consciences, and actions. All which maketh nothing to the controuersie in hand. For it is one thing to continue in allegiance and subiection to princes, and another to obey or execute their wicked commandements. This Christians are not to do, bicause they are to obey God, rather then man. Yet may they not rebell against their princes, nor may they seeke to depose them, and murder them, as the papists teach and practise. Naie they proceede further, and obey the most wicked commandements of the pope, which like Herode co^mandeth many innocents to be done to death. And therefore are they Herodians, and Christiani sanguinis hirudines, and most vnlike to the apostles and former martyrs. Which appeereth in this also, for that apostles and martyrs paide tribute, and sought not to kill their princes; these fellowes vpon the popes excommunication, not onely thinke themselues discharged of tribute, but also of oath and obedience, and oftentimes take armes against emperours, kings, and lawfull princes.
Where sir Francis woulde teach, That all obedience is due to the souereigne magistrate, and prooueth it out of the wordes of1. Pet. 2. Peter, that teacheth vs, that wee must Subiect our selues to all manner of ordinance of man for the Lordes sake, our aduersarie quarrelleth, and taketh diuers exceptions to his dealing. First hee taketh exception to his translation, for that hee translateth (...), all manner ordinance of man, and leaueth out Siue ducibus ab eo mistis. Secondly hee quarrelleth with his interpretation, as if sir Francis shoulde teach, that an absolute obedience in all causes were to bee yeelded to the temporall magistrate. Lastlie hee saith, that this place of saint Peter is impertinently alleaged to prooue that papists are to obey the magistrate commanding them to go to church. And so gladly woulde hee finde a knot
 in a rush, and as if hee had founde out great matters, hee despiseth his aduersarie, and calleth him Seely man, and simple soule, and bible-clerke knight, and guilt-spurre doctor, rayling at his pleasure, and according to his fashion; yea and without iust cause. For first (...), is better translated Humane ordinance, then Humane creature. For properly men neither create, nor are created by men. Moreouer if wee shoulde translate humane creature, then shoulde this subiection be not to magistrates ordeined by man, but generally to all men. And therefore the worde (...) signifying both creature, and ordinance or election, wee are to choose the fittest signification. Secondly it is no part of sir Francis his meaning to teach an absolute obedience to bee due to temporall princes. Nay hee thinketh it neither due to temporall, nor ecclesiastical magistrates, saue onely in things lawfull. But this the papists denie to princes in ecclesiasticall externall gouernment simplie; and in temporall causes too, if the pope do excommunicate them, or depose them. Thirdly sir Francis did not alleage this place to prooue that papists were to go to church vpon the princes commandement, but rather to shewe, that they ought not to rebell against princes vpon the popes warrant, as they do very often. And thus all this matter, about which the Noddy maketh so great exclamations, is easily cleered, and all his calumniations and cauillations at his aduersaries person, and writings answered. It resteth therefore nowe, that we consider a little of his braue speake made in the latter end of this chapter to the Recusants. Perhaps he is better able to teach them, what they are to do heereafter, then to defend that is done already.
First hee telleth vs, That hee can say no more to cacolike Recusants, then that which followeth. Which sheweth, that hee hath little to say in their defence, and lesse for their instruction. Then hee pronounceth in his graue voice, That the course which they haue taken is most honorable, and pious before God and man; and that forsooth in three points: first in shewing their dutie towards God by standing constantly, and suffering for their conscience. Secondly in offring all loyal obedience in temporall causes to their liege prince; and lastly in edifying their neighbors by their good life, and behauiour. But what if they haue neither shewed their dutie to God, nor
 suffered for their conscience; nor offered loyall obedience to their prince, nor haue so taken her; nor haue either by their beleefe or life edified their neighbors? May we not then conclude, that their course is neither pious nor honorable; and that albeit they escape the censures of men, yet assuredly they shall answere before God? Nay what if for religion they maintaine superstition, for loyaltie nourish in their bosomes trecherie and disloialtie, and ruinate their neighbours by their euill example; doth it not hence follow, that their course is impious, and disloiall, and odious both in the sight of God, and of man, and that not in three points, but in many points, resulting partly of their impieties and errors in religion, and partly of their malcontent humours in ciuill actions? It is most apparent. For this Warder their good friend hath laide those grounds, whereof this conclusion ariseth.
First then I say, that no papist since her Maiesties raigne hath suffred death, or losse of landes, or liberty meerely for his conscience, vnlesse he make it conscience, not to commit treason. Let the recordes be sought, and their causes be examined, and this will easily appeare. And albeit some haue beene imprisoned, yet was the same not directly for not comming to church, but for refusing to pay the mulct.
Secondly compare their penalties and sufferinges with the sufferings of true Christians, whome they imprison, spoile, torture and murder, and that onely for matters of faith; and then they will appeare nothing in comparison. But were they much greater, then they are; yet it is the cause, and not the suffering that maketh their patience commendable. Haue theySee the conclusion of the 4. encountres following th^^ treatise. suffered for their impieties, idolatries, treasons and felonies, and for adhering to Antichrist? Then is their shame great, and their reward nothing.
Thirdly I deny, that they haue shewed their duty towards God. Nay in refusing to heare his word, and to receiue the sacraments ordeined and instituted by Christ Iesus, and administred according to his holy institution, and embracing a fond and false religion standing partly on traditions and popish decretalles, and partly vpon leud customes and lying legendes, and partly vpon wicked heresies and false positions, they haue declared themselues impious towardes God, and aliens from Christ his church. And that they shall well perceiue
 by a speciall encounter concerning that point.
Fourthly it is meere impudence, to affirme that the recusantes haue offered to her Maiestie all loyall obedience in temporall causes; or that they haue acknowledged her to be their liege prince. For who knoweth not, that the rebellions both in the north parts of England, and also in Ireland were raysed by recusants and papists? The same men haue diuers times attempted the destruction of her Maiestie and the alteration of gouernment, as appeareth by the practises of Parry, Somerfield, Throgmorton, Ch. Paget and others. These are the men, that Cardinall Allen hoped would ioyne with the Spanyard, and helpe to depose her Maiestie. And although now they stir not; yet it appeareth, that theirThose be the words of Campians facultie. obedience must onely continue, Rebus sic stantibus. And call you this yeelding of loyall obedience? Beside that theBulla Pij Quinti. pope curseth all that will obey her, or repute her as lawfull Queene. Whether is it then more likely, yt they will obey the popes sentences, whom they take to be their soueraigne iudge in these cases, or her Maiesties commaund, which they respect not? But suppose they would yeelde loyall obedience in temporall causes; yet that is not sufficient to make the recusantes seeme loyall subiectes. For the princes authority in commaunding for true faith, and abolishing errors and abuses, for establishing externall orders, and remoouing disorders both in the time of the law, and in the auncient Christian church, hath alwayes beene esteemed great.
Lastly I would aduise these cacolike malecontentes, or recusantes, or what you will haue them called, not to bragge too much of their good works, least they giue others iust occasion to make their vncharitable dealing, and dishonest liuing knowne. Now I will onely say this, that he that fauoureth forraine enemies, and entertaineth eyther practise or intelligence with them, or receiueth markes of faction from them; whatsoeuer his pretenses are, cannot seeme much to edifie his neighbors. Surely he leaueth for himselfe no place in the state, that loueth not the state. Let them therefore if they will needes boast of their workes giue no more eare to these hispaniolized English, combined with traytors for the destruction of the country. For he canne hardly seeme honest, whome such rinegued traytors, so highly do praise.

In the end of this chapter he goeth about to teach his disciples the recusantes, how farre they are to yeelde obedience to their prince. But if his teaching be no better in schooles, then in these encounters, I doubt, he will make but few good schollers. First he doth not shew vs, whome he taketh for a lawfull prince, which for determination of this controuersie would certainly be knowne. For if he do not beleeue that a prince excommunicate by the pope, and by him deposed, is to be reputed lawfull, and to be obeyed, notwithstanding the popes spite, then whatsoeuer he talketh here of obedience to princes, concerneth her Maiestie nothing.
P. 88.Secondly he would haue recusantes to serue their prince With body, goods, and life. Where we are to note, that he neither mentioneth the heart nor the inward affection. Do we not then thinke, that the recusantes will do her Maiestie good seruice, that are deliuered vnto her without soule, hart, or harty affection?
Thirdly least vpon his promise they might perhaps be too forward in seruice, he draweth them backe with a limitation, and teacheth, that their seruice and obedience is to stretch no further, Then to iust causes, of which he maketh eyther the recusantes themselues, or the pope their holy father to be iudge. So that her Maiestie, if the pope proceede against her, is to looke for no seruice at the recusantes handes. Nay Allen in his traytorous exhortation to the nobility and people of England and Ireland hopeth to draw them to assiste forreine enemies against her. Behould I pray you this goodly doctrine. Fourthly he teacheth, That Christian princes haue no more commaund, nor authority in ecclesiasticall causes, then heathen magistrates; for that Christ altered nothing at all in temporall gouernement. But that is a position contrary to the law of God, to the practise of Gods church, and most absurd, and sencelesse. The law of God referreth ambiguous matters aswell to the iudge or prince, as to the priests or leuites. For in the Sanedrin, of which that law is the foundation, the soueraine magistrate was chiefe;Deut. 17. and the king was commanded To read in the law, that he might keepe it, by his authority restraining offendors. In auncient time vnder the law the kinges and soueraigne magistrates gaue lawes to priests and leuites, and not contrarywise. In the church of Christ for a thousand
 yeeres or more there were no lawes obserued, but those of princes. Bellarmine would fetch it higher, but his proofes faile him. In their Bullary which containeth a summe of the popes lawes, they begin with Gregorie the seuenth. but in truth Gregorie the ninth was the first, that gaue authoritie of lawe to the popes constitutions, and gathered them into the booke of decretals. Before this time bishops, priests, deacons, and the whole church wasCod. de sum. trin. and fid. ^ath and tit. sequentib. gouerned by the lawes of Christian princes, as appeereth by the lawes of Constantinus Magnus, Valentinia^, Gratian, Theodosius, Arcadius,Ansegisus de leg ib. Caroli and Ludouic. Charles the great, Ludouicus Pius and diuers others. And certes very absurd it were, if heathen princes, that are strangers from Gods church shoulde haue as much authoritie, as Christian magistrates, that are principall parts thereof, and to whom the execution of Gods law is committed. Neither is it materiall, that Christ altered nothing in the office of magistrates. for it did alwaies belong to the magistrate, that was of the church, to gouerne the church in externall matters, and to see true doctrine published, and the sacraments sincerely administred by those, to whose office it appertained. So we see, that by this false position he would exclude her Maiestie from all gouernement in ecclesiasticall causes, and that notwithstanding his pretence of teaching obedience, he teacheth flat disobedience to princes ecclesiasticall lawes, and their commaundements.
Fiftly heP. 88. teacheth, That ecclesiasticall and temporall gouernment is so distinguished, that he that ruleth in the one ought not to rule in the other. The which doth vtterly ouerthrow the popes temporall kingdome, which our aduersary would so willingly maintaine. For why should he gouerne a kingdome, pretending to be a bishop, rather then a king gouerne a particular church of one nation, in externall causes especially? Secondly we do deny this distinction of authority, vpon which our aduersaries fancies are founded. And our reason is, for that in Christian common wealthes, where the same persons are members both of the church and common-welth, there the cheefe gouernours ought to haue care both of church and common-welth: and most absurd it were, if the prince, which is a principall member of Gods church, shoulde haue no gouernment therein; and that inferior persons
 shoulde haue supreme command ouer the prince.
Sixtly hee doth insinuate, that the pope is Christs vicar, and the apostles successor in supreme gouernment of the church. And this hee teacheth is Recusant schollers, least percase they shoulde faile to obey him. But this is nothing else, but to draw her Maiesties subiects from their due allegiance, and to perswade them to listen to the pope, as pretending to bee Christs vicar, and the apostles successor, and supreme gouernour and head of the vniuersall church of Christ: which is quite contrarie to his faire pretenses, and purpose in this place, where hee shoulde perswade the Recusants to obedience towarde their prince. Beside that, it is so false, as nothing more. Let this Noddy, if he canne, shew foorth the popes commission eyther for his vicegerentship, or for his pretended apostolicke office, and supreme gouernement. let him prooue it vnto vs, or else forbeare impudently to assume it, and to affirme it. wee doe shew, that bishops are the apostles successors. and yet that is no preiudice to the princes supreme authority, nor neuer was. What then is that which hee bableth of the pope, that is neither bishop, nor the apostles successor?
Finally hee affirmeth, That ecclesiasticall gouernment stood distinct from ciuill 300. yeeres after Christ, and that euery emperour, and mortall prince conuerted to the faith, and entring into the church submitted themselues to this ecclesiasticall gouernment, and so continued, vntill certaine heretikes confounded all. And so still cunningly hee speaketh for the popes authoritie, and secretly disableth not onely her Maiesties power in ecclesiasticall matters, but her title also to the crowne, standing as shee doth excommunicate by the pope. He doth also abuse his reader with the ambiguitie of ecclesiasticall gouernment. For if by ecclesiasticall gouernment he meaneth the power of the keies consisting in the censures of the church, and power of priestly function, which is properly ecclesiastical, we grant that such ecclesiastical gouernment belongeth not to princes, so that they are to execute the same in their owne persons. But if by ecclesiasticall gouernment he meane power to direct, and co^mand in externall matters; and to cause euery ecclesiastical person to do his function; and to see the church, and euery part thereof well ordred, and abuses reformed; it is most apparent, that such gouernment appertaineth to princes, and
 euer did both before Christs time, and after, and that no pope of Rome did euer meddle with any such matters before Gregorie the seuenth, or Gregorie the ninth his time, as before hath beene declared; and shall against stronger aduersaries, then this seely Noddy bee iustified. Lastly they were no heretikes, that giue to the prince this authoritie, but those rather that giue power to popes to depose princes and discharge their subiects from their othes of allegiance: as Sigebertus Gemblacensis speaking of the trecherous dealing of Gregorie the seuenth against Henry the fourth, in expresse terms affirmeth, and the Synode at Brixina assembled against Gregorie the seuenth determineth,
And thus wee see that this Noddy contrary to his intention hath intricated himselfe and his clients the Recusants in this cause. Before this many men woulde haue thought, that hee and his friendes the Recusants had beene of a better mind to her Maiestie, and this state. But now all the worlde may see their whole purpose and intention verified by their owne masters doctrine, and authoritie. They serue the prince, but not with hartie affection, nor in all causes, nor against euerie enimie. They yeeld her no authoritie in ecclesiasticall causes; nay they giue it cleere away to the pope. Finally they make her subiect, not onely to the popes excommunication, but also to his sentence concerning her crowne and kingdome. So it appeereth by their owne confession, that they are but sory subiects; and when the pope hath once gotten a side heere, apparent enimies. The same doth also appeere by their rebellions and practises against her Maiestie and the state, and by their infamous libels set out by the pope, by Sanders, Allen, Ribaldineira, Rishton, and diuers traytors, which the Recusantes either approoue, or do not disallow; and lastly by the generall hatred, that papists beare both against true religion, and also against all that maintaine it, or professe it. Wherefore albeit I do not wish the punishments of papists aggrauated; yet I say, it is great weaknesse in vs, either to suffer their insolency, or not to secure our selues against their hatred and tyrannie. But I need not vse many words to stir vp the magistrates to vigilancie. They see these things, and I doubt not, will take a course not still to suffer their right to bee disputed, or their actions disgraced and slandered: and euery true patriot, I
 hope, I will concurre with their prince, and not suffer the bowels of their countrey any longer by these vipers to bee gnawed. The trecherous intention of this our aduersarie, I haue opened; so that I hope, the quieter sort of Recusantes will not much trust him; his malice against true religion is euery where apparent, so that, I trust, honest men will heereafter learne to detest him, and to prouide more carefullie against him, and his consorts. And so I dismisse him for this turne, as a false traytor; you may looke to his proceedings, if you please, as a false teacher.


CHAP. VII. 

Of the pope of Rome, and his vsurped authoritie: and of N. D. his seuenth encountre.

IN the beginning of this seuenth encountre our aduersarie swelleth verie bigge, and degorgeth very great words against sir Francis, charging him With immodest rayling and calumniation, and saying, that he hath ouerlauished to the iniurie and slander of forreine potentates and nations abroad, and vsed opprobrious speeches against the sacred honors of annointed princes, and the greatest monarkes of Christendome. A man that readeth his loftie praeludium woulde haue imagined, that some great matter had beene out of ioint, that made him leape into this rage. But when I saw, that all this furie grew vpon some wordes vttred partly against the pope of Rome, that is neither lawfull prince, nor potentate, nor honest man; but onely a greasie priest or frier, if so much; and partly against the Spaniard, who to serue the popes pleasure without desert of ours is become our enimie; then I perceiued it was nothing else, but a loftie tricke of iacke an apes, that for feare of the whip leaped out of his little patience. To storme against vs for defending our selues against ye publike enimies of religion, of the state, of her Maiestie, of
 our nation, hee had no reason, but that hee woulde shew himselfe enimie of religion, the state, Queene and countrey. Certes if hee had not declared himselfe an open enimie, hee woulde neuer haue pleaded for publike enimies, nor beene so much offended with those that speake in defence of his prince and countrey. But let vs heare what slander it is, that our accuser laieth to our charge.
First it greeueth him exceedingly to heare, that the pope should be called The man of sinne, and that Antichrist, of whom ye apostle 2. Thes. 2 speaketh. And some reason he hath, in regard of his owne particular, to be offended. For if the pope be Antichrist, then is our aduersary a marked slaue of Antichrist, a false prophet, and an instrument of satan. But how heinously the matter is taken, it is not greatly materiall; that the pope is very Antichrist, we make no question: neither should any doubt, if they would well consider his proceedings. For first the name of Antichrist importeth, that taking the authority and place of Christ he should notwithstanding set him selfe against Christ. Secondly the office of Antichrist is to set himselfe against Christ his kingdome. Thirdly he shall excell in pride and arrogancy, and take to himselfe diuine honors. Fourthly notwithstanding his pretence of holinesse, yet shall he excell in all impiety and wickednesse. Fiftly he shall haue a face of brasse, and pretend vnderstanding of all doubtes of religion. Sixtly he shall appeare vpon the decay of the Romayne empire. Seuenthly he shall rise out of the ruines of that state.
8. Hee shall cause a great apostacie from the Christian faith, and in his raigne there shall bee a generall corruption of mens manners. 9. Although his kingdome shall be opposite to Christes kingdome, yet shall he sit in Gods church, and take on him the authority of the church. 10. The seate of his empire shal be in Rome. 11. His kingdome is represented by the purple whoore Apocalip. 17. and by Babylon Apocalip. 18. 12. Antichrist his impietie shall bee hidden and mysticall. 13. Hee shall most greeuously afflicte Christ his church. 14. He shall rule in mens consciences.
15. He shall make merchandise of mens soules.
16. Hee shall bee like a lambe, and yet speake like the Dragon. 17. Hee shall take to himselfe the power of the Romayne Empire. 18. Hee shall bring in a newe
 forme of Religion. 19. Hee shall bee an authour and cause of many impieties, and great corruption in manners.
20. Hee shall in effect denie Christ Iesus.
21. Hee shall pretend to worke wonders, and the worlde shall beleeue his signes and wonders. 22. He shall prescribe a certaine forme of ceremonies and lawes to all his folowers. Finally he shall rise obscurely, receiue power of princes, encrease by force, be folowed with all wicked traytors, heretikes, atheistes, and shall be destroyed with the breath of Gods spirite. All which conditions, as they are proper and well agree to the pope of Rome, and his kingdome; so the aduersaries themselues cannot shew any other, vnto whome these qualities canne agree. He calleth himselfe Christs vicar, and yet opposeth himselfe against Christ and his kingdome. He declareth himselfe a plaine aduersary in suppressing Gods word, and extolling his owne constitutions, and aduancing himselfe aboue all, that is called God. He taketh to himselfe the name, power and honor, that is proper to God, excelling all mortall creatures in pride and arrogancy. His life is full of all abominations. He taketh no shame, albeit his dooings be most shamefull, nay albeit his ignorance in religion be exceeding great, yet doth he vant himselfe, that he cannot erre in decyding of matters of faith. Presently vpon the decay of the Romayne empire, his kingdome beganne to shew it selfe. Neyther did he rise, but vpon the ruines of that state. Hauing gotten credite among Christians, he brought in infinite nouelties into religion, and by his euill example, and facilitie in granting pardons wrought a great dissolution in mens manners. At Rome hee now reigneth and none but hee. Nay hee is reputed to bee head of the church although head of the societie of wicked and feined Christians. His kingdome is plainly described in the figure of the purple whoore and of Babylon. Finally his mysticall impieties, persecutions of Christians, merchandizing of mens soules, and all those properties of antichrist, which before I described, appeering in him, and in no other, declare him to bee antichrist.
Neither can any medicine, which the papists haue deuised, helpe this greefe. As for the Noddy our aduersarie, hee doth not vnderstand those reasons which hee draweth out of Bellarmine. Much lesse is hee able to enforce them. First hee
 telleth vs That antichrist shall be one singuler man. But that cannot stande with the apostles wordes, that teacheth vs that the mysterie of iniquitie began to worke in his time. Againe the kingdome of Antichrist could not bee erected, and attaine to such greatnes by one man onely; nor is one onely man opposite to Christ. Further the state of antichrists kingdome is called an apostacie, but the terme of apostacie cannot fit one man. Finally Saint1. Ioan. 2. Iohn saith, that that antichrist that was prophecied of, was in the world in his time. AndTract. 30. in Matthaeum. Origene maketh antichrist a state or succession of men. Generaliter saith hee, vnus antichristus est, species autem eius multae. Neither haue the Scriptures or fathers any thing, whereof the contrarie may directly be concluded. Onely the scriptures by the figure of one beast do set out a state, and the fathers do firmely adhere to the manner of speech vsed in Scripture, which by one particular man vnderstand diuers men succeeding in one state. Nay the aduersaries themselues beleeue, that Christ by the rocke Mat. 16. whereupon he said he would build his church, vnderstood not onely Peter, but all the bishops of Rome.
Secondly he saith, That the Iewes shall receiue Antichrist for their Mes^ias. And therefore that it is not likely, that the pope should be Antichrist, whome they canne neuer admit for their Messias. But the antecedent is a meere fancy taken vp without ground. For albeit our sauiour^an. 5. saith, that the Iewes Will receiue another, if he come in his owne name; yet canne it not be gathered, that he speaketh there of Antichrist. For he speaketh indefinitely and saith, if any come in his owne name, that him they will receiue. And so dothIn Ioan. 5. Nonnus expound it. And if we should otherwise take it, then would it folow, that Antichrist should come in the apostles times, that he might be receiued of those, to whome our sauiour then spoke.
Thirdly he reasoneth out of Matth. 24. and 2. Thes. 2. That the gospel of Christ must first be preached to all nations, before the comming of Antichrist: which saith he, is not yet fulfilled. But in the 2. Thes. 2. there is no mention made of preaching the Gospell to all nations. In the 24. of Matthew wee finde, that the preaching of the Gospell to all nations shall bee fulfilled before Christs second comming, and not before the comming of Antichrist. But were this a signe of the comming of
 antichrist, yet it is long, since the sound of the Gospell hath passed throughout the world.
Fourthly, That antichrist should be a Iewe, and of the tribe of Dan; is but a meere conceite of some few, vpon false vnderstanding of scripture: for how shall a Iewe, that establisheth the ceremoniall law of Moses bee receiued among Christians? Wherefore this notwithstanding, the pope may bee antichrist.
Fiftly it is a Iewish fancie That antichrist shall reigne in Hierusalem, and restore Salomons Temple. Neither is anie such matter gathered out of the eleuenth chapter of the Apocalypse, where it is saide, not that the bodies of Henoch and Helias, as this falsarie hath, but That the bodies of the two prophets shall lie in the streetes of the great citie. For he speaketh not of the persecution by antichrist, but by the Gentiles, and vnderstandeth all godly men, that shall beare witnesse of the truth of Christ Iesus.Lib. 18. in Isai. and ad Algas. q. 11. Hierome saith, that all these imaginations of restoring the citie, and temple and ceremonies proceede from the heresie of Cerinthus. And truely very strange it were, if antichristes reigne continuing but three yeeres and a halfe, as our aduersaries hold, hee shoulde reedifie the citie and the temple, and founde so large a kingdome, as that of antichrist shall bee.
Sixtly it cannot bee prooued, That antichrist shall expresly deny Iesus, and vtterly abolish the sacraments instituted by Christ, and openly professe, that either hee is Messias, or God himselfe. Neither in ye 1. of Ioh. 2. v. 22. nor Ioh. 5. nor 2. Thes. 2. which places are cited to this purpose, is any such thing to be founde. Nay his dooings they shall bee mysticall, and hee shall deceiue many. But if hee shoulde plainly denie Christ, and abolish his Sacraments, he coulde not deceiue any Christian. SaintIn Ioan. Tract. 3. Augustine therefore calleth them antichrists, That by their workes denie Christ. And cunningly shall antichrist peruert the Sacraments, and take to himselfe diuine worship. All which wee see verified by the pope: and therefore rightly take him to be antichrist.
Seuenthly, that antichrist shall worke lying miracles, it is not denied. For it is very apparent, that popish religion doth much stande vpon miracles; and the legendes red in churches are full of them. But that hee shall make fire come really
 and visiblie downe from heauen, or make a dumbe image speake it is no where declared or prooued. Neither is it a miracle for a man to feine himselfe dead, and to rise againe. For that euery sacrificing priest is able to do that, albeit his power to worke miracles bee not great. By fire therefore, which antichrist shal make to come from heauen, we are to vnderstand antichristes thundring excommunications and other sentences, and the wrath of the court of heauen, that hee seemeth to haue at his disposition. By the image of the beast Apocal. 13. wee are to vnderstande new Rome, which now giueth out her imperiall edicts; by the beast that had a mortall wounde and yet was after a sort cured wee vnderstand the Romaine empire after a sort restored in the papacie. And so all agreeth with the pope and his kingdome, and sheweth him to bee antichrist.
Wee do also read, That antichrist shall reigne two times, one time, and a halfe. But that this number is to bee taken precisely for three yeeres and a halfe, and no more, wee do not read, nor beleeue. For as this time is applied to antichristes reigne, so likewise is the time of 42. monethes, and 1290. daies, neither of which numbers doth precisely make three yeeres and a halfe. Moreouer it is a vaine imagination to thinke, that such an alteration, as antichrist will make, can be wrought in three yeeres and a halfe.
Further the doctrine of napistes concerning the comming againe of Helias, is nothing but a Iewish fable, as appeereth by the wordes of the apostles, Matth. 17. Why do the Scribes say, say they, that Helias must first come? Our Sauiour also declareth, that Iohn Baptist was figured by Helias after a sort. Their opinion concerning Henochs returne is also a meere fiction. for neither in the Apocalypse chap. 11. nor in the 48. chap. of Ecclesiasticus, which is all the ground our aduersaries haue to prooue these matters, is there any apparance, that hee shall come againe, and bee slaine of antichrist. So that if the papistes looke not for antichristes comming before they heare of Henoch and Helias, they are like to bee much abused. And as well may the old Britons looke for the returne of king Arthur; as they for Henoch and Helias.
Lastly our aduersary dreameth, when he beleeueth, that within fiue and fortie daies after Antichristes death, Christ
 shall make an end of the world, and come to iudgement. For if that were true, then should not the end of the world come vpon such a suddaine, asMatth. 24. Christ telleth, nor should the same be kept from mens knowledge, as he likewise teacheth, that it shall. Wherefore if the Noddy haue no better meanes to shift off the name of Antichrist from the pope, then by determining the precise time of Christes second comming; then the pope will assuredlie prooue Antichrist. For that time no mortall man knoweth, or can certainly know.
Now if the pope be Antichrist, it is to no purpose to dispute, whether he be one of Antichristes forerunners. Yet because this Noddy will needes for his owne pleasure dispute that question, it will not be amisse, for a fuller view of the mans folly, to consider likewise of this his foolish dispute. First to prooue that Antichrist hath his forerunners, he alleadgeth a place out of1. Iob. 2. Iohn, where he saith, You haue heard how Antichrist commeth, and how many are become antichristes. But this prooueth, that antichrist was rather then come. and so directly Saint Iohn affirmeth saying, That he was then in the world. Which ouerthroweth the Noddies conceit of forerunners, and sheweth that hee is runne out of breath, and out of his wit; and yet helpeth him nothing to shew, that the pope of Rome is not antichrist. for albeit the bishops of Rome were not antichrists in Saint Iohns time: yet later popes of Rome furthering the mysterie of iniquitie, that began couertly to worke in Saint Iohns time, appeered plainly to bee antichrist, and in them antichrist, that before did worke closely, and in diuers men, and diuers places, became openly to be knowne, and reuealed. Hee saith further, that Turkes, Mores, tyrants, persecuters and other wicked people, and especially heretikes and sectaries are forerunners of antichrist. But if this were so, then might the pope also bee a forerunner of antichrist, for any thing this proctor of antichrist can alleage to the contrarie, surpassing all others in wickednesse, and being the father and author of diuers heresies, of which wee shall haue occasion to speake more heereafter. And indeede seeing antichrist was long in the worlde, before hee obteined his kingdome; and that those, that laide the foundation of his state, went before the popes, that openly reigned; it is not strange to say, that some popes were, as it were, pages and forerunners,
 and workers of antichristes apostacie; and that at the length other popes began to shewe themselues manifestly in his seat^. Do then wee see this by-question helpeth him but little. And yet to helpe himselfe, ourP. 93 aduersarie for (...) writeth (...), committing two faults in one Greeke word.
Afterward hee mooneth this question, Whether Rome be Babylon, or no: and yet like a wise fellow hee saith, it is not materiall, whether it be, or no. Which sheweth him to bee an idle discourser, that mooueth questions, that bee not to purpose. Beside, hee is deceiued much in his opinion. For if new Rome figured by the whoore of Babylon Apocal. 17. bee the seate of antichrist, and if his kingdome bee the westerne Babylon; then doth the apostle plainly declare, that the pope is antichrist. For none hath reigned there of long time, but the pope of Rome. But that the state of new Rome, as it is the seate of the pope, is figured by the purple whoore Apocal. 17 and by Babylon, it is proouedMatth. Sutl. de pontif. Rom. lib. 5. already by reasons vnanswerable. First the holy Ghost did signifie the destruction of old Rome, or the Romaine empire in the 13. of the Reuel. by the head wounded to death. And therefore no reason, that we should suppose hee declared the flourishing estate of the same empire in the 17. chap. which were nothing but to go backe, and foorth.
Secondly immediately after the destruction of Babylon and the purple whoore, the holy Ghost speaketh of the mariage of the lambe, and of the last iudgement, which must ensue after the destruction of Babylon, and the purple whoore immediately. Of which wee may gather, that the popes kingdome, and not the Romaine empire, that is long since destroied is vnderstood by the purple whoore, and by Babylon.
Thirdly Saint Iohn telleth vs, that the beast whereupon the purple whoore did sit, was to ascend out of the bottomelesse pit, and was not yet in the world. Necessarily therefore must we vnderstand the papacy of Rome, and not the Empire of Rome, by that beast that had seuen heads, seeing the Empire was then most florishing, and the papacy not yet established.
Fourthly after the decay of the Romaine empire for a while Christian religion began to flourish in Rome, and that citie of a wicked citie became the church of God. But after the desolation of Babylon or new Rome, it shall be made The habitation of diuels, and the hold of all foule spirits, and a cage of
 vncleane and hatefull birdes. Which must needes be vnderstoode of the destruction of Rome vnder the pope.
Diuers other reasons also are alleaged in a late treatiseLib. 5. de pontif. Rom. siue eius apost. c. 11. De apostasia Pontificis Rom. that most apparently shewe, that Rome as it is the seate of the pope, is that Babylon, and that beast with seauen heades, of which Saint Iohn speaketh in his Reuelation.
Hauing talked his pleasure of Rome and Babylon,P. 94. the Warder with many idle wordes returneth backe to talke of his deere father the pope: which sheweth that Babylon and antichrist are of neere affinitie, and cannot well bee sundred. But what hath hee to say of the pope? Forsooth it greeueth him much, that hee shoulde bee called The proud priest, and arch-prelate of Rome. And yet sir Francis hath therein done him great fauour. For if wee will rightly esteeme, hee neither deserueth the name of priest, nor arch-prelate, nor bishop hauing giuen ouer all priestly and bishoplike function, and occupying himselfe about worldly affaires, and his terrestriall kingdome; which to erect, hee ouerthrew the empire, and the whole strength of Christendome, and gaue leisure to the Turke, to rauage so many christian prouinces; and to maintaine it, hee hath caused the destruction of infinite Christian people. And calling him Proud and Ambitious, yet he doth him no wrong. For hee taketh to himselfe diuine power and authoritie in his commandements and iudgements, and aduanceth himselfe aboue all, that is called God. Hee taketh on him also power to canonize saints, and to giue diuine honors to others, and beareth himselfe, as lord of the Calendar of saints. Hee is borne high on mens shoulders, and maketh great princes to attende on him, like squires or pages, giuing his toe to kisse, for a speciall fauour. Neither doth hee content himselfe to bee called lord of lordes and Christes Vicar, but will needes bee calledC. satis. dist. 96. God at the least honored as God on the earth. Hee aduanceth himselfe high aboue all earthly princes, and presumeth to depose them and take away their kingdomes at his pleasure. Oh that Christian princes woulde open their eies, and consider, how by his pride he hath abused the honor of kinges, and troden the maiestie of the emperor, and other christian magistrates vnder feete.
Hee is also greatly offended, that the pope is called Bloody
 monster; and in great sadnesse telleth vs, That wee must not speake euill of the prince of the people: and alleageth the law, that condemneth him to death, that spoke euill of his father. But the ^eely fellow shoulde haue remembred, that wee haue shewed him to bee neither the prince of Gods people, nor a friend of Gods people. And hee himselfe hath declared, howe vnwoorthie hee is of the name of father, that seeketh to murder and ruinate his children. Nay hee is the father of lies, heresies, wicked practises, and of all that either by wicked doctrine, or trecherous practise seeke the destruction either of the church, or of this state. When William the conquerour came against England, the popeMatth. Paris. in W^llelm. conquest. blessed his banners. Another pope sent his blessing to the French, that in king Iohns time inuaded this countrey. Paule the third by all meanes hee could, sought the ouerthrow of our nation in king Henrie the eights daies, stirring vp forreine enimies abroad, and wicked rebels at home to hurt vs, and to destroy our countrey. Of late time Pius Quintus, Gregorie the thirteenth, and Sixtus Quintus haue not onely brought the Spaniards vpon vs, but also wrought diuers rebellions in England, seeking, if they could, vtterly to ruinate this state. And as they haue done in England, so haue they proceeded in France, and in the Lowe countries; and by their rebellions and practises haue brought to destruction diuers millions of Christians. In summe, if wee please to read histories; we shall finde, that the popes are the onely firebrands and enflamers of all the warres of Christendome, which Machiauel in hisLib. 1. Florentine historie doth in plaine termes confesse. And haue not wee then reason to call the pope bloodie monster?In Gregorio 6. Platina calleth three popes for their cruelties shewed one to another, and for their wickednesse, Tria teterrima monstra. And shall not wee, that haue farre greater cause to doe so, call them by their names? But saith hee, More bloud hath beene shedde in London for religion in one yeere, then in all the popes territories this twentie. It is also maruell that hee saith not, that lambes are more cruell then woolues. For hee is ashamed of nothing. This which hee heere writeth, is a most shamelesse and impudent slander. For hee cannot shew, that for popish religion any at all hath beene executed to death. Papists I confesse, to the number of some fiftie or threescore haue beene executed, but
 they were such, as either practised treasons at home, or came from forreine enimies abroad to the entent to worke mischiefe against the state. Who albeit they were woorthily put to death for their offences; yet the pope that sent them, and set them on, is to answere for their blood. Compare then the number of those that haue beene massacred in France, and executed in Flaunders, and that haue by the crueltie of Inquisitors beene done to death in diuers places of Christendome: and you shall see, that the pope and papacie is that bloodie purple whoore, whose vestures are redde with the blood of saints, and whose cruelties haue farre surmounted all other tyrants.
Now least he should seeme to speake without booke, he layeth on his aduersary with textes of scriptures, and saith, That euery soule should be subiect to higher powers, and that there is no power, but of God: and how he that resisteth power, resisteth Gods ordinance. And of this he would inferre, that those stand in bad tearmes, That resist and reuile the pope. But all this maketh much against the pope, that hath shaken off his princes yoke, and stirreth vp rebelles to resist lawfull princes, promising them his blessing for their wicked, and cursed treasons. For the pope this allegation is most fond and sencelesse. For it canne neuer be prooued, that the popes tyrannicall gouernement both in church and common wealth is of God. Let any learned papist (for our aduersary is but a seely Noddy) shew, that the popes gouernement and fulnesse of power, which he claimeth ouer all churches, is of God. Let him also prooue, that God hath giuen him an earthly kingdome, and authority to depose princes, to translate kingdoms, to raise warres and rebellions and to cut the throte of Christians, and murder Christes lambes. Our aduersary he passeth this ouer without touch, and onely telleth vs, That the popes power hath beene acknowledged in all Christendome for many yeeres and ages. But he lyeth and forgeth in this also. For the easterne churches neuer acknowledged this power, nor could the pope euer sell his commodities in those countries for any mony. The churches of Africke likewise resisted the popes vsurpations, and forbad their people to runne to Rome eyther for fauour, or iustice. The Frenchmen neuer would receiue the sixt booke of decretalles. His prouisions the kinges of England would neuer admitte. his pilling legates were odious
 generally to all Christendome. Finally albeit his tyranny preuailed much in latter times, yet hauePetr. de Alliac. de refor. eccl. Conci^. Basil. and grauam. G^^man. honest men declared the discontentement, which they haue receiued by his burdensome lawes, iniurious excommunications, and most shameful exactions and pillages.
He telleth vs moreouer, How Christ said to his Apostles Luk. 10. He that heareth you, heareth me; and he that contemneth you, contemneth me. But first he is mistaken in the persons to whome these wordes were spoken. For these wordes were deliuered to the seuentie disciples, and not to the twelue. Beside, were these wordes to be vnderstood of the apostles, and their successors, yet they concerne the pope nothing. For he is no apostle, beeing neither called immediately of God, nor sent into al the world, nor ledde into all truth, nor being able to make his decretals of authenticall credite. Hee is not the apostles successor: for hee feedeth not, nor preacheth, nor doth anie part of apostolicall function. Nay hee doth contrary to the apostles fashion, murder Gods saints, trouble Christian people, and resist Christes doctrine. The apostles taught such things, as Christ gaue the^ in instructions. The popes publish nothing, but fond decretals, and strange doctrine not onely diuers, but also in manie points contrarie to Christes Gospell and holy Scriptures.
But saith N. D. The bishops of Rome be successors in the apostle Saint Peters seat. Which I do not altogether deny, if he meane the first bishops of Rome, which were indeede true bishops, and succeeded Peter and other apostles teaching apostolicall doctrine. So all other true and godly bishops also were successors of Peter: albeit they claymed not this vniuersality and fulnesse of power, which the pope pretendeth to belong to him. But whatsoeuer the first bishops of Rome were, yet this concerneth the pope nothing, for he is no bishop, nor teacher, nor successor in Peters chaire, but rather Simon Magus his successor buing and selling not onely sacraments, and benefices, but also mens soules. He succeedeth also the Angelicks in worshipping angels, the Carpocratians in dissolutenesse and worshipping images, the Collyridians in worshipping the virgin Mary, the Manichees in his halfe communions, and forbidding of mariage to priests, the Pelagians in extolling the force of nature and merit of works, and infinite
 other heretickes in seuerall points of leud doctrine. He succeedeth also Nero in the Empire of Rome, rather then Peter, that was subiect to Neroes gouernement.
He alleadgeth also the example of the scribes and pharisees, and saith That Christ commaunded his disciples to obserue and do, whatsoeuer the scribes and pharisees, that sate in Moses chayre, said to them. And to speake truth, he hath more reason to compare the pope to scribes and pharisers corrupters of the law, then to the successors of Christes Apostles. But yet will not this serue his purpose: for our Sauiors meaning was to shew, that such as sate in Moses seat, and taught his law were to be heard, albeit otherwise bad men. But the popes do not sit in Peters seat, nor in Moses chaire, nor teach apostolicall or true doctrine.
Hee telleth vs further, That railers shall not inherite Christes kingdome, especially such, as raile against Magistrates. All which wee admitte. For it is a sentence condemnatorie against the pope of Rome, and his faction, that of late time haue taken to themselues infinite libertie in all their writings to raile against christia^ princes, and others not sparing any, yt is contrarie to their proceedings. For witnesse and proofe heereof I referre my selfe to the railing buls of Paule the third against Henrie the 8. of Pius quintus and Sixtus 5. against Elizabeth his daughter; of Sixtus 5. and Gregorie the 14. against Henrie the third and fourth of France, and of Sixtus 5. against the prince of Condey: To Sanders, Ribadineiraes, Rishtons, Anniball Scotus, the author of the commentarie of the popes late constitutions, and other most slanderous and railing libels against Queene Elizabeth. The wise fellow doth also condemne his owne scurrilous railing against sir Francis Hastings. Against vs it maketh nothing, that onely in plaine termes declare our aduersaries leud dealings sparing all euill termes, as much as we can. Neither doth this concerne the pope, that is neither Magistrate, nor good Christian. For that which this Noddy writeth, How the pope is a spirituall Magistrate, and hath a higher degree of authoritie then temporall magistrates, and that he doth represent immediately the person of Christ Iesus: is nothing but a peece of his frierlike folly, and ignorance in spirituall and temporall matters. For if such high authoritie had beene giuen him, no doubt, but wee
 shoulde long ere this haue seene authenticall writings of this donation, and haue heard of the particulars. Now wee must take these words, as proceeding from a writer of antichristes marke, that for Christ woulde commend vnto vs antichrist.
He telleth vs, That all ancient diuines and doctors for aboue a thousand yeeres togither haue taught, that it is blasphemie to raile at the bishop of Rome appointed by Christ to gouerne in his place, and damnation not to acknowledge his authoritie. And yet he is not able to shew either one sound diuine or doctor that hath so taught. Nay he is not able to name many canonistes, no nor schoolemen, that haue so written or spoken. Thomas Aquinas2.2. q. 13. teacheth him, That blasphemie is against God. Syluester PrieriusSumma in verb. blasphemia. saith, Blasphemy is a sinne against God properly, which he prooueth by the authoritie of Saint Ambrose, and improperly against saints. But the pope is neither God, nor saint. Nay if it bee blasphemy to attribute to man that which is proper to God, as the foresaide schoolemen teach, then do the papists blaspheme, that giue to the pope Christs power to remit sins, and sticke not to call him a god on earth. All ancient fathers of the church had the bishop of Rome in no other esteeme, then they had other godlie bishops; neither did euer any one suppose, that it was damnation not to acknowledge his authoritie. Nay his vniuersall authoritie ouer all the church, and infinite power in deposing princes, not Caluin and Luther, but all ancient writers doe gainsay and denie. So that vnlesse the Reader haue great patience in this place, hee will hardly endure to read so shamelesse and notorious lies. I cannot choose but woonder, that he is so lauish in talking of the popes authoritie without offring his Reader any proofe or reason of his sayings.
Because Luther and Caluin haue spoken against the popes authoritie, therefore doth our aduersarie in a furious rage of railing call the first A loose apostate frier, and the second, A searbackt priest for Sodomie. As if it were lawfull to raile and reuell against any, but the pope and his darlings; and as if his declamation against railers did not touch himselfe. I answere therefore, that as it is lawfull to reprooue publike offenders publikely, and to publish the abominations of the whoore of Babylon to the worlde; so none but such, as haue whoorish foreheads, thinke it lawfull to publish notorious
 slanders against innocent men. As for Luther, his innocencie was such, that he gaue the aduersarie no iust cause of euill speaking. And therefore they call him loose, because hee was matched in honest mariage, themselues being giuen to all viciousnesse of liuing and loosenesse. Nay albeit themselues be friers, yet they are still rayling at him, for that once hee had beene a frier. Caluin was neuer masse priest, and yet the priests of Baal obiect priesthood to him. He liued without suspicion of incontinencie, and yet are they not ashamed to charge him with most vnnaturall and abominable filthinesse, and say he was punished for it. But the author of this slaunder Bolsecus in an open synode did confesse with teares, that without ground he had slandred him, and the very narration it selfe is so improbable, that any man may see it was deuised by a sot, suborned to raile vpon Caluin, and most absurdly forged against so innocent a man. Let it be prooued, that such a punishment is due for such an offence, and that Caluin at Noyon was so punished; and then we will confesse, that they haue reason to raile against him. In the meane while, they haue no reason to obiect to Caluin their owne faultes, which are to be prooued against them by authenticall witnesses.Visiones Vguetini. Vguetinus a monke, in his visions doth note the abominable Sodomitrie of monkes and priests.Nouell. 2. Boccace testifieth that the Romish clergie offended most abominablie Both in naturall, and vnnaturall lust. Iohn the 23. was condemned in the Councell of Constance for Sodomitrie. Sixtus quartus was generally noted for his villanous affection to Petrus Riarius. Iulius the second for his vnnaturall loue of two yoong French gentlemen was taxed by the masters of Paris. All Rome did well know, that Iulius the thirde kept Innocentius de Monte for his Ganymedes, and made him Cardinall without desert. In the visitation of the monasteries in England in king Henrie the eightes daies, it was found, that they were nothing but sinkes of Sodome. Iohn Casa for his vertue highlie preferred by the pope wrote verses in commendation of this sinne.Hist. Iesuit c. 6. Hazenmiller doth in a large discourse shewe the filthinesse of the Iesuites liues. Lecherie and filthinesse of life among the priestes of the whoorish synagogue of Rome, is accounted but a small fault. The author of the booke calledC. 21. 22. 23. Onus Ecclesiae doth testifie this to bee true, and bringeth
 suffcient proofes against the infinite abominations of the Romish clergie. Nay it is not long since the Iesuites contending with the priests and schollers of the English colledge at Rome about the gouernment thereof, charged them to bee a packe of Sodomites; and Harward one of their faction saide, that hee could directly charge seuen of the companie with that abominable filthinesse. And euen Parsons himselfe, hath beene vnder the hande of Surgeons, and cut and seared, which sheweth that hee is not altogither so cleere, that hee can without blushing accuse others of vncleannesse. May they not then bee ashamed to charge Luther and Caluin with those sinnes of which they were most cleere, and the Romish clergie most giltie? Beside this, in this place this crimination of Luther and Caluin was very impertinent.
But saith the wise Warder, If an herbe shoulde bee presented to sir Francis to eate, that for a thousand yeeres hath beene held for poyson by all Physitions, one or two onely excepted, that without actuall experience holde the contrarie, woulde he eate it? And so the wise man by a similitude drawn from an herbe woulde prooue the popes supremacie. ^or that the supremacie is no more to be refused, being so long holden, then poyson to be receiued for medicine contrary to experience, and consent of Physicions. Where it is woorthie to bee noted how the aduersarie compareth the popes authoritie to a poisoned herbe. But howsoeuer he maketh his comparison good, the argument certes which he bringeth is not woorth a rush. For in disallowing the popes tyrannicall gouernment, we do not depend on two or three new doctors, no nor on two thousand, but vpon the authoritie of the apostles and apostolike church, and all ancient fathers of the church. We finde it contrarie to the gouernment of the church vnder the lawe, to apostolike rules, to the ancient canons of Christs church. If then we will rightly iudge, popish doctrine is better compared to this poisoned herbe, then ours: and the popish schoolemen and canonistes are the new physicions, of which this Noddy speaketh. Vpon whose credite he that will eate poyson, is giltie of his owne bloud, and proceedeth contrary to the rules both of diuinitie and reason.
We saie further, that all those reasons which this Noddy bringeth to prooue this noble and famous kingdome of the
 pope, vpon which the papists do builde all their hope, as the Iewes do vpon the expectation of the terrestriall kingdome of their Messias, bee nothing else but idle fancies of an addle head distempered with affection to the pope, and hatred to his prince.
FirstP. 97, saith he, It cannot be imagined, but that Christ instituted a church to continue, and to be gouerned to the worlds end. Which is a very graue consideration, and very deepe, continuing from Christes time to the end of the world. But it maketh nothing for the popes gouernment, nor for his vniuersall monarchie. For God had his church from Adam: yet did he not institute one vniuersall head and gouernour like the pope, nor approoue any such like gouernment, wherein one had all power, and bought and solde mens soules for money. But if Christ appointed, that his church should continue, then is it not likely, that the papacie which tendeth to the destruction of the church, and of all religion, came in by his appointment.
Secondly he telleth vs, That this gouernement was to be vnder bishops and prelates ordeined by the holy ghost by imposition of handes of the apostles, whose successors they were; and that this succession is to endure to the worldes end. But he had said better, if he had determined that bishops should be vnder gouernement, rather then gouernement vnder bishops. For that is best gouernement where gouernours are subiect to lawes, and not lawes to mens fancies, as it is in the popes gouernement, where all matters are referred to his determination. Further he had dealt more wisely, if he had passed ouer in silence this ordination by the holy ghost, and succession from the apostles. For if bishops appointed by the holy ghost, and that haue right of succession from the apostles be to gouerne the church of God: then must the popes of Rome lay handes off, of this gouernement. For neither can they shew commission from the holy ghost, nor right of succession, and truth of doctrine from the apostles. Nay it appeareth they are rather wolues, then true bishops and pastors, and succeede Nero rather in killing and murdering, then Peter in feeding and cherishing Christes lambes. Neither is it sufficient for them to alledge, that they sit at Rome. For the Turkish priests sit at Hierusalem, Antioche, and Cesarea, yet are they neither
 successors of Iames, nor Peter, that sometime taught in those places.
His third reason, as he saith, is drawne from the light of nature. For because among the prelates of the church, Christ would haue some subordination for auoyding schisme and confusion, and because all philosophers held without controuersie, that the monarchie was the best among all regiments, he saith it is very probable, euen by reason it selfe, that Christ instituted a monarchicall gouernement in his church. But first it is no small error in matters of spirituall gouernement to draw a patterne from humane reason, that in spirituall matters is so blind, and from philosophers, that vnderstood nothing; and to ground faith vpon probabilities, and likelyhoods.Lib 2. de pontif. R^m. Bellarmine hath hitherto borne vs in hand, that Christ instituted the papacy. But this wise Noddy layeth the foundation of it vpon probability, and humane reason. Secondly it is absurd to thinke, that the same gouernement is best both for church, and common wealth. For the church is Christes mysticall body, and hath her head in heauen, and is gouerned by diuine lawes. The common wealth is a politicall body, and hath her gouernors present with her here in earth, and is gouerned by lawes of men. There all commaund commeth from heauen, here the most part commeth from men. Thirdly albeit Christ would haue a subordination of officers in church gouernement, yet maketh that nothing for the popes extrauagant power, but rather against it. For when Christ made his subordination, andEphes 4. and 1. Cor. 12. set out the list of the officers of the church, he gaue apostles, prophets, euangelistes, pastors and doctors, not so much as mentioning the popes holinesse, which could not haue beene doone, if the pope had bin constituted chiefe gouernor of Christ his church. Lastly it is a bould and impudent vntruth to say, that all philosophers held a monarchie to be the best forme of gouernment. This simple hoddy Noddie hath neither read all, nor many: and therefore cannot tell. But his fellowes could haue told him, and their writings declare, that Plato, Cicero, Philo, Iosephus, and diuers others condemne monarchical gouernment: and that Aristotle preferreth an aristocratical gouernment before a monarchicall. Nay Bellarmine himselfe aboue all gouernments commendeth a forme mixed of diuers states, and formes of common-welthes.

His fourth reason is very celestiall. for Because God made Lucifer first head of the angels, and afterward head of all diuels; he beleeueth That one pope must necessarily be head of the catholike church. So his first reason for the papacie was from man and humane reason, the second is from the diuell of hell, and his authoritie. Is it not likely to prooue a braue gouernment, that hath so strange a precedent? Beside it is very vncertaine, whether God established any such gouernment among angels, as is supposed. Nay it is not likely, seeing Christ Iesus is head of angels, and present with them, that they haue any head, but him. In the 40. of Iob, and 14. of Isay there is no such matter to bee founde, as our aduersary pretendeth: nor doth Saint Austin, or any other father teach any such doctrine. Mention is made of Michael and his angels Apocal. 12. But that hee is head of all angels, cannot out of those words be prooued. As for our aduersaries themselues, it is very vnlikely they shoulde know the oeconomy and gouernment of angels in heauen, that will not see, what God hath ordeined concerning his church on earth.
Fiftly he affirmeth, That God established a monarchicall gouernment in the church of the Iewes giuing them a high priest to direct all other priests, and al synagogues in the world. Wherein he bewraieth his great ignorance in matters of the people of God. For in that state the cheefe authoritie for matters both ecclesiasticall and ciuill was in the councell of state, which they called Sanedrin, which was appointed by God himselfe Deut. 17. and iudged all causes, and persons, yea the high priest himselfe. Afterward the cheefe commaund was in princes both concerning priestes, and other church matters. Salomon deposed one high priest and placed another: all which maketh against the supposed gouernment of the cheefe priest. They that list to see these matters prooued out of Scriptures, and writers of the histories of that people, let them read M. Sutcliffes treatise De Pontifice Rom. lib. 1. c. 5. 6. 7. 8.
His sixt reason is drawne from the similitude of riuers, trees and all creatures. But he is much deceiued, if he thinke all creatures to haue liked of monarchicall gouernement. All birdes haue not one head, no nor all beasts, nor all trees. Could he shew me who is the head gouernour of all owles or woodcockes, he should worke a wondrous feat for the establishing
 of his holy fathers monarchie. If not, then his similitudes will shew him to be a Noddy and a woodcocke. Which also appeareth in this, that there is great difference in things naturall and politicall, and that the papall gouernement is not like to those naturall things, which he mentioneth.
His seuenth reason standeth vpon this ground, That without a monarchie in the church, schisme and diuision cannot be auoyded. But that is but a point of his folly and ignorance. For no doubt, but God prouided against schisme, when he gaue chiefe authority to the councell of state Deut. 17. And Christ prouided for the same likewise, when he chose not one, but twelue apostles, and sent them abroade into the world with one and the same commission. As for the humane deuises of popes, they were neuer so sufficient remedies against this supposed mischiefe of schisme, but that there hath fallen out among the popes some 22. or more schismes, and infinite sects, and diuisions among the members of the Romish synagogue.
Last of all he saith, The church is compared to a well ordered army, that must necessarily haue a knowne generall: likewise to a house, a sheepefould, a ship, the arke of Noe; all which things haue one head gouernour. But nothing is more preiudiciall to so great a gouernment, then that it shoulde rest vpon so weake similitudes, which prooue nothing, further then they haue confirmation out of the holy Scriptures, fro^ whence they are taken. For example out of these similitudes wee may with better reason ouerthrow the papacie, then establish it. For if euery houshold, and ship, and sheepefold haue seuerall heads, and are not vnder one cheefe master of houshold, or one principall shipmaster, or shepheard; then is not this generall monarchie prooued by so weake similitudes. We may therefore very well conclude out of the premisses, that all the arguments, which the Warder with his multiplicity of wordes hath brought to prooue, that the gouernment of the church vniuersall ought to be monarchicall, are mishapen, euill featured, weake timbred, and vtterly insufficient. Beside all that we haue yet alleaged, we are to vnderstand, that Christ is so the monarke of the church vniuersall, that no other can be admitted in his place without iniurie to him. There is but one head of one body, one husband of one wife, one cheefe
 gouernor of one state. As for the pope hee being no bishop deserueth no place in the gouernment of the church; and the first bishops of Rome were but fellowes first with other bishops, and afterward with other patriarkes.
So then it appeereth not, that the externall gouernment of the church was monarchicall. Neither do I thinke, that this Noddy will prooue, that Peter was the monarke or head of the church vnder Christ. His reasons do hang togither like ropes of sand. Christes proceeding with Peter, saith hee, declareth his meaning. But it appeereth not, that his meaning was to make him the monarke of the church. For albeit hee did that to Peter, that he did to none of the rest of the apostles, yet doth it not follow thereof, that he ment to giue him any such priuilege or authoritie, as is pretended. For hee did that to Iudas and to the sonnes of Zebedei, that hee did not to any other apostle. Iudas was made treasurer; yet was he not made a monarke of the worlde, although the purse doth work much in such cases. He saith further, That Christ first reueiled to Peter the hidden mystery of the incarnation, and of the blessed Trinitie, and that he said onely to him, Rogaui prote, ne deficiat fides tua. And, That he promised to him, that the gates of hell shoulde neuer preuaile against his seate. And sheweth, How Christ paide tribute onely for Peter, and for himselfe, and changed Peters name, and did myracles in Peters shippe, and how Peter walked on the waters, and Christ tolde Peter what death he shoulde die, and washed Peters feete first, and woulde haue his resurrection declared first to Peter, and such like other singularities. But it is most ridiculous to conclude that Peter was made monarke of the church, because either Christ reuealed to him the hidden mysteries of the faith, or praide for him, or changed his name, or paide tribute for him, or made him walke on the sea, or foretolde his death, or washed his feete or did any such like matter. For if euerie of these actions shoulde bring with it a monarchie, there woulde bee more monarkes, then monarchies. Moreouer the Noddy doth affirme diuers things most falsely, and impudently, which hee shall neuer bee able to prooue. For what can bee more absurd, then to thinke, that none euer vnderstoode the mysterie of Christes incarnation, and the holy Trinitie, before Peter? Againe what was reuealed to Peter, that was not
 likewise reuealed to other apostles? Moreouer it is manifest, that ChristIohn 17. praied as well for the rest of the apostles, as for Peter, and changed both Matthew the apostles name, and the names of the sonnes of Zebedei, and tolde them, what death they shoulde die, as well as Peter. Finally it is most vntrue that Christ praied, that the gates of hell shoulde not preuaile against the popes seate, whom they take to bee Peters successor, or that he paide tribute for Peter alone. Why then doth he auouch these matters so confidently, and leaueth them without proofes so nakedly?
To supply his former weake argument, he proceedeth further and telleth vs, That Peter first called a councell, and caused Matthias to be chosen in the place of Iudas, and first after the comming of the holy ghost published the gospell. He telleth vs also, That Peter wrought the first miracle, and as high iudge condemned Ananias and Sapphira to death, and that he first saw by a vision, that the gentiles were to be admitted to Christianity. Likewise, That he passed through all, and that Paul went vp to Ierrusalem to see Peter, and finally, That Peter by Christes speciall order left Antioche and went to Rome. But if these be the grounds of Peters monarchie, and of the Romish faith, it must needes fall out, that the faith of papists is built not onely vpon sand, but vpon meere coniectures and fancies so weake, that they cannot bring forth any strong conclusion. For what is more vaine and ridiculous, then to conclude that Peter was chiefe and vniuersall monarke of the church, because he wrought the first miracle, and was visited of Paul, and went to Antioche? Besides, it standeth on false positions. First it is no where written, That Peter called the first councell. Nay it is apparent, that returning from the mount of oliues, they all came together of their owne accord, without commaundement from Peter. Secondly Matthias was not chosen by the apostles, but by God himselfe. Thirdly Peter wrought not the first miracle. For what greater miracle, then that the apostles spoke with tongues, which they had not learned: which was common to them all? Fourthly he condemned not Ananias and Sapphira, as high iudge, no nor by way of iudciall proceeding, but rather by miracle wrought their death. Fiftly it is most absurd to thinke, that the other apostles did not vnderstand, that the gentiles were to be called to the faith,
 when sending them into the world our sauiour bad them, Go teach all nations. Lastly it is no where to be shewed, that Christ gaue any speciall commaundement, that Peter should remooue his seat from Antioche to Rome. If this hoddy Noddy thinke otherwise, let him if he canne, bring foorth his proofes, and shew where this commaundement is to be seene. And if he meane to prooue Peter to haue beene constituted head monarch of the church by these grounds, he may do well to frame his arguments, and to prooue his positions soundly. If not, then we do him to vnderstand, that all that monarchie, which the papists so much stande vpon, is built vpon fancies, and dreames, and meere foolerie without firme foundation.
To strengthen his weake building, hee doth in the ende take vpon him a great matter. For heP. 100. vaunteth, That hee will shew foorth a plaine commission for the monarchicall gouernment of Peter, giuen him by Christ, in two places recorded, beside others not recorded. The first saith hee, is in these words Matth. 16. Thou art Peter or a Rocke. The second in these Iohn 21. Feede my lambes, feede my sheepe. In the wordes written by Matthew, he telleth vs, That the principalitie of the church is promised to Peter, as the words themselues do shew, and the consent of ancient fathers both Greeke and Latine doth expound. In the latter hee saith, Peter was made pastor generall of all Christes flocke, as both the words themselues do import, and all antiquitie with one consent hath euer taken the sense to be. And this is the commission, these are the recordes, these the proofes, which he vanteth of. But if hee acquit not himselfe the better, he will be taken and conuicted for a forger of false patents and commissions, for a falsifier of recordes, and for a corrupter of fathers, and a vaine pretender of antiquitie. And all that read his vaine writings with iudgement, will condemne him woorthie, if not to haue his eares clipped, because our proceeding is not before the tribunall of iudges, yet to haue his coxcombe pared for crowing, and crying so loude, and so proudly vpon so little cause. For first the wordes of Christ are not, Thou art Peter, or a Rocke? As hee forgeth changing a proper name into a noune appellatiue; but simply Thou art Peter. Secondly he confesseth himselfe, that Christ in the first place giueth nothing, but onely promiseth. Now it is no warrant
 for any to alledge a promise of a commission, vnlesse he canne prooue an act passed, or else exhibite the commission it selfe. Thirdly nothing is here promised to Peter, but the keyes of the church. But those keyes are common not onely to the apostles, but also to all true pastors, and successors of the apostles, and therefore cannot signifie any sole, monarchicall, or supreme gouernement of the whole church. Fourthly suppose that Peter were in this place promised to be made the rocke and foundation of the church, which as the fathers expound it, was onely in respect of his confession, or of Christ the rocke which he confessed; yet that is no priuiledge, nor matter properly belonging to Peter, but a common graunt made to all the apostles, who in respect of their doctrine, and after a sort, may be termed theEphes. 2. and Apoc. 21. foundation of the church. Fiftly it cannot be shewed, that any greeke, or latin fathers do so expound the wordes Matth. 16. as if Christ meant to giue to Peter the sole monarchicall gouernement of the church. Let them speake in their owne wordes, and he shall perceiue it to be, as I say. Nay it appeareth by Bellarmine himselfe, that no such matter canne be prooued by the fathers. Sixtly Christ saying to Peter, feed my sheepe, and redoubling his charge three times, gaue him not any new authority, but rather stirred him vp to the execution of his office, and sought to draw from him a threefould confession, to answere his former threefould deniall. And so saith Nazianzen in Orat. in sanct epiph. lumina, and Cyrill vpon Iohn, Lib. 12. c. 44. and Augustin. tract. 123. in Ioan. and de vtilit. poenit. c. 1. and serm. 149. de tempore. Seuenthly the charge of feeding was as well committed to all the apostles Matth 28. as to Peter. Iohn 21. Lastly not one of the fathers doth by these wordes prooue, that Peter was ordeined the monarchicall, and sole supreme gouernour of the church. SaintIn c. vlt. Luc. Ambrose saith, That Peter was preferred before all the apostles, but he speaketh not of his office or function, but of loue and affection. For speaking of all the apostles, he saith,Ibidem. Similiter praedicandi his per totum orbem mandat officium. SaintIn c. Ioan. vlt. Augustine saith onely, That Christ committed his sheepe to be fedde of Peter. But so hee did also commit them to be fedde of the rest of the apostles, when he gaue them authoritie to teach all nations.In c. 21. Ioan. Chrysostome saith, That Christ committed to Peter the care of his brethren: but we may not imagine,
 that other apostles were carelesse, or had no care committed to them; neither may we imagine, that all are supreme and sole gouernors, that haue care committed to them. Epiphanius dothIn Anchirat. testifie, That Christ committed his sheepefold to Peter. So do the holy scriptures testifie, that the apostles had all commission to feede Christes sheepe, and to gouerne his folde. But saith our wise aduersarie,P. 101. These wordes, Pasce ouesmeas, were spoken to Peter in preeminence, and highest degree. But SaintDe simplic. Praelat. Cyprian, andC. In nouo. dist. 21. Anacletus, that were wiser then he, make all the apostles equall in power and apostolicall dignitie: and the common commission giuen to all doth prooue them equall. And least any might surmise, that the apostles receiued any power from Peter the apostle,Gal. 1. and 2. Saint Paule saith, hee had his authoritie from God and not from man, and Receiued nothing from the rest of the apostles. Most vaine therefore and foolish is all this our aduersaries discourse concerning the supposed monarchie of Peter. But whatsoeuer is to be supposed of Peter, yet that concerneth the pope of Rome, that is more like to Nero and Heliogabalus, then Peter, iust nothing. For he is not the Rocke, of which Christ speaketh, he hath not the keies of heauen deliuered vnto him, hee feedeth not Christes sheepe, nor liueth in poore estate and contempt, nor suffereth persecution, as did the holie apostle saint Peter.
But saith the woordy Warder our aduersarie, All the christian worlde hath made euer this most certaine and infallible deduction; that Christ gaue not Saint Peter these eminent prerogatiues for himselfe alone, but for his posteritie and successors also, that should ensue him in his seat to the worlds end. As if whatsoeuer Saint Peter had, must necessarily descend to his counterfect successors the popes of Rome. Beside that, the vanitie of this bragge of all the christian worlde, and of the infallibilitie of this collection may appeere in diuers particulars. First it is cleere, that diuers of Peters prerogatiues were personall, as to haue his name changed, to bee called Cephas, to worke miracles, to speake with toongs, to confesse Christ three times, and such other like. And therefore strange it is, that this ignorant fellow durst either talke of all the christian worlde, wherein he is but a stranger, or woulde say, that all the christian world beleeued these prerogatiues of Peter to
 belong to the popes of Rome. Secondly it can neuer be prooued, that Peter had, or that the worlde beleeued, that hee had power to depose kings, to translate kingdomes, to dispence with othes, to grant pardons, to release out of purgatorie, to heare appeales out of all the worlde, and such like points of the popes power. Thirdly, admit Peter had apostolicall power ouer the whole worlde, yet neither was that proper to Peter, nor did any sounde doctor of the church, or true Christian imagine, that whatsoeuer belonged to Peter, descended to the pope of Rome. Fourthly the aduersaries themselues cannot prooue this succession by any such infallible and certaine deduction, as is pretended. Wherefore vnlesse this Noddy can shew, first that the pope hath succeeded Peter in the generall charge of apostolicall gouernment, and teaching throughout the worlde; and secondly, that the pope is a true bishop, pastor, and successor of Peter: and thirdly, that neither the bishops of Antioch, nor Caesarea, nor Ioppe, nor Lydda where Peter taught, nor any, saue the bishops of Rome, succeeded in Peters seate: and fourthly that the popes authoritie in giuing lawes, in censures, exactions, dispensations, iudgements was generally allowed and neuer contradicted: and finally that he still holdeth the apostolike doctrine and faith intirely, and admitteth no heresies, nor false opinions in religion: vnlesse I say he prooue all this, he is at the end of his reckoning for the popes authoritie, and sheweth himselfe to bee but a vaine babler, and a foolish challenger, that euen in the midst of danger conueieth himselfe out of the steccato. And I do much woonder, that all true Christians do not suspect this manner of proceeding, and detest the pride and vanitie of this discourser, that leaueth his miserable disciples more perplexed, then before. For he teacheth, that vpon paine of damnation they must subiect themselues to the popes authoritie, and yet when it commeth to the iumpe, he is neither able to iustifie the popes authoritie in making and dissoluing lawes, nor in ordering bishops throughout the worlde, nor in iudging of controuersies, nor authorizing the scriptures, nor in dispensing in cases reserued, nor in deposing princes, nor in raising warres, and handling both the swords, and such like matters. Nay he is not able to prooue, that he is Peters true successour, or a lawfull bishop. He teacheth subiects to rebell, and setteth
 princes to murder Christians, and blinde papists blindely obey; and yet no warrant can the popes proctor bring, to iustifie the popes strange desseines, and dooings.
Onely he endeuoureth in the last end of his pleading for the pope, to shew That this land ought especially to respect the sea of Rome for beeing twise conuerted from paganisme to Christian religion: and that first by Eleutherius; then by Gregory the first, which were both bishops of Rome. And here he triumpeth, and thinking that he hath satisfied his reader with an exquisite and delicate dish at the ending of his papall banquet; he taketh away the table, and biddeth all his guests Proface, and a dieu. But if his readers be not more wary, while they thinke to be fed with holesome meat, they are like to be gulled which googeons. This gull certes in this his catastrophe seemeth to haue no other purpose. For first it is a meere fable to say, that this land was conuerted from paganisme either by the one, or by the other of these two. For Christianity was in England long before Eleutherius time, and stories say, he did onely, and that by his deputies, christen king Lucius. And when Augustine the monke came to the Saxons, the Britons long before that were Christians. Secondly neither did Eleutherius, nor Gregory preach the faith here, nor giue much aide to the conuersion of the people of this land. Onely Eleutherius sent Eluanus and Meduinus two Britons otherwise called Fugatius and Damianus to king Lucius, and Gregory sent Austin the monke hither. But the Saxons were conuerted by certaine Britons and French, that could speake the Saxon language, and not by Austin, that could do nothing, but hould ye crosse like a crosier-clerke, whiles others preached. Thirdly albeit this land had beene conuerted by Eleutherius and Gregory, yet this is but a personall fauour, rather making vs beholding to those two, then to those, that succeeded them. To prooue that we owe any obedience to the sea of Rome for that cause, this argument is all too weake. For the church of Rome was first conuerted by those that came from Ierusalem: yet doth not Rome yeelde any obedience to the bishops of Ierusalem. Nay they haue forgotten Saint Paul, whome we are assured, preached at Rome, and do all depend of Peter. Likewise the Phrysons and Germanes were conuerted by Saxons out of England; yet do they not subiect themselues to the church of
 England. Fourthly the late popes of Rome haue beene alwayes beholding to the kings and people of this country. One king gaue the tribute of peter pence: others gaue them great priuiledges and authority; by which meanes they drew out infinite treasure out of England. BonnerIn praefat. in lib. de ver. obed. saith, that the reuenues of the pope out of England were equall to the kings reuenues. In requitall whereof the popes haueMatth. Paris. sent to our princes either glasses, or feathers, or rotten bones, or paper and lead, and such like toies. Adrian the fourth gaue to our princes a title to Ireland, which he had no power to giue. Innocent the fourth to king Henry the thirdes sonne gaue a bare title to the kingdome of Naples, which cost infinite treasure, and in the end prooued a meere mockerie. Other popes haue shewed the^selues alwaies opposite to the English nation, and to the kings of this realme. No sooner had the pope intelligence, that William of Normandie was purposed to come with a puissant armie to conquer this lande (which coulde not be done without great waste, wracke and slaughter) but heeMatth. Paris. caused his standard and ensignes to bee halowed and blessed. So much did it please him, to heare of an inuasion of our countrey, and so holy a thing did warre and waste of this kingdome seeme vnto him. Another pope did vpholde Thomas Becket and his rebellious consorts against king Henry the second, fauored his professed enimies, and in the end forced him to a most shamefull penance.Matth. Paris in Ioanne. Innocent the thirde thundred out his excommunications against king Iohn, and stirred vp forreine enimies against him. Neither did he euer cease to pursue him, vntill such time as he had made both the king himselfe, and as much as in him lay, all his people tributarie to forreiners. At which when the Nobilitie and people of England repined, the furious pope in great cholerIbidem. sent out his interdictions, excommunications and curses against them, and neuer ceased to pursue them, as long as he had meanes to hurt them. In the warres, which the kings of England made in France, for the obteining of their right in that kingdome, the popes crossed them by all meanes possible, and declared themselues vtter enimies to our nation, being glad of any calamitie that hapned to vs, and sorrowfull for our good successe. But neuer did anie declare more malice against any of our kinges, then Paule the third against king Henry the eight the Queenes most noble
 father, as appeereth by his most execrableD. Sanders de sch^sm. lib. 1. bull, which he published against him. For therein hee doth not onely curse the king, and stirreth vp both his subiects, and forreine enimies against him; but also curseth and banneth all his friends, subiectes, and partakers. Their goods hee giueth away for a spoile; their persons hee will haue solde for slaues; and the waste of the whole lande hee woulde haue remaine, as a monument of his holinesses great displeasure. Neither did it content him to prosecute the liuing onely, vnlesse the dead also were throwne out into the fieldes, as vnwoorthy of christian buriall. Such is the charitie of his holinesse towards christians, and his louing affection toward the English nation. Neither was Paule the thirdes fact singular. For in our times Pius quintus, and Sixtus quintus haue published no lesse odious, and scandalous excommunications against her most gracious Maiestie, most bitterly cursing her, and all her louing subiects, then their predecessor did against Henry the eight and his people.
Further they haue not onely gone about to trouble this state by rebellions, but also to subuert it by forreineThe plots were taken vpon Criton a Iesuite, Throgmorton and others. inuasions. Haue wee not then great cause to honor and loue the popes holinesse, that hath shewed himselfe so friendly to our princes, and nation? Wee may do well also to entertaine such priestes and friers, as come from him, seeing they wish vs no more harme, then the destruction of the prince, the ouerthrow of religion and the state, and the slaughter of our people. Neither haue they any thing in their vowes, but that all our throtes were cut by the Spaniard. Nay when neither by open hostilitie, nor secret treasons and practise they could preuaile against vs, they haue encouraged certaine railing and scurrilous companions by infamous libels to defame her Maiestie, to raile on her cheefe Counsellors, and to dishonor all our nation, and those especially that haue shewed themselues most forward in dooing God and their countrey seruice. This prating companion sheweth himselfe verie spitefull, albeit hee woulde dissemble it. Sanders, Rishton, Allen, Ribadineira and others haue published cart-lodes of slanders and lies against the Prince, the Nobilitie, and diuers other honest men.
Finally beside these wrongs and disgraces, which concerne
 matters temporall, the popes of Rome haue gone about to wrong vs in matters spirituall, which concerne the saluation of our soules. For they haue not onely sought to depriue vs of the worde of God in our mothers language, of true faith and doctrine, of the sincere administration of the Sacraments, and of a true ministerie according to Christ his institution: but also in lieu thereof to establish the idolatrous worship to stocke and stones, of angels, of saints departed; and to bring into the church the abomination of the masse, togither with manifold superstitions, impieties and heresies. And for this cause they haue secretly sent into this lande diuersIt is thought, that aboue 400. of them, are dispersed in diuers corners in England. troopes of massing priestes and friers all marked with antichristes brand, to seduce simple people, and to draw them to superstition, idolatrie, and heresie. Wherefore let all true christians, and true harted Englishmen open their eies and beware, that they be not oppressed both with spirituall and temporall bondage and slauerie. This is it which the popes of Rome entend, and haue by so many practises laboured: this is also the drift of this glauering parasites discourse. This the merchants of Babylon, and slaues of antichrist, which secretly lurke in diuers corners of this lande watching their oportunitie, do wholie purpose. But remember that you haue faire warning.


CHAP. VIII. 

Of the Spanish nation, and king Philip the second, and his practises against England; wherein also the eight encountre of our aduersarie N. D. is examined.

LOth I am and very vnwilling, where the different betwixt vs and the Spaniard hath beene so long in deciding by blowes, to begin any long contention about words and termes. It is a co^mon saying, words are light as winde, and men of action, in wordes commonly vse least ostentation. Beside that, I
 holde it no good course to set out inuectiues against princes, and especially such, as are now departed this life, and haue receiued their guerdon, whether they haue done good or euill. The popes and their parasites take to themselues libertie in infinite slanderous pamphlets to disgrace all men opposite to their faction, neither sparing prince nor priuate person, liuing nor dead: but all honest men detest this frierlike fashion. I thinke it also a vaine thing, to recount matters formerly past, that concerne vs little or nothing.
But yet seeing this pratling and busie felow our aduersarie will needes haue the Spanyards and their late king the subiect of this encounter, and like a fugitiue traytor sticketh not to aduance them aboue his owne nation, and to pleade their cause against his owne prince and country; I am content thus farre to reason of them, as that men may learne how farre to trust them, and vnderstand, that we haue no reason either to feare their force, or to yeelde them any superiority, or to thinke better of the Spanyard, then of our owne nation. Lastly least any might suppose our aduersary to haue spoken wisely and learnedly, I will briefely runne ouer his discourse, and note the leudnesse, and vnsufficiency of his pleading. His vnnaturall and vnkind dealing against his prince and nation, before which he taketh on him to preferre the Spaniard, I neede not to note, for it is too too apparent, and sufficientlie knowne to any, that will take paines to read ouer his idle discourse.
The time hath beene, when the English and Spaniardes did well agree, as appeared not onely by mutuall trade and conuersation of both nations one with another, but also by diuers publike contractes and leagues made betwixt them. Sometime the kinges of England matched with the house of Spaine, and sometime the Spanish kings haue had their wiues out of England; and both of them esteemed much of the amity eache of other: albeit the Spaniard hath beene more happy to receiue more profit of this coniunction with England, then our nation by our matches and linking with the house of Spaine. For by the aide of our archery the Spaniardes diuers times haue obteined victory against ye Mores: and Don Pedro king of Castile beeing expulsed by his subiects; by the blacke prince, and the English forces was restored to
 his kingdome. Neither could Ferdinand king of Spaine so easily haue possessed the kingdome of Nauarre, had not the forces of English sent for his aide by king Henry the seuenth distracted the French so, that they could not come in time to succor their friends distressed. Contrarywise king Edward the first matching with ye house of Castile receiued smal aduancement, as is declared in the chronicle ofIn Henric. 3. Matthew of Paris: and king Henry the seuenth matching with Catherine of Spaine, presently lost his sonne and heire. The same woman also beeing maried afterward to king Henry the eight, was like to haue caused great trouble both to the king, and this realme, vpon the dissolution of that vnlawfull contract; if the kings vigilancie and magnanimitie had not surmounted the same.
Great friendship likewise hath beene betweene our kings, and the dukes of Burgundy, of whome the late kings of Spaine are lineally descended: betwixt the English nation, and the people of the low countries depending on the house of Burgundie. The nations by mutuall trade reaped great profit each of other. The princes by the aide and countenance each of other were much strengthened against their common enemies. Charles the fift in his time much esteemed for his wisedome, did make so great accompt of our nation, that he chose Mary Queene of England, as a fit match for his sonne Philip, to whome he left all his dominions; and dying, gaue his sonne this speciall charge, that he should neuer breake with England, nor loose the fauour of our nation. He did wisely consider our strength by sea, and what aide we were able to afford him beeing friend; and what hurt we might do vnto him, if we conioyned our forces with his enimies.
Much it were to be wished, that the frendship of the Spaniard had beene as profitable to the English nation, as the friendship of the English was to the Spanyard. But then we should not haue lost Guines and Caleis by this coniunction, nor beene spoiled of the remainder of the ancient conquest of our ancestors in France by his meanes; neither then should the English for his pleasure haue beene intricated with the warres with France. Howsoeuer the same ought to haue beene profitable vnto vs; yet for our goodwill a man would neuer haue thought, that we should haue reaped displeasure
 and wrong.
Yet we see, what is come to passe. This league of friendship is broken, and all ancient good offices doone by our nation to the Spaniard quite forgotten. King Philip when her Maiestie came first to the crowne, forgot not onely the bond of allyance with her sister, but also his fathers charge. In the treaty of peace betweene France and Spaine, heGuicciardin de paesi bassi. forsooke his sister and left her to shift for her selfe; and that also in a war, which himselfe had begun. Not long after, at the solicitation of pope Pius the fift, he became our professed enimie, and sought the destruction of her Maiestie.Girol. Catenae in vita Pij Quinti. one saith, that to secure his dominions in the low countries, he determined to aide the rebelles in the north, and to ouerthrow the Queene.This record of Pius his negotiation with king Philip, doth ouerthrow all Philopaters calumniation. Non potendo assicurare i suoi stati di Fiandra con miglior mezzo, che con l'abbatimento de quella reina. Both Pius the fift and he conioyned their forces and counsels together to do vs hurt, determining vnder the conduct of Chiapin Vitelli to send ouer aid to the rebells in England. Hauendo commandato saithIbidem. Catena, Il re catholico, che dalla parte di Fiandra si mandasse in Inghilterra vna quantita di gente armata sotto la scorta di Chiapin Vitelli, and Pio quinto rimessa grossa prouisione di denari, etc. When the Duke of Alua made some stay of the execution of the kinges commaundement, the king againe sent him expresse word, that notwithstanding any difficulties, or considerations whatsoeuer, he shouldIbidem. aide the rebelles of England, which he termed, His friends. Nuouamente il re gli comando, che non ostante qual si volesse difficulta, o consideratione, seguisse l'impresa d'aiutar gli amici d'Inghilterra, and gli mando appresso la persona di Ridolphi, and denari per l'esse quutione. Yea and with such affection did he prosequute this matter, that when he saw his purpose tooke no effect, he wept for sorrow. E'lre Catholico saithIbidem. Catena, ne pianse alla presenza del Cardinal Alessandrino. By this therefore it appeareth, that all loue of that king to her Maiestie, which this philippicall parasite so much pretendeth, was altogether extinguished, and al bondes of alliance and friendship vtterly broken: and that by king PhilipsAndreas Philopater his slanderous report to the contrarie is refuted by Pius Quintus his letters. default first.
When secret practises of rebelles preuailed not, the king prouided a nauy which his flatterers called inuincible, and a great force and army of land souldiors, determining with fire
 and sword to inuade this realme, and by fine force to dispossesse her Maiestie of her crowne. What successe his enterprise had, the world knoweth, and therefore we neede not here report. His inuincible nauy was well beaten and scattered; his souldiors and mariners for the most part either were slaine, or taken, or dyed of want and misery; and the mightie monarke of whose Potent force our aduersary maketh such crakes, was ouercome by a woman. But whatsoeuer the succsse was, it appeareth, that this was no brotherly part, thus to inuade her Maiesty; nor any point of a catholicke and Christian king, to oppugne peacible Christians for the profession of true catholicke religion.
Nay albeit this great losse and shame, might haue forced him to acknowledge Gods iustice and powerfull working against him, and caused him to surcease his cruell persecution against Christians; yet did the same worke nothing in his hard hart; nor coulde hee be induced to giue ouer his former desseignements so long as breath lasted. anno 1594. being verie weake, and for some daies speechlesse, theThis was written out of Spaine. first wordes which he vttered after he came to himselfe were these, Is the adelantado gone for England? So much was his head troubled about that voyage. His friends also report, that he should say, that hee woulde sell his siluer candlestickes, and the rest of the furniture of his chappell, before hee woulde giue ouer the warres against England. And I beleeue it to bee true, seeing notwithstanding diuers repulses and infinite losses anno 1588. 1594. 1595. and 1599. hee neuer gaue ouer vntill such time, as hee gaue vp his spirite, and yeelded to nature.
The papistes do exceedingly commend his zeale in popish religion, or rather his great hatred against the professors of true religion. So earnest he was in this cause, that he spared not his owne onely deere sonne, for that he was thought to fauor that truth which we professe. E cosa molto notabile, saithIn vita Pij 5. Gierome Catena, Ch' el re facesse sacrificio della sua carne, and del suo sangue a dio. Et Pio publicamente commendo la Christiana and catholica mente and religione di lui dicendo; quia proprio filio non pepercit. Albeit his sonne Charles was a prince for his yeeres of great excellency, and then the onely sonne of his father, and the hope of his succession; yet did not that mooue the fathers hard hart to pity, but he made him a sacrifice for the
 good of the Romish clergie: and pope Pius did highly extoll this fact comparing king Philip most impiously and blasphemously to God almighty, that gaue his sonne to be sacrificed for the redemption of mankind. But to forbeare now to speake of the popes blasphemy, and to speake of the Spanyards malice, it is very apparent, that king Philip, while he liued, professed himselfe an enimie vnto all that professed true and catholicke religion; and especially to her Maiestie, that hath alwaies according to her stile declared her selfe to be a defender of the faith, and a principall maintainer of the professors of true religion, and all true catholickes.
He hath also shewed himselfe an enimy to our whole nation, entending with force to subdue vs, and by all meanes to trouble vs. He hath taken manyIn the embarguo anno 1586. honest men of our nation prisoners, and confiscated their ships and goods without anie lawfull proclamation of warres. Hee hath suffred diuers of Her Maiesties subiectes to bee murdred by the bloody Inquisitors, contrary to all iustice. Neither haue the rebels attempted any thing against the state either in England orIacobo Geraldino Cantabrorum ac Gallecorum manum concessit. Andreas Philopater p. 134. Ireland, but by his knowledge, abettement and procurement.
The whole Spanish nation also hath drunke very deepe of that cup of hatred, which the pope hath filled to their king. Don Iuan de Austria, while he was gouernor of the low countries, did neuer cease toThis was a part of Escouedoes negotiation, at his going into Spaine. perswade his brother, to transport an army into England, and here to make wars. The duke of Alua before that was likewise desirous, that his sonne might passe with forces into England for the aide of the northren rebells. And that of long time hath beene a common argument for priests and friers to handle in their sermons. They haue alsoThese pardons were found vpon diuers Spaniards ann. 1588. preached indulgences and remission of sinnes, and offred the same to all, that would fight against vs, accompting it percase meritorious to kill any of our nation. If their iourney 1588. had succeeded, either they had killed our people, or made slaues of them to worke in their Indian mines, or to rowe in their gallies, or else to do other base and seruile worke* our goods they had already swallowed in their hope, and meant to haue deuided the land amongst them, and to haue raigned here like great conquerors. And albeit at that time they had no good successe, yet haue they not giuen ouer their hope, nor ceased to take all opportunities to worke vs either dishonor, or
 domage.
I omit to speak of the wrongs they haue done to particulers, albeit many and greeuous; for that our dispute is about the disposition of the Spaniardes to our whole nation. And yet many particular wrongs, and actes of iniustice and crueltie doe argue a great hatred to the English in generall. But to forbeare to speake of particular actions, and of generall attempts formerly passed, it appeereth they meane not thus to giue vs ouer. For out of Spaine there come priestes and others daily to practise treason against her Maiestie and the state. It is not long, since Squire was executed for a most horrible treason plotted in Seuile. Neither can the shamelesse and impudent denials and cauils of Iesuites and priests which they make at the processe against him, either make that vndoone which is done, or qualifie so foule a fact. Nay admit the poore fellow shoulde erre in some circumstance, yet no reason can be alleaged why hee shoulde accuse and charge himselfe in a matter that concerned his life, wrongfully. And to the entent there may bee a succession of traytors and conspirators which may make the way more readie for their intended inuasions and conquestes; at common costes they maintaine two Seminaries of English fugitiues and traytors. I know they pretend planting of popish religion: but if that were their onelie marke they aime at, why dothTestified against him by priests in their memorials. Parsons cause euerie one of them that come for England to take an oath, that they shall to their vttermost power prefer the Infantaes of Spaines title to the crowne of England? Is this no point of treason? And doth not this flowe from some purpose of the Spaniard against our countrey and nation?
To make our nation hatefull, Ribadineira a certaine ribaldly frier hath published a most odious discourse of schisme in Spanish, wherein hee omitteth nothing that may procure vs dishonor or hinderance.
And yet these are the men, whom our aduersarie commendeth and defendeth, and vnto whom Cardinall Allen, Robert Parsons, and other Iesuites and priests, that lurke among vs, haue vowed their seruice.
Great reason therefore hath our nation, where so violent enimies seeke to hurt vs, and so malicious traytors endeuour to ensnare vs, to watch and looke about. Our aduersary crieth
 peace, peace, but war is in his hart. hee may tell vs as long as hee listeth, that the Spaniards are our good friends, and meane vs no hurt at all. But if wee list to arme our selues, and preuent their malice; wee may assure our selues, if God be pleased, that they neither dare fight with vs, nor can bee able to hurt vs. These double toonged traytors pretend good dealing, and vse many kinde wordes, as if they loued their countrey. but who can trust them, that are so neere linked by oath, friendship, and opinion to publike enimies? Finally now the Spaniardes and other publike enimies seeme to haue laide aside their armes: but yet it is not safe to trust them. After great calmes oft-times arise great stormes. We must remember that king Philip the second was alwaies ready to execute the popes command, and was still set on by the Iesuites,Acosta in his booke of the new world calleth it, Praeclarum Zelum in expugnandis and debellandis fidei (Romanae) hostibus. in praefa. ad Philip. and commended for his zeale in oppugning the enimies of the Romish faith. The whole Spanish nation is also much deuoted to popish religion, and very ready to execute the popes commandements.
Wee must also consider that it is no argument of a disposition to peace, that such great forces of men are continually leuied throughout most of the parts of Spaine and Portugall; and that such numbers of ships of warre are either made of late, or in making, as wee haue not heard of manie yeeres before; and that such care is had of prouisions of corne, wine, munitions, and other things necessary for the wars, as is not vsual. I confesse, that by reason of the kings large dominions, and great occasions and affaires, these prouisions are necessarie: yet vnlesse hee had some extraordinarie purpose, neither woulde his prouisions be so great, nor should his men march toward Lisbone and Coronna, nor his Magazins bee dressed in those parts, that looke hitherward.
Further it woulde not be forgotten, how much it greeueth the Spanish nation, that they haue beene disturbed by vs in their trade to the Indies, and pursued by our shippes euen to their owne doores. The enterprises also of Portugall and Caliz are no small corrosiue to their hautie harts. And no doubt they see, how that to secure their Indies, and their owne countries both of Spaine, and Flaunders, and the partes adioining, they haue no meanes, but by making warres vpon vs.

But suppose the Spaniards shoulde neither respect their profite, honor, nor safetie, or that they woulde by conclusions of peace prouide for themselues, and their owne indemnitie: yet what assurance can wee haue, either that any peace will bee concluded, or that it will certainly bee performed, when the SpaniardsPope Pius 5. and Sixtus 5. excommunications take hold of them, if they should. dare not once treate of peace with vs, being excommunicated by the pope, without expresse licence; nor may performe their grants further, then shall please theThe canonists giue him power to dispence with oathes and dissolue contracts, and he chalengeth that power, as may appeere by Paulus 3. his bull against k. Henry the eight. pope? Is it likely, that the pope will suffer the very foundations of his authoritie to bee shaken to gratifie vs? Or will he reuoke so many sentences of excommunication and decretals, as haue beene made against her Maiesty and her subiects, that we may now enioy a firme peace? When was euer any such thing done? Nay the popes authoritie standing in many places, how can any such matter bee done? If then the pope cause his Iubiley and indulgences to bee preached and published in Spaine against vs; and if hee offer full remission of sinnes to all, that will take armes, or send foorth soldiers against England, do wee not thinke, that there will bee a great stirre in Spaine? Do wee not know how much the Spaniardes are addicted to these opinions, and how they beleeue that the pope hath Saint Peters keies and power either to send men to heauen or to hell? Great reason therefore had our good knight, hearing of great preparations made in Spaine, and combinations ofThere are troupes of them sent ouer into England daily. popish priestes dispersed euery where in England, and considering the state of both nations, to giue the alarme to his countreymen, and to exhort them to prepare themselues to resist so great and violent an enimie, as ment the vtter subuersion of the state, and the destruction of our most deere countrey. Neither had our aduersarie any reason to take this in dudgeon, or to mislike their forwardnesse that armed themselues vpon their princes co^mandement, and resolued the^selues to fight for their prince, their countrey, their religion, their liberty, their lawes, their wife, their childre^, their friends, their goods, and whatsoeuer they now enioie by this gouernment; but that hee declareth himselfe a traytor to his prince and countrey, and an vtter enimie to true religion, and that hee hath renounced all affection toward his nation, to ioine himselfe to Spaniardes, Italians, Mores and barbarous people culled out of diuers countries, and thought fit to be emploied
 in this seruice against vs. Neither woulde hee haue declared so much to the worlde, had hee not well answered his name, and shewed himselfe a Noddy, not knowing how euill it beseemeth him that ioineth with publike enimies, to pretende loue and friendship to his owne nation. And therefore, albeit peace bee a gladsome matter, and much to bee desired; yet wee haue no reason either to harken to this trecherous friers tale, or ouer farre to trust to parlies or offers of peace made by the Spaniardes. Oftentimes swordes may bee couered vnder branches of laurell. But this our superiors will looke vnto, whom it specially concerneth; vnto whose care I report me. This is sufficient to shew, how little wee are to trust the Spaniard, whom our aduersarie so much aduanceth.
Now it followeth, that I shew briefly, that we haue lesse cause to feare him, then to trust him: which may euidently appeere by these particulars. First our soldiers giue no place to the Spaniards, if they may meete them vpon equal termes: as experience and triall in diuers encounters doth plainly declare. It is not long since our troops encountring them hand to hand betwixt Ostend and Newport gaue them a greater foile, then they haue receiued within our memorie. The effects do plainly shew it, seeing they haue beene quiet euer since. Our mariners are without comparison better men at the sea, then theirs, and more able and skilfull in managing of their ships, and better do they vnderstand the nature of these seas, and the situation of Ilandes, portes and harbors in these partes, then the Spaniards.
Our ships are better of saile, and better accommodated for shot and great ordonance, then those of the Spaniards. And being assisted with the fleete of our associates of the Low countries, farre superior to any fleete in the world.
If the Spaniards come into these seas, we haue both the seas, the harbors and portes fauorable, and may haue present supply of any thing wee want; which they being farre from home, cannot looke nor hope for.
If the Spaniard come into these seas, hee cannot long continue heere without encounter, nor depart at pleasure, the windes being commonly southerly and westerly. But if our fleete should go into the Indies with any strength, they might either take any Iland or porte, or saile along the coast, and returne
 with more commoditie.
They can winne little by vs, but blowes, for that our riches are not great, nor easie to bee come by. But if in the Indies or in Spaine we ouercome them, our spoile cannot choose but be great, their trade being for golde, and siluer, and things of great value.
If any suppose the Spaniard to be inuincible, considering our want, and his abounda^ce of treasure; he must thinke first, that as his reuenues are great, so his imployments are many; and that he wanteth oftentimes mony to pay his souldiors, and set his ships to sea. Nay he wanteth mony to pay his debts, and defray necessary charges: insomuch as king Philip the second was co^streined to playAnno Dom. 1575. and 1597. as appeereth by the record of his proclamations. bankeroupt twise or thrise in his time; and his souldiers for want of pay haue beene forced to rauage the country, and to mutine against their commaunders.
Secondly albeit we want the Indian mines; yet we want not meanes both to pay our souldiers and mariners; nor to furnish them both by sea and land; nor canne want sufficient prouisions of all sorts, if we list to establish a certaine course of proceeding for the continuance and maintenance of the warres.
Thirdly it is not mony that fighteth, nor hath principall vse in warres, but men, iron, munition and necessary prouisions. Neither do monyed men spoile the poore; but the poore armed souldier, maketh a spoile of him, that is rich in mony. Lastly as princes and states, that haue great store of treasure haue meanes by their hired souldiers to make warres abrode, and hardly canne be ouercome that way; so are they weak, and vnable to resiste, if they be strongly affronted and set vpon at home, where their treasure lyeth, and their hired souldiers cannot be found. Which appeared by the example of the Carthaginians; and may appeare by the Spanyardes, if wee please.
Now, our cause is farre more iust and honest, then the Spaniards.In primis spectat, vt pacate tantum and suauiter viuat. Andreas Philopater p. 14. Her Maiesty and her people neuer desired any thing more then peace: they desire nothing more then wars. We, if ye Spaniard shall come against vs, shall fight for our country, our liberty, our lawes, our religion and conscience: they come to spoile vs of al these, and fight for the popes pleasure, and for
 that religion, of which they haue noStapleton praefat. in princip. doctrin. relect. further assurance, then the popes word. Her Maiestie neuer wronged the Spaniard: nay she hath not taken that, which lawes of warre, and all nations did giue her. When the shippes, that carried mony to pay the souldiers in the low countries, that were prepared against her, and her country, were brought into her ports, and gaue her good meanes to helpe her selfe against her enimy; yet was she content to restore the mony to the king. When the Ilandes of Azores were offered into her handes, yet did she refuse them. Nay she would not accept of Antwerp and a great part of the low countries, that offered to submit themselues vnto her, beeing alwaies vnwilling to intricate herselfe with vnnecessary warres. Yet was she assured, that this was most lawfull, and would be a certaine meanes, both to bring the Spaniard to any conditions, and to make the warres far from home, and vpon other mens charges. Nor in assisting them of Holland and Zeland hath she doone any thing, but after she had attempted all other meanes, and was forced to take this course by necessity for her owne safety. But the Spaniards haue sought matter of quarrell against her, and offered her and her people infinite wronges. First king Philip hauing intricated our nation with the French about his quarrell, lost Caleis, and abandoned the English in his treatie of peace. Anno 1567. when we thought he had continued our friend, at the solicitation of the pope, heGirol. Catena in vita Pij 5. It may also bee gathered out of the aduersaries discourse in Andreas Philopater. determined to make warre vpon vs. Afterward he encouraged and holpe the rebels of the North: and determined to aide the earle of Desmond in Ireland. Anno 1588. he made open warres vpon vs, and neuer since hath ceased to molest vs. Nay when he could do her Maiestie and her people no other harme, he hath suffered Sanders booke of schisme, and diuers other most rayling libells to be published by Ribadineira and others to the dishonor of our nation, our princes, and gouernours. Finally Lopez, that was executed for attempting to poyson her Maiestie,See his confession and the actes of the processe against him. confessed that he was hired by Ibarra, the Count of Fuentes, and diuers of the kings agentes, not without the kings priuity, as was prooued by the deposition of Manoel Lois, and Stephen Ferreira, and diuers other circumstances. Seeing then we haue such meanes to make warres, and so iust a cause to vndertake them; why should any eyther doubt, or feare to encounter
 the Spanyardes, especiallie if they will needes be quarrelling?
But to surcease to discourse of the valour of the Spaniard in the warres, and of his puissance, or rather weakenesse both by sea and land; let vs a litle consider him in his other parts and qualities, and see whether he deserueth such extrauagant commendations, as N. D doth heap vpon him, and what reason he hath to aduance the Spanyard so highly, and to debase his owne nation. Our aduersaryP. 106. commendeth the Spaniardes For their religion, their labour in preaching and winning soules in the Indies, their learning, their morall vertues; and forgetteth not to praise them for their country, which he calleth Rich, fertile, and potent. But if these be the points, that he meaneth to stand vpon; he will hardly perswade his Reader to affoord him any assent or credit. For the religion of the Spaniard is not catholike, as we shall easily prooue, when we come to speake of catholike religion. Nay few of that nation know any religion, but are ledde by the noses by the pope and his priestes and friers, receiuing for truth whatsoeuer they teach, though neuer so false, and not knowing the very grounds of Christian faith, though neuer so true. Our aduersary knoweth, that the Spaniard is saide to account it but a Peccadillo or little fault, not to beleeue in Christ, and euery man may see, they haue no right faith, that receiue all the popes decretalles for true religion.
In the Indies their disorders haue beene so great, that the barbarous people do beleeue rather any religion, then that of the Spanyard. Bartholomew a Casas a fryer, and Hierome Benzo shew, that where in Hispaniola there were three millions of people at the first arriuall of the Spanyardes there, they shortly by their pious and vertuous gouernement, brought them to the number of 300. So great was their slaughter and cruelty.Histor. Indiar. Hierome Benzo saith, that all the religion the Indians haue, is to make the signe of the crosse, and to heare a latin masse, which they vnderstand not; and to performe such like ceremonies.
And if hee will not beleeue me, yet hee may not with anie reason refuse the testimonie of Ioseph a Costa a Iesuite, who of purpose writeth a storie of the new worlde, and declareth how the Indians haue profited in religio^ He sheweth that the
 Indians are so vnwilling to be baptized,De procuranda Indorum salute lib. 6. c. 3. That the Spaniards haue baptized many against theit wils: whereby baptisme Is made a mocke among them. Speaking of Christian religion in the Indies, hee saith their knowledge is small, and so offred to them, that it is either refused easily, or easily lost.Ibid. lib. 1. c. 2. Notitia quaedam vel ten uis offertur, vel ita offertur, vt facile repudietur, vel ita recipitur, vt mox perniciosius deseratur. HeLib. 1. c. 14. saith, They are like the Samaritanes, that worship god and idoles both togither. And againe,Ibidem. Simulatoriam Christianitatis speciem praeferunt, non colunt (deum) serio, nec credunt ad iustitiam.A costa lib. 4. c. 15. Their priests and teachers hee chargeth to be giuen to couetousnesse, dicing, hunting, concubinage and luxuriousnesse. And this is that goodly conuersion of millions of soules of which this personate N. D. so much braggeth: and of which the pope doth seeme so studious and desirous. But if hee were indeede desirous to winne soules to Christ, and not gaine and glory to himselfe; why doth hee not seeke to conuert the Grecians, Asians, and Mores that are hard by him, and which through his ambitious quarrels about his superioritie haue beene oppressed by the Turkes, and abandoned by the princes of the west empire? Doth it not appeere, that where Christian princes rule with their sword, hee entreth there into the peoples closets with his counterfeit keies or rather picklockes; and that hee neither can do any thing in countries oppressed by infidels, nor is so willing to winne soules, as to establish his authoritie, and to seeke gaine?
To returne to our purpose: In schoole diuinity diuers friers I confesse seeme well studied: neither are the Spaniardes ignorant of other humane artes and learning. Yet neither is the number of learned men great, nor their learning singuler. Their priests for the most part are ignorant both of tongues and of the grounds of religion. Their common people know almost nothing, and scarce canne say their Credo, pater noster and aue maria. but admitte they canne say the wordes; yet are they ignorant of the sence. Their morall vertues we will examine, when we come to speake of particulars. It should seeme they are not many, when their aduocate mentioneth none.
Finally it is but a simple praise to dwell in a rich and fertile country. For so the Indians, and Cananites should deserue to be preferred before the Spaniardes. For no country is
 richer in gold, then the Indiaes. And in time past the land of Canaan flowed with milke and hony; and that is cleerely testyfied of it in holy scripture.
But were it, that the Spaniardes deserued commendation for their religion, and their zeale in preaching the truth and other vertues; yet hath our aduersarie no reason to despise his owne nation, or to preferre the Spaniards before vs. For heere true religion without mixtures of poperie is embraced, and the same so generally taught, that none can be ignorant, but such as like the adder, that stoppeth his eares, refuse to heare Gods worde, and to vnderstand the truth. The number of learned men among vs is greater, then among the Spaniards, proportion for proportion; neither to abridge this idle dispute, shall N. D. finde, that our nation either in morall vertues, or naturall endowments, or supernaturall graces is inferior to the Spaniard, or ought to yeeld to him in any thing; saue in this, that hee hath better happe to encounter with English traitors to flatter the Spanish nation, and we no Spaniards, or fewe, that will take on them to set foorth our due praises.
It resteth now that wee examine the particulars, of our aduersaries pleading, according to the course which before wee haue proposed to our selues. Not that any great matter doth result of the whole summe, but that wee may at the least, gather a summe of our aduersaries fooleries and trecherous purposes.
In the beginning of this last encounter heeP. 103. telleth vs That there remaineth yet another bickering about the Spanish king and nation. Hee shoulde also haue told vs, against whom this bickering, made as it shoulde seeme by the shadeThat is, of a glasse of wine. d'vn bicchier di vino, is entended. but that is apparent by the discourse ensuing. for it is wholy against his countrey and nation. So then, this champion commeth out in his Spanish ierkin, to fight for Spaniards, and against his owne nation. May we therefore (thinke you) safely trust him, that taketh on him to speake for publike enimies against the safetie and state of his countrey and countrey people? Well let vs see what this champion hath to say for his clients.
First heeIbidem. saith, That a man must speake moderately of his enimie, and that we must not lie, nor faine reproches, no not
 of the diuell himselfe. So hee maketh a faire entrance into his matter, comparing the Spaniardes to the diuell: then which course nothing can be more reprochfull to his clients. Hee may be glad that the Spaniards vnderstande him not. Otherwise they woulde make him know, that they are not to be compared to diuels. But to let that passe, and to grant, that a man must speake moderately of his enimie, yea of the diuel; yet hath not hee obserued that moderation in speaking either of friendes or enimies. For hee flattereth his friends grossely, and raileth against his enimie most odiously and despitefully. Nay hee raileth against his liege prince, and such as haue shewed themselues to be her most faithfull subiectes, and praiseth her greatest enimies, albeit if hee were a true man, hee woulde haue done neither. In the libell against her Maiesties proclamation of the yeere 1591. published by him and Creswell vnder the name of Andreas Philopater, vnder the title he placeth this sentence, Vidi mulierem ebriam de sanguine sanctorum: as if shee were drunke with the blood of saints. HeeScelus sceler nectit. p 6. saith Shee added wickednesse to wickednesse, and vseth wordes not to bee vttred against so gracious a prince,P. 11. libr. Romae excus. comparing her to Maxentius, Iulian, Costantius, Decius, and Nero. Hee disgraceth her in her parents and stocke, and saith what his malice can deuise against her.
The like course hee taketh against her principall Counsellors,In praefat. ac edictum. accusing them of fraud, crueltie, rapines, impietie, and most hainous crimes. Against the earle of Leicester and the Lord Treasurer that dead is, hee hath published whole volumes of reproches in two seuerall libels, entituling the first Leycesters common-wealth; and setting out the second vnder the name of, Causes of supposed feares, etc. Neither hath any railing libell of late come foorth but he hath had some finger in it. Furthermore as the former bookes are full of railing and reproches, so they want no prouision of lies, and vntruthes. Hee saith inAndr. Philop. p. 121. Philopater, that King Philip did thrise deliuer the Lady Elizabeth out of trouble; and cannot prooue once. And that king Philip denied the rebels aide, which Pius quintus the pope his grand master controlleth. He repeateth diuers slanders out of Sanders and Genebrard, and can write nothing without lies.
In this treatise, which wee haue now in hand, albeit hee
 seeme to professe Warding and fensing; yet hath he no fence to keepe his toong from lying. And yet they say hee lieth verie closely; yea and falsely too. Such is his excellencie in both faculties, that a great question may be made, whether he raileth or lieth more impudently and starkely. Do you not then take him to bee a fit man to giue precepts of modestie and true dealing to others, that hath nor modestie, nor truth, nor reason in his owne dealing? And may he take vpon him to censure others for rayling, libelling, raging, lying and facing, that in lying and libelling hath surmounted, not onely Lucian and Rabelays, but also all his owne companions of the societie of his firie father Ignatius?
As for his aduersarie, hee hath not spoken any thing, that in equall iudgement can be thought to sauour of immodestie. For albeit hee seemeth to charge the Spaniards with Oppression and tyrannie, and saith, that they are Proud, ambitious, bloudie, rauening, and cursed of God: yet his intention was not to touch the whole nation, in which no doubt there are many ciuill, religious and honest men, and of great woorth, especially when they come to the knowledge of the truth; but diuers of them indefinitely, and such especially, as came in the popes seruice, to execute his wrath and displeasure against innocent Christians. For against these doth hee direct his discourse, and against them doth hee animate his countreymen to fight, seeing their purpose is to destroy our countrey, and with crueltie to establish both a false religion, and an absolute tyrannie. Neither coulde hee vse more gentle termes, considering the insolencies of the Spanish forces in these cases, and the tyrannie of their gouernment. The ambassadors of the citie of SienaNatal. Comes ^istor. lib. 6. say, That the gouernment of the Spaniard in the kingdome of Naples, and other places of Italy is so rigorous, that the countrey people desire to liue rather vnder the Turke, then vnder the Spaniard. And this by infinite insolencies, and actes full of iniustice, and crueltie, for manie yeeres exercised by the Spaniards in theBartholomeus casas. Indies, in theBelgica hist. Meterani. Low countries, and lately in the countries of Iuliers, Wesell, Monsterland and places adioyning, may be verified. Our ancestors were woont to say they were crabbe faced, and woorse natured. Vultu despicabiles, moribus detestabiles, as Matth. Parts testifieth. And if antichrist, and these that receiue his
 marke, and worship him, be cursed and miserable; then are the Spaniards, that are so willing to execute the popes most irreligious and vniust commandes, most miserable, and haue a great curse hanging ouer their heads.
But faith our fencing warder and bickerer, The Spaniards are hated for their catholike religion especially, and next for their virtue and valor. He saith also, that the like happened to the English, when they were Lords of France for the most part; and to the Romaines, when they ruled a great part of the world. But why should he seeke for new supposed causes, when the true causes and reasons are so well knowne, and so violent and all sufficient? Beside that it is well knowne, that the Neapolitanes, Milaneses and Portingals do not hate the Spaniards for their religion, but for the causes formerly declared. Neither do we maligne the Spaniards for their catholike religion (for we know that their religion is not catholike) nay we do not hate them in regard of their false religion, which they hould, but rather pray for them, and pittie the^: but we haue great reason to suspect their encrochements, and to detest their ambition, iniustice, rapines and tyranny. How they may be called Fortes, or valiant, I report me, seeing as Philosophers hould,Fortitudo est virtus pugnans pro iustitia. Fortitude is a vertue striuing for iustice. Lastly he offereth great wrong not onely to the Romaines, but also to the ancient English, to compare the Castilians vnto them. For neuer was the Romaine or English gouernement like to the Spanish, nor canne these two famous nations well bee compared to the inhabitantes of Casttle, Granada, Valentia and Arragon, that vntill of late were a pooreMatth. Paris in Henr. base people, and for the most part nowe consisteth of Gothes, Vandales, Mores, Maranes and Iewes, which haue surmounted and deuoured the auncient inhabitantes of Spaine.
He telleth vs also, That it is no reason, albeit some Spaniardes be found to haue those vices, which Sir Francis imputeth to them, that all the nation should be charged with them. As if either he, or any other did suppose all Spaniards to be of like vitious humor. No, Sir Francis doth onely charge Spaniardes indefinitely, and those principally, that are the popes vassals, and agentes, and are so willingly emploied in his seruice. And in effect saith no more, then our aduersary willingly
 confesseth.
HeP. 105. saith further, That no nation in Europe hath more cause to glory and giue God thankes for his giftes aboundantly powred on them both natural, morall and diuine, then the Spanish, who haue a country potent, rich and fertile praised in scripture. 1. Machab. 8. a people able in wit and body, as appeared by Traian, and Theodosius emperors; by Seneca, Lucan, Martial, Poetes; by Hosius, Damasus, Leander, Isidorus, Orosius renowmed Christians; by famous martyrs, Christian kinges, famous souldiers, that haue conquered great countries by the sword, and finally by excellent preachers, that haue gayned many millions of soules to Christ by preaching. And thus with bigge wordes, and many great bragges he thinketh to put his aduersary downe. But he is confident without cause, and triumpheth before the victorie, nay before he seeth his enimie. To answere him in his owne tearmes, I thinke there is no nation in Europe more behoulding to this base lying companion, then the Spanish. For renouncing all loue to his country, and duty to his prince, he hath sould himselfe to publike enemies, to flatter them, and to set out their praises. Beside that he forgetteth all plaine and honest dealing, and delighteth himselfe with vaine reportes and lyes. The world knoweth that Spaine for the most part is a bare and barreine country, and that the common sort is poore and miserable. Portingall that is accompted the more fruitefull, notwithstanding is but barreine.

Ieiuna miseraeBuchanan. saith one, tesqua Lusitaniae
Valete longum, vosque glebae tantum
Fertiles penuriae.

How potent the country is, it may appeare by this, that it hath beene so often conquered by the Cathaginians, Romaines, Gothes and Vandales, and lastly by the Mores of Barbary. Theodosius and Traian albeit borne in Spaine, were of Romaine bloud, and brought vp in Italy and Rome. Seneca also and Lucan and Martiall had their learning and skill at Rome, albeit Martiall for his filthy and obscene writing sauoureth of the humor of some Spaniards.
It is also a matter of meere impudency, to compare the battels and conquestes of Spaniardes in the Indiaes, where they had to do onely with naked men, and people vnskilfull in
 feats of armes, to the actions of the Romaines, that haue subdued the most warlike people of the worlde. Neither can wee account of his relation of winning of soules to Christ in the Indies by friers otherwise, then as of a lying legend, and vaine bragge, that hath no ground. ForHierom. Benzo. and Barth. Cas. diuers report, that they haue destroied millions of soules, and speake sparely of winning of soules. But were all this true, that is heere reported, yet maketh the same nothing so much for the Spaniard, as the Noddie imagineth. For what auaileth it to possesse a fertile and good countrey, and which is praised in scriptures, vnlesse the inhabitants bee good and vertuous? Spaine, I trow, is not better then the land of Canaan, that flowed with milke and hony, yet were the people exceeding wicked. What commendation is it, to bee descended of a nation, that hath had many religious Christians, constant martyrs, iust and wise princes, valiant soldiers and captaines, vnlesse the Spaniards continue in the steps of their ancestors? But that now the Spaniards are like their auncestors, this declamer durst not say. Nay it may very well bee saide, that the inhabitants of Spaine now are not descended of the Spaniards that were either in Traians and Theodosius his time, or in the daies of Isidorus and Leander. Nor haue they the religion, or zeale of the ancient Spaniards. But saith the Ward-worder, God in regard and recompence of other rare vertues, will pardon other infirmities and defects. Hee auoucheth also that God hath aduanced the Spaniards aboue other nations of Europe for the defence of Catholike religion. So it appeereth by his owne confession, that the Spaniards his clients want not sinnes and faultes (hee calleth them onely infirmities Peccadillos, and defects) but all their enormous sinnes, as hee supposeth, are couered by their zeale in the popes seruice. A verie excellent peece of doctrine. If the Spaniard commit most heinous murders, and rauage whole countries, and liue most filthily, and blaspheme Gods holy word neuer so execrablie; yet by this mans diuinitie they neede not feare, if they maintaine the popes cacolike religion, and murder all that are studious of peace and Christs truth. Let them go to father Parsons, and hee will absolue them, and set them toll free, that they shall not pay any thing to the pope. But what if they oppugne catholike religion and murder Gods saints? Then the
 case is altred, and the Warder hath no fence for them, nor for such offences. Nay hee cannot denie, but as their faith is heretical and superstitious; so their sins are great and enormous. The Spaniards therefore woulde be aduised not to trust this false frier too farre. Zeale is commendable: but then it must be ioyned with knowledge. It is no Christian zeale that induceth men to kill poore christians. Our Sauiour Christ sent his disciples to teach the Gentiles, and not to kill them. Neither did Peter kill the Gentiles and sinners, that were ignorant of the truth, albeit in a vision he wasAct. 10. macta and manduca. commaunded to kill and eate: but sought by preaching to conuert them from their wicked liues, to the truth of Christ Iesus. But the pope and his adherents the Spaniards auert many from the truth, conuert none to the truth; kill the body with the sworde, and destroy the soule with corrupt doctrine, runne into the Indies vpon pretence of winning soules, and yet neglect the Turkes, Mores, and Iewes, that are hard at their doores. And all this is commended in them by our aduersarie. Nay he seemeth to teach, that sinners, that are out of the state of grace can merite remission of sinnes, and that the Spaniards for murdring of Christians, shall bee pardoned for other sinnes, which they commit. But be it hee shoulde onely say, that a man, that shoulde zealously adhere to the truth, shoulde thereby purchase remission of other sinnes; yet is not this iustifiable. For wee being out of grace are dead in trespasses and sinnnes, and Christ onely can purchase remission of sinnes, which without faith cannot be applied to vs.
Finally he is not ashamed to confesse, That in times past our ancesters were neere linked to the Spaniard in loue, leagues and allyance betwixt the princes of both the nations: and that at this tyme the Spaniardes shew great kindenesse to papistes fled beyond the seas. But little doth this make to the purpose, and lesse for the commendation of the Spaniard. For it is not here called in questio^, what hath passed betwixt the natio^s, but whether the Spaniard hath so rare partes in him, that he is to be preferred before all other nations, and before the English especially: which is no way to be deduced or decided by this discourse concerning leagues and allyances. Againe if we were so neere linked and conioyned together, as our aduersary talketh, and that to the profite and honor of both the nations;
 what reason had the Spaniardes at the solicitation of that bald frier Pius Quintus to fall out with their ould friendes, and to treate with our most malicious enimies? What can they alledge, why without all iust cause, they should both by force and practises oppugne our nation, that neuer offered them wrong? Had they not thereby hazarded the losse of the low countries, if her Maiesty would haue accepted them beeing offered vnto her? And haue they not opened a way for the possessing some part of the Indiaes as oft, as it shall please the princes of this land to establish a course for the mainteinance of the trade into those countries? And albeit we haue omitted to take the aduantage of either of these two courses; yet there is no time past, but her Maiestie may alwaies take the one, and percase haue opportunity to make benefit of the other. Finally if the Spaniardes had remembred the ould friendship, that hath passed betwixt both nations, they would not haue abetted traytors to rebell, nor receited rebelles, that are fled out of the realme for feare of lawes, albeit they pretend religion.
After the defence of the Spanish nation in generall our warder with his guard of loose wordes descendeth to speake of king Philip the second in particular. A man now dead and buried, and therefore the rather to be spared, although while he liued he was a heauy enemy to our whole nation. Yet for as much as our aduersary hired percase to pronounce a funerall discourse in his praise, doth so commend him, as he sticketh not to touch the honor of our nation someway entangled with his crosse dealings; I thought it not amisse to consider what this exorbitant frier hath to say either for king Philip, whome he rayseth out of his graue, purposing percase to enshrine him for a saint, or against the English nation, which he hateth more deadly, then doth the Spaniard.
First hee is offended that king Philip shoulde bee termed Proud, ambitious, false, cruell, trecherous, tyrannicall, and such like: and saith that If any of the kings subiectes were to answere sir Francis, he woulde giue him the lie and challenge him into the field. As if the kings subiects were such dangerous men, as none durst maintaine an honest quarrell against them; or as if they were more terrible Rodomontes among the Spaniardes, then otherwhere. Well seeing these challengers
 come not forth, we shall easily iustifie Sir Francis his charge against this frierlike combatants rude and vnciuill cauils and wrangling. For it was no part of Sir Francis his meaning simply to charge king Philip with any matter further then concerned the cause in hand, and further then the king, taking vpon him to be the Popes champion, persecuted poore Christians with great iniustice and cruelty. And vsing the pretence of popish religion sought both by force of armes, and fraudulent practise to vsurpe the dominions of other princes, and to establish a tyranny among such people, as by armes he had oppressed. Hereupon let the world iudge, whether Sir Francis had not reason to exhort all true English to oppose themselues against such ambition, pride, vsurpation, treacherous practise, iniustice, cruelty and tyranny, and whether any man in such a case could haue said lesse. But if he had said more, yet the kinges strange proceedinges against his sonne Charles, testyfied by popeVita Pij 5. Girol. Cat. Pius himselfe: against his wiues; complained of by the French: against the prince of Orenge, and the people of the low countries recorded in the actes of the Duke of Alua, and testyfied by diuers apologies of the prince of Orenge and the states, and knowne to many yet liuing: against his subiectes of Naples and Milan, reported in Natalis Comes, and diuers histories: against the Portingals witnessed by the historie of the conquest of Portugal, by Don Antonio the king wrongfully dispossessed of his country and best knowne to the Portingals: against the Queene of England knowne to the world, and recorded in the processe against Lopez the physicion, and partly testyfied by Gierome Catena in the life of Pius Quintus; against the secretarie Escouedo, and Antonio Perez, and the state of Arragon published to the world in a treatise for that purpose: these proceedings (I say) and his whole life recorded in histories, would sufficiently iustifie the same. Against which recordes, and testifications the idle talke of this addleheaded Noddy Concerning his catholike maiesties opposite vertues, of his sweete nature and co^dition, of his princely behauiour and pious gouernement, deserueth neither credite, nor consideration. He was of so sweete a nature, that for certaine monthes before his death, neither his physitions nor surgeo^s, nor others without good preseruatiues could endure to come neere him, albeit his clothes and
 lodging were neuer so sweetely perfumed. So excellent a thing it is to bee sweete natured. Hee saith also, That by the witnesse of enuy king Philip is cleered. Percase hee himselfe in this frierlike declamation degorged in the kings praise taketh on him the person of enuie, and so cleereth him. Otherwise all the water in the baie of Alcasson woulde neither wash him, nor cleere him.
Where sir Francis doth obiect to king Philip certaine dangerous practises heere in England, during his mariage with Queene Marie: this idle discourser not remembring his title of Warde-word, leaueth his garde, and runneth into a needlesse discourse Of the state of things in Queene Maries time, while the Spaniards were in England. As if it were in questio^, what was then done in England, and not how king Philip caried himselfe in Spaine, and all other places; or else, as if the state of thinges in England concerned king Philips humors and qualities any thing at all. Well let vs notwithstanding see, what this idle iangler hath to say for the state of matters in England.
Hee saith first, That king Philip paide the expences and for the furniture of the mariage with Queene Marie: and how the two Spanish and English nauies, that accompanied the king, when hee came into England were at his cost, vntill they came to Portesmouth, and the whole traine from thence to Winchester, and that the mariage was celebrated at his charges. But what is this to the discharge of his promise concerning the relation of the state of England? Besides that, this narration is full of vanitie and falshoode. For what is more vaine, then to bragge that the king defraid the charges of his seruants, and attendants, or that hee paid the charges of his owne mariage? What more consonant, then that the husband and goodman of the house shoulde bee at the charge of his wife and houshold? What a ridiculous thing is it to vaunt, that the king paide all charges betweene Portesmouth and Winchester, when either little or nothing was spent in the iourney? The falshood of his narration may be controlled by the accounts, that are yet to bee seene in the auditor generals office, and in the Eschequer. For thereby it is apparent, that the Queene not onely defraied the charge of her owne fleete, but also spent infinitlie about the furniture and preparations


 for her mariage. Money certes euill bestowed. For neuer was mariage more vnhappie either to ye prince her selfe, or her state.
Secondly hee telleth, That the Spanish nobles and gentlemen came furnished with necessities and money. It is maruell he setteth not downe also, how they came furnished with Moriscoes and Negroes, and horseboies, and such Canalliary. All which pertaine as much to the purpose, as that which hee setteth downe of the nobles and gentlemen. But bee it they came well furnished, yet that deserueth no great commendation. As for their expences they could not be great, seeing most did eate vpon the Queenes charge, and the rest ate bread by the ounce, and drunke water by the quart: and yet all of them coulde not auoide to come in merchants bookes.
Thirdly hee saith, That the priuie councell was not altered by the king. As if that were not a point following vpon the conditions of the mariage. Beside that, albeit he altered nothing, yet through the subtiltie of Winchester, the Councell was at his deuotion: and shoulde no doubt haue beene altered, but that he was preuented by the Queenes death.
Fourthly he vaunteth much That he honored the English Nobilitie, and gaue many of them great pensions. But hee shoulde do well to name those, that were so honored, and enriched by king Philip. For it is more then I can learne. Howbeit it is no strange matter, if for to effect his purposes, he was at some expence. For fishers when they angle for fish must bee at the charge of the baite; and fowlers, that seeke to catch birdes, must draw them to their nets by casting them meate. Like vanitie he vseth where hee sheweth, That the king honored highly English captaines and soldiers, and made them equall in all points of seruice with the Spaniard. As if it were a high point of honor for English to bee made equall with Spaniards. Beside that, all the honor the king did them, was to suffer their throtes to bee cut in the sacke of Saint Quintin, and the seruice ended, to send them home poore, bare, and naked. Hee affirmeth also, That the king made our merchants free to enioy all priuiledges throughout all his kingdome. Which is a plaine and most notorious vntruth. For neither were they suffered to trade into the Indies, nor had any more priuiledge in Spaine and the Low countries, then meere strangers, as is euident by the merchants bookes now to be shewed,
 if neede bee. It is also a meere fable, That the king in all quarrels betwixt English and Spaniards shoulde fauor the English, and that this should cost the Queene many a bitter teare. Let ye quarels be specified, and witnesses produced to prooue ye Queenes tendernesse more to Spaniards, then her owne people.
Fiftly hee telleth a very pitifull case, viz. That no Spaniard coulde walke in the night without danger of his life, nor at other times without iniurious wordes; and that they paide deere for all things, especially if they were taken talking with a mans wife, daughter, or seruant: and, as a certaine Viceroy tolde him, that some English would send their wiues and daughters of purpose into the fieldes, where Spaniards walked, to allure them to talke with them, and thereby to entrappe them, and get money from them: and that diuers of the Spaniardes had their purses taken from them, and that the Count Fuensalida was robbed, as he was at supper with diuers of his countrymen. All which long discourse is as farre from the purpose, as Spaine from England. For what doth this concerne king Philips vertues, or the state of England, which are the points which heere he taketh on him to handle? Must the state of England consist now in the brabbles betwixt the scum of the kings traine and a fewe bandes and base fellowes, about their Sen^oras? Further the same doth rather shewe the insolency of the Spaniards, then deserue any commiseration for the losses or knockes they priuily receiued. For why shoulde they be suffred to abuse honest women, or to attempt maidens chastitie? Will N. D. our Warder play the baud to make matches betwixt knaues and whoores, and mislike that there was not a guard set, while such lend fellowes went about their base affaires? Againe it may be, that it was not a Viceroy (for what hath such a Noddy or vice, as this, to do with Viceroies, or viceroies to do with such petite matters) but some vice that purposed to delude him, that tolde him the tale of these walking wome^, or walking knaues. For how could he know, that they were mens wiues or daughters, if he were a stranger; or else yt they were sent for that purpose that he speaketh, into the fields? how knew he, but yt it was a quarrell betwixt knaues and bauds? how knew he, that ye Spaniards did not willingly bestow their mony vpon baggages, being men that frequent the bordell, as oft as the church? As for the robbery of the Count
 Fuensalida, if any such thing were, it no more concerneth the honor of our nation, then the robberies by Fuorusciti in Italy and Naples ye honor of the king of Spaine. Robberies and disorders wil euery where be committed: but we praise them not, we allow the^ not. Neither did Queene Marie then allow this foresaid robberie. And rather then the old Count should weepe for his plate, he shall haue a collection in part of reco^pence for his losses. All this great matter therefore being well considered is nothing: neither hath our aduersarie any reason to exclaime and say, That these were the fine fruites of our new Gospell, then freshly planted among vs. For those that did these feates were papists, and not men of our religion, and these disorders were committed in Queene Maries time, when popery was publikely professed in England, and not in the time of the Gospell. Againe, the Spaniards, and not any of our profession, vsed to haunt bordels, and to make these baudy matches. And if in states, that professe the Gospell there be diuers outrages committed; they cannot bee imputed to our profession, but to the leudnesse of those, that will not bee reformed; and that liue among vs, and are not of vs. Which kinde of people are both reprooued by their teachers, and punished by the magistrates.
Hauing thus for his pleasure ranged farre from the matter, in an idle discourse co^cerning certaine brabbles betwixt the English and Spanish in Queene Maries daies, he commeth to his purpose concerning king Philip: and gladly would he purge him from all suspicion of euill meaning towards our nation, contrary to a letter mentioned by Sir Francis, and written out of Spaine, when king Philip was yet in England. The letter purported, that notwithstanding the kings faire pretenses, his purpose was to winne the fauour of the nobility, and so to make himselfe absolute king, and possessing the principall places with his owne souldiers, to alter the lawes, and to impose taxes, and rule the country at his pleasure. And this the warder by all meanes seeketh to shift off, and to discredite: and that first, Because these plots and practises were neuer heard of before, as he saith. But he must needes be deafe, that liued in Queene Maries daies in any eminent place in the state, that heard not often of these practises; and very dull and sencelesse, if he suspected them not. Neither is it likely, that
 such a prince would desire to come hither, if he should still be tied with conditions.
Secondly he saith, That the name of the writer and receiuer of the letter would haue beene set downe. But that might haue bred daunger, the letter beeing written against Spaniardes, that then ruled in England. Neither is it the fashion for intelligencers to declare either their owne names, or the names of such as they write vnto.
Thirdly he would auoide it by this shift, That it was some flying report, without ground, and taken vp in some port-towne or tauerne, by some factor, or other wandring companion. But the probability of the plot, and proceeding of the Spanyard, and the euent of thinges did shewe the contrarie.
Fourthly he would beare vs in hand, That it was some deuise to make the Spaniards odious, and perhaps to vphould the faction of the earle of Deuonshire, that missing the mariage of Queene Mary began to practise. But the ambition, and malicious purpose of the Spaniardes against all that professed the truth, and his proceedings in the gouernement did plainely declare, that it was a truth, and no fiction. As for the earle of Deuonshire he neuer desired to marry the Queene. For if he had, he might. Such was her affection towards him. Neither did he euer take any greefe for not marrying her. for his affection was no way enclined that way. Neither could he poore gentleman entertaine any practise, beeing destitute of friends and meanes, and watched by his enemies, and of no subtill reache to compasse any such matter. I wonder the Noddy was not ashamed once to name this yong earle, who albeit innocent and harmelesse, yet was poysoned at Padua to content some mens humors. But our aduersarie, as if he were a smith and of Vulcans generation, as his supposed father was, canne forge twentie such deuises: and shift off wicked practises, with a number of loose wordes. He saith, It is a grieuous and heinous slander against a mightie, munificent, and bountifull monarke, to say, that he meant to make himselfe king. As if mighty and munificent monarkes do not in their ambitious humors seeke to enlarge their dominions. That this was no fiction, it may appeare by the drift of Charles the fift entending this mariage; by the popes demandes to the king, that could not be effected
 without greater authority; by the propositions made by king Philip to the counsell to enlarge his power, and release the rigour of the conditions, whereto he was tyed; by the kings secret working to draw ouer Spanish soldiers, and his practises to possesse himselfe of the nauy, and the principall portes and fortresses of this kingdome; by wordes commonly giuen out; by the testimony of Sir Francis Englefeld, if he were aliue and would say truth, and also of diuers others of the nobility; by the ambitious humors of the Spaniard; and finally for that otherwise his aduancement by this mariage would haue amounted to nothing. And if in the low countries, where he is but duke, or earle, he hath sought to be an absolute king; we may not doubt of his purpose in England, where he had the title of king, and possessed the Queene.
Where the letter saith, That king Philip meant to haue altered the counsell, to possesse the hauens, to make new fortes, to furnish them with his owne men, to change the common lawes, to bring in the Spanish inquisition and Spanish lawes, and to impose strange taxes vpon vs, after the fashion of Spaine: he thinketh it sufficient to answere first, That no such thing was attempted by him; and secondly That all this was prouided for in the conditions of his mariage with the Queene. But his slender surmises are all too weake to crosse such violent purposes. For albeit beeing preuented by the hand of God, that tooke away the Queene, he could not put matters in execution; yet doth it not follow, that he neuer had any such purpose or intention. Againe, it is a fond thing to imagine that the king could be tyed with wordes and conditions, when experience teacheth vs, that neither promises, nor othes, nor lawes of God, nor lawes of nations could bridle his ambition. He wasGuicciardin. de paesi bassi. precisely sworne, to obserue the priuiledges, and lawes of the low countries. Yet did he obserue none; but contrary to all order change the councell of estate, bring in the inquisition, and enlarge the authority of the ecclesiasticall state, erect citadelles place garrisons, and impose strange taxes vpon the people. And if the Duke of Alua did this by his direction in the low countries; no doubt, but he would haue doone the same himselfe in England, if he had atteined his purpose, and had not beene crossed by the Queenes death. And that this was his full intention, we haue already shewed by diuers argumentes beside
 the testimony of the letter. These therefore are no bugges, nor imaginations; but true collections grounded vpon principles of state, and the kings actions. Heereby also we may gather, that we were happily deliuered from the thraldome of the Spaniard, more grieuous then the thraldome of Egypt, as their rigorous dealing with them of the low countries may plainely enforme vs.
Where among strange taxes imposed by the Spaniards, one is mentioned most strange, That the subiect payeth for euery chimney; and others are noted as not common, that some pay by the poll; and all pay for their victuals, so that a man cannot eat but the king must be paid, as if he were a common host (as indeede he keepeth a common tauerne in his court after a base fashion, that a man cannot drinke, but the king will gaine somewhat) our aduersarie wondreth, That any should publish such childish toyes. But the Spaniardes and the kings subiects in other places do find, that the burthens are so heauy, that neither children, nor yet men are able to beare them. And albeit there is (percase) some error in the particulars, yet the sum is not much mistaken. For throughout the kings dominions a tribute or taxe is paid for all things bought and sould in the market. Neither is any marchandise exported, or brought into the country, or passed from place to place, but there is a custome paid. Of late there is a tribute exacted not onely for euery Hanega of corne ground at the mill, but also for salt. Neither are the countries of Biscay, Arragon, Nauarre, Catalonia, or Valentia so free, as our aduersary pretendeth. In Flanders according to the Spanish stile, the duke of Alua imposed a tenth and twentieth part vpon all the kings subiectes: a tribute neuer exacted in the Turkish dominions. Now then if the king exact such payments vpon his owne free subiectes; in what case are they like to be, that he shall vanquish with his sword?
Where it is declared in the letter, That the king purposed to roote out the nobility of England, and to bring the commons to beggery; and to sell all not aboue twentie yeeres ould for slaues: our aduersary doth terme this narration sottish and impudent; and asketh, How this beeing contriued in England could be discouered by one in Spaine. But whatsoeuer termes the relation doth deserue, certaine it is, that this manner of
 proceeding is most inhumane and barbarous; and not so improbable, as the warder would make it. For first we may not thinke, that the haughty minde of the Spaniard could either be content with a simple reuenge of wrongs, or conteined within the boundes of common lawes and customes. Secondly we know, that the popes malice is so great against such as spurne at his authority, that he stirreth vp all the world against them, and Giueth them for slaues to those, that canne take them, asSander. de schism. lib. 1. Paule the third did giue the English in Henry the eight his daies. Thirdly it is most notorious, that in the Indiaes they haue practised all these barbarous cruelties, so that they haue almost dispeopled diuers countries, that were very ful of people at their first comming thither. Fourthly the example of our neighbours of the low countries, that liue vnder the Spanish yoke, and haue their nobility eyther extinct or debased, and their liberties abolished, and liue in great slauery, may shew vs some part of their purposes, and as it were the plot of their gouernement. Lastly in their fleete that came against vs anno. 1588. beside store of halters and fetters prouided to bind our poore countrymen, that should be taken prisoners, and were already taken in conceit, there were found in Don Pedro de valdez his ship diuers engines and irons to marke such, as should be taken, for slaues. Adde heereunto the testimony of him that wrote the letter out of Spaine mentioned by Sir Francis, and did vnderstand by good intelligence the resolution of the Spaniards in this point, and wee shall not neede to make question, but that this was indeed intended, and resolued against our nation. Neither coulde hee reueale this secret, vnlesse it had come to his notice: which might by diuers meanes come to passe. For albeit the king hatched this purpose first within his owne brest; yet was the same communicated to others, and so made knowne in Spain to those, that shoulde concurre in the execution of it. Such abominable treasons God would not haue kept secret.
Lastly where it is saide, That the king had laide a plot for the destruction of the Ladie Elizabeth now Queene of England: hee answereth, That the worlde knoweth, that the king at that day was her chiefe stay and defence; and that for the reasons before alleaged, and that finding her when he came into England in prison, and hardly pressed about Wyats insurrection,
 hee deliuered her, and brought her to the court, and yeelded her most carefull protection. In the end hee concludeth, That it is barbarous ingratitude, not to acknowledge his fauour towards her. But if this were a matter knowne to the worlde, it were a great woonder, if it shoulde neuer bee knowne in England, where men haue greatest reason to know the same. No, no: hee abuseth his Reader very much, that, imputeth the cause of her safetie to king Philip. For albeit for some causes hee had reason to respect her then, when he hoped to haue issue by Queene Mary; yet afterward, no doubt, hee consulted (and that for many and potent considerations) to bee ridde of her. Yea albeit her innocencie in Wyats cause was sufficiently knowne; yet if God almightie had not beene her cheefe protector, and stirred vp meanes for her safetie, neuer thought of by man; it was not the kings fauour, that coulde haue defended or deliuered her. But suppose God shoulde vse the king likewise for an instrument of her deliuerance; yet did hee neuer any thing in regard of the Ladies innocencie, but rather in regard of his owne profite, as the Noddy vnawares confesseth in his third encounter, and as is very apparent by the proceedinges of the king in that action. But what if the king shoulde do a fauour to any person, is it barbarousnesse for all others, not to acknowledge the same? In ancient time those that receiued a benefite, were deemed vnthankefull, if they did not acknowledge the same, and endeuor to requite it; but our barbarous Warder will haue all condemned for barbarous and vngratefull, that either know not, or acknowledge not the kings fauour extended to others. Other points of his answere, I haue before touched and refuted.
The premisses considered he doth woonder, How sir Francis his booke (which hee termeth a libell) could bee suffred to passe to the print, especially conteining so reprochfull calumniations against so great and potent a prince, as the king of Spaine is. But rather it is to bee woondred, that Parsons, or any Iesuite shoulde once open their mouth to speake of calumniations and libels, when their common course is by libels and slandrous writings to denigrate all such as oppose themselues to their factious courses. Parsons is not onely a practitioner, but also hath passed master in this facultie. Against my Lord of Leycester heeLeycesters common-welth began to play his masters
 prises; yet was not that his first libell, as his friends of Oxford know. The booke, which hee published vnder the name of Andreas Philopater, toucheth her Maiestie, and all her cheefe Counsellors very rudely* beside that hee set out a booke against the old Lord Treasurer, and his whole house. After that followed Dolmans booke, which hee will not denie to bee both calumnious and iniurious, and to haue beene written by him. Hee is also charged by a friend of his to bee a principall actor in the infamous libell, set out anno 1588. by Allen against the Queene, at the least hee ouersawe the presses, and diuulged certaine copies thereof. Nowe hee hath set out this fencing Ward-word comparable to the rest of his satyricall writings for the bitternesse thereof. A certaineA discouerie of a counterfeit conference p. 6. priest of his owne religion doth call his booke of succession set out by Dolman, An infamous babling cartell or libell. IohnDiscouerie of the errors of William Criton Iesuite. Cecil a popish priest doth not onely taxe Criton a Scottish Iesuite for setting out a Satyr, pasquinado, and libell against himselfe and others, but condemneth all these pestilent courses, of libelling and killing practised by the Iesuites. Neither do I thinke that any can allow Ribadineiraes booke of schisme. As for sir Francis Hastings Watch-word, it is a discourse of another nature, conteining neither satyricall inuectiue, nor iniurious calumniation, but a iust accusation and declaration of our enimies most wicked and malicious purposes against vs: which none can mislike, but such, as professe themselues either enimies to our nation, or traitors to their prince.
In the end of this discourse hee goeth about to cleere king Philip the second Of all supicion of hiring Lopez to poison her Maiestie, yea of being priuie and consenting to that execrable fact. But hee doth his client no pleasure in mentioning that, wherewith hee is not charged, and refuting the charge so loosely, as if hee were hired to betray the kings cause; as hee hath heeretofore long gone about to betray his prince and countrey. Wee, I say, do not charge the king with any such matter, but onely referre our selues to Lopez his confession, and to Manoel Lois, and Stephen Ferreiraes depositions, and to the bil of exchange for fifty thousand crownes to be paid to Lopez. The witnesses and parties do all blot the king, and his principall agents in the Low countries, the Count of Fuentes and Ibarra. Such a great summe coulde not bee paide without
 the kinges notice: heereto may bee added a certaine token or iewell sent from Christopher Moro the kings counsellor, and a message from the king brought to Lopez by one Andrada. But nothing doth breede more suspicion, then this Noddies defence for the king. Hee saith, That this matter coulde neuer probably be knowne to the king. And why not? Coulde neither Lopez himselfe by letters, nor Andrada by message, nor secretarie Ibarra tell him of the purpose? It is no question. Nay it is confessed and deposed that they did. Secondly hee saith, That Lopez neuer gaue any signification of any such matter. But his confession in writing testifieth the contrary. And many heard him say more then his confession importeth. Thirdly hee alleageth, That the king was not to haue correspondence with Lopez being a Iew. As if the Spaniards vse not to haue correspondence both with Iewes and Turkes to serue their owne turnes; or if any coulde bee more fit to execute such horrible factes, then Iewes and Infidels. Lastly hee asketh, If the king had no agents neere to plot such matters, but he must be made priuy himselfe. But it may bee answered, that no warrant coulde bee graunted for so great a summe, but by the king, that would not let fiftie thousand crownes go for nothing: and that Lopez woulde do nothing, vnlesse hee had the kings warrant both for the money and his further preferment. It is therefore no Turkish impietie, to talke of such matters, but a course Turkish and heathenish or woorse to do, or consent to such execrable empoisonments. Neither would Parsons haue taken vpon him the defence of the king in this foule fact, if he had not beene of a Turkish humour. Which also appeereth by a letter signed with his owne hand, where he confesseth that one of his owne consorts doth charge him With tyrannicall, Turkish, and Machiuilian practises. And another priest in a letter resembleth Dolmans booke of succession to Machiauels prince, making Machiauelisme, and Dolmanisme or Iesuitisme wordes of one signification, and saying that Both signifie Turkied Atheisme.
But saith the Warder, It may bee doubted, whether any such thing was entended by Lopez. It may bee also, that hee will doubt whether Lopez and his consorts were publikely conuicted, and executed for that treason. For he is an infidell, as it shoulde seeme, and will beleeue nothing, but that which
 the pope deliuereth him to bee beleeued, and that maketh for the popes aduantage. And yet if hee had beene in Lopez his case, hee shoulde haue felt and touched with his finger, that all that was true, which now he will not beleeue.
Wherefore if he haue no further Warde to make for the Spaniardes and their late king; his fence will prooue woorth nothing. If hee haue no better argument to prooue the excellencie and renowne of the Spaniardes, then is conteined in this encounter, his clients will neuer thanke him; nor will any man take the old king for Catholike, pious, wise and potent, as hee oft termeth him, vnlesse his proctor answere better for his faults, and bring better grounde for his exorbitant praises. Onely thus much hee hath gained, that men may see how with drinking good sacke, hee is become Spanish. What good then may wee looke for at the hands of a professed enimie, and rinegate frier the popes sworne slaue?
In the ende of his discourse for a farewell hee putteth vs in some hope of peace betweene both nations: but wee will then beleeue it, when wee see the conditions equall on both sides, and sufficient securitie that they shall not breake their promise vpon the popes warrant. In the meane while we wil take the Spaniards as wee finde them; and make ready to receiue those, that shall offer vs violence: and trust such, as vse to keepe promise.


CHAP. IX. 

Conteining an answere to N. D. his conclusion and petition to the Lords of her Maiesties most honorable priuie Counsell, to whom the determination of all this controuersie is referred.

ALthough, my good Lords, your leisure is not such, as that wel you can attend, to read euery friuolous discourse set out by Parsons the Iesuite, or other his consorts; nor can take pleasure to see their vaine and wrangling pamphlets, which they write daily in defence of publike enimies, notorious traytors,
 and dangerous malcontentes against religion, state, lawe, prince, countrey, and those that shewe themselues most forward in defence thereof: yet if any of you chance to light vpon a petition made by them of late, but, I thinke, not exhibited to your Lordships; I woulde also most humbly beseech you, to take the paines to read and co^sider of this my answer. Not that I dare commend the worke as excellent, or perfect, but for that I thought it might bee a matter not vnprofitable for you to know, vnto what boldnesse the Iesuites and popish priests are come, and how necessarie it is to represse their notorious insolencie, that with painted glosses, and glorious termes haue defended the actions, not onely of publike enimies, but also of most disloyall traytors; and not onelie encourage mal-contents, and stubborne subiectes in their disobedience, but also endeuor to disgrace all those, that shall dare to enterprise the defence of religion, of her Maiestie, and the present gouernment. Nay albeit they take to themselues libertie to oppugne religion, and the state, and vphold the cause of those, that seeke the ruine of both; yet are they greatly offended, that any shoulde touch publike enimies, or mislike these trecherous and disloiall courses. Yea such is their impudencie, that they haue presumed to addresse their pamphlets to your Honors, and to complaine to you, as if wee offred them great wrong, when wee defend our selues against publike enimies, and traytors, and euill disposed subiects; whereas themselues wrong her Maiestie and the state, and wrangle against all honest men, that are studious of truth and peace, and loyall to their prince and countrey. But this you shall perceiue the better, if as in the rest of his encounters, so in this his conclusion and petition I note, not onelie the peruersenesse and presumption of this petitioner, but also the vanitie and absurditie of his petition.
In his first entrance he offereth his discourse To your view and iudgement. But presently he excepteth against you, as if you were not equall, nor indifferent iudges. I cannotP. 119. saith he, expect to haue you equall iudges. Which is a course most absurd. For if he thought you not indifferent, why did he come before you? If he presented his cause in good earnest, why doth he refuse you before hearing? Is this law among Iesuites, to refuse and appeale from arbitrators chosen by themselues, and
 that before the cause be entred? Is not this notorious insolency thus to scorne your Lorshippes? Beside that he is plaine contrary to himselfe. For in the title of this conclusion, he remitteth The whole answere to the iudgement, and arbitrement of your Lordeships. Here he draweth backe, and refuseth you for his iudges. And yet, as if he had not refused you for iudges, he proceedeth in his pleading before you. Perhaps he meaneth to make you readers in stead of iudges, or such iudges, as all readers are, which iudge what they like or dislike themselues, but giue no rule to others.
Well albeit he will not make you iudges Of the controuersie it selfe; yet he is content you should iudge of the manner of the prosequution thereof. So he will not haue you iudges, whether the pope and Spaniards are publike enemies, nor whether Iesuites and priests fled out of England are traytors; nor whether papists are dangerous subiectes; nor finally whether we are to arme our selues against forreine enimies, and beware of traytors and suspected subiectes; which is the controuersie betwixt him and Sir Francis Hastings, but in what termes we are to deale against enimies, and traytors, and their consortes. Belike he meaneth to make your Lordships grammarians, for such are fittest to iudge of words and phrases: the controuersie he telleth you plainely, you are not to meddle withall. I beleeue you haue not seene many such suppliantes come before you: neither do I thinke, that a forme canne readily be found of such a petition.
He saith, If the watchword had beene presented to your Lordships, before it was printed, that it should, as he thinketh, haue beene stopped or moderated. So he doth not onely bestow on your Lordships an office of iudicature, but also of watching of presses and correcting of bookes set out against Iesuites: and albeit a base companion, yet is he bold to abuse your Lordships and to make you ministers of his pleasures and purposes, that nothing may passe but formally, and to the Iesuites good liking. For he is much offended, that any should speake either for truth, or state against publike enemies and traytors, and would most earnestly pray you, that you would be pleased to suffer him and his consortes to vndermine the state, and to stirre vp rebellion, and cut honest mens throtes without any noise, or question made about the matter. And because
 Sir Francis hath exhorted his countrymen couragiously to withstand the Spaniards and other publike enimies, and speaketh plainely, what we are to thinke of him and his consortes; he calleth him A troublesome stickler, and saith, He is transported with violent rage against potent and annointed princes, and in diuers places chargeth him with railing and slandering, and heere imputeth to him Base detractions and contumelious fictions, and giueth him many other verie bigge words degorged out of his wicked and impotent malice against good men. As if it were not lawful for vs, to defend our selues, or touch our enemies, but in such manner and forme, as this criticall Aristarchus, and new teacher of formes of speech shall like. So ridiculous and absurd a Noddy we do encounter, and such vnreasonable requests we are to answere: as may further appeare by the sequell of his discourse.
My first petitionP. 120. saith he, Should be. Note I pray you, that he saith, Should be, and not, Is. Whereby we may vnderstand, that this proud companion disdeineth to make petition to your Lordships. Signifying onely, that if he might abase himselfe so low, as to make petition to such, as he accounteth heretickes, That then his petition should be to restraine such turbulent spirits as those are, which more of a madde and malicious kind of wantonnesse, then of witte, do loose their tongues with ouermuch liberty against the honor of mighty catholicke princes abrode. So his complaint is, that we loose our tongues to speake without witte, thinking (percase) because he and his consortes do raile against Christian princes wittily, or rather saucily, that they may do it freely and lawfully. His desire is, That turbulent spirites may be restrained. But he doth not consider, that this concerneth him and his consortes the Iesuites and popish faction very neere. For they are the turbulent spirits stirred vp by satan to trouble kingdomes and enflame warres throughout the world as before hath beene in part declared.Discouery of William Critons errors. Criton was taken with diuers plats for the inuasion of England. He holpe to stirre warres in Scotland. They are therefore Turbulent spirits, and condemned by their owne consorts and all the world for such. As for vs it toucheth vs nothing. And therefore we willingly subscribe this petition, and would wish that all Christian princes would take a course with such as publish libels and slanderous calumniations to
 the disgrace of princes and states. For none haue more cause to complaine then we. Paule the third published a slanderous bull, or libell against Henry the eight. Which was seconded with a bitter inuectiue written by cardinall Poole. Pius 5. and Sixtus 5.In bulla Pij 5. and Sixti 5. haue d spoken their pleasure against her Maiesty,Sanders and Ribad. de schism. and this kingdome. Sanders, Ribadineira and Rishton haue e written bookes full of most impudent calumniations against diuers catholicke princes. f Cardinall Allen hath passed all that went before him in bitternesse and malice.In his letters to the nobility and people of England and Ireland. The like course haue they taken against Henry the third and fourth of France, and diuers noble princes of that kingdome. Parsons the Iesuite himselfe alone hath published cart lodes of libelles. Time therefore it is to stoppe the mouthes of such barking curres, and to tye them vp for barking.
But why would he haue such turbulent Spirits restreined? He saith, That the furious hatred of Sylla and Marius, of Pompey and Caesar was kindled by certaine opprobrious speeches vttered by some of their followers. But he should do well to shew his author and prooue his words true, least he be taken for a false forger of examples. I could yet neuer vnderstand any such matter. And therefore let him take heed, least for want of good handling, he marre the fashion of his first petition.
His second petition is, That your honors would resolue to be mediators vnto her Maiestie for some more gentle, mild, and mercifull course to be taken with papistes. Wherein First he doth greatly wrong her Maiestie, charging her with rough, vnmercifull and cruell dealing against papistes, who hath so much spared them, that to many it is thought, that she hath neither had sufficient regard of her owne safety, nor of the peace and security of her subiectes. Secondly he doth couertly charge your Lordships, That you haue borne a hard hand ouer them, and assisted her Maiestie in her vnmercifull dealing. Thirdly he is so saucy as to make you his factors, and mediators in a cause most irreligious and impious; most dangerous to her Maiestie and the state; most odious to her most loyall subiectes; and most vnreasonable in regard of the petitioner and his consortes. and this I will briefely shew, leauing the consideration and prouision for the rest, to your honors.
Most impious it is to perswade a toleration of popish
 religion, beeing a doctrine full of heresies, and not cleere of Idolatry, as is notorious to all that know it, and shall God willing be fully prooued heereafter. And if it be impious to perswade it, we must thinke that piety will not suffer vs to yeelde it. OurMatth 4. Sauiour saith, It is written we must worship the Lord our God, and serue him onely: and that is the briefe of the firstExod. 20. commaundement, Thou shalt haue no other Gods, but me. Now how is God onely serued, where the idole of the altar, and euery crucifixe is worshipped with diuine honor? How do they serue God alone, that make angels and saintes their mediators, and communicate gods honor to them? Besides that, it is nothing but idolatry and Worshipping of strange Gods, as saithAduers. haeres. Vincentius Lirinensis, to embrace and stifly to maintaine heresies. For heretickes no lesse reuerence their opinions, then the Gentiles their gods. Nay SaintDe vera relig. c. 38. Augustine saith, That it is the vilest kinde of idolatrie, for men to worship their owne fancies, and obserue that for a religion, which their deceiued and swelling mindes imagine. The apostle forbiddeth the Corinthians to haue any societie with them, that1. Cor. 5. worship and serue idols. And sheweth, that there is no fellowship betwixt light and darkenesse, nor company to bee kept with Infidels. Nolite saith hee,2. Cor. 6. iugum ducere cum infidelibus. quae enim participatio iustitiae cum iniquitate? Aut quae societas luci ad tenebras? Quae autem conuentio Christi ad Belial? Aut quae pars fideli cum infideli? Qui autem consensus templo Dei cum idolis? God was much offended with the bishop of Pergamus for winking at false teachers, and their leud doctrine. Habeo saithApocalyps. 2. hee, aduersus te pauca, quia habes illic tenentes doctrinam Balaam, qui docebat Balac mittere scandalum coram filijs Israel, edere, and fornicari. Ita habes and tu tenentes doctrinam Nicolaitarum. And shall wee endure the Balamiticall priestes of antichristes synagogue, and more damnable heretikes, then the Nicoloitans? TheApolalyps. 2. bishop also of ye church of Thyatira was sharpely reprooued for permitting one, that pretended to bee a prophet, to teach and seduce gods seruants. Habeo saith hee, aduersus te pauca, quia permittis mulierem Iezabel, quae se dicit prophetem, docere, and seducere seruos meos, fornicari and manducare de idolothytis.
The prophet Dauid woulde not suffer any strange worship of God within his kingdome, neither coulde hee endure, so
 much as once to mention the names of idolaters. Their offrings of blood saith he,Psal. 16. I wil not offer, nor make me^tio^ of their names within my lips. That was likewise the zeale of godly emperors. Omnes vetitae legibus diuinis and imperialibus constitutionibus haereses perpetuo quiescant, say theL. omnes. Cod. de haereticis. Emperors Gratianus, Valentinianus, and Theodosius. Nowe to suffer contrarie religions was euer condemned. Salomon greatlie offended in suffring his wiues to erect idolatrie, yet were they his wiues. And when the Israelites serued God and Baal, Elias greatly reprooued them. How long1. Reg. 18. saith hee, halt you on both sides? If God be God, follow him; if Baal bee god, follow him. Nay it is punishable in matters of religion, to winke at idolaters, as appeereth by the example of Salomon before rehearsed, and of those kings, that did not cut downe groues, and destroy hill altars. He that serueth God, saithLib. 5. ep. 30. Ambrose, must bring no dissimulation, no conniuence, but faithfull zeale and deuotion: he must giue no consent to the worship of idols, and other prophane ceremonies* for God will not be deceiued, which searcheth all things, euen the secrets of mens harts. Now besides these reasons, that make against all false worshippers, and abused Christians, there are speciall lawes against teachers of heresies, such as the Iesuites, and other friers, and priests are.Deut. 13. God co^mandeth False prophets, that would turne vs away to worship other gods, to be slaine. GodApocal. 16. he powreth out his wrath against those, That haue receiued antichristes marke, or worship his image. Helias caused Baals priestes to be slaine.L. Cuncti. Cod. de haeret. and Manich. Arcadius and Honorius tooke away all churches from heretikes, least they shoulde teach, or do the exercises of their false religion in them. Such as haue beene zealous in remoouing all monuments of idolatrie, and aduancing Gods true worship, haue receiued manifold blessings at gods hands, and are well reported of in holy Scriptures, and their memoriall and name is blessed. Such were Hezekiah, Iosiah, Iosaphat and others mentioned in holy Scriptures: Constantine, Theodosius, Martian and other famous princes in the church of God, mentioned in Ecclesiasticall histories. Contrariwise not onely open idolaters, but such as shewed themselues colde in promoting Gods seruice haue beene punished by God, and accounted infamous among godly men. The4. Reg. 17. Samaritanes were content to serue God, but they woulde worship
 idols too. Fuerunt gentes timentes dominum, sed nihilominus and idolis suis seruientes. Therefore were they hatefull to gods Church.Nicet. Choniat. lib. hist. 7. Manuel Comnenus remooued out of the church certaine tables conteining both the articles of Christian faith, and certaine anathematismes of Turkish impieties and Mahomets false gods, and substituted in their places other tables and articles of doctrine not so directly contrarie to Turcisme: and this he did for feare to offend the Saracens. But his fact neither pleased God nor men. Neither did he satisfie those, whom hee sought to please. Let all those therefore that seeke to mingle contrary religions, or feare to maintaine true faith, diligently looke to the examples of the4. Reg. 17. Samaritanes, and ofNicet. Choniat. lib. 7. Manuel Comnenus.
This course would be dangerous to her Maiesty, and the state. Now the pope beeing publikely hence excluded, hath not those meanes to worke her Maiestie displeasure, as he hath to worke against princes in countries of his obedience, and should haue heere, if popery might be tolerated. And this to be true, Sixtus Quintus in his bull published against her Maiesty anno 1588. and translated by Cardinall Allen, doth himselfe in plaine wordes testify. Not hauing saith he, in these parts the ordinary meanes, which by the assistance of Christian princes we haue in other countries to remedy disorders, and keepe the people in obedience, for that Henry the eight late king of England did of late yeeres reuolt from the sea apostolike. Likewise it appeareth by theVita di Pio 5. Girol. Catena. example of the pope Pius the fiftes Nuntio Vincentio Lauro, who not daring to passe into Scotland to practise, but staying at Paris, was depriued of meanes to effect his wicked purpose. Likewise the Iesuites and priests not daring now publikely to shew themselues, nor to deale with all persons publikely and without danger, loose many opportunities to set forward the popes cause. The recusantes also, though they come not to the church; yet hauing no liberty to conuerse with Iesuites, nor to learne their seditious doctrine, keepe themselues in better termes, then otherwise they would do, if it were lawfull for them to professe their religion openly. But admit once Iesuites and seminary priestes to reenter into the land, or to liue among vs; the pope first will haue more opportunitie and meanes to worke his purposes. Neither is it likely, that he will euer desist from prosequuting her Maiesty,
 hauing by so many sentences disabled her, excommunicated her, and deposed her. Secondly the Iesuites and priests would haue better meanes both to peruert the simple, and to worke their treasons against the prince, and her most loyall subiects. And if they do much hurt now, when they are restreined, because they are suffered to liue in prisons; what would they do, if such woolues were let loose amongst Christes lambes? That they will alwaies be ready to execute the popes commaundements against her Maiestie, there is no question, seeing they holde it damnation, not to obey him. Thirdly, the Recusants hauing such teachers, what woulde they not do, when Hall coulde perswade Somerfield; and Ballard, Babington and so many gentlemen desperately to aduenture to kill the Queene?
How dangerous this may bee to good subiects we may consider, if wee do but looke into their wooluish practises in France, and Flanders, and other where. Did not the papists of Orleans being admitted thither according to the edict after the first warres, murder those of the true religion, and shut out the rest? Did they not in all other places, as oft as they were the stronger, seeke to murder them? The matter is apparent, and recorded in many histories. Neither may wee thinke, wee shall better agree with them heere, then others haue done in other places. Light and darkenesse, sheepe and woolues ca^not agree togither. And albeit our doctrine will not suffer vs to persecute papists, yet their doctrine teacheth them to kill vs. And that is their continuall practise.
Finally this petition is most vnreasonable, in respect of the petitioners themselues. They will not grant or procure our brethren libertie in Spaine and Italy; and yet they are so shamelesse to aske that, which they will not grant vs, or procure for vs otherwhere. Againe they desire to liue vnder her Maiestie, and yet they will not renounce her sworne enimie, and his vsurped authoritie, nor acknowledge her to bee lawfull Queene; although the pope do depose her. Nay they giue her enimie power ouer her, which by lawes of state is not sufferable.
Thirdly they haue heeretofore shewed themselues rebellious and factious. How shoulde wee then secure our selues, that they will behaue themselues more loyally heereafter? Why shoulde wee thinke, that they will do otherwise, then
 the Irish rebels, that haue shaken off her Maiesties gouernement? They say they will behaue themselues peaciblie: nay, percase they will not sticke to sweare it. But how shoulde wee beleeue either oathes, or promises, when they depend vpon the pope, that will suffer them to keepe neither?
I conclude therefore, that to aske a toleration of the masse and of popish religio^, is a matter impious, vnsafe for her Maiestie and her people, and most vnreasonable. For it is contrarie to theExod. 20. and Deut. 13. law of God, that forbiddeth all idolatrie; to the doctrine of Christ,Matth. 15. That excludeth all humane deuises in gods worship: to the doctrine of theEphes. 4. apostle, that teacheth vs, That there is but one Lord, one faith, and one baptisme: to the practise of ancient Christians,Ioan. epist. 2. That would not receiue those into their house, or bid them god speede, that brought not with them Christes true doctrine: to the authoritie of fathers, and holy emperors and princes, that by no meanes could endure any idolatrous worship, or hereticall doctrine: to the custome of the Romish synagogue, and the traditions of the pope and hisPosseuini bibliotheca selecta lib. 1. c. 26. Iebusites and Cananites, and finally to the lawes of the church and kingdome of England, which without great consideration are not to be dissolued or suspended. Neither can the same bee allowed by any good Christian or loyall subiect, seeing it bringeth with it first an vncertaintie of faith and religion. secondly a confusion in Gods worship. thirdly a dissolution of ecclesiasticall gouernment and discipline. fourthly an ouerthrow of lawes and ciuill pollicie. fiftly an entrance for seditious priests and Iesuites not tolerated euery where among the papists. sixtly an easie meanes to practise against the prince and state. seuenthly a coldnesse in religion, eightly sedition, trouble and rebellion. Lastly the wrath of God, and most speedie destruction. And that this is true, the veryIbidem. aduersaries will not denie within the sphere of their actiuitie, and in their owne gouernment. Why then shoulde they looke for that at our hands, which they will not yeeld vnto themselues? Or with what face can they desire thinges so impious and vnlawfull?
First saith our aduersary, Great princes and monarchies round about vs that had greater difficulties and differences, then we haue. He should haue said Monarkes, and Neere vnto vs. For not monarchies but monarkes do treate of peace. And
 the kings of France and Spaine dwell not round about vs but neere vnto vs. But we must beare with our great aduersary if talking of princes and states, he forgot to vse fit wordes or make good sence. Beside that, he is much deceiued where he saith, That they had greater differences and difficulties in concluding of a peace, then we haue. For all ciuil causes may be compounded. But no composition can be made with false religion or idolatry. Againe kinges may agree concerning temporall titles, but we cannot agree with the pope or his faction, vnlesse we meane to forsake God and the true Christian faith. Well let vs see notwithstanding what These great princes and monarchies round about vs haue doone. They haue saith hee, concluded a most honourable peace and friendship. And I will not deny, but it may be so, albeit diuers small accidentes may much alter the case. But what maketh that for this purpose, where it is debated, whether the idolatrous masse is to be tolerated, or any other course to be take^ with English fugitiues, and home-bred papistes? If we might haue an honorable, profitable and most assured peace, it is the thing that we do much affect and desire, neuer prosequuting warres but for our owne defence and safety. But what is this peace heere spoken of to the toleration of seditious priests, and Iesuites and such rebels and traytors? Can wee haue no peace, but by suffering of exiled and banished rebels and traytors to returne? Why, that is the extremest calamity, that a ruined common wealth canne suffer. Perditae ciuitates, saithLib. 5. in Verrem. Tully, desperatis omnibus rebus, hos solent exitus exitiales habere, vt damnati in integrum restituantur, vincti soluantur, exules reducantur. Againe we are not at warre with recusantes, or papistes. Why then should he talke of peace and friendship heere? Therefore he telleth further, How the French king is returned to the sea of Rome, and that her Maiesty is courteously inuited to the same. And is this the onely meanes of peace? Sure then any warre is better, then such a peace. For if wee respect onely temporall matters, yet to yeeld to a tyrant, is the last, and most extreme calamity, that happeneth to a natio^ vanquished and subdued: and no prince can put himselfe vnder another, but he giueth ouer his soueraignty. Beside that, suppose her Maiesty should yeeld to the pope, which without indignation cannot be spoken, nor yeelded vnto by any true English man;
 how is she sure, that she shall either reteine, or recouer her crowne, he hauing disabled her, and dispossessed her of it? Shall she begge a crowne at his handes? Shall she do penance at his pleasure? Will she abandon her selfe and her subiectes to such a base fellow? Fye fye, that any should be suffered once to motion such a shamefull and an abominable matter. But if we respect religion, truth, and conscience: we cannot submitte our selues vnto him; we cannot acknowledge his authority: we may not embrace his abominable doctrine and heresies, whatsoeuer may ensue of it. Hee is the head of antichristes kingdome, and the synagogue of Rome is the purple whoore mentioned in the seuenteenth of the Reuelation of saint Iohn. His whoorish allurements to idolatrie and heresie wee value not. And if this bee meanes of peace, and no other; then welcome warres, nay welcome rather death. For who had not rather endure ten thousand deathes, then die the second death, and kill his owne soule? Our aduersarie saith that her Maiestie hath beene inuited curteously to come to the pope. But we thinke it strange curtesie to stirre vp rebels against her; to curse her; to hire desperate cutthrotes to murder her and empoison her. But were shee inuited curteously, yet simple are the birdes that suffer themselues to be taken at the foulers call. Vlysses heard the Sirenes songs, but hee would not come neere them. As for the French kinges example, it is not to purpose. Hee to winne a kingdome might do as it pleased him* but if her Maiestie shoulde so do; shee shoulde hazard that kingdome, which shee possesseth already quietly, rather then winne one poore towne or hamlet. Nay shee shoulde hazard her soule. Beside that, her Maiestie is rather to follow the examples of godly kinges, that abolished idolatrie; of godly emperours, that woulde not admit heresies in their states, of her noble father, that ouerthrew the popes vsurped tyrannie in this land, and her owne former noble actions, then others. Of the French kings act wee dispute not. Onely wee desire God to open his eies, that hee may see how he standeth.
Secondly hee telleth vs of the qualities of Clement the eight, and the king of Spaine, and reporteth him to be A meeke, milde, sweete, and holy man, and calleth king Philip Salomon the peacible. And certes euill shoulde hee deserue his hire, if he did not set out these his two old masters with extrauagant
 praises. But as in the fairest monuments and most glorious sepulchres there is ofttimes nothing but rotten bones; so I thinke while men thinke in these two to finde treasure, they shall finde nothing, but rotten bones, and corruption. Clement the eight is a seuere persecutor of Christians, and not very gentle to cacolykes, as appeereth by the excommunication of Don Cesare Duke of Ferrara, against whom hee thundred with fire and sworde, and manie foule words. Outwardly hee pretendeth to bee a sheepe, but inwardly hee is a rauening woolfe; a saint in shewe, but indeede of a filthie andWhen he was in Minoribus, he was knowne to be a great hanter of bordels. vncleane life. A bishop in name, but indeed antichrist. King Philip is now dead, and loth I am to rake into his ashes further then I needes must, especially hauing saide much of him alreadie. But the name of Salomon no man can deserue woorse, then hee, being neither extraordinarily wise, nor very studious of peace: of which two his best friendes do testifie the first, and the latter is prooued by his troublesome reigne, that neuer was without warres either with French, Dutch, Italians, Portugals, or English. But were the first neuer so milde, yet his office is wicked, his doctrine heretical, his practises detestable; and were hee not so, yet what peace can bee honorable, that bringeth with it slauerie; or composition firme with him, that keepeth no faith nor promise? Neither can wee looke either for honorable or sound dealing with the Spaniard, so long as hee dependeth on the pope. Hee may percase desire fauour for his faction, but will yeelde no exemption from inquisitors to true Christians. Hee will desire to trade with vs; wee shall not I thinke trade into the Indies. Finally hee will not yeelde vs and our associates either reasonable and equall conditions, or firme assurance. If hee please to doe it, and can do it, I knowe none, but is most desirous of peace.
Thirdly hee saith, There is no cause of doubt of dutifull behauiour of English cacolykes at home and abroad. But his saying sheweth, that he hath neither shame, nor honestie in auouching thinges so false. What? Is there no cause for vs to doubt, when wee see how they are linked to the greatest enimies this kingdome hath, and take themselues neither bounde by oath nor affection further, then the pope giueth them leaue? Do wee looke for more loialtie at their handes,
 then wee haue already founde at the handes of their predecessors and consorts? Do wee thinke that sodainly these serpents will cast off their skins, or loose their stinges? Do we not see how vndutifully the papists haue behaued themselues in Ireland, and how they haue reuolted from their liege soueraigne, and that these warres were stirred by priestes and Iesuites? Haue we not heard what massacres they haue committed in France, and how they haue leagued and confederated themselues against their kinges? Do wee not knowe howe in England they haue rebelled against their Souereigne Ladie, and sought to murder her, and empoison her, and betray her, and her countrey into the handes of Spaniards and forreine enimies? What impudencie then, or rather furie doth possesse this Noddy, that he shoulde say, that There is no feare of their dutifull behauiour? He answereth that Their first and highest desire is, that her Maiestie woulde returne to the sea of Rome, and that by this act all difficulties and iealousies woulde be ended and taken away. But hee may as well say, that by yeelding to the Spaniards all controuersies woulde be ended. Certes as well may the one be done, as the other, and yet neither without manifest impietie against religion, without perpetuall dishonour to our nation, and vtter destruction of the countrey. This is the woorst that can happen to a nation shamed, spoiled, beaten, vanquished; and yet with these execrable rinegates it is the first and highest point, that they desire, as themselues confesse, seeking nothing more, then our hurt, dishonor and destruction. They studie to ruinate religion, to bring her Maiestie and their countrey into slauerie. Nay, and when they haue their desire, they are nothing neerer. For they may not thinke that all English men are so base, that euer they will endure either the idolatrous masse, or the tyrannie of the pope, or the co^mand of strangers. Neither can any true English endure to receiue conditions either from pope or Spaniard, much lesse, that they shall haue power to dispose of this crowne and gouernment. If then this be their desire, we are come to a full stoppe. this as long as wee liue neither will, nor can with honor, or safetie, or conscience be yeelded.
Their second desire is as their proctor telleth vs, That they may haue the same libertie for their consciences in England,
 that our brethren haue in France and Germany. But wee haue answered alreadie, that it were impious, dishonorable, dangerous, and vnprofitable to grant any such matter. Neither is the case of France and Germanie like to this countrey. There religion was alwaies openly professed, and that by grant of princes and consent of the people. Heere poperie since her Maiesties gouernment was neuer permitted. But if our aduersarie coulde assure vs, that our brethren in Spaine and Italy might without danger professe the Gospell, and that we might heare the king of Spaine and princes of Italy secure vs as much; then shoulde hee receiue an other answere. In the meane while both he and others must haue patience, if we bridle those, that woulde runne a course to the hazard of this kingdome. Neither because we stande against this proposition, Do we therefore crie fire, and sword, and blood against the papists, nor do we crie out Crucifige, crucifige, as this desperate Iewe, and fugitiue frier chargeth vs. For we vtterlie renounce all such bloodie massacres, and fierie executions, as the papistes practise against our brethren; but onely we tie vp these popish woolues, that woulde deuoure Christes flocke; and stoppe their furious rage against their countreymen. We may not suffer them to come with fire and sworde to the destruction and desolation of their countrey. Wee know that in Queene Maries times they persecuted Christ in his members, and made vs beare his crosse: but we are not so simple to put sworde and fire into their handes againe. Now if they will needes rebell against lawes; they shall finde vs readie in the field to defend our religion, prince, and countrey; and not burne vs at a stake, as most cruelly they haue done diuers of our brethren. If the papistes yet will quietly liue amongst vs, we neither meane to endanger their liues, nor take away their landes, goods, and liberties. If they beginne to stirre, whatsoeuer shall happen, they must impute it to their owne deseruings.
He telleth vs further, That there hath beene bloud inough spent in this realme, and that aboue a hundred and thirty priests haue lost their liues within these twentie yeeres for religion, men of peace, learned, vertuous, well descended, and martyrs. But if he had named the men, it would easily haue appeared, that they were no martyrs of Christ, but traytorous
 agentes of the pope and Spaniard sent hither out of Italy, Spaine and other countries by forreine enimies. It would likewise haue appeared, that most of them were simple and ignorant youthes, that for neede were driuen to seeke aduentures, blindly led, furiously bent, fautors and raysers of faction, and such as no common wealth could endure. And yet too many of this sort haue beene spared, to the great hazard of the country; I pray God, that they do not first feele the harme, that are cause of fostering such yoong woolues. The last lord Treasurer knowing their natures, kept them short. And time I hope will make vs see hidden truth. It is knowne what Ballard practised with Babington, and his confederates. Bisley otherwise called The greene priest, professed, and set it downe vnder his hand, that it was lawfull to kill the Queene, and that himselfe would haue doone it, if he had could.
The rest were all linked in intelligence with forreine enemies. He therefore that desireth liberty for such men, doth not onely professe himselfe an open enemy of his prince and country, but also impudently desireth that such may come amongst vs, as may sow sedition, bring in strangers, and cut our throtes. If this be a reasonable request, let him be heard. If we be weary of our liues, then let vs entertaine this butcherly race. They haue skill to cut mens throtes artificiallie and closely. And finally if we be co^tent to heare her Maiestie closely charged to be an extreme persequutor, and her iudges and iustice calumniated, as if they had doone to death peacible quiet men; then let vs open our eares to such impudent petitions, as this is. I thinke no honest man can reade it without indignation, and therefore few words serue to refute it.
After he hath tould vs his pleasure of popish traytors, and called them martyrs, he ioyneth recusantes with them, who no doubt he esteemeth as confessors. Such confessors, such martyrs, as neuer Christes church knew: all either dying for treasons, or suffering for heresies, and disorders, and set on by Antichrist. Of these recusants he prophesieth, That they must winne in the end. That all shall be paid vs; that feare is an euill meanes to make things continue; that her Maiesty will not liue alwaies; that if exasperated mindes come to wreake their wrathes, great extremities will ensue; that we haue many enimies abrode. All which discourse doth shew, that the recusants,
 whatsoeuer they pretend, do nothing else but grind their teeth, and whet their swordes to take reuenge vpon vs; that they desire her Maiesties death, whome God long preserue; that they meane to ioyne with strangers, and to worke the destruction of their aduersaries by all meanes whatsoeuer. Our wise aduersary doth plainely confesse it, and threaten it, and by that meanes would strike a terror into vs. Which as it may make himselfe, and his consortes odious; so it may teach vs first, to serue God as beeing threatned with this danger; next to take a course to strangle such vipers blood, as seeke the destruction of their prince and country. As for the feares he obiecteth, they may rather stirre vs vp to watch, then to feare. For the onely way to be without feare, is to remooue the causes of feare. He that hath madde dogges must tye them sure vp, if he will not feare their biting. He that will not feare theeues, must ride well armed. If we arme resolutely, I see no cause, as I haue said alredy, but that the Spaniardes should rather feare vs, then we them. To yeelde to conditions vnequall with papists, were not, as this sencelesse sophister surmiseth, a way to cleare vs of feare, but to redouble both feare, and danger. For it is an easie matter to thrust him downe to the bottome of the staires, that is content to go downe one steppe. But he that standeth vpon equall termes, and yeeldeth not to any dishonorable conditions, nor feareth to meete his enemy vpon the way, may with more probabilitie defend himselfe against him.
He alledgeth also the examples of Augustus, Henry the fourth, Edward the fourth, and Henry the seuenth, which disposed themselues to clemency toward their latter daies, and would perswade her Maiesty To vse the same clemency and sweetnesse to the exhilerating of all her people. But first the case is so vnlike, as nothing can be more. For those princes contended not about religion, but matters of state. Now matters of state may be compounded by remitting of a mans right. But religion may not be abandoned, for that it is the cause of God. Her Maiesty she did not possesse her kingdome by violence, as those princes did. And therefore if papists were true and loyall men; they should not seeke to depriue her of her right. She neuer offered violence to papistes, but onely sought to liue in peace; and put to death none, but such as rebelled and
 practised against her, sparing but too many of this sort: those princes vsed clemency towards their subiectes, that were not linked with forreine enemies, nor were factious, and punished those rigorously, that practised against their states. How then, if the case were like, canne her Maiesty not defend her right against such traytors? Shall she yeeld her crowne to her enemies? And is this the sweetenesse that the papistes seeke? Secondly admit her Maiesty should spare traytors and factious persons, this I confesse to priests and Iesuites would be a ioyfull day, but there cannot be a greater calamity, that can happen to good subiects. Nay it would be a dissolution of lawes, and confusion of the kingdome.
Seeing that the former examples fitted not his purpose, he bringeth in the example of Henry the eight, Who, as Gardiner said, was desirous in his latter daies to returne to the vnion of the Romish church: Likewise he is still harping vpon the French kinges submission to the pope. But that king Henry did euer purpose such a matter, or that such a magnanimous prince could endure to debase himselfe so low, as to come vnder a paltry frier, or a proude pope, is incredible. Nay the last negotiation with the French kings ambassadour, the king then lying at Hampton court, was to draw him likewise from the popes obedience. As for Gardiner he was neither so neere, nor so deere to the king, as to know any such secret purpose, beeing long before the kings sicknesse, forbidden to come at the king: and his practise about the pope had cost him his life, if hee had not submitted himselfe to the kings mercie.
Neither is it certaine whether Gardiner euer vttred any such matter or not. If hee did, yet we are not bound to beleeue him. Nay wee are to beleeue that hee spoke so much rather to please the popes legat, then of any truth.
But if her Maiestie do consider, how her noble father was dishonored by this generation, shee cannot choose but detest them, and follow his steps, that abolished this tyrannie; and not of those, that establish it. Further if examples may preuaile; then is shee rather to follow the steps of godly Emperors, that stopped the mouthes of heretikes, and woulde not suffer them to practise their false religion, and of the godly kings of Iudah, that abolished all monuments of idolatrie, and burnt the idolatrous priestes bones vpon their altars,
 then of idolaters. As for the French king, that for a crowne altered his religion, wee haue little to say. We will rather praie for him, then dispute of his dooings. Her Maiesties case is farre vnlike his, being with content of all quiet and honest subiects possessed of her crowne, and able by Gods assistance to defend it, and all her rightes, maugre all enimies, and traitors, that iointly conspire against her.
Hee appealeth to your Lordships considerations, what a comfort it would be to her Maiestie, and your selues, to see all sortes of people laugh, and sing togither, and praie to God most hartily for her Maiesties health, wealth, and prosperous long continuance. All which I do beleeue, her Maiestie beeing so gracious a prince, and your selues being so studious of the good of your countrey, and her Maiesties safetie. But they that desir^ ^is, must take a farre contrarie course to this, which our aduersary desireth. Her Maiesty must, as she doth, resolutely defend Gods religion: iustice must be executed seuerely: wicked members must be rooted out vtterly: good men must be cherished louingly, and employed respectiuely. But if we should once admitte a packe of factious traytors, within the bowels of this kingdome, and harken to Parsons that traytorous and infamous Iesuite; all our singing would be turned into mourning, and our laughing, into lamenting, as it is in Ireland. The prayers as well, as the practises of papistes would be little for her Maiesties safety, or continuance; as former experience teacheth vs. all this ioyfull state which these traytors dreame of, would be nothing, but a state deuided by warres and sedition, a time of darkenesse and desolation, and extreme misery. finally he blusheth not to propose vnt vs the example of such, as first professed true religion after the first establishment of reformation, that desired, that their conscience might not bee forced: which doth quite ouerthrow his cause. For as in Italy and Spaine, and such places, as were subiect to popish princes our brethren coulde obtaine no toleration for the exercise of true religion; so they cannot with any reason desire the establishment of their masse, where vnder Christian princes it is vtterly abolished.
Wherefore if nothing be more impious, then to erect idolatry, and to suffer notorious superstition and heresie to be preached; if nothing be more dangerous and dissolute, then to
 receiue rebels, traytors, and enemies within the entrals of our country; if no composition can be made with the pope of Rome and the whoore of Babylon; if nothing be more dishonorable, then to listen to enemies and traytors threatnings, and promises; I doubt not, but all men of religion and iudgement, and well affected to their country, see that our aduersaries motion is impious, dangerous, dishonorable, and not to bee yeelded vnto, nor granted without the destruction of the present gouernment, and desolation of this kingdome. All which I referre to your Lordships consideration, and beseech God to reueale the truth to the ignorant, and to establish the weake, and to confound all that are enimes either to his truth, or to their most gracious Prince and deere countrey.




