To the Kings most excellent Maiestie. The humble petition and information of Sir Lewis Stucley, Knight, Vice-admirall of Deuon, touching his owne behauiour in the charge committed vnto him, for the bringing vp of Sir Walter Raleigh, and the scandalous aspersions cast vpon him for the same Humble petition and information Stucley, Lewis, Sir, d. 1620. To the Kings most excellent Maiestie. The humble petition and information of Sir Lewis Stucley, Knight, Vice-admirall of Deuon, touching his owne behauiour in the charge committed vnto him, for the bringing vp of Sir Walter Raleigh, and the scandalous aspersions cast vpon him for the same Humble petition and information Stucley, Lewis, Sir, d. 1620. TO THE KINGS most Excellent Maiestie. The humble petition and infor∣mation of Sir Lewis Stucley, Knight, Vice∣admirall of Deuon, touching his owne beha∣uiour in the charge committed vnto him, for the bringing vp of Sir Walter Raleigh, and the scandalous aspersions cast vpon him for the same. BEing deterred by your Ma∣iesties more important af∣faires, from any hope of redresse of those scarres cast vpon my reputation by Sir Walter Raleigh at his death, without some remonstrāce of the businesse made by my selfe; I haue presumed to offer to your most Excellent Maiestie, a iust defence of my carriage in that affaire: Wherein as I hold it the part of an honest man, to preferre publique duety be∣fore priuate affection; so I cannot but keepe the heart of a Gentleman, which is euer more sensi∣ble of a wound giuen to his reputation, then to his life I haue noe pleasure to fight with a ghost: But seeing an Angel of darkenesse, did put on him the shape of an Angel of light at his de∣parture, to performe two Parts most cunningly; First, to poison the hearts of discontented people; Secondly, to blemish me in my good name, a pooreinstrument of the iust desires of the State, with false imputations: Giue mee leaue, most Gracious Souereigne, to speake for my selfe: which I doe not to insult vpon the dead, but to defend my selfe against the false reports of the li∣uing, taken from the dead vpon trust, to strike me directly, but through my sides indirectly, ay∣ming at a higher marke. All men haue long knowen, that this mans whole life was a meere sophistication, and such was his death, in which hee borrowed some tincture of holinesse, which he was thought not to loue in his life, there∣with to couer his hatred of others in his death. As it appeareth, that being moued by the Deane of westminster, and thereupon promising chari∣tie to mee in the prison, doth thus vent his hatred on the Scaffold, in shew of charitie to the liuing, to take heede of so dangerous a man. An vncha∣ritable charitie, not much vnlike that mans re∣pentance, who purposing to hang himselfe, writes his repentance of that sinne before hand in his booke, which he did purpose to commit. Yet will not I take vpon me to iudge of his last repentance, I leaue him vnto God, to whom hee stands or falls; but I would he had giuen a better signe of it, then by godly words at his death to gather credit to himselfe to worke vpon the com∣passion of men, thereby to infuse more warily the venome of sedition into the hearts of as ma∣ny as hee might, and to gaine reputation vpon his Soueraigne, but to spend his malice vpon mee your poore seruant, who did nothing, but execute your iust Commands, with the perill of my life. Witnesse his open inuitation of diuers to his death, wherein hee meant, as in his last Will and Testament, to leane a Legacie of his hatred vnto me, to be executed vpon me by them to my destruction. But it is nothing in respect of his generall end, to spread by them whom hee had inuited, the contagion of his seditious humour vnto others, which the euent doth manifest: That it growes verie questionable, whether this man did more hurt by his life, or by his death: By his life through his ill example; By his death through his false testimony to traduce the Iustice & instruments of the State. Yea but it was the te∣stimony of a dying man, now a penitent (as alsay) as some say, a Saint, euen then when as himselfe said, it was no time to flatter or feare Princes: yea, but it was the testimony of an enemie, of a periur'd, of a condemned man. First, of an enemie, and of an angrie enemie, euen with your Maiestie that would haue iustice executed on him, vpon his originall condemnation, who were satisfied, as he publikely did speake of his innocencie in that cause, as priuately before hee bewrayed his deepe discontentment, when it was vrged, that the testimony of the Lord Cobham was neuer retracted, Sir Walter Raleigh did per∣emptorily denie it. To whom answere was made, that then the publike Act registred in the Counsell booke would manifest it, for there it appeares. So faine would this man cast aspersion vpon your Iustice for taking the life of an inno∣cent in that cause, wherein hee was condemned by his Countrey. When this would not serue his turne, then did he flie to the Commission of a generall; pleading it as an implicit pardon of that former offence: Not considering that being already a man condemned for treason, he was, as the learned in the Law held, vncapable of ano∣ther triall, by which hee might haue been found as Nocent as before. For he hauing a Commis∣sion, to goe into those parts of America, vnposses∣sed by any Christian Prince in league with your Maiestie, and no where else, either to plant or trade, hee made his designe for the Riuer of Oreonoque, where hee knew the Subiects of the King of Spaine were already planted, which, as he confessed vnder his hand to your Maiestie, hee concealed from you; and this vnder pretence of his gold Mine, which he did apparantly to this end, to breake the League, and to imbroyle the two States. Many Generals haue for exceeding their Commissions beene punished, euen for good seruices: how then could he haue escaped, for this his disseruice, being against his Commis∣sion, if hee might by the law haue beene tryed vpon it? Its cleere then, that he was angry with your Maiestie for commaunding Iustice to bee done vpon him: how then could hee chuse but be angry with mee the poore Instrument who brought him backe to Iustice, from whence hee intended often to make an escape? First at Sea, vpon his returne, making motion to be set on shore in France, and to quit his Ship to his company on that condition; for the which hee was blocked vp in his Cabin a moneth to∣gether, as himselfe hath confessed vnto mee, and is to be prooued by diuers of his company: By which it is cleere againe, that out of his guilti∣nesse, he did not so much trust in your goodnesse, as hee saide on the Scaffold hee did too much, or else he had not suffered death. Next at Plymouth, after hee was by your Maiesties speciall com∣mand, committed to my keeping, hee plotted with two French Captaines; by name with Cap∣taine Flory, and Captaine Le'Grand, to escape in one of their shippes, then there in harbour, as he then confessed to the Lords Commissioners, it beeing first euidently prooued against him; by which it appeareth againe, hee did not trust your Maiesties goodnesse, as he writte and said at his death. But I am sure by this he did much wrong my kindnesse, to my vndooing, had not the goodnesse of heauen preuented him. Next hee plotted his escape at Salisbury; which my worthy Cozen William Herbert first discouered to your Maiestie. Last vpon the same Saturday when I receiued your Maiesties Commission, by my Cozen Herbert, by whom also I receiued intelli∣gence, that at that instant, he was flying from my custody without my priuity; not hauing as yet made him any semblance of condiscent, so that I almost came on him at vnawares, euen at the in∣stant that hee was putting on his false beard, and his other disguisements: Which declares hee did still distrust your goodnesse; doubtlesse out of the conscience of his guiltinesse, whatsoeuer he writte or saide to the contrary. And is it any maruaile then, that he was angry with mee at his death, for bringing him backe? Besides, that bee∣ing a man, as he was thought, of so great a Wit, it was no small griefe, that a man of so meane a wit as I, should bee thought to goe beyond him. Yea, but you should not haue vsed such craft to goe beyond him; No? Sie ars deluditur arte. Ne∣que enim'lex iustior vlla est quam'necis artifices arte perire sua. But why did not you execute your Commission barely to his apprehension on him in his house? Why? my Commission was to the contrary, to discouer his other pretensions, and to seaze his secret papers, &c. And can any honest Subiect question mine honesty, in the per∣formance of such a Commission, which tended to the discouery of the secret intentions of an ill affected heart to my Soueraigne? How can any dislike this in mee, and not bewray his owne di∣shonest heart, vnto the State? Yea, but though another might haue done this, yet how might you doe it, beeing his kinsman and his friende? Surely if I had beene so, yet in a publique im∣ployment, and trust laid vpon mee, I was not to refuse it, much lesse to prefer priuate kindnesse or amity, before my publique duety and loyalty: For what did I know the dangerous consequence of these matters, which were to bee discouered? or who knowes them yet, of those that make themselues my competent Iudges? But if there were no kindred or amity betweene vs, as I auow there neuer was, what bond then might tie me to him, but the tie of compassion of his miserie? which was in my Soueraignes heart to distribute, when hee saw time, that did command mee, and not in the dispensation of mee, nor of any other instruments power, that is to bee commanded. Hitherto I haue prooued hee was angry, both with your Maiesty, & with my selfe, and therefore his testimony ought not to be of any force against me. It followeth next to proue, that his protesta∣tions and oathes, concerning others were false, both before he came to the Scaffold, and vpon the Scaffold. Before, against Queene Elizabeth of infinite famous memory, who aduanced him with great fauour from the dust. For one day my selfe vpbrayding him with the notorious ex∣treame iniury he did my father, in deceiuing him of a great aduenture which my sayd father had in the Tyger, when hee went to the West Indies with my Vnkle Sir Richard Grenuill; which was by his owne confession worth fifty thousand pound: which came all to his hands, my fathers portion at the least being tenne thousand pound that hee might lawfully clayme: Hee answered that the Queene howsoeuer she seemed a great good mi∣stresse vnto him in the eyes of the world, yet was so vniust and tyrannous vnto him, that she layde the enuie aswell of this, as of many other her op∣pressions vpon him: and that shee tooke all the pearle in a Cabinet vnto her selfe, without euer giuing him so much as one pearle. This hee swore to me, and to Captaine Pennington, he did so basely and barbarouslie raile vpon that our most excellent Queene oftentimes, as hee can at∣test, that no man hath cause to beleeue his oth against others, that would breake his oath of Al∣legeance to so excellent a mistresse, that had ray∣sed him from such meannesse to such greatnesse, as we of his countrey did well know. Now that hee swore that he was not guiltie of the plotting of the Earle of Essex death, nor did insult vpon him being dead, there is a Gentleman of worth, which about that time came from out of a long captiuitie, which hee had suffered in Spaine, who touched at Sherborne, and Sir Walter Raleigh asked him, What they said in Spaine of Essex death: He answered, They heard not of it there: But that he was sory he heard in the Iland voyage, That the Earle had brought him to his mercy. To which Sir Walter Raleigh answered, But I trust I am now quittance With him; which this Gentleman is ready to attest. Besides, in his Letters written to others, hee did ordinarily vp∣braid him, That hee died like a Crauen: and in another, That the great boy dyed like a Calfe: And he was often heard to say, That he died like a foole, and like a coward: So persecuting his ghost, and insolently trampling in his ashes; that it thence grew into many mens mouthes; That it was better to be a liuing dogge, then a dead Lyon. But a more euident demonstration there cannot be of any thing, then that an olde Warder of the Tower will depose, that hee saw Sir Walter Raleigh the night before the Earles suf∣fering, with his footman onely with him, to come to the Tower, and heard him giue strait in∣structions to the Lieutenant of the Tower for execution of the Warrant, for that worthy Lords execution, which shortly followed him. Whether then he for swore not himselfe euen at his death for publicue applause, about the not plotting the destruction, and not insulting on the death of that most noble Earle, and excellent Saint of God; whole Christian humilitic and charitie, if Sir Walter had followed, hee had not called his repentance and Saintship so farre into question, as now he hath done, and so seditiously haue poisoned the hearts of discontented peo∣ple, nor so maliciously wounded the reputation of an honest Subiect: Who vpon iust reason, be∣leeuing the disloyall and dishonourable wordes spoken by such a proude vassall against your sa¦cred person to Monsieur Manourij, as other his disloyall deeds which hee intended against you: That if he had escaped, he was like to prooue as dangerous a Traitour to this Crowne, as euer Antonio de Pcres was to the Crowne of Spainc; tooke them to heart, and performed my best deuoyer to bring him vnto Iustice. But whether, I say, hee forswore not himselfe in these things, I referre my selfe to them that are better acquain∣ted with the Tragoedie of that time. Not to forget in the end, that which hee con∣fessed himselfe vnto me and others, that he tooke an oath vpon the Bible to his Company, which he purposed to breake; which periury, his Lady hath said, was the cause of all his ruine. And what interpretatiō can my greatest enemie make of his oath, which voluntarily he swore vnto my selfe in the Lieutenants dining chamber, the Wed∣nesday after his commitment; which was, That he loued me as well, as any friend he had in the world; to which I haue substantiall witnesse. But in all these things he vsed an aequiuocation, as he doeth in these things now concerning me. To which I answere in generall once for all, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, father to his wife, was thought iustly to except against the testimonie of one Vaughan, brought against him, because he was a condemned man: And may not I then ex∣cept against the testimonic of Sir Walter Raleigh, vrged against me vpon the Scaffold, comming from an Outlaw after Iudgement, euen in a case of high Treason? Yet to answere in particular to the points, hee sayth first; I neuer did receiue aduice from my Lo. Carew to make mine escape. And I doe now verely beleeue he neuer did re∣ceiue any such aduice, as I euer said to the Lords: But that Raleigh tolde it vnto Stucley, yea, and that many times, I will auow it vnto death, and take the Sacrament vpon it. To the second; I neuer named my Lord Hay, and my Lo. Carew, in other wordes and sence, then as my honourable friends: amongst other Lords my honourable friends. That is very true, and I would the rest of his Honourable friends vnderstood how farre he named them, as well as I doe. But as euer I beleeued, that he did abuse their Honourable names, to seduce mee, and to draw me to his purpose: So did I promise to my selfe, that some of the chiefe of them be∣ing ioyned in the bond either of blood or affini∣tie with mee, a poore Gentleman, would be a comfort vnto me in the way of my loyaltie, and renounce the testimonie of such a disloyall man, that was neuer true to any, but to himselfe. There is no mans displeasure can further hurt me, then hee hath threatned me, That if I reuealed the things he tolde me in priuate, I should die for it. And die for this cause I am content, so it be not by an assacinate: But whensoeuer I die, there shall die your Maiesties faithfull and loyall ser∣uant, and one that will part with his blood at as deere a rate as he can. For the third, concerning the shewing of a letter to mee about money, his wife if shee were put to her oath, can tell whether it were so or no. But vnder the former protestation, I auow it to be true, that he shewed me such a letter; though I thinke it not true what the letter spake. I omit his periury in swearing hee had no designe for Fraunce; when as Sir Iohn Fearne, and Captaine Penington are able to testifie vpon their oathes, that hee often told them hee had commission to stand them in stead from the High Admirall of France, which confirmes the testimony of M. Mannowry, who saw the Commission at Plim∣mouth, as he will deposeit. I vrge not his periu∣ry in that Article concerning Sir Iohn Fearne, that he neuer had it in his thought to goe from Trini∣dado, to leaue his company: which Sir Iohn Fearn is ready to prooue, by the deposition of 60. per∣sons, that Sir Walter propounded it vnto them, whatsoeuer he intended. And therefore how this man equiuocates at his death, all the world may see. O barbarous cruelty, to leaue so many gen∣tlemen, when hee had secretly heard that his son was dead, to the mercy of their enemies, without hope or meanes to returne. Where hee also per∣swaded Captain Penington to goe away, who an∣swered him, hee would rather die then lay the guilt vpon his soule, of the death ofso many gen∣tlemen: But if I would, you lately swore you haue no money left, quoth Captaine Penington, without which wee cannot victuall at Virginia; Tut, whatsoeuer I swore (sayd Sir Walter ) I haue 300. pieces in a corner at a dead lift; as he con∣fessed also to the Lords that he gaue one hundred and fifty pieces to his company to come home: And how then can that be true, which he swore at his death, that hee carried but 60. pieces with him, and brought home neere the same summe. Certainly periury was but a Peccadillio with this man, which he shewed also towards me, when he protested that I perswaded him to goe to Sir Ed∣ward Parrhams fathers house, which is most vn∣true: For Sir Walter Raleigh hauing a secret inten∣tion, which afterwardes appeared to play the mountbanke at Salisbury to pretend the taking of a doze of poyson, by which hee deceiued mee first, that by me he might deceiue others, which was a most base vnmanly part; thought Sir Ed∣ward Parrhams fathers house, whom he thought to bee a Papist, to bee a fit subiect of suspicion, which hee meant to cast vpon his friend, who had so louingly and worthily entertained vs. For, sayd Sir Walter, though the Gentleman would not hurt mee, yet there might bee Priests or Iesuites there that did it: For I re∣member after my mornings draught, of a cuppe of Ale, which Sir Edward Parrham offred me in the Hall, I felt presently a kinde of exco∣riation in mine Intralls, as if some Iesuit had beene the Butler. Now when I saw the pustales breake out vpon him at Salisbury, my Compas∣sion I confesse was too credulous to report from his mouth so much, wherein I made no lie, but told a lie: Non mentientis astu, sed compassionis affectu, which hath beene ill required by him to whom I shewed it. But I am heartily sory for it, that being so farre abused as I was, I should wrong my true kinsman, which mooued mee after to no small iust indignation against Sir Wal∣ter, who had thus abused vs both. When I heard of his often purposes to escape to mine vn∣doing, to draw him forward to it, which hee intended of himselfe by making of a lie, Non amore mendacij, sed officij, the rather because hee had inuegled mee to hurt my kinsman by telling of a lie, which I doubt that Diuinitie would not beare but reason of State, (as the best Philoso∣phers doe hold) doth beare it to bee lawfull to lie for the discouerie of Treason to doe seruice to the common wealth. Yea, but they say, that hee hath not left so sufficient a man behinde him, and that therefore his death is a losse to the common-wealth; I doubt much of both. But no man denies, but he had many sufficiēcies in him: But what were these, but so many weapons of practise and danger to the State, if hee escaped, being so deepely tainted in so many points of discontent, dishonesty, and disloyaltie? He knew, as he writ, that as in nature, so in policy, A priua∣tione ad habitum non fit regressio, and therefore be∣ing desperate of any fortune heere, agreeable with the height of his minde, who can doubt, but he would haue made vp his fortune elswhere vp∣on any tearmes against his Soueraigne and Countrey? No Coriolanus heart could bee more vindicatiue, then he was vnto them to whom he did impute his fault. Yea, but hee died most re∣solutely: Yea, but hee was taken most sheepish∣ly. Neuer was there man out of the conscience of his owne corruption and guiltinesse so cowed at his taking, as he was; trembling and weeping to come before Iustice. Yea but he gathered his spirits afterwards, and died resolutely. Euen so hath many a Iesuite done at Tyburne; a cancred enemy to God and his Soueraigne: But with this difference, that they died in hope of false Martyr∣dome, and this with a desire of a false popular fame. But he died like a Saint too: Hee hath before verie much called his Saintshippe into dispute by the carriage of his life: Wee may now iudge of it, by that hee did a night before his death, who after his Conferences with the Deane of Westminster, for his better instruction, and preparation of his soule for God, called the Kee∣per of the Gatehouse (Master Weekes ) to him, and was curiously inquisitiue to know, whether hee had any Romish Priests vnder his charge, and custodie, and what they were; but vpon his answere (that he had not any) whether hee mistrusted that Master Weekes would not deale plainely with him, or would not bee true vnto him, hee presently surceased from any further Inquisition of that matter; which whether it might proceed of an irresolution in the Religi∣on wherein hee professed himselfe to die, or out of a popular affectation to insinuate and applie himselfe to all factions, I leaue it to the censure of the Iudicious Reader, and of such as best ob∣serued the whole Scene of his action vpon the Scaffold. But to go further, they say he died like a Souldier & a Saint, & therfore then to be beleeued, not only against me, but against the attesta∣tion of the State. O wicked times, to say no more! But my hope is that Religion and the feare of God, and the conscience of our duty and loyaltic to your Maiestie, will sway more with the most and best, by that time men shall from the State be better informed. Opinionum commenta delebit dies, veritatis iudicia confirmabit, saith Tully. Wher∣fore I doe heere make two most humble petitions to your most excellent Maiestie. First, that see∣ing I your poore loyall Subiect am burthened and oppressed, with the Testimony of a bitter enemy, of a periurd and condemned man, which is against all reason, conscience, and law: That I may haue your Maiesties leaue to the confirmation of the truth, which I haue avowed to be sufficient; to receiue the Sacrament vpon it in your Maiesties Chappel. The next is, that your Maiestie will be so gracious vnto mee, as to suffer a declaration to come forth from the State, for the cleering of these matters, and further satis∣faction of the world: By which it may appeare, that the Iustice of God, and the Iustice of the King, did neuer better meete together in one man: Which my iust and humble request, I hope your Maiestie will not deny to Your Maiesties loyall Subiect and Seruant, LEVVES STVCLEY. Imprinted at LONDON by BONHAM NORTON and IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO 1618.