A famous fight at sea VVhere foure English ships vnder the command of Captaine Iohn Weddell, and foure Dutch ships fought three dayes in the Gulfe of Persia neere Ormus, against 8. Portugall gallions, and 3. friggots. As also the memorable fight and losse of the good ship called the Lion, with the barbarous crueltie of the enemie truly declared. With a farewell and hearty well-wishing to our English sea and land forces. Taylor, John, 1580-1653. A famous fight at sea VVhere foure English ships vnder the command of Captaine Iohn Weddell, and foure Dutch ships fought three dayes in the Gulfe of Persia neere Ormus, against 8. Portugall gallions, and 3. friggots. As also the memorable fight and losse of the good ship called the Lion, with the barbarous crueltie of the enemie truly declared. With a farewell and hearty well-wishing to our English sea and land forces. Taylor, John, 1580-1653. A famous fight at Sea in the Gulfe of Persia. THe Eternall prouidence hauing diuided mankinde into many Kingdomes, Climates, People, and Na∣tions, yet to the end there should be a vnitie or mu∣tuall society amongst all men, hee hath permitted traffique and Commerce betwixt Nation and Na∣tion. Realme and Realme. Nauigation and Shipping being as it were the fleeting bridges, for the transportation and exportation of men & Merchandise, from Countrey to Countrey, that though God hath not inriched any one Kingdome or Countrey with all things, (the one hauing what the other hath not:) yet to maintaine hu∣mane society (but chiefly for his owne glorie in dispersing his gifts) Commerce and traffique hath been vsed at all times, and in all a∣ges; for the which noble imployments our Kingdome of England hath not beene inferiour to any Nation for the ability and worthi∣nesse of Merchants, and I thinke not equalled by any for goodnesse and sufficiencie of skilfull Nauigators, and Marriners, and strength of shipping, and munition. So that neither the parching heat of Libia and Ethiopia, or the benumming frigidity of Groen-land, or the Hiperborean Icle Regions, neither the farre remotenesse of China Eastwards, or the vttermost bounds of the new world America Westwards, the dangers Stormes, Gusts, Flawes, Tempests, Spowts, and Tornadoes, or Monsoones, the hazard of Shoales, Rockes, Leakes, Enemies, Pirates, barbirous and cruell Nations, vnwholsome and vntemperate Aires and Climates, Sea or Land Monsters, or what perills may be named or thought vpon, hath euer daunted or hin∣dred our Merchants and Mariners to prosecute and accomplish their continuall, laudable, and profitable vndertakings. Amongst whom our noble, worshipfull, and worthy East-India Merchants, and Aduenturers, may in these later times be held as superlatiue to those of former ages, their inestimable charge, their mighty force, their valuable returnes, and their aduenturous ha∣zards rightly considered. All which being no part of my purpose to treas of, I referre the Reader onely to the description of two fa∣mous Sea-fights, performed betwixt the English and the Portu∣gals; which, though the newes of it could not be brought hither so soone as if it had beene done vpon the Coast of Zealand or Flan∣ders ; yet, as soone as winde and weather could bring it, I had it, and with what time I could well spare I haue written it, assuring my selfe of what I dare assure my Reader, which is, that all is true. In which regard, I thought it vnfit to let it lie buried in obliuion, or the hatefull and ingratefull graue of forgetfulnesse. In it is valour described, and manifested in the liues and deaths of many of our English, and extreme cruelty and inhumanity in the Enemy. But to the matter. A braue Sea-Fight in the Gulfe of Persia. 4 English Ships. 1 The Royall Iames, Admirall. 2 The Ionas, Vice-Admirall. 3 The Starre, Reare-Admirall. 4 The Eagle, fourth Ship. Iohn Weddell chiefe Comman∣der of the English Fleet. 4 Dutch Ships. 1 The South-Holland Admirall. 2 The Bantam Vice-Admirall. 3 The Maid of Dort, Reare-Admirall. 4 The Wesope, fourth Ship. Albert Becker, chiefe Commander of the Dutch Fleet. THe 30. of Ianuary 1624. being Friday, the English and Dutch Ships being in the Road of Gombroone, there arriued a small Frigot belonging to a place neere Chowle, (which is in warre with the Portugals ) she came in betweene the Maine and Ormus, to whom the Generall of the English, Capt. Iohn Weddell, sent M r . Andrew Euans, in a little Boat called a Gellywat, to know from whence he came, and whether hee could giue vs any in∣telligence of the Portugall Armado; his answer was, that hee came from a place some eight or ten leagues to the South∣wards of Chowle, laden with Pepper and other Merchandise, and withall he said, that on the Saturday before, being the 24. of Ianuary, he was of the Cape called Cape Gordell, halfe way betwixt the Coast of India, and Cape Iaques, where to Sea∣ward of him hee saw eight great Gallions, and certaine Fri∣gots, which Frigots gaue him chase, but he kept himselfe so neere the shore, that they could not fetch him vp; and this was the first information of the neere approach of the E∣nemie. The 31. of Ianuary in the morning, the English and Dutch Fleet heard three peeces of Ordnance goe off from Kishme Castle, (a strong hold, and in warre with the Portugals ) the Captaine of the said Castle hauing before promised the Ge∣nerall (Captaine Weddell ) that if he descried any Crosse Sailes or Ships in sight of the Castle, that then he would dis∣charge those Peeces as a warning vnto him, which according∣ly he did. Wherupon a man was sent vp to the top-mast head in the English Admirall, to looke abroad, who being vp, presently cried a saile, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. with many Frigots in their company, then the Generall commanded the Gunner to shoot off a Peece of Ordnance, to giue warning to all the Fleet to put themselues in readinesse for the entertainment of the Enemy, putting also the bloudy Colours out, as likewise the Dutch Admirall did the like, with all speed getting their men and boats from the shore, weighing their Anchors of all hands, and getting vnder saile with all possible celerity, with courage and resolution they stood towards the Enemy, (whose drift was to haue taken the English and Dutch at An∣chor vnprepared) but their expectations were frustrate. Towards 8. of the clocke at night it fell calme, so that our ships came to an Anchor, when the Commander of the Dutch Fleet (named Albert Becker ) sent his Master of his ship, accompanied with some other Merchants, and Masters aboord the Royall Iames, informing Captain Weddell that their Commander had sent them to see how he did, and what hee thought the ships and Frigots to be that they had descried. The Commander Weddell answered, that they could be no other than the Portugall Armado, which had beene two yeares preparing to meet with the English and Dutch, and that now they were come in search of them, from Goa, vnto this place, hoping first to conquer both our and their Nati∣on, and afterwards to fall to worke vpon Ormus, Kishme, and Gombroone, to destroy our setled trade, and to extirpe and root vs out with all hostility and dishonour. Then the Dutch demanded Captaine Weddells Resolution, concerning so common and open an Enemie, he told them that his resolu∣tion was, for the glory of God, the honour of his Nation, the profit of worthy Imployers, & the safeguard of liues, ships, & goods, he would fight it out as long as a man was liuing in his ship to weare a Sword, and that he doubted not but the other three ships vnder his Command were all of the same minde and courage; to whom the Dutchmen answered, that they were of the like resolution, and would sticke as close to the English as their shirts to their backs, and so in friendly manner each tooke leaue of other for that night. The first of February, being Sunday, the Dutch Admirall weighed Anchor an houre before day-light, and the English presently after him, but the Dutch got the start of vs all, though we made al the saile we could; at last the English came vp to him with their whole Fleet, but he discharged the first shot at the Portugall Admirall, who presently answered him with three for one. The friends and foes being now within Musket shot of each other, it fell calme, whereby our ships would not worke but as the Tide did set them, that when the Portugalls were Boord and Boord, they had a great aduantage of vs with their Frigots that towed them cleare one off ano∣ther often, which helpe we wanted, thus we lay some foure or fiue houres pelting and beating one another with our Ord∣nance, the whilst the Frigots plyed vs with small shot, as fast as they could, the Royall Iames being forced to keepe the Barge a head to pull the ships head to and fro; but towards the afternoone there arose a fine gale, but the Enemy had the wind of vs, whereupon the Admirall and Vice-Admirall of the Portugalls bore vp roome vpon vs, making account to lay the Royall Iames aboord, the one on the Starboord, the other on the Larboord side, which Captaine Weddell perceiuing, scarce being able to shun it, he called to the Master, and told him the purpose of the Enemy, to auoyd which danger, hee commanded the Master to beare a little lasking to separate them further each from other, that hee might haue more roome to goe betweene them, the Vice-Admirall of the Ene∣mie seeing the Iames beare vp so lasking, she likewise bore vp with her, when suddenly Captaine Weddell perceiued there was hope to weather him, caused his Mizzen and Mizzen top-saile to be set, and so presently got the wind of him, edg∣ing close vp with the Admirall, being within Musket-shot of them both; the Portugall Admirall put to stay, by which meanes the Iames gate the wind of him also, hauing much a∣doe to get out a weather of him, comming so close vnder his sterne, that his Boats were close at our ships side as she shea∣red by, when presently we gaue him a whole broad-side, eue∣ry shot taking him fore and after, tacking forth with, and stan∣ding after him. Thus the first dayes fight lasted till fiue at night, wherein the Royall Iames lost eight men, and some o∣thers which had some small hurts: Also this day the Dutch lost their chiefe Commander, a braue valiant fellow, who li∣ued and died nobly in the bed of honour. This fight was terrible and fierce for the time, for the Royall Iames alone spent neere 700. great shot, and all the other ships English and Dutch, did proportionably doe the like. The Sunne being set, the Enemy fell off, and came to an Anchor at the East end of Kishme, the English being North-northwest from them two leagues, thus was concluded the first dayes fight. Munday the 2. of February, being Candlemas day, the wind being very little which blew off from Kishme, so that the Enemy had the aduantage of it, but neuer offered to make vse of it, to make roome towards vs; the English and Dutch be∣ing imployd busily to fit vp their torne rigging and tackling, and stopping such dangerous shot as they had receiued in the fight betwixt wind and water. Also the same day in the afternoone there was a meeting aboord the Royall Iames, where both the English and Dutch concluded, that they would giue the Enemy fight the next morning, and that the Royall Iames should be the leading ship, and the Admirall of the Dutch should second her, and that they should goe directly to the Enemies Admirall, not stri∣king higher or lower till the Iames came side by side with her. So the third of February being Tuesday, both the Fleets weighed Anchors at breake of day, hauing the weather gage of the Enemy, the great Iames stood right with the Admirall of the Portugalls, which was head-most but one; but comming neere them, they weaued to Leeward with their bright ar∣ming Swords, and we the like to them, they saluted vs with a whole broad side; but Captaine Weddell commanded his men not to answer them, till they were brought neerer with∣in danger, which charge was obeyed; but being come neere the Admirall, and another of their ships, the great Iames be∣stowed vpon each of them a whole broad side, making them both to beare vp, the one a port, and the other a starboord, by which meanes one of their ships was cut off and sundred from them, and was chased three or foure houres by the Ea∣gle, and Weasope ; the hope of the English and Dutch being that she should no more returne to her Fleets Company; the Iames following still the Admirall and Vice-Admirall, got vpon the Admiralls side, hauing the Vice-Admirall on his Starboord bow; insomuch that this daies fight grew ve∣ry hot, for often the Iames was in thickest of the Enemy, be∣ing at one time all round about vs; but our men so plyed their Ordnance vpon them, that they all refused to stand by vs, but fled all before vs as chaffe, dust, or smoake before the wind. In this fight the Iames got between one of their Fleet, and singled her out, lying by her sides with fore-saile, and fore-topsaile a backe stayes, so neere as a man might quoit a Bisket Cake into her, when straight Master Iohnson came vp in the sterne of the Iames, so neere as he could hardly keepe cleare, to whom Captaine Weddell called, willing him to clap the Portugall aboord on the Larboord quarter, (whilst the Iames lay thundring vpon him with her great Ordnance) he promised to doe it, but after he refused it, this Vessell had not so few as 500. shot thorow her Hull, Masts, Sailes, and Yards, before she got cleare. This third day the fight was ve∣ry violent, for the Royall Iames onely spent 2000. and odde shot vpon the enemy, foure men being slaine in her, and three others their legs shot off. In her Masts, Yards, Rigging and Hull, she had receiued aboue 400. great shot; both parties at Sun-set being so faint and weary, that they all left off, the Portugalls came to an Anchor vnder Ormus, and the other neere Gombroone Road, this fight last neere eight houres. Note, that the morning Captaine Weddell had fitted a Por∣tugall Vessell (which had beene formerly taken with some Cokernuts) and purposed to haue fired her thwart the Admi∣ralls Hawse, she being appointed to come between the Dutch Admirall, and the Ionas, but through disaster, or rather negli∣gence in Darby the Master, who came not vp according to his appointed place, she was chased by the Frigots (she hauing but ten men in her) being of no defence, they were forced to set her on fire farre from the Fleet, and so the men betooke themselues to a Barge, which was left them for their safety, by which meanes the Generalls proiect was disappointed. All this third day at night this Vessell burnt, & two houres before daylight, whether she was towed by some of the Ene∣mies Boats, or no, is vnknowne, but she came burning a∣mongst the English and Dutch Fleets, and forced them from their Anchors by slipping their Cables, which Anchors they tooke vp some three daies after. The 4. of February in the morning, both Fleets made to∣wards the Enemies, who were vnder saile, and made all the haste they could to get vnder the Iland of Lowracke, which lieth some eight or nine miles from Ormus, vnto which Iland their Frigots went ahead, conducting them in ouer a Barre, whom the English and Dutch followed as farre as with safe∣ty they durst, hauing neither the helpe of Pilots to shun the dangers of the place, or Frigots to goe a head as conductors, as the Enemy had. Besides, there might haue beene Ord∣nance planted a shore by the Enemy, which would haue been greatly to their aduantage, or otherwise in the darke night they might haue chained two or three Frigots together, and turning them vpon them, vpon the Ebbe thwart their hawse, might much haue endangered them, they knowing the Ene∣mie to be implacable, malicious, and politique; these reasons caused them to follow them no further at this time, but to come to an Anchor a League from them, when Captaine Weddell sent for the chiefe of the Dutch, whose resolution was to go backe againe for Gombroone, there to dispatch our Mer∣chants affaires. So Anchors were weighed, the Iames giuing them a shot for a farewell, and they answered her with the like, they all getting into Gombroone Road that night, where they speedily fell to worke to repaire the ruines of warres, in sitting of Masts, Yards, Sailes, rigging and stopping breaches, all which in three daies, was accomplished, leauing the Portu∣gall like a Theefe in his Mill, or a Fox in his hole, not minding to trie as yet the hazard of another bout. In this fight their Reare-Admiralls maine Mast was shot by the boord, their Vice-Admiralls maine top-mast was like∣wise shot by the boord, their Admiralls Mizzen-mast, Flag, and flag staffe shot by the boord, and her Hull much rent and torne. Their fourth ship had the head of her maine Mast shot by the boord. Another of their ships had al her top-masts shot by the boord. In conclusion, all their eight ships were so torne and tattered, that they had neither good Masts, Sailes, or Yards to helpe themselues with, nor tight sides to beare saile vpon. Thus it pleased the Almighty to giue the victory of the day vnto those that relie vpon his promise; to that great God be all glory for euer, and let all true Christians say Amen. The 13. of February being Friday, the English and Dutch Fleets set saile at day-light from the Road of Gombroone, ha∣uing also with them foure Iunks, other vessels of lading, vnder the conduct and charge of the Dutch, which as soone as the Enemy perceiued, they let slip their Cables and slipped from their harbour at the Iland of Lawracke, which is foure or fiue Leagues from the Road of Gombroone, the Enemy making all the saile he could to sea-boord of the English and Dutch all the day till Sun-set; when they were got within Saker-shot of each other, and a good bearing gale, they all kept compa∣ny together all night. This 13. at night it blew so hard at West-south-west, that one of their great Gallions bore ouer-boord the head of her maine Mast, close vnder the hownds, not being able to hoyst vp her maine saile, she was forced to steere alongst with her fore-saile, fore-top-saile, her Sprit-saile, and Mizzen, the wind being at West-South-West, they steered away South and by East. The 14. in the morning the Dutch Fleet staying, and bearing vp vnto the Iunke, the night past was a storme so farre, that the English Fleet could scarce descry them; so the Iames laid her fore-saile a backe-staies, staid for them, the Portugall neuer offering to alter his course, but kept on still. The same day about noone the Dutch being come vp with the English, it was agreed betweene them, that the Royall Iames should giue the first on-set vpon their Admi∣rall, and the rest of the Fleet to second her; so about two of the clocke that afternoone the two Fleets came to weather of the Enemies Admirall, receiuing the first shot from their Vice-Admirall, and presently a whole broad side from their Admirall, both sides comming as neere each other as they could but well keepe cleane of each o∣ther, they fell to it of all hands pell mell, the Ordnance going off as fast as small shot, the Iames for her part giuing them two broad sides, shee then edgd vp in the winde, laying her fore-saile and fore-top-saile a backe staies, as well to giue leaue to the Ionas, (who was second to the Iames ) as also to suffer the Portugall Admirall to shoot a head, which she suddenly did, then the Iames filling her top-saile the second time, bore vpright with the Enemie Admirall, plying her whole broad side so fast vpon him, that hee had scarce leasure to returne any shot backe, whilst the English and Portugall Admiralls were so neere each other, that they could hardly cleare themselues. In this time whilst our ships plyed the Enemies Admirall, (not so much looking after, or heeding the other ships) the Vice Admirall, with the rest of their Fleet, were left a sterne, their Admirall plyed very hard vpon the Iames, giuing and receiuing many dangerous shots, the Iames being shot betweene wind and water often, and had more spoile in her Sailes and Rigging than she had done any of the two daies fight before, then the third time comming side by side with each others Fleet, they let driue one at another like Thunder in the aire, the Iames comming vp with the Admirall (the great ship of Damon, who the first daies fight lost her maine Mast) crept in be∣twixt the Iames and the Portugall Admirall, lying as a Bulwarke to weather of her, to receiue all that might be put vpon her, and indeed all that was meant to haue been bestowed vpon the Admirall, was still plyed vpon that great Hulke; as likewise the Iames, and Dutch, did conti∣nue this third daies fight til day-light was shut in, the Por∣tugalls edging vp to get neere the Arabian shore, in so much that at eight at night both English and Dutch were faire by it, chasing them in. This night the English and Dutch steered away their course for Surat, the Portugalls steering for Swar, a place where they haue a Castle. The Royall Iames with the rest, were forced to giue euen the Chase for these reasons. FIrst, for that the time of yeare was so farre spent, that they should not haue time enough to deliuer their goods at Surat, and so to goe cleere off the coast be∣fore the Westerly Monsoone, which is a wind that blowes at west six moneths together, beginning in Aprill, would be come, and so endanger the ships in getting off againe. A second reason was, that the Royall Iames had but 31. Barrells, and some 500. Cartregos fild with Powder, and some 600. shot all which was not aboue three quar∣ters of a dayes fight for her vse, for in her former dayes worke the third of February she alone spent 1000. great shot vpon the Enemy, so that now through want of Pow∣der she was not able to maintaine such another fight ac∣cording to that rate. And this last dayes fight she lost but one man, hauing spent vpon the Enemy more than three hundred great shot. To the Lord of hosts the only giuer of victory, the mighty God of battels, be all honour, glory, praise and dominion for euer, Amen. A note of the mens names slaine in these three seuerall fights with the Portugalls, out of the English Fleet. Slaine in the Royall Iames. Richard Dauis quarter Masters. Nicholas Burton quarter Masters. Robert Skalfe, Gunners Mate. Ioseph Wright Carpenters. Thomas Bland Carpenters. Iohn Bircham Carpenters. Godfrey Howton Carpenters. Richard Dauis Iunior Sailers. Richard Walker Sailers. Iohn Maisters Sailers. William Wilcockes Sailers. William Clarke dismembred in their legs, and died. William Surnam dismembred in their legs, and died. Slaine in the Ionas. Robert Nodding, Masters Mate. John Beedam, mid ship-man. William Adams. Robert Sancie. Edward Wilkinson. Robert Larke. Richard Hergell. Francis Blow. Thomas Page. Thomas Wilkinson. Thomas Williams. Slaine in Starre. Iames Wanderion. William Carter. Reignold Sanderson. Charles Robinson. Slaine in the Eagle. Iohn Sares. The Dutch lost neere the like number, amongst whom their chiefe Commander Albert Beaker slaine the first dayes fight. A Relation by Peter Hillion a Frenchman, of the force of eight Portugall Gallions, which fought with the English and Dutch Fleet, in the Gulfe of Persia ; as also the spoile they receiued by them, with their number of men slaine, on the 1.3. and 14. of February 1624. himselfe being then in the Admirall; which afterwards riding with three more of her fleet at the Riuers mouth of Surat, he esca∣ped from her, and ran to the English, which were then ri∣ding in the Barre of Surat. THeir Admirall named S. Francisco Sanuer, wherein was Generall Non Alua Basellia, had 48. peeces of Brasse Ordnance of whose Cannon, Demy-Cannon, Cannon Pethrow, whose Culuering, and Demy-Culue∣ring, and 350. men, of which were slaine 38, whereof three were chiefe Captaines vnder the aforesaid Generall, na∣med Lorenzo Luis, Ieronimo Botella, and Brossa Coze, who all three were kild with one shot, the ships Fore-mast, Bospreer, and maine Mast were so torne with shot, that they were vnseruiceable, her Mizzen-mast, Flag and Flag∣staffe shot by the boord, with the head of her maine top-mast, and her Rigging much rent and torne. Their Vice-Admirall named likewise S. Francisco, wherein was Commander Francisco Burge, had 32. pee∣ces of Ordnance as the former, and 250. men, of which were slaine 31. the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, her maine top mast shot by the boord, her maine Mast, fore-mast, and Bospreet so torne, that they were vn∣seruiceable. Their Reare-Admirall named S. Sebastian, (their big∣gest ship) wherein was Commander Don Antonio tela, who was lamed of an arme, had 40. peeces of Brasse Ord∣nance as the former, and 400. men, whereof 20. were slaine, her maine Mast, fore-top-mast, fore-yard, and Spritsaile-top-mast shot by the boord, and her fore-mast so vnseruiceable, that she could beare no more saile but her Sprit-saile. Their fourth ship named S. Saluador, wherin was Com∣mander Don Francisco de Tuar, had 24. peeces of Brasse Ordnance, and 250. men, 41. whereof were slaine, the aforesaid Commander being one of the number, his masts were so rent and torne, that they were all vnseruiceable. Their fifth ship named S. Iago, wherein was Comman∣der Simon de Kintalle, had 22. peeces of Brasse Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof were slaine 83. her Masts were all standing, but she so leaked betweene wind and water, by shot receiued, that they had much to doe to free her, so that she was cast away vpon the Coast of India seuen daies after. Their sixth ship named Trinidada, wherein was Com∣mander Pedro Alua Botelia, had 22. peeces of Brasse Ord∣nance, and 250. men, 243. whereof were slaine, his Top-masts were all shot by the boord, and her other so torne, that she could beare no saile thereon, but was towed by the Great Hulke Reare-Admirall, from Muscas to Goa. Their seuenth ship named S. Antonio, wherein was Commander Antonio Burallia, had 22. peeces of Brasse Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof 22. were slaine, her Masts were all standing, but she very leake by shot recei∣ued betwixt wind and water, and the seuenth day after she was cast away vpon the Coast of India. Their eighth ship named Miserere-Cordium, wherein was Commander Emanuel Rodreeges Chaua, had 22. pee∣ces of Brasse Ordnance, and 200. men, whereof three were slaine, her fore-top-mast, maine-yard, fore-yard, and maine-top-saile-yard shot by the boord, and her fore-mast so torne that it was vnseruiceable. A Table containing the former numbers. Ordnance. Men. Men slaine The Admirall had 48 350 38 The Vice-Admirall had 32 250 31 The Reare-Admirall had 40 400 20 The fourth Ship had 24 250 41 The fifth Ship had 22 200 83 The sixth Ship had 22 250 243 The seuenth Ship had 22 200 22 The eighth Ship had 22 200 3 The summe 232 2100 481 Thus it pleased God in mercy that the English and Dutch, not being halfe the numbers of the Enemy, nei∣ther in men or Ordnance, that with onely the losse of 58. or 60. men, they should kill 481. of the Portugals, and with all so to beat them, (notwithstanding the helpe of 16. Frigots) being so torne that they were cast away seuen dayes after, and the rest all vnseruiceable, and not daring to stand to the hazard of another conflict. A briefe description of the Disaster of the good ship called the Lion, one of our Eng∣lish ships, trading to the East India, who was lost in fight with the Portugalls, neere Gombroone in the Gulfe of Persia, on the eighth of Nouember 1625. THe seuenth of October 1625. about 4. in the morning, the Palsgrane, Dol∣phin, and Lion anchored about three Leagues to the Southwards of Surat Barre, and when it grew light (men being in the top) espied certaine Roa∣ders, riding against Surat Riuer, which some supposed to be English or Hollanders, others affir∣med to be a Fleet of Frigots; but in fine, about an houre after they set saile and steered after vs, and in short space we made them to be foure Portugall Gallions, and fifteene Frigots, the wind being then of shore, they could not come to vs that tide, but anchored about a League from vs, our Captaine perceiuing their intents, put forth an Ensigne for Counsell, and the Master of each Ship pre∣sently repaired aboord. At which consultation, as it was reported by our Ma∣ster M. Richard Swanley, Captaine Blithe propounded that he thought it expedient to set saile, and stand off to Sea againe, and by that meanes to abate the force of the Frigots, and if it fell out so that our Ships sailed better than the Portugalls, we should stand direct for Ormus ; the reasons he gaue for it were these, viz. first, hee doubred that the Portugall had a great force of shipping in Swal∣ley Road. Secondly, hee feared whether our Merchants had friendship with the Countrey people, or not, by reason of the discord which was between them at the Dolphins pre∣parations for England, which was the last newes hee heard from thence. Thirdly, he doubted that the Portugalls had made peace with the Gazerats, and had planted Ordnance a shore on Swalley sands. Hee also doubted what was become of Captaine Weddells Fleet, for he assured himselfe, if there were any friends at that time in Swalley Road, they would not suffer the Portugall to ride there, for he supposed that the Portugall had beene in fight with them the yeare past, and had either put them to the worst, or else for want of munition to effect another fight, they were forced to re∣paire to Ormus Castle for succour vntill supply came out of England. All which being propounded, and the vnreadinesle and great charge of all three ships well considered, it was concluded to set saile, the which we did, the wind being Northerly, and the tide of stoud come, we stood for Sea, and the Portugall Admirall and Vice-Admirall sayling better than the rest, fetcht vs vp about foure in the after∣noone, at which time the Lion being formost of our Fleet, the enemy Admirall shot one peece of Ordnance at her, for the which she answered three of foure, but could hard∣ly reach further than halfe way: the Portugall finding his Ordnance better than ours, both Admirall and Vice-Ad∣mirall plyed vpon the Lion for the space of halfe an houre, in which time she receiued diuers shot both in her Hull and Rigging. Our Master Richard Swanley, seeing their aduantage, caused to bruile maine-saile, and edge within Musket-shot of them both, and there maintained fight with them vntill Sunne-set, and receiued no hurt at all. All which time, and an houre after, being calme, the other two ships of the Enemy were at least a League a starne. The Palsgrane, and Dolphin all this time being right a head, kept on their course, only plying their starne peeces. The Portugals seeing them still stand away, came both aboord of vs, the one in the one quarter, and the o∣ther in the other, and entred at least 100. of their men, heauing fire-pots, and diuers sorts of fire-works vpon our decks, the Frigots (as many as could lye about vs) threw firepots in at the ports, and stucke fire-pikes in her sides; all which (by the great mercy and assistance of God) wee still put out. Our Admirall and Vice-Admirall, in this our misery were quickly out of our sight, the cause where∣of is best knowne to themselues. This conflict remained from 8. at night till about 11. in which space our Master Richard Swanley was slaine, and 4. more of our men were also slaine, 3. of our Masters Mates, and 20. more were exceedingly burnt, the rest al∣most wearied, and more discomforted, by reason our Fleet had left vs, and in briefe we were in that case that the word was giuen to blow vp the ship, had not God in his wisdome staid it, by putting it in the minde of some of our men to let fall an Anchor, which being done (the tide run∣ning very strong) brought our ship to so strong a bitter, that the fast which the Portugals had vpon vs brake, whose vnexpected▪ sudden departure from vs left 50 or 60 of their men vpon our Poope, who still maintained the fire in such sort, that we were forced to blow them vp, which blast tore all the Starne of our ship in peeces, from the middle-Decke vpwards. The Portugals being all repulsed, and the fire put out, we vsed all diligence for the clearing our ship, and getting vp our maine-top-saile-yard, which then lay vpon our Decke, likewise bringing new sailes to Yard, the for∣mer being all burnt and torne, all which being as well done as haste would giue leaue, wee expected their com∣ming again the next tide, but they hoping we would either haue burnt or sunke, onely left fiue Frigots without shot of vs, and themselues with the other two ships that were formerly a starne stood after the Palsgraue and Dolphin, and in short space fetcht them vp, and fought with them all that night, they standing still off to Sea, were but off our sight the next morning. The 8. day in the morning, (all the ships being out of our sight) it was agreed vpon by the Officers of our ship, that Henry Crosbey our Masters chiefe Mate should suc∣ceed as our Commander, vntill such time as it pleased God we should meet with our Commander. This being done, we being not able to weigh our An∣chor, by reason our men were most of them hurt, cut Ca∣ble in the hawse, and set as much saile as wee durst beare, (our fore-mast hauing receiued three shot, in such wise, as it had but foure inches hold) and stood off to Sea, and being faire weather, praised be God, in short time our fore-mast was made seruiceable. The Frigots aforesaid that were left by vs, stood foure of them after the Fleet, and the other in for the shore, all that day we heard them in sight, but saw them not, like∣wise the next night wee could see the light of their Ord∣nance at our top-mast head; but they being to wind-ward of vs, we could not get to them, nor indeed were not in case if we could, for our ship was so open, and all our chiefe men kild and hurt. The ninth in the morning, we could neither see them, nor heare them, then it was thought fitting by our Master, that according to the consultation held aboord the Pals∣graue the seuenth day wee should stand for Ormus, the which (by the assistance of God) wee did, hauing faire weather all the way; in which time of our sailing, our Carpenters had got vp all the sterne of our ship againe, as well as his store would giue him leaue, our men also were all well recouered of their hurts. The fourth of Nouember wee arriued at Gombroone, where wee had intelligence by our Merchants there resi∣dent, that Rufrero was riding vnder Ormus Iland, with 18. or 20. Frigots, the which when our Master vnderstood, (the Merchants being then aboord) it was concluded by consultation, that to preuent any ensuing danger that might happen, and also for the cleering of our ship, wher∣by to mount our lower Tier, all the Cloth, and Currall, and foure Chests of money should be sent a shore with as much speed as possible, the other our Master refused to send out of the ship, alleaging, that if it should please God they were forced to leaue the Port by any disaster, there was no stocke to buy any refreshing for our men which then did want it; the rest of our Carriages or Goods lying low in Hold, could not then be come by, without much time which then we wanted. It was also appointed that we should with all speed take in water, and stand for Or∣mus, the which was assaied to doe, and partly effected, for vpon the fifth day the Merchants and our Purser rode with all speed to the Sultan, (who was then out of Towne) to intreat for Boats to land the goods, and to water our ships, the which he granted, and also gaue vs a Boat to make vs a Long-boate, by reason wee had lost both our Skiffe and Long-boat the last fight. The sixth there came Boot-hailers aboord, and tooke all the goods aforesaid, and carried them a shoare, and also tooke in Caske to fill with water. The seuenth of Nouember there came twelue Tunne of water aboord, which was presently taken in, and more Caske sent a shore, also in this short time our Lower or∣lope was almost made Priddie, and our two Chase pee∣ces were mounted, and wee were in good hope the next day to take in water enough to serue vntill the Fleet came to stand ouer for Ormus ; but God hauing otherwise ap∣pointed, it fell out contrary. The eighth day, about seuen in the morning, Rufrero with his Frigots came rowing towards the ship, and being then calme that the ship could not worke, he came in such sort, that she could haue none but her Chase peece to beare vpon them, which lay so well to passe, that they sunke two of their Frigots before they could boord her, and two more after they were by her sides. But after they were a boord they plied their small shot in such wise, that they were not able to open a Port in the ship, but were forced to shute away Ports, and all. They also maintained such abundance of fire-workes round about her, that in a moment all her Masts and Sailes were on fire, her vpper Decke was also on fire, the which for all their heauing much water vpon it, in lesse than halfe an houre fell downe vpon their heads, and put them from their Ordnance, who seeing death on each side, some leaped ouer-boord, and put themselues to the mercy of their enemies, the rest gaue fire to the Powder-roome, and blew vp the ship. Those men which leaped ouer-boord were all receiued into the Frigots, and carri∣ed vnto Ormus Iland, and the next morning Rufrero gaue order to cut off all their heads but one, namely, Thomas Winterborne, whom he sent with a letter to the Merchants at Gambroone, the rest being 26. persons were immediatly beheaded. Those that were blowne vp in the ship droue a shore, and were buried at Gombroone, being in number 42. there were also 9. men a shore about the Companies affaires, and one that Rufrero sent with a letter makes 10. whom God grant neuer worse fortune. Thus was this good ship and men vnfortunately and lamentably lost, yet as much courage and manly resoluti∣on as possibly could be was performed by the Engligh, nor can it be imagined how more industry or truer valour could haue been shewed; on the other side the cruell and bloud-thirsty Enemy gained nothing but knockes, losse of liues and limbes, hauing his Frigots suncke and torne in peeces, his maine purchase being dishonour and infa∣mie, for after all our men had fought so long, and so man∣fully, being besieged round with death, as the Sea to swallow them, the fire to consume them, or the Portugals swords to cut their throats, not being possible to escape one of these waies of eminent danger, that then in that ex∣tremity 27. men leaping into the Sea, were all aliue taken vp by the Enemy, whom had hee then kild in heat of bloud, when warre, rage, death and fury were vp, it had beene then but the effect and fortune of warre; but to giue them harbour all night, and the next day in cold bloud to cause them to be beheaded, it was one of the ig∣noblest, inhumane, and barbarous parts of murther that could be committed. But Rufrero being a Portugall or Spaniard, could doe no other (for the honour of his Coun∣trey) but shew his bloudy nature, especially to our Nati∣on: a Barbarian, a Turke, or a Iew should haue found more kindnesse, for indeed they all are of one disposition. And I am sure no Record or Chronicle can shew, no History can report, no tradition can declare; nor any memorie re∣late, that euer any Englishman, or almost any other Nati∣on (except the Spaniard ) did murther so many disarmed naked men, hauing had them all a whole night in their custodie. A farewell and hearty well-wishing to the noble attempts of our English Sea and Land forces, with their Allies and Confederates. YOu Sonnes of Mars, that surrow Neptunes brow, And o're the dang'rous Deepe (vndanted) plow; You who esteeme your Countreys honour more Than life, or pelse, (which Peasants doe adore,) Your noble Ancestours, whose memories Are borne by fame as farre as Titans Rise, And vniuersally diuulg'd from thence The Circle of the Worlds circumferenoe, Let their example be a Spurre to you, That you their worthy vertues may pursue: They were but men, and you are each so much, They were victorious, may you each be such; They had good courage, guided with good skill, Which Skill and Courage, Fortune, Grace, and Will, I doe implore th' Almightie to bestow On you in generall, All, both high and low. Time doth record, our Britaines matchlesse force By Sea and Land, with valiant foot or horse, Hath made France tremble, and proud Spaine to quake, And great Ierusulems foundations shake: And as true valour did inspire their brests, So Victorie and Conquest crown'd their Crests. O may your good intendments fall out right, The God of Battels still your battells fight; That as your Fathers were, so you may be Rare Patternes vnto your posteritie: That all our Foes with terrour now may know They haue beene beaten, and they must be so. True Honour, Fame, and Victorie attend you, And high Iehouah in your cause defend you: That Immortality your fames may Crowne, And GOD may haue the Glorie and Renowne. IOHN TAYLOR. FINIS.