An armado, or nauy, of 103. ships & other vessels, who haue the art to sayle by land, as well as by sea morally rigd, mand, munition'd, appoynted, set forth, and victualled, with 32. sortes of ling, with other prouisions of fish & flesh / by John Taylor ; the names of the ships, are in the next page. Taylor, John, 1580-1653. An armado, or nauy, of 103. ships & other vessels, who haue the art to sayle by land, as well as by sea morally rigd, mand, munition'd, appoynted, set forth, and victualled, with 32. sortes of ling, with other prouisions of fish & flesh / by John Taylor ; the names of the ships, are in the next page. Taylor, John, 1580-1653. ¶ The names of the Ships, with the number of their Squadrons. 1 The Lord-SHIP wh se Squadron were of Ships & other Vessels, 12. in al. 2 The Scholler-SHIP with 10. others in all. 3 The Lady-SHIP, with 12. others. 4 The Goodfellow SHIP, with 12. others. 5 The Appprentice SHIP, with 4. others. 6 The Court-SHIP, with 11. others. 7 The Friend-SHIP, with 4. others. 8 The Fellow-SHIP, with 5. others. 9 The Footman-SHIP, with 5. others. 10 The Horsman-SHIP, with 4. others. 11 The Surety-SHIP, with 7. others. 12 The Wor-SHIP, with 3. others. 13 The Wood-man-SHIP, with 7. others. Besides, there were 7. other needlesse Ships which were in the nature of voluntaries, or hangers on vpon the Nauy, s namely, The Mary Cary-Knaue, the Knaues- , the Superfluous, the Carelesse, the Idle, the Coxcombe ▪ the Braggard. And what man soeuer he be, that hath, or doth not sayle in some one Ship of this my Fleete, Let him come to me and I will Ship him, and allow him double wages The description how the whole Nauy is victualled with thirty two sortes of Ling, besides other necessaries. F Irst, thirty thousand couple of Change-LING, appointed onely for the dyet of such fellowes who had honest parents, and are them∣selues changed into very Rascals. Secondly Dar -LING, this fish was dearer then fresh Salmon (for it was consecrated to the God∣desse Venus ) it was of that high price that some men haue consumed their whole Lordships, Manners & credit, in two or three yeares onely in this kind of dyet, therefore it is not a dish for euery mans tooth, for none but braue Sparkes, rich heires, Clarissimoes and Magnificoes, would goe to the cost of it. Thirdly, Shaue-LING, which was only for the dyet of Priests, Monks, & Fryers. Fourthly, Fond-LING, this fish was for Cockneys, and other pretty youths, ouer whom their parents were so tender, that a man might perceiue by their manners, they had beene bet∣ter fed then taught. Fi tly, Tip-LING, a dish for all men. Sixtly, Vnder-LING, this fish was ship'd for witty younger brothers, poore Schol∣lers that hath neither friends or money. Sea∣uenthly, Starue-LING, this Ling was onely for the Barke beggerly, which was man'd with old discarded Seruing-men, and maymed cassiered Soldiers and Mariners. Eightly, Strip-LING, prouided for Pages, Lackeyes, and Foot-boyes. Ninethly, Foo-LING, a dish for euery mans dyet, Tenthly, Swad-LING, against stomacke, but yet a dish of good vse. Eleuenth, Grumb-LING, a discontented kind of fish for the poorer sorte of people to chaw vpon, for when they doe thinke themselues wrong'd by their Supe∣riours and dare not vtter their minds openly, then they feed vpon Grumb-LING. Twelfth, Wrang-LING, this Ling was salted by 16. Pet∣tifoggers, in a long troublesome Tearme: it is held to bee a lasting dish, and will serue the whole Fleete with their posterities, to the se∣cond and third generation. Thirteenth, Troub-LING was prouided by certaine double dili∣gent Constables, to the mollestation of their sleepy watch, and the charge of many a man that would quietly haue gone to their lodging. Four∣teenth, Prowe-LING, is a plentifull fish, vpon which many thousands do liue, but by vsing it too much, it choakes a great number: and as fi∣sher-men do baite their hooks with one fish to catch others, so is this Ling (for the most part) taken with three other sortes of Ling, as with Iug-LING, Brab-LING, Braw-LING, vntill by hooke or by crooke it is taken with Ang-LING; I haue seene many of these Prowle-LING fisher∣men end their liues like Swans (in a manner singing) and sometimes making their wils at Wapping, or looking through a hempen window at St. Th mas Waterings or the three leg'd instru∣ment neere adamg n. There were many other sortes of Ling sent to the Nauy which (to auoid prolixiti ) I will but name, as Quarrell-LING was for the dyet of some of the Noble Science, some for Roaring boyes, and Rough-hewd Tit∣tery tues. The nineteenth sorte of Ling was Fumb-LING, which is for their dyets who haue beene long maried and can get no children. The twenteeth was Ming-LING, which was for Wine-marchants, Vintners, Brewers, and Apothecaries. Iumb-LING and Tumb-LING, for the keepers and Cupid an haunters of vaul∣ting houses. Fid LING, Fud-LING, and Stumb-LING from the Schooles of Dauncing, and Drinking. The twenty sixt sorte of Ling was Bung LING, which was the fare of Quack-s l∣u r , Mountebanckes Ratcatching Waterca∣sters, and also for all bo hing Artificers and cobling Trades-men. Mumb-LING was for those that had no need of the Tooth-drawer. Ster-LING money was at such a Scant-LING, Why these Ships are called SHIPS. I haue little to say to the Reader, be∣cause I neither know him or his con∣ditions, therefore to auoyde lying and slattry in putting the stiles of Christian, Gentle, courteous, friendly, learned or honest, vpon the Atheiste, barbarous, hatefull, Ignorant, or dishonest, the Reader gets no Epi∣stle at all of me: If he be good and well inclinde it is the better for himselfe, and if otherwise, it shall not be much the worse for me, ther's the poynt: now the reasons why all these words or names of my Morrall Nauy are called SHIPS, or doe all end with the word or sillable SHIP, as Lord SHIP, Ladye SHIP, Freind SHIP and the like &c. The reasons I take to be these which followeth, and as I imagine most signifi∣cate; first the whole life of man is as a SHIP vn∣der sayle, for, be it either day or night, storme or calme, light or darke, hot or colde, winter or sommer, yet the SHIP is in her course euer going on her voyage: so likewise Man, let him goe, sit, stand, ride, run, worke, play, sleepe or wake, yet he is still going onward in his mortall passage. A SHIP is euer in need of repayring, so is a man eyther in body, minde or goods. A Ship is euer vnsteddy; a Man is alwayes mutable: Some SHIPS are hard to be steered; some men are harder to be guided. Some Shipps beare so great a sayle that they beare their Masts by the Board and make all split againe; some Men doe spread such a Clue in a calme, that a sodaine storme halfe sinkes them and teares all. Some SHIPS are so fauoured by the wind that they make rich voyages, & quicke returnes; some men are so fortunate that wealth and promotions do fall in their mouthes. Some SHIPS runs through many a storme, with much danger, and yet are so vnlucky that they doe neuer make good voyage; some Men (being borne vnder a three peny plan∣net) can neither by paines, watching, labour or any industry bee worth a groat. Some SHIPS by being ouerladen haue bene cast away, some men by taking in too much haue bene forc'd to cast all away. SHIPS doe wallow and heaue and set vpon the Sea; Men do stumble, reele and stig∣ger on the land. Some Ships haue their cracks & imperfections gayly hid with painting; some Men haue their bad intents coulourd ouer with hippocrisie, and their diseased carkases couered with good clothes. Some SHIPS doe bring pro∣fitable commodities, and some bring bables, toyes and tri les; some Men doe inrich a king∣dome with their wisedome, authority, and pra∣ctise in vertue: and some men doe disgrace and Impouerish a Monarchy by solly, ill imployed power, and sottishnes in vanity. Some SHIPS will run to leeward extreamly if the wind bee scant, and some againe will brauely beate it out to windward and weather it, so some Men will shrink from their friends or from thēselues, in a storme of trouble or pouerty, and some few agen will beare vp stiffe, constantly contemning & opposing the brunts of fortune. Some SHIPS are taken by others and made prizes; some Men are captiu'd by others and made slaues. Some SHIPS are commended more for their Bulke & beauty, then for any good seruice; and some Men are more applauded for their fortunes, then for any good conditions. If I would insist longer on these comparisons, I could enlarge my In∣duction to the bounds of a Pamphlet: therefore I will conclude it with King Solomons similitude, wisdome 5. C. 10. that mans life passeth as a SHIP that passeth ouer the waues of the water: therefore I wish all men to bee prouided, as good SHIPS should be: let HOPE be their Anker, let Fayth be their Cable, let charity & loue be their Card & Compasse, till they come happily to the Hauen of GRAVESEND, and from thence to that bles∣sed harbour which hath no END. Iohn Smith of his friend Master IOHN TAYLOR and his Armado. ARme, Arme, Arme, Arme, great Neptune rowze, awake And muster vp thy monsters speedily: Boreas vnto thy blustering blasts betake, Guard, guard your selues, from Taylors policy, Rockes, shoales, Lee-shores, oh helpe them Goodwin sands, For this new Fleete runnes ouer Seas and Lands. And's now so victua'ld, rigd and yarely plyes, It threatens all the waters, ayre and skies, Truth in his Nauy such a power doth leade, The Deuill, Hell, vice and all, the Fleet may dreade. And well it may, if well you vnderstand, So rare a Fleet, was neuer made nor man'd. The Masters name was Petrus Vainglorious, his Mate Hugo Hypocrisy, men that haue Steered the course in the Lord-SHIP many hundred yeares: The Boatswaine and his Mate were Scoffe and Derision, with Gripe the Steward, Auarice the Purser, & Lawrence Delay the Paymaster; kins∣man to Tom Long the Carier: which three last are thought to be very arrant Knaues, who haue spoyld the Gouernment of the whole Ship. In Briefe, the Gunner, Cockswaine, Swab∣ber, and Ship-boyes were plentifully stored with pride, flattery and other the like Gentlemen like vertues. The Ships that went in the same Regiment or Squadron with the Lord-SHIP, were these that followe. Namely. 1 The Ambition, 2 The Presumption, two stout Ships of very lofty Sayle and great Burthen. 3 The Oppression, a Ship of Account and Estimation. 4 The Costly, a Ship of great Charge. 5 The Mutable, a braue Ship, but in no course steddy. 6 The Selfeloue, a great Ship, but of small seruice. 7 The Delight, a faire Ship to the eye. 8 The Hopewell, a Ship of great expectation. 9 The Debt, a Ship of great Burthen and much Receit. 10 The Satisfaction, a large long Ship, a very cart, a slugg and slowe of sayle. 11 The Promise : a Ship very vnsteddy, yet her sayles euerful. The Scholler- SHIP with her Regiment. THis Ship is a very Auncient Ship, and was built at the first, and hath bin euer since Repaired with Infinite cost, paines and Study. Shee hath beene of that worthy Estima∣tion, that the greatest Monarks, Kings, Princes, and Estates of the world, haue made it their chiefest felicity to sayle in her: all famous Diuines and Philosophers haue steered her and beene steered by her. Some of her greatest Mariners haue beene much troubled with plurifies, pluralities I would say, and some haue bene great Marchants a Steeple faire, but it was in the old time when Si- Mony, was as good as ready Mony. The Artes Mathematicall & metaphysicall haue beene the Rich Prizes and Purchases of her Painfull Voyages: and now at this present (though the world be much altred with her) She tryes her fortunes in this aduen∣trous Nauy. The Captaines name was Sapience, the Master Experience, his mate Knowledge, and euery other officer Correspondent, being muniti nd and victualled for the enterprise shee set sayle, with her squadron or Regiment of Ships here under named. 1 The Serious a Ship laden with Grauitie. 2 The Fore-sight a Ship worthy of much regard. 3 The Desert a Ship of great seruice and small payment. 4 The Industrious ▪ a good profitable Ship. Then there attended her fiue small Pinnaces and Frigots, namely, the Dogmatist, the Captious, the Preiudicate, the Carper, and the Critick. These fiue were man'd with yong Bachelours of Arte, Puny Inns of Courtmen, and humorous Poets, who with their continuall cudgelling one another with broken verses, had almost beaten Priscians braines out. All these three were of most especiall vse and seruice for the Ladyship whose chiefe charge and imployment was to weare, eate, and drinke the best; and withall not to pester, wrong or oppresse the Fleete, with good examples of dire∣ctions, The Goofellow- SHIP with her Regiment. THis Ship is very old, and much out of reparations: She hath beene of such vse and imployment, that shee hath sayled into all Countries of the inhabitable world; she only is the greatest traueller, for there is not a Hauen or Harbour vnder the Sunne, but she hath cast Anker in it. Wine Mar∣chants, Vintners, Brewers & Victuallers, haue thrust them∣selues into whole Lordships, by the often returnes, lading and vnlading of this Ship; yet now she is so weather-beaten with the stormes of Time, and so windshaken with too much vse, that through want shee is not able to beare halfe the ayle which she formerly hath done. In the golden age, when Saturne raigned, (long before the two wrangling words Thine & Mine, had set the world together by the eares) then was the Goodfellow-SHIP in such request, that all estates and conditions sayled in her, then her voyages and quick returnes (her lading being for the most part hearty loue and true affection) did maintaine and keepe such vnity, that whosoeuer was not a Mariner or Sayler in her, was esteemed as a Branded stigmatizd infa∣mous person. But at last her Nauigators began to steere another course: for some of them had learned the Arte of couetousnes, and with a deuillish kinde of Bawdrye, cald vsury and extorti∣on, made gold & siluer engender and beget yearely so much and so much in the hundred, when Taylors, like so many wicked Spirits, flew from one Country to another, bringing home more fashions then would kill a hundred thousand horses; when for the maintenance of those fashions, the Earth was equally shared & deuided amongst the people, (some all, and some not a foote) with Hedges, Ditches, Bownds, Mownds, Walls and Markes; when my Lady Rustye began to take such a thrifty order, that all the meate in the Kitchin should be cheaper, then the washing and Painting of her Visage, (if you allow the powdring of her bought or borowed Periwig into the bargaine) when the world came to this passe, then this Good ship, this Good∣fellow Ship being forsaken of her best Pilotts, Masters, and Mariners, all her Saylors in little time declined to bee no better then Swabbers, so that through want of skilfull managing and reparation, and with extreme age, shee is nothnig so seruiceable as shee hath beene, yet as shee is, shee sets forward with her best ability in this Voyage. The Captaines name was Hercules Dumplin, a Norf∣folke Gentleman, the Master Giles Gammon, was borne at Rumford, the rest of the Mariners it were needlesse to name them. The other Ships and vessels that were in the same Regiment with the Good fellow∣ship, were these. 1 THe Drunken Sisse, a great Ship, it is though she was built at Midleborough ; but howsoeuer, shee hath made many voyages into England: she is so beloued, that shee needs not presse any man to serue in her: for all sorts of people doe daily come aboard of her, & freely, and volun∣tarily offer ster their best seru,ce, so that it is a wonder to see how brauely she is man'd; and (many times) women doe take their turnes at helme, and steere their courses as well as men. She is a Ship contrary to all other Ships, for she rowles, reeles and tumbles, most of all when she is in a calme harbour; and the more lading she takes in, the more vnstedy she is; for if the Sea be as calme a milke-pan, et is shee euer tossing, which makes her Mariners Sea-sicke, and subiect to much casting. Her Ordinance are Gallons, Pottles, Quarts, Pintes, and the mizers Gallon: with three hoop'd pots, Kannes, Goddards: in the which Artillery, almost euery one hath the skill to charge & discharge, main∣taining the fight as long as they can either stand or vnder∣stand. The Master of her is an Amsterdam'd man, his name is Cornelius van Broaken gulch ; the Master Gunner was one Denis Whirl poole, a man of Doepe, with Gulph the Purser Swallow the Bot-swaine, and Swill the Steward. 2 The second Ship in the Regiment with the Good-fel∣low-SHIP,, was the Sow of Flushing, she was a vessell vn∣seemely to the eye, but yet seruiceable. 3 The Carowse, a Ship of hot seruice, and as the Spider suckes the sweetnesse of the fairest flowers, conuerting their juice into poyson, so the Saylors in this Ship haue taken a vse to drinke other mens healths, to the amplifying of their owne diseases. 4 The Quaffe, a quicke smart Ship, much of the bulke and carriage of the Carrowse. 5 The Biss e of Breda, a small Ship, yet in continuall ser∣uice, her worst fault is, she is so low built, that her Mari∣ners can hardly keepe themselues drye. 6 The Sleeper of Roterdam, a great Ship of exceeding necessary vse, and much imployment, she is to the whole Regiment, in the nature of an Hospitall or Spittle, for when any of them are wounded, Pot-shot, Iug-bitten, or Cup-shaken, so that they haue lost all reasonable faculties of the minde, and in a manner are so mad, that they dare speake fellony, whistle treason, and call any Magnifico a mun∣grell; in such desperat cases as this, the distracted parties are brought aboard the Sleeper, where Time like a good Cloath-worker, with setting a good nap vpon their threed∣bare eyes, their wits that were spent and like Notherne Cloth shrunke in the wetting, are speedily recouered. So likewise for the limbs and members of the body, she is the onely, Aesculapian Tabernacle; and to speake the truth, St. Winifrides Well, the Bath of Spa , are not to be compared to this Ship, for speedy ease and cure: for I haue seene many that were so dimsighted, that they could not see their way at noone-day, and others haue beene so defectiue in their speech, that they could not speake one wise word; and others so lame of their legges, that they could neither goe or stand, and with a few houres lying aboard of this easie Ship, their sights, speech, and legges haue beene all recouered. 7 The Whiffe, a small Pinnace of Varina. 8 The Puffe, a Barke of Virginia. 9 The Vapour, a Frigotte of Trinidado. 10 The Snuffe, a Caruell of Bermoodoes. 11 The Barke Beggerly, before mentioned, man'd with old cashired Soldiers, Mariners, and Seruingmen, Negli∣gent Tradesmen, with some few Courtiers, whose dyet is onely Statue- Ling. The Apprentice- SHIP. THis Ship is very slowe of sayle, so that a man may make two East India voyages, or girdle the terrestriall Globe twice about (as Sir Francis Drake did once) before shee can make a returne; The Compasse whereby she shewes her course is for (the most part) in our Troynouantine Ocean, within the sound of Bowe-Bell ; insteed of a Map or Carte, shee is directed by an Indenture, whereby shee hath more knowledge in the time to come, then any Witch or Conjurer; for by onely looking on it, the least Ship-Boy that's in her can tell when her voyage will be done; she is a vessell that is both singular and single, for none but single persons must boord her; and (to auoyd double dealing), she hath banished Matrimony out of her quarters for seauen yeares or more; her Mariners doe (against their wils) endure much hardnesse, as hunger, thirst, heat, cold, watching, toyle and trauell; yet many times they are allowed more Lamb and Ribroste then they would haue; yet by patience and long suffering, ma∣ny of them doo chance to be preferd (in time) to sayle in the Lord-ship, Court-ship, Surety-ship, or some other bottome of Honour or eminency; for they claime a free∣dome of all Trades whatsoeuer, and are so mysticall in their diuersities of mysteries, that no one man liuing can describe them: yet for the most part) waight and measure are their guides, by weight from the Scruple to the Dram, to the Tunne, to the three Tunnes, and to the three hundred thousand millions: and by measure from the halfe quar∣ter Pinte to the whole quarter Sacke; from lesse then the Inch to the Ell, to the Furlong, to the Firmament, and downe to the bottome of the Celler, to the Ocean and the Tayle s hell, who indeed are accounted the best bread men in the Shippe, and such as goe through stitch with what they take in hand. There are diuers functions which neuer doe come aboard of this Shippe, as Cuckolds, Wittols, and others which I could name: but to supply these wants, she is seldome vnfurnished of young lying Knaues, Whores, and Theeues, who (as the cockle growes among the wheate) doe sayle in the Apprentice-SHIP, and share as much benefit as most of her labouring Mariners. She hath small attendance, for indeed she is the onely bounden ser∣uant in the Nauy, onely there is a sluggish vessell called the Tedious that sayles with her, with foure small Pinnaces, as 1 The Lodge. 2 The Dyet. 3 The Wash. 4 The Wring. And sometime double, single; or no apparell is allowed to the Saylors when the voyage is ended. The Court- SHIP with her Regiment. COurt-SHIP, is a vessell of Royall and magnificent burthen, of eminent Command, and inuincible force, if she be well man'd, carefully rig'd, discreetly ballac'd and wisely steerd; she is of that impregnable strength, that nei∣ther the stormes of sawcy censure, the Gusts of Mallapart babling, the flawes of Enuy, the Tempests of Temporising tale-bearers, or the smooth calmes of Flattery, can make her sayle to any other Harbour then the famous Ports and Hauens of Vertue, Honour and perpetuall hapines. But (to vse Sea-tearmes and Phrases) there are a Crew of vnprofitable Steale-sharers, peremptory Hotshots, idle Flat-sheates, and vnseruiceable vseles Loose-guise, that doe attempt to board this worthie admired Ship, and so hauing boarded her, (like Drones) they eate and liue vpon the labours and deserts of the painefull industrious Mariners; these are the youths that after they haue foysted themselues into so e meane place or Office, though it be but a Swab∣ber, Lyer or Lyers Mate (alwayes prouided that they haue sworne themselues into good cloaths) then let all their acquaintance and friends stand further off, for the : themselues to be no more mortall, so that a man ha faire better speake to the Material owner of the Shippe him∣selfe, then to any of these Pucke-foysts: yet there is shew of zeale in their salutation to any one they meete, for the word God s e yee, is as common as the Ayre hem, b t f ct they neither mind God nor the hey speake to, and (like an Ape for an Aple) they kisse their pawe, inuiting a man to their Cabbin, but who∣soeuer takes them at their word, they hold him to want manners, and to be a fellow of no breeding. The ignorant Asse that caried the Egyptian Goddesse Isis in procession, hen the more ignorant people kneeled downe to adore the , the witlesse Asse thought it had beene in reue∣r o him: so in like manner these vpstart Ship-boyes. once crept into any inferiour Office in the Ship, and being couered with silke and good borrowed bea∣ten Sattin, nde and buttered through with Plush or Veluet, they arrogantly imagine, that all the reuerence or respect that men doe either for their vndeserued place, or gawdy out-side, is done to their persons; but I would haue them vnderstand that they are honoured and worship'd, with the same deuotion as the barbarous Brasilians, Ame∣ricans and Virginians doe adore the Deuill withall, which is not for the hope of any good which they evpect, but for feare of the hurt which they suppose the Deuill can doe them. The conclusion is, that when a storme or tempeste comes, the Noble, stout, skilfull Nauigator stands to his Tackling, and couragiously applyes himselfe either to Top and yard, Helme and Lead, from Post to stem, and from Prow to Quarter, when all the seruice Monsier Mushrome and his Mate can doe, is either to eate, sleepe, spewe, and stinke, and at last for some notorious or meritorious worke, they are duck'd from the yeard arme of State, into the deep sea of disgrace, and turn'd a shoare like Caines Imps, pre∣ferd to their due estates of Runagates and Vagabonds. The Squadron of Ships that went vn∣der the command of the Court- SHIP. 1 THe Renowne, a Ship of worthy port, strength and burthen, man'd with approued and experienc'd Soldiers and Saylors. 2 The Courage. 3 The Resolution. 4 The Fore ght. 5 The Expedition. 6 The Loyalty. The Perseuerance. Sixe tall Ships of most excellent ser∣uice and performance. 7 The Complement. 8 The Brisbe. 9 The Strange. Three Gallant Pinnaces, but of very small vse, profit or seruice. 10 The Obliuious. A Ship of great burthen and most plentifully man'd, with those that had forgotten their Pa∣rents, kindred, friends, birth, estate, breeding, and indeed such as were so farre out of knowledge to knowe any man, that they had no acquaintance of themselues, and being meere strangers to their owne qualities and conditions; and thus was the Court-SHIP appointed and attended; much of her great Ordinance, were Promises, the Pouder breath, and ayry performance were the Shot, which by reason of the tossing of the billowes and vnquiet surges of the Sea, did often misse the marke. The Friend- SHIP WAs a Vessell of great account and estimation, Da∣uid and Ionathan, Damon and Pithias, Pilades and Orestes, Alexander and Lodowicke, Scipio and Lea∣lius, did most louingly and vnfeignedly sayle in her: in∣deed shee was euer free for all commers of what Country, sexe, age or estate soeuer, for the word Friend im∣portes free end, which is as much as the end and intention of Friend-SHIP is free: In these latter times, she should haue gone to Sea, but there were not men to be gotten to man her, so for a shift they were faine to furnish her with Kinred, Nunkles, and Couzins, with here and there a false Brother: Herod, and Pilate went aboard this Ship (with a shamefull deale of loue from the teeth outward) but their purpose was to destroy innocent blood. It was a merry world when Fidelitie was Master of this Ship, Con∣stancie his Mate, and Plaine-dealing the Botswaine: but those worthy Mariners are dead, and an old Prouerbe as sure as Checke with them: in a word, the old Ship is decayd and rotten, hauing onely the bare name left, for she is so much past seruice, that she can hardly steere or beare sayle, with an aduerse contrarie gale, shee will fall to Leeward most abominably, yet with a prosperous and fortunate winde, she will spread all her Canuasse exceeding faire and hipocriticall, and so I'le describe no further, because shee is growne to that cheape rate, that a man may haue her a Bellingsgate for a box on the care. The Friend-SHIP had two very small Pinnaces in her Squadron: named, he is called and esteemed a man of good Foote-man-SHIP, which word Annagramatiz'd is Foe to Man-SHIP, impor∣ting that running away is an enemy or foe to Man-hood, valour and resolution, (thus much by way of Paradox.) Let the winde blowe where it will, yet all weathers this Ship sayles a Trot, her light-footed, nimble-hee d Mariners (like so many dancers) capring in the Pumpes and vanities of this sinfull world, sometimes a Morrisca or Trenchmore of 40. miles long, to the Tune of Dusty my deere, Dirty come thou to me, Dun out of the mire, or I wayle in woe and plunge in paine, all these daunces haue no other musicke, except now and then he chaunce to heare an oath, or a curse or two from the Coachman. These Saylors, the most part and best of them are bred in a Kingdome of much fertilitie and plenty, called Realdine, where after they haue all their youth beene accustomed to weare Brogues and Tru es, their fare being many times shamrookes, oaten-bread, beanes and butter-milke, arm'd vpon starke naked, with a Dart or a Skeene, steeld with the spirit of Vsquabath, then they crosse a ditch of eight houres sayle, and land in the most flourishing King∣dome of Triabnie, where by their good Foot-man-SHIP they are turned out of their old habits, into Iackets of good Preterpluperfect Veluet, plated with siluer or Argentum vi um, (for the quickenesse) and all to be embrodered backe and side, with the best gold twist, and the best of the silke-worme, sometimes with a Courte (a Coate of Guard I should say,) or a Coate of Regard, being well guarded, vnreguarded, with such a deale of feather Ribbands, and points, that he seemes to be a running Habberdashers shop of small wares. Yet are those men free from Pride, for their greatest Ambition is not to ride but to foote it, or else to sweepe Chimneis, or turne Costermongers; this is the altitude of their aime, and the profundity of their elicitie, neuertheles they know themselues to be Great mens Trappings, cou∣ragious Torch-bearers, ill strious Firedrakes, glorious & sumptuous Turmoylers, they are farre from the griping sinnes of Vsurie and Extortion, and are such Philosophicall contemners of the world, that euery day they treade it vn∣der their ete and trample on it; and they are such haters of wickednesse, that they leaue it in all places where they come: they are not couetous of other mens land, for they make all the hast they can euery day to leaue it behinde them; they are so much to be trusted, that their words are as good as their bonds, yet in this their humilitie they may compare with Emperours, for they are as braue as Nero, and can drinke with Tiberius: To conclude, the Foot-man-SHIP is man'd with well breath'd Mariners, who after all their long, painefull, and faithfull seruice, are ship'd in-the Barke-beggerly, and brought to an Anker in the Ha∣uen of Cripplegate. There were in the R giment with the Foote-man-SHIP 4. small Pinnaces. 1 The Sweat, a vessell of warme imployment or hot seruice. 2 The Moyle, a Fregate that will endure much foule weather. 3 The Toyle, a Barke for all weathers, Winter or Sommer. 4 The Cripple, an old Drumler, quite past seruice. The Horseman- SHIP with her Squadron. HOrsmanship had not so faire a beginning as Footman-SHIP, for Cayno who was the first vagabond and runnagate in the world, was also the first that back'd and mannadge a Horse (as Polador Virgil saith, doubt af∣ter he had murdred his brother, seeing he could not runne from the horror of his conscience, therefore he practised Horseman-SHIP, because perhaps hee tho g t to ride from himselfe. This Ship hath more p ces then hath; and the comparison may hold well for in long vacations, quarter dayes, against payment of Bon s absence of true friends, or protracting of Maydes marriages, after the Banes hath beene thrice asked, in these cases the Lawyer▪ the Land-lord, the Vsurer, the friends, and the Contra∣cted couple, doe thinke time to be soundred, starke lame, or quite tyred, & that his best pace is after 14. miles in 15. dayes; whilst many a poore (lyent, an vnprouided Ten∣nant, or vnfurnished debter, or a fellow going to be hang'd, they thinke time is all vpon the spur, and that he run at full speed a wilde galloppe. And as a Ship at sea sayles some∣times by the wind, sometimes before the wind, some∣times with a quarter wind, sometimes with a stone sheate, and sometimes with tacke hard a board, and Bolin st e chd and sheate close a te, by all which winds she sayles seuerall paces: So Horseman-SHIP hath the Trot, the Amble, the Rack, the pace, the false and wild Gallop, or the full speed, & as seuerall vessels at sea do make vp a Nauy, as Carracks, Argoseys, Hulkes, Ships, Barkes, Pinnaces, Hoyghs, Drumlers, Fregates, Brigādines, Carnels, Catches, Gallies, Gallions, Gall oysts, Galley-Asses, and Asses-Galleys: so this Horseman-SHIP, hath to attend her, her , her Barbary ho e, her Naples Courser, her Germ ne S e de her Mare, her Galloway Nagge, her Hobby, her French C uaia, her Welch Pal ray, her English All, her Smithfield lade, and her Barthlomew Hoby-horse, and to all other Ships, which haue their Bridle, H lme or Rudder in their sterne or tayle, Horseman SHIP is altogether directed and steered by the head, whereby, r want of good managing, many times the Rider makes a head-long voyage (like a man of good forecast the horse head. And as Horseman are none of the best Mariners, so Mariners are commonly the worst Horsemen, as one of them being vpon a tyred Hacken y once, (his companions pray'd him to ride faster, he said he was becalm'd. Another mounted vpon a foundred ade, that stumbled 3. or 4. times hea ong, the Saylor imagined that his horse was too much a head, or t ward on (as the sea phrase is) and therefore to b l e him, that he might goe or sayle with an euen keele, he aligated and s l'd his erkin slee full of stones, and ty'd them fast to his horse cro ∣p r, supp sing to make his s eme as deepe laden as his head to an yd stumbling. Indeed this Horseman-SHIP is neuer vnfurnished of a lad tricke or two at a pinch or time of neede, (and con∣trarie to any other ship in the fairest weather it will heaue, set, wi ce, kicke, fling, & uruet, like a Mi ommer Mor∣ris dauncer, or as if the Deuill were practising a French or rran o▪ but I cannot blame them to be lusty, they we not put to such hard allowance as many poor who had taught their Iades no better manners, then to take the wall of his Maiesties Horse, hee dismissed them from their Offices, and made two of his owne stable Groomes, Senatours in their roomes, and after proceeded to the funerall of his Horse, in manner and forme follow∣ing. First, a 100. poore gald Hackneies, and next 300. labouring Asses, all couered with blacke Cotton, going 2. and 2. euery one hauing 2. bottles of aye on their backes, the onely guift of the deceased: then 100. hunting Nags, and 50. Coache-horses, with 10. Horses of State, with each two horse-loaues for dyet bread. Then followed the Pleybeians in mourning habit 200. in number; next the stable Groomes, Puruayers, Chikes of the stable, Farryers, Horse-leeches, and Gentlemen of the stable, 300. Then went the Sadlers, Charioteeres, Waggoners, Carters, Sumptermen, Littermen and Coachmen, 300. After them Singers, Pagan Priests, Flammines and Archslammines. 70. Then the H arse richely behung with Scutcheous deui∣ces, Mottoes, and Impresses. After them, the Emperour Nero chiefe mourner, and his Trayne borne vp by Otho, and young Sporus. Next went two old Asses all in blacke Veluet, as mour∣ners of State or Cheuals de du il. Then followed Agripina ( Nero his mother) with the faire Popeia and the beautifull Acte, (two of his Concu∣bines) and after them Galba Nimphid us Vittelluss, with others: it i t ought that Seneca at all the while in his stu∣die laughing at the Funerall. Lastly a great Troope of straggling attendants: The Hearse being set downe in Campus Martius, Otho began this speech which followeth, in blancke Verse. INintious death to make an Emperour mourne Fleabit ten Otho's tymeles Exequies, Who might haue hu'd, and borne great Conquerours And beene the father of most valliant Coltes; Lament yee Meades, whereon this Palsray grazd Ah! strew the streetes of Rome with rotten hay. Let Pease, Beanes, Oates, and horse-bread must with griefe Rust Curry-combes, and Saddles rend in sunder, Breake stirrop-leathers girths and bridle, breake, Fall racke and manger, plankes split all in twaine, For you shall ne're support his weight againe, You stable Groomes that comb'd his crisped mane, And oft were grac'd to make vp Otho 's trayne, Sigh, groane, and weepe, lament and howle and crye, In litter and horse-dung euerlastingly: Thinke how braue Otho did his breath respire, Who with his heeles hath oft strooke sparkling fire. Heare Nero speakes. THe brauest beast that euer Emperour backd That thump'd the field of Mars with greater grace Then P gasus bearing Tritonia About the valleyes neere the Muses Hils, In battaile swift r then the Northern wind But in a triumph flout and f ll of state, Listing his hooses, as if he scorn'd the ground, And cant to make the ayre support his weight. As mannerly and moderate at his meate As is a Bride groome on his wedding day, For neuer would he touch a locke of hay, Or smell vnto a heape of prouender Vntill he heard a noyse of Trumpets sound, Whereby he knew our meat was serued in. But after meales, how he would meditate Vpon his Tutors reuerend documents, And by himselfe would practise what was taught him, Offring to run the Ring, and fetch Curuets, To trot in state as we were on his backe, And to out doe his schole-master in Arte, The thought of these things (Otho) kils my heart. Otho speakes to the two Asses. THen these poore Animals haue cause to weepe, Most reuerend Asses you haue lost a friend, A friend, a father haue your worship lost, Who would haue giu'n you pensions in your age, And made you Beads-men, free from Cariages. When he lay speechlesse, on his death bed, then He pointed to the hay-loft with his heeles, As who should say, if I dye giue it them: Then to the Wardens of his Company, (For he was made free of the Blacke-smiths Craft) He turn'd about, bade them pull off his shooes, And take them as true token of his loue. And as he dying shewed his loue to them, Because his Master did delight in Playes, He wil'd that of hi mane should beards be made, And of his tayle, a head-tire for a Deuill. One Asse he made his sole Executor, The other Ouer-seer of his will: Graunt Iupiter they may performe the same To doe and ouer-see, that men may say They were Iust Ouer-seers another day. Epitaph. HEre lyes the Horse, whose foure foote Progeny Did trot in blood before the walls of Troy: Yea in the bowels of the Greekes perdye, And on his breast this Morto, Par ma foy, Kin (by the Sire) to winged Pegasus, And by the Mother to the King of Mules, Whose Vnckle was the great Bucephalus, Whose Armes, foure Horse shooes, and the fiel was Gules. To conclude, this Horsemanship after many stormes, tempests, gusts, and flawes, came at last home to hir an∣tient hauen the Beare-garden, richly laden with these com∣modities following. The Chinegall, the Nauellgall, Windgall, Spurgall, Lightgall, and Shacklegall, the wormes, the Staggers, the Mallenders and Sallenders, Scratches, Pole-euill, the Anticote and the Pompardye, the Dropsie, the Feauer, the Palsie, the Glaunders, the Frenzy, the Cough and the Colt-euill, the Yellowes, the Fashions, the Splinters, the Spa ines, the Ring-bones, the Quitter-bones, the Curbes, the Rotten-frush, and the Crowne-scabb, the Hide-bound, the Hawes, the Crestfall, the Viues, the Bloody-riffes, the Crampe, and the Canker, the howkes, the Toothake, the Surfet, the Tonghurte, the Paps and the Bladders, the Tyrednesse, the Lowsinesse, the Surbate, the Farley, the Pose and the Strangle, the Broaken-winde, the Hoofe-bound, the Botch, the Bots, the Wen in the Groyne, the Rot in the Lungs, the Kybes, the Pearle, and the Pin and Webbe, the Cloyde, the Blood-shot, the Wrung in the Withers, the straine, the Pricke in the sole, the Loose in the Hoofe, the Graueld, the foundring, and the shedding of the haire, the Horse-hipped, the Wrench, the Necke∣cricke, and the Shoulder splat. These are the commodities wherewith the Horseman∣SHIP was sraight, which are so shared and deuided, that a man cannot light of any horse, young or old, but he is fur∣nished with one, two or more of these excellent guistes. The Ships that attended in the Squadron or Regiment with the HorsemanSHIP, were these, 1 The Rac , an aduenturous vessell of much expecta∣tion, and admirable, swiftnesse. 2 The Poste, a vessell of much vse, quicke returne, and exceeding hazzard, toyle and trauell. 3 The Hackeney, a most seruiceable Pinnace, that en∣dures all weathers, and is so common, that she is to be hy∣red by any or vsed by all. The Suretie- SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment. THis is a Ship of great antiquitie, and makes more voyages then all the rest of the Nauy, she is the onely Marchant aduenturer vnder the Sunne, for they that ayle in her, doe hazard goods, lands, money reputation▪ friends, kinred, credit, libertie and life; of all which rich commo∣dities (alwayes at her returnes) she is so prouident▪ that she makes one Iayle or other her weatehouse, where it is more safely kept vnder locke and key, then the golden apples of the Hesperides were guarded by the Dragon; she is so easie to be boarded, that a man neede not trouble his feete to enter her, or vse any boate to come to her, or if all her Mariners should goe to her by water, then were a Water-man the richest trade belowe the Moone; onely a dash with a pen, the writing of a mans name, passing his word, or letting his marke (though it be but the forme of a paire of Pot-hookes, a Crosse, a crooked billet, or a W. for Ihon Tompson, any of these facile wayes hath ship'd a man into the Surety-SHIP, during his life and his heires after him, and though the entrance into her be so easie, yet she is so full of impertinent and needy courtesie, that ma∣ny men will lend a man a hand into her, with more faire en∣treaties, requests and inuitations, then are commonly vsed to a Maske at the Court, or a groce of Gossips in the Coun∣trey, and being once entred, a ten peny nayle driuen to the head may as soone leape out of an Oaken poast, as a man may get a shoare againe: she is painted on the out-side with vowes and promises, and within her are the stories of the t tter'd Prodigall, eating Huskes with the Swine, the picture of Niobe, with Allecto, T siphone and Megera, dauncing lachtimae: Her Armes are a Goose quill or pen, couchant in a sheepe-skin field able, the Motto aboue No∣uerint vniuersi, the supporters a Vsurer and a Scriuener, the crest a Wood-cocke, the Mantles red wax, with this other Motto beneath, Seald and deliuer'd, this Ship hath the Arte to make parchement the deerest stuffe in the world; For I haue seene a peece little bigger then my two hands, that hath cost a man a thousand pound, I my selfe payd a hundred pound once for a small rotten remnant of it. She is rig'd most strangely, her opes and Cables are Conditions whether or to what Port a man would haue her. 3 The Foole, a Ship of great burthen, and for sayle and steerage much like the Kinde heart. 4 The Negligence, an Argosey that through want of good fore-sight, brought the Surety-SHIP in great dan∣ger. 5 The Decaye, a Ship much broaken. 6 The Scape-thrift, a small ragged Catch, that hangs or depends vpon the whole Regiment. The Wor- SHIP with her Squadron or Regiment. THough the first syllable of this Ships name be, Worse, whereby she is called Worse-SHIP, yet she is a bet∣ter Ship then many are aware of & indeed she is farre too good for euery▪ or for any Knaue to come aboard of her. In my opinion she doth not belong to any mortall man, for God himselfe is both Owner and Master of her. Yet many there are who claime an interest in her, as first the Deuill would haue her belong to him, for which cause he makes many barbarous Nations to adore and Wor∣SHIP him, and to sacrifice themselues, their children, and all that they esteeme deerest vnto them, to his infernall Hell-hood, and for his better holding and keeping of this Worship, he hath his Ministers and Agents, in the most Kingdoms of Christendom, who with their jugling leager-demaine, hath guld, blinded & besotted many thousands of all Estates, ages & sexes, that they will fall down & Wor∣ship Stockes, Stones, Blockes, Idols, Images, Reliques, dead mens bones, or a peece of bread, as the heathen Ido∣latrous Egyptians did formerly adore and Wor-SHIP Oynions and Garlicke. And as there are many that for desert are worthy Pilots, Steeremen and Mariners in the Worship, and are ship'd into her onely for their merits, so there are a great many, and more then a good many, that by falsehoode and indirect courses, haue ship'd themselues into her: for as Cornelius Agrippa saith in his Vanity of Sciences, some haue gotten the Wor-SHIP by cutting throats in the warres; some by being Great mens Bawdes, or Cuckolds in peace; some for marying of cast Stale Concubines, or Bastards; some by bribery, extortion or oppression; some by false weights and measures; some by the excessiue drunkennesse of others; some by theft, some vpon credit, some for ready money, and some for fauour; which is a word crept into the place of merrit since the dayes of Quintillian the Oratour: the most corrupted Iustice will board her; the slothfullest Diuine will haue a Cabin in her; the carpet Knight will be ship'd in her; the most cowardly Captaine will enter her; and many of least faith and conscience will lay claime to her: she hauing store of such false owners, I say no more of her, but commit her to the mercy of Winde, Tyde, and Time. There went with her in her Regiment, these that fol∣low. 1 The Abuse, an old Ship, too much in vse. 2 The Purchasse, a vessell all for Simony or ready mo∣ney. 3 The Mittimus, a daungerous Barke, whose word is, At your perill. after foure or fiue dayes preparation, and some ten pound charge among men and horses and dogges, besides an infi∣nite deale of toyle and trouble, and an innumerable num∣ber of oathes & curses: after all this great deale of doe, the maine purchase can be no more then a poore silly Hare, which is but a drye meate, and will take more butter in the basting, then her carkasse is worth. Our auncient Progenitour or first King of this Iland (Brute) was so expert in this Woodman-ship, that he kil'd his owne father Siluius, shooting him with an arrowe, mi∣staking him for a Hart, a Stagge or a Bucke: and William the second surnamed Rufus, King of England, was by the like mischance, of a shot made at a Deere, by Sir Walter Tirrell Knight) slaine with the glaunce of an Arrow against a tree, in the New-forrest in Hampshire. I thanke Coopers Dictionary that tells me that Venator is a Hunter, and Venatrix a Huntresse or a Woman Hun∣ting, and that Meretrix is a Whore or a Woman Hunted: all these words hauing deriuation from, or Allusion to Ve∣nereus Alias Le che-reous, for though Diana the hunting Goddesse of Chastity bee a Constant Venatrix ▪ yet Venus the Queene of Loue neuer failes a right Woodman of a Me∣retrix. But if Venator and Venatrix should Hunt as much as Meretrix is (or hath beene) hunted, I thinke verily that there had not beene (or in time would not be) one Deere left in many of the greatest Forrests, Parkes and Chases of Christendome. Besides, there is not a perfect Marriner in the Wood∣man-SHIP but he hath ingrafted in him a most Abundant guift of promising, for one of them will sweare and vowe to giue more Deere away to sundry persons▪ then there are vnder the keeping and commaund of six or seauen of them: and I haue heard that one White Buck in a small Parke (in a place which I could name within the Walles of Christen∣dome) hath bene giuen away at the least to a 1000. seue∣rall persons, by one keeper, and the said keeper is so kinde that he will neuer deny a Buck to whosoeuer will Aske. A Deere friend (whom I loue Deere) did promise me a Deere, foure yeares since and foure deere Iourneyes I made for my Deere, and still with Delaves and Demurres I was put off from my Deere, with promises, that at such and such a time I should haue my Deere, but now I am in despaire of my Deere, and I meane to take no more care for my Deere; And so Adue my Deere; but indeed he that had the boun∣ty to promise me this Deere, hath the grace to blush when∣soeuer he sees me, and therefore I doe loue him for his mo∣desty and shamefastnes, and had it not bene for that, and that I doe loue him indeed, I would long before this time haue Sung him A Kerry-Elison that should haue made him beene glad to haue promist me a Brace of Bucks more to haue stop'd my mouth withall, although in performance my deere had bene non est inuentus. In a word, of all sort of Deere I hold stolne Venison to be the most honestly gotten, because the theiues are so quiet, close, priuate, & silent at their worke, that they haue no lea∣sure to sweare and curse as men doe when it is lawfully ta∣ken, and my conceite is that where oathes and curses are most restraind, there most honesty and piety remaines. But comonly swearing, execrations, and drinking, are the cere∣monious Rites of a Bucks or a Hares death and obsequies. With the crye of the Houndes; And the Eccho resownds Through the Meade, through the sallow, With the Horne, with the hallow, With the Horse lowde neigh, and the Buck at a Baye. And with the Deers fall; And Hornesounding Knell, My Pen bids Hunting Woodman-SHIP farewell. The Ships and Pinaces that serued in the Regiment vnder the Woodman-SHIP, were these. 1 The Chaunter. 2 The Boweman. 3 The Ringwood. 4 The Slut. 5 The Bewtye. 6 The Daysie. 7 The Kilbuck, with diuers others, all of them being for course or chase. FINIS.