



A TREATISE OF FAITH, AND SOME FRVITS THEREOF.




EPHES. 3.1^.

In whom wee haue boldnesse and accesse, with confidence by the faith of him.


THe Apostle in the former verses, had by many excellent titles set foorth the glory of the Gospel, and
 his Office, and Ministerie in preaching of it, aduancing it farre aboue the Law, and the Ministerie of the Church in former ages. The Gospel he commends, and sets forth especially by the subiect matter thereof, which is Iesus Christ. In this verse, he continueth his praise of the Gospel, from the sauing fruits and effects, as its receiued by faith, and Christ the subiect matter thereof rightly apprehended.
The principall scope of the Apostle in this verse, after his commendations of the Gospel, is, to shew the excellencie of faith in the gospel apprehending Christ, aboue all naturall faith, and confidence in any creature, and aboue all faiths, and religions in the world, as the
 onely sure and infallible meanes of saluation. This excellencie of true sauing faith in Christ, is set foorth from the vertues, or fruites it brings foorth in the heart, and soule, or inner man of him that hath it, such as no other faith, or any other Religion, that leads vs to any other creature, or meanes, or name vnder heauen, or in any other Gospel or doctrine can breed, that is, that (...) and (...), that accesse to God by Manuduction, with that confidence, and freedome of speach; Therefore hee inferres by way of exhortation in verse 13. that they should shew forth these vertues of their faith in all afflictions, and not faint.
The Exposition of the words (...) signifieth Manuduction,
 or leading by the hand to God, 1. Pet. 3.18. Which being performed by Christ our Mediatour the Sonne of God, taking vs by the hand, we goe with boldnesse and confidence to God This wee haue in, and by Christ the second Adam. The necessitie whereof, is raised from this ground originally; That whereas the first Adam, and his posteritie were cast out of Paradice from all fellowship with God, and from the tree of Life, the way shut vp against him,Gen. 3.24. and kept with a Sword drawne, full of Terrour, and Horrour; Christ Iesus the second Adam, not onely opens the way againe by his blood,Heb. 10.19, 20. and makes a new liuing way, but takes vs by the hand to lead vs to God,
 with boldnesse and confidence, remoouing all matter of feare, and the sword shaken. This is also opposed to that going to God by the old Church vnder the Law, at mount Sinay, in the giuing of the Law, and first Couenant of workes, by the Manuduction of Moses their Mediatour, Gal. 3.19. They had not this Manuduction with this confidence: they stood afarre off trembling, and might not goe vp into the mount to God: Yea so terrible was the sight, that Moses himselfe their Mediatour said, I feare and quake.(...). Hebr. 12.21. And whereas all this came originally by receiuing, and admitting the deuill and his counsell, and beleeuing his false gospel
 and promises: So contrarily, all this good comes to vs, by beleeuing Christ Iesus the Son of God, whom God hath sent from Heauen to vs, to redeeme and saue vs,Acts 7.37. that great Prophet whom God hath raised vp to vs, of our brethren like to vs, and by receiuing him for our King, Priest, and Prophet by faith, ((...),) such a one as God hath sent, and giuen him to vs. Also by faith in Moses the people had accesse to God, and by taking, and following him their Prophet, they came neerer to God, and God to them, then any other Nation and people, as Deut. 4.7. What Nation is there to whom the gods come so neere to them, as our God is neere to vs in all
 that wee call to him for, yet had not they by Moses that (...) so neere to God, nor with that confidence, as now all Nations haue by Christ.
(...) signifieth open manifestation and appearance,Such as were of forward disposition and free spiri s to expresse themselues boldly without seare of their aduersaries, were called (...) A^st Rhet. lib. 2. with glorious liberty which stands in lifting vp of the face and countenance, and in freedome of speech: its opposed to the effects of the sentence of condemnation by the Law, when malefactours and guiltie persons, arraigned and conuinced by euidence of inditements, that they can say nothing for themselues, beeing abashed and confounded, haue both their mouthes stopped, and their faces couered, and so carried away to execution. This
 appeares in the arraignement, and sentence passed vpon Caine,Gene 4.13, 14. which made him crie out, that his punishment was greater then hee could beare, because hee was cast out from the earth, and from Gods face hee should bee hidden hauing his owne face, as couered with eternall shame, neuer to come to appeare before God, to sacrifice or pray to him. But hee that beleeueth in Christ shall not be ashamed. 1. Pet. 2.6. Rom. 10.11. Haman after the sentence of death was passed on him, his face was couered, and hee had out of the Kings presence, neuer to appeare more before him. And this is the state of all the damned, vpon the last sentence of condemnation passed o^
 them, that they a^e pun^shed with euerlasting perdition (...) from the face and presence of the Lord. 2. Thes. 1.9 neuer to come and appeare before him, nor to speake, or to pray to him, or to praise him, and for confusion of face and shame, wish the mountaines to fall on them, and the rockes to couer them. Contrarie to this woefall estate of the damned, is this blessed and glorious (...) of the Saints by the sentence of the iustification of life in Christ that without shame or fear, they may come befor^ God with open face, (...), 2. Cor. 3.18. (and not as Moses with his face couered)verse 13. may behold the glory of the Lord with open face, and bee changed into it.verse 18.
 For hauing our sinnes pardoned, and our persons receiued into fauour with God, wee may behold his face and glory, as reconciled in iustification, and so are changed into it more and more, in sanctification from glory to glory. Whatsoeuer boldnesse of face, and glory of countenance, or libertie of speach, wee may haue towardes men, in and by our selues, and our workes; wee haue none towards God but by Faith in Christ. Rom. 4.1. First the Law indites, arraignes, and stops our mouth, as Rom. 3.19. shame and confusion couers our faces, and then Christ lifts vp our head, as Psal. 3.3. Thou art my glory, and the lifter vp of my head: Yea, hee annoints
 our head with oyle, and giues vs the oyle of gladnesse, for the spirit of heauinesse, 2. Cor. 1.21. 1. Ioh. 2.20, 27. as God hath created oyle to make the face to shine gloriously. Therefore contrarily, by the law in humiliation, they cast durt on their heads, and couered their faces in pleading their guiltinesse, and in dayes of fasting the Pharises were (...).Mat. 6.16. Now Christ our high Priest was annointed with this oyle of gladnesse aboue his fellowes, that it might lift vp his face for vs, in the sight and presence of God to appeare before him, and wee receiue an anointing from this holy One, and hee annoints our faces with oyle of ioy, for this (...), which
 word signifies specially freedome, and glory of speech in prayer, or praises of God, and thankesgiuings, for in Christ wee haue a new mouth, a new speach, tongue, and language of Canaan. The end of mans creation being chiefely to glorifie God; Adam was created with an excellent mouth and tongue, wherewith to glorifie him, which was his greatest glory, life, and happines: but by hearkning to Sathans blasphemous mouth, and tongue, belying and dishonouring God, and beleeuing it, he and all his posteritie, haue lost their naturall mouth, tongue, and language, and haue the mouth and language of Satan, readier to blaspheme and curse God,
 then to pray to him, or to pr^ise him; and being man become earth, and lacking the Image and Glo^ie of God, and borne of the earth,Ioh. 3.3^. he speakes of the earth, as an earth-worme, with an earthly mouth rising out of the dust: As Satan is a lyer, so is euery man from the wombe, going astray, and speaking lies. Therefore Christ giues a new mouth, tongue and language, if we hearken to him as our only Prophet and Rabbi, and a new (...), by his spirit of Glory in vs, according to his gracious couenant in Christ, Isa. 59.21. And I will make this my couenant with the^, saith the Lord: My spirit that is vpon thee, and my words which I haue put in thy mouth, shall not depart
 out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seede, nor out of the mouth of the seede of thy seede from henceforth and for euer. Therefore Christ is called the Truth. Iohn 14.6. But first he is the Way, then the Truth; our Way to God, and our (...) as Priest, and then is he the Truth, and giues vs a new mouth.
But these particulars appeare more fully in the obseruations: only thus much for vnfolding the text, and the sense of the words.
Wherein wee consider two parts. 1. The Excelcellencie of Faith in Christ set forth by two vertues or workes in the heart and inner man.
1. Accesse to God, or Manuduction with boldnesse
 or confidence, or a confident accesse to God by Manuduction.
2. (...), Glory of face with liberty of speech.
2. The limitation of this excellencie and of these vertues; They are not in the whole man and beleeuer, but (...), that is so farre, as he is in Christ, not as he is or euer was in the first Adam, or as he is in nature, in the flesh, and world, or as he is in any other estate and condition in this life, or that any man can haue in any other Religion then by Faith in Christ. And whereas the childe of God may complaine that hee finds and feeles contrary to all this, feare, trembling, flying from God, shame of face for his sinnes, and his
 mouth often stopped, and not able to pray or praise God:
Answer is here made; It is true, so farre as we are not in Christ, and haue nature and flesh in vs; but as we are in Christ, we haue all this contrary good. 1. De Iure, though not de facto, by right, though not by full possession. 2. Wee haue these in some measure, though mixt with contrary corruptions. 3. We may haue more, if the fault be not in our selues. 4. We shall haue all these in full measure. 5. These are prepared for vs in Christ, and our Faith in Christ will grow vp to these, and increase with the increasings of God and of Christ, if we pray, as Paul here doth for
 these Ephesians, so they may haue all this in Christ and that their Faith may grow and haue these vertues working in them, as in the verses following, verse 16, 17, 18. which imply, that they had them not as yet from Christ, as they should haue hereafter, but were only laid vp and prepared for them in Christ.
The summe then is, that no Faith, nor Religion giues that accesse to God, with that boldnesse, so cheerefull and glorious a countenance, such a mouth to praise God, to pray, and speake freely to God, to powre out our hearts before him, that giues such a Spirit of prayer, and of Adoption to cry Abba Father, to make a man bold


 to plead with God, (...), to stand vpon interrogatories with God, and to parle with him, especially when Satan, sinne, and conscience accuse.
Now these vertues are not sanctifying graces in vs in their full perfection, but they are such blessings and benefits in Christ, as Faith drawes from Christ. Therfore he saith, (...) in which Christ they are, as in the propper naturall subiect, roote, and fountaine and Head, and which Faith drawes and receiues from Christ or possesseth in him, and therefore he saith (...). and so I come to the obseruations. (...), in whom, that is in Christ. By Christ dwelling in vs, we haue and exercise these vertues of
 Christ; or Christ shewes himselfe to be in vs, and we to be in him by these vertues. All sauing good things in vs, are sauing vertues, in and from Christ. Rom. 8.2. 1. Pet. 2.9. To shew forth the vertues of him that hath called you out of darkenesse. As the soule shewes it selfe to be in the body by the life and vertues it exerciseth in the body, such as the body it selfe hath not by its naturall humors: So Christ exerciseth such vertues in the heart and soule of a Christian, as the heart and reasonable soule haue not naturally.
As a man shewes himselfe to dwell in a house, by the wisedome, authoritie, power he exerciseth therein: So Christ to dwell in
 vs by faith as in his house, when he exerciseth his vertues in vs, Eph. 3.17. Heb. 3.6. Whose house ye are if ye hold fast your confidence and hope of your reioycing, etc. 1. Cor. 1.30, 31. Col. 2.6. As ye haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke in him: And by his life, vertue, and strength to doe all things, and not by the strength of nature, and of your naturall spirit, as Paul, Philip. 4.13. I can doe all things by the helpe of Christ strengthning me. Rom. 8.10. If Christ be in you, the bodie is dead in regard of sinne, but the Spirit is life in regard of righteousnesse, that is, the bodie lies dead from sinfull actions and motions, from which a mans naturall spirit, wit, and pollicy cannot
 restraine him, and his bodily members to make them lye dead, but rather quicken and powerfully sway them. Rom. 3.15. and 7.5. The passions of sinnes which are by the Law, haue force and vigour in our members, to bring forth fruit vnto death, and Romanes 6.12. but if Christ be in vs, he deads these, (...), the passions of sinnes or sinfull passions, that they cannot worke in our bodily and earthly members; For they that are Christs haue crucified the flesh with the affections and the lusts, Gal. 5.24.
 As Satan shewes his habitation in man as his house possessing as a strong man the pallace of the minde,Luk. 11.21 and heart in peace, by the
 vigour hee exerciseth in swaying their minds, wils, and lusts, as Eph. 2.2. Iohn 8.44. 2. Corinth. 4.4. So Christ.
2. Reason.We are the children of the first Resurrection, begotten of Christ, risen from the dead, 2. Pet. 1.3. by the greatest vertue and power of Christ quickning the dead, 1. Peter 3.21. Wee are not only begotten of Christ, by vertue of his Propheticall office, as he is light, as Hypocrites only inlightned are: but we are begotten of Christ by vertue of his Priestly office as crucified for vs, vnto Adoption and Iustification of life, and by vertue of his Kingly office, as risen from the dead to Sanctification, and participation of his Diuine
 nature, 2. Pet. 1.4. As Christ was discerned and differenced from all the sons of men, to be knowne to be the Sonne of God, (...), Rom. 1.4. by his resurrection from the dead; as the first begotten from the dead, Col. 1.18. So are all we his yonger brethren, by the same Spirit of power raising vs to a new nature and life with him, Rom. 6.4, 5. Col. 3.1. and 2.12. Eph. 2.6. we are discerned and differenced from all the naturall sonnes of men.
 That we may know whether we haue Christ in vs or no, we must examine, tempt, and trie our minds, hearts, wils, affections, what vertues of Christ worke in them and sway them; such as are propper to Christ,
 and which no creature else can exercise in vs, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2. Cor. 4.10. As we beare in our bodies the dying of the Lord Iesus, that is, the greatest miseries and afflictions, So the life of Iesus is manifested in our mortall flesh, that is, his greatest quickning, comforting vertue, when no creature can doe our mortall bodies any good, in sicknesse or in death, or other infirmities. Christ is not only our light, but our light of life; that is, in whom we haue not only light of knowledge, but the same a quickning knowledge, putting life into our wils, and affections, and bodily members to practise what we know. The Hypocrites light of knowledge, is like the candle
 light, which quickens nothing: the Saints light of sauing Knowledge, is like the Sun-light, which quickens hearbs, trees, plants: our light of naturall reason, Philosophy, Pollicy, cannot so quicken vs, and make vs so liuely and vigorous to good duties, as this light of the sauing Knowledge of Christ, Eph. 4.20, 21, 22. Let vs shew forth the vertues of Christ our light in vs, Eph. 5.8. 1. Pet. 2.9. A man may haue a wonderfull light of Knowledge in the lanthorne of his braine, and yet his heart, will, and affections lye as dead as stones from desire or endeauour to embrace or practise the good hee knowes, and haue no vertue from Christ, to liue,
 walke and fructifie.
 This is for comfort to such, as though they cannot feele Christ in them, nor faith possessing Christ; as long as Christ shewes himselfe to be within by such vertues exercised in them, they may know themselues to bee in the faith, and that Christ by faith is in them, 2. Cor. 13.5. For as many haue Satan in them, that doe not know or feele, or beleeue Satan to be in them: So many haue Christ, etc. and as many intertaine Satan in them, by receiuing his lying Gospel, and promises of wealth, peace, comfort by sinning, and his temptations and perswasions to sinne: So we receiue Christ when we beleeue and receiue his
 perswasions, and temptations to good duties, and suffer the words of exhortation, and beleeue his promises, and gladly embrace his word. Therefore such as so did, were baptized into Christ for seale and assurance that Christ was in them, Acts 2.41. 2. Iohn verse 9. See Iohn 14.23. If any man loue mee, hee will keepe my words, and my Father will loue him, and we will come vnto him, and make our abode with him. Adam, and Eue, and Iudas receiued Satan into them, when they receiued his counsels and temptations, and suffered themselues to bee swayed thereby; So co^trarily we receiue Christ. If when wee giue place to wrath,Eph. 4.26 27. we giue place to the
 Diuell, counselling and exciting vs thereto; then contrarily wee giue place to Christ and receiue him into our hearts, when we receiue his Gospel of peace, counselling, and commanding vs peace, and loue, by reasons from the Gospel, that is, from his loue and peace towards vs. Euery one that harbours willingly in his heart any knowne sinne, and sinfull suggestion of Satan, he intertaines Satan; the malicious man hath a furious Diuell, the wanton a voluptuous Diuell. So he that regards no sinne in his heart, but casts it out, Christ perswading him thereto by his Gospel, and not the Law alone inforcing him by terrors; He that turnes from sinne vpon
 such suggestions, promises, perswasions, as Christ makes to him, he receiues Christ by faith first.
 And Faith beleeuing and receiuing Christ for Prophet and only Rabbi, to be his Disciple, and as the only Way and Truth, it goeth before Repentance, which is nothing else but a walking in Christ, as we first receiued him by faith; shewing forth the vertues of Christ, and the life of Christ to walke as he hath walked. For Repentance is the life and vertue of Christ receiued as our way, Truth, and Life, and made all our Wisedome, Righteousnesse, Sanctification, and Redemption, and our light of life. What is Repentance but liuing and walking in
 Christ? For out of Christ euery motion is to death, ^nd hell; and can a man walke in Christ, before hee haue Christ by faith in his heart, Coloss. 2.6. As yee haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke in him.
Thus we see that all sauing good things, are sauing vertues in and from Christ. Now how, and by what meanes, do we receiue and draw these vertues from Christ, or inioy them in him?
Ans. This is only by faith of him (...), that is, by Faith receiuing or going to Christs person, pitching on him alone as reuealed and offered in the Gospel.
By Faith of him.Doct. Faith in Christs person, Name, is the only meanes of receiuing all sauing
 vertues from Christ. Rom. 3.22. Act. 3.16. When we beleeue the Gospel and glad tidings offering vs Christs person with all his benefits and vertues, and behold him to be such a one towards vs, as the Gospel reueales and offers him to vs, that is, as 1. Cor. 1.30. our Wisedome, Righteousnesse, Sanctification, and Redemption, our King, Priest, and Prophet; then is he indeede become such a one towards vs, and we are made such in him, 2. Cor. 3.18. Beholding as in a looking glasse, viz. the Gospel, the glory of the Lord, with open face, we are changed from glory to glory; For in the Gospel, God sets forth Christ before our eyes, Rom. 3.25. (...)
 as the Mercy-seate was exalted and lifted vp before the eyes of the people, that all may looke vp to him as the only Propitiation through faith in his blood, and so finde mercy and peace with God. Faith lookes vp to this Propitiation or Mercy seate, and to this brazen Serpent thus lifted vp in the preaching of the Gospel, and so finds healing vertue. It directs our thoughts and desires to Christ in the sense of all sinne and misery, as offered in the Gospel for cure, and so receiues remedie. Isay 45.22. Looke vnto mee and yee shall be saued, all the ends of the earth, etc. Looke not vnto lying vanities.
Gal. 3.1.O foolish Galathians, who hath bewitched your
 eyes, that is, corrupted your minds and iudgements, and drawn away your thoughts and desires from Christ, that ye should not looke vp to him, who by the Gospel is so cleerely manifested and described before your eyes: that yee should not obey the Truth, beleeuing Christ to be such a one to you, as the Gospel offers him to you; but looke a squint to circumcision and workes, and other meanes of saluation. Beleeuing the Word of the Gospel, offering vs Christ, and embracing the same gladly, we receiue Christs Person and all that is his, and inioy them by this only meanes as fully as any creature can inioy any naturall good, by any naturall meanes, as trees
 inioy the earth and sap of it by their roots, so by faith in the Gospel wee inioy Christs person, and all the sappe of the Spirit of Life in him, Coloss. 2.6, 7. As the members inioy the Life and Spirits of the Head, by the bond and vnion of the nerues and arteries: So we the members of Christ by this Faith, receiue the spirit of life from Christ our Head, Rom. 8.2. with Gal. 3.2, 5, 14. As meate is receiued and inioyed by eating, light by looking on it; So is Christ by Faith. By Faith in the Gospel, and promises we know Christ, we taste him, and feede on him. 1. Pet. 2.3. Wee are rooted in him, built on him, Col. 2.6. vnited to him. By it we receiue his Person, and are
 begotten by him into his Nature and life, Ioh. 1.12, 13. By Faith we goe to his Person and receiue life, Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not come vnto me, that ye might haue life; and wee are made liuing stones by comming to him this liuing Stone, 1. Pet. 2.4. By this Faith we are built on him as on a Rocke, and the gates of Hell cannot preuaile against vs, Math. 16. By Faith we walke in him, Col. 2.6. We eate his body, and drinke his blood, that is, we inioy all the Diuine vertues of his Godhead, and the merits of his Person in all his sufferings, and that fulnesse of the Godhead as dwelling in him bodily, that hee is Emanuel God with vs, and we are filled with all fulnes of God, and
 all this only by beleeuing the Gospel, that there is no facultie or vertue of soule or body, of man or any creature that can inioy any naturall good belonging to it, more fully and surely, then we may inioy Christ, and his Person, life, merits, vertues by Faith in the Gospel only and the promises. Hereby we know him, we taste him, we are rooted in him, built on him, vnited to him, married to him. Such is the necessitie and vertue of Faith in the Gospel, that by it, the Sonne is ours, we haue and possesse him for our owne, euen his Person as our Husband, and his vnsearchable riches. See 1. Ioh. 5.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
 Would we then inioy
 Christ, and his benefits? there is no meanes but his Word, and Gospel imbraced by Faith; and this meanes is infallible, and all-sufficient by Gods ordinance. Therefore care to get nothing, but Faith in the Gospel, that the word of Christ may dwell plenteously in vs, and then Christ himselfe, with all his riches, and sauing benefits are in vs, Colos. 3.16. Wee neede not take thought, who shall ascend vp to heauen, or who shall descend into the deepe: if the word be neere vs in our mouth, and in our Heart, then Christ descending, and ascending, both abased, and exalted, crucified, and glorified, and all-sufficient to Saluation is ours, and in vs,
 as Rom. 10.4, 6, 7, 10. Say not, what may I doe to obtaine eternall life, and as Iohn 6.29. to worke the workes of God, to serue him, that wee may earne the bread of life; This is all the worke that God requires, and meanes of obtaining all sauing good, to beleeue in him, whom hee hath sent, first from Heauen to Earth by incarnation, and now to all of vs, by the preaching of the Gospel, Act. 3.26. Eph. 2.17. and Eph. 3.6. receiuing the promise of Christ by the Gospel, wee are made one body with him, and the whole Church, and inheritors of all the same sauing good: Christ hath ordained, and Sanctified this meanes only, and infallibly to conuey
 himselfe into vs, his spirit, life, righteousnesse, merits, and not the Lawe, or any workes, or merits of man, or any creature, Gal. 3.2, 3, 4. Obey Christ the Son, Iohn 3. vlt. Stumble not at his word, 1. Pet. 2.8. bee not offended at it, Ioh. 6 60, 61, 67, 68, 69. heare Christ, Matth. 17.5. this great Prophet, Act. 3.22, 23. and hee will giue the holy Ghost to them that obey him, Actes 5.32. The reiecting of the Word, is the reiecting of Christ, the receiuing of it, and his Ministers, is the receiuing of Christ. Iohn 14.21, and 13.20. 2. Thessa. 1.10.
 Abandon Transubstantiation, Crucifixes, Relickes, Oralem manducationem: for by none of all these doe
 wee inioy Christ: which Idoles, the Deuill taking away the Word, and Gospel, hath substituted in the roome to hold Christ by sense, and not by Faith. Admit wee could receiue Christ by sense, yea, and fill all our senses with him; yet our soules could neuer bee saued by him, nor inioy his sauing merites, and vertues, which can neuer come into the heart but by Faith, and the riches of the full assurance of vnderstanding, in comprehending the mysterie of God the Father, and of Christ, which made Pauls preaching so full of agony and difficultie, Colos. 2.1, 2. which needed not if it were sufficient to saluation, to communicate Christ to the senses internall, or externall.
 But Christ is inioyed of the soule vnto saluation, onely of true beleeuers through Faith, Ephes. 3.17. who often haue least feeling and fruition of him by sense, and hee is often most tasted of Hypocrites by sense, and felt by outward comforts, who least inioy him in their hearts by Faith of the Gospel, and promises to saluation. It was an easie thing, for Paul to giue a tast of Christ to the senses, but it was his agonie as hee saith, Colos. 2.1. and his child-bearing paines to forme Christ aright in their hearts, as Gal. 4.19. and so to giue their hearts sound and sauing comfort indeed, Colos. 2.2.
Hauing shewed that all sauing good things in vs, are
 sauing vertues, in, and from Christ, and how, and by what meanes wee receiue and draw these vertues from Christ, or inioy them in him. Now in the third place, we come to consider these sauing vertues in particular, whereof here are two specified, the most sauing, which respect God as their obiect, and the state of iustification before God, and not so much our estate of sanctification before men, and these are two, first (...), a confident accesse to God, or rather a Manuduction, with confidence to God, secondly, (...) boldnesse of open face with libertie of speach, for so much doeth the signification of the word import, as may appeare,
 2. Cor. 3.12, 13. and as shall further appeare in a larger vnfolding of the text in the next Sermon.
(...) this word imports two things, first accesse to God, secondly the manner, by leading, or Manuduction, whereof I will speake in the next Sermon.
 This the priuiledge of Gods Saints and people, they haue neere accesse vnto God, and into God by Faith; not onely to behold, and contemplate of God a farre off, but their hearts and soules draw neere to that light which none can attaine vnto,1 Tim. 6.16. (...). Therefore the phrase (...) not onely to beleeue God, or beleeue that there is a God, but by this faith to enter into God, to dwel in
 the secret of the most High,Psal. 90.1. and to abide vnder the shadow of the Almighty, to lodge in his bosome, and hide our selues with him, and vnder the shadow of his wings,Psal. 63. to dwell in God, and God in vs,1. Iohn 3. that he keepes vs as the apple of his eye,Psal. 17. Mat. 23.37. and hee gathers vs as the Hen doeth her chickens vnder her wings. Hee beares vs as his Lambes in his bosome; the Name of the Lord is a strong tower,Pro. 18.10. the righteous runne to it, and into it, and are exalted: there is intimate co^munion betweene God and vs in our hearts, and soules. For in Christ his nature is fatherly to vs, not a consuming fire, as to wicked men, and vnregenerate: He is the naturall element of a regenerate heart,
 and soule, wherein it liues, mooues, and workes all its workes in God, Iohn 3.21. (...). Euery parent giues free accesse to its birth to come to it, and to hide its selfe in its bosome: how much more God the Father of mercies? This is our priuiledge by the Gospel. In the olde Testament, none could so much as see God and liue; no man could warrant his heart to goe vnto God.
 Make this thy onely refuge in all dangers, and troubles, hauing such a Father to flie vnto. Hos. 14.3. Ashur shall not saue vs, neither will we ride vpon horses, neither will wee say any more to the workes of our hands, Yee are our gods: for in thee the fatherlesse findeth mercy.
 Thus saith euery true beleeuing, and repentant soule, and this is the worke of Faith and of true Repentance: If wee can call God Father, wee haue free accesse to him, and into his bosome, and vnder his armes wee may hide our selues with him.
 This is our happinesse that wee are not Orphans, but wee haue an euerliuing Father to flie and to runne vnto, and to hide our selues with him from all sinnes, temptations, dangers, troubles, enemies. Wee need not flie from God, but vnto God from all euills, euen our sinnes to him, whom by sinne we haue offended, 1. Sam. 12.19, 20, 21, 22. Count this thy onely happinesse, and reioyce in it.

 How great is their misery that want this; If God bee shut vp against vs, all creatures are shut vp: wee are as Cain, runnagates vpon the face of the earth. If wee haue no accesse to God, whither shall we flie from his presence, who is present in all places? All our sinnes, and all euils, and miseries finde vs out, whersoeuer wee hide vs, if wee haue not him our Sanctuary, and inward Holy place to hide vs, as his secret ones, to abide vnder the protection of the Almightie. Wee haue in God alone, a secret hiding place, and Sanctuary to retire our selues vnto, where no deuils sinnes, enemies, crosses, though they make hue and crie, and fierce pursuit after
 vs, as blood-Houndes, may bee able to finde vs. God hath such a secret bosome, and hiding place for his children, such a refuge and Sanctuary, whither Christ himselfe is entred, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. euen Iesus our forerunner, and is now safe aboue the reach of all deuils, and men, and hath raised vs vp together, and made vs sit together with him, in these (...), most High, Heauenly places of refuge; our life is hid with Christ in God our Father, and neither famine, perill, sword,Rom. 8.35.39. can separate vs from the loue of God, in Christ Iesus.
 This is for our great comfort, in all distresses, dangers, miseries, when all creatures are shut vp against
 vs, and all wayes, and meanes of redemption, escape, and deliuerance from enemies, and euils, if wee haue this (...),Heb. 10.20. this new and liuing way made for vs, wee are safe; and contrary, if all creatures opened their bosome to entertaine vs, and the world loue vs, as her owne, and foster vs: though nature should command all her children, and forces, to aide, and entertaine vs, so that wee could make our neastes in the starres: yet if God bee against vs, hee will plucke vs thence, he will hunt vs with blood-Hounds, and draw vs out with fishing hookes. Therefore repaire to God, and prepare thy place of refuge with him, against the euill day, acquaint thy
 selfe with his bosome, and secret loue dayly, that it may bee thy present helpe in time of trouble, and open to thee, and not locked and shut vp in time of danger. Psal. 42, Hee is my present helpe, and my God.
(...); In whom, that is, in Christ wee haue this accesse, and entrance to God, and Faith giues it, and workes it for vs, not in our selues, our workes, merites, righteousnesse, o^ by the mediation of any Saint, or Angel: No creature can make way for vs to God, but Christ his Sonne Rom. 5.2. 1. Pet. 3.18. Who died for sinners, the iust for the vniust, that hee might bring vs to God. Iohn 14.6. I am the Way, the Trueth, and the Life: no
 man commeth to the Father, but by me. No way to God, but Christ, no entrance to him, but by his Sonne. By Satan, and Adam, wee were led out of the way, banished, and separated from God, the deuill teaching, and leading vs a false way, how wee should come to bee Gods, knowing good and euill, and so lead vs in the way of perdition, from God: this hee did by lies, and falsehood, deceiuing vs, and so killing vs, and euery sin, like Satan, its parent, doeth (...) draw vs out of the way from God, and (...) intise vs with promises of false comforts, profits, glorie, and so kill vs. Iam. 1.13, 14. Rom. 7 11. Now Christ, contrary to Satan,
 and to all sinne, as a Prophet hee teacheth vs the right way, and as a great high Priest of good things to come,Heb. 9.11. and such as are truely good, and not onely hauing the shadowes of good things, hee giues vs true good things, by the word of trueth, which is the Gospel, Heb. 9.11. with 10. 1. Iohn 1.17. This Law of shadowes was giuen by Moses, but Grace and Trueth, comes by Iesus Christ: and whereas Satan, and sinne, kill by deceit, and raigne ouer vs by death; Christ as King, and Lord of life, quickens vs. No man in sinne and Satan, could so much as see God, and liue: but now Christ, is both our way to God, a^ our Prophet, the Trueth of
 all shadowes, and ceremonies of the Lawe, as true Priest, by whom wee goe to God, and as King, and Lord of life, wee liue by him. Hee is our light, as Prophet, to shew vs the way; hee is our Priest, to make the way to God; hee is our King, to make vs liue in Gods sight, that we may not crie, as Hos. 14. Hee shall reuiue vs, and wee shall liue in his sight. This is our confident accesse to God, without feare, that the sight, and presence of God, shall not kill vs. All the workes, righteousnesse, and mediation of men and Angels, cannot make way for vs to God, but onely Christ his Sonne: Hee is the only way, and entrance to God.

 For Gods loue, mercie, face, presence, are shut vp from vs, and infinitly remooued from sinners: yea, such is the contrarietie of mans corrupt nature, to Gods infinite, pure, and holy nature, that it infinitly separates, and remooues him from God,Luk. 16.26. by such a ^hasma, or gulfe, that onely by such a person, and high Priest, as is infinitely holy separate from sinners,Heb. 7.22 and higher then the Heauens, can this gulfe bee filled vp, to make way to God. Therefore Christ first descended into the bottome of our hell,Eph. 4.9.10 and miserie, and from thence ascended,Heb. 2.9.10. farre aboue all things, that hee might bee our (...) to bring many children vnto Glory, Heb. 2.

For be we neuer so neere God, in place, Church, ordinances, yea, and haue God in our mouthes, and could eate his reall flesh; yet our hearts, and natures, are infinitly remooued, and separated from God, without Christ the Sonne of his bosome bring vs to him, and hee is Emanuel God with vs, so that now,Rom. 8.39 neither height, nor depth, can separate vs, the Sonne of God, the second person, hauing brought vs so neere to God. For no euill is so great a meanes of separating vs from God, as Christ is good, and a meanes to bring vs to God, the chiefe good. No euill of sinne, or punishment so contrary, or remote from God, as Christ is neere to God, equall
 with God, and one with God, and pleaseth God, more then all sinnes can displease him, Matth. 3. vlt. My beloued Sonne in whom I am well pleased.Mat. 3.17. Iohn 1.18. Iohn 1. The onely begotten Sonne, which is in the bosome of the Father, hee vnfolds God to vs, and makes vs neerer, and deerer to God: then sinne which comes out of the bosome of the deuill, can make vs hatefull, and detestable to God, and this onely Christ can doe. To bring two such contrary natures together, as light, and darkenesse, Gods infinite pure nature, and our fleshly corrupt nature, must needes bee by an infinite meanes, of infinite merit, and vertue, God, and sinne are so contrary.

Therefore count all as doung, for Christ, to bring thee to God. Our wit, wealth, beauty, learning, righteousnesse, goodnesse, may make way for vs to men, and Kings priuie-chambers, and to mens Thrones, and Courts, Rom. 4.1. But considered with our sinnes, they are doung to God, and hee casts vs, and all ours as dung out of doores, see Phil. 3.7.8.
 Hereby wee see the difference betweene Philosophy, the glasse of the creatures, the Law of God, and the glasse of the Gospel. 2. Cor. 3.18. In the Law, and in Philosophy this question is much moued, and intreated of, what the chiefe good, and happinesse of man is, and how it may bee
 attained: but onely Faith in the glasse of the Gospel, resolues it fully. To see the face of God which is our life, and happinesse, to behold the Father of glory, and to attaine to this chiefe good, and by what way, and meanes to compasse him,Rom. 16.25. Ephes. 3.5. is the mystery hid from the foundation of the world. The creatures all crie, and professe they are not the chiefe good, but point at God their Creator, and direct vs to him. The Law more cleerely shewes God to bee the chiefe good; but how we should attaine vnto him it shewes not, but but by a way impossible for flesh to goe, Rom. 8.2. But the Gospel doeth more fully reueale God, as mans chiefe good, and shewes
 Christ to bee the onely way, and meanes of comming to him. Nature and Philosophy, and all wit of man, is dimme, and weake in seeing, and apprehending God the chiefe good; but its starke blind to discerne the way, and meanes, whereby man, especially a sinner may come vnto God; This is that hid wisedome,1. Cor. 2.7.9. which God determined before the worlds to our glory, which neither eye hath seene, nor eare hath heard, nor euer entred into the heart of man, or Angel to conceiue, how once falling from God by sinne, they should euer bee able to recouer God againe, and come into fauour, and fellowship with him. For there is no way in nature, as
 by creation to God; all way is hedged and stopped vp by sinne. All naturall good things, haue a naturall way prepared by creation, wherby to be attained; but there is no way to attaine to that supernaturall chiefe good; its a light which cannot bee attained vnto. 1. Tim. 6.16.
The way is now prepared by grace, that is Christ, the Sonne sent from Heauen,Ioh. 17.3. not borne by nature, as a naturall way, but sent from aboue as a Ladder reached vp to Heauen,Gen. 28.12 Gods saluation which hee prepared before the face of all people.Luk. 2.31. Luke 2.31.
 How is it then that wee are said, to prepare the way, Matth. 3.3.
 Our preparation is for Christ, who is the way;
 Its not a way made by vs to God, but a fitting of our selues for Christ, who is the way, and that is as much as in vs lyeth, remoouing the things that hinder vs, that is our sinnes by repentance, and by faith receiuing Christ. Not that repentance and Faith are our way, or any meanes to attaine God our chiefe good, but as preparations and qualifications for Christ, who is the only way and meanes of obtaining God. For faith of it selfe and Repentance, doe not iustifie vs, or commend vs to God, but dispose vs for Christ to inioy, vse and improoue him, in whom we walke as in the way to God, and eternall life and happinesse. Faith and Repentance, and al^
 good works are not worth a rush, nor haue any vertue to bring vs to God, but as they are from Christ, and doe vse and improoue Christ. By faith we receiue and choose Christ as the only way to God, forsaking all other waies, and meanes, and by repentance wee walke in Christ as in the way to God. Col. 2.6. As yee haue receiued Christ Iesus the Lord, so walke in him: so that neither Faith nor repentance are the way, but Christ. Therefore as yee haue receiued Christ by faith, as the way, so walke in this way by Repentance; that is, forsaking all sinne and all meanes of safetie and lying vanities, make vse of Christ Iesus only for all sauing good, Who is made
 vnto vs of the Father, Wisedome, Righteousnesse, Sanctification, Redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. For Faith, Repentance and all the works in the world without Christ cannot bring vs to God, and are of no worth with God, but as they make vse and improouement of Christ.
 Let vs therefore care for nothing, but to get Christ, and let Christ be the End of our Faith and Workes, All our gaine and aduantage in life and death,Phil. 1.21. and then let Christ alone for bringing vs to life, heauen and happinesse. Let vs by Faith make way for Christ, to come into our hearts, to be our Prophet, Priest, King, Sheepheard, that we may receiue him, offering himself;
 and then hee will make way for vs to God, to heauen and eternall happinesse; Let vs as sheepe that goe astray daily, by Repentance Conuert and returne to Christ the Sheepheard of our soules, 1. Pet. 3. vlt.
(...), Accesse with confidence, or a confident accesse, not such as was vnder the Law with feare and trembling, where the sight was so terrible, that Moses said, I feare and quake. See Heb. 12.12, 13. with verse 18, 19, 20.
Wee come not before God as Diuels and Malefactors drawne into Gods presence, as before the Iudge with feare and trembling, to be arraigned vnwillingly, inforced by conscience, nor yet as vncertaine
 beggers that roue and wander vp and downe for helpe, and knocke at euery doore, and so goe to Gods doore, but know not what intertainement they shall haue there. But wee haue good assurance, and good securitie, and go confidently in exspectation of finding good entertainment with God, Heb. 12.12, 13. Lift vp your weake hands, and strengthen your feeble knees and make streight steps to your feete, least that which is halting be turned out of the way, etc. As if he had said; There is great danger and feare, we bee turned cleane out of the way, if we goe not confidently in the way. Prou. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runneth to it,
 and is exalted. Running implies confidence, Psal. 33.6. They shall runne to him, and their faces shall not be ashamed, etc.
 This the property and vertue of this true Faith in Christ the Sonne of God our Mediatour, whereby we must prooue and trie it, and difference it from all faith in all creatures, and all meanes out of Christ, and all that affiance that man can haue in any naturall worldly helpes, that this Faith in Christ, steeles the heart, and strengthens it with inuincible confidence, more then any faith in any religion or any creature in the world. It breeds (...), a confident glorying and boasting.Heb. 3. 2. Chron. 20.20. Trust in the Lord and ye shall be assured,Rom. 5.2.
 that is, your hearts shall be confident and free from those feares, scruples, auxieties, whereby carnall men that trust in earthly things,Luk. 12.29. hang in suspence like Meteors in the aire, wasting themselues and their liues, with continual cares, feares, and griefes, and are (...) as Iam. 1.6, 7, 8. running from one helpe to another, and are neuer secure, Psal. 27.14. Be strong and he shall strengthen your heart, that is, seeke all your strength and safetie by faith in God, and not in earthly things, and God shall strengthen your hearts with confidence. No faith breeds (...), but this, Luke 1.4. that is full certainty, and Act. 2.36. Phil. 3.1. All other refuges that men flye vnto, are with
 doubting, anxiety, and some distrust whether our workes, or mediation of Saints or Angels, or any creature, because both the refuges themselues are not sure, nor cannot promise certaine and infallible helpe, and therefore can giue no full securitie to the minde; but God is a most sure inuincible and impregnable defence and strong tower, and therefore the righteous runne to it with full confidence: or secondly, the meanes, that men vse to attaine thereto may faile them, and therefore they vse them not without care, feare, anxiety; but Christ is a most sure and infallible meanes to bring vs to God, and cannot faile, and therefore this Faith in him
 breeds that confidence, That as God is a sure strong and vndoubted defence, that no man can make question: So is Christ his Son like him, as sure a Meane and Mediatour to come to him, and to obtaine him.
But of this vertue of Faith, and how its increased and confirmed in Christ the obiect, shall appeare more in the next Sermon.
(...), that is, boldnesse of face and freedome of speech. Of all the vertues of Christ, which he dwelling in our hearts, exerciseth in vs,Psal. 3.3. this is one of the chiefe, that he is the lifter vp of our heads, and exalts our faces before God, and giues vs free liberty of speech to plead with God, that wee poore sinners, dust and
 ashes may pleade and parle with God, and stand vpon interrogatories with him, 1. Pet. 3.21. The interrogatory which a good conscience makes to God. For the conscience beeing acquitted from the guilt of sinne, by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ, is made bold to question with God, and to aske him what hee hath more to lay to our charge: What more full and perfect satisfaction his Iustice can require, then what Christ hath already made. Isa. 1.18. Come let vs reason together. 2. Cor. 7.11. We can make our (...) and cleere our selues before God, for whatsoeuer can be laid to our charge; and cry Abba Father, and poure out our hearts before him in all our
 afflictions, and bemoane our selues to God, and all our wrongs, crosses, indignities. For Christ hauing stopped the mouth of the Law, and of all iniquitie, and of our crying sinnes, which stopped our mouths, as Rom. 3.19. Psal. 107.42. thereby opens our mouth to God. Dauid vpon the guilt of murther and adultery had his mouth stopped, and gagged, and euery man by the Law and spirit of bondage, hath his mouth sealed vp: let Christs spirit open it, by the sprinkling and washing of the blood of Christ, applyed by faith, and then vpon experience of Gods free sauing grace and mercy, pardoning and healing the guilt of his sin, his mouth was opened,
 that his lippes might set forth the praise of this his sauing grace, loue and mercy.
Christ is the Lyon of the tribe of Iuda, and courage with God is his naturall peculiar vertue, and which he dwelling in our hearts exerciseth in vs, and especially as he is now risen from the dead, and sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for vs. For whatsoeuer Christ is in Heauen, or doth for vs there, he is the same in our hearts, and the vertue and influence of it descends into vs, and raiseth vs vp together,Eph. 2.6. and makes vs sit together with him in the heauenly places;Eph. 3.17. and Christ dwelles in vs vertually, as he doth in heauen, yea Christ risen from the dead
 and making intercession for vs in heauen, and liuing there for vs, is the same Christ in our hearts, and in the temple of our soules, and consciences, as he is in heauen, the same person, exercising the same office and vertues in the inner holy place of our consciences before God, whereinto he is entred by his blood, and hath made way for himselfe to raigne in vs, as King of Salem and Prince of Peace, as hee doth in heauen for vs. For God is in the Sanctuary of our consciences, being purged by the blood of his Sonne, as he is in heauen his holy place, our soules beeing made and framed like to heauen to be Gods House and Temple. The Fabricke
 of the Iewish Temple, was not only a type of heauen, but of our soules the Temples of God, and therefore Christ is our High Priest and doth his office o^ Priest-hood as well in our soules as in heauen, and as A Minister of the true Tabernacle which God pitch and not man.Heb. 8.2.
As by his blood he entred as by a new and liuing way,Heb. 10.20 into the Sanctuary o^ heauen, so doth he enter into our consciences: and a^ he makes intercession, an^ speakes for vs in heauen, (...) doth he in our hearts wit^ that (...),1. Pet 3.21. the Interrogatory which a good conscience makes to God by th^ Resurrection of Iesus Chri^^ from the dead, or Christ r^sen vp in it, with that (...)
 and that Spirit which (...) makes request for the Saints.Rom. 8.26. Christ was arraigned, accused, condemned for our sinnes, and he satisfied and answered for all, that we also in him might answer for our selues.
 Highly prize this benefit. We that could not answer God, for one of a thousand, now can answer all inditements and obiections by Christ. Wee that could not abide the least triall, nor indure the least search, can now abide the most seuere Iudgement and most exquisite triall, being found in Christ,Phil. 3.9. not hauing our owne righteousnesse, but his righteousnesse. Else, if thou streightly marke what is done amisse, who is able to abide it? Psal. 130.3.

 Let vs prooue our selues how Christ is in vs. How doth he open our mouthes to God? If Christ be within, in the heart, hee opens the mouth, as a Priest to God. What new opening of thy mouth, before seale^ and stopped vp by th^ Law? The guilt of sinne makes speechlesse and dumb as Zachary. Infidelity make dumbe; but as soone as by faith we receiue Christ into our hearts, he opens ou^ mouthes to pray, whic^ before we could neuer doe Christ giues a new mout^ and tongue, not only t^ speake to men, but to God not only to pleade our euill righteousnesse in th^ courts of men, but in God courts, and to stand vpo^ interrogatories with him
 Rom. 4.1. If Abraham be iustified by workes, he hath to glory, but not with God; He may stand and pleade his righteousnesse boldly, in mens courts, but not in Gods. But we can pleade in heauen, and make our Appeale to the Throne of Grace, and there make our Apologie,Hos. 14.2. and Take to vs words, and say, Receiue vs graciously, so will we render the calues of our lippes.
Ye are carefull saith Paul, 2. Cor. 13.3. To prooue and try your Ministers, yee will haue experience of Christ speaking in me; Its well,2. Cor. 13 3.5. but withall prooue your selues whether Christ bee in you. Know that the same Christ, and so his spirit that speakes in me, and opens my mouth to speake from God to you,
 enters into your hearts, and opens your mouthes freely to speake to God. Hereby we may know if we heare the word sauingly, and receiue Christ by Faith. Therefore not only prooue and try your Ministers, whether Christ speak and preach in them, but also try your selues whether ye be in the Faith, and receiue Christ, to speake to God in prayer, else ye are not fit nor able to iudge whether Christ speake in me. Such a spirit of liberty and (...), as opens the Ministers mouth to speake from Christ to the people, such a spirit enters into the people and Church by Faith, in the word heard, and opens the mouthes of the people to pray. Prayer
 is a common gift of euery member of the Church. Euery one must call on the Name of the Lord that will be saued,See Rom. 10.13, 14, 15. though euery one must not preach. First, the Ministers mouth must be opened to preach, before the peoples mouthes can be opened to pray. To put downe a preaching Ministery vnder colour of setting vp a praying Ministery is by sinfull Hypocrisie, to put downe both; and to deuoure not only widdowes houses, but the house of God vnder colour of long prayer, as the Pharisees then did, and Papists now doe.






EPHES. 3.12.

In whom we haue boldnesse and accesse, with confidence by the faith of him.


THere are two principall radicall and fundamentall graces in a Christian heart and inward man, viz. Faith and Repentance, Hebrewes 6.2. Repentance from dead Workes, and Faith towards God. These two rootes shew themselues by fruits in life and conuersation. Repentance shewes it selfe in hating and flying sinne, and in vsing all meanes of abstaining from
 sinne and vanities. Faith shewes it selfe in motions and imployments towards God, which are chiefely these two.
1. Our Accesse to God by Manuduction, as led by Christ, which makes vs confident in going to God, because we are led, and goe not of our selues. As with all care and feare, we flie all sinne by repentance; so we must boldly and confidently goe to God, being led by Christ taking vs by the hand.
2. The second motion or imployment, is freedome of speech.
The first is of the inner man, the second of the outward man.
The worke and imployment of Faith in the soule
 called that (...), by which we most serue, honour and attend on God, as Ioh. 6.29. Heb. 6.10. 1. Thess. 1.3. stands in these things here set downe in this verse. 1. We take Christ our Mediatour by the hand, and lay hold on him, (...), that is, that faith which laies hold on his Person. 2. Hauing him by the hand, and led by him to God, we haue accesse to God, and goe to him (...) 3. We goe with boldnesse and confidence being so led, and hauing such a guide, as the second Person in Trinitie, the Sonne of God. (...), 4. Beeing come to God in this confidence, led by Christ, we open our minds, and hearts, and speake to him freely
 with open face without feare or shame. Of these in their order.
1. Faith laies hold on Christs Person, and takes him by the hand in all motions to God, and in all things wherein we haue to doe with God. We must haue nothing to doe with God, without Christ our Mediatour. As the Iewes had no dealings with God, no accesse to him, but by the high Priest taken from among men,Heb. 5.1. and ordained for men in all things appertaining to God; Therefore they first went to the high Priest, before they went to God. So we must first goe to Christ, before we goe to God, Iohn 14.6. Heb. 7.25. The soule cannot thinke of going to God, but
 it thinkes of laying hold of somewhat, by which to be imboldned to goe vnto God, to finde acceptance with him. Therfore it saith to it selfe;Mich. 6.6, 7, 8. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my selfe before the high God? who, or what shall warrant me, a worme, dust and ashes, to goe to so high and a great God? Reason and flesh saith 10005. of rammes, and ten thousand and fiue riuers of oyle, and some great thing answerable to so great a God. No man can apprehend the Highnesse and Greatnesse of God aboue himselfe, and thinke of going to him, but he must also thinke of what hee must bring to God.
But Faith, as it only sees aright the height and greatnesse
 of the most High God, and the face of tha Father of glory, in the glasse of the Gospel, wherin also hee hath reuealed and offered vs a Mediatour, answerable to himselfe, and to his glory: so faith onely answeres this question, and resolues the soule, saying, Hee hath shewed thee O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; There is nothing great, and good enough for God, but Christ his Sonne: He is infinitely abased, if any thing neuer so great, or good, bee thought fit to present to God, or to warrant vs to goe to him, but onely Christ his Son. Especially we thinke too basely of his Maiestie and Glory, if wee conceiue that the same
 offended by sinne, and dishonoured, can bee satisfied by any creature, but by his onely Sonne, the second person in Trinity, and shall wee thinke to giue the fruit of our body, for the sinne of our soule! No, its onely the fruit of the Virgines wombe, that Branch, and Off-spring of Dauid, the onely begotten Sonne of God.
Now Faith, first laies holde on the humane nature of Christ, as a handle fit for mans nature, to lay sure hold on: and as the hand of the Sonne of God, fit for vs to grapple, or graspe, and imbrace as our owne flesh. For it cannot lay hold on the God-head; its fire consuming; in the man-hood it imbraceth the
 God-head, dwelling in it bodily. Colos. 2.9. As he that holds a Lanthorne by the handle, receiues, and holds also the light thit is in the Lanthorne: So he that by Faith laies hold on Christs flesh, and body, as the Lanthorne, laies hold on Christ the second Person, and the fulnesse of the God-head, and hee is Emanuel God with him.Matth. 1.
 In going to God, some lay hold on their workes, as the Pharisie, Luke 18. some on Saints and Angels, as the Papists: let vs onely lay hold on Christ.
(...),2. Heb. 2, etc. 12.2. hauing hold on Christ, he goes before, and leads, and wee follow him, as our (...) and (...), and our fore-runner, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20. 1. Pet. 2.25. We were
 as sheepe that went astray, following our lusts, but now are returned to the Shepheard of our soules, that hee may lead vs to God. Its nothing, what sinnes wee turne from, if we turne not to Christ, to leade vs to God, the chiefe good; its nothing, what euils wee auoid, if we goe not streight to God, and make straight steps to our feet. This leading by the hand, is opposed as a Medium, or middle vertue, or motion, to two extreames.
First desperation, whereby Deuils, and wicked Men flie from God, and come not to him, but as drawne, and compelled, and that with horrour, and hatred of God.
Secondly, presumption
 of proud, and blind Iustitiaries, that goe to God of themselues, as the Pharisie, Luke 18. not led by the hand of a Mediatour, but trusting to themselues. As Sathan leades all wicked mens soules to Hell, so Christ leades the soules of all Saints to God. That is called the Spirit of the world, which swayes the whole world, Ephes. 2.2. this the Spirit of Christ, swaying all his body, and members.
Hee onely leads vs, because hee onely remooues whatsoeuer makes vs vnworthy, or vnfit to come, or feares, and discourageth vs to come vnto God, and giues vs whatsoeuer makes vs acceptable, as his Person, merits, sacrifice, etc.

Hee came downe from the bosome of the Father, to bring vs thither, and was made flesh for this end, that by the hand of his flesh, wee might lay hold on him crucified, and risen againe, and so be drawne by him to God. He is that ladder of ascension to God. Iohn 3.13.
 Shall wee not then goe to Christ, who is come downe from Heauen to vs, and suffer our selues to bee led by him, and drawne from the world, but follow our reason, and lusts, pursuing earthly vanities? shall wee be still as sheepe that stray, and not come to the Shepheard of our soules, that hee may leade vs to God, who hath died for vs, to make way for vs, by
 his blood to God, and is risen from the dead, for this end, to bee our Shepheard, and is gone the way before vs? To vs hath God raised vp his Sonne Iesus,Act. 3. vers. last. and sent him to blesse vs, in turning euery one of vs from our iniquities, Actes 3. vlt. He is raised vp to vs of God, and giuen vs to be a Prince, and a Sauiour, to giue repentance to Israel, and forgiuenesse of Sinnes. Actes 5.31.
 The woefull condition of such as are without Christ, they are without hope, and without God in the world, Ephes. 2. and without all hope, of euer comming to God. He that obeieth not the Sonne, to follow him, and to bee led, and guided by him, shall not see
 life,Ioh. 3.36. but the wrath of God abideth on him; but he that beleeueth in the Sonne, to follow him as his Shepheard, and his voyce, and doctrine, as Iohn 10. hath euerlasting life. My sheepe heare my voyce, and I know them, and I giue vnto them eternall life. see 2. Thes. 1.8, 9, 10. Because they obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ, to bee led, and guided by him, the Prince of their saluation, but followed their owne reason, and lusts, and senses, etc.
3. Iohn 14.6.Therefore commit thy selfe to Christ, to bee thy guide, to walke by him as the way, to bee counselled, and led by him as the trueth, and quickned, and strengthened by him as the life; and neuer doubt, but
 he will bring thee to God safely, and thou shalt neuer miscarie. Hee will bring thee into his rest, and where God dwels, and present thee before his face, and perfectly saue thee. Heb. 7.25. Thou shalt neuer perish by any sinnes, lusts, temptations, crosses, miseries; for Christ hath made the way safe through all these, and leade the way by sinnes, temptations, death, to make it (...) a liuing way,Heb. 10.20 1. Pet. 2.24 bearing all our sinnes in his body on the Tree, who in that hee suffered, and was tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted. Therefore onely commit thy minde, and heart, to bee guided by him, trusting to him as thy Prophet to counsell thee, and call none Rabbi but
 him: thy onely Priest, to lead thee to God, and king to defend and to quicken thee. Renounce thy reason, wit, learning, lusts, and all creatures, trusting to Christ thy Shepheard onely, to bring thee out of Egypt, of Satans bondage, and darkenes, and to leade thee through the wildernes of this world. For onely the Sonne that came from God his bosome, can bring vs to God, commit thy way vnto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed.
Hee as the Shepheard of of thy soule,2. Tim. 4.18. will keepe thee from euery euill worke, nor suffer Satan, or lust, or the world, to withdraw thee from God.Isa. 30.21. When thou turnest to the right hand, or to the left, thou shalt heare a
 voyce behind thee, saying, This is the way, walke in it.Psal. 23. He is thy shepheard, and hee will conuert thy soule, when it goes astray:2. Tim. 3.16. Hee will make vs wise to saluation, against the deceits of sinne, and sinfull vanities; Hee that followes him shall not walke in darkenesse, but shall haue the light of life.
Say not in thy heart,Rom. 10.6, 7.who shall ascend to Heauen, or who shall descend into the deepe to goe to God! For Christ is come from aboue to bring vs to God, and hee is descended into the lowest deepes, to draw vs out from thence to God, so that neither height,Rom. 8.39. nor depth, can separate vs from God. Bee God neuer so high aboue vs, and wee suncke neuer so low in hell,
 and misery belowe him, euen to the bottome of hell; Christ is come from aboue, to cary vs vp aboue, and hee is descended into the lowest depths of misery, to fetch and draw forth the most miserable, to exalt them to Heauen, and to bring them to God. Therefore neither famine, perill, sword,Vers. 37. height, or depth, can separate vs from the loue of God in Christ, but Christ will bring vs to God, if we make him our Shepheard, and lay hold on him.
 Hang and depend not on any man, or creature, Say not,1. Cor. 1. I am Pauls, I am Apollos, Christ is the onely shepheard of our soules. Say not, what Saint, or Angel shall lead mee to God? Was Paul crucified for vs? or
 did Peter, or Paul, or any Saint, or Angel come downe from Heauen, or descend into Hell, and come fro^ the dead againe, to lead vs to God? God dwels in that light inaccessible,1 Tim. 6.18. which no man, or Angel can come vnto, but onely Christ to lead vs to God, to see his Face, and to inioy his presence. By other meanes and guides, wee may bee brought to wealth, glory, honour, health, as by learning, loue, workes of righteousnesse, Philosophy: but neuer come to God, to see and inioy him.
 Hereby wee may know the true Faith, and Religion, and whether Christ and his spirit bee in vs. If they ^^rie vs out of our selues, and from all creatures to


 God, to seeke all life, comfort, glory, strength, and safetie in God, and not in our selues, or any creature, that there bee not in any of vs an euill heart of infidelitie,Heb. 3.12. verse 14. to depart away from the liuing God; Then are wee partakers of Christ, if wee hold that (...), that principall pillar of supportance, and the foundation of our sustentation, which is God our Rocke, and Adonay our staies; For so I vnderstand that place.
Consider how thou commest before God, in prayer, and in his Church: how is it, thou darest appeare in his presence, and tread in his Courts, who makes way for thee, and leades thee? There is a third fleshly boldnes, wherby
 by many rush into the Lords house, and to his Table, which makes them more bold then welcome, as Isa. 1.12, 13. who being not led by Christ, when hee shall question with them, and say,Mat. 22.12. Friend how camest thou in hither, not hauing me for thy guide? they will become speachlesse, ouerwhelmed with the more desperate horrour, as they came in with the more boldnesse. They are most bould to goe to God, who haue the least grounds of true boldnesse, and these haue most feare in the end. Isa. 33.14. If Christ make way for thee, then bee as bould, as thou wilt. Hebr. 4.14, 15, 16, and chap. 10.19.22.
In this Manuduction, or
 leading to God,  wee consider two things. First the ground of it. Secondly the maner, and meanes. The ground is feare, and diffidence, which by this Manuduction is healed, that wee may goe to God with boldnesse, and confidence. There bee two things, that make boldnesse, and confidence; and the contrary makes feare, and diffidence. First affinitie of nature. Secondly familiaritie, and acquaintance: the first is the cause of the latter. The corruption, and contrarietie of our nature, and our estrangement, and vnacquaintance with God, by dayly defection from him by actuall sinne, makes vs feare, and distrust God, and therefore cannot, nor dare
 not goe to God by our selues, but wee must be led by such a one, as is of the same infinite, Holy, and perfect nature with God, and neuer departed from him,Ioh. 1.18. (...). but lies alwayes in his bosome, who leading vs by the hand, wee haue boldnesse towards God.
For that wee may bee bould, and confident with God: First our hearts, natures, and consciences must bee purged, from all that which is contrary to God, and made of Gods nature. Secondly, wee must haue perfect acquaintance with God, as lying in his bosome; neither of which haue wee in our selues, and in our owne persons, but in the person of Christ, dwelling in our hearts by Faith,
 Ephes. 3.17. and by putting on the Lord Iesus Christ, we haue both: first our consciences are purged from all that which is contrary to God, as the guilt of sinne, as Hebr. 10. Draw neere with a true heart, in assurance of Faith.
Faith first purgeth the heart, and by that purgation after increaseth its owne assurance in the heart.First, a true heart purged, and sanctified, and then followes assurance of faith. But what makes a true heart, and like to God? He shewes its one by two things. First sprinckled with the blood of Christ, to iustification, and Christ dwelling in it. Secondly, washed in our bodies with pure water of sanctification, begun in it. As the strongest, and stoutest creatures are afraid of those things, which are contrary to their natures,
 which other creatures neuer so weake feare not, being of the same nature. No more fearefull creature then a fish, flying at the shadow of a man; yet it feares not the Ocean sea, because its of its owne nature, which Lyons, and the stoutest creatures feare.
 Acquaintance, and familiaritie with God. A sheepe feares not his Shepheard, by reason of acquaintance, whom yet the Beare, and the Wolfe feare: whatsoeuer is strange, and vnacquainted, is fearefull. If we acquaint our selues with God, and walke with him as his friends, we shall haue the more bouldnesse with God:Hos. 13.8. else hee meetes vs as a Beare robbed of her whelps, and as a Lyon in secret places.
 In whom both these are wholly wanting, as in Deuils, and all wicked men, there is no accesse to God, no acquaintance, nor communion with him, as in all of vs by nature, wee are alients from God, and strangers from the wombe, and goe astray, and can neuer come where God is. In whom these are imperfect, as in the regenerate; that nature is partly renewed, and fellowship, and acquaintance with God in part, to know God by repentance; but in part through contrarietie, and corruption of nature, and defection from God dayly by actuall sins, there is no immediate accesse to God, but by a Mediatour, leading by the hand: as among men that
 are strangers, though of the same nature. In this mixt condition, there is a mixt motion of accesse to God, which is by the Manuduction of a Mediatour, of perfect nature, and intimate fellowshippe with God. If in our owne persons wee were perfectly holy, and like vnto God in our nature, and had full, and perfect acquaintance with God, neuer departing from him, nor estranged by any sinne; then wee might goe to God of our selues, and needed not a Mediatour, to take vs by the hand.
Againe, haue wee neuer so much corruption of nature, if there bee any true grace, and sparke of Gods nature, and life in vs, wee need not feare, and runne
 away from God, as long as wee haue a Mediatour, to take vs by the hand, who will not despise, nor quench the smoaking flaxe,Matth. 12. nor breake the bruised reede,Heb. 10.14. but with one offering hath perfected for euer, them that are sanctified, in any small measure. And though we dayly fall from fellowship with God by sinnes, yet if there bee any constant will, and desire of repentance, and seedes of conuersion, and acquaintance with God, and that wee hate not fellowship with God, as the Deuils, and flie from him, (as they are not capable of a Mediatour, by such a contrariety, to lead them, neither are such their children.) We are capable of a Mediatour, to bring vs into
 perfect fellowshippe with God, and of such a Shepheard to leade vs, and conuert vs. 1. Iohn 2.1, 2. God in himselfe is full, and perfect light,See 1. Ioh. 1 5.10. with chap. 2.1.2. and in him is no darkenesse at all: Wee by nature are nothing but darkenesse, and in vs is no light at all.
Now comes Christ a Mediatour betweene vs both, that because there can be no communion betweene light, and darknesse, Christ the middle person in Trinitie, becomes a middle person also betweene God and vs, by taking our flesh; betweene God that simple light, and vs that are nothing but darkenesse, and communicating of both our natures, and taking vpon him all our sinnes, brings
 vs into fellowshippe with God, reconciling, and killing the enmitie betweene God and vs in iustification, and then imparting Gods nature in part, in sanctification: which because its imperfect, by his perfect sacrifice, and intercession, and leading to God dayly, hee reneweth, and increaseth our fellowship with God, and communion, till we be presented perfect in Christ Iesus, to God his Father. According therfore to our mixt condition in this life of light, and darkenesse, holinesse, and corruption, wee haue a mixt accesse to God, which is by Manuduction.
Hence arise these consectaries. First, wee must haue sinne, corruption of
 nature, contrarietie and enmitie to God in nature, and life, and often fall from God by daily sinnes; else we needed not a Mediator. We might goe to God of our selues. Secondly, We haue neede of such and so great a Mediatour to lead vs to God, as is holy, harmelesse, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heauens, because the cursed enmity of our natures, and estrangement from God, so requires it, and needs it. None other can lead such wicked sinners to God, so full of enmitie and abhomination in nature and life, to so iust and holy a God, but such an infinite holy Sonne of God. Thirdly, If there be any sparke of God and Christs
 nature and life in vs, its sufficient to make vs capable of such a Mediatour, to take vs by the hand as his brethren, partakers of his flesh and blood, to bring vs to God his Father. Fourthly, Such as haue no loue to God, nor fellowship with Christ by repentance, but loue darkenesse rather then light, and fellowship with sinne and Satan, haue in this estate no benefite of this Mediatour.
 Hereby we see, what it is to be a Puritan. To professe or thinke himselfe to be so holy of himselfe, as daring to goe to God in his owne name, that he needs not a Mediatour to lead him; that feeles no such filth and corruption in himselfe, for which God
 should abhorre him: or if there be sinne, and corruption, yet its so little, light, and veniall, that we neede not make so great friends and suite, a Saint or Angel may be sufficient for mediation. Such a Puritane was the proud Pharisee, and euery carnall presumptuous Atheist, who without faith and repentance dare goe to God in the Church, to the Word and Sacraments, and such as goe in confidence of their ceremoniall righteousnesse. These lay the imputation of Puritanisme on others, which themselues chiefely practise.
 Sinne being an infinite euill, and infinitely hated of God, its infinite pride and presumption for any creature to dare to present such
 a sinner to God. For its worse then any sinne committed against God, to be an Aduocate for sinners, to dare to speake for them, and to countenance them before God, as Romanes 1. verse last. vnlesse that hee that shall dare to doe this, be as great as God, and as a surety will vndertake to satisfie and answer God for them: and therfore to make any Saint a Mediatour to God for sinners, is to make him God. So much of the Ground of this leading.
In the Meanes and Manner of leading, we consider. First, the Person leading. Secondly, the Persons led. Thirdly, the hands by which the one leadeth, and the other is led.

The Person leading, as I haue shewed, is only the second Person in Trinitie the Sonne of God, made flesh like vnto vs, as I haue already shewed.
The Persons led, are the Saints and children of God, reconciled by Christs flesh crucified, and imperfectly sanctified as is also shewed. The hands by which this leading is made, are carefully and distinctly to bee considered. And first the hand of Christ the Person leading.
The hand of the second Person in Trinitie Iesus Christ, euen now as he is man, is his spirit. As it was the hand of the second Person before hee was made Flesh, so it is now since he is made Flesh, especially
 since his Resurrection. The hand of God is the hand also of Flesh, now risen from the dead, and glorified. Now God hath no hand but his Spirit; the Father and the Sonne haue no hands but the Spirit the holy Ghost. For nothing can proceed from the Father and the Sonne, but the holy Ghost, which is sometimes called the hands of God: Thy hands haue made mee and fashioned me, that is, as else-where is expounded, his Spirit, Eccl. 11.5. Who knoweth the way of the Spirit, and how the bones grow in the wombe of her that is with childe?Iob 26.13. His Spirit garnished the heauens, and renueth the Face of the Earth;Psal. 104.^0. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and
 they are created, which in other places is called his hands: His hands prepared the dry land;Psal. 101.26. And Christ calles it the finger of God; If I by the finger of God cast out Diuels,Luk. 11.20. then is the Kingdome of God come vnto you, which is expounded by him to be his Spirit. Its also called the breath of God which proceeds from him; the heauens were made by the word of the Lord, and all the Host of them by the breath of his mouth; and His word and Spirit proceede and come forth from him together: that is, his commandement and infinite diuine Spirit and power, as his Arme, and therefore its called the Word of his power, Heb. 1.2. Who hath beleeued our report,
 and to whom is the Arme of the Lord reuealed? and the word is (...), breathed forth by his Spirit. Its called the shadow of God, and the wings of God, and whatsoeuer proceeds from the Father and the Son, to Man or to any creature, is only the holy Spirit. Luk. 1.35. The holy Ghost shall come vpon thee, and the power of the most High shall ouer shadow thee.Psal. 90.1. Psal. 90.1. Such as dwell in the secret of the most High shall abide vnder the shadow of the Almightie. Psal. 63. Vnder the shadow of thy wings, will I reioyce; all which must be meant of his Spirit, counselling, comforting, strengthning, as Isa. 30.1. Woe bee to them that seeke a couering, and not by my Spirit. Therefore
 Mary conceiuing by the holy Ghost, without all power of nature, a weake woman, sings,Luke 2. that God had shewed strength with his Arme. As the shadow comes from the body, so the holy Ghost from God, which is therefore sometimes called a shadow, because it shewes it selfe but darkely, obscurely, and mystically, and yet surely and powerfully, and this especially in the Ministry of the Church, both in Ministers and people. In Ministers, as Isa. 50.16. I haue hid thee vnder the shadow of my hand, that I may plant the heauens, etc. that is, I will powerfully by my Spirit way thee, and inable to this so great a worke, as to make a new world by thee,
 and protect thee from diuels and men. No shadow can proceede from God, but what is God himselfe, his Spirit and Diuine power and vertue, which when its giuen obscurely, and not so manifestly, is called a shadow. In people as Acts 3.19. that is, when God in his infinite loue, mercy and grace, shining to you as his face, shall send to you his Spirit, the Comforter, which shall assure you of the pardon of your sinnes, and refresh you with ioy, peace, comfort in Christs righteousnesse applied to you, blotting out your sins out of your consciences, if ye continue to grieue, repent and to be sorrowfull for them daily, and by sorrow to kill and mortifie
 them. Let all your care be only to repent, and to lament your sinnes, to mortifie them, and to grieue for them all your dayes, and God knowes the best season when to refresh you with comfort, which is the Season of all Seasons, (...), that is, when to giue you the Spirit the Comforte^, as an infinite gift of his Fatherly loue and mercy, and when to shew you that his Fatherly Face, and the refreshing from it, by sending his holy Spirit to assure your grieued hearts of his fauour, and true reconciled in Christ, which is the most comfortable refreshing season, that can come to a mans soule. Now we must not appoint God this season, when to
 refresh vs, with the comforts of his Face, and Loue by his Spirit; but we must goe on in our worke, and labour of repentance, and daily turning to God flying all sins, and vsing all meanes of obtaining all the good promised vs, and God in his due time, after all our toile, labour, and sorrowes, will send his Spirit to refresh vs.
But this by the way, to shew what Gods Hand is.
Now this Hand of God, is also the Hand of Christ the second Person as made Flesh; Its the Hand of Flesh, especially as risen from the dead and glorified; the holy Ghost is his Breath, Shadow, Wings, Arme, Hands, and whatsoeuer proceedeth from him
 towards his Church, both Ministers and people, is nothing but that eternall Spirit, the third Person, who proceedeth from the Father and the Sonne, Iohn 14.26. By which as High Priest,Heb. 9. hee offered himselfe without spot to God, as with his owne Hands; So now much more the same Spirit proceedth from him in more abundance from his Flesh glorified. For before,Ioh. 7.39. the Spirit was not giuen in that abundance, because that Iesus was not yet glorified. But now this Flesh of Christ being glorified, this eternall Spirit is all the Breath, Armes, Hands, Strength, Shadow, Light, and Glory of Christ; He now breathes nothing but the holy Ghost and Spirit.
 He breathed vpon his Disciples,Ioh. 20.21. and said, Receiue ye the holy Ghost. He hath it now at command as his Breath, and as naturall to him, and can as easily and plentifully giue it; He holds the 7. Starres his Apostles, and Ministers in his right hand, not of Flesh, but of the holy Ghost, and being risen, he gaue commandements to his Apostles, not by a humane breath and voice, as before, but more specially by the holy Ghost, Acts 1.2. See Iohn 5. The time shall come and now is, but shall be much more, that the dead shall heare the voyce of the Sonne of God, that is, shall shall haue his quickning spirit, 1. Cor. 15. The first Adam was made a liuing soule, and all that he could
 communicate to his posteritie and children, if he had continued in innocency, had bin only a liuing soule, qualified with Gods holy Image: but the second Adam is made a quickning spirit, which hee communicates to his members and posteritie, and which proceedes from him. This Spirit is Christs light, by which he shines to vs, Eph. 5. Awake thou that sleepest, and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall shine vnto thee. (...), Whatsoeuer proceeds from Christs Flesh now in heauen, is nothing but Spirit; He is ascended farre aboue all things,Eph. 4.7, 8. to fill all things with his Spirit. Whereas therefore he is said to feed vs from heauen with his Bodie as Manna, and to wash
 vs from our sinnes in his blood, to guide vs with his light, all this is nothing but his Spirit, which being purchased by his death, comes as it were through his body and blood giuen to vs, as our own flesh and blood. This Spirit is obtained and giuen by his death and sufferings, and comes to vs by his humane flesh and nature, into our flesh and nature.Ioh. 6.63. Therefore his Flesh is called meate indeed, and his blood drinke indeede. For the flesh of it selfe profiteth nothing, but because for the merit of his sufferings in his flesh and by it, as by a cundit the third Person the holy Ghost, proceeding naturally from the Father and the Sonne, is hereby procured to flow, issue, and
 come forth to vs and into our hearts by grace. Galat. 4.4. Because yee are sonnes reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Sonne into your hearts, which cryeth Abba Father. The Spirit doth and would euer naturally issue and proceed from God into vs, as Iam. 1.17. did not our sinnes stop the currant, and keepe him out of our hearts, by our indisposition and vnworthinesse, and vncapablenesse of receiuing him, as Ioh. 14. Which the world cannot receiue, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but our sins remooued and abolished by the death and sacrifice of Christ, and by his flesh and body broken, through it, as
 by a conduite the spirit againe hath its issue, and vent to flow into our sinfull flesh, and hearts, and God becomes againe that (...), That liuing God,Iam. 1.3. that giues to all men simply without exception, whatsoeuer his sinnes he, and reproacheth no man, that by faith comes to him; but poures of his Spirit vpon all flesh.Act. 2.17. This Spirit as its God the Fathers hand, so its Christs our Sauiours hand, the hand of flesh, which Christ reacheth from heauen to vs, as to his brethren, and takes vs by the hand. Now that Christ is glorified in our flesh and nature, that Spirit which from eternitie proceeded from the Father and the Sonne, and was as their breath and hand, by which
 they made the worlds, and breathed into mans face the breath of life, and made him a liuing soule; the same spirit and third person, doth now proceed from the Father of Christ, as man, and from Christ the second Person Incarnate, and is now both the breath of Christ, and the arme of Christ, which breath of eternall spirit, Christ now breathes into man dead in sinne, to make him a new creature, created in Christ Iesus vnto good works, creating anew all the powers and faculties of soule and body, as it were new hands, and feete, quickned with a new life, for new motions towards God, and seruices and workes; its the hand and arme of Christ, which
 he now reueales and makes bare from heauen, and thrusts into our hearts, quickning, and creating in vs new hands, that is, new faculties of our soules, to lay hold on and fasten on spirituall good, purchased by his death, and offered vs by his Gospel.
Christ by his Priestly Office, hath performed all things needfull for our saluation, and prepared all sauing matter. And by his Propheticall Office in the Ministery of his Word, offers vs himselfe the second Person incarnate to be our Sauiour, and all his sauing benefits and spirit, if we will reach forth our hands, that is, the faculties of our soules, to receiue and apprehend him; but our hands
 lye dead in sinnes, that is, our minds and hearts from vnderstanding, choosing, willing and affecting any such Person and his Spirit and benefits offered. Therefore Christ as King risen from the dead, and as Lord of life, reacheth forth his arme, and hand from heauen, and creates in vs new hand^ that is, new mindes and hearts; Hee breathes into vs the breath of life, that is, his quickning spirit, that quickens our dead hands, to apprehend spirituall things; For the naturall man, by his naturall soule and spirit,1. Cor. 2. as (...). Therefore the Spirit creates in vs. First, a right hand of Faith, to know and apprehend the Person of the Son of God, and to choose, and take him
 for our Sauiour, as he is reuealed, and offered in the Word, reiecting all other Persons, Angels, or Saints, or any creature, or our selues, and our workes, betaking our selues to Christ alone, and to this second Person in Trinitie made flesh, fastning vpon him, and receiuing him as offered and commended to vs in the Gospel, euen as crucified, and made our King, Priest, and Prophet, our Wisedome, Righteousnesse, sanctification, and redemption, and all that good which the Gospel sets him forth, and commends him vnto vs, Christ himselfe giues vs such a minde, 1. Iob. 5. The Sonne of God is come and hath giuen vs a minde to know him that is true, and
 his infinite hand and arme, that is, his Spirit, creates this minde as a hand, by which we fasten vpon this Person, euen the hand of Faith, beleeuing the Gospel, by which we are vnited to Christ this Person, and are in him that is true, and the only true Sauiour, that is, in his Sonne Iesus Christ, this is very God and eternall life, and therefore can by his Spirit, giue vs such a minde to know him, and quicken our dead minds, as a liuing hand to apprehend his Person, with all his benefits offered to vs.
2. This Spirit and Hand of Christ creates and quickens in vs a left Hand, of a renewed Will and Affections. For our wils and affections being dead in sin,
 selfe-loue, and lusts of the world, this Spirit breathes into them such holy motions, as casts out these wicked lusts, and swaies the will and affections to heauenly things, which spirit the Comforter so felt, quickning the will and affections, they againe close with this spirit, consent to it, imbrace and hugge these holy motions, and resigne vp themselues with full resolution, to forsake all for his Spirit and Graces, and to be ruled, guided, and swayed only by this Spirit; as by the hand of Christ, and to be comforted, supported, and ordered by it. That as the Faith of the minde as a right hand, chuseth the right Person, and preferreth him before all,
 and takes him only by the hand as a Mediatour, all-sufficient to bring him to God; So the renued will and affections ioyne hands with his spirit, that omnipotent quickning hand which hath created them a new, and put a new life into them, by spirituall and diuine inspiration; which Person with all his offices and benefits offered, and which hand of his spirit and spirituall motions and inspirations felt in our hearts, by the word preached, when our hearts, wils, and affections, doe (...) gladly imbrace, then Christ and wee are one, and we goe hand in hand together to God, and to heauen, he leading vs by the hand of his Spirit, and we following
 him by the motions, and inspirations of it, Rom. 8. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sonnes of God. But if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his. Now some in hearing the Word, resist, and put backe the hand of Christ, the holy Ghost, reiecting all spirituall motions, and will not bee led by them, but choosing rather to follow their owne reason, flesh, sense, and lusts, to walke after the flesh, not after the Spirit, as sheepe that goe astray, and will not returne to Christ the Shepheard of their soules to bee led, and guided by him, 1. Peter 2. Rom. 10.21. In preaching of the word, Christ stretcheth foorth his hands, that
 is, offereth vs his Spirit, to counsell, guide, inlighten, sanctifie, and men refuse it; which some doe ignorantly, the Spirit hauing not inlightned their mindes, to inable them to discerne it selfe, to bee the hand of Christ graciously offered, and reached forth to them; and this is the common state of the World, and of all sinfull naturall men, as Christ sheweth, Iohn 14. Which the world cannot receiue, because it seeth him not, nor knoweth him, that is, which Spirit and hand of Christ, the world, and all naturall men cannot receiue, nor lay hands on, or ioyne hands with, because they are not inlightned by it, to know it, and Christ, and therefore cannot will, or
 desire them, but yee know him, for hee dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.
Some doe it vpon knowledge wilfully, and maliciously, who beeing made partakers of the holy ghost, and inlightened by it, so farre as to know Christes person, the Lord of glory, and his Spirit of glory, and to see and discerne his gracious arme, and power, and to taste, and feele in some measure, and to perceiue the spirituall motions, and inspirations of it, and the powers of the world to come, that is, the powerfull vertues, and suggestions to a better life: but this Spirit, and the hand of God, not ouercomming the stony hardnesse, and impenitencie of the heart, and
 will, dead as a stone in selfe loue, and lusts of the world, to make it resolue to forsake it selfe, and its lusts, and the world, to receiue, and choose Christs person, benefits, counting all things as doung for him, and to imbrace the hand of his Spirit, and promises aboue all creatures, and his spirituall motions, and inspirations: but though they know them to bee such, yet for selfe-loue, and for their lusts sake, to keepe them vnmortified, they will rather fight against the spirit, checke it, and kill, and strangle the good motions of the spirit, and rather crucifie Christ againe, and peirce through his hands and feete, then that hee shall crucifie their flesh and lusts, and his hands
 mortifie them and their lusts, and therefore through the rottennesse of their vnrenewed hearts, they vtterly fall away from Christ his person, and Gospel, whom they know, and haue professed, and acknowledged, and maliciously hate him, and persecute him, and his Ministers, and members, and in the disposition, and affection of their hearts, as much as in them lies, they crucifie againe to themselues the Sonne of God, and make a mocke, and scorne of him, and of sinceritie, and holinesse, and tread vnder feete the Sonne of God, and despight the spirit of grace, seeking to expose to all shame, godlinesse, and sinceritie, and godly Ministers, and people, euen
 whom their consciences know to be such, and onely because they professe, and vrge the mortification of their flesh, and lusts, and liuing, and walking spiritually, which their corrupt, and impenitent hearts, and willes cannot indure. But they that are Christs,Galat. 5. haue crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, that is in the heart, choice, will, and purpose, accepting, and allowing, and imbracing that, which Christ hath done for them to that end, which wicked men abhorre and reiect, being offered them.
Some through ignorance, reiect the gracious, and mercifull hand of Christ, reached from Heauen, euen his Spirit, and sauing vertues,
 and benefits. Some though knowing them by illumination of minde, and by some taste of Diuine sweetnesse, and comfort in them: yet, ouercome of their lusts, and loue of the world, their hearts, and willes vnrenewed, and vnchanged, grow to hate, and detest them, seeking their destruction, and abolishing, because they seeke the destruction of their flesh, and lusts; and therefore had rather Christ were againe crucified, and dead for euer in the graue, then that hee should rise, with such hands of his Spirit, as should crucifie their flesh, and lusts.
Therefore such is their malice, that they would euen pierce through these hands of Christs spirit, as
 the Iewes pierced through, and crucified through ignorance, fleshly Christ, as I may say, in the dayes of his flesh, when he was in abasement, to whom Christ promiseth pardon vpon repentance;Matth. 12. If any man speake a word, against the Sonne of man, that is, as onely knowing him as a Man, and ignorant of his God-head, and Spirit, it may bee forgiuen him: But if any man blaspheame the Holy ghost, and God-head of Christ shining, and sparkling in him, it shall neuer bee forgiuen him.
Some now maliciously, crucifie Spirituall Christ, risen from the dead, and shining into their hearts, and soules, by his Spirit, and comming to apply his
 Crosse, and Death, to crucifie their flesh, and lusts, by his Spirit, and Spirituall hands: they now, not as in the dayes of his flesh, but in the eternitie of his Spirit, and Glory, would crucifie againe, and abolish for euer.
They that are thus affected towards the spirit, are said to be so affected to Christ; because the Spirit is Christs hand, and because it reueales, presents, and offers Christs person, merits, righteousnesse, and the sauing vertue of his Crosse, to crucifie all our lusts, for this spirit takes of Christ, and shewes it vnto vs, Ioh. 16.9, 10. it comes with its hands full of Christ. So that as I loue Christ, and take him by the hand, when
 I gladly imbrace his Spirit, and suffer my selfe to bee led by it, and its spirituall motions: so contrarily, they hate Christ, and crucifie him, and pierce through his hands, that hate his Spirit, and destroy his spirituall motions suggested to their hearts.
For as some of the Iewes, through ignorance of Christs God-head, crucified Christ onely, as a poore man, the Carpenters sonne, that had proudly vsurped a Kingdome ouer them, and against Caesar, and therefore put him to death as a Traitor, and as onely crucifying his fleshly hands: Yet some others, and especially the Scribes and Pharisees that knew him by the light of
 the Holy Ghost, that hee was God, and by the finger of God had cast out deuils, (as Christ knowing their hearts, professeth they did) They crucified him not as the Sonne of man, nor onely his fleshly hands, as hee was the Carpenters sonne, but his Spirituall hands, as he was the Sonne of God, hating his spirit and power, in the Ministery of his Word, and Miracles, and Doctrine, and Disciples, for which sake they chiefely crucified him, that if they could possibly, they might abolish for euer his Name, Doctrine, Religion, Profession, Spirit, and Church, which now began to bee gathered. Hee was crucified of these, not as the Sonne of Ioseph, but as the
 Anointed, and Holy One of God, anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, doing what they could to crucifie the Holy ghost, and to pierce through the hands and feete of the Spirit. They trode vnder feet, not the sonne of man, but the Sonne of God, and made a mocke of him. Hebr. 10.
(...) in confidence, Christ leading, and taking vs by the hand, and we laying hold on his flesh crucified for vs, wee goe confidently. If wee lay hold on any creature else, and bee led and guided by any Saint, or Angel, wee goe with feare, and doubting, with perplexitie, and anxietie, when conscience of sinne accuseth vs, and are neuer
 secure, that wee shall bee saued. To bee bould and confident with God at any time, but especially in the conscience of sinne, is a marueilous courage: Before whose face and presence, the Angels are abashed, the mountaines melt, whose Maiestie and presence is, so glorious, fearefull, and terrible, that no creature can abide his presence, when hee is angry. The most Holy Angels without spot of sinne in nature, and conscience, yet couer their faces, as abashed at his presence, though doing his will, in obeying the voyce of his mouth.
How much more must sinfull man, dust and ashes melt, and bee confounded with shame, and horrour,
 at the presence of so Holy a God? yet Faith in Christ, makes confident and bold. Iacob had strength, and courage, and preuailed with God. Moses indured as seeing him, that is inuisible, by this Faith in Christ, who at Horeb in the giuing of the Law, where the sight was so terrible, hee confessed, I feare and quake. Rom. 5.11. Wee not onely glory in afflictions, saith Paul, which some stout hearted carnall men haue done by pride, ambition, or strength of nature, who vpon the sight of God, haue trembled like Belteshar, but wee also glory in God, see 1. Iohn 4.17. and 3.21. Abrahams boldnesse was with God, to parle with him, though hee was but dust and ashes.

Wee see how hard a thing it is, to be bold in the presence of a King, a mortall man, especially if he be angry: His wrath is like the roaring of a Lyon: How much more to bee bold in the presence of God, the King of Kings, when hee is angry, who cutteth off the spirit of Princes, who is terrible to the Kings of the earth, that they feare in their Priuie-chambers? Psa. 14.4. Psal. 76.5.
Sinne weakens, and breakes the heart, and soule of man, by breeding doubts, feares, griefes, tremblings, and horrours: So the Deuils, and Adam, by their fall, brake themselues into shiuers of feares, and tremblings. And as the Deuill trembles, so our corrupt
 nature, and guilty conscience, like his, is to doe as the Deuill doeth; for wee are broken, and infected like him by sinne, Rom. 5. when wee were yet of no strength, Christ died for vs, that is, when wee were broken, and infected with the guilt of all sinnes. Therefore the Lawe, first breakes vs, and kils vs with the sight, and guilt of sinne, before Christ cures vs, and binds vs vp; and this is the cure of the heart, and soule, by Faith in Christs blood, and breaking for vs, his terrours, horrours, griefes, and paines, in soule and body, that we are strengthened with confidence,Ephe. 3.16. by his spirit in the inner-man,2. Tim. 1.7 and haue not the spirit of feare, but of power and loue, and of a sound
 minde,Rom. 8.15 Isa. 61.1. not the spirit of bondage, to feare againe, but of adoption, to cry confidently, Abba Father: This is to bind vp the broken hearted.
Therefore is Christ called the Rocke of the soule, Mat. 16.18. Vpon this Rocke will I build my Church, because hee giues the heart, and soule, built on it by Faith, strength of courage, nd confidence. Therefore the fearefull, and vnbeleeuing, are cast out with dogs. Reuel. 21.
Christ is the Redeemer of the soule chiefely, and therefore from feares, doubts, and griefes chiefely, and from the spirit of bondage, to feare againe. The chiefest vertue of bread, is to incourage, and strengthen the heart: So
 Christ crucified, his body broken, and fed on by faith, its vertue is, to incourage, and strengthen the heart with confidence towards God.
If therefore wee feele feare, fainting, doubting, goe the more to the Sacrament of Christes body, which as it requires some courage, and hope, that we shall finde strength, and nourishment of confidence by it; so it also giues it, and makes vs bold with God, and fearelesse of sinne, and death, as Christ incourageth. Ioh. 16. vlt.
 Therefore renouncing all other meanes of courage, and confidence, and seeking not to make our selues safe, and bould in our selues, our workes, righteousnesse,
 wealth, friends, let vs goe onely by Faith to Christ, to giue all true confidence, securitie, and comfort of minde, and heart, by his death, and blood, as the onely bread of life, and strength to the soule, and of cordiall vertues.
For all carnall men feele feare, and griefe, and anxietie of minde, and in this sense, they go to the world, and wealth, to the Lawe, and workes, and seeke to secure, and strengthen, and free themselues from these feares, and griefes, and to heale themselues by wealth, and trusting here to, and say, If I could doe, and liue, thus, and thus, and had so much wealth, or performe this, or that righteousnesse: then my
 minde would be quiet, and at rest, and fearelesse. But these things can neuer giue securitie, and rest to the minde, and heart, but vexation. Goe to Christ by Faith, and hee will giue thee rest. Matth. 11. verse the last.
 Therefore confidence is as well a fruit of Faith, as the forme of Faith. For Faith goes to Christ, for increase of it selfe, its life, and strength of confidence. It could not goe at all to Christ, if it had not some strength, and life of confidence: but because it feeles weakenesse, of feare, and doubting, it goes to Christ to bee incouraged, and strengthened, and quickned more, crying,Luke 17.5. Lord increase our faith, and giue vs mor^
 courage, and strength of Faith in heart, by feeding vs with thy body, and blood,Mar. 9.24. Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbeleefe. Therefore he saith here, by Faith of him, that is, by going to Christ by Faith, and betaking our selues to him, and laying hold on him, wee haue a confident accesse to God, with more confidence, then we can haue by laying hold on, and choosing any other to lead vs. Therefore eate his Body, and drinke his Blood, that is, take and choose his Death, and blood, for your onely meate, to nourish, and strengthen your hearts with comfort, and peace, as onely cordiall, to giue you courage, and confidence against sinne, and Satan, and boldnesse with
 God, and it will doe so. For as meate requires some life, and strength, to take, eate, and digest it, and so it giues, and increaseth more life, and strength to the heart: So Christ the bread of life, requires some strength of Faith, to receiue him, and digest him, and so he giues more strength, and courage with God, and against sinne.
Therefore we must goe to the Sacrament, as well to increase faith, as to bring Faith with vs. In going, we must by Faith renounce all comfort, and confidence in our selues, and all creatures, and goe out of them to Christ onely, and imbrace him, that hee may giue vs all true boldnesse, and confidence towardes
 God, that nothing may incourage vs, but Christ, and that hee may giue vs better courage, then any other creature can giue vs.
Choose, and take Christ, for thy onely (...) thy guide, and Captaine to lead thee to God, and hee will incourage thee, with inuincible strength, and confidence, and giue thee a heart of steele: but trust to any thing else, and it will faile thy heart, and not be a sure Rocke to it, but leaue it in feare, doubting, anxietie. Goe to Christ onely, and hee will giue the legges to goe better, and strengthen thy feeble knees, and make straight steps to thy feete, and incourage thy heart to come more to him, and to God by him: but goe to
 any other, and they will increase thy feares, doubts, and scruples. Take heart to goe to God by Christ, and incourage thy heart, and hee will giue thee more courage; Bee strong, and he shall strengthen your hearts. Psal. 26.14.
All true Ministers and Christians boldnesse, and (...), to preach, or goe to Gods house, to appeare before him, to worship him, is by faith in Christ, and towards God, as seeing him, and in sinceritie approouing the heart to him, as beholding him in Christ, 1. Thess. 2.1, 2. The hypocrites boldnesse is only towards men, in blindnesse and darknesse, not seeing God, but only men, whose eyes and eares they can
 please, and only satisfie their exspectation. If Ministers could manifest Gods face and presence, and God would shew himselfe in them, as in the Primitiue Church; only beleeuers durst ioyne themselues to the Church, and to the Lord: hypocrites would either abhorre, or tremble, or bee ashamed to appeare, Act. 5.13, 14. 1. Cor. 14.24, 25.
The best and greatest boldnesse and confidence is towards God. Diuels and wicked men by sinne, pride, malice, or by wealth, learning, authoritie, power, may be bold towards sin full men, weake and impotent and base like the earth as themselues: but they haue no courage or boldnesse
 towards God, but quake and tremble at his Maiestie; and especially when they are ouermatched by death, or any other euill. They that are bold in mans day, only beholding man, shall tremble in the Lords day, when God shall exalt himselfe. Such as put their strength and confidence in their wealth, pride, malice, are most feareful and cowardly with God and death.
Let vs draw neere with a true heart in assurance of Faith,Heb. 10.22 without all doubt and scruple, seeing we haue such an all sufficient High Priest ouer the House of God,Heb. 7.25 that can perfectly saue them that come to God by him,Heb. 7.26 holy, harmelesse, vndefiled, separate from sinners, and


 higher then the heauens, that hath all-sufficiencie, of all-sauing good, as King, Priest, and Prophet, to vanquish, and remooue all sinnes, and deuils, and to conferre all good.
Receiue Christ into thee by faith, lay hold on him to lead thee, renouncing reason, and sense, that thou mayest be strong, and confident without all feare. For therefore we feare, and are in doubt, because we looke to our selues, and to our owne strength, and righteousnesse, and rest thereon, and goe not wholly out of our selues to Christ, to rest our hearts on him, and to receiue him onely into vs, to comfort, and incourage vs, but wee receiue the World, or our workes into
 our hearts, and feede on them, which will neuer strengthen our hearts. This bread wants that staffe, and strength, and vertue to vphold our hearts against sinne, Satan, and so many crosses, that they cannot be strong, but full of feare and doubting, because they are not built on Christ the Rocke, and are not fedde with his body broken, and blood shed, which only is that bread which strengthens the heart of man to goe to God, without feare and fainting. For therefore was Christs soule and heart, and body broken with feare, fainting, horrors, that ours might bee bound vp and healed.
If we haue no boldnesse with men, but feare their
 earthen faces, and tremble at their wrath, whose breath is in their nostrils: If the conscience of sinne make vs tremble before men: how much more before God the Iudge? 1. Pet. 3.15. with Isa. 8.12, 13. Seeke boldnesse with God. Its nothing what boldnesse we haue with men, that our hearts and consciences warrant vs to stand vpon Interrogatories with men, and challenge, Who dare lay any thing to our charg? and we can shew our faces in any court, and stand vpon our righteousnesse But dare we doe so with God, and stand vpon interrogatories with him, either in Iustification, as 1. Pet. 3.21. or Sanctification,Psal. 138.23. as Dauid, Lord Prooue mee and try mee if
 there be any way of wickednesse in me? In whom wee haue accesse with confidence, as we haue our accesse to God out of our selues only in and by Christ, so we haue our confidence only in Christ, and not in our selues.
First, in regard of the matter, all matter of confidence is only in Christ, viz. his Death, Resurrection, Merits, Righteousnesse, Intercession, as 1. Pet. 1 21. and 3.21, 22. Luk. 18.9. with verse 8. and 13, 14. 2. Cor. 1.9. Phil. 3.3.9.
Secondly, as the Rocke and efficient cause of our actuall confidence, dispensing it to vs arbitrarily, as he sees fit, and we need, as enemies, troubles and dangers increase. There is nothing
 in vs naturally but feare, and a spirit of infirmitie, and weaknes, wherewith we are bound, and goe faintly, but Christ suggesteth and breatheth into vs a spirit of courage, and confidence aboue that we haue by faith, whereof faith is an instrument and meanes to draw it forth. Our hearts naturally meditate feare, and we weaken and discourage our selues, and Christ incourageth vs, and giues vs strength and confidence. We must vnderstand that there is a double confidence. 1. Seminall, which is in faith, a kinde of naturall child-like confidence seeded in vs, whereby we are well perswaded of Gods fatherly heart and good will, as little
 children naturally are of their parents affection, and yet vpon all dangers and miscarriages, or other accidents, they feare and tremble through weakenesse of iudgement, and apprehension, and imbecillitie of nature, in which infirmities its the parents wisedome and indulgency to incourage and comfort,Eph. 6.4. not (...) to be furiously angry least they be discouraged and all together put out of heart. So is it with God and his children; they haue some child-like perswasion of God the Father his Loue, by which they goe to him; which perswasion is seminall in their hearts, the first habite of Faith, but which is not of strength to carry them to God with confidence
 when conscience of sinnes, Satan and Enemies, and dangers assault, but by weakenesse of iudgement and apprehension, and frailtie of the flesh, they are ready desperatly to cry out for feare, as the Disciples did at the sight of Christ comming like a ghost vpon the waters, till Christ incouraged them, and strengthned them saying; It is I, be not afraid, Christ is not furiously angry against our infirmities, feares, doubts, but spareth vs as a Father spareth his childe that serueth him as well as he can,Psal. 103. though with neuer such weakenesse and frailtie; and he supports vs in our feares and doubts, as Psal. 93.18. When I said my foote slippeth thy mercy O Lord held mee
 vp.Psa. 93.19. In the multitude of the thoughts of my heart, that is full of feares, doubtings, distractions, thy comforts reioyce my soule. So Christ giues all beleeuers confidence, dispensing it, as we need against our many sins, temptatious, dangers, enemies. For as our life is hid with Christ in God, so is our confidence, which is our life and strength, increased and dispensed as Christ pleaseth, as 2. Chro. 20.20. Trust in the Lord, and yee shall be assured, that is, confident. If yee by faith goe only to God, beleeuing that he is able and willing, according to his promise to helpe, and choose him only for your Sauiour, and protector, and reiecting all other, betake your selues to
 him alone, he will not only saue you, but giue assurance and securitie of saluation before-hand, which is indeede the greatest part of saluation, the healing of the soule of sinfull feares, doubts, and scruples, and stablishing the heart and minde in peace passing all vnderstanding, as I haue before touched.
Obiect. I feare my faith is not true, because I cannot be confidently assured that God will helpe me, not rest therein without feare.
Answ. Our Faith may be true though weake, and ioyned with feare. Let vs striue therefore against the feare and weaknesse of our nature, and flesh, and vse our weake faith to go vnto
 Christ, and he will giue vs strong confidence. That is his gift, and not of our selues. Its that fruit, or rather growth and increase of the first faith, sowen in our hearts rightly improoued, as Psal. 26.14. Be strong and he shall strengthen your hearts, and trust in the Lord, that is, doe you improoue your weake faith to goe to Christ, seeking to him for strength and courage, and increase of your faith, and goe not to any creatures, to make your selues strong, confident, and secure in them, and Christ will giue you confidence and securitie, as Psal. 73.26. My flesh faileth me, and my heart also, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for euer.

 This makes greatly for the comfort of the weake in faith. And let vs not exspect a faith without feare, infirmitie, anxietie: but striue against this weakenesse, and lament it, and vse this weake faith in going to Christ, to strengthen it with confidence. The chiefe treasure of confidence, and of this life of faith, Christ keepes in his owne hand, and will haue vs in the sense of our weaknesse of faith in his promise to goe to him for it, and depend on him to keepe, strengthen and support our weake faith, as he hath promised,Matth. 12. That hee will not quench the smoaking flaxe, nor breake the bruised reede.
We haue a small roote of faith in our selues, but
 the body and truncke is in Christ: by this small roote we liue and goe to Christ, and cleaue to him, and sigh to him in our weakenesse, and being thus humbled, we depend on him daily to support our faith, and increase our confidence, which we must not looke to haue alwaies in our selues, but in and from Christ as his free grace shall arbitrarily dispense the same.
Therfore he suffers some of his Saints, and members to be more weake then others, and fearefull, and into some he infuseth a greater spirit of confidence. Some goe weakely and faintly all their daies, and can hardly lift vp their weake hands,Heb. 12. and feeble
 knees, to make streight steps to their feete. And this Christ doth partly for exercise of his owne grace, and mercy in supporting such weake ones, and for exercise of our mercy and loue. Rom. 15.1, 2. 1. Thess. 5.7. As the soule infuseth not the like vigour, and vertue of life, comfort, strength into all the members of the body: So nor Christ.
We must as well goe to Christ for faith and confidence, as for any other grace, and he requires of vs perswasion and faith, that wee shall receiue it from him, viz. that he will in dangers, feares, sinnes, temptations, strengthen, incourage and comfort vs against them all, euen death, and hell, and all enemies. Say
 not, I am a creature so weak and faint in faith, that I shall neuer stand against these. Cast not away thy weake faith, as Heb. 10.35. Sit not still, and keepe not thy bed, because thou canst not goe so strongly to Christ as others can; but goe as well as thou canst with thy feeble weake knees, and let not that which is halting be turned out of the way but rather be healed;Heb. 12. Seeke for more strength of faith, rather then despaire and cast away all faith. Fight the good fight of faith, and striue to lay hold on Christ and he will strengthen thy faith; only seeke not to strengthen and secure thy heart in wealth, pollicie, thy owne righteousnesse. For he is the sheepheard of
 our soules,Psal. 23. and hath promised to conuert our soules and to dwell in our hearts, if we by faith choose him to dwell in vs, to bee his house, reiecting all other lords and spirits, then will he come into vs and strengthen vs by his Spirit in the inner man, as Eph. 3.16, 17. and he dwelling in vs, as in his house, we shall hold fast our confidence and hope of reioycing vnto the End. Heb. 3.
Therefore pray as the Disciples,Luk. 17.5. Lord increase our Faith, and cry as the Father of the Daemoniake,Mark. 9.24. Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbeleefe, and giue me confidence; and beleeue that hee will pardon thy weake faith, and heale it, as well as any other thy sinnes and enormities,
 as long as they are but infirmities which thou striuest against, lamentest and labourest for strength of faith, desiring aboue all to honour God with confidence. Beleeue hee will pardon the want of beleefe, as long as thou striuest and labourest to beleeue, and doest not affect infidelitie with an euill heart of infidelitie,Heb. 3. totally euill and vnfaithfull, to depart away from the liuing God, and to forsake him our Rocke and portion, choosing and preferring other creatures, as Heb. 10. vlt. For that which our hearts choose for our portion, they trust in, and are strong and confident in. Where our treasure is,Math 6. there will our hearts bee also.
 Lam. 3. The Lord is my Portion, saith my soule, therfore will I trust in him. Hereby I know, I haue some true faith, though with much feare, when I choose God to bee my chiefe portion, to be secure, confident and fearelesse in him. As a seruant that chooseth a Master, in whose power, riches, authority, for protection and maintenance, he reposeth himselfe to quiet, secure and rest his heart in him. Some choose wealth; some the Arme of flesh; But a Christian by faith chooseth Christ. Therefore Christ saith, A man cannot serue two Masters, to repose confidence and safety in them both, but wee must either cleaue to the one, and despise
 the other, or hate the one, and loue the other. So yee cannot serue God and Mammon, to seeke safetie and securitie from them both. The heart seekes its security but in one treasure. See Math. 6.21.24. That which is our portion giues vs confidence; It belongs not to our Faith, but to our portion which faith chooseth, and pitcheth on, to giue vs confidence. Choose God for thy portion, to rest thy heart in him, as he hath promised to be the Rocke of thy heart, and then try and see, if God doe not giue thy heart secure confidence as a Rocke, Psal. 73.26. and 2. Chron. 20.20. Trust in the Lord and ye shall be assured. Let thy heart bee Christs house to dwell in
 thee by faith, and thou shalt see, that he will strengthen thee by his Spirit in the inner man, not to faint or feare in any afflictions, as Eph. 3.13, 16. Thou shalt then sensibly feele and know, that Christ is in thee, and thou art his house, in that thy heart keepes this confidence and hope of reioycing vnto the End, as Heb. 3. that is, hereby we sensibly know it. We are Christs house before by faith; but we doe not so sensibly feele and know it, that he dwels in vs, till he as the Master of the house, strengthen and incourage our hearts.
Wicked men and vnbeleeuers doe not beleeue, that Christ can or will strengthen their hearts, to make them strong and confident
 without feare and griefe, therefore they put their strength and confidence in wealth, pride, malice.
Pride is to them as a chaine,Psal. 7.3.cruelty couers them as a garment. They arme themselues with these weapons of the flesh, and imbolden and incourage themselues by them, and not in God and Christ their Portion. They seeke freedome from care, feare, and trouble of minde in wealth and honour, and promise to themselues all securitie of minde and heart, and safety of life, and estate in these things, as Luke 12. My soule take thine ease, eate and drinke, thou hast much goods laide vp for many yeares. Contrary, a beleeuing
 heart, beleeues as God saith, not as Satan, Reason and flesh say, viz. that though he had all abundance,Luk. 12. yet his life stands not in his riches, and though hee had all the world, it will not keepe his minde and heart safe from feares, cares, griefe, nor his body and life safe, quiet, nor secure, but only God and Christs loue and mercy, and therefore nothing will content him but these.
Therefore hee goeth to God, and Christ, onely to repose his soule in them, and hauing them, he is perswaded as the word saith, that his soule shall dwell at ease, and bee secure, his defence shall bee the munition of rockes,Isa. 33. that the Name of the Lord will be a strong TowerProu. 18.
 to him, if he could attaine to it, that he should lie downe in peace, and sleepe, and rise againe,Psal. 3. because the Lord would make him dwell in safetie,Isa. 33. that bread should be giuen him, and his waters should bee sure: But the wilfull infidelitie of vnbeleeuers, makes them resolutly to conclude, and say, Who is the Almighty, that they should serue him,Iob 21.15. and what profit should they haue, that they should pray vnto him? They count not God any such secure refuge,Isa. 28.15. and therefore make falsehood their refuge, and vnder vanitie hide themselues.
They cannot rest nor sleepe, without their God Mammon, their chiefe portion, and their bellies filled
 with that meate that perisheth. Contrary, a Christian cannot rest, nor sleepe, feeling his soule emptie of God, and Christ, and the meat that indureth to euerlasting life. Because hee beleeues, that Christs body broken, is that onely bread of life, that can quicken, and strengthen his heart, with courage, comfort, and confidence inuincible, and therefore chooseth no other foode but this, and layes foorth his money,Isa. 55.2. and labour chiefely for this, Iohn 6.27. being perswaded that all nourishing, comforting, and strengthning vertue to the heart, is in Christes death, blood, and sufferings, and that all other bread is but ashes,Isa. 44.20. and that a seduced heart deceiueth
 men, that they cannot deliuer their soules from feeding on these vanities.
If wee beleeue, that all comfort, and confidence is in Christ crucified, and goe to him for it, we shall find him indeed, that bread of life, that will giue life, comfort, strength, courage, as he promiseth, by his word, and Sacraments. In which Faith, and sense of his feares deadnesse, Dauid so often repaires to God, praying, Quicken mee, O Lord,Psal. 119. according to thy promise. Let vs likewise, goe to Christ, and say; Lord Iesus, thou hast promised, that if wee come to thee, thou wilt giue vs life, if wearied with our pride, infidelitie, feares, and doubtings, wee lament the same,
 and come to thee, thou wilt ease, and refresh vs, with strength in our soules, and not breake the bruised reed.
Lord Iesus, renouncing all other meanes of easing, resting, and refreshing my soule, and heart, and of giuing mee comfort, and confidence, and to free me from my feares, and cares, and sinfull troubles of minde, I come onely to thee, the Shepheard of my soule,See Hos. 14.3. who callest mee vnto thee, as Matth. 11.28. and Psal. When I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Therefore Lord ease, and refresh my minde, with confident rest, and repose in thee, from all feare, doubting, anxietie. Thou hast promised to giue to the thirstie soule, that
 faints with feare, griefe, and trouble of minde like the parched ground that gapes, the water of life.
Lord Iesus, thou wast weary, and thirstie in body, and soule, and askedst drinke, both Spirituall,See Heb. 4 15. and 2.17, 18. and bodily, whereby thou perfitly knowest, what it is to haue a wearie, faint, and thirstie soule, full of feare, griefe, doubting, and didst promise the water of life, which I beleeue, thou onely hast to giue, and wilt giue, and therefore I come to thee. I know, and beleeue, that thou promisest no more, then thou canst performe, and that thy Spirit, and righteousnesse can doe it, and therefore I renounce all other meanes of refreshing, and come to thee, as
 thou callest mee, crying, in the last,Ioh 7.37. and great day of the Feast, promising to make a better Feast then that was, or all the Feastes of the yeere, euen a continuall Feast, to all that are thirstie, and come to thee, to drinke, to refresh, and satisfie their hearts desires, in thee onely, as our Passeouer sacrificed for vs. 1. Cor. 5.7, 8.
 But my feares, and griefes, and despaires, are so great, that I feele no faith at all, but all faith, and hope is swallowed vp.
 It is so to sense, but not so indeed, as with Ieremie, Lament. 3. My strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord.
Secondly, its not a wilfull, willing, and obstinate despaire,
 reiecting all counsell, and meanes of confidence, as in Ahaz. Isa. 7.12. but a desperation, lamented, and striuen against, with subiection to any counsell, and meanes for the cure, desiring, and prizing Faith aboue all things, and therefore is not damnable.
Thirdly, especially if thou canst thus doe, which is my counsell to thee, to labour to doe, that is, to goe to Christ, though quaking, and trembling, and full of feare: flie not from Christ, to any creature for refuge and confidence,1 Sam. 12.20. for that is to goe after vaine things, that cannot profit. Though by feares, and doubts wee sinne, and offend Christ, yet, flie not from Christ, the only medicine of sinne,
 and cure of doubts, and infidelitie, especially, he calling, and commanding thee to come vnto him. Therefore obey his co^mandement, and hope aboue hope, and beleeue aboue thy faith, that his grace and mercy, wil pardon, and heale thy infidelitie, and say, I will not vtterly feare, and despaire, but in despight of my feares, and distrustfull heart, and Satans temptations, I will goe to him, because he commands me; If I cannot goe by faith, yet, I will goe by obedience, because he commands mee to come to him, and not suffer my feares to keepe mee backe: I will resolutely cast my selfe on him; if I cannot doe it faithfully, yet, with a wilfull resolution to obey, his co^mandement: though
 I cannot doe it with heart and affection, and delight, as I would, and should doe it. Euen despairing of all hope from him of any good, yet wilfully, and resolutely, cast thy selfe on him, saying, if hee will let mee perish, so let it bee, I will goe to him, though without all hope, and commend my selfe to him, and if I perish, I perish.
 Oh, but I can doe nothing but feare.
 Yet, goe and cast thy feare, and infidelitie, and all thy sinnes on him, who hath satisfied for them all, and must heale them all; chiding thy selfe for thy feares, and doubts, Why art thou so cast downe my soule,Psal. 42. and disquieted within me? waite on God, and Christ, and in despight of despaire,
 with a contrary desperate resolution, aboue all reason, sense, or hope, say as Ionas,Ionas 2. yet will I looke towardes thy holy Temple, though to all reason, and sense, I am vtterly cast out from thy presence for euer, I will not yet giue ouer prayer, I will yet fight the good fight of Faith, I will cast my selfe on him.
As there is in some wicked men, a desperate wilfulnesse of rushing into euill, against all meanes of restraint both of promises, threats, mercies, and blessings from God, and examples, and prouocations from men, and a desperate will in men, to aduenture vpon desperate meanes, as if they were mad, vpon no ground of reason or hope, but only
 their owne foolish credulitie, beleeuing their owne conceit, and following the hardnesse of their owne hearts and desperate wils, so much will they attribute and sacrifice such honour to the Godhead of their conceit and will: That honour doe thou giue to Christ, by a desperate resolution of a holy will, converted to God, aboue all hope, and against all feares of apparent euils and discouragements, to all reason, vpon a credence of Gods word and promise, against all arguments of despaire, cast thy selfe vpon Christ, because hee bids thee. As Peter at Christs commandement goes vpon the waters, and at his commandement casts forth
 his net, to make a draught against all doubts and arguments of despaire. Such authority giues Faith to Christs commaundement, and word, and such is the obedience of Faith.
Obey not therefore thy owne feares, and doubts, to beleeue and follow them, but obey Christs commandement, to beleeue against all reason, and sense, feares, doubts, and despaires. This is the obedience of Faith, simple, and absolute, without any reason why, but onely because Christ commands. For its Christs commandement, that whatsoeuer our sinnes, and vnworthinesse, our feares, doubtings, and infidelitie be, and how great so euer our misery be; that yet we should
 beleeue, that hee will pardon, and heale all. Nay, because our misery by sins, and punishments of God, on soule and body, are great, and desperate, passing all created power, to cure, or helpe them; therefore to beleeue, and to goe to him, ordained of God, a Physitian, to heale all that are desperately sicke, and diseased, and past all hope, in reason and sense: Yet, there is hope in Christ, and hee commaunds vs to beleeue it, and vpon his commandement, to goe to him, to ease vs of the burden of our sinnes, and miseries, when they lie so heauy vpon vs, and so fastned on vs, as we conceiue no possibilitie of remoouing them, nor of any ease, and refreshing
 from any creature, promising, that he will giue vs rest.
Obey the commandement, which commaunds thee to beleeue, against all vnbeleefe, and aboue all beleefe, and to hope, aboue hope, that is, in infinite doubtings, to beleeue, and in all despaires, to hope, and when all reasons, grounds, meanes, and hopes are wanting, yet to beleeue, only because God commands thee so to doe. Though nature, reason, sense, and thy owne heart, and faithlesse feares, and all creatures forbid thee so to doe,Lam. 3. saying, That thy strength, and hope, is perished from the Lord, yet obey, and beleeue none of these, but Gods commandement, commanding thee
 to beleeue his promise, against them all, and so to honour him as God, aboue them all in power, mercy, trueth, and faithfulnesse.
Though they say, thy case is desperate, God saith it is not: they say, Thy daughter is dead,Mar. 5.35. why troublest thou thy maister with prayers, and suites any further, now all hope is past? But Christ saith, Feare not, onely beleeue, and fight against all, that perswade thee to the contrary, euen Satan, flesh, reason, nature, and all the World. For this commandement of beleeuing, is contrary to all creatures. All other commandements of the Morall Lawe, of naturall equitie, and Iustice, are seconded,
 and sealed by the testimony of all creatures, to bee iust, faithfull, and true, and they perswade to the obedience of them: onely this commandement of beleeuing, is contrary to all creatures: Heauen, and Earth are against it, and bid vs despaire, for there is no hope. This therefore is the greatest obedience, and the cheifest worke, most pleasing to God, and most honouring him, as God, aboue all creatures, and against them all, and therefore, God will honour, and saue such a soule, against all creatures. He that beleeueth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he liue. Iohn 11.25. Of all sinnes, and sinfull passions, its the hardest to resist infidelitie, feares,
 doubts; and of all combats against sinne, to fight the good fight of Faith. Because nature giues some strength, and aide, to resist other sinnes, and naturall reason, but onely God and his word, to resist infidelity. Nature, and all creatures, forbid this beliefe, that a dead man should liue, and rise againe. When we feele sinne, and dead workes, which surely bring death in reason, sense, and conscience, and course of nature, when wee feele a dead heart, and see nothing, but dead bones, as Ezek. 37.3. that these dead bones should liue againe, all creatures forbid vs to beleeue it, yet, Christ commands vs to beleeue, that he is the Resurrection, and the life, to
 quicken the dead, and to trust in his voyce, that the dead shall heare it, and liue, whatsoeuer the death be in heart, or conscience, and whatsoeuer soule-murdering despaires, and feares, destroy the life, peace, and comfort of our soules, and consciences, yet, if we will hearken to Christs voyce, and obey his commandement, to beleeue his promise of life, comfort, peace, willing, desiring, and indeauouring to beleeue, hee will quicken in vs the life of Faith, and fill vs with ioy, and peace in beleeuing, and make vs to abound in hope,Rom. 15.13. through the power of the holy Ghost, Fulfilling the good pleasure of his goodnesse,2. Thes. 2.11. and the worke of Faith, with power in vs.

Faith, hath God for its obiect, in two respects.
First, of his Person, and Diuine authoritie, which it beleeues simply, and onely, because God saith so, and commands him to beleeue his bare Word. This is that speciall honour, which Faith giues to God, aboue all creatures, that, though all creatures should command vs the contrary, vpon neuer such reasons, arguments, and probabilities; yet, wee will beleeue God, vpon his bare Word, and commanding vs so to beleeue, because he is God, and ought so to be obeyed, and beleeued, though wee can see no reason for it. For if he be Iehouah, hee will giue Beeing to his Word, and hath Wisedome, Power,
 and will, to doe whatsoeuer hee saith, else hee were not God. Therefore, because the Gospel, a mysterie, and hid wisedome, aboue the capacitie of men, and Angels, is preached by Gods soueraigne commandment, Rom. 16.26. and wee are commanded, to heare, and beleeue it: therefore we wil so doe, onely, because God commands. Rom. 10.16, 17. Faith therefore comes by hearing, and hearing by the word, and commandement of God, which commands preaching, and hearing, as the meanes to beget Faith. Now all wicked men, and vnbeleeuers, doe not onely not beleeue, when the Word is offered, but by a rebellion of will, they refuse to beleeue,Psal. 50. and cast the word behinde
 their backes, and the commaundement to beleeue, and will not submit themselues to the meanes of beleeuing, in obedience to God, because God commands them. But if they heare, its when they list themselues, and whom they please, and in such maner, and measure, as likes themselues, as learned, eloquent preaching, and for such ends as they thinke fit, and not in simple obedience to God, as his commaundement, and ordinance, to get Faith, and by Faith, all sauing good in Christ, but in obedience to their owne reason, and lusts. Such men, their infidelitie is not in them an infirmitie, but an obstinate rebellion, as of enemies to God, and despisers
 of his commandement, and of Faith.
The Saints doubt, and feare, but against their wils, highly prizing faith, and earnestly desiring it, they submit themselues to the commandement of beleeuing, which they obey as well as they can, at least in consent, and earnest desire to obey, and beleeue, subiecting themselues gladly to all counsell, and meanes of getting Faith, as Rom. 7.16. I consent to the Law, that it is good. So they consent, to this Lawe of Faith, as singularly good, and delight in it,Rom. 7.22. concerning the inner man.
If this bee true Obedience to the Law Morall, thus farre to obey, though we cannot fulfill the commandement:
 then also is this rather true obedience to the Law of Faith, to be willing, and desiring, and to labour to beleeue vpon Gods commandement, lamenting our vnbeleefe, and striuing against it, when we cannot beleeue as wee would: Especially the commandement of beleeuing the mysterie of the Gospel, so farre aboue the capacity of Men and Angels, being a commandement infinitely harder then all the commandements of the Lawe Morall, which haue their ground in nature by creation. But to beleeue that God will quicken the dead, and iustifie the vngodly, and saue sinners, etc. Is a commaundement against nature, reason, and sense,
 and all creatures, and all power and authority in heauen and earth, commanding to beleeue the contrary. Yet this honour doth Faith giue to God, commanding vs to beleeue, and this obedience, that we renounce Nature, and Reasons Rule, and Authoritie, and all creatures, to obey God, as most wise, true and faithfull, and King and Prince only, that by his Word creates and commands all things;1. Thes. 2. Receiuing his Word not as the word of men, but as it is indeede the Word of God, of soueraigne authoritie with vs aboue all creatures.
 Faith hath God for its obiect, beleeuing God, as first and chiefely for himselfe, his Person and Authority
 sake; so in the second place for the reasons and proofes giuen by him. Some things we must beleeue simply and only vpon Gods commandement, because he bids vs beleeue them, though he giues vs no light of reason, nor no proofe to our sense by experience, as the principles of Religion. Some we beleeue, because he giues vs cleere reasons, and prooues his words by sensible experience and vndeniable arguments to reason and sense, Psal. 119.140. Thy Word is prooued most true, therefore thy seruant loueth it, as Ioh. 20.29. Thou hast seene Thomas and beleeued, blessed are they that haue not seene and haue beleeued, only vpon my commandement,
 Ioh. 3.12. If when I tell you earthly things ye beleeue not, that is, doctrines demonstrated with naturall sensible proofes, to your reason and sense here on earth; How will ye beleeue when I shall tell you of heauenly things, aboue reason and sense to conceiue, commanding you to receiue them vpo^ bare diuine authoritie, without reason and grounds to beleeue? If we beleeue not God, nor honour him as true in his word, proued by good reasons and grounds reuealed to vs, and light shining to our vnderstandings, much lesse will we beleeue him vpon his bare word, to honour him as God.
(...), the first part of liberty by Christ, is of heart our (...) by which
 we goe boldly to God, and to the Throne of his grace
The second is that liberty of our mouth, to spe^ke to God. Maruailous largenesse of mouth, and liberty of speech, to speake to God freely, in prayers, praises, and thankesgiuings.
Wee are all by nature dumbe and deafe to God, by a dumbe and deafe spirit of Satan: possessing and dwelling in vs, till Christ redeeme vs to be his owne seruants, we neither can nor dare speake to God. But Christ our Lord giues vs in Redemption, an open large mouth to speake to God, to sing to him, and praise him, as Psal. 51. Open thou my lips, that my mouth may set forth thy praise. Isa. 51.11. The Redeemed of the
 Lord shall come and sing in the height of Sion.Psal. 40.2. Ezek. 12. Therefore God is said to put a new Song of praise in our mouths, and to poure on vs a large spirit of supplication, to take to vs words, as Hos. 14.
For this is the principall End of our Redemption, that we should haue libertie of speech to call on God and praise him, that our mouthes should be open to him, to set forth his glory, as it was the chiefe end of our creation. Isa. 43.21.Rom. 10. This people haue I formed for my selfe, they shall set forth my praise. Therefore with the mouth we confesse vnto saluation, and sing to the Name of the Lord. Therefore Dauid prayeth, That God would not vtterly take the word of truth out ofPsal. 119.
 his mouth. And this is Gods couenant, Isa. 59.11. As its the End of our creation and redemption, and the chiefest part of our happinesse; So the contrary, is the chiefest part of our misery by our Fall, to haue our mouthes shut vp as beasts, from prayers or praises.
 The nourishing vertue of meate feeding the heart and strengthning it, opens the mouth to ioyfull praise, as Psal. 22.26. and Psal. 63.5. Dan. 5.4. They ate and dranke, and praised the gods of siluer and gold. How much more then the Saints fed with Christs body and blood, and that plenteous redemption that is in Christ, praise him?
Out of the abundance of
 the heart the mouth is inlarged to poure out.Math. 12.34. If the Treasure of the heart bee large, the mouth will largely dispense. Christ is a most rich Treasure in the heart of all store of good, therefore the mouth must needs be answerable to open and confesse, and vnfold the mysterie of Christ, and to praise him. Where there is nothing of God and Christ in the heart, there is no mouth opened, but shutte vp to confession and praises.
 Hereby we may know, if our sinnes be pardoned, and we redeemed in heart and soule, considering how our mouthes are opened, and tongues vnloosed, to Apologize for our selues, as 2. Cor. 7.11. and to plead our
 cleering and Iustification in Christ, to pray and call vpon the Name of the Lord, to praise and confesse his mercy and truth. Heb. 3.1. consider the high Priest, (...), that is, whom we all confesse, as 1. Tim. 3.16. (...), that is, by ioynt confession of all, its a great mystery, etc. Haue we left booke prayer (though I simply condemne it not, but allow it in yong Christians, while they are as babes, and nothing differing from seruants) but true Christians co^tinue not in this bondage but grow vp to this libertie to pray in the H. Ghost,Iude 20. as the Spirit giues them vtterance; haue we a naturall liberty and facillity of mouth to speake of holy things, and not as Socrates taught, by rote? Can
 we speake more abundantly and fluently in the causes of God, then of any thing else in the world, and sing more ioyfully of Gods mercies, waies and workes?
 This is also an euidence of our future Redemption, and liberty in due time out of any misery, if God before open our mouthes, and inlarge the liberty of speech to prayer, praises, thankesgiuings. The Spirit of Redemption and libertie is now in vs, and hath begun our freedome, and will perfect it. If God were purposed to shut vs vp in prison of perpetuall bondage of perdition from him, his face, and presence, hee would also shutte and seale vp our lippes, that we should not haue libertie to
 speake and pray to him, and make any suite, as Matth. 22.12. (...). But if hee giues our soules liberty out of the Diuels prison, from that dumbe and deafe spirit, to come to him in prayer, and to tender our petitions to him, its an euidence, that he intends our perfect deliuerance and good issue out of all our troubles. If hee vouchsafe vs the honour to call on him, to speake or petition to him, its certaine, its his purpose to free vs, Psal. 10. last vers. When a King is purposed to destroy a Rebell or offender, he commands him to be kept close prisoner, and not come forth, to make or present any petition, to come into his sight, or speake to him: but if he
 giue him leaue to goe abroad, though with his Keeper in restraint, only with libertie to vse his friends and best meanes, it shewes there is hope of his inlargement, and of the Kings purpose to free him. So if wee haue libertie to goe to Christ by Faith, and take him by the hand, and vse him our Mediatour, by him to petition to God, and make our suites, its assured securitie to bee heard and deliuered.
Hereby wee may also know if we haue beene fed with Christ, and haue drunke his blood and spirit, or the spirit obtained by his blood in the Sacrament; we shall then sing and praise Christ and his benefits, our mouthes will be opened, as Psalme
 22.26. and Ephes. 5.18.
Likewise if we be the redeemed of the Lord Iesus, and his seruants by redemption, he will giue vs a new mouth, and language to praise and honour him. The receiuing of a new language is a note and marke, and indeede a bond of subiection. Thus the ancient Romanes did plant their language, the Latine tongue in the countries which they conquered; And the Kings of Spaine, cause the Indians to speake Spanish. Whom God conquers by his Word, hee plants his Word in their hearts, and in their mouthes. Where Christ or Satan raigne in the heart, their language and voice, or tongue is in their mouth.
 If Christ dwell in the heart by faith, hee will giue a great (...) in the mouth, Eph. 3.17. with 12. verse. and Heb. 3.6.
The Beast of Rome exalted by Satan the Dragon, or the Dragon reigning in the Heathen Emperours, and their successors, gaue them a mouth to speake as a Dragon.
As Christ especially reignes in his Ministers, and sets vp his Kingdome in others, by them preaching the Gospel of the Kingdome; so hee giues them a speciall mouth, and (...) aboue others. 2. Cor. 13.3. So he promiseth to Moses in a speciall manner to be with his mouth, to conquere Pharaoh, and to redeeme his people, and to
 giue his Disciples a mouth and wisedome, against which all their aduersaries shall not be able to speake or resist; but it shall conquere them, and all their wisedome, pollicy, sophistry, and all the wisedome of this world, and of the Princes of this world, which come to nought. Mens beastly, prophane, earthly, and fleshly speech, mouth and language sheweth, that they are base slaues and vassals to the flesh, belly, earth, and Satan. Contrary, holy and godly speech, and the Word and Truth of God in mens mouthes, holy conference of diuine things, shew Christ to reigne within. When the word of Christ dwels in vs plenteously, Col. 3.16. and wee abound in all
 speach, and in all wisdome, as 1. Cor. 1. not in excellency of humane speach, and wisedome, but as 2. Cor. 6.11. As God raignes by his word, and its his kingdome, so where he sets vp his Kingdome, in any mans heart, and soule it giues him the lip of excellencie, and a mouth of glorie, as to Christ, speaking with that (...) and authoritie, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7. verse the last. God rules and gouernes all by his Word. Hee stilleth the raging of the Sea, by his Word. Reu. 19. The word of God, is King of Kings, and hath many Crownes vpon his head, conquering the Beast, and false Prophet, and sends them to Hell, and the rest, that is, the Kings of the Earth are
 slaine by the sword, that comes out of the mouth of him, that sits on the white horse, that is, sanctified godly ministers, which sword, is the gospel of the kingdome.
For Christ raignes by his Word, in the mouthes of his true Ministers: contrarily, Antichrist raignes by the Temporall sword. His Kingdome stands not in his mouth, and word preached, as of the true Prophets, Reuel. 11.5. Out of whose mouth came fire, to deuoure their aduersaries, that is, the holy Gospel, in spirituall, and powerfull preaching: For thus it becommeth true Ministers to fight, and to kill their aduersaries, verse 5. But the Beast that comes out of the bottomelesse pit, makes
 warre against them with the Temporall sword, and kils their bodies, verse 7, 8. for their kingdome stands in Temporall Power, Honour, and Dignity. Christes Kingdome is his Word Preached: Antichristes Kingdome, and power, stands in Kings, and Princes power, the tenne hornes of the Beast, wherewith he is armed to gore, and wound the body of Christ.
From Adam to the building of Babel, the Church of God was one, and vniforme, and all the seruants of God confessed one faith, in one language, and professed their obedience, and subiection to the kingdome of Christ in one language, the Hebrew, the Primitiue holy Tongue, till the confusion
 of Languages came in, at the building of Babel. In the Primitiue times, all the Churches, and seruantes of Christ, professed their obedience, and subiection to Christ, the Lorde that had bought them, by one vniforme confession of Faith, till spirituall Babylon erected, brought a confusion of Languages, and differing confessions of Faith, and of the worshippe, and seruice of Christ in diuers articles of Doctrine, and Discipline, of differing formes of Churches, betweene Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea, which will continue till Babylon it selfe be destroyed, and then the vniuersall Church shall be vniforme in all Nations,
 and one confession of faith, both of Iewes, and Gentiles, professing their ioynt subiection, and seruice to Christ their Lord, in one forme of confession of faith, in one holy language, and forme of worship, praising God with a ioynt Halleluiah. Reuel. 19.1. the generall state of the vniuersall Church, and the common forme of Diuine worship, and praising, from the first calling, and rising of it out of Egyptian bondage, and Antichristian darkenesse to this time, is a new song before the Throne of God, now raigning ouer them, being redeemed from the tyrannie of Antichrist; A new song of praise, and worship, not before heard for many ages, Reuel. 14.3.
 The song of Moses, and of the Lambe, chap. 15.3. the song of a small number; chap. 14.3. But now that Babylon is destroyed, and both Iewes, and Gentiles called, and Church inlarged by the comming in of the fulnesse of the Gentiles, the common forme of Diuine worship, and praising of God is altered, and brought to the first, and Primitiue auntient forme from the Creation, which is Halleluiah. See Reuel. 19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

FINIS.

