The historie of serpents. Or, The second booke of liuing creatures wherein is contained their diuine, naturall, and morall descriptions, with their liuely figures, names, conditions, kindes and natures of all venemous beasts: with their seuerall poysons and antidotes; their deepe hatred to mankind, and the wonderfull worke of God in their creation, and destruction. Necessary and profitable to all sorts of men: collected out of diuine scriptures, fathers, phylosophers, physitians, and poets: amplified with sundry accidentall histories, hierogliphicks, epigrams, emblems, and ænigmaticall obseruations. By Edvvard Topsell. Topsell, Edward, 1572-1625? The historie of serpents. Or, The second booke of liuing creatures wherein is contained their diuine, naturall, and morall descriptions, with their liuely figures, names, conditions, kindes and natures of all venemous beasts: with their seuerall poysons and antidotes; their deepe hatred to mankind, and the wonderfull worke of God in their creation, and destruction. Necessary and profitable to all sorts of men: collected out of diuine scriptures, fathers, phylosophers, physitians, and poets: amplified with sundry accidentall histories, hierogliphicks, epigrams, emblems, and ænigmaticall obseruations. By Edvvard Topsell. Topsell, Edward, 1572-1625? To the Reader. G Entle and pious Reader, although it be needlesse for mee to write any more of the publishing of this Treatise of Ve∣nemous beasts, yet for your better satisfaction and directi∣on, briefly take this which followeth. After the publishing of the former booke of Foure-footed Beasts, I vnderstood of two thinges much misliked therin, wherein I also my selfe receiued a iust offence. First, the manifolde escapes in the presse, which turned and sometimes ouerturned the sence in many places, (especially in the Latine:) which fault as it may in parte concerne me, so yet it toucheth another more deepely, yet are both of vs excu∣sable: He, in wanting the true knowledge of the Latine tongue; and I, bicause of my employment in my pastorall charge, and both of vs together, because we were not so thorowly estated, as to maintaine a sufficient Scholler to attend only vpon the presse. Wherefore, in this second Booke, we haue remooued away that blot, and vsed a more accurate dilligence, and I trust there is no escape committed peruerting the sence, and not very many altring the letters. The second exception taken against the former Treatise, was the not eng∣lishing or translating of the Latine verses, which thing I purposed to haue done if I had not beene ouerhastened in the businesse; for it had beene to the worke an ornament, and to the History a more ample declaration: This faulte I haue now amended in the setting forth of this second Booke of Liuing Creatures. Al therefore that can be saide for your direction, I could wish the Historye more compleat for the manifestation of the most blessed Trinities glory, whose works are here declared; and for the better reuelation of the seuerall natures of euery Serpent. I may fayle in the expressing of some particular, yet I suppose that I haue omitted no one thing in their Narration, which might bee warranted by good authority or experience. And therfore, although I cannot say that I haue saide all that can be written of these liuing Creatures, yet I dare say I haue wrote more then euer was before me written in any language. Now therefore Aske the Creatures (after God,) and they will tell you: For, sayth S. Austen, Interrogatio creaturarum profunda est consideratio ipsarum: responsio ea∣rum, attesta ipsarum de Deo, quoniam omnia clamant, Deus nos fecit. The aske∣ing of the Creatures is a deepe and profounde consideration of theyr seuerall natures: theyr answere is, their attestation or testimony of God, because all of them cry out The Lord hath made vs. Wherefore, seeing it is most true, incogni∣ta non desiderantur, things vnknowne are not desired, to the intent that all true English Christians may hereafter more affectionately long after and desire, both the mysticall vision of God in this world, and also his perfect sight in the worlde to come, I haue (for my part) out of that weake ability wherwith I am endued, made knowne vnto them in their owne mother tongue, the wonderfull workes of God; for the admiring of Gods praise in the Creatures, standeth not in a confused ignorance not knowing the beginnings and reason of euery thinge, but rather in a curious and artificiall inuestigation of their greatest secrets. Therefore, let all liuing men consider euery part of diuine wisedome in all his workes; for if it be high, he therby terrifieth the proud; by the truth he fee∣deth the great ones; by his affability he nourisheth the little ones, and so I will conclude my preface, with the wordes of the three Children: O all ye workes of the Lorde, praise him and magnifie him for euer. EDVVARD TOPSELL. A Table of the seuerall Serpents, as they are rehearsed and described in this Treatise following. A ADder. 50 Ammodyte. 53 Arge, Argolae. 54 Aspe. 54 B Bee. 64 Bee-Drone. 78 Bee-waspe. 83 Bee-Hornet. 92 Boas. 111 C Cantarides. 96 Cankers. 102 Caterpillers. 102 Chamaeleon. 113 Cockatrice. 119 Cordyll. 126 Crocadill. 126 Crocadile of Egypt. 140 Crocodile of Bresilia. 141 Crocadile of the earth, called a Scinke. 141 D Darte. 145 Dipsas. 147 Doublehead. 151 Dragon. 153 Dragon winged. 158 Dryine. 174 E Elephants. 176 Elops, Elopis. 176 F Frogges. 176 Greene Frogge. 185 Crooked Frog, or Paddock 186 Toades. 187 G Greene serpent. 194 H Haemorrhe. 193 Horned serpent. 198 Hydra. 201 Hyaena. 200 I Innocent Serpents. 203 L Lizard. 203 Lizard greene. 209 Locust, vide Caterpiller. M Molure. 203 Myllet or Cencryne. 211 Myagrus. 203 N Neute, or Water Lyzard. 212 P Pagerina. 203 Pareas. 203 Palmer-worme vide caterpiller. Pelias. 214 Porphyre. 214 Prester. 214 Python vide Dragon. R Red Serpent. 216 S Salamander. 217 Scorpion. 222 Scytall. 232 Sea-serpents. 233 Seps or Sepedon. 236 Slow-worme. 293 Snake. 240 Spiders. 246, 259 Stellion. 276 T Tyre. 280 Torteyse. 281, 285, 287 V Viper. 290 W Wormes. 306 A Generall Treatise of Serpents, DIUINE, MORALL, AND NATURALL. Of the Creation and first beginning of SERPENTES. T Here is no Man that can iustly take exception that this History of Serpents beginneth at theyr Creation: for see∣ing our purpose is, to set forth the workes of GOD, by which as by a cleere glasse, he endeuoureth to disperse and distribute the knowledge of his Maiesty, Omnipotencie, Wisedome and Goodnesse, to the whole race of Man-kinde, it seemeth most proper that the first stone of this building, laid in the foundation be fetched from the Cre∣ation: and the rather, because some Naturalists (especial∣ly amongst the auncient Heathen) haue taken the Origi∣nall of these venemous Beasts, to be of the earth, without all respect of Diuine and Pri∣mary Creation. And hereunto some Hereticks, as the Manichees and Marciontes, haue Augustine, Epiphan. also subscribed, though not directly, for they account the Creation of these venemous & all hurtfull beasts an vnworthy worke for the good GOD, because they could neuer see any good vse of such creatures in the World. Yet we know the blessed Trinity created the whole frame of this visible World by it Zanchius. selfe; and for good, reasonable, and necessarie causes, framed both the beneficiall & hurt∣full Creatures, eyther for a Physicall or metaphysicall ende. Therfore it is most certaine, that if we consider the outward parts of these Creatures endued with life, no man nor na∣ture could begin and make them, but the first Essence or fountaine of life: and if we can be brought, to acknowledge a difference betwixt our shallow capacitie, and the deepe wisedome of God, it may necessarily follow by an vnauoydable sequele, that their vses & endes were good, although in the barrennesse of our vnderstanding, we cannot conceiue or learne them. But I purpose not to sollow these thinges Philosophically by arguments, but rather Diuinely by euident demonstration of the thinges themselues. And first of all, it, appeareth, Gen. 1, 24. that God brought forth out of the earth all creeping thinges after their kinde: And least that any man should doubt, that vnder the generall name of cree∣ping thinges, Serpents and other Venemous beasts, were not intelligibly enough expres∣sed, it is added Cap. 3, 1. That the Serpent was more subtile then all the Beastes of the fielde which God had made. The Prophet Dauid also, Psal. 148, 7. among other thinges which are exhorted by the Prophet to praise their Creator, there are named Dragons, which are the greatest kind of Serpents. Vnto this also alluded S. Iames, cap. 3, 7. saying: That the whole nature of Beastes, and of Birdes, of creeping thinges of the sea is tamed by the nature of man: for Man, which is next vnto God, hath authoritie and power, to rule ouer all his workes, and therefore ouer Serpents. And herein it is fit to shew, what wonders men haue wrought vpon Serpents, taming and destroying them rather like Wormes and Beasts, no waies enemies to mankind, but friendly, and endued with sociable respect, or else as weaklinges commaunded by a supe∣riour power. Such an one was Atyr a notable Inchaunter, who by touching any Serpent Textor. brought it into a deadlie sleepe; according to these verses. Nec non serpentes dire exarmare veneno, Doctus Atyr: tactuque graues sepire chelydros: In English thus; The cunning Atyr, serpents fierce, of poyson did disarme, And Water-snakes to deadly sleepe, by touching he did charme. Aluisius Cadamustus, in his description of the new World, telleth an excellent hysto∣rie of a Lygurian young man, beeing among the Negroes trauailing in Affrick, whereby he endeuoureth to prooue, hovv ordinary and familiar it is to them, to take and charme Ser∣pents, according to the verse of the Poet; Frigidus in prat is cantando rumpiter anguis. that is, The cold-earth-snake in Meddowes greene, By singing, broke in peeces may be seene. The young man beeing in Affricke among the Negroes, and lodged in the house of a Nephew to the Prince of Budoniell, when he was taking himselfe to his rest, suddenly awa∣ked, by hearing the vnwonted noise of the hissing of innumerable sorts of Serpents; wher∣at while he wondred, and beeing in some terror, he heard his Host (the Princes Nephew) to make himselfe readie to go out of the doores, (for he had called vp his seruants to sadle his Cammels:) the young man demaunded of him the cause, why hee would goe out of doores now so late in the darke night? to whom he answered, I am to goe a little way, but I will returne againe verie speedily: and so hee went, and with a charme quieted the Ser∣pents, and droue them all away, returning againe with greater speed then the Lygurian young man his ghest expected. And when he had returned, he asked his ghest if hee did not heare the immoderate hyssing of the Serpents? and he aunswered, that he had heard them to his great terrour: Then the Princes Nephew (who was called Bisboror) replyed, saying; they were Serpents which had beset the house, and would haue destroyed all their Cattell and Heards, except hee had gone foorth to driue them away by a Charme, which was very common and ordinary in those parts, wherein were abundance of very hurtfull Serpents. The Lygurian young man, hearing him say so, maruailed aboue measure, and said, that this thing was so rare and miraculous, that scarcely Christians would beleeue it. The Ne∣gro thought it as strange that the young man should bee ignorant heereof, and therefore told him, that their Prince could worke more strange things by a Charme which he had, and that this and such like, were small, vulgar, and not to be accounted miraculous. For when he is to vse any strong poyson vpon present necessitie, to put any man to death, hee putteth some venom vppon a sword, or other peece of Armour, and then making a large round circle, by his Charme compelleth many Serpents to come within that circle, hee himselfe standing amongst them, and obseruing the most venomous of them all so assem∣bled, which he thinketh to containe the strongest poyson, killeth him, and causeth the re∣sidue to depart away presentlie; then out of the dead Serpent hee taketh the poyson, and mixeth it with the seede of a certaine vulgar Tree, and therewithall annoynteth his dart, arrow, or swords point, whereby is caused present death, if it giue the bodie of a man but a very small wound, euen to the breaking of the skinne, or drawing of the blood. And the saide Negro did earnestly perswade the young man to see an experiment heereof, promi∣sing him to shew all as he had related, but the Lygurian beeing more willing to heare such things told, then bolde to attempt the triall, told him, that hee was not willing to see any such experiment. And by this it appeareth, that all the Negroes are addicted to Incantati∣ons, which neuer haue anie approbation from GOD, except against Serpents, which I cannot verie easilie be brought to beleeue. And seeing I haue entered into this passage of Charming, being (no doubt) an inuen∣tion of Man, and therefore argueth his power to tame these venomous Beasts, according to the former saying of Saint Iames, although I condemne such courses vtterly, yet it is lawfull to prosecute the same, seeing the holie Ghost, Psalme 58, verse 4, 5. arffirmeth a practise against Serpents, a dexteritie and ripenes in that practise, and yet an impossibility to effect any good, except the voyce of the Charmer come to the eare of the Adder: For thus hee writeth; Their poyson is like the poyson of a Serpent, like a deafe Adder that stoppeth his eare. 5. Which heareth not the voyce of the Inchaunter, though hee be most expert in cun∣ning. Vpon which words, Saint Augustine, Saint Ierom, & Cassidorus wryting, say; that when the Charmer commeth to Inchaunt or Charme, then they lay one of theyr eares to the earth so close, as it may not receiue sound, and their other eare they stoppe with theyr taile. I will therefore yet adde somewhat more of this taming of Serpents. I haue heard a Gentleman of singuler learning, & once my Worshipfull good friend, and daily encourager vnto all good labours, report diuers times very credibly, vppon his Ma: Will: Morley of Glynde in Sussex. owne knowledge and eye-sight, that beeing at Padua in Italy, hee sawe a certaine Quack∣saluer, or Mountebacke vpon a stage, pull a Viper out of a box, and suffered the saide Vi∣per to bite his flesh, to the great admiration of all the beholders, receiuing therby no dan∣ger at all. Afterward he put off his doublet and shirt, and shewed vppon his right arme a very great vnwonted blew veine, standing beyond the common course of nature; and he said, that he was of the linage of Saint Paule, & so were all other that had such veines, and that therefore (by speciall vertue to that Family giuen from aboue) no Viper nor Serpent could euer annoy or poyson them: but withall, the fellowe dranke a certaine compound water, or antidote, for feare of the worst, and so at one time vented both his superstitious hypocrisie, and also much of his Antidote to his great aduantage. But I haue since that time also read, in Matthiolus his Commentaries vppon the sixth Booke of Dioscorides, that there were wont to be many such Iuglers in Italy, carrying in theyr bosomes liuing Serpents, of whose fraudulent Impostures hee speaketh in this sort. They take Serpents in the Winter time, when they growe dead and stiffe through cold, and yet for their better defence against their venomous byting, they defend themselues by a certaine experimentall vnguent, knowne to bee practised in this sport, made of the Oyle pressed out of vvilde Radish, the rootes of Dragonwort, the iuyce of Daffodill, the braine of a Hare, the leaues of Sabine, sprigges of Bay, & some other few things there-vnto ad∣ded. As soone as they haue taken them, they instantly all to spette vpon their heads, for by reason of a secret antipathy in Nature, they grow very dull thereby, and lay aside the force and rage of venome; for the spettle of a Man, is of a cleane contrarie operation to their poyson. And when afterward they make ostentation heereof in the Market, or pub∣lique Stage, they suffer them to bite their owne flesh: but first of all, they offer thē a peece of hard flesh, where-vppon they bite to clense their teeth from all spawne and spume of ve∣nome, or els sometime pull forth the little bagges of poyson, which inhaere in their chaps, and vnder their tongues, so as they are neuer more repleate or filled againe: And by this deceit they deceiue the world where euer they come, giuing foorth that they are of the li∣nage of Saint Paule, who cast a Viper off from his hands, as wee reade in the holie Scrip∣ture. It was an inuention of auncient time among the wise Magitians, to make a pipe of the skinnes of Cats legges, and there-withall to driue away Serpents; by which it appeareth, that the soueraigntie of Man ouer Serpents, was giuen by GOD at the beginning, and was not lost, but continued after the fall of man, (although the hand that should rule be much weaker) and practised by the most barbarous of the world, necessitie of defence for∣cing a violence and hatred, betwixt the Serpent, and the Womans seede. For this cause we reade of the seauen daughters of Atlas, whereof one was called Hyas, whose dailie ex∣ercise was hunting of venomous Beastes, and from her the Hyades had their denominati∣on. And for a conclusion of this Argument, I will adde this one storie more out of Aelia∣nus. When Thonis the King of Egypt had receiued of Menelaus, Helen to be safely kept, whiles he trauailed through Aethiopia, it hapned that the King fell in loue with her beau∣tie, and oftentimes endeuoured by violence to rauish her; then, it is also said, that Helen to turne away the Kings vnlawfull lust, opened all the matter to Polydamna the wife of Tho∣nis, who instantly fearing her owne estate, least that in time to come, faire Helen should de∣priue her of her husbands loue, banished her into the Iland of Pharus, which was full of all manner of Serpents, and yet taking pittie on her for her simplicitie, gaue her a certaine herbe, whereby she droue away all Serpents. For (it is said) when the Serpents and veno∣mous beasts doe but smell the same herbe, they instantly hide their heads in the earth. He∣len comming into that Island planted the same there, and was therefore called by the in∣habitants, after her owne Name Helenium, which the skilfull Herborists at this day af∣firme to grow in Pharus. Vnto this discourse of the taming of Serpents, I may adde yet more strange things, if any thing be strange in the nature of this World. And those are some histories of the fa∣miliaritie of Men, Women and Serpents. Alexander was thought to bee begotten of a Serpent, for it is said, that one a time there was found a great Serpent vppon his Mother Plutarch. Olympia as shee was sleeping; and some say (for the honour both of the Mother and the Sonne, that this Serpent was Iupiter, turned into the likenesse of a Serpent, as wee reade he changed himselfe into many other shapes. And the like story vnto this, is alledged of Scipio Affricanus his mother, who long time remained barren without the fruite of the Ca: Oppius Iul: Higinus wombe, insomuch as that P: Scipio her husband, vtterly dispaired of posteritie. It hapned one day, as she was in her bed, her husband beeing absent, there came a great Snake and lay beside her, euen in the presence of the seruants and familie, who beeing mightily asto∣nished Gellius. thereat, cryed out with loude voyces for feare, whereat the woman awaked, and the Snake slidde away inuisibly. P: Scipio hearing this report at his returne home, went to the Wisards to vnderstand the secret or signification of this prodigie: who making a sa∣crifice, gaue aunswere that it betokened prolification, or birth of children, and therevpon followed the birth of Scipio Affricanus. We reade also in Plutarch of certaine Serpents, louers of young Virgins, who after they were taken and insnared, shewed all manner of lustfull, vitious, & amorous gestures Pierius. of vncleanenes and carnalitie; and by name, there was one that was in loue with one Ae∣tolia a Virgin, who did accustome to come vnto her in the night time, slyding gentlie all ouer her body neuer harming her, but as one glad of such acquaintance, tarried with her in that dalliance till the morning, and then would depart away of his owne accorde: the which thing beeing made manifest vnto the Guardians and Tutours of the Virgin, they remoued her vnto another Towne. The Serpent missing his Loue, sought her vppe and downe three or foure dayes, and at last mette her by chance, and then hee saluted her not as he was wont, with fawning, and gentle slyding, but fiercely assaulted her with grimme and austere countenaunce, flying to her hands, and binding them with the spire of his bo∣die Pierius. fast to her sides, did softly with his tayle beate vpon her backer parts. Whereby was collected, some token of his chastisement vnto her, who had wronged such a Louer with her wilfull absence and disappointment. It is also reported by Aelianus, that Egemon in his verses, writeth of one Aleua a Thes∣salian, who feeding his Oxen in Thessaly, neere the Fountaine Haemonius, there fell in loue with him a Serpent of exceeding bignesse and quantitie, and the same would come vnto him, and softly licke his face and golden haire, without dooing him any manner of hurt at all. These, and such like thinges, doe euidently prooue, that Serpents are not onely invo∣luntarilie tamed by Men, but also willingly keepe quarter with them, yeelding to the first ordinance of the Creatour, that made them subiects & vassals to men. And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken in this place, concerning the first creation of Serpents. Of the naturall Generation of SERPENTS, and their seuerall Originalls. I T beeing thus cleered, that Serpents were at the beginning crea∣ted by GOD, and are ruled by Men, it now followeth, that wee should in the next place talk of the matter of their beginning, and the meanes of their continuance euer since their Creation. First therefore it is most plaine in Genesis, that the Earth, (by the vertue of the Word of GOD) did produce all Creeping things, and among them Serpents: but since that time, they haue engendered both naturally, and also prodigiously. As concerning their constitution, it is held to be most cold, aboue all other liuing Crea∣tures; Pliny. Gallen. and therefore Pliny writeth, that they haue neither heate, nor bloode, nor sweat. Heere-vnto subscribeth Galen and Rasis; yet Auicen seemeth to affirme the contrary. Mer∣curiall decideth this controuersie, and proueth that Serpents are extreamely cold, & their bodies outwardly moist. First, because those which are stunge & poysoned by Serpents, are oppressed with an vnnaturall cold, which ouercommeth naturall heate, and distendeth all their parts, vexing them intollerably. Secondly, there can be assigned no other reason why these Creatures hide themselues 4. moneths in the yere, but onely their naturall cold, making thē so tender, as they are altogether vnfit to endure any externall frigiditie. Third∣ly, if a Man take a Snake or a Serpent into his handling in the midst of Sommer, & war∣mest part of the yeere, yet shall he perceiue, that they are cold in a palpable manner being aliue, which is not a qualitie competible to any other creature. Fourthly, seeing that blood is the proper and natiue seate of all heate in naturall liuing bodies, Serpents hauing a very small quantitie of blood, must also haue a smaller proportion of heate: and therfore it fol∣loweth vnauoidably, that the eminencie of their temperament, is cold in the highest de∣gree, aboue all other liuing Creatures. And that their bodies be outwardlie moyst, it ap∣peareth (saith Isidorus) by this, that when they slide along vpon the Earth, (which way so∣euer they goe) they leaue behind them in their traine or path a slymie humour. By this therefore it is confirmed, that they are of the Earth and of the Water, as after∣ward we shall shew in the description of their kindes. But yet there are prodigious begin∣nings of Serpents, whereof some seeme to be true, & other to be fabulous. The first sort Plutarch. Pierius. Textor. are those which Plinie affirmeth to be engendred of the marrowe in the backe-bone of a man, and that indifferently, out of the dead bodies of good & euill men. Yet some more modest, thinking it vnreasonable, that the remnants of a good meeke man, should beget or be turned into so barbarous, venomous, & cruell a nature; rather taking it for granted, that peace and quietnes is the reward of such persons, attribute these beginnings or altera∣tions to the bodies of wicked men, as a iust deserued punishment of their former euills, that the reuersion of their bodies should after death turne into Serpents, whom they re∣sembled being aliue in the venemous fraude of their spirits. Of this Ouid speaketh. Sunt quae cum clauso putrefacta est Spina sepulchro, Mutari credunt humanas angue medullas. Which may be thus englished; Some thinke the putride backe-bone in the graue rack'd, Or marrow changd, the shape of Snakes to take. In Egypt, as Frogges and Mice are engendred by showers of raine, so also are Serpents: And Autcen saith, that the longest haires of women are easily turned into Serpents. Ni∣cander Macrobius Caelius Rho: dreameth; that all venomous beastes are engendred of the blood of the Tytans or Gyants. Acusilaus, of the blood of Typhon. Apollonius Rhodius of the drops of blood which doe distill from Gorgons. Virgilius saith, that dung beeing laid in a hollow place, subiect to Pliny. receiue moysture, engendereth Serpents. Of the Gorgons drops, Ouid writeth thus. Cumque super Lybicas victor penderet arenas, Gorgonei capitis guttae cecidere cruentae, Quas humus exceptas, varios animauit in angues, Vnde frequens illa est infestaque cerra colubris. Which may thus be Englished: And as he ouer-flew The Lybicke sandes, the drops of bloud that from the head did sewe Of Gorgon being new cut off, vpon the ground did fall, Which taking them, and as it were conceiuing them withall, Engendred sundry Snakes and wormes: by meanes whereof that Clyme Did swarme with Serpents euer since, to this same present time. But most strange of all other, are the succeeding Narrations. For it is reported that when L. Scipio, and C. Norbanus were Consuls, that the mother of Clusius in Hetruria, brought foorth a liuing Serpent in stead of a childe, and the sayde Serpent by the com∣maund of the Wisardes was cast into a Ryuer, neuerthelesse it woulde not drowne but swimmed against the streame. And Pliny sayth, that at the beginning of the Marsycke warre, there was a mayd-seruaunt that brought foorth another Serpent. And Faustina Obsequent. the Empresse dreamed that she brought foorth Serpents, when shee was with childe of Commodus and Antoninus, and one of these Serpents seemed more fierce then the other, which proued allegorically true: for afterward Commodus was so voluptuous and tyran∣nous, that he seemed like a Serpent to be borne for nothing, but for the destruction of mankinde. In the yeare of the Lorde 1551. there was a little Latine booke printed at Vienna, wherein was contained this History following. In this Summer (sayth the Booke) about S. Margarites day, there happened most rare and admyrable Accidents: for neere a Vil∣lage called Zichsa, by the Riuer Theose in Hungaria, there were many Serpents & Lisards bred in the bodies of men, very like to such as are bred in the earth, whereupon they fell into exquisite torments: and there dyed of that calamity, about three thousand, & some of the bodyes being layde against the Sunne gaping, the Serpents came foorth of theyr mouthes, and suddenly entred into their bellies againe. Amongst other, there was a cer∣taine Noble-mans daughter which dyed of that malady, and when she was dissected or ripped, there were found in her body two great Serpentes. These thinges seeme to bee miraculous and aboue the order of Nature: yet credible, because in our experience in England, there haue beene Wormes like Serpentes found in the bodies of men, where∣of some haue beene eiected the parties being aliue, and other when as the parties were dead. But that these beginnings of Serpents being vnnaturall are Diuine and sent from God as scourges, it may appeare by another notable History, recorded in the aforena∣med booke, both in the same yeare, and in the same Countrey. There was (sayth mine Author) found in a mowe or rycke of corne, almost as many Snakes, Adders, and other Serpentes, as there were sheafes, so as no one sheafe could be remoued, but there presently appeared a heape of ougly and fierce Serpents. The coun∣trey-men determined to set fire vpon the Barne, and so attempted to doe, but in vaine, for the straw would take no fire, although they laboured with all their wit and pollicye, to burne them vp: At last, there appeared vnto them at the top of the heap a huge great Serpent, which lifting vp his head spake with mans voyce to the countrey-men, saying: Cease to prosecute your deuise, for you shall not be able to accomplish our burning, for wee were not bredde by Nature, neither came we hither of our owne accord, but were sent by God to take vengeance on the sinnes of men. And thus much for the true and naturall beginninges of Serpentes. Now we reade in holy Scripture, that the rod of Moses was turned into a Serpent by diuine myracle, whereby he was assured of the power that God woulde giue him to de∣liuer his people Israell out of Egypt, which land abounding with Serpentes, both natu∣rall bredde in the earth, and morall, such are crafty and polliticke Princes and people: yet Moses shoulde take them as he did his Serpent by the tayle, and cause them to bende vnto him like as it were a wand, or else some other little walking staffe: and also that his power should be vnresistable, because his Serpent deuoured others. The Magitians or Sorcerers, (as Iannes & Iambres) resisted him, and also turned their rods into Serpents. But Moses did it by true pietie, they by diabolicall delusions, as false Christians many times worke miracles by outward signes of true pietie, and therefore Moses rodde ouer-came the Sorcerers Serpents, because the end of fraude and falshood is, to be ouercome by truth & pietie. From this changing of rods into Serpents, came the seuerall metamorphosing of sun∣dry other things into Serpents also, as that tale of Orpheus head, after he was torne in pec∣ces by the Thrasian women; and the same throwne into a Riuer, was taken vp in Lemnos. The Poet describeth it thus; Hic ferus exposito peregrinis anguis arenis Os petit, & spar sos stillanti rore capillos Lambit, & hymniferos inhiat diuellere vultus: Tandem Phoebus adest: morsusque inferre parantem Arcet, & in Lapidem rictus Serpentis apertos. Congelat, & patulos vt erant indurat hiatus. In English thus; No sooner on the forraine coast now cast a-land they were, But that cruell natur'd Snake did straight vpon them fly, And licking on his ruffled haire, the which was dropping dry, Did gape to tyre vpon those lippes that had beene wont to sing The heauenly hymnes. But Phoebus straight preuenting that same thing, Dispoints the Serpent of his baite, and turnes him into stone, With gaping chaps. &c. So Isacius Tzetzes writeth, that when Tiresia found Serpents in carnall copulation in Cithaeron, he slew a femall, who presently after death was turned into a Woman, then al∣so he slew a male, who likewise beeing dead, was in the same place and manner turned in∣to a man. When Cadmus was sent by his Father, to seeke out his sister Europa that vvas rauished by Iupiter, with straight charge not to returne backe againe except he could finde her, hauing spent much time in seeking her, to no purpose, because he could not find her, and not daring to goe backe againe to his father; hee was warned by the Oracle that hee should goe into Baeotia to build a Cittie. Comming thether, he sent his companions to the Fountaine of Mars that was in the Countrey to fetch water, where a great Serpent came and killed them; at the last, Cadmus not finding their returne, went likewise to the same Fountaine, where he found all his men slaine, and the Serpent approching to assaile him, but he quickly killed it. Afterward he was admonished by Pallas, to strew the teeth of the same Serpent vppon the ground, which he performed, and then out of those teeth (saith Ouid) arose a multitude of Armed-men, who instantly fell to fight one with the other, in such cruell and bloodie manner, that at the last there were but fiue of them all left aliue, which fiue (by the will of Pallas) were preserued to be the Fathers of the people of Thebes. And so Apollonius faineth, that with the helpe of men bred of Serpents teeth, came Iason to obtaine the Golden-Flecce. They faine also, that Achelous when hee stroue with Hercules about Deianira, turned himselfe into diuers shapes, and last of all into a Serpent, or as some say; into a Riuer. So likewise Cadmus afore-said, beeing ouer-come with the sight and sence of his owne mise∣ries, and the great calamities that befell to his Daughters & Nephewes, forsooke Thebes, and came into Illyrium, where it is said, that hee earnestly desired of the Gods to be turned into a Serpent, because a Serpent was the first originall of all his extremities. Antipater faineth Iupiter to be turned into a Serpent, and Medusa refusing the loue of Neptune, is al∣so fained by Ouid to be turned into a Serpent, when he writeth; Hanc pelagi rector templo vitiasse Minerua, Dicitur, aversus est & castos Aegide vultus Nata Iouis texit: neue hoc impune fuisset, Gorgoneum crinem turpes mutauit in Hydros. Nunc quoque vt attonitos formidine terreat hostes, Pectore in aduerso, quos fecit sustinet angues. In English thus; It is reported how she should abusde by Neptune be, In Pallas Church, from which fowle fact, Ioues daughter turnd her eie: And least it should vnpunisht be, she turnd her seemely haire To loathsome Snakes, the which the more to put her foes in feare, Before hir breast continually she in her hand doth beare. Pierius writeth, that the myrtle rod was not lawfull to be brought into the Temple of Necates, and that a Vine braunch was extended ouer the head of her signe: and whereas it was not lawfull to name wine, they brought it into her Temple vnder the name of milke, and that therein continually liued harmelesse Serpents. The reason of al this was, because that her owne father Faunus fell in loue with her, whom she resisted with al mo∣desty, although she were beaten with a myrtle rodde, and made to drinke Wine; but at last the beastly father was transformed into a serpent, and then hee oppressing her with the spyres of his winding body, rauished her against her minde. These and such like sto∣ries and Fables are extant about the beginninges of serpents; all which, the Reader may consider, to stirre vp his minde to the earnest and ardent meditation of that power that of stones can make men, of Rocks water, of water wine, and of small roddes great ser∣pents. Then thus hauing expressed the originall of serpentes in their creation, it followeth now to adde the residue of this Chapter about their generacion. It is a generall rule Pliny. Aristotle that all beasts wanting feet and haue long bodies, performe their worke of carnall copu∣lation by a mutuall embracing one of the other, as Lampreys and serpentes: And it is certaine, that two serpents in this action seeme to be one body and two heads, for they are so indiuisibly vnited and conioyned together, and the frame of their body is altogi∣ther vnapt Aelianus. for any other manner of copulation. When they are in this action they send forth a ranke sauour offensiue to the sence of them that doe perceiue it: And although like vnto many Fishes, they want stones, yet haue they two open passages wherin lyeth their generatiue seed, and which being filled, procureth them to their veneriall lust, the seede it selfe being like a milky humour; and when the female is vnder the male, she hath also her passages to receiue the seed, as it were into the celles of hir wombe, and there it is framed into an egge, which she hideth in the earth an hundred in a cluster, about the quantity of a Birdes egge, or a great bead, such as are vsed sometime by women. And this is generall for all serpents except Vipers, who lay no egges, but hatch in their wombes their young ones, as we shall shew at large in their particular hystory. The ser∣pent hauing layd her egge sitteth vpon them to hatch them at seuerall times, and in a yeare they are perfected into young ones. But concerning the supposed copulation of serpents and Lampreys, I will not meddle in this place, reseruing that discourse to the historic of fishes, and now only it sufficeth in this place to name it, as a feigned invention, although saint Ambrose and other anncient Writers haue beleeued the same, yet Athae∣neus, and of late dayes P. Iouius, haue learnedly and sufficientlie declared by vnanswear∣able arguments the cleane contrarie. The serpents loue their egges most tenderly, and doe euerie one of them know their owne, euen among confused heapes of the multitude, and no lesse is their loue to their young ones, whom for their safeguard, sometime they receiue into their mouthes and suffer them to runne into their bellies: And thus much for the generation of serpents. Of the Names of Serpents, and their seuerall parts or Anatomie. B Y Serpents we vnderstand in this discourse all venomous Beasts, whether creeping without legges, as Adders and Snakes, or with legges, as Crocodiles and Lizards, or more neerely compacted bodies, as Toades, Spiders and Bees; following heerein the war∣rant of the best ancient Latinists, as namely Cornelius Celsus, Pli∣ny & Apuleius doe call Lyce Serpents, in that their relation of the death of Pherecydes the Sirian, who was the Praeceptor of Pytha∣goras, of whom it is said, Serpentibus perijsse, to haue perrished by Serpents, when on the contrary it is manifested he was killed by Lyce. Aristotle and Ga∣len define a Serpent to be animal sanguineū pedibus orbatum & ouiparum, that is, a bloody Beast without feere, yet laying egges; and so properly is a Serpent to be vnderstood. The Haebrewes call a Serpent Nachasch. Darcon and Cheueia by the Chaldees: so also Thaninim & Schephiphon, by the Hebrewes, as Rabbi Salomon, Munster & Pagnine write. The Graecians, Ophidi and Ophis, although this word doe also signifie a Viper in particu∣lar, euen as the Latine, Serpens, or serpula doe, sometime a Snake, and sometime an Ad∣der. The Arabians Haie and Hadaie, for all manner of serpents. And Testuh or Tenstu, or Agestim for serpents of the wood; likewise Apartias & Atussi. The Germans Ein schlang: which word seemeth to be deriued from Anguis by an vsuall figure, and after the German fashion, proposing Sch. The French call it Vn serpent, the Italians Serpe & serpente: and Massarius saith, that Scorzo and Scorzone, are generall wordes for all manner of Serpents in Italy, which strike with their teeth. The Spanyards call them Sierpe. The Graecians call the young ones in the Dammes belly, Embrua: and the Latines Catuli. And thus much for their Names in generall, which in holy Scripture is englished a Creeping thing. Now it followeth, that I should sette downe a particular description of all the outward parts of Serpents; and first of all, their colour is for the most part like the place of their ha∣bitation or abode, I meane like the Earth, wherein they liue; and therefore I haue seene some blacke, liuing in dung, some yellow, liuing in sandy rocks, & some of other colour, as greene, liuing in trees and fieldes; but generally, they haue spots on their sides and bel∣lie, like the scales of fish, which are both white, black, greene, yellow, browne, & of other colours also, of which Ouid writeth: —Longo caput extulit antro, Caeruleus serpens horrendaque sibila misit. that is; The greenish Serpent extolld her head from denne so steepe, And fearefull hyssing did send forth from throate so deepe. The frame of their bodies doth not much varry in any, except in the feete & length, so that with a reseruation of them, we may expresse their vniuersall Anatomy in one viewe: for almost all of them are of the same proportion that is seene in Lyzards, if the feete be ex∣cepted, and they made to haue longer bodies. For they are inclosed in a kinde of shell or crustie skinne, hauing their vpper parts on their backe, and the nether parts on the bellie like a Lizard; but they want stones, & haue such manner of places for copulation as fishes haue, their place of conception beeing long and clouen. All their bowels, by reason of the length and narrownes of their bodies, are also long and narrow, and hard to be discer∣ned, because of the dissimilitude of their figures and shapes. Their arterie is long, & their throate longer then that: the ground or roote of the artery is neere the mouth, so as a man would iudge it to be vnder the tongue, so as it seemeth to hang out aboue the tongue, especially when the tongue is contracted, and drawne backward. The head long like a Fishes, and flatte; neuer much bigger then the bodie, except in monstrous and great sha∣ped Serpents, as the Boas. Yea, Aristotle maketh mention of a Serpent that had 2. heads, and Arnoldus, of a Serpent in the Piraeney Mountaines, slaine by a souldier, that had three heads, in whose belly vvere found two sonnes of the said souldier deuoured by him, and the back-bone thereof was as great as a mans skull, or a Rammes head. And such an one we read in our English story was found in England, in the yeere 1349. And the 23 yeere of Edward the third, there was a serpent found in Oxfordshire, neere Chippingnorton, that Holinshed. had two heads and faces like women, one beeing shaped after the new attire of that time, and another after the manner of the old attyre, and it had great winges, after the manner of a Bat. The Tongue of a Serpent is peculiar, for besides the length & narrownesse thereof, it is also clouen at the tippe, beeing deuided as it were with very little or small nailes points. It is also thinne, long, and black of colour, voluble; neither is there any beast that moueth the tongue so speedily: wherefore some haue thought, that a Serpent hath three tongues, but in vaine, as Isidorus sheweth, for they deceiue by the nimblenes thereof. Their ven∣tricle is large, like their maw, and like vnto a dogs, also thinne, and vniforme at the end. The Hart is very small, and cleaueth to the end of their artery, but yet it is long, & shew∣eth like the reynes of a Man: vvherefore sometimes it may be seene to bend the tippe or lappe thereof to the breast ward. After this followeth the Lights, but farre seperate from it, being simple, full of fibres, and open holes like pipes, and very long: The Liuer long and simple; the Melt small and round as in Lizards. The Gall is for the most part as in fi∣shes, but in Water-snakes it is ioyned to the Liuer: in other Serpents to the stomacke or maw. All their teeth stand out of their mouth, and they haue thirtie ribbes, euen as there were among the Haebrewes and Egyptians thirtie daies to euery month. Aristotle saith, that as their eyes be small, so also they haue the same good hap that be∣falleth young Swallowes, for if by chance they scratch or rend out their eyes, then it is said they haue other grow vp naturally in their places: In like manner their tayles beeing cut off, grow againe. And generally, Serpents haue their hart in the throat, the gall in the bel∣lie or stomack, and their stones neere their tayle: Their egges are long and soft, & in their teeth they carrie poyson of defence and anoyance, for which cause they desire aboue all o∣ther things to saue their heads. Their sight is but dull and dim, and they can hardlie looke Aelianus. Isidorus. atone side, or backward, because their eyes are placed in their temples, and not in theyr fore-head, and therefore they heare better then they see. They haue eye-liddes, for gene∣rally no creatures haue eye-liddes, except those which haue haire in the other parts of their bodies; foure-footed Beasts in the vpper cheeke, Fowles in the nether, or Lyzards which haue egges, or Serpents which haue soft backs. They haue also certaine passages of brea∣thing in their nostrills, but yet they are not so plaine that they can be termed nostrills, but breathing places. Theyr eares are like to finny Fishes, namely small passages, or hollowe places in the backer parts of their head, by which they heare. Their teeth are like sawes, or the teeth of Combes ioyned one within the other, that so they might not be worne out by grinding or grating together; and yet they bend inward, to the end that they may the better hold their meate in their mouthes, beeing without all other externall helpe for that purpose; for euen those Serpents which haue feete, yet can they not apply them to their chaps. In the vpper chap they haue two longer then all the residue, on either side one, bored thorough with a little hole like the sting of a Scorpion, by which they vtter their poyson. Yet there be some good Authors that affirme, that this poyson is nothing els but their gall, which is forced to the mouth by certaine veines vn∣der the ridge or backe-bone. Some againe say, that they haue but one long tooth, & that a crooked one, which turneth vpward by often byting, which sometime falleth off, and then groweth againe, of which kinde those are, which men carry vp and downe tame in their bosoms. Although they be great raueners, yet is their throate but long and narrow, for helpe whereof when they haue gotten a bootie, they erect themselues vppon their tayles, and swallow downe their meate the more easily. They cannot be said properly to haue any neck, yet somthing they haue, which in proportion answereth that part. They haue tailes like all other creatures, except Men and Apes, and some say that their poyson is contay∣ned in their tayles, & is from thence conuayed into little bladders in their mouthes, there∣fore the Mountebancks or Iuglers, breake that bladder, that they may keepe them with∣out poyson, but within the space of twentie foure houres, they are recollected, and growe anew againe. Their bodies are couered ouer with a certaine skin like a thinne barke, and vppon Ser∣pents it supplieth the place that scales and haire doe vpon Beasts and Fishes; for indeed it is a pure skinne, and in most things they are like to Fishes, except that they haue lights, & Fishes haue none: the reason is, they liue on the Earth, and the Fishes in the Sea, & ther∣fore haue finnes and gilles in stead thereof. The little Serpents haue all their bones like thornes, but the greater, which stand in neede of greater strength, haue solide bones for their firmitude and better constitution. It is questionable whether they haue any melt or no, and some say they haue at the time of their laying of egges, and not otherwise. Theyr place of conception or secrete, is large, and standeth farre out, beginning beneath, and so arising vp to the back-bone double; that is, hauing one skinne or enclosure on either side, with a double passage wherein the egges are engendered, which are not layd one by one, but by heapes or clusters together. They haue no bladder to containe vrine, like to all o∣ther Creatures, which haue feathers, scales, or rinde-speckled-skinnes, except the Tortei∣ses: the reason is, because of the exiguitie and smalenes of the assumed humour, and also all the humour acquired, is consumed into a loose and euaporate flesh. And to conclude this Anatomie, I will adde a short description vvhich Gregorius Macer a Phisition wrote to Gesner 1558. by his owne dissection as followeth, saying. As I lay at rest in a greene field, there came vnto mee a great Serpent hyssing, & hold∣ding vp her necke, which I suddainly with a peece of vvood amazed at a stroake, and so slevv without perrill to my selfe. Afterward, sticking her fast to a pale, I drevv off her skin, which was verie fast and sharpe, and I found betwixt the skinne & the flesh, a certaine lit∣tle thinne skinne, descending all vppon the body with the outward skinne, and this vvas some-what fat. And when I came vnto the place of excrements, I found it like a Fishes, but there issued forth certaine filth, farre exceeding in stinking sauour the excrements of a man. After I had thus pulled off the skinne, it was easie for mee to looke into the inward parts, which I found to answere the inward Anatomy of Fishes & Fowles in some parts, and in other things, there appeared a proper disposition to the Serpent it selfe. For the ar∣terie Trachaea was about three or foure fingers long, turned about with little round cir∣cles, and so discended to the lights, vnto which the hart and the bladder contayning the gall, did adhaere or cleaue fast. Then the liuer was long like the fish Lucius, and so a white caule or fatnes couered both the liuer and stomack, which was halfe a spanne long: The guttes began at the chappes, and so descended downe to the place of excrements, as vvee see they doe in Fishes. Beneath the liuer were the guttes, vpon either side descended a certaine neruy or hard veine, vnto which the egges did cleaue: which were couered with such little skinnes as Hennes egges are before they be layd, but yet they were distinguished in seate or place be∣cause of their multitude; for vpon either side I found two and thirty egges. The tongue of the Serpent was clouen, and very sharpe, but there appeared not any poyson therein. And so it is euident, that in the veine Trachaea, hart and lights, it agreeth with Birdes; in the liuer, guttes and caule, it resembleth a Fish, but in the place of the gall, and disposition of the egges, it differeth from both. And thus farre Macer, with whose words I will con∣clude this Chapter of Serpents Anatomie. Of the quantitie of Serpents, and theyr abode, foode, and other accidents. S O great is the quantitie of Serpents, and their long during age increaseth them to so great a stature, that I am almost afraide to relate the same, least some suspitious and enuious minded persons, should vtterly condemne it for fabulous; but yet when I consider not onely the plentifull testimonies of worthy and vndoubted Antiquaries, and also the euidence of all ages, (not excepting this wherein we liue) wherein are and haue beene shewed publiquely ma∣ny Serpents and Serpents skinnes, I receiue warrant sufficient to expresse what they haue obserued, and assured aunswere for all future Obiections, of ignorant, incredulous, and vnexperienced Asses. Wherefore as the life of Serpents is long, so is the time of theyr groweth and as their kindes be many, (as wee shall manifest in the succeeding discourse) so in their multitude, some grow much greater and bigger then other. Gellius writeth, that when the Romanes were in the Carthagenian warre, and Attilius Regulus the Consull had pitched his Tents neere vnto the riuer Bragrada, there was a Ser∣pent of monstrous quantitie, which had beene lodged within the compasse of the Tents, and therefore did cause to the whole Armie exceeding great calamitie, vntill by casting of stones with slings, and many other deuises, they oppressed and slew that Serpent, and af∣terward fleyed off the skinne and sent it to Rome, which was in length one hundred and twentie feete. And although this seemeth to be a Beast of vnmatchable stature, yet Possi∣donius a Christian Writer, relateth a storie of another which was much greater, for hee writeth, that he saw a Serpent dead, of the length of an acre of Land, and all the residue both of head and bodie, were answerable in proportion, for the bulke of his bodie was so great, and lay so high, that two Horsemen could not see one the other beeing at his two sides, and the widenes of his mouth was so great, that hee could receiue at one time with∣in the compasse thereof, a horse and a man on his backe both together: The scales of his coate or skinne, beeing euery one like a large buckler or target. So that now there is no such cause to wonder at the Serpent which is said to be killed by S. George, which was as is reported so great, that eight Oxen were but strength enough to drawe him out of the Cittie Silena. There is a Riuer called Rhyndacus neere the Coasts of Bythinia, wherein are Snakes of exceeding monstrous quantitie, for when thorough heate they are forced to take the wa∣ter, for their safegard against the sunne, and birds come flying ouer the poole, suddenlie Mela. Pliny. Megasth. they raise their heads and vpper parts out thereof, and swallow them vp. The Serpents of Megalauna, are said by Pausanias to be thirtie cubits long, and all their other part answe∣rable. But the greatest in the world are found in India, for there they grow to such a quan∣titie, Solinus. Textor. Strabo. Aelianus. that they swallow vp whole Bulls, and great Stagges. Wherefore I doe not maruell that Porus the King of India, sent to Augustus Caesar very huge Vipers, a Serpent of tenne cubits long, a Torteise of three cubits, and a Partridge greater then a Vulture. For Alex∣ander in his nauigation vpon the Red-Sea, saith; that hee saw Serpents fortie cubits long, and all their other parts and members of the same quantity. Among the Scyritae, the Serpents come by great swarmes vppon their flocks of sheepe and cattell, and some they eate vp all, others they kill and sucke out the blood, and some part they carry away. But if euer there were any thing beyond credite, it is the relation of Volateran in his twelfth booke of the New-found Lands, wherein he writeth, that there are Alosius. Gillius. Scaliger. Cardan. Serpents of a myle long, which at one certaine time of the yeere come abroad out of their holes and dennes of habitation, and destroy both the Heards and Heard-men if they find them. Much more fauourable are the Serpents of a Spanish Island, who doe no harme to any liuing thing, although they haue huge bodies, and great strength to accomplish their desires. In the kingdome of Senega, their Serpents are so great that they deuoure whole beasts, as Goates, and such like, without breaking any one of their bones. In Calechute, they are as great as their greatest Swine, and not much vnlike them, except in their head, which doth farre exceede a Swines. And because the King of that Country hath made a Lavv, that no man kill a Serpent vnder paine of death, they are as great in number as they are in quantitie: for so great is his error, that hee deemeth it as lawfull to kill a Man, as a Ser∣pent. All kindes of Serpents are referred to their place of habitation, which is eyther the earth, or the waters of the earth; and the serpents of the earth, are moe in number then the P. Fagius. serpents of the vvater, except the serpents of the Sea: And yet it is thought by the most learned Rabbines, that the serpents of the Sea, are fishes in the likenes of Dragons. Nowe Venetus. Hatthonus the places of Serpents abode beeing thus generally capitulated, wee must enter into a far∣ther narration of their habitations, and regions of their natiue breeding. In the first place, India nourisheth many and diuers sorts of Serpents, especially in the Kingdome of Mor∣filium, and Alexander the Emperour, found among other Beasts, sundry kinds of serpent in a long Desert, which is on the North-side of India. But all the Nations of the World may giue place to Ethiopia for multitude and varietie, for there they gather together on heapes, and lye in compasse like round hills, visibly apparant to the eyes of them that be∣hold Pi rius. them a farre off. The like is said of all Affrica, for in Numidia, euery yeere there are many men, women and children, destroyed by Serpents. The Island Pharus, is also (by the testimony of the Egyptians) filled with serpents: The Coastes of Elymais are annoyed by serpents; and the Caspians are so annoyed by serpents which come swymming in the floods, that men cannot sayle that waies but in the Winter-time. For from the begin∣ning of the Spring, or aequinoctiall, they seeme (for their number) to approch fauening, like troupes and Armies. There are also certaine Ilands called Ophiusae insulae, named af∣ter Solinus. Aelianus. Ophis a serpent, for the multitude bred therein: And there are serpents in Candy, Ephe∣sus, and all hot Countries; for this priuiledge hath GOD in nature giuen to the colder Countreys, that they are lesse annoyed with serpents, and their serpents also lesse nocent and hurtfull: and therefore the serpents of Europe, are fewer in number, lesser in quantity, Cor. Celsus. Pierius. and more resistable for their weakenes and strength. There were a people in Campania called Osci, because of the multitude of serpents bred among them. Likewise there are great store in Lombardy and Ferrara. And whereas we haue saide, that the most nocent and harmfull serpents are bredd in the hotest Regions, where they engender more speedily, and also grow into greater proportions, yet is it not Sc liger. to be vnderstood of any speciall propertie appertayning to them alone, for I read in Olaus Magnus, his description of the Northerne Regions, of serpents of as great quantitie as in any other place of the World; but yet their poyson is not halfe so venomous & hurtfull, as in the hoter Regions, especially the Affrican serpents. In Botina neere Liuonia, there Olaus Mag: are great store of great serpents also, so that the Heard-men are at continuall war and con∣tention with them for defence of their flock: Likewise, in the Mountaines of Heluetia and Auergne, whereof there are many wonders reported in the world, which I will not stand vpon to relate in this place. We reade also, that some places haue beene disinhabited, & dispeopled by serpents, such were the people of Scythia, called Neuri, who before the war of Darius, were constrained to forsake theyr soyle, because they were annoyed, not onely with home-bred serpents, but also with many other which came from other parts: and so the Country remaineth desolate to this present day, the ancient Inhabitants beeing all re∣mooued to dwell among the Buditani. The Cittie Amyclae in Italy, (as M: Varro writeth) was destroyed also by serpents. And there be certains places of the world, which haue re∣ceiued their denomination from serpents, besides the Ophiusae neere Creete. The Iland Tenos, was called Hydrussa and Ophiussa, so were Cremiuscos, Aepolium, and the Mountaines Macrocremnij, Rhodus, & the long Ilands Ophiades in the Arabian coast, Eupolides. which after it had remained a long time desart, was purged and cleered from serpents by the Kings of Egypt. Nicaenetus also calleth Cyprus, Ophiodia. And in Pausanias, we read of a place name Opheos Kephale, the Serpents head. The like might be saide of Riuers, as of Orontes, called also Ophites and Ophis in Pontus, which deuideth a sunder Colchis, and the Diod: Sicul. Country Thiamica. Ebusus nourisheth no serpents, and the earth thereof hath in it a se∣cret vertue to driue away serpents, wherefore it is much desired of all men to carry about them, for that it hath beene often prooued, that neuer any venomous beast durst aduen∣ture vpon any man possessed thereof. The like is said of Ireland, as our owne Chronicles Arrianus. Suetonius. Pliny. doe plentifully declare, and therefore I will spare to enter into any narration thereof. To come therfore to the more particular abode of Serpents, especially, of such as are knowne to vs, we must leaue of the talke and nominaton of Kingdoms, and descend to dennes, holes, caues, dunghils, sheep-coats, valleys, rocks, hollow-walls and trees, woods, greene pastures, hedges. and such like places, wherein they make their most abode: And now and then in these Northerne parts of the world (& yet sildome) they diue downe in∣to the bottome or rootes of trees, especially such as are greene all the Winter-time: For they finde in them a greater heate or warmth, then in other, whose leaues fall off and de∣cay in the cold weather, except in the rootes of Birch. And by reason of their multitude gathered together at the roote of this tree, it falleth out that their breath heateth the same, and so preserueth the leaues of it from falling off: Wherefore in auncient time, the igno∣rant multitude, seeing a Birch-tree with greene leaues in the Winter, did call it our Ladies Tree, or a Holy tree, attributing that greenenesse to miracle, not knowing the former rea∣son, or secrete of Nature. Solinus reporteth of such a like wood in a part of Affrica, where∣in all the Winter time, the leaues of all the Trees abide greene, the cause is as before re∣cited, for that the Serpents liuing at the rootes of the trees in the earth, doe heate thē with their breath. Neither ought any man to wonder that they should so friendly liue toge∣ther, especially in the winter & cold time, seeing that by experience in England, we know that for warmth they will creepe into bed-straw, & about the legges of men in their sleepe; as may appeare by this succeeding discourse, of a true history done in England, in the house of a worshipfull Gentleman, vpon a seruant of his, whom I could name if it were needfull. He had a seruaunt that grew very lame and feeble in his legges, & thinking that he could neuer be warme in his bed, did multiply his clothes, and couered himselfe more & more, but all in vaine, till at length he was not able to goe about, neither could any skill of Phi∣sitian or Surgeon find out the cause. It hapned on a day as his Maister leaned at his Parlour window, he saw a great Snake to slide along the house side, and to creepe into the chamber of this lame man, then lying in his bedde (as I remember,) for hee lay in a lowe chamber, directly against the Parlour window afore-said. The Gentleman desirous to see the issue, and what the snake would doe in the chamber, followed, and looked into the chamber by the window; where hee espied the snake to slide vppe into the bed-straw, by some way open in the bottome of the bedde, which was of old bordes. Straightway his hart rising therat, he called two or three of his seruaunts, and told them what he had seene, bidding them goe take their Rapiers & kill the said snake. The seruing-men came first and remoued the lame man (as I remem∣ber) and then the one of them turned vp the bed, and the other two the straw, their mai∣ster standing without at the hole, whereinto the said snake had entered into the chamber. The bedde was no sooner turned vp, and the Rapier thrust into the straw, but there issued forth fiue or six great snakes that were lodged therein: Then the seruing-men bestirring themselues, soone dispatched them, & cast them out of doores dead. Afterward, the lame mans legges recouered, and became as strong as euer they were: whereby did euidentlie appeare, the coldnes of these snakes or Serpents, which came close to his legges euerie night, did so benumme them as he could not goe. And thus for heate they pierce into the holes of chimneyes, yea into the toppes of hills and houses, much more into the bottomes and rootes of Trees. When they perceiue that winter approcheth, they find out their resting places, wher∣in they lye halfe dead foure moneths together, vntill the Spring-sunne againe communi∣cating her heate to all Creatures, reuiueth, and (as it were) raiseth them vp from death to life. During which time of cold and vvinter, as Seneca writeth, Tuto tractari pestifera ser∣pens potest, non desunt tunc illi venena, sed torpent: They may bee safely handled, without Epist. 5. feare of harme, not because they want poyson at that time, but because they are drouzie, and deadly astonished. But there is a question, whether when they be in this secrecie or drouzines, they awake not to eate, or else their sleepe be vnto them in stead of foode. O∣laus Magnus affirmeth of the Northerne serpents, that they eate not at all, but are nouri∣shed with sleep. Cardan saith, that they take some little foode, as appeareth by those which are carried vp and downe in boxes to be seene, and are fedde with branne or cheasill. But this may be aunswered, that serpents in boxes, are not so colde as those in woods and de∣sarts: and therefore, seeing cold keepeth them from eating, the externall heate of the box∣house, or humane body which beareth them about, may be a cause, that inclosed serpents feede in Winter as well as in Sommer, and yet the serpents which run wild in the fieldes, eate nothing at all, during the time of their Chias or Ehiaus, that is, their lying hid. Greuinus that learned man proponeth this question, Si serpentes calidi sunt, qui fit vt in regros tres aut quatuor menses, id est toto illo tempore qu delitescunt absque cibo vivunt? If (saith he) Serpents be hot, how commeth it to passe that they can liue three or 4. months without all foode, that is, all the time of their lying secret? He maketh (in my opinion) a sufficient aunswere to this question, which for me shall conclude the cause, saying; Doth it not fall out with Serpents as it doth with some women, who beeing full of humor, and thicke phlegmaticke matter, haue but a little and weake naturall heate, (yet proportiona∣ble to the said humour) doe liue a great time by reason thereof without foode or nourish∣ment. And for this cause, all the hoasts of Philosophers doe define, that serpents doe al∣so abstaine from eating a long season. For Nature hath clothed them with a more solide skinne, and liued them with a more thicke and substantiall flesh, to the intent that theyr naturall heate should not easily vanish away and decay in their bodies, but remaine there∣in permanent, for the feeding and preseruing of life. When they sleepe, they seeme to sleepe with open eyes, which is elegantly described by Philes in these Greeke verses. Opōs kathéude kai dokeī palin blepin Ophis te kai ptox kai thumou pleres león Epipetatai gar he chlamys ton ommaton Allou tinos Chitonos apaloterou. Phrorountos autois os dioptras, task-óras. Which may be englished thus; How can the Hare, the Serpent, and the Lyon bold, Both sleepe, and see together at one time? Within theyr eye-lids, a soft skinne their sight doth fold, Shielding their apples, as glasse doth weakened eyne. The foode of Serpents that is permitted them by God, is the dust of the earth, as may appeare by that first and iust sentence, which GOD himselfe gaue vpon them, for sedu∣cing our first Parents Adam and Eue, Gene: 3. 14. Because thou hast doone this thing, thou art accursed aboue all the Beasts of the field, for thou shalt goe vppon thy belly, and eate dust all the dayes of thy life. And againe, Esay 65. 25. Dust shall be meate to the Serpent. And least that we should thinke that this curse hath not taken hold vpon the Serpent, we may finde the expresse practise heereof, Michae. 7. 17. Where it is said of Gods enemies, that, They shall licke the dust like the Serpent. Yet Aristotle affirmeth truly, that Serpents are Omni∣nori, that is, deuourers of flesh, fish, herbes, or any other thinges; howbeit, heerein they passe their kind, or else the curse of God reacheth not to any other kinds thē to that alone which deceiued our first Parents. We haue shewed already, how they eate and deuour men, women & children, oxen, sheepe, and goates, but whatsoeuer they eate, they retaine nothing but the moysture of it, and the residue they eiect whole and vndigested. VVhatsoeuer is offered them, that they take, either a bird, or a small chicken, or an egge, hauing it, they take hold but of one end, as of the head of a chicke, or small end of an egge, and so set it directly before them; then doe they gather themselues together in as short a compasse as may be, that so their bodies which seeme long and small, beeing extended, may appeare great and wide, reduced into a short and compacted frame. And surely, heereby they open and make wider their pas∣sage or swallow, for then they suddenly goble in the beast or meate before them, without any great adoe; & hauing kept it in their body till it be dryed from all moisture, they cast it out againe as they swallowed it vp, at another ordinary place. But for birds & chickens, they striue with them till they haue gotten off their feathers, or els, if they swallowe them whole, they eiect the feathers as they doe egge-shells. The Serpents of the North, doe in the Sommer time eate the flesh of birds, & herbes, and after the eating of them, they tast of a little water, or milke if they can attaine it, or els vvine. For this cause they will suck the vdders of Kine, or Goates, or sheepe, as hath been seene in England. Yet is their appetite to drinke but smally, as is in all other Creatures, whose liuers are fungous, and soft like Spunges; and so are all beastes and creatures which lay egges. Aboue all kindes of drinke they loue vvine, and thereof they be drunke, wher∣fore in Italy they set pottles of vvine to entrappe Vipers: for if once they smell the vvine, they enter the vessell gladly and speedily, and the vvine or milke whereof they drinke, is poysoned by them. But in those places of Affrick where it neuer raineth, they eate a kinde of black moyst vvorme, which hath many legges, as is said by Theophrastus. And to con∣clude, their meate and drinke is so small, that it is receiued for truth, Nullum venenatum perit fame vel siti, that no venomous beast perrisheth by hunger or thirst. The voyce of Serpents is called Sibilus, a hyssing, and theyr voyce differeth from all o∣ther beasts hyssing, in the length thereof: for the hyssing of a Torreise is shorter and more abrupt. Of this hyssing voyce speaketh Lucan, saying; Quod strident vlulant que ferae quòd sibilat anguis. In English thus; Gnashing and howling is the voyce of wild beastes, Long hyssing in Snakes and Serpents doth rest. Among other things notable in a Serpent, this is one, because it easteth off his old age euery yeere, whereof the Graecians tell this fabulous reason. Once Man-kinde stroue ear∣nestly with the Gods, by supplication for a perpetuall youth, that they might neuer waxe old: and obtayning their desire, they layd the same to be carried vpon an Asse The sillie beast waxing sore athirst in his trauaile, at last came vnto a water, and thereof endeuou∣red earnestly to drinke; but the keeper of the same water beeing a Serpent, denied leaue to the Asse to drinke thereof, except he would grant him his carriage, which was Perpetuall youth: The poore Asse ready to perrish for thirst, easily condiscended therevnto. Wher∣vppon the Serpent changeth her age for youth, and men their youth for old age; and the Asse for his punishment, is more tormented with thirst then any other beast. But to leaue fables, and to come more neere the marke, the Latines call the casting of their skin, Anguina senectus, spolium serpentis, & vernatio: the Graecians, Opheos derma, suphar, leb ris & geras: the Arabeans, Geluc & Genlut, & Fulcalhaileb: the Italians, Spo∣glia delle serpi: and the Spanyards, Pelle de la culebra. About this Snakes skinne there is great difference among Authors, some affirming it to be the very skinne. Other, that it is nothing but a kind of hard Leprosie, growne vpon them during the Winter time vvhile Aelianus. Greuinus. Olaus. Mag. Textor. Pliny. they lye hid. Some againe say, that they cast it twise a yeere, first in the Spring, and then secondlie in the Autumne. But by conference of all together it appeareth, that while the Serpents lye hidde, by reason of their drought now in the beginning of the Spring when they come first abroade, they rubbe off this skinne by slyding betwixt two stones, or vn∣derneath some roote of a tree, or else betwixt some boughes or small trees, beginning at the head, and so continuing to the tayle. And within foure and twenty houres, that which was raw and bald, beginneth to haue another skinne vppon it; and so as a young child or beast commeth out of the Secondine doth a Serpent come out of his skinne. As concerning their eye-sight, they naturally doe take the iuyce of Fennell, which they eate, and by that recouer their seeing againe: and if it happen that they cannot finde sufficient, they rubbe their dimme eyes there-vpon. And if it happen that any of his scales Mercurialis be brused or fall sencelesse, then doe they rubbe themselues vppon the thornes of Iu per. And whereas it is thought that they cast their skinnes againe in Autumne, that is to be at∣tributed eyther to Vipers alone, which cast their skins twice a yeere, or else to those which Pliny. are long before they cast, and so it falleth off in Haruest or Autumne the first time, which by reason of the vnseasonablenes, is thought to be a second coate. And this haue I my selfe often found heere in England in the Sommer time. The casting of this skinne is thus ele∣gantly described by Tibullus: Crudeles Diui serpens novus exuit annos Formae non vllam fata dedere moram Anguibus exuitur tenui cum pelle vetustas Cur nos angust a conditione sumus. Which may thus be englished; O, cruell Gods, sith Serpents change their yeerely age, And Fates delay not to refine their forme, Sith snakes with tender skinne excuss'd theyr yeeres enlarge, Why vnto worser hap is Man-kind borne? Of the inward disposition of Serpents, and of their concord and discord with other Creatures. I T is euer to our woe to be remembred, that which the Lord him∣selfe hath left recorded in Genesis, that, The Serpent was more sub∣tile then all the beasts which God had made. By which is expressed, the naturall disposition of this beast aboue other to subtiltie and policie; For I cannot approoue the saying of them, who thinke that the deuill at the beginning, might as well haue vsed the tonge of an Asse or a dogge to haue deceiued Man, as well as a serpents; but surely that old Serpent knewe very well, (better then all they which speake the contrary) that he could not haue so fit a subiect in all the World, as the shape, wit, and cunning of a Serpent. And that this came not into the Serpent at that time when the deuill framed his tongue to speake, may appeare by the praecept of our Sa∣uiour Christ, where he saith; Be wise as Serpents, be innocent as D ues. For if there had not beene naturally, some extraordinarie faculty of vnderstanding in this beast, as there is of meekenes in a Doue, his wisedome would neuer haue sent vs to a serpent possest with a deuill, but rather to some other ingenious Beast, whereof there were great store in the World. And therefore I conclude, that subtiltie and prudence, came not to the Serpent as speaking into Balaams Asse, but rather by nature or creation. And yet concerning this last sentence of our most blessed Sauiour, I cannot but expresse the words of Tzetzes, who writeth thus vpon it, Seruate capita vestra, quemadmodum ser∣pens qui insidijs petitus vapulansque ad mortem, omnimodò caput suum abscondit, sic vos à ty∣rannis & impijs cruciati, caput seruate mihi, fidem vestram, & ne Deum negetis vsque ad ip∣sam mortem: That is, it is as much as if our Sauiour Christ would say; Euen as whē a ser∣pent is set vpon and strooken, by all the meanes she can she hideth her head, and exposeth all her other parts to blowes, reseruing that sound; so you, when you are persecuted by Tyrants, preserue your head, that is, your fayth, and deny not your God to death. And this thing is affirmed by all Writers, both diuine and humane, which haue euer touched this poynt, that aboue all the parts of the body the Serpent preserueth his head. For Pliny saith, that if his body be cut off but two fingers length from his head, he will goe away as if he had no harme at all, and liue longer. Paulus Fagius writing vpon Genesis, saith; It is the opinion of some Haebrues, that the Serpent at the beginning did goe vpright, and was indued with all the affections of men: but this Iewish fable is not worthy to be confuted, because humane affections cannot pro∣ceed but frō a reasonable soule, which to ascribe to the serpent, were blasph mous & ab∣surd. Besides, that then the soule might die, and that God had created such a soule, other∣wise then by breathing into the body the breath of life. Serpents haue many Epithets giuen vnto them, as illiberall, perfidious, trecherous, ve∣nomous, poysonfull, stinging, implacable, furious, sauage, mercilesse, deuouret, and such like: And indeed the holy Writers, by a Serpent doe vnderstand implacable furie: For they are Immitissïmum animalium genus, a most vngentle and barbarous kinde of all crea∣tures, as may appeare by the rage of a little Snake, one of the least of Serpents kinde: for when he perceiueth that he is hurt or wounded, hee neuer ceaseth casting out his poyson, vntill he haue done harme, or die for madnes. Two things I find to be notable in Serpents, the first is proper to their kind, the second is common to them with Swine, Rats and Mice. First, they are aboue measure kinde, not onely to their young ones, but also to their egges. For Funckius confidently sweareth, that at Lostorfium hee saw a serpents egge taken & cast into a hot fornace, and when it be∣gan to fry in the same, whether by naturall instinct, or by smell thereof, the olde Serpent came, and would haue runne into the fire to fetch it out, but that hee and other strangers by hindered her by killing her. And so likewise, if in a Wood one of them be set on fire, all the Serpents that are within the sauour thereof, or within the hearing of the hyssing, will ista tly gather vnto it, euen as Beastes when they heare one another roare. And so great is their loue one toward another, (as Pliny & Textor write) that it was a vulgar say∣ing, Serpentium morsus non petit serpentes, one serpent will not bite another. And Iuuenall writeth; Sed iam serpentum maior concordia Scilicet, quam hominum inter se. That is to say; Better doe serpents with serpents accord, Then Man with Man, who should be their Lord. I cannot conceale a most memorable historie as euer was any in the world, of a fight betwixt the Serpents of the Land and the Water. This history is taken out of a Booke of Schilt ergerus, a Ba arian, who knew the same (as he writeth) while hee was a captiue in Turky, his words are these. In the kingdome called Genycke, there is a Citty called Samp∣son, about which while I was prisoner with Baiazeta King of Turkes, there pitched or ar∣riued an innumerable company of Land and Water-serpents, compassing the said Cittie a mile about. The Land-serpents came out of the vvoods of Trienick, which are great & many, and the Water-serpents came out of the bordering Sea. These were nine dayes together assembling in that place, and for feare of them there was not any man that durst goe out of the Citty, although it was not obserued that they hurt any man, or liuing crea∣ture there-abouts. VVherefore the Prince also commaunded, that no man should trou∣ble them, or doe them any harme, wisely iudging, that such an accident came not but by Diuine miracle, and that also to signifie some notable euent. Vppon the tenth day, these two valiant troupes ioyned battell, early in the morning before the sunne-rising, so conti∣nuing in fight vntill the sunne-set, at which time the Prince with some horse-men, went out of the Cittie to see the battell, and it appeared to him and his associates, that the Wa∣ter Serpents gaue place to the Land Serpents. So the Prince and his company, returned into the Citty againe, and the next day went forth againe, but found not a Serpent aliue, for there were slaine aboue eyght thousand: all which, he caused presently to bee couered with earth in ditches, and afterward declared the whole matter to Baiazeta by Letters af∣ter he had gotten that Cittie, whereat the great Turke reioyced, for hee thereby interpre∣ted happines to himselfe. But I haue beene too long in this first and proper affection of Serpents, namely, theyr mutuall concord; and this example of the Land and Water-serpents, doth not breake the common promised rule, because it is to be vnderstood of serpents that liue in the sam ele∣ment. The second propertie of Serpents is to presage pestilence, rottennesse of ayre, fa∣mine, floods, and ruine of those places wherein they are commorant, and haue theyr abi∣ding: Aelianus. so doe they knowe to chuse a good ayre, and fore-knowe fertilitie of fruites, earth∣quakes, and great tempests. VVhen Helice was destroyed, fiue dayes before, the serpents, snakes, rats, mice and vvesills, departed all out thereof, beeing wiser then men, that mis∣deeming no harme, although they sawe & wondered at these remooualls, yet stood it out to their owne vtter ruine, ouerthrow and destruction. Of the friendship and enmitie which Serpents keepe with other Creatures. E Ver since the deuill entered into the Serpent, it became hatefull to all, or the most part of the Beasts of the field, so that it may as tru∣ly be verified of the Serpent as it was of Esau, that the hands of all men and beastes are against them, (except very few) for they are strangers to all, and find very fewe or no friends. Yet it is repor∣ted, that the Serpent and the Foxe will liue peaceably together in one caue or lodging. There is a story, not vnpleasant, of a Man that found a Serpent enclosed betwixt two stones, and at the in∣treatie of the serpent, he loosed him out of danger, and did him no harme. The Serpent beeing released and free from death, instead of other recompence for so good a turne, told the Man that hee had beene therein long time inclosed, and was very hungry, and there∣fore was forced (against his will) to make the best of his fortune, & therefore must needes eate the Man, and bad him prepare himselfe for death. The man astonished at this moti∣on, replyed to the serpent, that he hoped hee would not deale so with him, hauing deliue∣red him from death, now to put his deliuerer to death: and said moreouer, that he would not be the Iudge of his owne case, but referre the same to the next they found: and the ser∣pent also yeelded to that iudgement, beeing assured that no creature would quit the man, least he should cast his owne life into perrill. Forth then they went and met with an asse, to whom the man told the difference betwixt him and the serpent, howe kindly hee saued the serpents life, and how vnkindly, he againe would take away his life. And then the ser∣pent bade the Asse consider what iudgement hee gaue, and for whom hee spake. The Asse adiudged it lawfull for the serpent to kill the man. Loe now, saide the serpent, make you readie, for the matter is iudged against you, and withall, began to make force at him with mouth and sting. But the man said, that hee would not take this Asses decree for reasona∣ble, and therefore prayed the serpent to tarry yet a little longer, and to try once more the next beast they met withall; and the serpent thinking himselfe sure of the bootie, yeelded there-vnto. Then forth they passed againe, & shortly after met with a Fox, to whom the man related his case, and the benefit he had done to the serpent: The serpent againe, con∣fessed he released him, but withall, denyed his case to be as the man had said, so desperat, but onely he entrapped himselfe, the better to compasse a bootie. The Foxe hauing heard them both, (desirous to end the matter for the mans benefit) would needes goe with them both, to the place where the serpent was inclosed, and so all parties consented. And whē the Fox came thether, he bade the Serpent goe into the same place againe, that so he might the better iudge of the whole matter. The serpent went in againe betwixt the stones, and was so inclosed as he was before, for he could not stirre nei∣ther backward nor forward. Then the Foxe asked the man if this were the serpents case, from which he had deliuered him? The man answered yea, in all poynts. Then hee bade the serpent come out againe, as he said hee could, without the helpe of the man. But the serpent called the man to helpe him againe. Nay, said the Fox, I found you two at vari∣ance, because of your discharge from this place, and seeing nowe you are as you were be∣fore, and the man as he was before your enlargement, my sentence is, that when you come forth of that place you are in, then shall you eate the man: and if hee will let you foorth a∣gaine, I will neuer pittie him. By this fable is shewed, that Foxes loue not Serpents so well as they loue men; and yet they neuer loue men, but they are afraide, suspitious, and vvil∣ling to forsake their familiaritie. Some say there is a kind of loue betwixt Serpents and Cats, whereof I finde this storie in Ponzettus. There were certaine Monks, who all of them fell sicke vpon a suddaine, and the Phisitians could not tell how or whence this sicknesse came, except from some secrete poyson. At last, one of the seruants of the Abbey, saw the Cat which was dailie fedde at Ponzettus the Monks table, to play with a serpent; and thereby it was coniectured, that the serpent hauing in his sport, lost or left some poyson vppon the Cats skinne, the Monkes by stro∣king of the Cat were infected there-with. And the cause why the Catte was not harmed thereby, was for that shee receiued the poyson from the sport, and not from the anger of the serpent. And this thing surely is not so maruailous, seeing that little Mice and Rats doe also play with Serpents, and heerein Politicians play the serpents, vvho hold correspondence and peace both with the Catte and the Mouse: that is, with two sworne and naturall enemies together. The like peace and league they are also saide to keepe with Eeles, as may more plainely appeare by this following historie, of a certaine Monke, called, Rodolphus a Will Monachus Capellensis. There vvas (as this Monke affirmeth) one of his fellowe Monks, which did often tell him, that beeing a little boy, and vsing to sport himselfe by the water side, hee hapned to catch an Eele, which he attempted (for his owne pleasure) to carry to another water, and by the way as he went, hee passed thorough a vvood, at which time when hee was in the vvood, the Eele began to hisse & cry mainelie, at the hearing wheteof, there gathered to∣gether very many serpents round about him, insomuch that he was afraid, and set downe his basket fast pinned and ranne away; afterward he came againe and sought for his bas∣ket, but he found not the Eele therein, wherefore it was supposed, that the Serpents deli∣uered the same Eele out of the basket, by some sleight of nature: the onely doubt is, whe∣ther Eeles doe hysse or not, seeing they are fishes, and Omnes pisces m ti, all fishes are mute or dumbe. But for answer to this obiection, it is most certaine that Ecles haue a voyce, as all they knowe which vse fishing in the night; for I my selfe, haue not onely heard such a voyce in the night time in Riuers, and other waters where Eeles abounded, but haue had it confirmed by diuers other, of greater practise & experience in fishing. The reason wher∣of, may be their manner of generation; for they engender not by spawne as other fishes, but of the slyme of the earth or vvater, and differ not frō serpents in their externall forme, except in their colour, and therefore may be said to partake with fishes & serpents in both their natures: that is, hauing a voyce like a serpent, & a substance like a fish. Such is theyr confederacie with liuing Creatures, and with no more that I euer read or heard of. But moreouer, it is said that they loue some plants or herbes aboue measure, as the Fe∣nell and Iuy; and for this latter, both Pliny and Textor, doe not without great cause won∣der, that euer there was any honour ascribed or giuen to the Iuy, seeing that serpents (the most vnreconcileable enemies of man-kind) delight so much therein. But herein the deuil blinded their reason, as hee did the modest women that worshipped Priapus, or the Tar∣tars, which at this day worship the deuill, to the end that he should do thē no harme. Thus much I can onely say of the friends and louers of Serpents, by the multitude whereof wee may coniecture, how among other parts of the curse of God vpon them, they are held ac∣cursed both by man and beast. Now then it followeth, that we enter into a more particular description, or rather a re∣lation of that hatred which is betweene them and other creatures, and first I will beginne with their arch enemie, I meane Man-kind. For vvhen GOD at the beginning did pro∣nounce his sentence against the Serpent, for deceiuing our first Parents, among other things he said, I will put enmity betwixt thee and the Woman, betwixt thy seed & the womans seede. Whereby he did signifie that perpetuall warre, and vnappeaseable discord, vvhich should be for euer (by his owne appoyntment) betwixt them. And the truth heereof is to be seene at this day, for by a kind of secret instinct, and naturall motion, a man abhorreth the sight of a Serpent, & a serpent the sight of a man. And as by the tongue of the serpent, was wrought mans confusion, so by the spettle of a mans tongue, is wrought a serpents a∣stonishment. For indeed such is the ordinance of God, that men & Serpents, should euer annoy and vexe each other. And this, Erasmus saith shall continue, as long as memineri∣mus illius inauspicati pomi, we shall remember that vnfortunate Apple. Isidorus saith, that serpents are afraid of a man naked, but will leape vpon, and deuoure a man clothed. Which thing is also affirmed by Olaus Magnus, for he saith, that when he was a boy hee often tryed it, that when hee was naked, hee found little or no resistance in serpents, and did safely without all danger combat with them hand to hand. I my selfe al∣so in my younger time, when I was about tenne or twelue yeeres old, vsed many times in At Seauen∣oake in Kent, which novve belongs to Sir Raphe Bosse∣vile, Knight. &c. the Spring and Sommer time, to wash my selfe with other my colleagues, in certaine fish-ponds, wherein I haue seene and met with diuers water-snakes, without all harme; and I did neuer in my life, heare of any harme they did to any of my fellowes beeing naked, nei∣ther did I euer see any of them runne away so fast on the Land, as they did fly from vs in the vvater; and yet are not the vvater-snakes lesse hurtfull then the Land-Adders. And this was well knowne to many. About the beginning or Fountaine Springs of Euphrates, it is said, that there are cer∣taine serpents which know strangers from the people of the Country, wherefore they doe Aelianus. Pliny. no harme to the naturall borne Country-men, but with strangers, & men of other coun∣tryes they fight with might and maine. And along the bankes of Euphrates in Syria, they also do the like; sauing that if they chaunce to be trode vpon by any of the people of those parts, they bite (like as a dogge doth) without any great harme; but if any other, forrai∣ner or stranger annoy them, they also repay him with malice, for they bite him, and intol∣lerably vexe him; wherefore the Country-men nourish them, and doe them no harme. Such as these are also found in Tirinthus, but they are very little ones, and are thought to be engendered of the earth. The first manifestation in nature, of mans discord with serpents, is their venom; for as in a serpent there is a venome which poysoneth a man: so in a man, there is the venom of his spittle, which poysoneth a serpent. For if the fasting spittle of a man, fall into the iawes of a serpent, he certainly dieth thereof. And of this, thus writeth the Poet Lucretius. Est vtique vt serpens, hominis quae tacta saliuis. Disperit, ac sese mandendo conficit ipsa. In English thus; As serpent dyeth when spittle of man he tasteth, Gnashing his teeth to eate himselfe he wasteth. The cause of this, the Philosophers (which knew nothing of Adams fall, or the forbid∣den Apple) doe assigne to be in the contrarietie, betwixt the liuing soules or spirits of these Creatures: for the Serpents life is cold and dry, and the humane life hote & moyst, wher∣fore either of both abhorreth one the other; and the serpent leapeth as farre from a mans Pierius. spittle, as it would doe out of a vessell of scalding water. Agatharcides writeth, that there was a King in Affrick called Psyllus, whose Sepulchre was preserued in the greater Syrtes. From this King there were certaine people named Psyllians, in whose bodies there was a certaine inbred and naturall power to kill, or at the least to astonish Serpents, Spiders, Toades, and such like, and lay them for dead, euen by the sauour or smell of them. And the manner of these men, to try the chastitie of theyr wiues, was to take their children newly borne, and to cast them vnto direfull Serpents, for if they were of the right line, & lawfully begotten, then did the serpents die before them, but if they were adulterous, and the children of strangers, the serpents would eate and de∣uoure them. Pliny affirmeth, that euen in his dayes, there were some of those people aliue among the Nasomons, who destroyed many of them, & did possesse their places; yet some running from death, escaped. Generally, such people were called Marsi and Psilli, for the Marsi were a people of Italy, descended of Circes (as is said) in whom there was a vertue to cure all the stinging of serpents, by touching the wounded places. Such saith Crates Perga∣menus, are in Hellespont, about the Riuer Parius. And some are of opinion, that at the be∣ginning they were Ophiogenes, borne or bred of Serpents; or that some great Noble man, father of that country, was of a serpent made a man. And Varro saith, that in his time there were some few men aliue, in whose spettle was found that vertue, to resist & cure the poy∣son of venomous beasts. But hauing named Ophiogenes, or Anguigenae, that is, men bred of serpents or snakes, I see no cause why it should be iudged, that those which cure serpents poyson, should be so misiudged; for to cure poyson, is not the worke of poyson, but of an Antidote, or contrary power to poyson: and therefore curers & resisters of poyson, are without all learning cal∣led Ophiogenes, that is, serpents broode: but rather, that terme belongeth more iustlie to those people, whose nature is sociable with serpents, and serpents agree with them, as they would doe with their own kind. Such an one was Exagon the Embassadour at Rome, who at the commandement of the Consuls, (for their experience) was cast naked into a vessell or tunne of snakes, who did him no harme, but licked him with their tongues, and so with great miracle, he was let foorth againe vntouched: and yet there is no more reason to say, that this man was borne of the linage of serpents, because those Men-enemies did not hurt him, then it was to say, that Daniell was borne of Lyons, because that the Lyons did not harme him. Or that Romulus and Remus were borne of the kindred of Wolfes, because a shee Wolfe did nourish thē. VVe do read of many people in the world, which were sur∣named of Serpents, all which may as well be deemed to be discended of such creatures, be∣cause of their name, as well as the other, who were by GOD, for their innocencie preser∣ued from death. Ebusus was called Colub xia, and the people thereof Ophiussae, and in Arabia we reade of the Ophiades, both which are deriued from Serpents, called in Greeke Opheis. Eustathius also relateth a story of a man called Ophis. I omit to speake of the Ophitae and others; yet thus much I must needs say, that commonly such names haue been giuen to Serpents, for some cause or accident, either fainedly or truly deriued from Serpents. So wee read of O∣phion, a companion of Cadmus, and a builder of Thebes, who was said to be made by Pal∣las of a Dragons tooth. Likewise the Spartanes were called Ophiodeiroi by Pythius, because Caelius Rho in a famine they were constrained to eate Serpents. S. Augustine maketh mention of certaine blasphemous Haereticks, who were called O∣phitae, because they worshipped a Serpent, & said that the serpent which deceiued our first Parents Adam and Euah, was Christ. Wherefore they kept a Serpent in a Caue, whom they did nourish and worshippe, which at the charme of the Priest would come out of his Caue, and licke the oblations which they set vppon his denne; rowling and folding him∣selfe round about them, and then would goe in againe: then did these abhominable Hae∣reticks breake these oblations into the Eucharist, and receiue them as sanctified by the ser∣pent. And such also is the storie of Caelius Rhod: where hee termeth the great deuill Ophio∣neus, whom both holy Scripture, and auncient Heathen say, that hee fell out of Heauen. But all these things are but by the way, vpon occasion of that vnnaturall conceit of those men called Ophiogenes: that is, descended or begotten by Serpents. Therefore I will re∣turne where I left, namely, to the hatred of Men to Serpents, and of Serpents to Men a∣gaine: In testimonie whereof, there haue beene mutuall slaughters, namely men, which haue killed monstrous serpents, and serpents which haue killed men againe. Hercules beeing but an Infant, (as Poets faine) killed thóse two serpents which Iuno sent to his cradle to destroy him; for Iuno is saide to be much offended at his birth, because hee was begotten by Iupiter vppon Al mena: and therefore there was reserued the Image of Diod. Sicul. Hercules at Athens, strangling a serpent. But Pierius maketh of this fiction a good morall or Hieroglyphick, when he saith, that by Hercules strangling of the serpents in his cradle, is vn∣derstood, how those men which are borne for any great enterprises, should kill their plea∣sures while they be young. I neede not to stand long vpon this poynt, for it is euident, that to this day there are many Hyades, both men and women, which are not afraid to kill the Serpents broode. But such as haue perrished by serpents, I meane men of any note, are also expressed, whereof Ouid writeth of A lacos the sonne of Priamus and Alixothoes, who following the Nymph Hesperia, (with whom hee was in loue) was suddainly killed by a snake biting his foote. So were Apaesantus, Munitus, Eurydice, Laocoon, Opheltes the sonne of Lycurgus King of Nemea, Orestes, Idmon and Mopsus, were slaine by serpents: vvherof Opheltes, by the negligence of his Nurse Hypsiphiles, leauing him vngarded in his cradle. It is recorded by Aelianus and Pliny, that when a serpent hath killed a man, he can ne∣uer more couer himselfe in the earth, but in punishment of so vile an offence, wandereth to and fro subiect to infinite miseries and calamities, beeing not acknowledged by his female if he be a male, nor yet by the male if it be a female; and is forsaken of all his crew or soci∣etie. The earth it selfe, not dayning to entertaine a man-murtherer into her bowels, but constraining him to liue Winter and Sommer abroad vppon the open earth. And thus hath the Diuine prouidence dispensed his iustice, that hee suffereth not murther of men to be vnpunished among the greatest haters and enemies of men. What monsters therefore are they which haue serpents in their delights, and admire that in them vvhich should be hated of all men. And how base were those minded Graeci∣ans, Aelianus. which worshipped the Serpent for a God? Or the Athenians, which kept a Serpent in their Temple, for an opinion that the same did conserue their Tower or Castle from all Herodotus Aeneas Syl: enmity. Iupiter was also worshipped in many places in the shape of a Serpent. And the auncient Borussians, worshipped a naturall Serpent of the earth. It is strange to consider the errour of the King of Calechut, who doth as seuerely punish the slaughter of a Serpent, as hee doth the slaughter of a Man; and not onely restraineth his subiects from harming them, but also buildeth for them little coates, wherein they safely lodge in the winter time. And the cause of this errour, is their conceit, that they thinke serpents are Diuine powers dropped out of Heauen, which they proue, because when they sting fiercely, they quickly kill, and dispatch their enemie suddainly. Wherfore they thinke that no creature can kill so speedily, except an Angell of God. Some of the Heathen, had their Ophiocephale beasts with Serpents heads, which they did worship for a God. And the Poet Virgil hath an ex∣cellent description of Aeneas, his sacrificing to the ghost of his Father Anchises. Gellius. —adytis tum lubricus anguis ab-imis Septem ingens gyros septena volumina traxit Amplexus placide tumulum lapsusque per aras Ceruleae cui terga notae, maculosus & auro Squammam incendebat fulgor: ceu nubibus ar us Mille trahit varios aduerso sole colores Obstupuit visu Aeneas, ille agmine longo Tandem interpateras, & laeuia pocula serpens Libauitque dapes, rursusque innoxius imo Successit tumulo, & depasta altaria liquit. Which may be thus englished; Then from the hollow holes, a slyding snake appeared, Which seauen waies did wind and turne, and dead-mans tombe embrace, Glyding along the Altar from, and backe, with colour cleered, By sunne-shine-light, like spots of gold each varied to the face A thousand hiewes, whereat Aeneas maruayled: but yet at last, This snake the holy dishes, and smoothest cups of choyce Did hast to touch, like as it would the sacreds tast, And so sunck downe from Altar cleane, without both harme or noyse. And to make an end of this Section, of the Antipathy betwixt Men and Serpents, that whosoeuer is of the Womans seede, may professe himselfe an enemy to the Serpent, let him but consider how that hatefull monster Heliogabalus, hauing by the helpe of the Mar∣sicke-Priestes Pampridius gathered together many serpents, one day in the morning, vvhen the people were gathered together to see some rare & vnheard of spectacle, suddenly he let loose the serpents, and hurt many of the people. Tzetzes telleth another story, of a deuise or vvar∣like stratagem, how serpents by slings or trunks, were sent abrode among the Campes of their enemies. So doth Galen, of serpents included in an earthen pot, and cast like dartes among the Tents of the Romanes. And so did Anniball shevv to Antiochus, how in a bat∣tell by sea, he might shoote serpents among the Marriners to his enemies, and hinder their rowing: for when he did follow the same deuise at Prusiae, he went away Victor & Con∣querour. And thus I will conclude this part, with the Emblem of Alciatus, which hee wrote vnto the Duke of Millan, vppon his Armes, beeing an Infant proceeding out of a Snakes iavves. Pierius. Exiliens Infans sinuosi è faucibus anguis, Est gentilitijs nobile stemma tuis. Talia Pelleum gessisse numismata regem. Vidimus, hisque suum concelebrasse genus Dum se Ammone satum, matrem anguis imagine lusam. Diuini & sobolem numinis esse docet. Ore exit, tradunt sic quosdam enitier angues, An quia sic Pallas de capite orta Iouis. In English thus; Out of the mouth of winding snake, Great Duke, this is thy Crest, A leaping Infant making scape From iawes, a wofull rest: The like Coate did Pelleus King Vpon his siluer presse, As we haue seene, the fame to sing Of Kindreds worthinesse. For whiles of Ioue he glorieth. Descended of his race, He faines his Mother like a snake, Borne of Diuinest grace. But why proceeding from the mouth? Some Serpents so are bred, Or els, that Pallas issueth Out of great Ioue his head. And the like by the same Author is expressed vpon this theame, That the wisdom of man, is foolishnes with GOD; therefore vppon the vnnaturall coniunction of two mortall ene∣mies, framed into one bodie, he thus writeth elegantly: Quid dicam quodnam hoc compellem nomine Monstrum? Biforme quod non est homo, nec est draco. Sed sine vir pedibus, summis sine partibus anguis Vir angui-pes dici, & homiceps anguis potest: Anguem pedit homo, hominem ructauit & anguis Nec finis hominis est initium, nec est fera. Sic olim Cecrops doctis regnauit Athenis. Sic & Gigantes terra Mater protulit Haec vafrum species, sed & religione carentem Terrena tantum quique curet, iuduat. That is to say; What shall I call? or how this Monster rightly name? Biformed, which nor man nor dragon, in all the same. But man vnlegged, and snake vnheaded: doubtful parts, Man-snake, snake-man, exceeding humane arts. Mans tayle breedes snake, & snake a man vp-casteth, On end is not of man, nor other of wild beast tasteth. Such one was Cecrops, learned Athens King, And Gyants such did earthly mother bring. Mishapen then, an earthly mind expresseth, Deuoyde of grace, for worlds good onely wisheth. Thus then I will leaue to talke of our most iust (& by GOD ordained) hostilitie, be∣twixt men and serpents, and descend to a particular discouery, hovve Serpents and other beastes, are for mans sake at the like enmitie. And first of all I will begin with the Foules, and so discend to foure-footed Beastes, and insects, or imperfect creatures. Eagles are alwaie in warre with Serpents, from an high they espy them, and suddainly flye downe vppon them, vvith a great noyse or cry, tearing out their bovvels, and casting aside their venom or poyson. And some (as Albertus) say, that they will in particuler deale with Vipers, Tygres & Dragons, when she seeth them hunting those small beasts or birdes vvhich are her pray. This fight is thus described by Virgill, howe the Eagle griping the serpent in her talant, flyeth vp into the ayre. Vtque volans altè raptum cum vulua dracone Fert Aquila, implicuitque pedes, atque vnguibus haesit Saucius et serpens, sinuosa volumina versat, Arrectis horret squaemnus, & sibilat ore. Arduus, insurgens: illa haud minus vrget adunc Luct antem rostro, simul aethera verberat ali In English thus; As Eagle flyeth on high, and in her clawes a Dragon beareth, Folded within her feete, wounded, dying to her talants cleaueth. The serpent fierce now windeth round, and with her head erected, Hyssing out threats, rough scales vpsetteth that were deiected, To fright her fo: but all in vaine, for she with beake doth striue, And beate the ayre with wings of force, till Dragon cease to liue. There is in the seauenth Booke of Aelianus historie of liuing Creatures, a notable and elegant story, of an Eagle which was almost ouercome by a Serpent, and yet preserued & made Conquerour by a man. There was (saith hee) sixteene men which were threshing of corne in the heate of the sunne, by reason whereof they became very thirstie, then they agreed to send one of their company to a Fountaine not farre off, to fetch some water for them all to drinke; and so the messenger comming to the Fountaine, found an Eagle al∣most killed by a Serpent: for whiles frō an high she beheld the serpent, beeing more gree∣die of the pray for to feede her young, then vvarie to auoyde danger, fell downe vpon her bootie, which was too strong for her; for the serpent receiued her aduersary with fell force, power, and preparation to stifle her, and so indeede she had accomplished, had not by chance this thresher come vnto them: for the serpent had so ensnared and wrapped vp the Eagle with her long body, that she was neerer ad pereundum quam ad perdendum, that is, to be killed, then to kill, or get a pray. The man beholding the sight, with his sickle cut asunder the serpent, and so deliuered the Eagle: but how the Eagle required the man, shall be shewed in the history of the Eagle. In the Mountaines of Morfilium, there are great store of great Serpents, which are ve∣ry dangerous, but there are also great vvhite Eagles, which doe eate and destroy them. Some say that the Vulture doth also destroy serpents, but heerein I cannot be satisfied, for all Eagles doe not hunt after this game, but onely the lesser sort of them. Eagles whē they build their nest to breed in, they seeke out a certaine stone called Aëtites, the vertue wher∣of P. Uen tus A stotle Philostratus keepeth serpents from their young, and also make their egges fruitfull, so as it is a verie rare thing for Eagles to haue a rotten egge. All kindes of great Hawkes, Bussards, & Kites, are also enemies to serpents, snakes, & Adders, and the Kites will eate them, if they find thē aliue or dead, as I my selfe haue of∣ten seene by experience. The Storkes also doe hunt after serpents, wherefore in Thessalie, Solinus. it is as vnlawfull to kill a Storke as to kill a man; for they haue many deuises to catch Ser∣pents, and all venomous beasts, and thereof to eate without harming themselues: and not onely eate themselues, but giue thereof to their young ones, as Iuuenall witnesseth. —Serpente ciconia pullos nutrit Et inuenta per deuiarura lacerta. In English thus; The Storke her young ones, according to kind, In Serpents and Lizzards, doe their meate find. Sometime they fight together irefully, & the serpent strangleth the storke by twyning about her necke; againe, the storke killeth the serpent by pecking vppon her head, and so sometimes they are both found dead together. As the Eagle hath the stone Aëtites, so hath the storke Lychnites, to defend herselfe and her young ones from the rage of serpents. There is (as Oppianus writeth in his Ix nticis) this vulgar story in Italy. There was a cer∣taine serpent, which came two yeeres together to the nestes of diuers storkes & destroyed theyr young ones, neither could all the storkes make sufficient force against her with all their might to saue their broode. The third yeere the serpent came againe to attempt the like slaughter; but there among the storkes shee found a certaine strange Bird neuer seene before, being shorter then the storkes, and yet had a great long sharpe bill, as sharpe as the poynt of any sword. This bird (as it seemeth) was brought thether by the storkes to guard their young ones, when the Parents were gone abroade to forrage for them. Then, as soone as the young ones were hatcht, out commeth the Serpent from his hole, and begin∣neth to assaile the nests of the storkes, but the guardian bird, (according to the trust com∣mitted to her) resisted the serpent, and pecked at her mortally with her sharpe beake. The serpent to end his aduersary, nimblie aduaunced himselfe vpright, & endeuoured to reach the bird; but the warie bird, soared so high aboue his reach, that the langrell serpent could not catch him, & so they continued in fight, till at last the bird killed the serpent, after that the serpent had once onely fastened his venomed teeth vpon the bird, which afterward so wrought vpon this bird, that all her feathers did flie off from her backe. But of all other Fowles enemies to serpents, there is none greater or more deadlie, then the bird called Ibis, which the Egyptians doe wonderfully honour; for when swarmes of Philes Marcedi. Simocratus Diodorus Zoroaster. serpents come into Egypt out of the Arabian gulfes and fennes, these birds meete and de∣stroy them: and there is such an admirable feate in serpents of these birdes, that they doe not onely tremble, and fall sencelesse at their sight, but also at the sight of their feathers: they do harme to no other liuing thing, except Locusts and Caterpillers, wherefore they are worthily nourished, and called Inimicae et populatores serpentum, enemies and destroy∣ers of serpents. All kind of Pullen, as Cocks and Hennes, are likewise enemies to the broode of ser∣pents. And a good couragious cock, (as Columella saith) is able to kill and resist a serpent. For, (as Rondoletius saith) he hath found in the croppe or craw of pullen, young serpents deuoured by them. But from whence Albertus had his relation, that a Henne cannot be hurt that day by a serpent wherein she layeth an egge, I cannot tell, and therefore leaue it to the Reader to beleeue or refuse. And it is also said, that the flesh of hennes applyed to the bitings of serpents, doth cure Crescentius them, or els cause a hen to sitte vpon the wounded place; but if the beast which is woun∣ded, be a cow with calfe, or any such other femall with young, how soeuer it fareth with the old one, surely the young ones shall perrish. There is also another bird, which for his combatting with serpents, is termed Ophioma∣chus, a fighter with serpents. Although Gesner be of opinion, that Ophiomachus neuer sig∣nifieth Textor. a Bird. Of this Bird the Septuagints make mention, Leuit. 11. but many of the better learned, doe interpret it for a Lizard, or a Locust, or an Ichneumon. The Peacocke also is a terrour to serpents, so as they will not abide within the hearing of his voyce, for it is at perpetuall fewde with all venomous beastes. And the Vulture, as wee said before, is a terrour vnto them, insomuch as one of their feathers burned, will by the sauour of the smoake driue away the serpent. And to conclude, the Swallowes also are at variance with the serpents broode, for the snake will creepe vp to the swallowes nest, & therein sudden∣ly surprize the young, for the old ones will flye away chattering, and chirping in mourn∣full sort, not beeing able to hinder or resist their chicke-deuouring foes. But at the last, when they see all their young ones dispatched, as if they could not endure to liue for sor∣row, or els thinking it possible to fly into the snakes belly to fetch out againe their deuou∣red young ones, they fall downe vpon their enemies iawes, doing what they can to make them deuoure and swallow them vp also. And thus much for the hatred betwixt fowles Oppianus and serpents: Wherein, although they kill the serpent, either in their owne defence, or els for rauen & pray, yet may we admire the prudence of the most mightie Creator, who hath so disposed of his power, that he causeth the fowles of heauen, to reuenge mans quar∣rell vpon the serpents of the earth, by whose subtiltie man was plucked from heauen, and they made subiect to corruption. In the next place, God hath also framed an opposition betwixt serpents, & the beasts of the earth and water, which liue with serpents in the same Element, that so they might be both annoyed at home and abroade. I will therefore beginne with the dogge, who is a notable enemie to the serpents, as I my selfe haue seene many in England, for hee vvill earnestly seeke them out with nose and foote, both in waters, dunghills, and hedges, and when he hath found any one, he will suddainly snatch him into his mouth, biting him a∣bout the middle, & so holding it in equall poyse, will fling and shake it about his eares very fast and violently, till hee perceiue it can stirre no more, and then suddainly againe letteth it fall out of his mouth to the earth, but if it beginne to stirre, he snatcheth it vp againe, and shaketh it about his eares as before, and so neuer giueth ouer till it appeare dead: but they sildome kill them, onely they astonish them, and so may a young childe knock out theyr braines. Howbeit, when they fight in defence of their Maisters, then they kill them, by byting them in peeces. And yet is it more safe for them, to astonish them, and leaue them for dead, by shaking them about their eares, then by biting them in pecces, for that com∣monly then, while they share them asunder, they are stung or bitten by the serpent. And this I haue seene often in mine owne experience. But one of the greatest enemies of Ser∣pents, are Harts, a timorous beast of all other, and yet greedie to combat with the serpent, vvherefore I will briefely describe this their war and hatred, out of Solinus, Aclianus, Plu∣tarch, and Oppianus. The Hart will greedily follow out the path of the serpent, and finding it lodged in his denne or hole, by the vertue of his nose draweth it out of the earth, and thereof some haue deriued Elaphos a Hart, of Elanein tous opheis, that is, driuing away of serpents. And here∣in I thinke it not reason to follow the opinion of Aclianus, who intreating of Harts draw∣ing serpents out of the earth, saith; that the serpent is inticed and allured out of her hole, by the breath of the Hart, as by a Philtre or Cup of loue; for seeing that there is so great an hostilitie, and antipathy in nature, betwixt their whole disposition, howe can it come from any secret sympathy, that the serpent (which is the subtillest of all beastes) should be bewitched with the loue of his enemies breath? But if it be said that Serpents, which are by nature very cold, can easily be drawne forth by a warmer breath, as it were by the sweet beames of the hot sunne; how then falleth it not out, that when any other beast breatheth vpon their lodging, and into their dennes, they are not remooued? But let it be granted, that the warmenesse of the Harts breath maketh him forsake his denne, yet it cannot be ascribed to any secret in nature, as if there were a fire of loue in the Harts throat or bones, but onely from the naturall concomitant qualitie of heate, with expiration, respiration, & inspiration: and therefore I cannot but conclude, that there is not any possibilitie or pro∣babilitie in nature, that where the spirits, which take and make the breath, are at such va∣riance, there the breath proceeding from the one aduersary, should so inchaunt & beguile the other. But the true cause of this extraction of serpents out of their lodgings, is as I coniecture, not her warme breath, that allureth, nor yet scorcheth and burneth her aduersary, but that when the Hart hath found the denne of the Serpent, by her violent attraction of the ayre out from the serpent, she enforceth it for the safegard of life to follow it out of the denne. As when a vessell is broched, or vented, the vvine followeth the flying ayre; or as a Cup∣ping-glasse draweth blood out of a scarified place of the body: and so is a serpent against her will, drawne to followe the breath of her destroyer. Oribasius and Gunterius, doe sub∣scribe vnto this opinion, and take it for most consonant to reason and truth, and therfore I will not follow it any further: for by the selfe same manner doe the Sea-Rammes drawe the Sea calfes out of their lodgings among the Rocks vnder the earth, for when they haue found the Calfe, they keepe them from ayre, and preuent their refrigeration. When the serpent seeth himselfe so drawne forth by his aduersarie, hee beeing aboue measure incensed to rage, flyeth away, and maketh his poyson more noysome, violent & powerfull, for which cause, there was wont to be a prouerbiall caueat or warning: Caue ne incideris in serpentem, quum extracta à latebris anhelitu cerui, effugerit, tum enim propter iracundiam vehementius ei venenum est. Take heede least you meete with a serpent flying away from the Hart, after she is drawne out of her denne by her breath, for then, by reason of her rage, her poyson is more sorcible. But I will proceede to the more strange & won∣derfull combat betwixt serpents and Harts. For when the serpent perceiueth the vnauoid∣able danger, and that she must needes fight for her life, she hysseth strongly, lifting vp her head from the earth, euen to the throat of the Hart, & thereat catcheth & gnasheth with her teeth; but on the other side, the valiant Hart, (if such a word may be giuen to a feare∣full beast) as it were deriding his aduersaries weake endeuours to harme, suffereth the ser∣pent to wind about his breast and belly, and to embrace both necke and legges with his long and weake bodie, that so he may haue the more power vpon it, for he teareth it into an hundred peeces. But the most strange combats, are betwixt the Harts and Serpents of Libia, where ha∣tred hath his deepest footing, for there the serpents watch the Hart when he lyeth downe to sleepe vpon the ground, and beeing a multitude of them, set vpon him altogether, fast∣ning their poysonfull teeth in euery part of his skinne, some on his neck and breasts, some on his sides and backe, some on his legges, and some hanging vpon his priuie partes, by∣ting him with mortall rage, to end and ouerthrow him. The poore Hart beeing thus op∣pressed with multitude, and assailed without any warning to the battell, in vaine attemp∣teth to runne away, for their cold earthy bodies, winding tayles, and pinching teeth, hin∣der his wonted pace, and ouer-charge his strength: whereat beeing forced to quite him∣selfe in the best manner he can, enraged with teeth, feete and hornes, assaileth his enemies, whose speares and arrowes of teeth and stinges, sticke so fast in his body; tearing them in peeces which he can touch with his teeth, beating others asunder where he can reach thē with his hornes, and trampling vnder his feete those which cleaue to his lower parts: and yet such is the rage and dauntlesse courage, or rather hatred of these enemies, not willing to die alone, (but like Champions to end their liues vppon and with their aduersarie) doe still hold fast, and euen when their bodies are beaten in peeces, their heads sticke close, and hang sharpe vpon the Harts skinne, as though they would grow with him, and neuer fall off, till he should also fall downe dead. But the Hart feeling some ease, and hauing by the slaughter of their bodies deliuered his feete from thraldome, by a diuine naturall instinct, flyeth and runneth fast to some adioyning fountaine, where hee seeketh for Sea-crabbes, whereof he maketh a medicine, that shaketh off their heads which cleaue so fast vnto him, and also cureth all their wounds and poyson. This valiant courage is in Harts against ser∣pents, neuer yeelding, tyring, or giuing ouer, and yet otherwise, are afraid of Hares and Connyes by nature. But what is the cause of this hostilitie betwixt Harts and serpents? is it for meate, or for medicine and cure? Surely they would abhorre to eate them, if it were not for health and naturall medicine, for sometimes the pores of their body are dulled and shut vp, somtimes the wormes of their belly, doe ascend vp into the roofe of their mouthes while they chew the cudde, and there cleaue fast; for remedie whereof, the Hart thus afflicted, runneth a∣bout to seeke for serpents, for the eating of a serpent cureth this maladie. Pliny saith, that when the Hart waxeth old, and perceiueth that his strength decayeth, haire changeth, & his bodie beginnes to be feeble, then for the renewing of his strength, he first deuoureth a serpent, and afterward runneth to some fountaine of water, wherof when he hath drunk, he findeth a sensible alteration, both in horne, haire, and whole bodie. And this thing is also deliuered by the Writer of the Glosse vpon the 42 Psalme, which beginneth, Like as the Hart desireth the water springs, so longeth my soule after my GOD. But for the ending of this question, we must consider and remember, that there are two kinds of Harts, one eateth serpents, and feeling the poyson to worke, straight-way by drinking casteth vp the poyson againe, or else cureth himselfe by couering all his body ouer in water. The other kind onely by nature killeth a serpent, but after victorie forbeareth to eate it, and returneth againe to feede in the Mountaines. And thus much for the discorde betwixt Harts and Serpents. In the next place, great is the variance betwixt Serpents, Dragons & Elephants, wher∣of Pliny & Solinus write as followeth. When the Elephants, called Serpent-killers, meete with the Dragons, they easily tread them in peeces, and ouer-come them, wherefore the Dragons and greater serpents, vse subtiltie in stead of might, for when they haue found the path, and common way of an Elephant, they make such deuises therein to intrap him, as a man would thinke they had the deuise of men to helpe them, for with their tayles they so ensnare the way, that when the beast commeth, they entangle his legges as it were in knots of ropes; now when the beast stoopeth downe with his trunke to loose and vntie them, one of them suddenly thrusteth his poysoned head into his trunke, whereby hee is strangled. The other also, (for there are euer many which lye in ambush) set vpon his face, byting out his eyes, and some at his tender belly: some wind themselues about his throat, and all of them together, sting, bite, teare, vex & hang vpon him, vntill the poore beast, emptied of his blood, and swollen with poyson in euery part, fall downe dead vppon his aduersaries, and so by his death kill them at his fall and ouerthrow, whom hee could not ouer-come beeing aliue. And whereas Elephants (for the most part) goe together in flocks and troupes, the subtile serpents doe let passe the formost of euery rancke, and sette onely vpon the hindermost, that so one of the Elephants may not helpe another; & these serpents are said to be thirtie yardes long. Likewise, forasmuch as these Dragons know, that the Elephants come and feede vpon the leaues of trees, their manner is to conuay themselues into the trees, and lye hid among the boughes, couering their fore-parts with leaues, and letting their hinder partes hang downe, like dead parts and members: and when the Elephant commeth to brouze vpon the Tree-toppes, then suddenlie they leape into his face, and pull out his eyes, and because that reuenge doth not satisfie her, thirsting onely after death, she twyneth her gable-long bodie about his necke, and so strangleth him. It is reported that the blood of Elephants is the coldest blood in the world, & that the Dragons in the scorching heate of Summer, cannot get any thing to coole thē except this blood: for which cause they hide themselues in Riuers & Brookes, whether the Elephants come to drinke, and when he putteth downe his trunck they take hold thereof, & instant∣lie in great numbers leape vp into his eares, which onely of all his vpper parts, are most na∣ked and vnarmed, out of which they suck his blood, neuer giuing ouer their holde till hee fall downe dead, & so in the fall, kill them which were the procurers of his death. So that his and their blood is mingled both together, whereof the Auncients made their Cinna∣baris, which was the best thing in the world to represent blood in painting: Neither can any deuise or arte of man, euer come neere it; and beside, it hath in it a rare vertue against poyson. And thus much for the enm tie betwixt Serpents and Elephants. The Cat also, by Albertus is said to be an enemie to serpents, for hee saith shee will kill them, but not eate thereof; howbeit, in her killing of them, except she drinke incontinent∣ly, she dieth by poyson. This relation of Albertus, cannot agree with the Monks of Mes∣ven their relation about their Abbey-cat. But it may be that Albertus speaketh of vvild∣cats in the woods and mountaines, who may in auine for their pray kill a serpent, which followeth with them the same common game. The Roes or Roe-bucks do also kill serpents, & the Hedge-hogge is enemy vnto them, for sometimes they meete both together in one hole, and then at the sight of the serpent, the hedge-hogge foldeth himselfe vp round, so as nothing appeareth outwardly, saue one∣lie his prickles and sharpe bristles: the angry serpent setteth vpon him, and biteth him with all her force; the other againe, straineth herselfe aboue measure, to annoy the serpents teeth, face, eyes, and whole body: and thus when they meete, they lie together afflicting one another, till one, or both of them fall downe dead in the place. For some-time the serpent killeth the hedge-hogge, and sometime the hedge-hogge killeth the serpent, so that many times she ca rieth away the serpents flesh and skin vpon her backe. The Wesills also fight with serpents with the like successe; the cause is, for that one & other of them liue vpon iuyce, and so for their pray or bootie, they fall together in mortall Aristotle Peroitus Isi orus. Aelianus. warre. Heerein the Wesill is too cunning for the Serpent, because before she fighteth; she seeketh Rue, and by eating thereof, quickly discomforteth her aduersarie. But some say, that shee eateth Rue afterward, to the intent to auoyde all the poyson shee contracted in the combat. The Lyon also and the Serpent are at variance, for his rufling mane is discouraged, by the extolled head of the Serpent to his breast. And therefore as S. Ambrose saith, this is an admirable thing, that the snake should runne away from the Hurt, the most fearefull of all other easts, and yet ouer-come the Lyon, King of all the residue. The Ichneumon or Pharoes Mouse is an enemy to serpents, & eateth them, and because he is too feeble to deale with a snake alone, therefore when hee hath found one, hee goeth and calleth as many of his fellowes as he can find, & so when they find themselues strong enough in companie, they set vpon theyr pray, & eate it together; for which cause, when the Egyptians will signifie weakenes, they paint an Ichneumon. The Peacock is also a pro∣fested Pellonius Orus. terrour and scourge to Snakes & Adders, and they will not endure neere those pla∣ces where they heare their voyce. The Sorex and Swine, doe also hate and abhorre ser∣pents, and the little Sorex hath most aduantage against them in the Winter-time, vvhen they are at the weakest. To conclude, the horse is wonderfully afraid of all kinds of Ser∣pents if he see them, and will not goe ouer, but rather leape ouer a dead snake. And thus I will end the warre betwixt serpents, and foure-footed beastes and fowles. Novv least their curse should not be hard enough vnto them, God hath also ordained one of them to destroy another, and therefore now it followeth, to shewe in a word, the mutuall discord betwixt themselues. The Spider (although a venomous creature) yet is it an enemie to the serpent, for when shee seeth a serpent lye vnder her tree in the shadow, Pliny. she weaueth or twisteth a thred downe from her vveb vppon the head of the serpent, and suddenly byteth into his head a mortall wound, so that he can do nothing but onely roule to and fro, beeing strooken with a Megrim, whereby hee hath not so much power, as to breake the Spiders thred hanging ouer his head, vntill he be dead and ouerthrowne. The Erasmus The Cockatrice is such an enemie to some kind of serpents, that he killeth them vvith his breath or hyssing. The Lyzard, a kind of serpent, is most friendly to man, & very irefull against serpents, to the vttermost of his power, whereof Erasmus (in his booke of friendshippe) telleth this storie: I saw (saith hee) on a day, a very great Lyzard fighting with a serpent in the verie mouth of a Caue, at the first sight whereof I maruailed at the matter, for the serpent was not visible our of the earth: there was with me an Italian, who said, that surely the Lyzard had some enemy within the Caue. After a little while the Lizard came vnto vs, & shewed vs his side all wounded, as it were crauing helpe, for the serpent had bitten him sore, for of greene, he made him appeare redde, and this Lyzard did suffer himselfe to be touched of vs. Thus saith Erasmus. Againe, in the same place he saith, that when a Lyzard saw a serpent lye in waite to set vpon a man beeing a sleepe, the Lyzard ranne to the man, and neuer ceased running vpon the mans face, scratching his necke and face gentlie with his clawes, vntill he had awaked the man, and so discouered to him his great danger. The Locust also fighteth with a ser∣pent, and killeth him when he lusteth, for he getteth hold with his teeth vppon his lower chappe, and so destroyeth him; but this is not to be vnderstood of euery kinde of Locust, but onely of one kind, which for this cause is called Ophiomachum genus. The Serpent is also an enemy to the Chamaeleon, for in the extremitie of famine, shee Aelianus. setteth vpon them, and except the Chamaeleon can couer herselfe from his rage, hee hath no defence but death. Albertus calleth a certaine vvorme, Spoliator colubri, because (as he saith) it will take fast hold vpon a serpents necke vnder-neath his iawes, and neuer giue o∣uer till he hath wearied and destroyed his aduersarie. The Torteises are enemies to Ser∣pents, and will fight with them, but before they enter combat, they arme themselues with wild Marioram or Peniroyall. But there is not any thing in the worlde that fighteth more earnestly against serpents then Sea-crabbes & Creuises, for when the Sunne is in Cancer, serpents are naturally tor∣mented with paines and feauers, and therefore if swine be stunge or bitten with serpents, Thrasillus Pliny. Aelianus they cure themselues by ca ing of Sea-crabs. There is a great water neere Ephesus, at the one side whereof there is a Caue full of many noysome & irefull serpents, whose bytings by often probation, haue beene very deadly both to men and beastes. These serpents doe oftentimes endenour to crawl ouer the poole; now on the other side there are great store of Crabbes, who when they see the serpents come crawling or swimming, they instantly put out their crooked legges, & as it were with tonges or pynsars, reach at the slyding ser∣pent, where-withall the serpents are so deterred, that through their sight, & often remem∣brance of their vnhappy successe with them, they turne backe againe, and neuer dare any more aduenture to the other side. Where wee may see the most wise prouidence of the Creator, who hath set Sea crabs, the enemies of serpents, to guard both men and cattell, which are on the opposite sides: for otherwise, the inhabitants would all perrish, or els be droue away from their dwellings. To conclude, not onely liuing creatures, but also some kind of earth and plants are enemies to serpents: and therfore most famous are Ebusus & Creete, as some say, although Bellonius say, that there are Scolopendraes Vipers, and Slow-wormes in Creete, yet he saith they are without venome: and there are very fewe in Eng∣land & Scotland, but none at all in Ireland, neither will they liue if they be brought in the∣ther from any other Country. This antipathy with Serpents, proceedeth from liuing to dead and vegetable things, as trees, herbes, and plants, as may be seene by this discourse following. There is such vertue in the Ashe-tree, that no Serpent will endure to come neere either the morning or euening shadow of it, yea though very farre distant from them, they do so deadlie hate it. We set downe nothing but that wee haue found true by experience: If a great fire be made, and the same fire encircled round with Ashen-boughes, & a serpent put betwixt the fire and the Ashen-boughes, the serpent will sooner runne into the fire, then come neere the Ashen-boughes: Thus saith Pliny. Olaus Magnus saith, that those Nor∣thren Countries which haue great store of Ash-trees, doe want venomous beasts, of which opinion is also Pliny. Callimachus saith, there is a Tree growing in the Land of Trachinia, called Smilo, to which if any Serpents doe either come neere, or touch, they foorth-with die. Democritus is of opinion, that any Serpent will die if you cast Oken-leaues vpon him. Pliny is of opinion, that Alcibiadum, which is a kind of wild Buglosse, is of the same vse & qualitie; and further, beeing chewed, if it be spet vpon any serpent, that it cannot possibly Aelianus. Constantinus liue. In time of those solemne Feastes which the Athenians dedicated to the Goddesse Ce∣res, their women did vse to lay and strew their beddes, with the leaues of the Plant called Agnos, because serpents could not endure it, and because they imagined it kept them chast, Where-vpon they thought the name was giuen it. The herbe called Rosemarie, is terrible Aelianus to serpents. The Egyptians doe giue it out, that Polydamna, the wife of Thorris their King, taking pittie vpon Helen, caused her to beset on shore in the Iland of Pharus, and bestowed vpon her an herbe (whereof there was plenty) that was a great enemy to serpents: whereof the serpents hauing a feeling sence (as they say) and so readily knowne of them, they straight∣waies got them to their lurking holes in the earth: and Helen planted this herbe, who cō∣ming to the knowledge thereof, she perceiued that in his due time it bore a seede that was a great enemie to serpents, and there-vpon was called Helenium, as they that are skilfull in Elecompane in English. Plants affirme; and it groweth plentifully in Pharus, which is a little Ile against the mouth of Nylus, ioyned to Alexandria with a bridge. Rue, (called of some Herbe of grace) espe∣cially that which groweth in Lybia, is but a backe friend to serpents, for it is most dry, and therefore causing serpent soone to faint and loose their courage, because (as Simocatus af∣firmeth) it induceth a kind of heauines or drunkennesse in their head, with a vertiginie or giddines through the excesse of his drinesse, or immoderate sticcitie. Serpents cannot en∣dure the sauour of Rue, and therefore a Wesill, when she is to fight with any serpent, ea∣teth Rue, as a defensatiue against her enemie, as Aristotle, & Pliny his Interpreter, are of o∣pinion. The Country people leauing theirvessels of milke abroade in the open fieldes, doe be-smeare thē round about with garlick, for feast least some venomous serpents should creepe into them, but the smell of garlick, as Erasmus saith, driueth them away. No serpents were euer yet seene to touch the herbe Trifolie, or Three-leaued-grasse, as Aedonnus wold make vs belieue. And Cardan the Phisitian hath obserued as much, that serpents, not any thing that is venomous, will neither lodge, dwell or lurk priuily neere vnto Trifolie, because that it is their bane, as they are to other liuing creatures: and therfore it is sowne to very good purpose, & planted in very hot coūtries, where there is most store of such venomous crea∣tures. Arnoldus Villanouanus saith, that the herb called Dracontea killeth serpents. And Flo∣rentinus affirmeth, that if you plant woormwood, Mugwort, or Sothernwood about your dwelling, that no venomous serpents will euer come neer, or dare enterprise to invade the same. No serpent is found in Vines when they flourish, bearing flowers or blossoms, for they abhor the smell, as Aristotle saith. Auicen an Arabian Phisitian, saith, that Capers doe kill wormes in the guts, & likewise serpents. If you make a round circle with herbe Beto∣nie, & therein include any serpents, they will kill themselues in the place rather then striue to get away. Galbanum killeth serpents only by touching, if oyle & the herbe called Fenell giant be mixt withall. There is a shrubbe called Therionarca, hauing a flower like a Rose, which maketh serpents heauy, dull and drousie, and so killeth them, as Pliny affirmeth. Albertus and Kyranides affirme, that there is a certaine Tree in Asia called Hyperdiocis, which soundeth as much as, Against the right hand, with whose sweet fruite Doues are de∣lighted; but there are serpents which are sore enemies to the Doues: so lying in waite for them, and not beeing able to abide the smell and shadow of the Tree, the Doues notwith∣standing very safely doe there in the Tree seeke their refuge, and finde foode where-with to sustaine themselues. Rasis (who practised phisick one hundreth yeres) affirmeth, that if any man doe melt Sal Almoniack in his mouth, and then spet it into a serpents mouth, that he will die of it. Of the Medicines made and taken out of SERPENTS. I T is manifest, that if any man be wounded of a Serpent, though Remedies to be had and ta∣ken from ser∣pents. the wound seeme incurable, that the bowels or inward parts of the same serpent, being applied to the wound, will cure the same; and those that haue eaten the liuer of a boyled Viper at any time, shall neuer after be wounded of any serpent. Neither is a snake venomous, vnlesse at some-times of the Moone, when shee is throughly mooued or angred. And a liue snake or serpent being caught, if the bitten place be bathed, soked or washed with the snake being brused in any water, it is of notable effect. Besides, they are thought to be ve∣rie soueraigne against many infirmities, and therefore (as Pliny saith) they are dedicated to Aesculapius. Auicen saith, that if any be troubled with the Leprosie, he is to be cured by taking a black serpent, and beeing excoriated, he must be buried so long till there breede wormes of him, and then he is to be taken forth of the earth and dryed, and so to be giuen to the leprous person for three dayes together, the quantitie of one dramme at euery time, with syruppe of honie. Pliny, and with him agreeth Cornelius Celsus, affirmeth, that if any one do eate the middle part of snakes or serpents, casting away the heads & tayles, they cure Str mes, which we in English call the Kings-Euill. There is a disease called Elephantia, or Elephan∣tiasis, which is a kind of Lepry proceeding of Melancholie, choler and flegme, exceeding∣ly adust, and maketh the skinne rough, of colour like an Elephant, with blacke wannish spots, and dry parched scales and scurffe: This disease (I say) so greeuous, and Strumes, are exceedingly holpen by eating often of Vipers and serpents, as Iohn Taganet, in his first Booke Institut. Chirurg. hath assured vs. Pliny saith, that if you take out the right eye of a serpent, and so bind it about any part of you, that it is of great force against the watering or dropping of the eyes, by meanes of a rhume issuing out thereat, if the serpent be againe let goe aliue. And so hee saith, that a serpents or snakes hart, if either it be bitten or tyed to any part of you, that it is a present remedie for the tooth-ach: and hee addeth further, that if any man doe ast of the snakes hart, that he shall neuer after be hurt of any serpent. Paulus Venetus, in his second booke, chap. 40, writeth, howe that in the Prouince of Caraiam, there be serpents of exceeding greatnes, which beeing killed, the inhabitants of the Country doe pull out their gall, which they vse to prize at a verie high rate when they sell any of it, for it is very medicinall: so that they which are byt of a madde dogge, if they take inwardlie in any drinke but the quantitie of a penny weight of this gall, they are pre∣sently cured. And if a woman be in her trauaile of child-birth, if shee tast neuer so little of this gall, the birth will be the more speedie. So, if any be troubled either with the Pyles or Haemerrhoides in the fundament, if that the place be annoynted with this gall, after a few dayes, he is set free from his disease. Hippocrates giueth the seede of serpents as a remedie against the suffocation of the belly. Nicholaus Myrepsus preseribeth this medicine against straines & hardnesses. Take a dead serpent, & put him into a new pot, luting it very well with Gypsum, then set it in a furnace that it may be burnt, after that, commixe the ashes of a serpent with an equall portion of the seedes of Fennegreke, so being wrought vp with Attick-hony, & throughly disgested, annoynt the place affected. And with him agreeth Pliny, who expresly affirmeth, that the ashes of snakes and serpents; beeing annoynted vpon Strumes, eyther with oyle or waxe, is a singuler medicine. And likewise to drinke the ashes of a serpent, that is burrit to pow∣der in new earthen potte, is very good: but it will be the more effectuall, if the serpents be killed betweene two tracks or forrowes that are made with Cart-wheeles. The ashes of a serpent burnt with salt in a pot, beeing put with oyle of Roses into the contrary eare, help∣eth the tooth-ach. An vnguent against the Morphue, prescribed by Olaus Magnus. Take of the ashes of a serpent burnt in a newe pot and well couered, two ounces, Lytarge, Galbanum, Ammoni∣acum, and Opponax dissolued in Vineger, three ounces, boyle them vntill the Vineger be consumed, then straine them, putting to them of Turpentine three ounces, Frankinsence, Masticke and Sarcocolla three ounces, Saffron two ounces, working them with a Spa∣thulor till they be cold. The powder of a burnt serpent, is likewise good against Fistuloes. The fat of a snake or serpent mixt with oyle, is good against Strumes, as Pliny saith. The fat of snakes mixt with Verdegrease, healeth the parts about the eyes that haue any rup∣ture. To which agreeth the Poet, when he saith: Anguibus ereptos adipes rugine misce, Hipoterant ruptos oculorum iungere partes. Which may be thus englished; The fat of snakes mingled with yron-rust, The parts of eyes doth mend, which erst were burst. It is certaine that barrennesse commeth by meanes of that grieuous torment and paine in child-birth; and yet Olympias of Thebes is of opinion, that this is remedied with a Bulls gall, the fat of serpents, and Verdegrease, with some honie added to them, the place bee∣ing there with annointed before the comming together of both parts. When a Woman is not able to conceiue by meanes of weakenesse in the retentiue vertue, then there is no doubt, but there must needes growe some membrane in the bellies entrance, for which it is not amisse to make a Pessarie of the fat of a serpent, verdegrease, & the fat of a Bull mixt together, &c. and to be applied. Hippocrates in lib. de Sterilibus. Gesner had a friend who signified to him by his Letters, that the fat of a Serpent vvas sent to him from those sulphureous Bathes which were neere vnto Cameriacum, and was sold at a very deere rate, namely, twelue poundes for euery ounce, and sometimes deerer. They vse to mixe it with the emplaister of Iohn de Vigo, that famous Chirurgeon) for all hardnesses, nodes, and other priuie & vnseene (though not vnfelt) torments proceeding of the Spanish-poxe. They vse it yet further, against leprous swellings, and pimples, and to smooth and thinne the skinne. Matthiolus saith, that the fat of a black Serpent, is mixt to good purpose with those oyntments that are prepared against the French or Spanish∣pox. And Pliny mixeth their fat with other conuenient medicines, to cause haire to grow againe. The suffumigation of an old serpent, helpeth the monthlie course. Michaell Aloi∣sius saith, that oyle of Serpents decocted with the flowers of Cowsleps, (euer remembring to gather and take that which swimmeth at the toppe) is singuler to annoynt podagricall persons there-with. NOvv followeth the preparing of Serpents. Take a Mountaine-Serpent, that hath a blacke backe, and a vvhite bellie, & cut off his taile, euen hard to the place where he sendeth forth his excrements, and take away his head with the breadth of foure fingers, then take the residue & squise out the blood into some vessell, keeping it in a glasse carefully, then fley him as you doe an Eele, beginning from the vpper & grosser part, and hang the skinne vpon a stick and dry it, then deuide it in the middle, and referue all dili∣gently. You must wash the flesh and put it in a pot, boyling it in two parts of Wine, and beeing well and throughly boyled, you must season the broth with good spices, and Aro∣maticall or cordiall powders, and so eate it. But if you haue a mind to rost it, it must be so rosted, as it may not be burnt, and yet that it may be brought into powder, and the pow∣der thereof must be eaten together with other meat, because of the loathing, and dreadfull name, and conceit of a serpent: for beeing thus burned, it preserueth a man from all feare of any future Lepry, and expelleth that which is present. It keepeth youth, causing a good colour aboue all other Medicines in the vvorld; it cleereth the eye-sight, gardeth surelie from gray haires, and keepeth from the Falling-sicknes. It purgeth the head from all in∣firmitie, and beeing eaten (as before is said) it expelleth scabbines, & the like infirmities, with a great number of other diseases. But yet such a kind of Serpent as before wee haue described, and not any other, beeing also eaten, freeth one from deafenes. You may also finelie mince the heads and tayles of Serpents, & feede there-with chic∣kins or geese, beeing mingled with crummes of bread or Oates, and these Geese or Chic∣kins beeing eaten, they helpe to take away the Leprosie, and all other foulenesse in mans bodie. If you take the dryed skinne, and lay it vppon the tooth on the inner side, it will mittigate the paine thereof, specially if it proceede from any hote cause. In like sort, the same skinne washed with spettle, and with a little peece of the taile laid vppon any Impo∣stume, or Noli me tangere, it will tame and master the paine, causing it to putrefie more ea∣silie and gentlie, and scarcely leauing behind any cicatrise or skarre. And if a woman bee∣ing in extremitie of paine in child-birth, do but tye or bind a peece of it on her belly, it will cause the birth immediatly to come away. So the skinne beeing boyled and eaten, per∣formeth the same effects that the Serpent doth. The blood of a Serpent is more precious then Balsamum, and if you annoynt your lips with a little of it, they will looke passing redde: and if the face be annoynted there-with, it will receiue no spot or fleck, but causeth it to haue an orient and beautifull hue. It repres∣seth all scabbinesse of the body, stinking in the teeth and gummes if they be there-with an∣nointed. The fat of a serpent, speedily helpeth all rednes, spots, & other infirmities of the eyes, and beeing annoynted vpon the eye-liddes, it cleereth the eyes exceedingly. Item, put them into a glassed spot, and fill the same with Butter in the Month of May, then lute it well with paste (that is, Meale well kneaded) so that nothing may euaporate, then sette the pot on the fire, and let it boyle wel-nigh halfe a day; after this is done, straine the But∣ter through a cloth, and the remainder beate in a morter, and straine it againe, and mixe them together, then put them into water to coole, & so reserue it in siluer or golden boxes, that which is not cuaporated, for the older, the better it is, and so much the better it will be, if you can keepe it fortie yeeres. Let the sicke patient, who is troubled eyther with the Goute, or the Palfie, but annoynt himselfe often against the fire with this vnguent, and without doubt he shall be freed, especially if it be the Goute. All these prescriptions and directions, were taken from the writings of a certaine namelesse Author. Hippocrates saith, that a Hart or Stagge hauing eaten any Serpents, the wormes in their guttes are thereby expelled. And Absyrtus hath the same words, that Harts by eating of a Serpent, doc kill and expell wormes from their guttes. Hierocles, to a certaine medicine which he prepared for the Strangulion in a horse, mingled the dung of a Lyzard, & Stèar herpetou, (that is, as I interpret it) the fat of a serpent, the blood of a Doue, &c. Laurence Rusius saith, that it is good to giue the flesh and decoction of Serpents, to madde, beating and striking horses. And that the fatte of a Serpent, &c. doth cure the puffing or swellings that arise in horses backs, which come by meanes of any compression, or close sitting and thrusting downe. Item, the vnguent that droppeth from a Serpent, whilst he is rosted on a spit, is highlie commended for Fistuloes that are in horses hoofes. Galen and Rasius, doc counsell vs to cut in peeces a snake or serpent, and to lay the fat there of vpon a sticke, and to annoint the outward parts of the hoofe of any horse. Horseleaches, liue Mise, the greene Lyzard be∣ing burned, if they be giuen to a Hawke in her meate, they do cause a speedie mutation of her feathers or wings; and the same effect haue little Riuer-fishes, finely beaten or stam∣ped, if they be cast vpon any meate. Item, the Serpent that is speckled, and of diuers and sundry colours, of all others hath the least poyson, and in the German tongue it is called Huf, (peraduenture it is that which we call a snake) if, (I say) you take this serpent, and boyle it with Wheate, and giue the same Wheate to a Henne to feede vpon, beeing mingled amongst her meate and drinke with the venim of a Serpent, a Hawke beeing fedde with the flesh of such a Henne, forth-with casteth her sicke feathers, and is freed from any other disease, if she haue any at all, as Albertus saith. The old skinne of an Adder or Snake, that he casts off in the Spring-time, if it be rub∣bed vpon the eyes, cleereth the sight, as Pliny saith. And Galen biddeth vs, if any be trou∣bled with blood-shotten eyes, to take the old cast-skinne of serpents, & being beaten with Sea-water', to annoynt them there-withall. And Cardan saith, that the cast-skin of a snake, if the eyes be rubbed there-with euery morning, that they will neuer be very dim of sight, nor yet euer haue any pinne or webbe in them. Amongst compositions that are made for the eyes, they vse to mixe the cast-skinne of snakes, as Diocles affirmeth; adding further, that the old age, or cast-skinne of a snake beeing boyled in vvine, is an excellent helpe for paine in the eares, if a little thereof be dropped into them. Boyle the cast skinne of a snake with toppes of Poppy, and droppe a little thereof into the cares, if any be troubled vvith paine thereof, and this is an excellent remedy, as Galen in his third Booke, De Composit. medicam. sec. loca, hath taught vs, hauing himselfe learned the same from Archigenes. The cast-skinne of serpents being burned in a pot, or on a hot burning tyle-shard, if it be ming∣led with oyle of Roses, and so dropt into the eares, is prooued to be very effectuall against all sores, and sicknesses of the eares; but especially against the stinking sauour of them: or if they be puralent or full of matter, then to be mixt with vineger. Some vse to mingle Bulls gall there-with, and the iuyce of the flesh of Torteises beeing boyled. Marcellus saith, that if you take the gall of a Calfe, with a like quantitie of Vineger, and mixe them with the cast-skinne of a serpent, if then you dippe a little vvooll into this me∣dicine, and put it into the eare, that it helpeth very much, especially if with a spunge being soked in warme-water, you first foment the eare. Dioscorides and Galen doe affirme, that the cast-skinne of a serpent, if it be boyled in Wine, doth cure the tooth-ach, if the pained place be washed there-with. But yet, in intollerable paines of the teeth, this is prooued more singuler. Take the cast-skinne of a Serpent and burne it, then temper it with oyle, till it come to the thicknes or consistence of hard Hony, and couer the tooth (being first scou∣red and clensed there-with, annoynting all the neere places to the same, and put some of it into the hollownes of the tooth. And as Archigenes saith, if you lay the cast-skinne of a snake vnto the teeth, not beeing burnt, they will all fall out. It cureth likewise the lowsie euill, called Phthiriasis. And Galen prescribeth this cast-skin of snakes or serpents, for a re∣medie against the Cholick, if it be put into a brasse pot with some oyle, and so burnt to powder, if then it be dissolued in oyle, and the place there-with annoynted, it is of great vertue. And if it bee boyled in a Tinne vessell with some oyle of Roses, it remedieth the the Bloody-flixe, and such as be troubled with Tenesmas, which is, a great desire in going to stoole, and yet can doe nothing. Arnoldus de villa noua, in his Breuiarie saith, that if you take the cast-skin of a serpent, Opopanax, Myrrhe, Galbanum, Castoreum, yellow Sulphur, Madder, Pidgeons or Hawkes doung, and incorporate them with the gall of a Cow, they beeing first puluerised, and the fume thereof receiued through a tunnell at the lower parts, it bringeth foorth either the dead or liuing birth. Cardan lib. de Subtil. saith, that the cast-skin of a serpent burned in the full of the Moone, & entring into the first degree of Aries, if the ashes thereof be sprin∣kled on the head, that thereby terrible and fearefull dreames will follow. And if the face be annointed or washed there-with being first layd in water, that it will cause one to looke very fearefully and horribly: and if it be held vnder the tongue, it will make one very wise and eloquent: and if it be kept vnder the soles of the feete, it maketh one very gratious a∣mong Princes, Magistrates and great men. And another saith, that this cast-off-skin bee∣ing puluerised when the Moone is in her increase, and in the first degree of Aries, if the powder thereof be set on the Table, in a woodden or metalline dish, if any poyson be ther∣in, it will be dispersed and doe no hurt, and yet the powder will remaine safe and whole: and if giuen to a Leaprous-person, his disease will spreade no further. And if you put a lit∣tle of this powder into any wound, it will cure it within three dayes. I haue seene, (fayth Galen) Goates that haue eaten of the boughes and leaues of Tamariske, and I haue found them without a spleene: also I haue seene other Goates that haue lickt vppe serpents after they had cast their skinne, and I haue prooued, that after that, they haue growne verie white, and to haue kept their young yeeres a great while; so that it was long before they waxed old. Of the way to driue away Serpents. Of their poison and bytings. A certaine and sure way to cure those, who either haue beene poysoned, envenomed, or bitten by them. T O expell and driue farre away any venomous Creatures, wee vse Suffu igati∣ons to expell Serpents. to make fumigations of the roote of Lyllies, Harts-horne, and the hornes and hoofes of such beasts as be clouen-footed: likewise of Bay-leaues and berries, Calamint, Water-cresses, and the ashes of the Pine-tree. The leaues of Vitex, Bitumen, Castorium, Me∣lanthium, Goates-hornes, Cardamomū, Galbanum, Propolis, which may be called Bee-glew, the herbe called Horstrange, Panax, Opo∣panax, Fleabane, the shauings or scrapings of the Cipres or Ceder tree beeing steeped in oyle, the Iet-stone, Sagapinum, the herbe called Poley, Ferne, and all other things that haue a strong or vehement ill sauour, beeing cast on the coales for a fu∣migation, doe with theyr vapour chase away venomous beastes. For whereas all veno∣mous creatures haue the passages or pores of theyr bodies wery straight and narrow, they are very easily filled and stuffed, and are quickly stopped and suffocated by such like sents and smells. Aetius in his 13. Booke, setteth downe an excellent fume after this manner. Take of Galbanum, of Sandaracha, Butter, and of Goates-fat, of euery one a like much, make them into Pills, and vse them for a Fumigation. Nicander in Theriacis setteth downe some for the same intentions, in these verses. Ceruinique graui cornu nidore fugabis: Et sic cum accendens Gagatae quandoque lapillum, Quem consumentis non exedit impetus ignis: Multifidam filicem crepitantibus inijce flammis, Aut imas viridis libanotidos accipe fibras, Tantundemque acris nasturci: his junge duobus Aequali capre iam jactum pondere cornu, Aut exic ant em nares cerebrumque nigellam, Interdum Sulphur, faedum quandoque Bitumen, Vt-su pta aequali pendantur singula parte. Praeterea graveolens candentibus indit a prauis Galbana, et ignitum faciens vetica dolorem, Dentatisque cedrum maxillis sectile lignum, Omnibus invisum serpentibus eff at odorem. In English thus; By Hart-horne-fu doe serpents slide away When stone Gagates burning's put thereto: Which heate of fire doth not cleane destroy; Then int' those flames cast many-leaued Ferne also. Of greene hogs- ll, take the lowest by a ches, Of Nosewort sharpe, so much to them ioyne A like proportion of Roes horne, in aight & kantches, Or els Nigella, drying nose and braine, Or Brimstone, called fil y Sulphure, So all be equall in waight and parts to cure. Besides, Galbanum ranck, layde on burning coales. Or Nettles, which doe cause a fierie paine, And Cedar cut, all burn'd d'bout serpents holes, Them ouer-come, and make them flie amaine. The breath or vapour that issueth from Serpents, is so pestilent, that it killeth all young chickins, as Columella saith; & for preuenting of this mischiefe, it is good to burne Harts-horne, Womens baire, or Galbanum. Vis et mirificos cautus perdiscere odores, Accensis quibus arcetur teterrima serpens, Aut Styracem vras, aut atri vulturis alam, Vel nepetam aut frondem rigidae stirpemque myricae. In English thus; If thou wouldst learne what odours for thy skill Were best to scarre the serpent fierce away, Burne Styrax, or blacke Vultures winged quill, Or Neppe, greene leaues, or stock of Tamariske assay. And Pliny and Sextus agreeing with him, doe say; that if you burne the feathers of a Vultar, all Serpents will quickly avoyde the strong sent thereof. There is a certaine Riuer in the countries of Media & Paeonia, (as Aristotle testifieth) wherin there is a stone found, with whose fume serpents are chased away: whose propertie is such, that if any man cast water on it, it will burne, and burning, if with any Fan you goe about to make it to flame, it is straight-way quenched; and thus beeing extinguished, it sendeth forth a sauour stron∣ger then any Brimstone. And to this subscribeth Ni ander in these words. Vel tu Threicium flamma succende lapillum, Qui licet irriguis mersus tamen ardet in vndis, Expressaque statim restinguitur vnctus oliua, Hanc quem fluçtisoni mittant de littore Ponti, Qui, rude vulgus, ibi vescentes carne magistri Pascendi pecoris suapost armenta sequntur. In English thus; Or take the Thracian stone, which set on fire Will burne in water, yet quenched is with oyle. This cast from Pontus shore, Heard-men desire, The better to feede their flocks, & serpents foyle. The povvder of a Cedar tree, putteth to flight venomous Serpents, as Virgil in the third of his Georgicks witnesseth. Disce et odoratum stabulis accendere Cedrum, Galbaneoque agitare graues nidore chelydros. Which may be englished thus; Learne how of Cedar, fire in thy foldes to make, And with Galbanums sauour, put to flight the snak. Things that are strewed or layd vnder vs, both in our houses and in high-waies or beds, will likewise defend & keepe vs frō venomous creatures, as for example; Sothernwood, Of such things as are layd vn∣der vs, that wil expel serpents. Dittander; Fleabane; Calamint; Gentian; Hastula regia; Sage; Nightshade; S. Iohns∣vvort, called of some Fuga damonum; Margerom; Origan; Wilde-Rue; Wilde-Time; Bay-leaues; the shauings or toppes of the Cypres or Cedar-tree; Cardamomum; Peny∣royall; Wormevvood; Mugwoort; Lysimachia, called in English Loose-strife; & Rose∣marie. And if we cannot lye vpon such a bedde: Tunc nixta virides sinuosi vorticis alueos, Amnicolam nepetam per obesas collige ripas. Aut tibi cast a salix, pulchro quae flore renidet, Praebeat, instrata securum fronde grabatum. Sic quoque montanum polium, cuius graue spirans Horret odor, nomenque suum quae debet echidnae Herba, et ab Euxina quae fertur origanus vrbe, Quaecunque illarum decerpitur obuia, prodest. Quin etiam multo per aprica cacumina flore Ridens abrotonus, pecorique ingrata petitum Pabula serpillum, molli quod pascitur horto. Praestat item exiguam circumlustrare conyzam, Vrticeasque comas, et spinosas anagyros: Sic et punicea sectis ex arbore ramis. Regalisque amplis licet hastae frondibus vti. Accipe item innocuo medicantem frigore strumum, Atque invisa pigris Scyra prima aestate bubulcis. Nicander. In English thus; Then by the winding bankes of crooked streames The Water-neppe take vp, which vnder-foote is tread, Or the chast Osier, whose fayre flower hath beames And leaues, secure from serpents make thy bedde. The Mountaine Poley, whose strong-smelling breath The snakes abhorre, and that which doth the Hydraname, The Origan which commeth from Euxinus earth, Doe profit all gainst serpents, if you beare the same. The smyling Sothernwood, which groweth on tops of hills, Wild-Marioram, to beasts abhorred foode, Conyza strewed, the haunt of serpents spills, The Nettle-croppes, thorny Anagres stay theyr moode, So doe Pomegranate branches out from tree: And the broade leaues of Kingly Hoosta vse, Strume, healing strumes in harmelesse cold I see, And Scyra, which in Sommer Neatheards doe refuse. In like sort, to sprinckle the place with water, wherein Sal Ammoniacum is dissolued, driueth away Serpents, as Auicen affirmeth. If any one annoynt himselfe, either with Deares-sewit, the fat of Elephants or Lyons, Of vnguents and thinges borne about vs, frō which serpents will runne avvay. Serpents will shunne that person: and there be some, (as Pliny saith) that for feare of Ser∣pents, doe annoynt their bodies with the seedes of Iuniper. The iuyce of the blacke Vine extracted from the roote, and annoynted on the bodie, persormeth the like. For preser∣uation from Serpents, Nicander compoundeth this oyntment. Take two Vipers about the end of Spring-time, Deare-sewit thirtie drammes, Vnguenti rosati thirtie sixe drams, crude oyle of Oliues as much, commix them with nine ounces of Waxe, boyle the Ser∣pents till the flesh fall from the bones, which you must cast away because they are veno∣mous. They that will yet be more assured, let them annoynt their bodies with a thinne cerate, made of Wax, oyle of Roses, a little Galbanū, some powder of Harts-horne, or els Cum∣min-seede of Ethiopia. &c. Aetius. If a man carry about him the tooth of a Stag, or those small bones which are found in his hart, he shall be secured from serpents. If any one doe beare about him Wild-Buglosse, or the roote of the wild-carot, hee cannot be wounded of any Serpents. Greuinus is of the minde, that the Iet-stone, beside other manifest quali∣ties, hath yet this as peculier to it selfe, that he which carrieth it about with him, need nei∣ther to feare serpents, nor any other poysons. Now for venomous beastes, which are found in any houses, the best way is to powre scalding water into their dennes & lurking-holes. And if any man (constrained by neces∣sitie) can find no other place to sleepe, but such a one as where Salamanders, the Spyders called Phalangia, or the like serpents doe abound, it is good to stop the holes and corners with Garlick beaten with water, or some of those herbes which before we haue spoken of. But yet men now adayes hold it the safest course, to powre vnquenched Lime sprinckled with water, into their dennes and secret corners. As they that are bitten by a madde dogge, so all such persons as be wounded by veno∣mous creatures, are in exceeding great danger, vnlesse at the first they receiue speedy help and succour: The safest way therefore to cure the poyson, is by attractiues, which dravve from the more inward parts to the surface, and not to make too much post-hast in closing vp the wound. But if any one hath swallowed downe, and taken inwardly any poyson, the best way is (as Dioscorides writeth) to vomit often: but if any be wounded by byting, then it is best to vse scarification, and to fasten Cupping-glasses vpon the place affected, to draw out the poyson. Some vse to suck the venom out, and others to cut off and dismem∣ber the part. And this is to be obserued, that if any one will vndertake to suck out the ve∣nom, the partie that attempteth it must not be fasting: & besides, he must wash his mouth with some Wine, and after that, holding a little oyle in his mouth, to suck the part, and to spet it presently forth. And before Cupping-glasses be applyed, the part must first be fo∣mented with a Spung, then scarified deepely, that the venomous matter may the more speedily be drawne out from the more inward parts; and yet cutting of the flesh round in a compasse, doth more good then any scarification. But if the place will admit no section or incision, then cupping-glasses, with deepe scari∣ ication, with much flame, must needes be vsed: for by attraction of the blood, and other humors with windines, the poyson it selfe must of necessitie follow. And Aetius in his 13 Booke and tenth chapter, counselleth that the sicke person be kept from sleepe, and so sitte still, vntill he find some ceasing or release from his paine. Besides, the member which is enuenomed, ought to be bound round about, that the poyson may not too easily conuey it selfe, and penetrate into the more noble and principall parts, as the hatt, liuer or braine. And in this manner hauing applyed your Ligature, you must by the aduise of Fumanellus, set on your Cupping-glasses, and they beeing remoued, apply the herbe Calamint vppon the place, and to giue the patient, some of the roote of Mugwort in powder, or the best Treacle, and such cordialls as doe corroborate the hart: and for this intent, Buglosse, Bo∣rage, Balme, and any of their flowers are much commended. A Doue or Pidgion beeing deuided in the midst, & applyed hote to the place affected, attracteth poyson to it selfe, and healeth. And the same effect and vertue haue other liuing creatures, as namely, hennes and chickins, young Kiddes, Lambes and pigges, if they be set to in the beginning, immediatly after the cupping-glasses be remoued, for beeing as yet hot and warme, they draw out the poyson and mittigate paine. But if neither any one for loue or mony can be found, that will or dare suck out the venim, & that no cupping-glasse can be prouided, then it is best that the patient doe suppe of mutton, veale, or goose broth, and to prouoke vomiting. Yet they that will more effectually and speedily giue help, vse to kill a Goate, and taking out the entralls, with the warme dung therein found, forth-with bind it vnto the place. The learned Phisition Matthiolus, in his comment vppon Dioscorides, saith; that to a∣uoyd the danger that commeth by sucking out the venom, men now a-dayes vse to apply the fundament of some Cocke or Henne, or other Birds after the feathers are puld off, to the wounded place, and the first dying, to apply another in the same order, and so another and another, vntill the whole venomous matter be cleane driuen away, whereof one may be certainely assured, if the last henne or byrd so applyed, doe not die. Auicen the Arabi∣an saith, that the Phisitians of Egypt, (in which Country there bee infinite store of veno∣mous beasts) doe hasten to burne the part with fire, as the safest and surest remedy, when any one is this way endangered: For fire not onely expelleth poysons, but many other grieuances. But the way how they vsed to burne with fire, was diuers in these cases: For some-times they vsed to seare the place with a hot yron, and other-whiles with a corde or match beeing fired, and sometimes scalding oyle; and many other deuises they had with burning medicaments, to finish this cure, as saith Hieron. Mercurialis in his first Booke D Morb. Venenatis writeth, and Iohn Tagault, Institut. Chirurg. lib. 2. saith, that the wound must first be seared with a hot yrou (if the place can endure it) or els some caustick and ve∣hement corroding medicine must be vsed: for all such wounds are for the most part dead∣lie, and doe bring present death, if speedy remedie be not giuen; and therefore, according to Hyppocrates counsell, to extreame griefes, extreame remedies must be applyed; so that sometimes the safest way, is to take or cut off that member, which hath either been bitten or wounded. Neither am I ignorant (saith Dioscorides) what the Egyptians doe in these cases: For whē they reape their Co e in Haruest-time, they haue ready at hand prepared, a pot with pitch in it; and a string or band hanging at it; for at that time of the yeere they are most a∣fraid of Serpents, which then chiefely doe hide themselues in darke holes, and caues of the earth, and vnder thick clots & turffes, for Egypt aboundeth with such venomous & poy∣sonfull creatures. When as therefore they haue wounded either the foote or any other part, they that are present, doe put the string into the pot of pitch, and binding the place, they fall to cutting it with some instrument rounde in compasse as the string is tyed, after this is done, they powre in of the pitch a sufficient quantitie, then vntying and loosing the band, they lastly annoynt it with Garlick and Onions. A certaine Countriman beeing bytten of a Serpent, perceiued by and by his foote to swell, and by little & little the force of the poyson to swell vp higher, & neerer to the hart, the Castle of life: who beeing taught & instructed of an old woman, to burie his foote vn∣der the earth, and to henne into two parts to apply to the wound, and to the hen she wished him to lay aliue frogge, who continually sucking the blood from the hennes flesh, might by this meanes at length, attract and draw all the poyson into it selfe. So when hee had held his foote a whole night couered and buried vnder the earth, & finding no abate∣ment, but rather an increase of his tormenting paine; at length, by the aduise and directi∣on of a certaine Noble Matron, he dranke a good draught of Theriaca & Hony tempred in Ale, and so after a few houres, fell on a great & continuall vomiting, by which meanes he was perfectly freed from the paines of the vpper parts of his body, his feete notwith∣standing continuing in their former swelling: which was also taken cleane away, onely by drinking the milke of a black Goate, so much in quantity at a time as one egge-shell would containe, his foote in the meane space beeing held or plunged in a sufficient quantitie of the same milke. From which there issued and ranne, a foule stinking, glutinous & snivelly matter, and this he was admonished to doe by a certaine Priest. But yet afterwards by chaunce, washing himselfe in a hot sunnie day in a certaine Ri∣uer, and sitting vppon the banke, his feete hanging downe into the water, and hee falling fast a sleepe, (hee knew not well how long time hee so continued) at length awaking, hee plainly perceiued the water that was neere, on all sides to bee filthy, stained and polluted with much stinking matter, and as it were, dreggie refuse and ful ulencie, and from that time forwards, he remained well and lustie, and as sound as a Bell. Another time a Mayde being bitten of a Serpent, layd presently vpon the wound some Fresh-cheese, made of the milke of a white Goate, and powring or sprinkling her foote with the milke of the same Goate, as a defensatiue for that part, was by this meanes resto∣red to her former health, as a certaine learned man testified in his Letters written to Ges∣ner. Vegetius affirmeth, that if any liuing creature be bytten and wounded of venomous Beasts, the place which is hurt, must first of all be suffumigated with hens egge-shels burnt, which first ought to be infused in Vineger, with a little Harts-horne, or Galbanum. After fomentation, the place must be scarified, & the blood must be let out, or else the place must be seared with a hot yron, so farre as the venom stretcheth. And this care must be had, that the Cauterre be neuer applyed and layde, either aboue the ioynts, or in sinewie parts at a∣ny time, for the sinewes or ioynts beeing seared and burnt, there must of necessitie, a con∣tinuall weakenes and debilitie follow. Therfore great diligence must be vsed, that neither a little aboue, nor a little beneath the nerues & ioynts, we lay any Cauterizing medicine, yea, although necessitie biddeth vs. But it is also requisite that euery one thus wounded, doe gently and easily prouoke sweating with warme clothes cast vpon him, & afterwards to walke vp and downe, & to take Barley-meale in his meate, with some leaues of the Ash-tree, and the white Vine added to it. And to the wound it is good to apply Attick-Honie, or Comin heated and patched, and so mixed with olde Wine. Some vse to mixe newe Hogs-dung and Attick-honny tempered together with wine, and so beeing warmed, to apply it as a Cataplasme, adding to it some vrine of a man. I haue said before, that young chickins, beeing dissected or cut in peeces when they are warme, ought to be layde to the stinged part: and some there be that yeelde this reason why they should be good for this purpose, because (say they) there is a naturall antipathy betwixt them, and venomous creatures. But this reason is reasonlesse, and I think rather, that hennes or young birds, beeing of a very hot nature and complexion, doe easilie con∣coct and disgest notable poyson, and their stomacks do consume most dry & hard seedes, which the strongest man liuing cannot doe; which may easily also be prooued by this ar∣gument, that many times by their rauening, they swallowe downe sand and little stones, which they doe easily dissolue, and their croppes very soone discharge, without any of∣fence to them at all. And therefore the spirits of an invenomed person, beeing helped and refreshed, with the liuely and strong naturall heate of these fowles thus applyed, and recei∣uing and acquiring strength from the part wounded, and so hastily leaping out as it were, and quickly sparkling forth, they doe expell, shut and draw out the poyson. Now, after we haue described the generall method of curing this mischieuous euill, we will now descend to particular remedies, obseruing euer this rule & order, that first I will speake of such meanes as are topicall, or such as are outwardly applyed; and next, of such as be taken inwardly, and in both of them I will first describe compound, before I speake of simple medicaments. This one lesson you must carry with you, that many remedies are prescribed and set downe, which be not onely good for the bytings of serpents, but also for the bitings and stingings of all other venomous creatures, as namely, of Scorpions, Ta∣rantula s, Spyders and the like. But yet, sith these doe properly respect Serpents, I vvill in this place first sette them downe: beginning first (according to my promise) with such compounded Medicines, as are applyed outwardly for helpe against the stinging of Ser∣pents. Theriaca Andromachi applyed plaister-wise, is notable for this purpose. So there bee o∣ther vehement strong plaisters, whose vertue is to attract, expell, and discusse venime, of which are those which are made of Salt, Niter, Mustard-seede, and Rosemary-seedes, Dit∣tanie, or Dittander, and the roote of Chamaeleon: and this that followeth is of singuler vertue. Take of the scumme, froth or spume of siluer, one pound, Ceruse, and of the best Turpentine, of either as much as of the former, old oyle three pounds, waxe sixe ounces, Ammoniacum Thymiama, foure ounces, and of Galbanum as much: boyle the Ceruse, the scumme of siluer, and the oyle so long, that they will not cleaue vnto the hands, then mel∣ting the other ingredients, incorporate them all together, and vse them when neede is for any bytings, &c. There is an Emplaister fathered vpon one Epigonus, & bearing his name: for this Epi∣gonus beeing in close prison, and condemned to die, for reuealing this Medicine had his pardon granted him, and was freely discharged, because he there-with healed the daugh∣ter of the Emperour Marcus: for beeing sorely wounded by a Serpent in her breast, and all other Phisitians dispayring of helpe, yet with this shee was recouered. It is also good for all new and old Vlcers, and for such as are either bytten by men, or by any kinde of veno∣mous creeping wormes and serpents. Take of Squamma aeris, (which is the scales and of∣fall of Brasse, blowne from it in melting) of Ammoniacum, Aloes hepatica, Verdegrease, of Aes vstum, of Frankinsence, Sal ammoniacum, Aristolochia rotunda, of euery one halfe an ounce, Turnep-seedes three scruples, of the roote of Dragonwort halfe an ounce, seedes of Mugwoort nine scruples, pure wax fiue pound, of Colophonia one pound, old oyle three ounces, sharp Vinegar halfe a spoonefull, Mustard-seede three scruples, Spodium nine scru∣ples, Stone-Allom and Opopanax, of either halfe an ounce: Infuse the metalline ingredi∣ents for three dayes space in Vineger, and beate and powder them together, melting those that are to be melted, then sprinkle on those that are dry; and all of them being throughly wrought and made vp, according to the form of an Emplaister, vse them where necessitie requireth. Antonius Fumanellus a late Phisitian, prescribeth an experimented, and (as hee calleth it) a diuine oyle against any poyson taken into the body, or the byting of any venomous beasts and serpents, whether it be receiued inwardly by drinking it downe, or annoynted outwardly vpon the body, & this is it that followeth. Take of oyle of Oliues one pound, the flowers and the leaues of the herb called S. Iohnswort brused, boyle them for the space of three houres and straine them, then boyle againe other fresh flowers and leaues of the same herbe and straine them hard, and doe so againe the third time, then adde to them of the rootes of Gentian and Tormentill, of eyther one ounce, boyle and straine them as you did before, and reserue this oyle for your vse. Andreas Matthiolus in his Commentaries vpon Dioscorides, doth exceedingly cōmend oyle of Scorpions, because beeing annoynted vpon the pulses outwardlie, it is (as hee af∣firmeth) a singuler remedie, not onely against any poyson taken inwardlie into the bodie by the mouth, but for the bytinges and stinginges of any venomous creature whatsoeuer. The way to prepare and make it, he describeth at large, in his Praeface vpon the sixt book of Dioscorides, which I thinke needlesse heere to describe to auoyde tediousnes; therefore if any one be desirous to know the composition of it, let him read Matthiolus in the place before cyted. Vnquenched Lyme, mixeth with Honnie and oyle, and applied to the place the thick-nes of a cerote, is good against the wounds that come by any venomous beastes byting. Now I thinke it meete to set downe those simple medicaments which are outwardlie to be applied, eyther by laying on, or by annointing, against the sting and venomous by∣ting of Serpents. It is best first to foment the sore place with hote vinegar, wherein Cat∣mint hath been boyled, and in stead of Vineger, one may take Salt-water, or Sothern-wood, Maidenhaire, and Garlick, either in drinke, meate, or to be vsed as an oyntment. The roote of Aram, & of Astrologe, & the leaues of the true Daffadill, and oyle of Balme, is most effectuall: also Beellium, and the roote either of the white or black Beete, is good against the bytings of Serpents. Betonie, Coleworts, especiallie the Wild-coleworts, Calamint, the leaues of the wild Figge-tree, Centorie, Onions, Germander, Chamaeleon, the herbe called Fleabane, wilde Carrets, Rocket, Heath, Fennell, Figges, Winter-cherries, Enula Campana, Barly-meale, the Day-lilly, Hisop, the Flower-deluce-roote, Horehound, Balme, Water-cresses, Ba∣sill, Origan, Plantine, Leekes, Turneps, Madder, Rue, Verven, Mustard-seede, Scabiose, and S. Iohnswort, all these plants are greatlie praised amongst the Writers of Phisick, for the mischiefes abouesaid. Pliny is of opinion, that the bowels or entralls of Serpents themselues, beeing applyed, will surelie cure the wounds of all other Serpents, although they seeme incurable. A liue serpent beeing caught, if it be brused, beaten and stamped in water, and the hurt place fo∣mented there-with, will assuredlie helpe and doe much ease. Quae nocuit serpens, fertur caput illius aptè Vulneribus jungi, sanat quae sauciat ipsa, Vt Larissea curatus Telephus hosta. Qu. Serenus. Which may be thus englished; What Serpent hurteth, men say by long experience, His head applyed doth cure: for where the wound, The helpe is also made, as in Telephus sence, Harmd by Larissus speare, by it was cured found. And Guil. Varignana saith, deuide or cut a serpent, and lay it vpon the place, and it will mittigate the anguish and paine. The seede of Thraspi and of Tithimal (which is a kind of spurge) is greatlie vsed for this. Aut Tithimallus atrox, vulnus quae tuta pervngat. Some Serenus besides these, doe put the roote of black Hellebor into the wound, because it draweth out the poyson, as I by mine owne experience can testifie, saith Matthiolus. There be also sundry Antidotes and preseruatiues which are taken inwardly, that are very effectuall against the bytings of serpents and venomous beasts, as namely that, which is called Theriaca Andromachi, or Methridate, & the like compositious. Galen in his booke De Theriaca ad Pisonem, preferreth Theriaca Andromachi before all other medicines either simple or compound, for virulent wounds; because it performeth that effect for which it is ministred. For it was neuer as yet heard, that euer any one perrished of any venomous hurt or byting, who without any delay foorth-with dranke this medicine: and if any man had taken it before he receiued any such dangerous hurt, if he were set vppon and assailed by any poysonous creature, it hath not lightlie been heard that hee hath dyed of the same. There be many Antidotes described by the Ancients, which they set downe to be admi∣rable for these passions: As for example, that which Auicenna termeth Theriaca mirabilis, whose composition is as followeth. Take of Opium and of Myrrhe, of eyther of them a dramme, Pepper one dramme and a halfe, the roote of Aristolechia longa and Rotunda, of each of them three drammes, Wine two drammes; make them vp with Hony & Rocket water, so much as is sufficient for an Electuarie: the quantitie to giue, is foure scruples, re∣lented in some fit and conuenient decoction. King Antiochus, surnamed Magnus, had a kinde of Theriaoa which hee vsed against all poysons, which is described of Pliny in his 20 booke and last chapter in this wise. Take of Wild-time, Opopanax, and the herbe called Gromell, of each a like much, two drammes, Trifolie one dramme, of the seedes of Dill, Fennell, Smallage, Anise, and Ameos, of euery one alike sixe drammes, of the meale of Orebus twelue drammes: all these beeing powned and finely searsed, must with wine a sufficient quantitie, be made into Trochisces, whereof euery one must weigh one dramme, giue thereof one dram at a time in a draught of wine. There is another Antidote and preseruatiue against any poyson, described by Paulus Ae∣gineta, much like vnto this, which is thus. Take of Bryonie, Opopanax, of the roote of I∣ris Illirica, and of the roote of Rosemarie, and of Ginger, of each of these three drammes, of Aristolochia fiue drammes, of the best Turpentine, of wilde Rue, of each three drams, of the meale of Orobus two drammes; make them into Torchisches with Wine, euerie one weighing one scruple and a halfe, or two scruples to be giuen also in wine. Galen in his second booke De antidotis, chapter 49. discourseth of a certaine Theriacall medicament, called Zopyria antidotus, (so taking the name of one Zopyrus) which was no∣table against all poysons, & bytings of venomous creeping creatures. This Zopyrus in his Letters written vnto Mithridates, sollicited him very much, that he would make some ex∣periment of his Antidote: which as he put him in mind he might easily doe, by causing a∣ny one that was alreadie condemned to die, to drinke downe some poyson afore-hand, & then to take the Antidote: or els first to receiue the Antidote, & after that to drinke some poyson. And put him in remembrance, to try it also in those that were wounded any ma∣ner of way by Serpents, or those that were hurt by arrowes, or Darts, annoynted or poy∣soned by any destroying venime: So all things being dispatched according to his praemo∣nition, the man (notwithstanding the strength of the poyson) was preserued safe & sound by this alexipharmaticall medicine of Zopyrus. Matthiolus in his Praeface vpon the sixth booke of Dioscorides, entreating of Antidotes and preseruatiues from poyson, saith; that at length, after long studie and trauaile, he had found out an Antidote, whose vertue was wonderfull and worthy admiration: and it is a certaine quintessence extracted from many simples, which hee setteth downe in the same place. He saith it is of such force and efficacie, that the quantitie of foure drammes being taken either by it selfe, or with the like quantitie of some sweet-senting Wine, or els with some distilled water, which hath some naturall propertie to strengthen the hart; if that a∣nie person hath either been wounded or strooken of any venomous liuing thing, & that the patients life be therewith in danger, so that he hath lost the vse of his tongue, seeing, & for the most part all his other sences, yet for all that, by taking this his Quintessence, it will recouer and raise him, as it were out of a dead sleepe, from sicknes to health, to the great astonishment and admiration of the standers by. They that desire to know the composi∣tion of this rare preseruatiue, let them read it in the Author himselfe, for it is too long and tedious to describe it at this time. There be besides these compounds, many simple Medicines, which beeing taken in∣wardly, doe performe the same effect, as namelie the Thistle, where-vppon Serenus hath these verses following. Carduus et nondum doctis fullonibus aptus, Ex illo radix tepido potatur in amni. That is to say; The roote of Teasill young, for Fullers yet vnfit, Drunke in warme-water, venome out doth spit. That Thistle which Qu. Serenus heere vnderstandeth, is properly that plant which of the Greekes is called Scolymos. Yet it is taken somtimes for other prickly plants of the same kind, as for both the Chamaeleons, Dipsacos, or Labram veneris, Spina alba, Eryngium, and some other. But Dioscorides attributeth the chiefest vertue against poysons, to the Thistles called Chamaeleon albus, and to the Sea-thistle, called Eryngium marinum, which some call Sea-hull or Huluer: for in his third booke and ninth chapter, entreating of Chamaeleon al∣bus, hee saith thus. The roote of it taken with Wine inwardly, is as good as Treacle a∣gainst any venime: and in the 21 chapter of the same booke, Eryngium, is (saith he) taken to good purpose with some wine, against the byting of venomous creatures, or any poy∣son inwatdly taken. And the same Serenus, adscribeth the same vertue to the Harts curd or rennet, as followeth. Cervino ex foetu commixta coagula vino Sumantur, quae res membris agit atra venena. In English thus; Wine mixt with rennet taken from a Hart, So drunk, doth venom from the members part. He meaneth a young Hart, beeing killed in the Dammes belly, as Pliny affirmeth also the same in his 8. booke and 30 chapter in these words; The chiefest remedie against the byting of Serpents, is made of the coagulum of a Fawne, killd and cut out of the bellie of his damme. Coagulum, is nothing els but that part in the belly which is vsed to thicken the Milke. Proderit et caulem cum vino haurire sambuci. Qu. Serenus. Which may be englished thus; In drinke, the powder of an Elder-stalke, Gainst poyson profiteth, as some men talke. That vertue which Serenus here giueth to the stalke of Dwarfe-Elder, (for that is meant in this place) the same effect Dioscorides attributeth to the roote, in his fourth booke, and Pliny to the leaues. The herbe called Betony is excellent against these fore-said affects, & by good reason, for the greatest part of poysons doe kill through their excesse of coldnes, and therefore to ouer-come and resist them, such meanes are necessarie, by which natu∣rall and liuely heate is stirred vp and quickned, and so the poyson hindered from growing thick together, and from coagulation. Againe, all men doe agree, that those medicines are profitable which do extenuate, as all those doe which haue a propertie to prouoke vrine, and Betonie is of this qualitie, and therefore beeing taken with Wine, it must needes doe good in venomous bytings, and that not onely in the bytings of men and Apes, but in Serpents also. Radish also hath the same qualitie, beeing taken with vineger and water boyled together, or els outwardly ap∣plyed, as Serenus affirmeth. Siue homo, seu similis turpissima bestia nobis Vulnera dente dedit, virus simul intulit atrum, Vetonicam ex duro prodest assumere Baccho. Nec non et raphani cortex decocta medetur, Si trita admorsis fuerit circumlitor membris. In English thus; If man, or Ape (a filthy beast most like to vs) By byting wound, and therein poyson thrust, Then Betony in hard wine steeped long, Or rinde of Radish sod as soft as pappe, Doe heale, applyed to the member strong. There be certaine herbes and simples, as Wild-lettice, Veruen, the roote called Rhu∣barb, Agarick, oyle of Oleander, and the leaues of the same, the seedes of Peonie, with a great number a little before described, that beeing taken either inwardly or outwardly in iuyce or powder, doe cure poyson, yea though it be receiued by hurt from enuenomed ar∣rowes, shafts, or other war-like engines & weapons: for the Arabians, Indians, the Galles (now termed French-men) and Scythians, were wont to poyson theyr arrowes, as Paulus Orosius in his third booke testifieth of the Indians, where hee writeth, howe Alexander the Great, in his conquering and winning of a certaine Cittie, vnder the gouernment of king Ambira, lost the greatest part there of his whole Armie with envenomed Darts and quar∣rells. And Celsus in his fifth Booke saith, that the auncient Galles were wont to annoynt their arrowes with the iuyce of white Hellebor, with which they did great mischiefe. Pli∣ny affirmeth the same to be vsed of the Scythian Nation. The Scythians (saith hee) doe an∣noynt their arrow-heads with the corrupt, poysonous, and filthy stained dreggie blood of Vipers, and with mans blood mixed together: so that the wounde seemeth to be incura∣ble. And to this alludeth Quintus Serenus. Cuspide non quisquam, longa neque caede sarissae, Fulmine non gladij, volueris nec felle sagittae, Quàm cito Vipereo potis est affligier ictu: Quare aptam dicamus opem, succosque manentes. Which may be thus englished; There is no man with speare or launces poynt, Sharpe edge of sword, or swift arrowes might, To kill so soone, as Vipers force doth dint: Then fit is the ayde and meanes that it acquite. There is a certaine kind of people to whom it is naturally giuen, either by touching or sucking, to cure the wounding of venomous Serpents, called Psylli, (a people of Libia) & Marsi people of Italie, bordering vppon the Samnites, and Aequiculania, and those that were called by the auncient Writers Ophiogenes, which dwelt about Hellespont, as both Pliny, Elianus, and Aeneas Siluius doe witnesse. Callias in the tenth Booke of the history which hee wrote of Agathocles the Syracusan, saith, that if any man were bytten of a Serpent, if eyther a Lybian by birth, or any Psyllus, whose body was accounted venom to serpents, was either purposely sent for, or came that way by chaunce, and saw the wound but indifferently and not very sore tormenting the patient, that if he did lay but a little of his spettle vpon the byting or stroke, that presently the aking and paine would be mittigated. But if he found the sick patient in great and in∣tollerable anguish and paine, he tooke this course in his curation, that first he would sucke and draw vp into his mouth a great deale of water, and first rinse & wash his own mouth there-with, and after this, pouring it all out of his owne mouth into a cup, he would giue it to the poore wounded person to suppe of. Lastly, if the malignity and strength of the venome had crept and spred it selfe very farre and deepe into the body, so that there vvas danger of death, then would he strippe himselfe starke naked, and so lie and spread his bo∣die vppon the naked body of the sicke person, and so by this way of touching, breake the malice and qualitie of the poyson, and giue perfect cure to the man. For more confirmati∣on heereof, Nicander Colophonius is sufficient authority, whose verses I will here describe. Audiui Libycos Psyllos, quos aspera Syrtis Serpentumque ferax patria alit populos, Non ictu inflictum diro, morsuue venenum Laedere: quin laesis ferre et opem reliquis, Non viradicum, proprio sed corpore juncto. Which is in English thus; The people Psylli bred in Lybia Land Neere Syrtes, where all serpents doe abound, Are neuer stunge nor bitten by that band Vnto their harme, or any bodyes wound: But straight one naked man anothers hurt doth heale, No rootes, but bodies vertue danger doth repeale. Some of the Greekes haue left in writing, that the Idolatrous Priests and Prelats of the God Vulcan, that dwelt in the Ile Lemnos, had a speciall vertue giuen them to cure those who were wounded by Serpents: wherevpon it is said, that Philoctetes beeing wounded by a serpent before the Altar of Apollo, went thither to be remedied of his hurt. Cornelius Celsus saith flatly, that the people called Psylli had no such peculiar gift in healing thē that were hurt of serpents, either by sucking or touching the place, but beeing boldly aduentu∣rous, had presumed thereby to attempt and do that, which others of lesse courage had no stomack to doe: for whosoeuer durst be so confident as to follow their example, should be himselfe out of danger, and assure the other safe and free from feare of further hurt. Galen in his booke De Theriaca ad Pisonem, manifestly sheweth, that the Marsi, who li∣ued in his dayes, had no such speciall qualitie against the poyson of Serpents, but that with their crafty dealing, and knauish tricks, they beguiled the common people. For (saith he) those Iuglers and Deceiuers, do neuer hunt Vipers at any conuenient time, but long after the Prime of the yeere and Spring, wherein they cast their skins, when as they are weake, and haue lost their strength, and are very faint: then do they take them, & so by long vse and continuance, teach them, and invre themselues one to another, & bring it so to passe, that they will feede them with strange and vnaccustomed meates to their nature; yea they will permit them to tast of flesh, and constraine them to be continuallie gnawing and by∣ting of the same, that by their so labouring and striuing, their poyson may by little and lit∣tle be spent, and purged out of their bellies. Besides all this, they giue thē a kind of bread made of milke and flower, that by this meanes the holes in their teeth may be stopped: & so by this labourious course of dyeting them, they bring the matter so about, that theyr bytings are very weake, & do small annoyance to any that they strike at. So that the seers and lookers on, account it a thing exceeding common reason and nature, and blaze it a∣broade for a miracle. Matthiolus also, a Phisition of late dayes, agreeth with him in this poynt, affirming ex∣presly, that these kind of trumperies and craftie fetches, are much put in practise in these times, by such bold and impudent Quacksaluers, Mountebanks, and cooseners of plaine Country-people, who dare face it out, lye, faine and cogge, that they are descended from the race and linage of Saint Paule, wherein they shewe themselues notorious lyers. &c. Thus farre Matthiolus. Serpents doe sometimes creepe into the mouthes of them that are fast asleepe, where-vppon a certaine Poet saith; Non mihi tunc libeat dorso jacuisse per herbam. Which may be englished thus, Then would I not vpon the grasse, Lye on my back where Serpents passe. For if a man sleepe open-mouthed, they slilie conuey themselues in, and wind & role them round in compasse, so taking vp their lodging in the stomacke, and then is the poore wretched man, miserably and pittifully tormented; his life is more bitter then death, nei∣ther feeleth he any release or mittigation of his paine, vnlesse it be by feeding this his vn∣welcome guest in his guest-chamber, with good store of Milke, and such other meates as Serpents best like of. The onely remedy against this mischiefe, is to eate good store of Garlicke, as Erasmus in his Dial. De Amicitia saith. Cardan saith, how that it was reported for a certaine, that a Viper entring into a mans mouth being asleepe and gaping with his mouth, the venomous worme was expelled onely with burning of Leather, and so recei∣uing the stinking sume at his mouth, the Viper not enduring it, hee escaped with life. But of this more in our discourse of the Viper. A certaine man called Cissus, beeing very deuout in the seruice, and much addicted to the worship of the God called Serapis, being trecherously wound in and intrapped, by the craftie wilines of a certaine woman, which first he loued and afterward married, when by her meanes he had eaten some serpents-egges, he was miserably vexed, and torne & rent with disquiet and torment through all his body, so that he seemed to be in great hazard of present death. Whereupon, forthwith repayring and praying hartily to this his God, for his helpe and deliuerance, he receiued aunswer, that he must goe and buy a liue Lamprey, All this medi∣cinall descrip∣tion of Ser∣pents, was written by Tho Bonham Doctor in Phisicke. and thrust his hand into the vessell or place where it was kept and preserued; which hee forth-with did, and the Lamprey caught fast hold on his hand, byting hardly, & holding fast by the teeth: and at length, when she was pulled from her fast hold, the sicknesse and grieuous torment of his body, was plucked away, and he freely deliuered from that threat∣ning danger. Thus farre Aelianus. The Conclusion of this generall Discourse of SERPENTS. H Auing thus discoursed of the medicinal qualities in Serpents, and the remedies which Almighty GOD in nature hath prouided a∣gainst their venom, now for a conclusion, I will adde some other naturall vses of them, and shut vp all in moralities, and in sundry wayes to take them. There were certaine Amazons, as Pierius noteth, that in theyr warre-like preparations and Armes, did vse the skinnes of Ser∣pents. And to the intent that this may not seeme strange, the Tro∣glodites Herodotus Mela. Pliny. did eate Serpents and Lyzards, for they liued in Caues in stead of houses, & their voyce was not a significant voyce, but a kinde of scrietching, like gnashing. And for these causes, Serpents are very much afraid of any one of this Nation. Likewise certaine of the Candeans were called Ophiophagi, that is, Eaters of Serpents, and one part of the people of Arabia eate Snakes. But in India, Ethiopia, and an Iland in the Ocean, found out by Iam∣bolus, there are Serpents which are harmelesse, and their flesh very sweet and pleasant to be eaten: So are there in Macinum, a Prouince of Asia. In Manzi in the vpper India, and Solinus. Scaliger. Boemus Caraia, they sell the flesh of Serpents in open Markets. These serpents are called Iuanae, & the common people are forbidden to eate them, because they are very delicate, euen as Pheasants, Partridges and Peacocks are in Fraunce. Yet is there but one way to dresse them, which is, to roule them in Lard, and so to seeth them. For first they bowell them, then wash them and fold them vp together round, putting them into a pot no bigger then Aeneas Syl: Nicander Venetus. P. Martyr to receiue their quantitie; vpon them they cast Pepper with water, & so seeth them vpon wood & coales that will not smoake. With this Lard there is made a broth sweeter then any Nectar, which they vse in many bankets of great account. But for the taking of Serpents, I will yet adde one or two more experiments, vvherein the Ancients reuenged themselues vpon these irreconcileable enemies of mankind. They did vse to set into the earth a deepe pot, whereinto all venomous creatures would gather and hide themselues, then came they suddenly & stopped the mouth of that vessell, wher∣by Florentinus they inclosed all that were taken, and so making a great fire, east the saide part of veno∣mous serpents into the same, which consumed them all. Otherwise, they tooke a liuing Serpent, and digged in the earth a deepe Well or pit so steepe, as nothing at the bottome could climbe vp to the top thereof, into this pit they would cast the serpent, and with her a brand of fire, by meanes whereof the enclosed Serpent would fall a hyssing for her life, at the hearing whereof, her fellowes of the same kind, were therby easily inuited to come at her call to giue her releefe, (as we haue shewed elswhere) who finding the noise in the bot∣tome of the pit, doe slide downe of their owne accord, wherby they likewise intrap them∣selues in the same pit of destruction. But the Iuglers or Quacksaluers take them by another course, for they haue a staffe slit at one end like a payre of tongs, those stand open by a pinne, now when they see a serpent, Viper, Adder or Snake, they set them vppon the neck neere the head, and pulling foorth the pinne, the serpent is ineuitably taken, and by them loosed into a prepared vessell, in which they keepe her, and giue her meate. It is reported, that if a Serpent bee strooken with a Reede, she standeth still at the first blow, as if she were astonished, and so gathereth Caelius Rhoi Aelianus herselfe together, but if she be so strooken the second or third time, as one deliuered from her astonishment and feare, she recollecteth her wits and strength, and slydeth away. The Constantinus like obseruation vnto this, is that of the Auncients, that a serpent cannot be drawne out of her denne by the right hand, but by the left, for they say, if one lay hold on her taile by the right hand, she will either slide farther into the earth from him, or else suffer herselfe to be pulled in peeces, neuer turning againe: and therefore saith mine Authour, Non cedit tra∣henti, Pliny. Textor sed elabitur fugiens, aut certe abrumpitur, she yeeldeth not to him that draweth her, but slideth away, flying from him, or els suffereth herselfe to bee pulled in peeces in the combat. The sundry Hieroglyphicks, statues, figures, Images, and other morrall obseruations about Serpents, are next heere to be expressed, which the Auncients in their Temples, Shieldes, Banners, Theatres and publique places had erected for their honours and dig∣nitie. And first of all, in the Temple of Delphos, neere the Oracle, there was placed the Serpent which prouoked Apollo to fight with him, wherein it was by him slaine. And the Plutarch. Pierius. Hermopolitans, did reserue the Image of Typhon, in a Sea-horse, wherevppon sat fighting a Hawke and a Serpent: by the Sea-horse they signified the Monster Typhon, by the other beasts, as namely the Hawke and the Serpent, how by his principalitie and gouernment, which he had gotten by violence, he troubled both himselfe and others. Hercules had in his shield certaine Serpents heads, pictured with these verses. Bis sena hic videas, stridentibus effer a flammis Coll , venenato vultu maculosa draconum. Tum magis offenso spirantia gutture virus Quam magis Alcides offuso sanguine pugnat. Which may be englished thus; Of Dragons heads twise sixe heere maist thou see, Raging amongst the flames with poysond spotted face: Casting most venom forth when they enraged be, As when Alcides saw his blood distill apace. And so Virgill saith of Auentinus. —Clypeoque insigne parentum. Centum angues, cinctamque gerit serpentibus, Hydram. That is to say; His shield an hundred snakes, his Fathers crest An Hydra in their compasse is entest. Oscus which raigned among the Tyrrhenians, gaue in his Standard & Coate of Armes a Serpent. Now the people Osci (from whom it may be he was sprung and deriued) liued Pierius. in Campania in Italie, as we haue shewed alreadie. In auncient time we read, that when hostilitie began to be compounded, they had He∣rolds and Embassadors of peace, which they called Caduceatores, which carried vpright a certaine Rodde or staffe called Caduceus, this Rod was very straight, & at the either side, Suidat. were artificially ioyned two serpents figures, winding and crooking into each other as the manner of Serpents is. This Rodde was so sacred, that it was a great offence to violate or offer any iniury vnto it: for by the straight Rod, was signified Perfect & Vpright reason or vnderstanding; by the two crooked serpents at eyther side thereof, was figured the two Armies inuading and assailing the same Vpright-vnderstanding, yet not preuailing: For this passed thorough and betwixt them without harme, by truce and entreaties of Peace. This Rod was therfore consecrated to Mercury, the tailes of the Serpents reaching downe to the handle or halfe of the Rod, where they were adorned with vvings. Alciatus made these Emblematicall verses vpon the Caduceus. Anguibus implicitis, geminus Caduceus abis, Inter Amaltheae cornua rectus adest. Pollentes sic mente viros, fandique peritos Iudicat, vt rarum copiae multa beet. In English thus; Twixt Ceres hornes the Rod of Peace doth stand Vpright, with winding snakes, and double-winged tayles, To shew that minds and tongues with Learnings brand, Are blest with plenty in all worldly vayles. But hauing thus entred into the Hieroglyphicall Emblems, if I should say so much as I find made ready, and squared for the architecture of this discourse, I might loose my selfe in a volumnious world of matter, therefore I will but giue the Reader a tast hereof. By the Serpent in Holy-writ, are many obseruatiue significations; and first, that the deuill him∣selfe, which is Malus deus mali mundi, an euill God of an euill world, should be termed and expressed by a Serpent. The cause saith Pierius, is linguae motatio, the continuall and ne∣uer ceasing motion of a Serpents tongue: and so the continuall and euer-working perswa∣sions of diabolicall tentations, and a true mixture and limbe of this old Serpent, speaketh otherwise with his tongue, then he thinketh with his hart. Therefore it is also said, that a naturall serpent hath a clouen or twisted tongue. Clemens saith truly, that Serpents doe also signifie men giuen ouer to sinnes, and frau∣dulent impostors or malices, Onos hybristes, ho akotastos, bukos agrios ho pleonecticos, kai o∣phis ho apatroon, that is, An insolent & an intemperate Asse. There is a raging wolfe which is couetous, and there is a serpent which is an impostour and fraudulent. The same lear∣ned man saith, that riches are like to a serpent: For as when an ignorant man thinketh to take a Serpent without harme by the tayle, shee turneth backe againe and biteth him, but if he take her by the necke, she cannot execute any part of her malice: euen so when a wise man hath the managing of riches, by vertue of his discretion hee so charmeth them, that there is not in them any harme at all: but the foolish man is mortally stung by his impru∣dent possession and dispensation of them. OF THE ADDER. I T falleth out in the particular Discourse of Serpents, that I expresse the most knowne Serpent to vs in England in the first place, according to Al∣phabeticall order, that is, the Adder. For although I am not ignorant, that there be which write it Nad re, of Natrix, which signifieth a Water-snake, yet I cannot consent vnto them so readily, as to depart from the more vulgar receaued word of a whole Nation, because of some likely∣hood in the deriuation from the Latine: For whereas Naders may seeme not improper∣ly to be deriued of Natrix, and Natrix of Natando, that is, swimming in the water, the first coniecturall deriuation is destroyed by the latter, because this Serpent whereof wee now entreat, haunteth not the waters, except for drinke in her time of thirst, and therefore I mislike the writing of Nadere for Adder: & rather take that word to signifie a land snake. And yet if there be any good argument of deriuation of English from Latine, I would not haue the Reader thinke, but that the Adder may as well be deriued à terra, from the earth which it vseth, or of ater, blacke, which is the colour that it beareth, or from atrox fierce, (for there is no serpent of that quantitie, more fierce, angry, or hurtfull,) as well as nadere from natrix. The Latines doe expresse this kind of serpent by the word Coluber, whereof some giue sundry reasons, either because colit vmbras, it haunteth and liueth in hedges & shadowye Isidorus. places, or els à lubricis tractibus, of his winding pace or path. Gelenius deriueth it of the Greeke word R lobouros, which signifieth wanting a tayle, because the snakes which are about houses, are sometimes found without tayles, which haue been strooke off my men; but this opinion hath no reason for the Adder, which is not domesticall. Indeede I con∣fesse that Pliny vseth Coluber for a generall word for serpents, when he saith, Coluber in a∣qua viuens, which deceiued Theophr stus & Gaza, applying it to the water Serpent. And so Erasmus and others, translate Ophis coluber, that is, the generall greeke word for a Ser∣pent, an Adder. There is also Colubra, as in Lucilius, Varro, & Nonius Marcellinus appea∣reth; wherevnto agree Horace, Virgill, and Cornelius Celsus. The Italians call this serpent Lo Scorzone, scorsoni Colubra, la scorzonara la scorsona. The French, Colenure. The Spa∣nyards, Culebra, and at this day, the Grecians Nerophis. And thus much for the name, ex∣cept I may adde these verses of Virgill in his Georgicks. Aut tecta assuetus Coluber, succedere & vmbrae Pestis acerba boum, pec rique aspergere virus Fouit humum. Cape saxa manu, cape robora pastor. Tollentemque minas, & sibila colla tumentem. Deijce, iamque fuga tumidum caput abdidit altè; Cum medij nexus, extremaque agminae caudae Solvuntur, turdosque trahit sinus vltimas orbes. In English thus; Or when the Adder vsing house or shade Bred in the earth, the bane of sheepe and neate, Then shepheard take both stone in hand and blade, To quash his swelling necke and hissing threat. Or when his fearefull heàd he puts full deepe in earth To flye thy wrath, him sunder in the midst, Or cut his tayle, if no part els appeareth, For that will stay his pace, while on't thou treadest. This is vsuall, to call a water-Adder, a house-Adder, a Land-snake, and such other, but catachrestically confounding one kind with another. And thus much for the name of this Serpent. The parts differ not from the generall description before recited, it is long like an Eeele, and hath many Epithets, as virides colubri, greene Adders, long, rough, veno∣mous, diuers coloured, swelling, slyding, winding, blew, terrible, secret, hurtfull, Medu∣saean, Cyniphian, Gorgonean, Lybissine, biting, spotted, wreathing, black, bending, heauy, scalie, and diuers such other, as the Gramarians haue obserued. But concerning the co∣lour hereof, it is most commonly blacke on the backe, sometimes greenish and yellowish. The scales of it are more sharpe then of the Snake, & therefore the Egyptians were wont to say of the Thebane Adders, that they had a certaine appearance of hornes vppon them, as we shall shew more at large in the story of Cerastes, or the horned serpent. Victorius, speaking of the great wormes which are bred in mens bellies, doth call them Caecas Colubras, blind Adders; but otherwise, the Adder which is proper to the earth, is not blind, but seeth as sharply as any other serpent either by day or by night. They are hoter then the snakes, and therefore liue more in the shadowes, and lye for the most part round, folded vp together like a rope, as the Poet noteth, saying; Hirtus & vt coluber, nodoso gramine tectus Ventre cubat flexo, semper collect us in orbem. In English thus; As the rough Adder in knotty grasse is couered, Lyeth on her belly, and round in circle gathered. They are a craftie & subtill venomous beast, biting suddenly them that passe by them, wherevpon Iacob said that his sonne Dan should be Coluber in via, an Adder byting the horse heeles. When she hath bitten, with her forked or twisted tongue shee infuseth her poyson, vvhereof, and the remedy seming there-vnto, there is this history in Ambrosius Paraeus. At what time (saith he) Charles the ninth lay at Melines, I and Doctor Le Feure the Kings Phisitian, were sent for to cure a certaine Cooke of the Lady Castropersees, who was bitten by an Adder, as he was gathering wilde Hops in a hedge. The Cooke as soone as he was bitten in the hand, sucked the wound with his mouth, thinking therby to mittigate the paine, and draw out againe the poyson; but as soone as his tongue touched the wound, presently it so swelled that he could not speake: and besides, is arme or shoul∣der swelled into a high bunch or tumour, which did put him vnto painfull torments, inso∣much that he swounded twice in our presence; his face and colour changed as though he would presently die. Whereat we all despayred to cure him, yet did not forsake him, nor left to try some meanes to ease his torments. Then wee washed his tongue with Triacle, mixed with an equall proportion of white vvine and Aqua vitae; then also I caused the arme to be scarified all ouer, and launced the place where the Adder had bitten him, out of which flowed abundance of corrupt mattery blood. Then we washed the vvound with Triacle and Mithridate, in Aqua vitae; so we caused him to be layd into a warme bedde, there to svveat, and commaunded to keepe him awake, which was done accordingly; and so the next day the swelling was abated, & the malignant symptomes were all euacuated: so we gaue order to keepe the vvound or launced place open, & afterward the Cooke be∣gan to be well againe. This one example in stead of many, I thought good to insert into this place, that hereby the generall cure may be learned and followed. It agreeth with all other serpents in the changing or putting off the skin; for after that by fasting it hath made his flesh low and abated, then by slyding thorough a narrow pas∣sage, whereof Virgill thus writeth. Qualis vbi in, lucem coluber, mala gramina pastus, Lubrica conuoluit sublato pectore targa Frigida sub terra, tumidum quem bruma tegebat: Arduus ad solem & linguis micat ore trisulcis Nunc positis nouus exuuijs, intidusque iuventa. Which may be englished thus; Euen as the Adder in the spring ill fedde and leane Moueth her winding limbes, holding vp her brest, Whom winters cold whiles hyd in earth made swell, In sunne-shine with her treble tongue exprest Doth licke and make to shine her skinne, neate youth Renueth, and casts old coate, for heate ensueth. S. Ierom saith, that when the Adder is thirstie and goeth to drinke, she first of all at the water side casteth vp her venome, least that by drinking it descend into her bowels and so destroy herselfe, but after that she hath drunke, she licketh it vp againe; euen as a souldiour re-armed after he was disarmed. The voyce of this serpent is hissing, although it be verie Herodo us. seldome heard. And it is said, that when Craesus vndertooke to wage vvarre with Cyrus, the suburbes of Sardis vvere all filled with Adders, which vvere deuoured aftervvard by horses in the pastures. Whereat the King and people vvere not a little moued: But the Priestes, after consultation with the Oracle, tolde them that it signified, howe strangers should deuoite the people of that Cittie; because that Adders were bred in those coastes, therefore they tooke them to signifie naturall inhabitants, and because horses came from other Countries, therefore strangers, (as Cyrus and his souldiours) should be thereby sig∣nified. And this is to be noted, that the enemies of this serpent, are the same that are com∣mon to other, and the Hart aboue all other beasts of the earth. Yet this Serpent (saith S. Ambrose) will kill a Lyon, & runne away from a Hart. ¶ The Medicines arising out of this beast, are briefely these; The water wherein an Pliny Silnius. Adder is preserued aliue, is a remedy against the poyson of a Toade: Also Adders or Vi∣pers included in a pot with the scrapings of Vines, and therein burnt to ashes, do help the vvennes or Kings-euill. And Pliny also affirmeth, that if a man which hunteth Crocodils, beate about him any part of the fatte of an Adder, or the gall mixed vvith the herbe Pota∣migiton, he cannot be hurt by that beast. Serpents and Adders, especially deafe Adders, signifie vntepentant wicked men, and also discord, as the Poet describeth it, vvhen Alecto sent a Serpent, Snake or Adder, to Virgill. moue cōtention in the familie of Amata. Libro 7. Aenead. And thus much for the Adder. OF THE AMMODYTE. T His Serpent I call after the Greeke name, Ammodytes, an Ammo∣dyte. It is also found to be called Ammodyta, and Cenchrias, or ra∣ther Centrias, or Centrites, because of the hardnes of their tayles, vvhich are also clouen on the vpper side. The Italians call it Aspi∣do del corno, because it hath vpon the vpper chap a hard warte like a horne. The head of this Serpent is longer & greater then a Vi∣pers head, and her chappes vvider, besides the late expressed diffe∣rence vpon the vpper lippe: and yet it may well be termed a kind of Viper. It is Immanis fera, a fierce wilde beast, in length not aboue a cubite, hauing di∣uers blacke spots vpon the skinne, and certaine appearances of strakes or small lines vpon Olaus Mag: Auicenn . the backe. The colour of the other parts is euer like the sand wherin it keepeth & maketh abode, according to these verses of Lucan. Concolor exustis, atque indiscretus arenis Ammodytes. In English thus; The Ammodyte, indiscreete on the Land, Doth hold the colour of the burning sand. The Countries most of all annoyed with these Serpents, are Lybia, Italy, and Illiria, especially about Gortinium, and the Mountaines of Lampidia. Their harmes are not infe∣riour to the stinging and poyson of Aspes, for Matthiolus writeth, that hee hath knovvne some to die thereof vvithin three houres after the wound receiued. And if they doe not dye within short time, then doth the blood issue forth in abundant maner out of the hurt, and the wound swelleth. Afterward, all is turned into matter, and then followeth dulnes in the head, and distraction in the mind; they liue long which endure it three dayes, and it was neuer knowne that any liued aboue seauen dayes: this also beeing obserued, that those that be hurt by a femall doe dye soonest. For together with their byting, they infuse a vehement payne, which causeth swelling, and the sore to runne. I find the cure hereof in Aetius to be thus, first of all Triacle must be giuen to the sicke person to drinke, and also layd vpon the wound, also drawing or attractiue playsters, and such poultesses which are fit for running vlcers. But first before the playsters, scarifie all the places about the hurt, and bind the vpper parts hard, then launce the sore a little with a Pen-knife, and let him drinke sweete water with Rungwort, Gourdes, Castoreum, and Cassia. Auicen prescribeth in the cure of these Serpents venorn: Castoreum, Cinnamon, the roote of Centory, of each two ounces with Wine, and the roote of long Hartwort, of Assoasier, the iuyce of the roote Gentian. And for emplaister, Hony sod and dryed, and so pounded, the rootes of Pomgranats, and Centory, the seede of Flaxe, and Lettuce, and wilde Rew: And so I conclude with Doctor Gesner, Percussus ab Ammodyte festinet ad remedium sine quo nemo affugere, He which is hurt by an Ammodyte, let him make hast for a remedy, without which neuer man escaped death. OF THE ARGES AND ARGOLAE. T Here is mention in Galen and Hippocrates, of a Serpent called Arges: Now Arges signifieth in Greeke white, swift, idle, ill mannered: of this Serpent Hippocrates telleth this story. There was (saith he) a young man drunke Galenus. Hippocrates. which lay asleepe vpon his backe in a certain house, gaping: Into this mans mouth entered a serpent called Arges, the young man perceiuing it in his mouth, striued to speake and cry but could not, and so suddenly gnashing his teeth, deuoured and swal∣lowed downe the Serpent: After which he was put to intollerable paines, his hands stret∣ching & quiuering like as a mans that is hanged or strangled, and in this sort he cast him∣selfe vp and downe and dyed. It seemeth therefore that this Serpent hath his name from the sudden destruction, he bringeth to the creatures it smiteth, and therefore in auncient time we read that Mercury was called Argiphon, for killing of Serpents. THe Argolae are onely mentioned by Suidas, for he saith, that Alexander brought them to Alexandria from Arges, & cast them into the riuer to expell and deuour the Aspes: where they continued a long time, till the bones of the Prophet Ieremy were brought out of Egypt vnto Alexandria which slew them, (as the same Author writeth:) And thus much of these two kindes of Serpents. OF ASPES. I N Hebrewe as appeareth Deut. 32. the Aspe is called Pethen, in Psal. 58. Akschub, in Isa. 59. and Ier. 8. Zipheoni, an Aspe or a Cockatrice, worse then a Serpent. The Arabians Hasyos, and Hascos: the Greekes Aspis, the Italians Aspe, and Aspide, the Spaniardes Biuora, the French Vnaspic, the Germans Ein sclang genannt, and the Latines Aspis. About the notation or de∣riuation of this word, there is some difference among Writers. Aristophanes deriueth it from Alpha, an intensiue Particle, and Spizo which signifieth to extend; either by reason of his sharpe-shrill hissing, or for the length of his body. Others deriue Aspis from Hios, which signifieth venome or poyson, & therefore saith the Scripture: The poyson of Aspes, because that is a predominant poison. The Latines call it Aspis, quod venenum aspergit morsu, bycause it sprinkleth abroad his poyson when it biteth. Besides we read of Aspis a Buckler, an Island in the Lycian Sea, a Mountaine in Affrike, and there is fashion of camping Souldiours in the fielde called Aspides. The Epithets declaring the nature of this pestiferous Serpent are, Iocheeira, reioycing in poison, Elikoessa, winding, Lichmores, putting out the tongue, Smerdalee fearefull, Pho∣inessa, cruelly killing. Likewise in Latine, dry, sleeping, drouzy, deadly, swelling, and Aspis, Pharia, a Pharian Aspe, so called of the Island Pharus, where they abound. It is said Cal: Rhod. that the Kings of Egypt did weare the Pictures of Aspes in their crownes: whereby they signified the inuincible power of principality in this creature, whose wounds cannot easily be cured: And the Priestes of Egypt and Aethiopia, did likewise weare very long caps, ha∣uing toward their toppe a thing like a Nauell, about which are the formes of winding Aspes, to signifie to the people, that those which resist GOD and Kings, shall perish by Diodorius, Pierius. vnresistable violence. Likewise by an Aspe stopping his eare, was figured & vnderstood a rebell obeying no lawes or degrees of the higher power: But let vs leaue this discourse of moralities, and come nearer to the naturall description of Aspes. There are many kings Aelianus. of Aspes after the Egyptian diuision, for one kind is called Aspis Siua, a dry Aspe. This is the longest of all other kindes, and it hath eyes flaming like fire, or burning coales; ano∣ther kind is called Asilus, which doth not onely kill by biting, but also with spetting, which it sendeth forth while it setteth his teeth hard together, and lifteth vp the head. Another kind is called Irundo, because of the similitude it keepeth with Swallowes, for on the back it is blacke, and on the belly white, like as is a Swallow. We read also in Albertus of As∣pis Hypnalis, and Hippupex, but it may bee that both these names signifie but one kinde. This Hypnale killeth by sleeping, for after that the wound is giuen, the patient falleth into a deepe and sweete sleepe, wherein it dyeth: and therefore Leonicenus saith; Illam fuisse, ex cuius veneno sibi Cleopatram suauem mortem consciuit, that it was the same which Cleo∣patra bought to bring vpon her selfe a sweete and easie death. There is also an Aspe called Athaes, which is of diuers colours: But I doe consider that all the kindes may well be re∣duced Aetius. Aegmeta. Pliny. to three, that is, Ptyas, Charsaea, and Chelidonia. Ptyas hurteth by poysoning mens eyes, by spetting forth venom, Chaersaea liueth on the Land, and Chelidonia in the waters. The Aspe is a small Serpent, like to a Land Snake, but yet of a broader backe, and ex∣cept in this differeth not much from the Snake, their Neckes swell aboue measure, and if they hurt in that passion, there can bee no remedy, for the stroake of their eyes are excee∣ding red and flaming, and there are two pieces of flesh like a hard skin which grow out of their foreheads, according to these verses of Nicander; Praeterea geminae, calli instar fronte carunclae Haerent, sanguineis scintillant lumina flammis. That is to say; As hard as Brawne two bunches in their face Doe grow, and flaming-bloudy-eyes their grace. And the dry Aspe so called, because it liueth in mid-landes, farre from any water, hath a vehement strong sight, and these eyes both in one and other are placed in the Temples of their head. Their teeth are exceeding long, and grow out of their mouth like a Boares, and thorough two of the longest are little hollowes, out of which hee expresseth his poy∣son: They are also couered with thinne and tender skinnes, which slyde vp when the ser∣pent byteth, and so suffer the poyson to come out of the holes, afterward they returne to their place againe. Of all which thus writeth Nicander; Quatuor huic intra marillae concaua dentes, Radices fixere suas, quas iuncta quibusdam, Pelliculis tunica obducit, triste vnde venenum Effundit, si forte su se approximet hosti. In English thus; Within the hollow of their cheekes fiery teeth are seene Fast rooted, which a coate of skinne doth ioyne and ouer-hide, From whence sad venom issueth forth when she is keene, If that her foe she chance to touch as she doth glide. The scales of the Aspe are hard and dry, and red, aboue all other venemous Beastes, and by reason of her exceeding drought, shee is also accounted deafe. About their quantity here is some difference among Writers: For Aelianus saith, that they haue beene found of 2. cubits length, and their other parts answerable: Againe, the Egyptians affirme them to be foure cubits long: but both these may stand together, for if Aelianus say true, then the Egyptians are not deceiued, because the greater number containeth the lesser. The Aspe Ptyas is about two cubits long: the Chersaen Aspes of the earth, grow to the length Aetius. Auicenna. Arnoldus. Strabo. of fiue cubits, but the Chelidonian not aboue one, and this is noted, that the shorter Aspe killeth soonest, and the long more slowly: one beeing a pace, and another a fathom in length. Nicander writeth thus; Tam proceram extensa querunt quam brachia duci, Tanta{que} crassities est, quantum missile telum, Quod faciens hastas docta faber expolit arte. Which may be thus englished; As wide as armes in force out-stretched, So is the Aspe in length, And broad euen as a casting Dart, Made by a wise Smythes strength. The colour of Aspes is also various and diuerse, for the Irundo Aspe, that is, the Cheli∣donian resembleth the Swallow: the Ptyas or spetting Aspe resembleth an ash colour, fla∣ming Aetius. Olaus. like Gold, and somewhat greenish: the Chersaen Aspe of an ash colour or green, but this later is more rare, and Pierius saith, that he saw a yellow Aspe neere Bellun: of these colours writeth Nicander: Squalidus interdum color albet, saepe virenti, Cum maculis saepe est cineres imitante figura, Nonnunquam ardenti veluti succenditur igne, Id{que} nigra Aethiopum sub terra quale refusus Nilus saepe lutum, vicinum in Nerea voluit. Thus otherwise; Their colour whitish pale, and sometime liuely greene, And spots which doe the ash resemble, Some fiery red: in Aethiop blacke Aspes are seene And some againe like to Nerean mud, Cast vp by flowing of the Nilus floud. The countries which breed Aspes, are not onely the regions of Affricke, and the con∣fines of Nylus, but also in the Northerne parts of the world (as writeth Olaus Magnus) are many Aspes found: like as there are many other Serpents found, although their venom or Am paraeus. poyson be much more weak, then in Affrica, yet he saith that their poyson will kill a man within three or foure houres without remedy. In Spayne also there are Aspes, but none in Bellonius France, although the common people do stile a certaine creeping thing by that name. Lu∣can thinketh that the originall of all came from Affrica, and therefore concludeth, that Merchants for gaine haue transported them into Europe saying; Ipsa caloris egens, gelidum non transit in orbem; Sponte sua, Nilo{que} tenus metitur arenas. Sed quis erit nobis lucri pudor? Indepetuntur, Huc Lybicamortes, & fecimus aspida merces. In English thus; The Aspe into cold Regions not willingly doth goe, But neere the banks of Nilus warme, doth play vpon the sandes, Oh what a shame, of wicked gaine, must we then vndergoe? Which Libian deathes, and aspish wares haue brought into our lands. Their abode is for the most part in dryest soyles, except the Chelidonian, or water Aspe, which liue in the bankes of Nylus all the yeare long, as in a house & safe Castle, but when they perceiue that the water will ouer flow, they forsake the bankes sides, & for safegard Aeli us▪ of their liues, betake them to the Mountaines. Sometimes also they will ascend and climbe trees: as appeareth by an Epigram of Anthologius. It is a horrible, fearefull, and terrible Serpent, going slovvly, hauing a vveake sight, alvvayes sleepy and drowzy, but a shrill and quicke sence of hearing, whereby shee is vvarned and aduertised of all Giltius. noyse, which when she heareth, presently she gathereth her selfe round into a circle, and in the middest lifteth vp her terrible head: Wherein a man may note the gratious pro∣uidence of almighty GOD, which hath giuen as many remedies against euill, as there are euils in the world. For the dulnesse of this Serpents sight, and slownes of her pace, doth keepe her from many mischiefes. These properties are thus expressed by Nicander. Formidabile cui corpus, tardum{que} volumen, Quandoquidem transuer sa via est prolixa{que} ventris Spira, veternosi{que} niuere videntur ocelli. At simul ac facili forte abseruarit aure Vel minimum strepitum, segnes è corpore somnos Exoutit, & teretem sinuat mox aspera tractum, Horrendum{que} caput, porrecta{que} pectora tollit. In English thus; This feared Aspe hath slow and winding pace, When as her way, on belly she doth trauerse, Her eyes shrunke in her head winking, appeare in face, Till that some noyse her watchfull eare doth rauish, Then sleepe shak't off, round is her body gathered, With dreadfull head, on mounted necke vp lifted. The voyce of the Aspe is hissing, like all other Serpents, and seldome is it heard to vt∣ter any voyce or sound at all, except when she is endangered, or ready to set vpon her e∣nemy. Whereupon saith Nicander; —Graue sibilat ipsa Bestia, dum certam vomit ira concita mortem. In English thus; This beast doth hisse, with great and lowdest breath, VVhen in her moode she threateneth certaine death. That place of Dauid Psalme. 58. which is vulgarly read, a death Adder, is more truely translated A deafe Aspe, which when she is enchanted, to auoyde the voyce of the Charmer, she stoppeth one of her eares with her taile, and the other she holdeth hard to the earth: And of this incantation thus writeth Vincentius Belluacensis. Virtute quorundā verborum incantatum aspis, ne veneno interinat, vel vt quidam dicunt vt quieta capi possit, & gemma de fronte eius auferri, quae naturaliter in eo nascitur, that is to say, The Aspe is enchanted by vertue of certaine vvords, so as she cannot kill with her poyson, or as some say, be taken quietly without resistance, and so the Gemme or pretious stone be taken out of her forehead, which naturally groweth therein. And from the wordes of the Psalme a, foresaid, not onely the certaintie and effectuall vse of charming is gathered by Pierius, but also by many iustified in the case of Serpents. Whereof I haue already giuen mine opini∣on in the former generall Treatise, vnto the which I will onely adde thus much in conclu∣sion, which I haue found in a certaine vnnamed Authour: Daemones discurrunt cum ver∣bis ad serpentes, & infectione interiori hoc faciunt, vt serpentes ad nutum eorum moueantur, ac sine laesione tractabiles exhibeantur: Which is thus much in effect; Deuils runne vp & downe with words of enchauntment to Serpents, and by an inward or secrete infection, they bring to passe that the Serpents dispose thēselues after their pleasure, and so are hand∣led without all harme. And indeed, that it may appeare to be manifest that this incanta∣tion of Serpents is from the deuill, and not from God, this onely may suffice any reaso∣nable man: because the Psalmist plainely expresseth, that the serpent shifteth it off, & auoi∣deth Peritissimos mussitantium incantationes, the most skilfull Charmers. Now if it came from the vnresistable power of almighty God, it should passe the resistance of them or de∣uills; but beeing a fallacie of the deuill, the serpent (wiser in this poynt then men that be∣leeue it) easily turneth tayle against it: and in this thing we may learne to be wise as Ser∣pents, against the inchaunting temptations of the deuill or men, which would beguile vs with shadowes of words and promises, of no valuable pleasures. If we may belieue Pliny, Elianus, and Philarchus, the Egyptians liued familiarly vvith Aspes, and with continued kindnes wanne them to be tame. For indeede among other parts of their sauage beastlines, they worshipped Aspes euen as houshold Gods, by meanes whereof the subtill serpent grewe to a sensible conceit of his owne honour and freedome, and therefore would walke vp and downe and play with their children, doing no harme, except they were wronged, and would come and licke meate from the table, when they were called by a certaine significant noyse, made by knacking of the fingers. For the guests after theyr dinner, would mixe together hony, wine, and meale, and then giue the signe, at the hearing whereof they would all of them come foorth of their holes; and creeping vp, or lifting their heads to the table, leauing their lower parts on the ground, there licked they the said prepared meate, in great temperance by little & little without any rauening, and then afterward departed when they were filled. And so great is the reuerence they beare to Aspes, that if any in the house haue neede to rise in the night time out of theyr beds, they first of all giue out the signe or token, least they should harme the Aspe, and so prouoke it against them: at the hearing whereof, all the Aspes get them to their holes and lodgings, till the person stirring be layd againe in his bed. The holy kind of Aspes, they call Thermusis, and this is vsed and fedde in all their tem∣ples of Isis with the fat of Oxen or Kine. Once in the yeere they crowne with them the Image of Isis, and they say that this kind is not an enemy to men, except to such as are ve∣ry euill, wherevpon it is death to kill one of them willingly. It is reported of a certaine Gardiner making a ditch or trench in his Vineyarde, by chaunce and ignorantly, he set his spade vpon one of these Thermusis Aspes, and so cut it asunder, and when he turnd vp the earth, he found the hinder-part dead, and the fore-part bleeding and stirring: at which sight his superstitious hart ouercome with a vaine feare, became so passionately distressed, that he fell into a vehement and lamentable frenzie. So as all the day time he was not his owne man, and in the night, in his madde fits leapt out of his bed, crying out with pittifull & eager complaint, that the Aspe did bite him, the Aspe did wound him, and that hee saw the picture of the said aspe (by him formerly slaine) fol∣lowing him, and tearing his flesh, & therefore most instantly craued helpe against it, say∣ing still he perrished by it, he was mortally wounded. And when he had now (saith Elia∣nus) continued a while in this superstitious fury and disease of the mind, his kindred & ac∣quaintance brought him into the house of Serapis, making request vnto that fained God to remoue out of his sight that spectre and apparision; and so he was released, cured, and restored to his right mind. This kind of Aspe they also say is immortall and neuer dyeth, and besides, it is a reuen∣ger of sacriledge, as may appeare by such another history in the same place. There was a certaine Indian Peacock sent to the King of Egypt, which for the goodly proportion and feature thereof, the King out of his deuotion consecrated to Iupiter, and was kept in the Temple. Now there was (saith hee) a certaine young man which set more by his belly, then by his GOD, which fell into a great longing for to eate of the said Peacocke: and therefore to attaine his appetite, he bribed one of the Officers of the Temple with a good summe of Money to steale the sayd Peacocke, and bring it to him aliue or dead. The co∣uetous wretch enraged with the desire of the Money, sought his opportunity to steale a∣way the Peacock, and one day came to the place where he thought & knew it was kept, but when he came, he saw nothing but an Aspe in the place thereof, and so in great feare leaped back to saue his life, and afterward disclosed the whole matter. Thus far Aelianus. The domesticall Aspes vnderstand right and wrong, and therefore Philanthus telleth a story of such an Aspe which was a Female, and had young ones: in her absence one of her young ones killed a childe in the House: When the old one came againe according to her custome to seeke her meate, the killed child was layed forth, and so she vnderstood the harme: Then went she and killed that young one, and neuer more appeared in that house. It is also reported, that there was an Aspe that fell in loue with a little Boy that kept Geese in the prouince of Egypt, called Herculia, whose loue to the saide Boy was so Aelianus feruent, that the Male of the saide Aspe grew iealous thereof. Whereuppon one day as he lay asleep, set vpon him to kill him, but the other seeing the danger of her loue, awaked and deliuered him. There is much and often mention made of Aspes in holy Scripture, beside the forena∣med place, Psal. 58. as in Esay. 59. the Iewes are compared to Aspes, and their labours to Spiders webs. And Esa. 11. The sucking childe shall play vpon the hole of the Aspe. Where-vpon a learned man thus writeth: Quicun{que} ex hominibus occulto veneno ad nocendum re∣ferti sunt, sub regno Christi mutato ingenio fore vel pueris innoxios: that is, whosoeuer by secret poyson of nature are apt to do harme to other in the kingdome of Christ: their na∣ture shall be so changed, that they shall not harm sucklings, not able to discouer thē. Great is the subtilty and fore-knowledge of Aspes, as may appeare by that, in Psal. 58. agaynst the Charmers voyce. Also it is strange, that all the Aspes of Nilus doe thirty dayes before the floud remoue themselues and their young ones into the Mountaines, and this is done yearely, once at the least, if not more often. They sort themselues by couples, and do liue as it were in marriage, Male and Female, so that their sence, affection, and compassion, is one and the same: for if it happen that one of them be killed, they follow the person eagerly, and will finde him out, euen in the middest of many of his fellovves: that is, if the killer be a beast, they will know him a∣mong beastes of the same kind: And if he be a man, they will also finde him out among men: and if he be let alone, he will not among thousandes harme any but hee: breaking thorough all difficulties (except Water,) and is hindered by nothing else, except by svvift Pliny. flying away. Wee haue shewed already, how the Psyllians in Asia, cast their Children newly borne to Serpents, because if they be of the right seede and kindred to their Father, no Serpent will hurt them, but if they be Bastards of another race, the Serpentes deuour them: These Serpents are to be vnderstood to be Aspes. Aspes also we haue shewed were Suidas. destroyed by the Argolae, which Alexander brought from Argos to Alexandria, and there∣fore those are to be reckoned their enemies. Shadowes doe also scare away and terrifie Aspes, as Seneca writeth. But there is not more mortall hatred or deadly warre betwixt a∣ny, then betwixt the Ichneumon and the Aspe. When the Ichneumon hath espied an aspe, she first goeth and calleth her fellowes to helpe her, then they all before they enter fight do vvallow their bodies in slime, or wet themselues, and then wallow in the sand, so har∣nessing, and as it were arming their skinnes against the teeth of their enemy: and so when they finde themselues strong enough, they set vpon her, bristling vp their tayles first of all, and turning them to the Serpent till the Aspe bite at them, and then sodenly eare the Aspe can recouer, with singuler celerity they fly to her chaps and teare her in pieces, but the vic∣tory of this combat resteth in anticipation, for if the Aspe first bite the Ichneumon, then is he ouercome, but if the Ichneumon first lay hold on the Aspe, then is the Aspe ouercome. This hatred and contention is thus described by Nicander; Solus eam potis est Ichneumon vincere pestem, Cum graue cautus ei bellum parat, edita{que} oua, Quae fouet in multorum hominum insuperabile lethū, Omnia fracta terit, mordace{que} dente lacessit. That is to say; Ichneumon onely is of strength, that pest to ouerquell, Gainst whom in warie wise his warre he doth prepare, Her egges, a deadly death to many men, in sand he doth out smell, To breake them all within his teeth, this nimble beast doth dare. Pliny, Cardan, and Constantine affirme, that the Hearbe Arum, and the roote of Win∣terberry, do so astonish Aspes, that their presence layeth them in a deadly sleepe: And thus much of their concord with other creatures. Galen writeth, that the Marsians doe eate Aspes without all harme, although as Mercu∣riall sayth, their whole flesh and body is so venomous, and so repleate with poyson, that it neuer entreth into medicine, or is applyed to sicke or sound vpon any Physicall qualifi∣cation: the reason of this is giuen by himselfe and Fracastorius, to be either, because Aspes vnder their Climate or Region are not venomous at all, as in other Countries, neither Vipers nor Serpents are venomous: or else because those people haue a kind of simpathy in nature with them, by reason whereof, they can receiue no poyson from them. The poyson of Aspes saith Moses, Deut. 32. is crudele venenum, a cruell poyson, and Iob. 20. Cap. expressing the wicked mans delight in euill, sayth: That he shall sucke the poi∣son of Aspes. For which cause as we haue shewed already, the harme of this is not easily cured. VVe read that Canopus, the Maister of Menelaus ship, to bee bitten to death by an Toxtor. Aspe at Canopus in Egypt. So also was Demetrius Phalareus, a Scholler of Theophrastus, & keeper of the famous library of Ptolomaeus Soter. Cleopatra likewise to auoyde the try∣umph that Augustus would haue made of her, suffered her selfe willingly to bee bitten to death by an Aspe. VVhereupon Properitius writeth thus: Brachia spect aui sacris admorsa colubris, Et trachere occultum, membra soporis iter. In English thus; Thus I haue seene those wounded armes, VVith sacred Snakes bitten deepe, And members draw their poysoned harmes, Treading the way of deaths sound sleepe. We read also of certaine Mountebankes, and cunning Iuglers in Italy, called Circula∣tores, to perish by their owne deuises, thorough the eating of Serpents, and Aspes which Aelianus. they carried about in Boxes as tame, vsing them for ostentation to get Money, or to sell away their antidotes. When pompeius Rufus was the great Maister of the Temple-works at Rome, there was a certaine circulator or Quacksaluer, to shew his great cunning in the presence of many other of his owne trade, which set to his arme an Aspe, presently he suc∣ked out the poyson out of the wound with his mouth: but when he came to looke for his preseruatiue water, or antidote, he could not finde it; by meanes whereof the poyson fell dovvne into his body, his mouth and gummes rotted presently, by little and little, and so vvithin two dayes he was found dead. The like story vnto this is related by Amb: Parae∣us of another, vvhich at Florence vvould faine sell much of his medicine against poyson, and for that purpose suffered an aspe to bite his flesh or finger, but vvithin foure houres after he perished, notwithstanding all his antidoticall preseruatiues. Now therefore it remaineth, that wee adde in the conclusion of this history, a particu∣ler discourse of the bytings and venom of this serpent, and also of such remedies as are ap∣pointed for the same. Therefore we are to consider, that they byte and doe not sting, the Mercuriall. Aetius. femalls byte with foure teeth, the males but with two, and when they haue opened the flesh by byting, then they infuse their poyson into the wound. Onely the Aspe Ptyas, kil∣leth by spetting venom thorough her teeth, and (as Auicen saith) the sauour or smell ther∣of will kill, but at the least the touching infecteth mortally. When an Aspe hath bitten, it is a very difficult thing to espie the place bitten or wounded, euē with most excellent eyes, as was apparent vppon Cleopatra aforesayd; and the reason hereof is giuen to be this, be∣cause the poyson of Aspes is very sharpe, and penetrateth suddenly and forcibly vnder the skinne, euen to the inmost parts, not staying outwardly, or making any great visible ex∣ternall appearante. Yet Gallen writing to Piso, affirmeth otherwise of the wound of Cleo∣patra; but because drowsinesse and sleepe followeth that poyson, I rather beleeue the for∣mer opinion: and therefore Lucan calleth the Aspe, Somnifera, that is, a sleepe-bringing serpent. And Pictorius also subscribeth herevnto. Aspidis et morsu laesum dormire fatentur In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt. Which may be englished thus, Hee that by rage of Aspes tooth is bitten, or is wounded, They say doth sleepe vntill his death curelesse, he is confounded. The pricks of the Aspes teeth, are in apparance not much greater then the prickings of a needle, without all swelling, and very little blood issueth forth, and that is black in co∣lour; straight way the eyes grow darke & heauy, and a manifold paine ariseth all ouer the body, yet such as is mixed with some sence of pleasure, which caused Nicander to cry out, perimitque virum absque dolore, it kills a man without paine. His colour is all changed, &▪ appeareth greenish like grasse. His face or forehead is bent continually frowning, and his eyes or eye-liddes moouing vp and downe in drowsines without sence, according to these verses following, Nec tamen vlla vides impressi vlnera morsus, Nec dignus fatu tumor ictum corpus adurit Sed qui laesus homo est, citra omnem fata dolorem Claudit, & ignano moriens torpore fatiscit. Which I translate thus; Wounds of impressed teeth, none canst thou see, Nor tumour worth the naming, smitten body burning, But yet the hurt man painlesse taketh destiny, And sleeping dyeth, sluggishly him turning. The true signes then of an Aspes biting, is stupour or astonishment, heauinesse of the head, and slothfulnes, wrinking the forehead, often gaping and gnawing and nodding, bending the necke, and convulsion: but those which are hurt by the Ptyas, haue blindnes, paine at the hart, deafenesse, and swelling of the face. And the signes of such as are hurt by the Chalidonian or Chersaean Aspe, & the Terrestrian are all one, or of very little difference, except that I may adde the Crampe, and the often beating of the pulse, & frigiditie of the members or parts, or paine in the stomack, but all of them in generall, deepe sleepe, and sometimes vomitting. But by this, that the blood of the place by thē bitten turneth black, it is apparant and manifest, that the poyson of the Aspe mortifieth or killeth the naturall heate; which is ouercome by the heate of the poyson outwardly, & the darknes or blind∣nesse of the eyes, proceedeth of certaine vapours which are infected, and ascend vp to the disturbance of the braine: and when the humours are troubled in the stomacke, then fol∣loweth vomiting, or else the crampe, and sometimes a loosnesse when the knuckles are drawen in by the venomous byting, or the infected humours falling downe into the in∣trals. Ponzettus To conclude, so great is the tabificall effect of this poyson of Aspes; that it is wor∣thily accounted the greatest venom, and most dangerous of all other: for Aelianus sayth, Serpentum venenum cum pestiferum sit, tum multò aspidis pestilentius, the poyson of all ser∣pents is pestiferous, but the venom of the aspe most of all. For if it touch a greene wound, it killeth speedily, but an old wound receiueth harme thereby more hardly. In Alexan∣dria, when they would put a man to a sudden death, they would set an aspe to his bosome or breast, and then after the wound or byting, bid the partie walke vp and downe, and so Galenus. immediatly within two or three turnes hee would fall downe dead. Yet it is reported by Pliny, that the poyson of Aspes drunke into the body doth no harme at all, & yet if a man eate of the flesh of any beast slaine by an Aspe, he dyeth immediatly. But concerning the cure of such as haue beene, or may be hurt by Aspes, I will nowe entreate, not spending any time to confute those, who haue wrote that it is incurable: on the contrary it shall be manifest, that both by Chirurgery and Medicines, compound and simple, this both hath beene & may happily be effected. First it is necessary when a man is stunge or bitten by a Serpent, that the wounded part be cut off by the hand of some skil∣full Chirurgeon, or else the flesh round about the wound, with the wound it selfe to bee circumcised and cut with a sharpe Rasor; then let the hottest burning thinges be applyed, Dioscorid. Actuarius Aegineta euen the searing yron to the very bone. For so the occasion beeing taken away from the poyson to spread any further, it must needes die without any further damage. Then also the holes in the meane time before the eiection, must be drawne, eyther with cupping-glasse, or with a Reede, or with the naked rumpe of a Ringdoue or Cocke; I meane the very hole set vppon the bitten place. And because the place is very narrowe and small, it must be opened, and made wider, the blood be drawne forth by scarifications, and then must such medicinall herbes be applyed as are most opposite to poyson, as Rew, and such Mercurialis. like. And because the poyson of Aspes doth congeale the blood in the veynes, therfore a∣gainst the same must all hote thinges made thinne be applyed, as Mithridatum & Triacle dissolued in Aqua vitae, & the same also dissolued into the wound; then must the patient be vsed to bathings, fricasing or rubbing, and walking, with such like exercises. But when once the wound beginneth to be purple, greene, or blacke, it is a signe both of the extin∣guishment of the venome, & also of the suffocating of naturall heate, then is nothing more safe then to cut off the member, if the partie be able to beare it. After Cupping-glasses, and Paraeus scarifications, there is nothing that can be more profitably applyed then Centory, Myrre, and Oppium, or Sorrell after the manner of a plaister. But the body must be kept in dailie motion and agitation, the wounds themselues often searched and pressed, and Sea-vvater vsed for fomentation. Butter likewise, & the leaues of Yew, are very good to be applyed Aetius to the bytings of Aspes. And in the Northerne Regions, (as witnesseth 'Olaus Magnus,) they vse nothing but branne like a playster, and theyr cattell they annoynt with Triacle & salt all ouer the bunch or swelling. And thus much for the Chirurgicall cure of the biting of Aspes. In the next place, wee may also relate the medicinall cure, especially of such thinges as are compound, and receiued inwardly. First, after the wound, it is good to make the party vomit, & then afterward make him drinke iuyce of Yew and Triacle, or in the default thereof, wine, as much of the iuyce as a groate waight, or rather more. But for the tryall of the parties recouery, giue him the powder of Centory in wine to drinke, and if he keepe the medicine, he will liue, but if he vomit or cast it vp, he will die thereof. But for the better auoydance & purging out of the digested venome, distributed into euery part of his body, giue the party Garlicke beaten with Zythum, vntill he vomit, or els Opponax in wine allayed with water: also Origan dry Mercuri: and greene. After the vomit, the former antidoticall medicines may be vsed. And the nor∣therne people vse no other Triacle then Venetian. Whereas there are aboundance of all Andreas. manner of Serpents in the Spantsh Islands, yet neuer are any found there to vse Triacle, neither doe they account of it as of a thing any whit vertuous, but in stead thereof they vse the bearded Thapsia, Gilliflowers, and red Violets, and the herbe Auance, boyled in wine Vinegar, the sharpest that may be gotten, & a sound mans vrine, wherwithall they bathe the wounded part, although much time after the hurt receiued. But saith Amb: Paraeus, it is much better for the patient to drinke thereof fasting, & before meate two howres, three ounces at a time. And by the help of this notable experiment, the Inhabitants of those I∣lands, are nothing afraid to offer theyr bodyes to be bitten by the most angry Aspes. And thus much for compound medicines in generall. It is saide, that the first and chiefest easie remedy for such as are bitten by Aspes, is to drinke so much of the sharpest Vineger, as he can sensibly perceiue and feele the same vp∣on the right side of his midreffe, because that poyson first of all depriueth the liuer of sence. Aetius. For Pliny saith, that hee knew a man carrying a bottle of Vineger to be bitten by an Aspe, whiles by chaunce he trode therevpon, but as long as he bore the Vineger and did not set it downe, he felt no paine thereby, but as often as to ease himselfe hee set the bottell out of his hand, he felt torment by the poyson, which being related to the Phisitians, they knew thereby that Vineger drunke into the stomacke was a soueraigne antidote against poyson. Yet some say, that the first knowledge of this vertue in vineger, grew from the necessitie which a little boy bytten by an Aspe had of drinking, and finding no other liquour but a bottle of vineger, dranke thereof a full draught, and so was eased of his paine. For the rea∣son is, that it hath both a refrigeratiue, and also a dissipating vertue, as may appeare when Cor. Celsus. it is poured on the earth, because it yeeldeth a froth, and therefore when it commeth into the stomacke, it disperseth all the infected humours. The Northerne Shepheards doe drinke Garlicke and stale Ale against the bytings of Aspes. And some hold opinion that Anniseede is an antidote for this sore. Other vse Hart-wort, Olaus. Mag. Apium seed, and wine. Aron being burned, hath the vertue to driue away serpents, and therefore beeing drunke with oyle of Bayes in blacke wine, it is accounted very soue∣raigne against the bytings of Aspes. The fruite of Balsame, with a little powder of Genti∣an in vvine, or the iuyce of Mynts, keepeth the stomacke from the Crampe after a man is bytten by an Aspe. Other giue Castoreum, with Lignum Cassiae, and some the skinne of a Storkes stomacke or mawe. There be certaine little filthy and corrupt wormes bred in rotten wood or paper, called Cimices, these are very profitable against poyson of Aspes, or any other venomous byting beast, and therefore it is said that Hennes & other pullen, do earnestly seeke after these wormes, and that the flesh of such fowle as haue eaten thereof, is also profitable for the same purpose. Athaeneus also writeth, how certaine thieues were condemned to be cast to serpents to be destroyed, now the morning before they came forth, they had giuen them to eate Cy∣trons; when they were brought to the place of execution, there were Aspes put forth vn∣to them, who byt them, and yet did not harme them. The next day, it beeing suspected, the Prince commaunded to giue one of them a Citron, and the other none, so when they were brought forth againe the Aspes fell on them, and slew them that had not eaten Cy∣tron, but the other had no harme at all. The Egyptian Clematis or Periwinke drunke in vineger, is very good against the poyson of Aspes; so likewise is Corrall in Wine, or the Pliny. Orpheus leaues of Yew. Henbane brused with the leaues thereof, and also bitter Hoppes haue the same operation. The vrine of a Torteyse drunke, is a medicine against all bytings of wild beasts, and the vrine of a man hurt by an Aspe: as Marcus Varro affirmed in the eyghtie∣ninth yeere of his age, according to the obseruation of Serenus saying; Si vero horrendum vulnus ferafecerit aspis Vrinam credunt propriam conducere potu: Varronis fuit ista senis sententia, nec non Plinius vt memorat sumpti iuvat imber aceti, Which may be englished thus; If that an Aspe a mortall wound doe bite, It's thought his vrine well doth cure againe, Such was the saying of old Varro hight, And Pliny to, drinke vineger like drops of raine. But it is more safe to agree with Pliny in the prescription of mans vrine, to restraine it to them that neuer had any beards. And more particularly against the Aspe called Ptyas, & Matthiolus out of Dioscorides saith, that the quintessence of Aqua vitae, and the vsuall an∣tidote both mixed together and drunke, is most powerful against the venoms of the deafe Aspe. And thus much for the antipathy & cure of Aspes byting venomous nature, wher∣vnto I will adde for a conclusion, that prouerbicall speech, of one Aspe borrowing poy∣son of another, out of Tertullian against the Hereticke Marcion, who gathereth many of his absurd impieties from the vnbeleeuing Iewes. Desinat nunc haereticus á Iudaeo, aspis quod aiunt á vipera mutuari venenum, that is, let the haereticke now cease to borrow his venom of a Iew, as the Aspes doe borrow their poyson from Vipers. And true it is, that this pro∣uerbe hath especiall vse, when one bad man is holpe or counselled by another; and there∣fore when Diogenes saw a company of women talking together, hee said merrily vnto thē, Aspis par' echidnes pharmacon daneizetai, that is, the Aspe borroweth venom of the Viper. Thus much of the Aspe. ❧ Of the Description and differences of BEES. A Mongst all the sorts of venomous Insects, (or cut-wasted crea∣tures) the soueraigntie and preheminence is due to the Bees, who D: Bonhan his discourse of Bees, wasps and Drones. onely of all others of this kinde, are made for the nourishment of mankind, all other (cut-wasted) seruing onely for medicinall vse, the delight of the eyes, delectation of the eares, & the ornament, trimming, and setting forth of the body, which they performe at the full. They are called of the Hebrewes, Deborah. The Arabi∣ans terme them, Albara, Nahalea, and Zabar. The Illirians and Sclauonians, Wezilla. The Italians, Ape, api, vna sticha, moscatella, ape or sc ppa, pecchi. The Spanyards, Abcia. Frenchmen, Mousches au miel. The Germaines, Eenymbe, apen. Names. The Flemmings, Bie. The Polonians, Pztzota. The Irishmen, Camilij. In Wales a Bee is called Gweniv. Amongst the Graecians they haue purchased sundry names, according to the diuersitie of Nations, countries and places, but the most vulgar name is Melissa, & in Hesiodus, Melie. Othersome call a Bee Plastis, á fingendo, of framing. Some againe, An∣thedon: and of their colour, Zanthai. Of their offices and charge, Egemones, ab imperando, from gouerning. Sirenes, à suam cantu, from their sweet voyce. The Latines call them by one generall name, Apis and Apes. Varro sometimes termes them Aues, but very impro∣perly, for they might better be named Volucres, not Aues. So much for their names, now to the definition. A Bee is a cut-wasted liuing creature, that can flye, hauing foure winges, and bloudles, Apum definitio the onely Crafts-master of Hony-making. Their eies are somewhat of a horny substance, hid deep in their bodies, as is also their sting: they want neither toong nor teeth, they haue Deseription of their parts. 4. wings, being of a bright and cleare colour, growing to their shoulder-blades, whereof the two hindermost are the lesser, because they might not hinder their flying: and out of their short feet or stumps, there grow forth as it were two fingers, wherein they carry a lit∣tle stone, for the peizing and making weighty their small bodies in stormy, tempestuous, blustering, or troublesome weather, for feare least they might be driuen from their house and home, by the contrary rage and violence of the winds. They do not breath (by Plinies No respirati∣on in Bees. good leaue) but either pant, moue, or stirre (as the hart or braine doth) and by transpirati∣on they are comforted, refreshed, and made liuely. Their stomack is contexed and framed of the thinnest part of all their members, wherein they not onely retaine, and safely keepe their Honny dew which they haue gathered, but also digest, purifie, and clense it, which is the true and onely reason, why the Honny of Bees is longer kept pure and fine, then a∣ny Manna or Meldew, or rather it is not at all subiect to corruption. Bees euen by nature are much different: for some are more domesticall and tame, and Differences of Bees from na∣ture. others againe are altogether wilde, vplandish, and agrestiall. Those former are much de∣lighted with the familiar friendship, custome and company of men, but these can in no wise brook or endure them, but rather keep their trade of hony-making in old trees, caues, holes, and in the ruders, and rubbish of old wals and houses. Of tame Bees againe, some of them liue in pleasant and delightfull Gardens, and abounding with all sweet senting & odoriferous plants and hearbs, and these are great, soft, fat, and big-bellied. Others again, there be of them that liue in townes and villages, whose study and labour is to gather ho∣ny from such plants as come next to hand, and which grow farther of, and these are lesser in proportion of body, rough and more vnpleasant in handling; but in labour, industrie, witteand cunning, far surpassing the former. Of both sorts of these, some haue stings (as all true Bees haue:) others againe are without a sting, as counterfeit and bastardly Bees, which (euen like the idle, sluggish, lyther, and rauenous cloystered Monkes, thrice worse then theeues) you shall see to be more gorbellied, haue larger throats, and bigger bodies, yet neither excellent or markable, either for any good behauiour and conditions, or gifts of the mind. Men call these vnprofitable cattle, and good for nothing, Fuci, that is drones; either because they would seem to be labourers, when indeed rhey are not: or because that vnder the colour and pretence of labour (for you shall sometimes haue them to carry wax, and to be very busie in forming and making hony-combes,) they may eate vp all the ho∣ny. These Drones are of a more blackish colour, somewhat shining, and are easily knowne by the greatnesse of their bodies. Besides some Bees are descended of the kingly race, and borne of the bloud Royall: where of Aristotle maketh two sorts: a yellow kind, which is the more noble, and the blacke, garnished with diuers colours. Some make three Kings, differing in colour, as black, red, and diuers coloured. Menecratés saith, that those who are of sundry colours are the worser, but in case they haue diuersity of colour with some black∣nes, they are esteemed the better. He that is elected Monarch Caesar, and captaine generall Description of the King. of the whole swarme, is euer of a tall, personable, and heroycall stature, being twice so high as the rest, his wings shorter, his legs streight, brawny, and strong, his gate, pace, & man∣ner of walking is more lofty, stately and vpright, of a venerable countenance, and in his forehead there is a certaine red spot or mark with a Diadem, for he far differeth from the Differences in regard of sexe▪ populer and inferiour sort in his comelinesse, beauty, and honor. The Prince of Philoso∣phers confoundeth the sexe of Bees, but the greatest company of learned Writers do di∣stinguish them: whereof they make the feminine sort to be the greater. Others againe will haue them the lesser, with a sting: but the sounder sort (in my iudgment) will neither know nor acknowledge any other males, besides their Dukes and princes, who are more able & handsome, greater and stronger then any of the rest, who stay euer at home, and very sel∣dome (vnlesse with the whole Swarme) they stir out of doores, as those whom nature had pointed out to be the fittest to be stander-bearers, and to carry ancients in the camp of Ve∣nus, and euer to be ready at the elbowes of their loues to do them right: Experience teach∣ing vs, that these do sit on egges, and after the manner of birdes, do carefully cherish and make much of their young, after the thin membram or skin wherein they are enclosed is broken. The difference of their age is knovvne by the forme, state, and habite of their bodies. Of age. For the young Bees haue very thinne and trembling winges, but they that are a yeare old, as they that are two or three yeares of age are very trimme, gay, bright-shining, and in ve∣ry good plight and liking, of the colour of Oyle. But those that haue reached to seauen yeares, haue layed away all their flatnesse and smoothnesse, neither can any man afterwards, either by the figure and quality of their bo∣dies or skinnes, iudge or discerne certainely their age (as wee say by experience in Hor∣ses:) For the elder sort of them are rough, hard, thinne and leane scragges, staruelinges, lothsome to touch and to looke vpon, somewhat long, nothing but skinne and bone, yet very notorious and goodly too see to, in regard of their grauity, hoarenes and aunciency. But as they be in forme and shape, nothing so excellent, so yet in experience and industrie they farre outstrippe the younger sort, as those whom time hath made more learned, and length of dayes ioyned with vse, hath sufficiently instructed and brought vp in the Art or trade of hony-making. The place likewise altereth one whiles their forme, and sometimes againe their nature, (as their sexe and age do both.) For in the Islands of Molucea, there be Bees very like to The differēce of the forme of Bees, ac∣cording to the place. winged Pismires, but somewhat lesser then the greater Bees, as Maximilian Transiluanus, in an Epistle of his, written to the Byshop of Salspurge, at large relateth it. Andrew Theuet in his Booke that he wrote of the new-found World, Cap. 51. amongst other matters re∣porteth that he did see a company of Flies or Hony-bees about a tree named Vhebehason, Bees of Amo∣ ca. which then was greene, with the which these Hony-bees do liue and nourish themselues: of the which trees there were a great number in a hole that was in the tree, wherein they made Hony and Waxe. There is two kindes of the Hony-bees, one kind are as great as ours, the which commeth not onely but of good smelling flowers, also their Hony is ve∣ry good, but their Waxe not so yellow as ours. There is another kinde halfe so great as the others: their hony is better then the others, and the wilde men name them Hira. They liue not with the others food, which to my iudgment maketh their VVaxe to be as black as coales, and they make great plenty, specially neare to the Riuer Vasses, and of Plate. The Bees called Chalcoides, which are of the colour of Brasse, and somewhat long, which are said to liue in the Island of Creta are implacable, great fighters and quarrellers, excel∣ling all others in their stinges, and more cruell then any others, so that with their stinges they haue chased the inhabitants out of their Citties; the remainder of which Bees do re∣maine and make their hony-combs (as Aelianus saith) in the Mountaine Ida. Thus much of the differences of Bees, now it remaineth to discourse of the Politike, Ethicall, and oe∣conomicke vertues and properties of them. Bees are gouerned and doe liue vnder a Monarchy, and not vnder a tyrannicall state, admitting and receiuing their King, not by succession or casting of lots, but by respectiue The gouern∣ment of bees. aduise, considerate iudgement, and prudent election; and although they willingly submit their neckes vnder a kingly gouernment, yet notwithstanding they still keepe their anci∣ent liberties and priuiledges, because of a certaine prerogatiue they maintaine in giuing their voyces and opinions, and their King being deeply bound to them by an oath, they exceedingly honor and loue. The King as he is of a more eminent stature, and goodly corporature (as before wee haue touched) then the rest: so likewise (which is singular in a King) he excelleth in mild∣nesse and temperatenesse of behauiour. For he hath a sting, but maketh it not an instru∣ment of reuenge, which is the cause that many haue thought, their king neuer to haue had any. For these are the lavves of Nature, not written with Letters, but euen imprinted and engrauen in theyr conditions and manners: and they are very flovv to punish offen∣ders, because they haue the greatest and Soueraigne povver in their hands. And although they seeme to bee slacke in reuenging and punishing priuate iniuries, yet for all that they neuer suffer rebellious persons, refractorious, obstinate, and such as will not bee ruled, to escape without punishment, but vvith their pricking stinges they greeuously wound and torment, so dispatching them quickly. They are so studious of peace, that neither vvil∣lingly nor vnvvillingly they vvill giue any cause of offence or displeasure. VVho there∣fore vvould not greatly be displeased vvith, and hate extreamely those Dionysian Tyrants in Sicilia; Clearchus in Heraclea, and Apollodorus the Theefe, Pieler and spoyler of the Cassandrines? And vvho would not detest the vngratiousnes of those levvd clavv-backes, and Trencher-parasites, and flatterers of Kings, vvhich dare impudently maintaine, that that a Monarchy is nothing else but a certaine way and rule for the accomplishing of the will, in vsing their authority as they list, and a science or skilfull trade, to haue wherewith to liue pleasantly in all sensuall and worldly pleasure: which ought to be far from a good Prince, who whilest he would seem to be a man, he shew himselfe to be farre worser then these little poore-winged-creatures. And as their order and course of life is farre different from the vulgar sort, so also is their byrth; for they of the kingly race are not borne after the manner of a little Worme, as all the comminalty are, but is forthwith winged, and a∣mongst all his younglings, if he find any one of his sons to be either a foole, vnhandsome, that none can take pleasure in, rugged, rough, soone angry, fumish or too teastie, il shaped, not beautifull or Gentlemanlike, him by a common consent, and by a Parliamentary au∣thority they destroy, for feare least the whole Swarme should bee diuided and distracted into many mindes, and so at length the Subiectes vndone by factions, and banding into partes. The King prescribeth lawes and orders to all the rest, and appointeth them their rules and measures: for some he straightly chargeth and commaundeth, (as they tender his fa∣uour, and will auoyde his displeasure) to fetch and prouide water for the whole Campe. He enioyneth others to make the Hony-combes, to build, to garnish and trimme vp the house well and cleanely, to finish perfectly the worke, to find and allow, to promote and shew others what to doe. Some he sendeth forth to seeke theyr liuing, but being vvorne with yeares, they are maintained of the common stocke at home. The younger and stron∣ger being appointed to labour, and take theyr turnes as they fall: And although (being a King) he be discharged and exempt from any mechanicall businesse, yet for all that, in case of necessity he will buckle himselfe to his taske, neuer at any time taking the fielde or ayre abroad, but either for his healths sake, or when he cannot otherwise chuse, by means of some vrgent businesse. If in respect of his yeares he be lusty and strong, then like a no∣ble Captaine hee marcheth before his whole winged-army, exposing himselfe first to all perils, neither with his good will, will he be carryed of his Souldiers vnlesse he be weari∣ed and vveakened by meanes of crooked age, or maistered and cleane put out of heart by any violent sicknesse, so that he can neither stand on his Legges nor fly. When night ap∣procheth, the signe and token being giuen by his Honny-pipe, or Cornet, (if you will so call it) a generall proclamation is made through the whole Hiue, that euery one shall be∣take himselfe to rest, so the watch beeing appointed, and all thinges set in order, they all make thēselues ready and go to bed. So long as the King liueth, so long the whole svvarm enioy the benefit of peace, leading their liues vvithout any disquieting, disturbance, vex∣ation, or feare of feuture wars. For the drones do vvillingly contain thēselues in their own celles, the elder liuing contented with their ovvne homes, and the younger not daring for their eares to breake into their father Lands, or to make any inrodes or inuasion into the houses of their predecessours. The King keepeth his Court by himselfe, in the highest and largest part of the whole Palace, his lodging being workemanlie and very cunning∣ly made of a fine round or enclosure of Waxe, beeing thus as it were fenced and paled a∣bout as with a defensible wall. A little from him dwell all the Kings children, beeing very obedient to their parents becke. Their King being dead, all his subiects are in an vprore, Drones bring foorth their young in the celles of the true Bees, all are in a hurly burly, all being out of season and order. Aristole saith, that Bees haue many Kings, which I would rather tearme Vizeroyes or Deputies, sithence it is certaine (as Antigonus affirmeth) that as vvell the swarmes do dye and come to naught, by hauing of many Kinges, as none at all. And thus to haue spoken of good Kings let this suffice. Euill Kings are more rough, rugged, browner, blacker, and of more sundry colours: whose natures and dispositions you will condemne, in respect of their habite and manner of body and mind, the one and other are thus physiogmonically described by the Poet: Nam{que} duae regnum facies, duo corpor a gentis. Alter erit maculis auro Squallentibus ardens, Et cutilis clarus squamis, insignes & ore. Faedior est alter multo, quàm puluere abacto Quum venit & sicco terram spuit ore venator: Disidia latamque trahens inglorias alum—Hunc Dede neci, melior vacua sine regnet in aula. In English thus; The two aspects of kingly Bees, two nations do disclose, One of them, Golden spotted red, burning with pale hew, And hauing scales both red and cleare, and great about the nose, The other filthy to behold like dust, for it is true, Which hunters spit vpon dry land, when all is crusht and prest, In sloth belly broad, doth trauaile worser then the least, Him kill, let the other raigne Alone, in empty Court, do not disdaine. And thus hetherto haue we spoken of their kinges and Dukes: now will we bend our discourse to the common sort of Bees. Bees are neither to be accounted wilde, nor altogether calme and quiet creatures, but of a nature betwixt both: & of all other they are esteemed most seruiceable and profitable. Their sting giueth both life & death to them, for being depriued of it, they surely die: but hauing it, they repell all hostility from their swarmes. Of these there are none Idle, al∣though they be not all Honny-makers, neither are the most sluggish of them all, like vnto the Drones in their inclination and manners: For they do not corrupt and marre the ho∣nie-combes, neither doe they lie in waite by treachery and deceit to filt h hony, but are nourished by flowers, and flying forth with their fellowes, do get their liuing with them; although some of them want the skill to make and lay vp the hony finely and safely, yet notwithstanding euery one hath his proper charge and businesse to vse and practise, for these bring water to the king, and to the older Bees that cannot trauaile. The elder sort if they be of a strong and robustious constitution, are chosen for the gard of the kinges person, as the fittest persons to be about him, in respect of their approoued worth, faithfull dealing, and vprightnesse of conscience, for the ordering and dispo∣sing of all matters. Some giue Physicke to those that are sicke, by making and giuing to them a medicinall aliment of hony, that is drawne from Annise, Saffron, and Hiacinthes. But if any thorough age or sicknesse chance to dye, then they whose office it is to carry forth the dead bodies to burying, do forthwith flocke together, carrying the dead bodie of their brother on their shoulders, as it were on a Beere, least the pure Honny-combes might be fainted with any vncleanlinesse, stinke, or nastinesse. Bees haue also their Ambassadours and Orators, sent with commission or authority, and put in trust to deale in their Princes affayres, their old beaten Souldiours, their Py∣pers, Trumpetters, horne-winders, Watchmen, Scout-watches, and Sentinels. Like∣wise Souldiers euen in a readinesse to defend, and looke to their hony-wealth and goods, as if it were a Citty committed to their trust and valiancy, and these do punish, torment, and throw to the ground all flying Theeues and Wormes, that dare inuade secretly by any cunning passage, or mine into their mansions. And that they might beare the world in hand, that they are no priuy or secret Theeues in their flying, they make a noyse and humming, which together with their flight, is heard both to beginne and end: Which sound, whether it proceedeth from the mouth, or from the motion of their winges: Aristo∣tle and Hesychius, do much vary and contend. Their Pipers and horn-blowers doe aedere Ziggon, as Hesychus saith (the Englishmen terme it Sing) and that they make to be the watch-word and priuy token, for their watch and ward, sleepe, and daily labour. They loue their King so entirely, that they neuer suffer him to goe abroad alone, but their Army being diuided into two partes, and by heapes winding themselues round, they doe as it were enclose and fence him on all sides ▪ If in a∣ny iourney the King happe to wander from his company, and cannot be found, beeing driuen away by the force of some stormie windes or weather, they all forth-with make a priuie search, and with their quick-senting, pursue and follow the chace so long, vntill he be certainely found; and then, because he is tyred with flying, and the tediousnes of tem∣pests, the common sort lift him vpon their wings, and so triumphantly conuey him home as it were in a Chariot. But if he die by the way, then they all mournefully depart, euerie one to his owne place seperating themselues, or peraduenture for a while, they worke vp theyr hony-combes not yet finished, but neuer make any more hony; So that at length, growing to be lazie, sickly, wasted, consumed and distained with their owne filth and cor∣ruption, they all miserably perrish. For they cannot possibly liue without a King, against whom, none is so hardy as to lift vp his finger to offer him any violence, much lesse to con∣spire his destruction, vnlesse he (after the fashion of Tyrants) doe ouerthrow and turne all things vpside downe, after his owne will and lust, or neglecting carelesly the Weale pub∣lique, setteth all vpon sixe and seauen. Yea, if he accustome himselfe to goe often abroad, (which he cannot doe without the great hurt and preiudice of his Cittizens) they do not by and by kill him, but they take from him his wings, & if he then amend his life & looke better to his office, they singularly affect and honour him. When the King by flying away hath left his Bees, they fetch him againe, and being a fugitiue from his kingdome, they follow him amaine by his smell, as it were with liue and cry, (for amongst them all the King spelleth best) and so bring him backe to his kinglie house. None dare venture out of his owne lodging first, nor seeke his liuing in any place, except the King himselfe first going forth, do direct them the way of their flight. For I am hardly of Aristotles mind, who affirmeth that the King neuer commeth abroad, but when the whole swgrme doth, which is seldome seene. But if by reason of his tyrannie, cruelty and violent rule, they be forced to seeke some other dwelling places, then a few dayes be∣fore the time appointed, there will be heard a solitary, mournfull, and peculiar kinde of voyce, as it were of some trumpet, & two or three dayes before, they flie about the mouth of the Hiue; so when all things are in a readines for their flight, being all assembled, they flie all speedilie away, and kill the Tyrant (whom they left behind) if he attempt to follow them. But a good King they neuer forsake, and if at any time he pine and fall away by reason of sicknes, any plague or murren, or through old age, all the meaner sort do make mone, the whole route and multitude of Senators and Aldermen do greatly bewaile him, not conueighing any meate into their hiues, nor yet looking out of doores for meere griefe, filling the whole house with sorrowfull hummings & laments, and gathering them∣selues by heapes about the carkasse of the dead King, they doe with great noyse tragically mourne for him. Neither doth cōtinuance of time mittigate or take away their griefe, but at length all of these faithfull friends, partly through griefe, and partly through famine, they are cleane consumed and brought to death. Whilst they haue a King, the whole swarme and company is kept in awfull order, but he being gone, they goe vnder the protection of other Kings. They haue not many kings at once, neither can they endure Vs pers, ouerthrowing their houses, and rooting out their stocke and familie. And if in one swarme there be two Kings, (as sometimes it fal∣leth out) then one part adhaereth to the one king, and the other side cleaueth to the other, so that sometimes in one hiue, you shall find hony-combes of sundry formes & fashions: where they behaue themselues so honestly and neighborly, that the one medled not with the others charge and busines, hauing no mind to enlarge their Empire, to entyce, drawe or winne by faire meanes, the subiects of the side, but euery one beeing obedient to his owne king without contradiction. They honour him so highly, that being lost they com∣plaine, being decrept, they preserue and keepe him, beeing weary, they carry him round about with them, beeing dead, they bewayle him with all funerall pompe and heauinesse, yeelding vp at length euen their very liues for an assurance of their loues and faithfull dea∣lings. Oftentimes they arreare deadly war against strangers borne, for the hony that they haue sto ne from them, as for the catching and snatching vppe afore-hand those flowers whereon they purposed to sitte on; so that sometimes the quarrell is determined by dint of sword in a iust battle. Oftentimes againe they wrangle about their hony-combes and dwelling houses, but then the deadly and vnappeasable warre is, when the contentio is about the life, crowne and dignitie of their King, for then they bestirre themselues most eagerly, defending him most valiantly, and receiuing the darts or stings that are bended against him, with an vndaunted courage, by the voluntary and thicke interposing of their owne bodyes, betwixt the darts and the person of their king. Neither are Bees onely, examples to men of politicall prudence and fidelity, but also presidents for them to imitate in many other vertues. For whereas Nature hath made thē Zooa agelaia, that is, creatures liuing in companies and swarmes, yet do they all things for the common good of their owne route and multitude, excepting euer the Drones and theeues, whom if they take tripping in the manner, they reward with condigne punish∣ment. Their houses are common, their children common, their lawes and statutes com∣mon, and their country common. They couple together without question, as Camels do, priuily and apart by themselues, which whether it proceed of modesty, or be done through the admirable instinct of Nature, I leaue it to the dispute and queint resolution of those graue Doctors, who being laden with the badges and cognizances of learning, doe not sticke to affirme that they can render a true reason euen by their owne wits, of all the cau∣ses in nature, though neuer so obscure, hid and difficult. Flyes and dogges doe farre otherwise, whose impudencie is such, that hauing no regard of times, persons, or places, they will not giue place, or be disioyned. Yea the Massagets (as Herodotus writeth) hauing their quiuer of arrowes on their carts, they dealt with their vviues very vnseasonably, and though all men beheld it, yet they most impudently con∣temned it. And that which is worser, this beastly fashion is crept amongst the vsurpers, or at least professors of the Christian name, who shame not openly to kisse and embrace, yea euen to play & meddle with filthy whores & brothelly queanes. Bees surely will cōdemne these kind of people of bestiall impudency and wanton shamelesnesse; or causing them to blush if they haue any grace, will teach them repentance. Neither are they altogether such creatures as cannot endure or away with musicke, (which is the princesse of delights, and the delight of Princes) as many vnlearned people cannot, but are exceedingly delighted with tune in any harmony wherein is no iarring, so the same be simple and vnaffected. And although they haue not the skill to daunce according to due time, order and pro∣portion in Musicke, as they say Elephants can, yet doe they make swifter or slovver theyr flight, according to the Trumpettors mind, who with his sharpe and shrill sound causeth them to bestirre themselues more speedily; but beating slowly and not so loude vpon his brasen instrument, maketh them more slow, and to take more leysure. Neither hath Na∣ture made thē onely the most ingenious of all liuing creatures, but by discipline hath made them tame and tractable. For they doe not onely know the hand and voyce of the hony∣man, or him that hath the charge and ordering of the same, but they also suffer him to do what liketh him best: which euery man must needes confesse to be an argument of a gene∣rous and noble disposition, thus to vnder-goe the rule of their ouer-seers and Surveiors, but the hand and discipline of a stranger, they will by no meanes endure. As for oeconomicall vertues they excell also, and namely for moderate frugalitie and temperance, not profusely and prodigally wasting and deuouring the great store of hony which they gathered in the Sommer season, but they sustaine themselues therwith in win∣ter, and that very sparingly: And so whilst they feede vppon few meates, and those of the purest sort, they purchase long life, (the reward of sobrietie.) Neither are they so higgard∣lie and sordidous minded, but when as they haue gathered more hony then their number can well spend, they communicate and impart some very liberally amongst the Drones. As for their clenlinesse these may be certaine Arguments, that they neuer exonerate na∣ture within their hiues, (except constrained thereto by some sicknes, foule weather, & for some vrgent necessity) that they conuay away the dead carkasses, that they touch no rot∣ten nor stinking flesh, or any other thing, no herbe that is withered, nor no ill-senting or decayed flovvers. They kill not their enemies within their hiues, they drinke none but running water, and that which is throughly defecated: they will not dwell in houses impure & foule, sluttish, blacke, or full of any feculent or dreggy refuse, and the excrementes of the labourers and sickly, they gather on a heape without their pauilions, and assoone as their leasure serueth; it is carried cleane away. Concerning their temperance and chastity, (although it hath beene partly touched before,) yet this I will adde, that it is wonderfull what some men haue obserued. For whereas all other creatures doe couple in the open sight of men, the Elephant onely excepted, and Waspes likewise not much differing in kind, do the same: yet Bees were neuer yet seene so to ioyne together, but either within their hiues very mo∣destly they apply themselues to that businesse, or else abroad do it without any witnesses. And they are no lesse valiant, then modest and temperate, Dum corpora bello obiectant, pulchramque petunt per vulner a mortem. Their war is either ciuill or forraine. Of the for∣mer there be diuers causes, that is to say: the multitude of their Dukes or Captaines ly∣ing in waight to betray both King and kingdome: scarsity of vittaile, straightnes of place and roome, corruption of manners and idlenesse. For if they haue no Dukes, then is it ex∣pedient (as otherwhiles it happeneth) they stay the ouerplus, least the number of them growing to great, either violence might be offered to the King, or the commons drawne to some sedition. They kill them most of all, when as they haue no great store of young Bees to plant any new colonies, ouerthrowing and spoyling withall their hony-combs (if they haue a∣ny.) They execute also Theeues and Drones, so often as they haue not roome inough to do their busines in, (for they hold the more inward part of the Hiue,) so taking from thē at one time, both their hony-combs and meat. The scarsity and lacke of Hony, causeth them also to be at deadly feude, so that the short Bees do encounter the long with might and maine. In the which bicketing, if the short be Conquerors, it will be an excellent Swarme, but if fortune smile on the long Bees side, they liue idlely, making neuer any good Honny. Whosoeuer getteth the day, they are so giuen to rapine and reuenge, as they take no prisoners, nor leaue any place to mercy, but commit all to the sword. Now concerning their forren warres, I must say that they giue place to no other liuing creature, either in fortitude, or hardy venturing: and if either men, Foure-footed-beasts, Birds, or Waspes, do either hinder, disquiet, or kill any of them, so that they be not well contented, agaynst all these they oppose themselues very stoutly, according to their power wounding them. They hate extreamely adulterous persons, and such men as bee smeared with any oynt∣ment, those that haue curled or crisped haire (as also all vnfaithfull and base raskally peo∣ple) and all those that weare any red clothes of the colour of bloud: as contrarywise they loue and reuerence exceedingly their Maisters, Keepers, Tutors, Defenders, and Main∣tainers: so that sitting vpon their hands, they doe rather tickle and licke them in sporting wise, then either wound or hurt them, though neuer so little with their sting. Yea these men may safely without any touch of hurt, and without any couering to their hands, ga∣ther together the Swarmes in a very hot Summer; yea, handle, place them in order, heap vp together, sit or stand before their Hiues, and with a sticke take cleane away Drones, Theeues, Waspes, and Hornets. If any Souldier looseth his sting in fight, like one that had his Sword or Speare taken from him, he presently is discouraged and dispaireth, not liuing long, through extreamity or griefe. Going forth into the fielde to fight, they stay till the watchword be giuen, which being done, they flocke in great heapes round about their King (if he be a good one) en∣ding all their quarrell in one set battell. In their order of fighting, how great vertue, cou∣rage, strength, and noblenesse, these poore creatures shew, as well wee our selues can te∣stifie, and they better who haue assured vs by their writings, that whole armies of armed men haue beene tamed by the stings of Bees, and that Lyons, Beares, and Horses, haue beene slaine by meanes of them. And yet (how fierce and warlike soeuer they seeme to be,) they are appeased and made gentle with continuall or daiely company, and vnlesse they be to much netled and angred, they liue peaceably inough without any great trou∣ble, neuer hurting any one maliciously or deceitfully, that standeth before their Hiues. If I should goe about to declare at large their ingenie, naturall inclination, cunning worke-manship and memory, I should not onely giue vnto them with Virgil: Particulam aurū diuinae, but also haustus mentis aethereae, and (liceat Pythagoricè errare,) the Metempsuchoo∣sis of that ingenious Philosopher. For after that they are inclosed in a cleane and a sweet hiue; they gather out of gummie and moist licqour-yeelding trees, a kind of glutinous sub∣stance, thicke, clammy and tough, (called of the Latines Comosis, and of the Greekes Mi∣tys,) especially from Elmes, Willowes, Canes or Reedes, yea euen from stones; and this they lay for the first foundation of their worke, so couering it all ouer as with a hard crust at first, bringing to it afterwardes another layer of Pissocera, which is a kinde of iuyce of Waxe and Pitch, made with Gumme and Rosin, and ouer that againe they lay Propolis, which we call Bee-glew. In this same three-fold tilie, and sure ground-worke thus artificially begunne, they doe not onely laugh to scorne, iest at, and mocke the eyes of the ouer-curious spectators of their Common-wealth and workes, but that which no man considers, they doe heere∣by defend both themselues and theirs, against raine, cold, small vermin and beasts, and all their enemies. Then after this they build their Combes, with such an Architectonicall prudence, that Archimedes in respect of them seemes to be no body. For first of all they set vp the cells of their Kings and Princes, in the higher place of the hony-combes, beeing large, fayre, sumptuous, stately and loftie, beeing cunningly wrought, of the most tryed, purest, & refined Waxe, trenching them round for the greater defence of the regall Ma∣iestie, with mound and enclosure, as it were with a strong Wall, Bulwarke, or Ram∣pire. And as Bees in regard of their age and condition, are of three sorts, so likewise doe they deuide their Cells: for to the most auncient they appoint houses next to the Court, (as those that are the fittest to be of his priuie counsaile, & garders of his person) next to these are placed the young Bees, and those that be but one yeere old. And they of middle yeres and stronger bodies, are lodged in the vttermost roomes, as those that are fittest and best able to fight for their King and country. Yet Aristotle saith, that Bees in the making of their Tents or Cells, doe first of all prouide for themselues, and next for their King & his Nephewes, and lastlie for the Drones. And as in the fabricature of their hony-combes, they make the fashion according to the magnitude and figure of the place, fashioning it either orbicular, long, square, sword-like, or foote-like, &c. according to their owne li∣king, running out sometimes in length eyght foote: so their little Cells contrariwise, are framed after a certaine forme in a Geometricall proportion and measure; for by rule they are iustly Sexangular, and capable enough to hold the tenant. The whole combe containeth foure orders of Celles; The first the Bees occupie; the next the Drones possesse; the third, those that are called of the Greekes Chadoones, of the Latines, Apum soboles, (call them if you please Schadones.) The last is appointed for the roome of hony making. There be some who constantly auerre, that the Drones do make combes in the same hiue the labouring Bees doe, but that they lacke the skill and power of mellification, it beeing vncertaine whether this comes to passe either through theyr grossnes and bigbellied fatnes, or through their setled & naturall lazines. And if through the weightines of the honie the combes beginne to shake and wagge, and to leane & bend as though they were readie to fall, then doe they reare them vp, and vnderproppe them with pillars made archwise, that they may the more readilie dispatch their businesse, and execute their charges, (for it is necessarie that to euery combe there be a ready way.) In some places, as in Pontus, and in the Cittie of Amisus, Bees make white hony, with∣out any combes at all, but this is sildome seene. And if a man would consider the rare and admirable contexture and fabricke of their honie-combes, farre excelling all humane Art and conceit, who would not subscribe with the Poet, Esse Apibus partem diuinae mentis, et haustus aethereos? who will deny them (I say) either imagination, fantasie, iudgement, memorie, and some certaine glimse of reason? But I will not dispute of this, neither am I of Pythagoras mind, who conceited that the soules of wise men, and of other ingenious creatures, departed into Bees. But whosoeuer will diligently examine how they deuide their labours, as some to make vppe the combes, some to gather hony, to heape together their meate, to trimme and dresse vp the houses, to clense the common draught, to vnder∣shore the ruinous walls, to couer those places wherein any thing is to be kept, to draw out the very strength of the hony, to disgest it, to carry it to their Cells, to bring water to the thirstie labourers, to giue foode at set and appointed howres to the old Bees that sitte, to defend their King with such ouer-sight and painefull regard, to driue away Spyders, and all other enemies, to carry forth the dead, (that no stinke or ill sauour hurt,) euery one to know and goe to his owne proper cell, and generally, all of them not to stray farre from home to seeke their liuing; and when the flowers are spent neere their lodgings, to send out their espialls to looke for more in places further distant, to lye with their faces vpward vnder the leaues when they haue set foorth any voiage by night, least their wings beeing much moistened by the dew, they should come tardie home the next day, to ballance and peize their light bodies with carrying a stone in stormie weather, and when there is anie whirlewind, to fly on the further side of the hedge, for feare least either they might be di∣sturbed, or beaten downe by the boisterous violence thereof. Whosoeuer (I say) wil du∣lie consider all this, must needes confesse, that they obserue a wonderfull order and forme in their Common-wealth and gouernment, & that they are of a very strange nature and spirit. I had almost omitted to speake of that naturall loue which they beare to theyr young, a great vertue, and sildome seene in the parents of this age. For Bees doe sitte vpon theyr combes (when they haue laid their increase) almost like vnto birds, neither wil they stirre from thence but in case of pinching hunger, returning out of hand to their breeding place againe, as though they were afeard least that by any long stay and absence, the vvorke of their little cell might be couered ouer by some Spyders web (which often happeneth) or the young by taking cold might be endangered. Their young ones be not very nice or tender, nor cockeringly brought vp, for being but bare three dayes old, as soone as euer they begin to haue wings, they enioyne them their taske, & haue an eye to thē that they be not idle, though neuer so little. They are so excellent in diuination, that they euen feele afore-hand, and haue a sence of taine and cold that is to come, for then (euen by Natures instinct) they fly not far from home: and when they take their iourney to seeke for theyr repast, (which is neuer done at any set and ordinary time, but onely in faire weather) they take paines continually and diligently without any stay, beeing laden with such plentie of hony, that oftentimes being ouer-wearied, they faint in their returne to their own priuate cotages, not beeing able to attaine them. And because some of them in regard of their roughnes are vnfit to labour, by rubbing their bodies against stones and other hard mat∣ter they are smoothed, afterwards addressing themselues most stourly to their businesse. The younger sort bestirre thē right doutelie without dores, bringing to the hiue all that is needfull. The elder looke to the family, placing in due order that hony which is gathe∣red and wrought by the middle-aged Bees. In the morning they be all very silent, till one of them awaken all the rest with his thrise humming noyse, euery one bustling himselfe a∣bout his owne proper office and charge. Returning at night, they are as it were in an vp∣roare at the first, and after that, they make a little muttering or murmuring among them∣selues, vntill the principall officer appointed for setting of the watch, by his flying round about, and his soft and gentle noyse, dooth as it were couertly and priuily charge them in their kings name to prepare themselues to rest; and so this token being giuen, they are as silent as fishes, so that laying ones are to the mouth of the hiue, you shall hardly perceiue any the least noyse at all: so dutifull they are to their Kings, officers and rulers, reposing themselues wholie in his bookes, fauour and pleasure! And now I will intreate of theyr excellencie and vse. Whereas the Almightie hath ared all things for the vse & seruice of , so especi∣ally The vses of Bees. among the rest hath he made Bees, not onely that they should be v vs patternes and presidents of politicall and oeconomicall vertues, (of the which before I haue discour∣sed) but euen Teachers and Schoolemaisters instructing vs in certain diuine knowledge, and like extraordinary prophets, premonstrating the successe & e ent of things to come. For in the yeeres 90. 98. 113. 208. before the birth of our blessed Sauiour, vvhen as great swarmes of Bees lighted in the publique and oxe-market, vpon houses of priuate Cit∣tizens, and the Chappell of Mars, many conspiracies and tr ons were intended against the state at Rome, with which the common-wealth was well-nigh deceiued, insnared, yea and ouerthrowne. In the dayes of Seuerus the Emperour, Bees made their combes in the Ensignes, banners and standerds of the souldiers, and most of all in the campe of Ni∣ger, after which ensued diuers conflicts betwixt the Armies of Seuerus & Niger, Fortune for a time imparting her fauours equally to them both, but at length Seuerus side carried away the bucklers. Swarmes of Bees also filled the Statuaes which were set vp in al Hetru∣ria, representing Antonius Pius, and after that they fell in the campe of Cassius, and what hurly burlies after that followed, Iulius Capitolinus will resolue you. At which time also a great number of Romans were intrapped and slaine by an ambush of Germaines in Ger∣many, P: Fabius and Q: Elius beeing Consuls. It is written that a swarme lighted in the tent of Hostilius Rutilus, who was in the Army of Drusus, and did there hang after such a maner, as they did enclose round his speare which was fastened to his pauilion, as if it had beene a rope hanging downe, M: Lepidus and Munatius Plancus beeing Consuls. Also in the consulship of L: Paulus and Caius Metellus, a swarme of Bees flying vp and downe, pre∣signified the enemy at hand, as the Soothsayers well diuined. Pompey likewise warring a∣gainst Caesar, when for the pleasuring of his friends he had set his Army in aray, going out of Pyrrhaciū, Bees met with him, & darkened e en the very ancients with their great mul∣titude. We read in the histories of the Heluetians, how that in the yere of our Lord God 1385. when Leopold of Austrich prepared to goe against Sempach with an host of men, be∣ing yet in his iourny, a swarme of Bees fled to the towne, and there rested vpon a certaine great tree called Tilia: wherevpon the vulgar sort rightly fore-told the comming of some strange people to them. So likewise Virgill in the 7. booke of his Aeneades, seemeth to de∣scribe the comming of Aeneas into Italy after this manner. —Lauri Huius Apes summum densae (mirabile dictu) Stridore Nigenti liquidum trans aethera vectae Obsedere api em et pedibus per mutua nexis Examen subitò ramo frondente pependit, Continuò vates: externum cernimus (inquit) Aduenture virum. that is, A tale of wonder to be told, there came a swarme of Bees, Which with great noyse within the ayre a Bay-tree did attayne, Where leg in leg they cleaped fast, and top of all degrees O're-spread, and suddenly a hiue of them remaind There hanging downe: whereat the Prophet said, Some stranger heere shall come to make vs all afraid. Which thing also Herodotus, Pausanias, and diuers other Historiographers, haue with greater obseruation then reason confirmed. Laon Acraephniensis, when he could not finde the Oracle of Trophonius, by a swarme flying thither hee found the place. In like sort, the Nurses being absent, Iupiter Melitaus, Hiero the Siracussan, Plato, Pindarus, & Ambrosius, were nourished by hony, which Bees by little and little put in their mouthes, as Plutarch, Pausanias, and Textor are Authors. Zenophon likewise in his Oeconomicks, termeth hony-making the shop of vertues, and to it sendeth mothers of housholds to be instructed. Po∣ets gladly compare themselues with Bees, who following Nature onely as a Schoole-mi∣stres, vseth no Art. So Plato saith, that Poets ruled by Art, can neuer performe any nota∣ble matter. And for the same reason Pindarus maketh his brags, that hee was superiour to Bacchilides, and Simonides, hauing onely Nature, not Art to his friend. Bees vnlesse they be incensed to anger, doe no hurt at all, but being prouoked & stirred vp they sting most sharply: and such is he disposition and naturall inclination of Poets; and therefore in his Minoe strictly enioyne , that those who loue their owne quiet, must take great heed that they make no wars ythe with Poets or Bees. Finally, they haue so many vertues which we may imitate, that ▪ Egyptians, Chaldaeans & Graecians, haue taken diuers Hiero∣glyphicks from them. A hee that will read ouer Pierius, shall there finde store of Em∣blemes of them. The Country people in like manner haue learned of them Aeromantie, that is, diuina∣tion of thinges by the ayre, for they haue a fore-feeling and vnderstanding of raine and windes afore-hand, and doe rightly prognosticate of stormes and foule weather; So that then, they flye not farre from their owne homes, but sustaine themselues with their owne hony-suck alreadie prouided. Which beeing true, we must then thinke it no strange mat∣ter, that Aristaeus, Philistius, Aristomachus Solensis, Menus the Samnite, and sixe hundred others, that haue writ of the Nature of Bees, bidding adue to all those pleasures and deli∣cacies that are found in Citties, for fyftie and eyght yeeres space together, inhabited the woods and fieldes, that they might more exactly come to the knowledge of their order of liuing, and naturall dispositions, leauing it as a monument for posteritie to imitate. But what theyr bodies doe worke in ours, I iudge woorth the labour and paines taking to let you vnderstand, that we may be assured there is nothing in Bees, but maketh to the fur∣therance of our health and good. First therefore, their bodies beeing taken newly from the hiues and bruised, & drunke Medicinall vses. with some diareticall wine, cureth mightily the Dropsie, breaketh the stone, openeth the obstructed passages of the vrine, and helpeth the suppression thereof. Beeing bruised, they cure the wringings and grypings of the belly, if they be layd vpon the place affected: and if any haue drunke any poysonous hony, Bees being likewise drunke doe expell the same. They mollifie hard vlcers in the lippes, and beeing bound to the part, they cure a carbun∣cle and the Bloody-flixe, amending also the cruditie of the stomack, and all spots & flecks in the face, beeing tempered with their owne made hony; as both Hollerius, Alexander, Benedictus and Pliny haue written. Galen affirmeth, that if you take liue Bees out of their combes, and mixe them with ho∣nie wherin Bees haue beene found dead, you shall make an excellent oyntment to be vsed against the shedding and falling of the hayre in any place of the head, causing it to growe againe, and come afresh. Pliny againe willeth vs to burne many Bees, commixing the ashes with oyle, and there-with to annoynt the bald places; but wee must (saith he) take great heede that we touch no other place neere adioyning. Yea he affirmeth, that Honie wherein is found dead Bees, is a very wholsome medicine, seruing for all diseases. Erotis cap: 61. De morb: muliebrib. commendeth highly the ashes of Bees beaten and tempered with oyle, for the dealbation of the hayre. Bees also are very profitable, because diuers liuing creatures are nourished by, and doe feede full sauerly on their hony, as the Beare, the Badger or Brocke, Lizards, Frogges, ser∣pents, the Woodpecker or Eate-bee, Swallowes, Lapwings, the little Titmouse, which of some is called a Nunne, because his head is filletted as it were Nun-like, the Robin-red∣breast, Spyders and Waspes, as Bellonius hath well obserued. But to what end (you will say) serueth their sting, against whose poyson Pliny knew no remedie? I must needes confesse truly that which cannot be denied, that the stings of Bees are sometimes venomous, but that is when eyther they are madde and raging, and be ex∣ceedingly disquieted by meanes of anger, or some vehement Feauer, for otherwise they doe not sting, but pricke but a little: and therefore Dioscorides neuer made mention of the stinging of Bees, supposing it very vnmeete for a man to complaine of so small a matter as the sting of a silly Bee. But yet they that haue succeeded him, haue obserued paine, rednes, and swellings, as companions and effects of their malice, especially if the sting doe sticke in the flesh, which if it doe very deepe, then death hath sometimes followed, as Ni∣cander writeth in his Theriacis. In like manner the people of the old World (that vvee may proue the sting of Bees to be conuerted to some good vse) did (as Suidas writeth) pu∣nish those persons who were found guilty of coosenage, and deceitfull counterfeiting of merchandise after this sort: First they stripped the offender starke naked, annointing his body all ouer with hony, then setting him in the open sunne with his hands and feete fast bound, that by this meanes beeing tormented with flyes, Bees, and scorching beames of the sunne, he might endure punishment, paine & death, due to his lewd and wicked life. With which kind of punishment & torture, the Spanyards doe grieuously vex the poore naked Ilanders of America at this day, (now called the West Indies) who are vnder their rule and gouernment, not for iustice sake, (as those Auncients did) but for satisfaction and fulfilling of their barbarous wills, and beastly tyrannie, that they might seeme to be more cruell, then crueltie it selfe. Noninus saith, that if the herbe Balme (called Apiastrum) be beaten, and annoynted with oyle vppon the stinged place, that there will ensue no hurt thereby. Florentius coun∣selleth the gatherer of hony, to annoynt himselfe with the iuyce of Marsh-mallowes, for by that meanes he may safely and without feare take away the Combes. But the iuyce of any Mallow vvill doe as much, and especially if it be mixed with Oyle: for it both preser∣ueth from stinging, and besides it remedieth the stinged. But admit that Bees by theyr stinging doe vexe and disease vs, yet notwithstanding the dead Bees so found in the hony, doe speedily bring cure to that hurt, if they be duly applyed, abating and taking away all the paine and poyson. What should I say? No creature is so profitable, none lesse sump∣tuous. GOD hath created them, and a little money and cost will maintaine them, and small prouision will content them. They liue almost in all places, yea euen in Forrests, Woods and Mountaines; both rich and poore by their good husbandry do gather good customes and pensions by them, they paying (as all men know) very large rents for their dwelling houses; and yet for all their tribute they pay, a man need neither keepe one ser∣uaunt the more for the gathering of it, nor set on pot the oftner. Merula saith, that Varro gathered yeerely fiue thousand pound weight of Hony: and that in a small Village of Spaine, not exceeding one Akre of ground, he was wont to gaine by Honie there gathe∣red, tenne thousand Sesterties, which is of our English coyne about fiftie pounds. Wee are furnished also out of their vvork-houses or shops, with vvaxe, Sandaracha, Bee-glevv, combes, and dregges of waxe, which no Common-wealth can well spare. To speake no∣thing of the examples of their vertues and noble properties, being no lesse wholsome for the soule, then these others are for the good prouision and maintenaunce of our life, and for nourishment of our bodies necessary and commodious. Now for the conseruation of Bees, it is very meete (as Pliny writeth) that we come by them lawfully, & by honest meanes, that is, eyther by gift, or by buying of them, for be∣ing taken away by theft, they will not prosper with vs: euen as the herbe called Rew bee∣ing stolne, will very hardly or neuer grow. Furthermore, to keepe these good Pay-mai∣sters, and to make them in loue with you, you must remoue from their Hiues mouthes, vnluckie, mischieuous, and deceitfull people, and idle persons that haue nothing to doe, causing them to stand further off: As also all those that are distayned with whoredome, or infected with the disease called Gonorrhaea, or the fluxe of menstrues, bathes, or anie thing that smelleth of smoake, mud, dung, or ordure of cattell, men or beasts, houses of of∣fice, sincks, or kitchens. Mundifie & correct the ayre oftentimes, infected with the breath and vapour of Toades and Serpents, by burning of Balme, Time, or Fennell; hauing great care to keepe them neate, cleane and quiet. Destroy all vermine and seekers to prey vpon their Hony, robbers, pillers and pollers, and if at any time they be sicke, giue them Phisicke. Nowe the signes of their vnhealthines, as of all other liuing creatures, are knowne by three things; that is, from the action offended, the outward affect of the body, and excre∣ments. For their cheerefulnesse beeing gone, sluggish dullnes, a giddy and vertiginous pace, often and idle standing before the mouth of the Hiue, lacke of strength, wearinesse, lithernesse, languishing, and want of spirit to doe any busines, detestation of flowers and Honie, long watchings, and continuall sleepings, vnaccustomed noyses and hummings, are sure arguments that Bees are not in good health. As also if they be some-what rough, not fine and trimme, dry and vnpleasant in handling, not soft, harsh and rugged, not de∣licate and tender, if their combes be infected with any manner of filthy, corrupt, and noy∣some sauour, and that theyr excrements melt, stinke, and be full of vvormes, carrying dead carkasses daily out of their houses, that they haue no regard to theyr Bees and Bee∣hiues, it is a certaine token that they are sicke, and that some exidemicall, generall pesti∣lence or plague rageth amongst them, whereof that famous Poet Virgill hath very ele∣gantlie, but confusedly touched some part, in the fourth Booke of his Georgickes, in these following verses. Si verò (quoniam lapsus Apibus quo{que} nostres Vita tulit) tristi languebunt corpora morbo, Illud non dubijs poteris cognoscere signis. Continuò est agris alius color, horrida vultum Deformat macies, tum corpora luce carentum Exportant tectis, et tristia funera ducunt. Aut illae pedibus connexae ad limina pendent, Aut intus clausis cunctantur in adibus omnes, Ignauae{que} fame, et contracto frigore pigrae Tum sonus auditur grauior, tractim{que} susurrant. Frigidus vt quando siluis immurmurat auster, Vt mare solicitum stridet refluentibus vndis, Aestuat aut clausis rapidus fornacibus ignis. In English thus; The life of Bees is subiect vnto fall, Theyr bodies languish with diseases sad: This by vndoubted signes discerne you shall, Their bodie's then with other colour is clad. A leanenesse rough doth then deforme their face, Then doth the liuing bring dead bodyes out, And for theyr fellowes make a funerall place, Mourning sad exequies theyr dwellings all about. Or els with feete in feete they hang vpon The threshold of their Hiue, or els abide Close within dores, not looking on the sunne Till sloth by cold and famine theyr life vppe dryde: Then also is their sound and voyce more great, Drawing soft, like Southerne wind in woods, Or fire enclosed in burning furnace heate, Or as int' Seafalls backe the flyding floods. And so the sicknesses of Bees beeing euidently knowne, plainly perceiued and cured, they will liue many yeeres, although Aristotle, Theophrastus, Pliny, Virgill, Varro, Colu∣mella, Cardan, and finally all Authors, would make vs beleeue that they ldome attaine to nine yeeres, but neuer to tenne. Although we know by good experience, knowledge of place, and the credible attestation of men worthy beliefe, that they haue liued 30. yeares. Which onely reason hath induced me to belieue, that Bees (euen by Natures appoynt∣ment) are long liued, and that onely with Albertus I onely doubt, whether they dye by meanes of old age. I am not ignorant how they are made away with the rage and violence of diseases, and other enemies, but if they haue all things furnished fit for the preseruation of their life, & prolongation of health, and the contrary farre from them, I knowe no reason but that I should conclude them long liued, yea more durable then any other liuing creature, and neuer to dye, but that I may not deny their time and turne to be mortall. For they onelie doe feede vpon hony, that immortall Nectar, sent from heauen, and gathered from a di∣uine dew (the very life and soule of all herbes, fruites, trees and plants.) Of whose nature, vse, and excellencie, if you would know more, I must referre you to the learned writings of Phisitions. ❧ Of Bees called Drones and THEEVES. A Drone or a Dran in English, is of the Latines called Fucus, of the Greekes Kephen, and Thronaz. Of the Illirians Czeno, of The names. the Germans Traen. Of the Belgies Besonder strael. Of the Spaniards Zangano. Of the Italians Ape che non famele. Of the French Baradon, and Fullon. Of the Pannonians (novv called Hungarians) Here. Of the Polonians Czezew. This kind of Bee is called Fucus, as some thinke Quasifur, because he doth furtim mella deuocare, deuour Honny by stealth: al∣though it be more agreeable to truth, that it is tearmed Fu∣cus, because he doth Apibus fucum fraudemque facere: And through the colour and pretence of keeping warme the Hiues, he spendeth their stocke, and vndo all their hony-making. And therefore for some to deriue Fucus the Latin word, from Phagomai the Greeke, seemeth to be farre fetched: Some againe will draw Fucus, à fouendo, quia incubando apum iuuant faeturas, and this in my minde is as harsh as the for∣mer. Many men make the Drone to be one of the 4. sorts of Bees, which is very vnaduisedly doone, as some would make vs beleeue: Because they bestow no paines in gathering the The descrip∣tion. Hony, nor labour it throughly to haue it perfectly wrought. He is twice so great as the common Bee, and greater then the Theefe, so that in bignesse he eueneth, yea, surpasseth the King himselfe: and yet he attaineth vnto this greatnesse, not by the gift of Nature, but by his custome and trade of life. For whereas Bees doe prepare and make their celles for the breeding of Drones: they make them lesser then the Drones, and not heere and there through the Hiue, but onely in the vttermost, and as it were in the banished or most out-cast place of all in the whole Camp and lodged Army. Besides, the small Wormes of the Drones, are far smaller at their first bringing forth, then those that are of the kingly race, and linage of their Dukes: Who yet at length grow greater then any of them all, in regard that by labour and trauaile, they wast and diminish nothing of superfluous mat∣ter, and those grosse humours, wherewith they abound, as also that both day and night (like Oxen lying at racke and Manger) they gluttonously rauen & stuffe themselues with the hony-liquor, which they againe pay for full dearely, in time of any general dearth and scarsity of vittaile and prouision. Further this is to be added, that the Drone is of a more shining black colour, then the true labouring Bee, he is also greater then the greatest, without sting, sluggish, idle, sloth∣full, without hart or courage, cowardous and vnapt to war, not daring to venture life & limbe in manly Martiall trade, as the true Ligitimate Bees will. Aristotle saith, that they breed and liue amongest the true Bees, and when they flye a∣broad, they are carryed scatteringly, here and there aloft in the aire as it were, with some violence or tempest; so exercising themselues for a time, they returne from whence they came, ther greedily feeding vpon the hony. Now why the droues may be compared with the Dukes and Princes, in respect of their corporature, and Bees like vnto them in theyr sting, let vs heare Aristotles reason. Nature would (saith he) there should be some diffe∣rence, least alwaies the same stock should encrease one of another confusedly, without or∣der or consideration, which is impossible: For so the whole stocke would either be dukes or Drones. And therefore the true Bees in strength and power of engendering and bree-ding, are comparable to their Dukes, and the Drones onely in greatnesse of body resem∣ble them: to whom if you allow a sting, you shall make him a Duke. These Drones fur∣ther of the Graecians are called Cothouroi, because he putteth not forth any sting: where∣of Arist. l. 3. de∣ ener. Anim. c. 0. Hesiodus hath these verses thus interpreted; Hinc vero Dij succenset & homines, quicunque ociasus; Viuat, fucis ac aleo-carentibus similis studio, Qui apuni laborem absumunt ociosi Vorantes. In English thus; Both God and men, disdaine that man VVhich Drone like in the hiue, Nor good, nor ill, endeuour can Vpon himselfe to liue, But idle is, and without sting, And grieues the labouring Bee Deuouring that which he home brings, Not yeelding help or fee. So that either he hath no sting at all, or else maketh no vse of it for reuengement. Pli∣ny saith flatly, that they are stinglesse, and would haue them called imperfect Bees, & the famous Poet Virgill stileth them, Ignauumpecus: that is, idle and vnprofitable, good for nothing. Columella maketh them a race or stocke of a larger size, very like vnto Bees, and accounteth them very aptly to be placed in the ranke of ordinary sorts of Creatures, of the same kinde and company with Bees. They suffer punnishment, and are scourged many times in the whole Bee-common-wealth, not onely for pretence of idlenesse, gluttony, ex∣tertion, and rauenous greedinesse, to which they are too much adicted; but because lack∣ing their sting, and by that defect, being as is were emaculated, they dare shew themselues in publique. Pliny doth not expresse their nature and quality. The Drones are stinglesse, and so to be reckoned imperfect Bees, and of the basest sort, taking their originall from tyred and worne-out Bees, and such as be past labour and seruice, liuing onely vpon a bare pension we may call them the very slaues and bond-men of the true Bees, to whom they owe all due homage and subiection, wherefore they exercise their authority ouer them, thru∣sting them first out of doores by head and shoulders, like a company of drudges to theyr worke; and if they be any thing negligent, not bestirring themselues quickly and liuely, they giue them correction, and punnish them without all pitty and mercy. For in the moneth of Iune, two or three Bees, (especially of the younger sort) will hale out of the Hiue one Drone, there beating of him with there winges, pricking and tormenting him with their stinges, and if he offer any resistance to their Lordly rule, then they violently cast him downe from the shelfe or step whereon he holdeth, down to the earth as though they would breake his necke. Thus when they haue glutted their wils, and punished him at the full, they at length put him to a shamefull death, all which we haue often beheld, not without great admiration and pleasure. Sometimes the Drones remaine like banished persons, before the enterance of the hiue, and dare not venture to presse in. For three causes specially the Bees do driue and cast out the drones: either when they multiply aboue measure, or when they haue not place y∣nough left for their labourers, or that they be pinched with hunger and famine, for lacke of Hony. And as they carry a deadly hatred against the Drones, so to make it more ap∣parant, they will not hurt such persons as offer either to take away with their bare handes any of the drones, and to cast them away, yea, though they be in the greatest heat of their fight. Aristotle in his ninth Booke De histo. Animal. Cap. 40. affirmeth, that Bees are engendered apart one from another, if their Captaine liueth: but in case their King and Captaine dies, some say they breed in the Bees celles, and that of all others of this kinde, they are the most noble and couragious. The young drones are bred without any King, but the true younger Bees neuer: for they deriue their originall and petigree from the kingly stocke. Some will say that the Their genera∣tion. young drones doe fetch their originall from the flowers of the Herbe Cerinthe (descri∣bed by Pliny, which is a kind of Hony suckle, hauing the tast of the Hony and Waxe to∣gether) from the Oliue tree and Reede; but this opinion is weakely grounded, and stan∣deth vpon small reason. Aristotle affirmeth, that they proceede from the longer and bigger Bees, yea, and those that are tearmed Thieues: which without question he receiued either from the Auncient Philosophers, or some others that had the charge and were skilfull of ordering Honny, that liued in his time. Some will haue them to breed and come from putrifaction, as Isi∣dore from stinking and putrified Mules: Cardan frō Asses, Plutarke and Seruius from Hor∣ses. Othersome are of opinion, that they first proceede of Bees, and that afterwards they degenerate bastardlike from them, after they haue lost their stings, for then they become Drones: neither are they afterwardes knowne to gather any Honny, but being as it were depriued of their strength, they grow effeminate, ceasing either to hurt, or to do any good at all. Some againe hold the contrary side, assuring vs vppon their knowledge, that the true labouring Bee fetcheth his beginning from the Drone, because long experience (the Mai∣sters of wisedome) hath taught vs, that there is yearely knowne to be the greater swarme, when there is the greater multitude of Drones. But this to me seemeth rather the de∣uise and inuention of some curious braine, then any true grounded reason. For because that many Drones breede (as it commeth alwaies to passe in good and plentifull yeares) therefore there should be greater Swarmes is no good consequent: but contrariwise, be∣cause the multitude of Bees do greatly increase through the moderatenes of the pure aire, and the plenty of the Hony-dropping dew, and through the aboundance of this milliflu∣ous moysture, there must needs follow a greater foison and store of drones: as the Philo∣sopher hath well obserued. But admit that this be true, that whereas there is the greater encrease of drones, there should yearly ensue the more swarmings: yet must we not ther∣vpon conclude, that Bees do owe, and ought to ascribe their first originall from Drones, but rather that they are indebted and bound in honesty to the drones, because in time of breeding, they giue much warmth and comfort to their young (as Pliny lib. 11. c. 11. saith) conferring vppon them a liuely heat, fit for their encrease and prospering. Some deuide them into male and female, and that by coupling together they make a propagation of their kind, although (as Athenaeus writeth) neither drones nor Bees were euer yet seen of any one to couple together. But whereas Waspes, Hornets, and other Cut-wasted creatures that make any combs and breed in the same, haue beene sometimes (though seldome) seene, both by vs and A∣ristotle, to ioyne together, I can surely see no cause why we should vtterly take from them the vse of Venus, though in that respect they be very modest and moderate. I haue before in the discourse of their generation said, that the Bees do make the male kind, and the Drones to be but the female; but sith that in the time of Hony-making, they punnish them so sharply after they haue eiected them from possession first, so that after∣wards they put them to death, I can hardly be enduced to beleeue that the drones are but the female kind, considering that one thing would ecclipse and ouercast all those resplen∣dant vertues which all men know to be in Bees, to deale thus cruelly with their Parents. To what vse therefore serue they in hiues? Seeing Virgill in the fourth booke of his Geor∣giks thus describeth them; Immunisque sedens aliena ad pabula fucus. That is to say; The Drone as free and bold doth sit, And wast of others food commit. Where Festus taketh Immunis, for lazy, idle, vnseruiceable, vnprofitable, and such as are nothing worth, except perchance after the guise of wicked men, they so serue theyr owne turnes, as to liue by the sweat of other mens labours, and to bring out of order, or vtterly seeke to ouerthrow the whole frame of the common wealth. But the most approoued Authors set downe diuers good vses of drones. For if there Their vses. be but a few of them among the Bees; they make them the more carefull about their af∣faires, and to looke more duely to their taske: not by their good example, (for they liue in continuall idlenesse) but because they might continue their liberality towardes stran∣gers, they worke the more carefully in their Honnie-shoppe. And (if Bartholemaeus doe not deceiue vs) these Drones bee not altogether idle: but they imploie themselues about the building of the Kings House, which they make large, stately, and very sumptuous in the higher and middle part of the Combes, being very faire to see too in respect of their couering. So then they are but lazie, in respect of Hony-making and gathering: but if you looke toward their Art or science of building, they are to be accounted excellent deuisers of the frame and chiefe Maisters of the whole worke. For as the Bees do fashion out the combs of the Drones nigh the Kings Pallace: so againe, for the like counterchange of kindnes, the Drones are the sole inuentors, and principall work-maisters of the Kinges Court; for which cause both they and their of-spring, kinsfolkes, and friends, (if they haue any) are bountifully rewarded of the whole stocke of Bees, by giuing them franckly & freely their diet and maintenance which costeth them nothing. The Lockers or holes of the vp-growne Bees, are somewhat to large, if you respect the quantity of their bodies, but their combes lesser, for those they build themselues, & these other are made by the Bees, because it was not thought cōuenient and indifferent, so great a portion of meat to be giuen to such vile labourers and hirelings, as was due to their own Sons and Daughters, and those that are naturally subiects. Tzetzes, and some other Greekes doe besides affirme, that the Drones are the Bees Butlers or Porters to carry them water, ascribing moreouer to them a gentle and kindly heat, with which they are said to keepe warme, cherish and nourish the young breede of the Bees; by this meanes as it were, quickning them, and adding to them both life and strength. The same affirmeth Columella in these wordes. The Drones further much the Bees for the procreation of their issue, for they sitting vpon their kind or generation, the Bees are shaped and attaine to their figure, and therefore for the maintenaunce, education, and de∣fence of a new yssue, they receiue the more friendly entertainement. And Pliny lib. 11. c. 11. differeth not from him. For not onely they are great helpers to the Bees in any ar∣chitectonicall or cunning deuised frame (as hee saith) but also they doe good in helping and succouring their young, by giuing them much warmth and kindly heat, vvhich the greater it is (vnlesse there be some lacke of Hony in the meane space) the greater will the swarme be. In summe, except they should stand the Bees in some good stead, the Almighty would neuer haue enclosed them both in one house, and as it were made them freemen of the same Citty. Neither doubtlesse would the Bees by maine force violently breake in vpon them, as being the Sworne and professed enemies of their common-wealth, except when their slauish multitude being to much encreased, they might feare some violence or rebel∣lion, or for lacke of prouision: at which time who seeth not, that it were farre better the Maister Worke-men, free Masons, and Carpenters might bee spared, then the true la∣bouring Husbandman, and tiller of the Eearth? Especially since that missing these, our life is endangered for lacke of meate, and other necessaries, and those other for a time we may very well spare without our vndoing, and for a need, euery one may build his ovvne lodging. But as they be profitable members, not exceeding a stinted and certaine num∣ber, so if they be to many, they bring a sicknesse called the Hiue-euill, as well because they consume the food of the hony-making Bees, as for that in regard of their extreame heat, they choke and suffocate them. This disease is by the Authour of Geoponicon thus remedyed. Moysten with Wa∣ter inwardly the lidde or couering of their Hiue, and earely in the Morning opening it, you shall finde Drones sitting on the droppes that are on the couers, for beeing glutted with Honny, they are exceeding thirstie, and by that meanes they vvill sticke fast to the moyst and Devvie places of the Couer: So that vvith small adoe, you may either destroye them quite, or else if you please, take away what number you list your selfe. And if you will take away withall their young, who are not yet winged, and first pulling off their heades throw them among the other Bees, you shall bestow on them a very welcome dinner. But what the dreaning of Drones portended, and what matter they Minister in the Hieroglyphicall Art, let Apomasueris reueale and disclose out of the Schooles of the Egyptians and Persians. I thinke I haue discharged my duety, if I haue set dovvne their true Vses, true Nature, generation, degeneration, description, and names. Fur in Latine, or Theefe in English, is by Aristotle called Phoor, of Hesychius Phoorios: from whence I take the Latine word Fur to be deriued. Some haue thought that theeues Of Bees cal∣led theeues. are one proper sort of Bees, although they be very great, and blacke, hauing a larger bel∣lie or Bulke then the true Bee, and yet lesser then the Drones, they haue purchased this theeuish name, because they doe by theft and robbery deuoure Honny, belonging to others, and not to them. The Bees do easily endure, and can well away with the presence of the drones, and do as it were greete and bid one another welcome, but the Theeues they cannot endure, in regard that the Bees do naturally hate them, for in their absence the Theeues priuily and by stealth creepe in, there robbing and consuming their treasure of Honny, so greedily and hastily (without chewing) swallowing it downe, that beeing met withall by the true Bees in their returne homewards, & found so vnweildy by means of their fulnesse, that they cannot get away, nor be able to resist, but are ready to burst a∣gaine, they are seuerely punnished, and for their demerites by true Iustice put to death. Neither thus onely do they prodigally consume & spend the Bees meate, but also priuilie breed in their celles, whereby it often commeth to passe, that there are as many drones & Theeues, as true and lawfull Bees. These neither gather Hony, nor build houses, nor help to beare out any mutuall labor with Bees: for which cause they haue Watch-men or Warders appointed to obserue and ouersee by night such as are ouerwearied by taking great and vndefatigable paines in the day time, to secure them from the Theeues and Robbers, who if they perceiue any Theefe to be stolne in a doores, they presently set vppon him, beate, and either kill him outright, or leauing him for halfe dead, they throw him out. Oftentimes also it happe∣neth, that the Theefe being glutted and ouercloyed with Honny, cannot fly away or get himselfe gone in time, but lyeth wallowing before the Hiues entrance, vntill his enemies either in comming forth or returning home do so find him, and so with shame discredit and scoffing-scorne slay him. Aristotle appointeth no office, charge or businesse to the Theefe, but I thinke that he is ordained for this end, that he might be as it were a spur to prick forwards, to whet and Their vses. quicken the courage of the true Bees, when the other offer them any iniury: and to stirre and encourage them to a greater vigilancy, diligence, and doing of right and iustice to e∣uery one particularly. For I cannot see to what other purpose Thieues should serue in a Christian common-wealth, or what vse might be made of such as lie in waight to do dis∣pleasure, and practise by crafty fetches, Ambushes, and deceitfull treacheries, to wound their Neighbours, either in their estimation, credit, or goodes. Thus hauing at large dis∣coursed of the lesse hurtfull and stinging sort of Bees, I will now apply my selfe to a more fumish, testy, angry, Waspish, and implacable genera∣tion, more venemous then the former, I meane Waspes and Hornets. OF VVASPES. A Waspe of the Chaldeans is tearmed Deibrane: Of the Ara∣bians Zambor. Of the English-men a Waspe. Of the Germans Eine VVespe. Of the Belgies Harsel. Of the Gothes Bool Ge∣tingh. D. Bonham. The common people of Italy tearme it Vespa, and some of them do vsually call it Muscone, and the Bononians Vres∣pa. The French Guespe. The Spaniards Abispa, and Vespa imi∣tating the Latines, who call it Vespa. The Polonians Ossa. The Slauonians Woss. The Hungarians Daras. Calepine saith that it is called Vespa, qui vesperi muscas venatur in cibum. The Greekes do also name them diuersly, for commonly they are called Sphekes. The Scholiast of Nicander calleth them Lucospades, and Suidas Dellides, & Delithes. Of Hesychius Auletaj, and Passaleres, and Gaza nicknameth them Authrenaj: for these ought rather to be called Bees. Eustathius deriueth Tous spekas, apo Tes diaspha∣gon, because they seeme to bee so much cut-asunder in the Wast or middle, as that they seeme to gape and to be cleane clouen asunder, as by the figure here set before your eyes you may plainely perceiue. A Waspe is a kinde of insect, that is, swift, liuing in routes and companies together, hauing somewhat a long body encircled, with with foure mem∣branous wings, (where of the two former are the greatest) without bloud, stinged inward∣ly, hauing also sixe feete, and a yellow colour, somewhat glistering like Golde, garnished with diuers blacke spots all ouer the body in forme of a triangle. Whereupon peraduen∣ture Pollio would needs haue it called Diachrusos. The body of a Waspe seemeth to be fastened and tyed together to the middest of the breast, with a certaine thinne fine thred or line, so that by meanes of this disioyned, and not well compacted composition, they seeme very feeble in their loines, or rather to haue none at all. Whereupon Aristophanes the Greeke Poet, in his Comedy, entituled Sphe∣res or Waspes, tearmeth all those Maids which are fine, slender, and pretty small in the wast, Spherodeis, resembling them to Waspes, as if one should call them Waspe-wa∣sted-wenches, whom Terence very quaintly and elegantly tearmeth Iunceas, that is, slen∣der, long, and small, like to a Bulrush. I think that all the whole pack of them haue stings in generall, although I am not ignorant that some Authors hold the contrary, affirming that the breeding female Waspes doe want them: but thus much I can say of my owne knowledge, that on a time finding a Waspes nest, and killing them euery one by pou∣ring hot scalding liquor into their holes, because I would boult out the truth, I plainely perceiued by long viewing of their bodies, that there was not one of them all but hadde a sting, either thrust out euidently, or closely and secretly kept and couered. So that: —Quid nobis certius ipsis Sensibus esse potest, quo era ac falsa notemus. In English thus; What can more certaine be then sence, Discerning truth from false pretence. They make a sound as Bees do, but more fearefull, hideous, terrible, and whisteling, es∣pecially Lucret . when they are prouoked to wrath; from whence Theocritus fetcheth this pro∣uerb, Sphex bomboom tettigos enantion, that is, Scilicet obstrepita s argutae vespa cicadit: and this old said saw may well be applyed to those who being themselues vnlearned, will not sticke to cry out, exclaime, and procure trouble to those that be more learned: or to such In Hoedeporis. as be weake, feeble, and impotent persons able to do nothing, that will offerto contend with their betters and superiors with their brawling speeches, and spitefull raylings. And this latine prouerb carrieth the same sense, Catulus leonem adlatrans. If you will haue the gifts and ornaments of their minds described, you must consider that a Waspe is a creature that liueth in companies together, one with another, subiect to a ciuill gouernment vnder one King or Ruler, industrious, mutuall friendes one to ano∣ther, ingenious, crafty, subtle, quicke, and cunning, of a very quarrelsome nature, and much subiect to anger and testinesse. This is a good Argument of their ciuill and politicall manner of life, in that they liue not solitarily in a desart or Wildernesse where no man keepeth, but they build for themselues a Citty, both excellent and admirable for the notable buildings and houses in it, where they spend their time (for the most part) ac∣cording to the mutable and neuer fayling lawes of Nature, obseruing and keeping euer the Golden meane, as well in their daily taskes, as in their dispositions and affections of mind. Besides, they are gouerned with a kingly, not with a tyrannicall gouernment, (as Aelia∣nus saith) although by nature they are great fighters, eger, bioysterous, and vehemently tempestuous: and he is led to say this, because their Dukes or generals are stinglesse, or rather hauing stings as their Subiects, they will not vse the same to the hurt of their infe∣riors, by thrusting it forth, or striking in passion. Now although they be twice so great, and harder or rougher then the other Waspes, yet are they not vnfurnished of the vertue of patience and clemency, or gentle and debo∣naire behauiour, by which meanes they keepe in order, and containe in their lists, as it were by gentle language, their vnruly rout, and mutinous companies. There is no man but will confesse, that this is an euident token and Argument of their mutuall loue, and great good liking which they bear one to another: for whosoeuer dare be so knack-hardy as to come neere there houses or dwelling places where they haue to do, and to offer any violence or hurt to the same, at the noyse of some one of them, all the whole Swarme rusheth out, being put into an amazed feare, to help their fellow Cittizen, and doe so bu∣sily bestirre themselues about the eares of their molesters, as that they send them away packing with more then an ordinary pase, and if we will credit Aelianus. The Phaselites in times past were constrained to forsake their Citty, for all their defence, munition, and Armour, onely through the multitude, and cruell fiercenesse of the Waspes, wherewith they were anoyed. Againe, this manifestly prooueth, that they want not a harty and fatherly affection, because with more then heroycall courage and inuincible fury, they set vpon all persons, of what degree or quality soeuer, that dare attempt to lye in wait to hurt or destroy theyr young breede, no whit at all dreading Neoptolemus, Pyrrhus, Hector, Achilles, or Aga∣memnon himselfe, the Captaine generall of all the whole Graecians if he were present. Yea the Diuine Poet Homer, in 12. Lib. of his Iliades, when hee would expresse the haughty and generous spirits of the Greekish Chiefetaines, hee likeneth them to Waspes in these wordes, Spekessin ajolois cradien kai Thumon echousaris, that is, hauing the harts and sto∣macks of Waspes, when they are to fight for their priuate dwellings, their deare Proge∣ny & of-spring. The loue that Bees carry to their issue is great, but it canot be greater then that of waspes, neither can they haue a greater promptitude, alacrity, or desire to defend their young ones, if they be any way offended by passengers. Which thing Homer in his Iliads lib. 12. insinuateth by the example of the chasing God Iupiter, who took it maruey∣lous angry, and much repined at the sturdy stomackes of the Graecians, adding that the Greeks did defend themselues as valiantly, and endured the shock and assault of their eni∣mies, as euer Waspes of Bees would in defence of their children or issue: in these verses following; —Non enim ego putaui heroas Achiues Sustentaturos nostrum robur, & manus inuictas Illi autem quasi vespae acres at{que} apes, Quae nidos faciunt ad viam puluerulentam, Neque deserunt cauam domum: sed expectantes, Viros venatores pugnant pro filijs. That is to say; I did not thinke our noble Graetian Lords, could beare Our force, and with vnconquered hands maintaine Our right: but they like Waspes and Bees deuoyde of feare, Which by high-wayes their houses vse to frame, Doe not for sake their hollow dusty homes, What re they be that come to hunt them out: Fighting with valour, (not fearefully like Drones) To rid their young ones both from death and doubt. Besides this, they further builde for them very large dwellings, with Chambers and floores, in a round and orbicular forme, with roomes one aboue another, finely and wit∣tily compacted, so that there is space enough of ingresse and regresse, and very defensible against all windes and weather, and yet their nests or houses, are not all made after one fashion, but very different, some of them representing a Harpe, some made much after the fashion of a Peare, a Toadestole, a Bottle, or budget of Leather, and some like a stan∣ding cuppe with handles. Some affirme, that the matter of theyr Combes is confused, rude, and fauouredlie heaped vppe, full of barke and sand, but I could neuer as yet see it otherwise then light, slender, and thinne like paper, dry, transparent, gummy and thinne, as though it vvere thinne leaues of gold, shaken very easily hither and thither with the wind, and rising ma∣ny times from the foote or foundation very small, and broade aboue like vnto a top. The place of this their building, is thought to be diuers, and much different for some respects. For if they haue lost theyr Duke or principall Leader, then doe they make them nestes of clay in the high holes of walls and hollow Trees; and as some say (although hetherto I ould neuer see it) they make vvaxe there also. But in case they haue a Generall or Duke, then they make their nestes vnder the earth, their Cells or Chambers beeing formed with sixe angles or corners, much like vnto Bees. They make theyr Combes ound, much after the fashion of a broade Toadestoole, from whose centers there goeth forth as it were a short stalke or tying, by which the Combe eleaueth, and is fastened hard to thearth, or some Tree, or peraduenture to some other Combe. They haue such a tender care ouer their females, (especially at such time as they are great with young,) and suffer them so much to haue their owne wills, as they will neither permit them to take any paynes abroade for theyr liuing, nor yet to seeke for their meate at home: But the males flying about, (like good Purueighers,) bring all home to their owne dwellings, thereby as it were strictly enioyning the femalls to keepe theselues within dores. All which fore-cited particulers, if a man would dulie enter into consideration of them, hee must needes confesse, (will hee nill hee) the admirable industry, diligence, wit, pru∣dence, Art, sweat, and labour that is in these poore vermine. Their naturall inclination to anger, and the hastie fumishnesse of Waspes, not onely Cockes, which doe scratch and scrape vppe with their spurres their nests, doe finde implacable, but euen all other distur∣bers and prouokers; From whence (I take it) that prouerbe hath sprung, Sphekian eri∣thizein, which the Latines, as Plautus almost in the same sence vseth, I ritare erabrones: For Crabro among the Poets, is vsed sometimes for a Hornet, and other-whiles for a Waspe. In like manner, Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromaton 2. when he would expresse and de∣clare the foulenesse and abhominable hurt of such sinnes that doe lye in waite, as it were to deceiue, and watch to doe displeasure to the life of man, hath these wordes, Houtoi gar (inquit) oi ant agonist ai pacheis koij Olumpicoi, sphaecon hos eipein eisi drimuterai, kai malist a edone. That is, these fatte, dull, grosse and Olimpicall enemies of ours, are worset then Waspes, more cruell and displeasant, and especially sensuall and worldly pleasure. Yea, whosoeuer dare aduenture to challenge into the fielde this hardie and couragious little creature, hee shall (I dare be bolde to say) but Cadmeam victoriam reportare, loose more then hee shall get, whet his sword against himselfe, and returne home by weeping crosse, considering that besides the noblenes of their stout stomacks, and armed stinges, they are withall so stiffe and obstinate, as that they will neuer giue ouer. They in their first breeding, stocke, sexe, place, feeding, and manner of la∣bour. Isidore sayth, (although perhaps not so trulie) that Waspes doe first proceed from the rotten carkasses of dead Asses: for all holde opinion, that the blacke Flyes called Bee∣tles, doe take their originall from them. But I am rather mooued to thinke, that they were first bredde from the dead bodie of some warlike and fierce Horse, and so also thin∣keth Pliny, in his eleuenth booke & twentith chapter. And the Graecians haue vsually this famous and vulgar verse in their ordinary talke. Hippoimen sphekon genesis, Tauroi de melisson, Equi enim vesparum generatio, Tauri verò Apum. In English thus; Waspes doe first come from Horses, and Bees are bred from Bulls. And surely, their incredible swiftnesse in their flight, their ardent and burning desire they haue to fighting, are sufficient inducements to mooue me to thinke, that they tooke theyr first beginning from some gallant Horse, and not from Asses, Oxen, or Cowes, & much lesse from the fearefull Deere. For dame Nature hath sildome beene so indulgent and friendly to any one beast besides an horse, as to excell both in swiftnes of pace, quick∣nesse of spirit, courage of stomacke, and magnanimity. And I rather leane to this side, because els I doe not know what sence I should giue to that Aristotelean prouerbe: Chairete aellopodoon thugateres ippoon, Saluete volucripedum filiae Equorum: Which may be englished thus; All hayle yee daughters of swift-footed Horses. For besides the truth that lyeth in the bare wordes, I take the morrall of it to be vtte∣red as a wittie checke, or a figuratiue flout, conceitedly to rebuke & hit in the teeth, those shrewd women, curst and scolding wiues, which are so peeuish that they will not be paci∣fied, who are like vnto waspes in their sullen displeasant humours, tempestuous madnes, and pelting chafe. Some waspes doe proceede from the stinking carkasse of a Crocodile, if wee may giue any credite to the Egyptians and their fellowes; and for that cause, when they imagine or thinke a waspe, they paint and draw out the shape and forme of a Crocodile or a Horse. From hence Hierom Cardan would make this collection, that of euery corrupted liuing creature, another doth proceede: which in my conceit is very absurd and against all rea∣son. For this beeing granted, the generation of waspes would be infinite, and daily expe∣rience would read a Lecture of contradiction against him, vpon the progresse of Natures workes. Many times waspes doe breede by the mutuall company of the male & female together, which though Athaeneus counteth but a fable, yet for all that, sith the Philoso∣pher doth plainely tell vs, that hee hath beene an eye-witnes to the same, (as in his first booke De generat. Animal. cap. 16. and in his ninth booke De histor. Animal. cap. 41.) I will wholy incline to his iudgement. But what manner of beginning they haue by ioy∣ning together, and how it is perfited & accomplished, let vs a little lend our listening eares to Aristotle, and Pliny his Interpreter. The Princes or Ring-leaders of the waspes, when they haue made choyce of a fit place for themselues vnder the earth, either in the holes, chincks, or clefts of the Rockes, or in thatched houses, (as I haue often seene) there they make there combes in the beginning of Sommer, fashioning their small cells with foure little dores, wherein small wormes do breede, who when they are more growne, they make yet other greater dores or hatches, and then againe, when theyr young are at the greatest, they make others, so that towards the end of Autumne, you shall find many, and those very large nestes: wherin their prin∣cipall Commaunder doth breed, not with euery waspe indifferently, but onely with those of his owne race and princely linage. They are bred in the most eminent and highest placo of the waspe nest, like vnto great wormes, their celles being foure or fiue in number, close ioyned and couched together, for otherwise they would encrease after the same sort in all respects as the common waspes doe. The excrement is onely in the small wormes, and their young increase remaineth im∣moueable without any stirring before they be able to flye, and whilst they are couered as it were with a thinne membrane, and yet in the same season of the yeere, and in the space of one day, you shall manifestly perceiue a great difference: for one flyeth out, another sticketh still as it were in the shell, another rolleth and tumbleth, and a fourth cannot stir one whit. All these haue their beginning and increase for the most part in Autumne, not in the Spring, and specially in the full of the Moone. This one thing here is to be noted, that waspes doe not swarme, and that in Sommer-time they are subiect to Kings, and in Winter, Guuaicocrateia, the females regiment, or Muliebre imperium preuaileth. And when they haue renued and repayred their issue with a great supply, & that they be fresh and lustie, the Empire againe returneth to the Masculine kinde, and yet it is but a short, brittle, and ruinous Empire not able to beare vp it selfe, although by Natures immutable decree, orderly ruled, and rightfully gouerned. Aristotle saith that it is not likely that the young waspes are brought forth as a broode, because they be so great in bulke, as that in reason it should not seeme probable, that so small a flye as a waspe, should haue such great young ones. But this is a bare & weake rea∣son, not beseeming the dignitie of so great a Philosopher. For what can any man alleadge to the contrary, why Nature in a lawfull birth and breeding, should not as soone, and as speedily finish, and make to grow and increase, as shee doth in generation that proceedes of rottennes or corruption, which I hold to be but illegitimate. Let vs but call to minde young birds, in how short a time after they be out of the shell, they be feathered, they be able to goe, to eate, yea quickly increased in strength, and growne to theyr full greatnes, so that they are in their full flowre ere one be aware. All which when one hath through∣ly considered, he will easily iudge, that famous Phylosopher Aristotle, to haue relyed but vpon a weake proppe, hauing scarse probability to stand on his side for the maintenance of his opinion. His credit therefore at this time must not be sufficient to barre vs the liber∣tie of contradicting him. The same Aristotle, the monarch of our moderne learning, saith, that the al wormes of waspes, before they haue any wings at all, are some-what long, not much vnlike those wormes which Hippocrates calleth E lai, that breede in flesh called (as I iudge) ggots, but in our country, Gentiles: & these waspish wormes are somewhat white, knowne and easily discerned by their slits or dashes, the hinder part of their body being very thicke and grosie, hauing a black list or line running along their backs, without feet, not creeping, but rolling & tumbling thēselues this way & that way confusedly. When they haue disbur∣thened themselues of their breed, they close vp their cells with a certaine thin small skinne, which againe beeing broken when they come to any perfection or growth, they get thē∣selues our of dores into the cleere light, & at two daies end wil be able to flie round about. The Philosopher maketh two kinds of waspes, the one wild & fell, the other more meeke and quiet. The wilder sort is sildom seene, for they liue & breed in mountaines & woods, in Oke trees, & not in the earth, and this kind is greater, blacker, more diuersly coloured, & stingeth more cruelly then the other. After they haue liued one whole yeere, they are seene to flie away, if in the winter the tree be cut downe. These kinde of waspes I did once see in a wood in Essex, where going vnwarily to gather simples with another Phisitian, & offending one of this fumish generation, the whole swarme of them presently rushed forth about mine eares, & surely had I not had in my hand some sprigs or branches of broome for my defence, I had vndoubtedly payde deerely for this my vnaduisednes, if it had not cost me my life, for they pursued me in euery place of the wood, with a vehement rage for a long season, insomuch that I was faine to take me to my heeles, & so to seeke to saue my selfe from further danger. And if our owne countriman Sir Francis Drake himselfe had beene there, although hee was (as Meteranus a stranger, (and so vnpartiall) in his Belgick Historie right truly obserued,) Omnium ducum nostri seculi fortissimus ac famosissimus, yet I make no doubt, but he would haue taken my part, and beene a companion with me in this my fearefull flight. Some of these vvaspes, as well those of the crueller kinde as those of the gentler, doe lacke a sting, (or rather I thinke they vse it not.) Othersome againe of both sorts, are fur∣nished with stinges, and those that want them, are euer the lesser and weaker, neither re∣uenging themselues any way, nor offering to make resistance. Contrariwise, those who haue stings are greater, stronger, more quarrellous, concentious, stubburne and eager. Some account these the males, and those other stinglesse to be the females. Many of those which haue stinges, doe for-goe and quite loose them when Winter draweth on, as some make reckoning, but it was neuer my hap to see this, saith the Philosopher, in his 9 booke De hist: Animal: capit. 41. If you catch a Waspe, holding her fast by the feete, suffering her to make her vsuall humming sound, you shall haue all those that lacke stinges presently come flying about you, which the stinged waspes neuer are seene to doe. Therfore some hold this as a good reason to prooue, that the one should be the male, the other the female. Both these sorts, both wilde and vnwilde, haue beene seene to couple together after the manner of Flyes. Besides, (in respect of sexe) both kindes of waspes are deuided into Captaines or Ringlea∣ders, and into labourers, those former are euer greater in quantitie, and of more calme dis∣position; these other, both lesser, more froward, testie, peeuish, and diuers. The males or labourers, neuer liue one whole yeere full out, but all of them die in the winter time, which is euident by this, because in the very beginning of cold weather, they are as it were frozen or benummed, and in the depth or midst of hard winter, a man shall hardly or ne∣uer see any of them. But yet for all that, their Dukes or principall Chiefetaines, are seene all the winter long to lye hidde in their lurking holes vnder the earth: and indeed many men whē they plow∣ed or broke vppe the ground, and digged in winter, haue found of this sort. But as for the labouring waspe, I neuer as yet heard of any that could finde them. Theyr Principall or Captaine, is broader, thicker, more ponderous and greater then the male waspe, and so not very swift in flight, for the weightines of their bodies is such an hinderance to them, that they cannot flie very farre: whereby it commeth to passe, that they euer remaine at home in their hiues, there making and deuising their combes, of a certaine glutinous mat∣ter or substance, brought vnto them by the worke-waspes: thus spending their time in ex∣ecuting and dooing all those duties that are meet, in their Cells. Waspes are not long liued, for theyr Dukes (who liue longest,) doe not exceede tvvo yeeres. And the labouring, that is the male waspes, together with Autumne, make an end of their dayes. Yea which is more strange, whether their Dukes or Captaines of the for∣mer yeere, after they haue ingendered and brought forth new sprong vp Dukes, doe dye, together with the newe waspes, and whether this doe come to passe after one & the selfe-same order, or whether yet they doe and may liue any longer time, diuers men do diuers∣ly doubt. All men hold the wilder kind to be more strong of nature, and to continue and hold out the longer. For why, these other making their nests neere vnto common high-wayes and beaten paths, doe liue in more hazard, lye open to diuers iniuries, and so more subiect to shortnes of life. The brouity of their life, is after a sort recompenced, and some part of amends made by the rare clammy glewishnes of the same: for if you seperate their bulkes from the head, & the head from the breast, they will liue a long while after, and thrust out their sting almost as strongly as if they were vndeuidable, and free from hurt and deathes harme. Apollonius calleth waspes Omoboroi, and Aristotle, Meloboroi, although they doe not onely feede on rawe flesh, but also on peares, plummes, grapes, reysins, and on diuers and sundry sorts of flowers and fruites; of the iuyce of Elmes, Suger, Hony, and in a manner of all things that are seasoned, tempered, made pleasant, or prepared with eyther of these two last rehearsed. Pliny in his 11. booke capit. 53. is of opinion that some waspes, especially those of the wilder & feller kind, do eate the flesh of Serpents, which is the cause that death hath some-times ensued of their poysonous stinging. They also hunt after great flyes, not one vvhit sparing the harmelesse Bees, who by their good deedes haue so well deserued. According to the nature of the soyle & place, they do much differ in their outward forme & fashion of their body, and in the manner of their qualities and dispositions of their mind: for the common waspes beeing acquainted, & familiarly vsed to the company of men & beasts, are the gentler, but the Hermites and solitary waspes, are more rude, churlish, and tem∣pestuous: yea Nicander termeth them Olaus, that is, pernicious. They are also more vn∣happy, dangerous, and deadly in very hote countries, as Ouidius reporteth, and namelie in the West-Indies: where both in their magnitude and figure, there is great difference betwixt theirs and ours, so that they are accounted farre more poysonous & deadly, then either the English, French, Spanish, or Barbarian waspes. Some of these dangerous ge∣neration doe also abound in exceeding cold Countries, as Olaus Magnus in his 22. booke telleth vs. Their vse is great and singuler: for besides that they serue for foode to those kinde of Hawkes which are called Kaistrells or Fleingalls, Martinets, Swallowes, Owles, to Brocks or Badgers, and to the Cameleon: they also doe great pleasure and seruice to men sundry wayes, for they kill the Phalangium, which is a kind of venomous Spyder, that hath in all his legges three knots or ioynts, whose poyson is perilous and deadly, and yet waspes do cure their wounds. Raynard the Foxe likewise, who is so full of his wiles and craftie shifting, is reported to lye in waite to betray waspes after this sort. The wilie thiefe thrusteth his bushie tayle into the waspes nest, there holding it so long, vntill hee perceiue it be full of them, then draw∣ing it slylie forth, he beateth and smyteth his tayle-full of waspes against the next stone or tree, neuer resting so long as hee seeth any of them aliue; and thus playing his Foxe-like parts many times together, at last hee setteth vppon their combes, deuouring all that he can find. Pliny greatly commendeth the solitary wasp to be very effectuall against a Quartaine-A∣gue, if you catch her with your left hand, & tyeor fasten her to any part of your body, (al∣wayes prouided, that it must be the first waspe that you lay hold on that yeere. Mizaldus memor. Cent. 7. attributeth great vertue to the distilled water, and likewise to the decocti∣on Mizaldus of common waspes, affirming expresly, that if any part be there-with annoynted, it straightwayes causeth it to swell monsterously, and to be puffed vp, that you would ima∣gine them to be sicke of a Dropsie: and this course craftie-drabbes & queanes vse to per∣swade their sweet harts, that they are forsooth with child by them: thus many times be∣guiling and blinding the eyes of vvarie and expert Midwiues. Wherevpon we may very confidently conclude, that their poyson is very hote, flatuous or windie. Some do prole after waspes, and kill them by other sleights & deuises. For when the Labourers do much vse and frequent elmes, which they doe very often about the Summer solftice, to gather from them some gummy and clammy matter, their Dukes and Princes beeing at home, not standing still, but setling themselues to their busines or trade, and helping to hatch vp their young, they are suddenly choked with the fume of Brimstone, Garlicke, the bran∣ches of Coleworts, or other pot-herbes, or els by breaking downe & onerthrowing their combes, they die through famine. VVhen you are minded to defend the Bees from the inuasion and spoyle of waspes, you must sette a potte with some peeces of flesh in it neere the Hiue, and when the waspes (in hope of some prey) are entered, suddenly clappe ouer the couer, and so destroy them, or else by pouring in some hot water at the toppe, you may scald them all to death in the pot. In like sort, some doe gently breath vppon Raisins, fruites, Suger, Hony, Oyle, by which, eyther the waspes are chased away, or by tasting the oyle doe die. And againe, some doe mixe corrosiues with Honie, (as for example, Sublimate, Vitrioll, Auripigmen∣tum, &c.) that they by taking this venomous or poyson-infected drinke, may suffer con∣digne punishment for their intemperate and insatiable gluttony. Of the stinging of vvaspes, there doe proceede diuers and sundry accidents, passions and effects, as payne, disquieting, vexation, swelling, rednesse, heate, sweatings, dispositi∣on or will to vomit, loathing and abhorring of all thinges, exceeding thirstinesse, & now and then fainting or swounding; especially when after the maner of venomous creatures, they haue infected their stings eyther by tasting the flesh of some Serpents, or by gathe∣ring their foode from venomous plants. I will nowe sette before your eyes and eares one late and memorable example of the danger that is in VVaspes, of one Allens vvife, dwelling not manie yeeres since at Lowick in Northamptonshire, vvhich poore woman resorting after her vsuall manner in the heate Allens wife of the Sommer to Drayton, the Lord Mordants house, beeing extreamely thirstie, and im∣patient of delay, finding by chaunce a blacke Iacke or Tankerd on the table in the Hall, she very inconsiderately and rashly sette it to her mouth, neuer suspecting or looking what might be in it, and suddainly a Waspe in her greedinesse passed downe with the drinke, and stinging her, there immediatly came a grea tumour in her throate with a rednes, puf∣fing and swelling of all the parts adiacent; so that her breath beeing intercepted, the mi∣serable vvretch whirling herselfe twise or thrise round, as though shee had had some verti∣ginie in her braine, presently fell downe and dyed. And this is knowne for a truth, not onely to me, but to most of the inhabitants there abouts, being as yet fresh in their memo∣ries, and therefore their authorities as I take it, is vnreproueable. Now, for feare least I should loose my selfe in this troublesome and vast Ocean of Na∣tures admirable fabricature, I wil now discourse of such medicinall meanes, as will defend from their furious malice. The vertue of Mallowes, and of Althea, (called Marsh-mal∣lowe) is notable against the prickings of Waspes. For the softest and most emollient herbe, is applyed as a contrary to a watlike and hurtfull creature, whose iuyce beeing an∣noynted with oyle, eyther abateth the rage of vvaspes, or so blunteth and dulleth theyr sting, that the paine is not very sharpe or byting. Pliny lib: 21. capit: 171. And of the same mind is Auicen: Waspes (saith he) will not come neere any man if he be annoynted with oyle and the iuyce of Mallowes. For as a soft aunswere doth frangere iram, and as the Graecians haue a saying; Edus Megiston estin orges, pharmakon logos: So also in naturall Salomon. Philosophy we see, that hard thinges are quailed, and their edge euen taken off with soft and suppling: as yron with a fine, small, and soft feather, the Adamant stone with blood, and the stinge of vvaspes, Hornets and Bees, with oyle and Mallowes. What is softer then a Caterpiller? and yet if Aetius credite be of sufficience, the same beeing beaten with oyle, and annoynted vppon any part preserueth the same from the woundes and stinges of vvaspes. And of the same vertue is the herbe called Balme, being stamped and mixed with oyle. The same symptomes or accidents doe follow the sting∣ing of Waspes, as of Bees, but farre more painefull, and of longer continuance, to vvit, rednesse, intollerable paine, & Apostumes. And if any be strooken of the Orenge or yel∣low coloured vvaspes, especially in a sinowie or some sensible part, there will followe a convulsion, weakenes of the kees, swounding, yea, & sometimes death, as before I haue touched. Against the stingings of vvaspes diuers medicines are prescribed by Phisitions, but I will speake of such onely as I haue made proofe of, and such as are confirmed by long ex∣perience. The curation of their stings. Gilbert the Englishman, saith, that vvaspes beeing bruised and applyed to the place affected, doe cure their owne wounds very strangely. The same vertue peraduen∣ture, not onely the Scorpion, but the greater part of Insects haue, if any one would make Gilbertus Anglus. any dilligent tryall thereof. If a man be stinged of any venomous vvaspes (which is easily knowne by the blewnes of the place, madnes, rauing and fainting of the partie, and cold∣nesse of the hands and feete) after you haue giuen him inwardly some Alexipharmacall medicine, the place agrieued must be launched, or rather opened with a Cauterie, so bee∣ing thus enlarged and opened, the venome must be well sucked out, and the paring or sha∣uing of that earth wherein the waspes build their nests, must be wrought & kneaded with Vineger, and so applyed like a Cataplasme. A plaister also made of VVillow-leaues, Mallowes, and the combe of waspes, is verie medicinable for the same, as by the counsell of Haly Abbas I haue experimented. The English-Northerne-men, doe prepare most excellent emplaister woorth gold, against all Haly Abbas stinges of waspes, onely of that earth whereof their Ouens are made, hauing vineger and the heads of Flyes commixed therewith. Let the place be very well rubbed with the iuyce of Citrulls, & withall, let the partie that is pained drinke of the seed of Margerom beaten to powder the quantity of two drammes: or thus. Take of the iuyce of Margerom two ounces, of Bole Armony two drammes, with the iuyce of vnripe Grapes so much as is sufficient, make an emplaister. Another. Annoynt the place with the iuyce of Purcelane, Beetes, or sweet Wine, and Oyle of Roses, or with Cowes bloud, or with the seedes of the Spirting or wilde Cucumber (called Nolime tangere) beaten with some VVine. Thus farre Galen. Barly Meale wrought vp with Vineger and the Milke or iuyce of a Fig-tree, brine, or Sea water, are excellent for these griefes, (as Dioscorides lib. 8. Cap. 20. writeth) if the wound be often fomented, bathed, or soked with any of them. To drinke, giue two drammes of the young and tender leaues of Bayes with harsh wine, and if the part affec∣ted bee onely annointed with any of these, they are much auaileable. In like sort the de∣coction of Marsh-mallowes drunke with Vineger and water, are much commended, and outwardly salt with Calues fat: Oyle of Bayes draweth out the poyson of VVaspes. The leaues of Marsh-mallow (as Aetius saith) beeing bruised and applyed, doe performe the same. The iuyce of Rue or Balme, about the quantity of two or three ounces drunke with wine, and the leaues being chewed and laid on with Hony and Salt, or with Vineger and Pitch, do help much. VVater-cresses, Rosemarie, with Barly meale, and water with vi∣neger sod together, the iuyce of Iuy leaues, Marigolds, the bloud of an Owle, all these are very affectuall against the stinging of waspes: as Pliny lib. 31. Cap. 9. telleth vs. The buds of the wilde Palme-tree, Endiue with the root, and wilde Timbe being applyed playster∣wise, doe helpe the stinging of VVaspes. After the vemine is drawne out by sucking, the place effected must bee put into hot water the space of an houre, and then suddenly they must be thrust into Vineger and brine, and forthwith the paine will bee asswaged, the tu∣mour cease, and the malice of the venemous humor cleane extinguished. Rhazes saith, Rhazes. that the leaues of Night-shade, or of Sengreene, do very much good in this case. And in like sort Bole Armony with vineger and Champhire, and nuts beaten with a little vineger and Castoreum. Also take the Combe with Honny applying to the place, and hold the grieued place neere the fire immediatly, and laying vnder them a few ashes, binde them hard, & forth-with the paine will bee swaged. Serapio saith, that Sauorie, or Cresses applyed, and the Serapio. seed thereof taken in drinke, and the iuyce of the lesser Centory mixt with wine, are very meete to bee vsed in these griefes, he also commendeth for the same purpose the leaues of Basill, the Herb called Mercury, and Mandrakes, with Vineger. Ardoynus is of opinion that if you take a little round ball of Snow, and put it into the fundament, the paine will Ardoynus. cease, especially that which proceedeth by waspes. Let the place be annoynted with Vi∣neger and Champhire, or often fomented and bathed with Snow-water. Take of Opium, of the seed of Henbane and Champhire, of each alike much, and incorporate them with Rose water, or the iuyce of VVillowes, and laie it vppon the wounded place, applying on the top of it a linnē cloth, first throughly wetted in wine. Iohannes Mesue (who of some Mesue. is called Euangelist a medicoram) prescribeth this receipt of the iuyce of Sisimbrium two drammes and a halfe, and with the iuyce of Tartcitrons make a potion. The iuyce also of Spina Arabica, and of Margerom are nothing inferiour to these forementioned. Aaron, Aaron. would in this griefe haue water Lintells (called by some Duckes meat) to be stamped with vineger, and after to be applyed. Constantine assureth vs, that Alcama tempered with Barley meale and vineger, and so Constanti. bound to the place, as also Nuts, leaues of vvall-nuts, and Bleetes, are very profitable in this passion. Item, apply very warme to the wound a Spiders web, bruised with a vvhite Onion, & sufficient Salt and vineger, will perfectlie cure it. Guil: Placentinus will warrant, Guliolmus. Placentinus. Gordonius that a Plate of cold Iron laid vppon the wound, or Lead steeped in vineger, will doe the deed. Gordonius counsell is to rub the place with sage and vineger, and afterwards to fo∣ment it with water and vineger sod together. Varignana would haue vs to apply Chalk in powder, and invvardly to take the seedes of Mallovves boyled in vvine, water, and a lit∣tle Uarignana. vineger. Matthiolus much commendeth Sperage being beaten and wrought vp with Hony, to Matthiolus annoint the place. Likewise Flyes beaten and annointed on the place, vvinter Sauoury, VVater-cresses, with oyle of Momerdica, giue most speedie helpe. Arnoldus Villanouanus Arnoldus de villa noua. assureth vs, that any fresh earth, especially Fullers earth, is very auayleable, and the herbe called Poley vsed as an vnguent, or else Goats Milke. And Marcellus Empiericus is not be∣hinde Marcellus. his commendations for the vse of Bullockes dung, to be applyed as a poulteisse to the stinged part. These and many others any man ascribe that hath hadde but an easie tast of the in∣finity of Physickes speculation, for the store-house of Nature, and truely learned Physi∣tions, which way soeuer you turne you, will Minister and giue sufficient store of alexy∣teriall medicines for the expulsing of this griefe. In conclusion one and the selfe same medicament will serue indifferently for the curation of waspes & Bees, sauing that when we are stung with Waspes more forceable remedies are requyred, and for the hurts that Bees doe vs, then weaker and gentler are sufficient. In the hundreth and nintith yeare before the byrth of our blessed Sauiour, an infinite multitude of Waspes came flying into the Market place at Capua, (as Iulius witnesseth) and lighted on the temple of Mars, all which when with great regard & diligence they were gathered together and solemn∣ly burnt, yet for all that they presignified the comming of an enemy, and did as it were foretell the burning of the Citty, which shortly after came to passe. And thus much for the Historie of the Waspe. OF HORNETS. A Hornet is called of the Hebrewes Tsirhah. Of the Arabians Zabor, and Zambor. Of the Germans Ein hornauss, Horlitz, Froisln, Ofertzwuble. Of the Flemminges Horsele. Of the The names. French-men Trellons, Troisons, Foulons. Of the Italians Ca∣lauron, Crabrone, Scaraffon, and Galanron. Of the Spaniards Tabarros ò Moscardos. Of the Illirians Irssen. Of the Slauo∣nians Sierszen. Of vs Englishmen Hornets, & great waspes. The Graecians cal them Anthrénas, and Anthrenoùs, because with their sting they raise an Anthrar or Carbuncle, with a vehement inflamation of the whole part about it. The La∣tines call them Crabrones peraduenture of Crabra, a Towne so named in the territory of Tusculanum, where there is great plenty of them: or it may be they are tearmed Cram∣brones of Caballus (a horse) of whom they are first engendered: according to that of Ouid 15. Metamorphos. Pressus humo bellator equus Crabronis origo est. That is to say; When war horse dead vpon the earth lies, Then doth his flesh breed Hornet flyes. Albertus tearmeth a Hornet Apis citrina, that is a yellow or Orenge coloured Bee. Car∣dan laboureth much to proue that dead Mules are their first beginners. Plutarke is of opi∣nion, that they first proceed from the flesh of dead Horses, as Bees do out of a Buls belly: and I thinke that they haue their breeding from the harder, more firme and solide parts of the flesh of Horses, as Waspes do from the more tender or soft. Hornets are twice so great as the common Waspes, in shape and proportion of body much resembling one Their descrip∣tion. another. They haue foure winges, the inward not beeing halfe so large as the outward, beeing all ioyned to their shoulders, which are of a darke, brownish, and of a Chestnut∣like colour, these wings are the cause of their swift flight: they haue also sixe feete of the same colour and hew, that their breast and shoulders are of. Their is somewhat long, of the colour of Saffron, their eyes and lookes are hanging or bending downewards, croo∣ked and made like a halfe Moone, from which grow forth two peakes like vnto Sithes or two sickles, nothing varying in colour frō their feet. Their belly is as though it were tied to their shoulders with a very fine thred, the forward and middle part whereof is ouercast with a browne colour, & begirt as it were with a girdle of Saffron. The hinder part is al∣together yellow, easily discerned and remarkable for those eight browne pricks or specks, euery one of them being much like vnto a small triangle, besides they haue certain clefts or slits on both sides, both before and behind, by which they can at their pleasure when they list, either shrinke vp themselues, or draw and gather themselues together, and with the same againe lengthen and stretch out their bodies. They haue also neere to their belly on both sides foure blacke spots, and in their taile they are armed with a strong piercing sting, and the same very venomous. They make a sound or a buzzing strange noyse, more hydeous and dreadfull then waspes doe. They are shrewd, fierce, and cruell, quick∣ly angry and wrathfull, and although they liue in companies together, yet notwithstan∣ding they are euer known to be but of an homely, rude, curft, and vntractable disposition and nature, and will neuer be brought by any Art or fashioning to lay aside their vplan∣dish wildenesse, (as some Herbes will doe that are transplanted into Gardens.) They are besides this of such a mischeeuous malignity and venemous quality, that as some affirme, nine of their stings will kill a man, and three time nine will be able to kill a strong Horse; especially at the rising of the Dog-star and after, at which time they haue a more fiery, hasty, and inflaming nature, and men at that season, by reason of their large exaltation and sending forth of spirits, grow more weake and faint. And therefore it is no maruaile though in holy Scripture, they are compared or like∣ned to most fierce & cruell enemies, which should put & cast forth the Cananites, Hettites, and Cheuits, Exod. 23. 28. So likewise Ouid in the eleuenth Booke of his Metamorphos. hath these words, Spicula carbronum ardentia. The burning stings of Hornets: And Vir∣gill in the fourth booke of his Georgiks, calleth them Asperrima, most sharp and violent. Terence (the most eloquent of all Comicall Poets) in his Comedy intituled Phormio, and Plautus in his Amphytrio, haue this Prouerbe: Irritaui crabrones, I haue prouoked or in∣censed the great Waspes to anger: which I suppose they vsed as a by-word against the properties, natures, and froward behauiours of women, who beeing in their wonted su∣mish mood, if once you go about to ouerthwart them, or a little to contrary their wilful∣nesse, you shall pull an old house ouer your owne head by a further prouocation, & per∣haps if you get you not the sooner out of their sight and reach of their Clutches, you may chance haue somewhat more flying about your eares then you would. It is good therefore if you haue a Wife, that is, Calcata immitior hydra, vnquiet and contentious, to let her alone, not to wake an angry Dogge: and when a mischiefe is well quieted and brought asleepe, to go your waies and say neuer a word. Whereas among Bees, their Drones and Kinges do want stinges; yea, and some Waspes too, as before I haue writ: yet notwithstanding all Hornets in generall, as well the greater sort of them that builde their houses in trees, as the lesser sort that dwell in the earth, are prouided of stinges, neither doth their Ring-leader seeme to bee vnarmed. For Waspes haue theyr presidents of their owne society, and their Captaines generall as well as Bees & waspes, whatsoeuer Pliny lib. 11. cap. 21. dreame to the contrary: which in proportion and quan∣tity are farre greater (if you respect the bodies of other Hornets) then either the captaines of the Bees or Waspes, are in comparison of their subiects. These also spend their time within doores, as the captaines of Waspes do, not hauing many but one head to guid & rule ouer them, least by banding into parties and factions, some ciuill warre (wherein all things are miserable, as Tully saith) or other mutinie might arise to their finall destructi∣on. They are great vexers and troublers, and euen like such as had sworne the death of In bellis ciui∣libus omnia sunt misera▪ Tul. in ep sam ▪ their enemies, Robbers, and Thieues: And yet at home they nourish peace, excelling e∣uen the very Bees themselues in their painefull, earnest, and willing desire to maintaine their stocke and common society. For neither do they chide, braule, or contend, nor yet make any stir or rustling when any is promoted to any office or place of preferment in their corporation; neither are they distracted into diuers mindes with their businesses, neither yet doe they raise any tu∣mult, make any vprore, or keepe a coyle or ruffling at the election of their Prince or cap∣taine generall, but with common consent they vse but one Table, taking their commons together like good friends and fellowes, and whatsoeuer they kill, they carry some part of it home, frankly imparting it to their neighbors, children, and companions. Neither do they yearely driue and expell forth of the doores to seeke new habitations, where they can, (as some Bees deale very churlishly and vnnaturall with their young) but they contrarywise cherish in their bosome, defend and keepe warme, their new springed vp progeny and race, building for them greater Houses, and raysing of moe Sellers and flores, bording and planking the same in case of necessity, neuer ceasing till they be fully reard and made fit for their defence and safety. But as for their King and captaine (whom they exceedingly honor and highly esteeme) they make choyce of such a one, as neyther seemeth to be a King without a kingdome, nor a Prince without people and possessions, and yet he so behaueth himselfe, and carryeth himselfe so euenly, as though hee had but little to do in this his Empire. And yet in largenesse of body and greatnes of his hart, in stoutnesse and statelinesse of stomacke and person, he staineth all the rest, carrying away the prize from them all, and when there is proclamation of warre to be made against any forraine foes, and that their flags and ancients bee displayed by sounding his deadly blast, he giueth the defiance to his enemies, most couragiously bestirring himselfe more then a∣ny of his followers, shewing himselfe both most vehement, warlike, and skilfull in fight, and yet againe at home towardes his subiects, (like a true noble spirit) he is very gratious, gentle, and temperate, tractable, easie to bee intreated and most ready to forgiue. They make for themselues certaine holes or dwelling places vnder the ground, casting forth the earth much after the fashion Pismires: for you must vnderstand that neither Waspes nor Hornets do send forth any Swarmes as Bees doe, but those young Hornets which spring from them now and then, do there remaine among their breeders, making their beds or hiues much greater, by meanes of the earth formerly cast out. They enlarge their Combes exceedingly, by adding more and more vnto them, so that of a strong and healthy stocke of Hornets, it hath beene knowne they haue gathered three or foure Treyes or baskets full of Combes. If any Hornets stray from their owne home, they repayre to some tree, l & there in the top of it makes their Combs, so that one many times may very easily and painely perceiue them, & in these they breede one cap∣taine generall, or great commaunder, who when he is growne to be great, he carryeth a∣way the whole company, placing them with him in some conuenient lodging. Wilde Hornets (as Pliny saith) do liue in the hollow trunkes and cauities of trees, there keeping themselues close all the winter long, as other Cut-wasts do. Their life is but short, for they neuer exceede the age of two yeares. Their combs are wrought with greater cunning, more exquisite Art, and curious conceit, then those ei∣ther of Waspes or Bees, and these excellent deuisers doe make them one while in the trunkes of trees, and sometimes againe in the earth, encreasing them at their pleasure with more floores and buildings, according to the encrease of their issue, making them smooth and bright, decking and trimming them with a certaine tough or binding slime or Gelly gathered from the gummy leaues of plantes. Neither do any of the little mouths or en∣tries of their Cells looke vpwardes, but euery one bendeth downewardes: and the bot∣tome is placed vpwards, least either the raine might soke thorough them in long shewers, or the head of them being built vpwardes, they might lye open and be the more subiect, and exposed to the vnruly rage and furious blasts of winds and stormes. If you eye well their nestes, you shall finde them all for the most part exactly sex angu∣lar or sixe cornered, the outward forme and fashion whereof is diuided with a murry co∣loured pertitions: and their membranous substance is much like vnto the rinde or bark of Byrch, which in the patching heat of Sommer cleaueth and openeth it selfe into chaps. The stinging of Waspes is for the most part accompanied with a Feuer, causing withall a carbuncle, swelling, and intollerable paine. I my selfe beeing at Duckworth in Huntingtonshire, my natiue soyle, I saw on a time a great Waspe or Hornet making after and fiercely pursuing a Sparrow in the open street of the Towne, who at length beeing wounded with her sting, was presently cast to the ground, the Hornet satisfieng her selfe with the sucked bloud of her quelled prey, to the exceeding admiration of al the beholders and considerers of this seldome seene combate. Aristotle, whom I so greatly reuerence, and at whose name I doe euen rise and make curtesie, knowes not of a surety how Hornets do engender, nor after what manner they bring forth their young breede. But since we are assured of this that they bring forth their young by the sides of their Cells, as Waspes and Bees, we need not doubt, but that they doe all other matter after their manner, and if they couple together, they doe it by night, as Cats do, or else in some secret corner, that Argus with his hundreth eyes can neuer es∣pye it. Hornets gather meate not from floures, but for the most part they liue vppon flesh, whereby it commeth to passe, that you shall often finde them euen in the very dunghills, or other ordure. They also proule after great Flyes, and hunt after small Byrdes, which when they haue caught into their clutches, after the manner of hungry Hawkes, they first wound them in the head, then cutting it asunder, or parting it from the shoulders, carry∣ing the rest of the body with them, they betake themselues to their accustomed flyght. The greater sort of them dye in the hard winter, because they store not themselues suffi∣ciently aforehand with any sustenaunce as Bees doe, but make their prouision but from hand to mouth, as hunger enforceth them, as Aristotle enformeth vs. In like sort Landius hath well obserued, that Hornets both day and night keepe watch and Ward besides the Hiues of Bees, and so getting vpon the poore Bees backs, they vse them in stead of a wag∣gon or carry age: for when the silly Bee laboureth to be discharged of his cruell Sytter: the Hornet when he hath sucked out all his iuyce, and cleane bereft him of all his moysture, vigour, and strength, like an vnthankefull Guest, and the most ingratefull of all winged creatures, he spareth not to kill, and to eate vp his fosterate and chiefe maintainer. They feede also vppon all sweete, delicious, and pleasant thinges, and such as are not vntoothsome and bitter, and the Indian Hornets are so rauenous, and of such an insasiate gluttony (as Ouidius reporteth) that they fly vpon Oyle, Butter, greasie Cookes, all sorts of sharpe sawce vsed with meates, and all moyst and liquid thinges, not sparing the very Napkins and Table clothes, and other linnen that is any way soyled, which they do fil∣thily contaminate with the excrements of their belly, & with their Viscous laying of their egges. But as they get their liuing by robbery, and purloining of that which others by the sweat of their browes, by their owne proper wits and inuention, and without the ayde & helpe of any do take great paines for: so againe they want not a reuenge to punish, & a prouost Marshall to execute them for their wrongfull dealings: tearmed of some a Gray, Broch, Their vses, or Badger, who in the full of the Moone maketh forcible entrance into their holes or lur∣king places, destroying and turning topsie-turuy in a trice their whole stocke, famile, and linage, with all their houshold stuffe and possessions. Neither do they onely minister foode to this passing, profitable, and fat beast, but they serue in stead of good Almanackes to country people, to foretell tempests and change of weather, as Hayle, Raine, and Snow: for if they flye about in greater numbers, and bee oftner seene about any place, then vsually they are wont, it is a signe of heate and fayre weather the next day. But if about twilight they are obserued to enter often their nestes, as though they would hide themselues, you must the next day expect raine, wind, or some stormy, troublesome or boysterous season: whereupon Auienus hath these verses, Sic & crabronum rauca agmina si volitare, Fine sub Autumni conspexeris athere longo, Iam vespertinos primos cum commouet ortus, Virgilius, pelago dices instare procellam. In English thus; So if the buzzing troupes of Hornets hoarse to flye, In spatious ayre bout Autumnes end you see, When Virgill starre the euenings lampe espie, Then from the Sea some stormy tempest sure shall be. Furthermore, since it is most certaine that those remedies which do heale the stingings Remedies a∣gainst their stings. of Waspes, do also help those wounds and griefes which hornets by their cruell stinging cause, yet notwithwanding as Aggregator hath pronounced, the Zabor is the Bezoar, or proper antidote of his owne hurt, if he be oftentimes applyed with Vineger and Water, Oyle and Cow-dung tempered together. In like sort all manner of soiles and earths that are myry and muddy, are much commended in this case, such as Bacchus applyed to bald Selenus, who was wounded with Hornets, when longing for a little Hony, he iogged & shaked their nests, thinking he had lighted vpon some Bees Hony, which Ouid most ele∣gantly 3. Fastocum hath described in these verses; Millia crabronum coëunt, & vertice nud Spicula defigunt, ora{que} prima notant. Ille cadit praeceps, & calce feritur aselli: Inclamatque socios, anxilium{que} vocat. Concurrunt Satyri, turgentia{que} ora parentis Rident, percusso claudicat ille genu. Ridet & ipse Deus, limumque inducere monstras; Hic paret monitis, & linit ora luto. In English thus; Of Hornets thousands on his head full bare, And on his face their poysond speares sticke fast, Then headlong downe he fell, and Asses foot him smote, Whiles he for help his voyce to fellowes cast, The Satyres flocke came runne apace, and did deride Their sires swellen mouth, whiles Asse had made him lame, The God himselfe did laugh, yet shewed an earth to hide The wound which he receiued, and so did heale the same. If any one be desirous of moe medicines against the perillous and transpeircing sting∣ing of these horne-mad Hornets, he shall finde store of them digested together in the Hi∣story of Waspes: for their remedies are common, belonging as well to the one as to the other, there being no other difference but this, that here they must be giuen in a greater measure or quantity, and their vse ought longer to be continued. And let this suffice to to haue spoken thus much of such insectes or Cut-wasted vermine as are winged, and liue in companies and routes together. Now will I make choyce to describe such as are wing∣ed and liue solitarily, least I should seem to lose my selfe in this troublesome and vast Oce∣an of Physicall contemplation. ❧ OF CANTHARIDES or Spanish Flyes. T His kinde of Cut-wast is called of the Graecians Kantharis, and among the Latines it changeth not his name. Of the Frenchmen Cantaride. Of the Italians Cantarella. Of the Spaniards Cubillo. Of the Germans Grüne Kefer, Goldkae∣fer. Amongst the Belgies or Netherlanders, it is tearmed Spaensche Vlieghe, and of vs English-men Cantharides, and Spanish Flyes. I haue seene two sorts of Cantharides, the one great, and the other small. Of the greater sort some are thicke, and long bodyed, which are found among wheat, and these are thicke, grosse, and vnwieldy like vnto Beetles, they are also of sundry colours, and changeable hew, with Golden streekes or lines crossing their winges, and these are best to bee vsed in Physicke. They of the other lesser kind, are leane and thinne scragges and staruelings, broad, hairy, heauy, and sluggish, and for physicall vses little worth. The greater sort also are not alwaies of a glistering green colour, but otherwhiles you shall haue them somewhat reddish or murrey coloured, but yet all of them of a glittering brightnesse, and maruellous shining glosse, piercing the eyes with singuler delight. The lesser sort are not so common as the greater, somewhat differing from them in shape and proportion of body, but in vertue, quality, and manner of breeding: there is no disagree∣ment at all to be found. Those of the lesser sort haue their bodies and heades somewhat long & hooked, theyr eyes very blacke, and hanging out, theyr winges growing out from the middest of their Loynes, beeing marked with tvvo Syluer speckes or prickes, and some fewe vvhite spottes. They are commonly found in the Summer season, in the Hearbe that is called Cicu∣taria, or wilde Hemlocke. Their feete and Legges are very small and long, finely dec∣ked and garnished, as it were with a Vermillion red, or beautifull purple. There is also another sort of these answerable to the former, in colour of their bodies in euery respect, sauing that their eyes are greene: their head very little; and the hinder part of their shoul∣ders round and crooked. The third sort haue theyr Head and Shoulders all one, being so closely and confu∣sedly ioyned together, as if they were but one thing, and could not by any meanes bee separated, vnlesse in imagination, and these are of a rusty colour, and their small pinke eyes as blacke as Iette, their winges as well as their heades are nothing differing in colour, sauing that their winges doe glister with some strakes of the colour of Golde, their feete also are short, and as blacke as Pitch. The fourth is very like to the third sort, but it is rather of a greenish, then of a rusty Iron coulour, but in all other respects there is no difference to bee seene, sauing in their magnitude, for this last described is the least of them all. But th se indes of Canthari∣des as well the greater as the lesser, doe first proceede not from any beastes, as some haue thought, but they rather take their Originall from some to ten, stinking, and cor∣rupt moysture and siccity, Ticteta gar en tois toon puroon lei is kai tais ageirais, kai tous Sukais proseti to toon Kantharidoon phulon, the meaning whereof is, that the whole stocke and kindred of Cantharides doe bring foorth or lay their young in the vile, base, and imperfect force of heate or warmth: and further in moyst Figges, as Aelianus in his ninth Booke and thirty nine Chapter, vvord for worde hath exscribed out of Ari∣stotle. They doe also breede from a certaine little Worme which is found in the sponge of the Dogge bryer (called of the Physitions Bedeguar) and from Catterpillets of the Figge-tree, Popler, Peare-tree, Ashe, Oliue-trees and Roses: for in all these there bee found certaine Wormes, the very Founders and Parentes of Cantharides, but yet in the white Rose these Wormes are of much lesser force, power, and sufficiency, then in the former. Cantharides doe couple together and generate, but yet not any liuing creature of their owne kind, but onely a little small Worme. They feede vppon all manner of pulse and Corne, but especially Wheat, and then they are best for medicinall Vses. They smell like vnto Tarre, and in their tast they much resemble the Cedar-tree, as Nicander repor∣teth. Their vertue and quality is to burne the body, to patch and to bring a hard seale or crustinesse vpon any part they shall be applyed to, or as Dioscorides sayth, to gnaw or eate into, to rayse blisters, exulcerate and rayse an inflammation, for which respect, they mixe them with such medicaments as are apointed to heale Leprosies, any dange∣rous Tetters and Ring-wormes, or those that be cancerous. They are applyed to hard, Scuruy, or Mangy Nayles, beeing first tempered vvith some fit playsters or Cerotes tending to the same purpose, taking them so cleane away, that they fall of by the rootes. Some vse also to temper them with such conuenyent me∣dycines as are warranted to take away Wartes, Cornes, or any hard knobbes or peeces of flesh growing in the hands or feet. Some againe vse to puluerife Cantharides, and then mixing them with Tarre, do make an Vnguent to cure the falling away of the hayre, or the shedding of it, eyther in the head or beard, but heerein there must bee good aduise required, least at any time by their causticke faculty they exulcerate too deepe into the flesh. Cantharides mingled with Lime, serue in stead of a Pen knife to eradicate and take a∣way those little hard and red swellinges rising chiefely in the Crowne of the head, arme∣pittes, or priuy partes, called of some Physitions Pani: and some there bee againe that will aduenture a little of thē in powder, to giue with such Medicines whose propertie is to prouoke Vrine: But yet there is hard hold and tough reasoning on both sides, whether they ought to be giuen inwardly with Dioretikes or no, considering that being so drunk, they are accounted amongest strong poysons, tormenting the Bladder without any cea∣sing: othersome againe hold the contrary, assuring vs vpon their owne experience, that not exceeding their due quantity, they may be taken with other Correctories, to serue as a Retricle to trāsport them to the place affected, so that you see either side hath his strength and reasons. Iust a pari premitur veluticum pondere libra, Prona nec hac plus parte sedet nec surgit ab illa. That is to say; As when an euen seale with equall weight is peized, Nor fals it downe this way, or is it that way raised. But beeing mingled and wrought vppe with the iuyce of Vna Taminea, (which is a kinde of Berry, growing on the Hearbe called Ampelos angria, a kind of Bryonie) sheeps or Goates sewet, there is no doubt but that they doe great good. Some of my maysters (saith Galen, the prince of all Physitions next to Hippocrates) did vse to put Canthari∣des amongest such medicines as they prepared to mooue vrine, taking onely their wings with the feete, but I (sayth hee) am wont to take Cantharides wholy, as well as some partes of them, and so I iudge them the more safe to bee vsed and prepared this vvay, especially I misse not to make choyce of such as are found among Corne, and haue as it were a yellow circle or enclosure crossing ouerthwart their wings, lib. 3. & lib. 11. de Sim∣plic. facult. Beeing applyed rightly, they doe also prouoke the monthly tearmes, and that very effectually, and put into Antidotes, they are thought of many to helpe Hydropicall per∣sons, as not onely Hippocrates and Dioscorides, but also Gallen, Auicenna, Rhazes, Pliny, and other Physitions of best note and worth haue witnessed: I cannot heere sufficiently enough commend theyr assured, tryed, and approoued vse, being commixed with Lea∣uen, Salt, and Gumme Ammonialum, for the diuersions of Rheumes or Catarrhes, the taking away of all goutish paines, out of the ha ch or hippe (called the Sciatica of the Po∣puler sort,) whilest they draw forth and donsume from the center of the body, (beeing there throughly and deepely impacted) to the surface the matter or offending humours causing these griefes aboue said. They are also good against the vemine of a Salamandra, as Pliny in his 29. Booke and 24. Chapter assuteth vs. They are also highly esteemed of some, beeing duely prepared and orderly mixed with certaine other medicines, to take away and correct the remisse negligence, falling-faintnesse, and heartlesse casting downe of the Virile part, yea they do (as they say) very much prouoke too venetous incitements. But heere I would counsell each one not to bee to knack-hardy bold, in medling with them, for these or the like intentions for as they bring both health and helpe, being du∣ly commixed, and orderly tempered, not exceeding their dose and first quantity; so a∣gaine, if you faile in their due and skilfull applycation or propmation, they induce and driue men into most intollerable grecuous symptomes and accidents, and other whyles to death it selfe. Iohn Langius setteth downe a true and very pleasaunt story, which in this place, because it maketh greatly for out matter in hand, I will not refuse breefely to de∣scribe it. There was (saith he) at Bononie in Italy, a certaine rich and noble young man of France (which Gallus, to vse his owne wordes, was Gallo quouis gallinaceo salacior) who falling extreamely in loue with a certaine Maide in the same Citty, preuayled so farre at length through his earnest importunities and incessant sollicitations, that at length they appoin∣ted and agreed vppon the time and place of their meeting, to keepe theyr Reuelles for one night. So this lusty Gallant beeing thus insnared in the inextricable laborinth of her beauteous Physnomy, fearing deadly, least his heart should turne into Liuer, or that hee might faint and loose his courage before hee should attaine to his iournies end; in this his doubtfull coaping, and dangerous skirmishing-conflict, like a Wise-man fearing the worst, casting all dangers aforchand what might ensue, would needs know of a fellow Souldier, and Countrey-man of his, who hadde as one may guesse borne a standard in the Campe of Venus, what were best to bee doone, to mooue him to a more vygo∣rous courage, and to keepe his credit for that time, least either he should turne Crauen like an ouertyred Iade, or else bee vtterly non-suited which was worst of all: who pre∣sently wished him to take some Cantharides in his Broath, which the other at all aduen∣tures forthwith did. But it was not long before this iolly Yonker felt an itching about his lower parts, then being frolike aboue measure, supposed it to bee the operation of his medicine that caused this Colt-euill, he without any more ado hyed him to his Loue, minding there indeed to draw the matter to a set battell, and to end all controuersies by dynt of sword. Tunc animis opus, Aenea tunc pectore firmo. In English thus; Of courage then indeed, Then of stout breast is neede. But yet for all this, in the still of the night, when euery one besides were at rest, my restlesse Franke selt his whole body to bee pockily torne, and miserably rent with sundry cruell prickinges and stinginges, feeling moreouer a strange tast in his mouth, like the iuyce or liquor that yssueth from the Cedar-tree, stamping and staring, raging and fa∣ring like a furious, madde, frantike Bedlam, being all most besides himselfe thorough the extreamity of his payne, vertiginy, and giddinesse of his braine, with inclination to fainting or swounding: so beeing troubled, tost, and perplexed, all sad, melancholike and male-content, destitute of counsell and comforr, like a silly Miser, and an impotent Suiter, and not like a couragious hot-spurre, hee let his action fall, turning his backe like a Nouyee and fresh-water Souldier, full sore against his will you may bee sure, but there was no remedy, and so with as much speede as hee could, bidding his Loue adew, hee trudged home to his owne lodging; whether beeing come; and finding no reliefe, but rather an encrease of his tormentes, with a continuall burning of his Vrine and stran∣gury, hee lamentably besought, and with weeping and teares most humbly craued and cryed out for helpe, requesting the fauour and furtherance, both of my selfe and of another Physition for the cure: so I beeing admitted to visit this poore patient, I first gaue him some Oyle to drinke, thereby to prouoke vomiting: then was there prepa∣red a Glyster, made of the Hearbes Mercurialis, Mallowes, and the rootes of Althaea decocted, wherein was dissolued Cassia, with Oyle of Violets and Lyllies. After the ad∣ministring of this, I commanded him to take a good draught of Cowes or Goates milke once in euery houres space, and if Milke could not be hadde, then I willed him to take an Almond, Milke made Exnucleis pinea, secdes of Mellons, Guordes, and Poppy bruised with the distilled Water of Mallowes, and Alkeakengy, and this would I haue giuen to him in good quantity in stead of the Milke if it were wanting. But after that my fiery Frenchman hadde recouered his former health with these and the like remedies, and that the vnaduised Authour of this rash counsell had very hum∣bly intreated pardon at our handes for this his great fault, he protested solemnely with a great oath, that hee would neuer hereafter prescribe any Physicke to any man ly∣uing. Thus farre Iohannes Langius in his first Booke Epistela. Medicinal. forty eyght. There is also very profitable vse to bee made of Cantharides, for if you beate them to powder, and conuay a little of it into Apples, Peares, Plummes, Figges, Peaches, or Quinces: especially those that bee fayrest and ripest, and those that hang the lowest, finely closing it vp againe with the pill, which if any Theeues or Robbers of Orchards shall tast of, they fall within a while after into an intollerable burning in their Vrine and strangury, making it onely in dropping-wise, whereby theyr theft is soone found out, and they well rewarded with sowre Sawce for theyr sweete meate: And this is an excellent night-spell, & therefore I was loth to pretermit it, but to make you acquain∣ted withall. There is also another excellent medicinall vse of Cantharides, if they be duely, and ac∣cording to true art administred, and with great warinesse for that passionate grieuaunce, which at this time though some foolish Physitions neuer heard tell of any such, I wil call Pessuli infirmit as, yet I may not set it downe in English, because I would haue but a few acquainted with secrets. Habeo enim ego singulare quoddam contra, penis Languorem re∣medium, quo cum promiscuè vterer, vtranque multis nobilibus (qui veneris vulgo studiosio∣res videntur) animos & vires adauxit absque noxa. Vni tamen inter caeterossic obfuit, vt à venere (cui nimium litârat) sanguinem continuó mingeret, & lipoithymia frequenti laboret. Sanè nisi lactis copia in procinctu fuisset, omninò interijsset venereus pullus, & meritas salaci∣tatis cupidinis{que} paenas luisset. And let this suffice to haue spoken of their medicinall vertues and qualities: Now will I proceede to tell you of their ill name, naughty, venemous, and pernitious properties. They are reckoned and scored vppe in the number of most deadly and hurtfull poysons, not onely because they cause erosion and inflammation, but more in regard of their pu∣trifactiue quality and making rotten, wherein they exceede. Their iuyce beeing taken into the stomacke, and so piercing into the veines, or layd vppon the skinne outwardly so long till it hath entred the veines, is a most strong poyson, whereupon Ouid when he wished ill vnto, or cursed his enemy writ this: Cantharidum succos dante parente bibas. lib. Trist. Cicero ad Parum, in the ninth Booke of his familiar Epistles, hath these wordes, Ca s accusante L. Crasso, Cantharidas sumpsisse dicitur, as if he purposed by that way to make an end of himselfe by death. Galen in his third booke De Simplic. medicam. facult. writeth thus. If they bee taken inwardly into the body, though but in small quantity, and mixed with other conuenient correctories, they doe mightily prouoke vrine, and sometimes corrode and fret the bladder, so that it is as cleare as the noone-day, that what thinges soeuer do ouerthrow nature, by reason of their extreame frigiditie, if they be taken but in a very small quantity, yet will nourish the body: so on the other side, whatsoeuer is contrary, repugneth or goeth against humaine Nature, by meanes of corrupting or any putrifactiue quality like vnto Cantharides, can neuer do so. Bartholomeus Montegnana a learned Physition, assureth vs, that he once knewe one Francis Bracca a Cittizen of Paduay in Italy, who hauing but outwardly applyed Cantharides to his knee, yet their poyson spreading to other inward parts, he voyded fiue pintes of bloud by way of vrine: and this may any man see, if he will take the paines to read ouer Montegnana Consil. 182. Cap. 10. The same accident hath also befalne them, who to be remedyed of rough, hard, man∣gy, or lepros-like nailes, haue aduentured to apply them to their great toe. So that Can∣tharides must not rashly be applyed and vsed, as common deceiuers, blind-empiricks, and cousening Land-lopers would make plaine countrey people beleeue. Pliny relareth a sto∣ry of one Cossinus a Romaine Knight, who was deerely beloued of Nero the Emperour, who hauing a very dangerous Tettar (a disease in times past was peculiar to the people of Aegypt) a Physition of that countrey in stead of curing, did kill him by giuing him Can∣tharides to drinke. But I should rather thinke that Cossinus dyed by the outward applycation of Canthari∣des, because by their burning and causticke quality, they cleane eate and consume away filthy Tetters or Ringwormes, Manginesse, scuruinesse, Lepries, and all hard Callous warts, Cornes, or peeces of flesh that grow in the handes or feete; for I can see no reason why any would bee so wilfully blinde, as to giue them inwardly for the curation of any Tetters or such like griefes: or at leastwise I must thinke that the right vse of Cantharides was vnknowne to the ancient Physitions of the old world, as by Galen it may appeare in his eleuenth booke de Simplic. Med. fac. and in his fourth booke de victa Acut. The same Pliny (in his twenty nine booke and fortith Chapter) witnesseth, that Can∣tharides were reprochfully layd to Cato vticensis charge, and that hee was sorely blamed for offering to make a price of poysons, and to sell them openly, as in port-saile to any that would giue most, so that their price rose to threescore sesterties. Being drunke in too large a quantity, or else apply outwardly to any part, eyther too long or too deepe, they produce these or the like symptomes, accidents, and effects. The party to whom they are any way giuen, feeleth apricking, paine and torment in his bowelles and inward partes, extending from the mouth downe to the lower partes a∣bout the Bladder, Raines, and the places about the Wast and short ribbes: they doc al∣so vlcerate the bladder very dangerously, inflaming the yard, and all other partes neere the same with a vehement apostimation: after this, they pisse bloud, and little peeces of flesh. Otherwhiles there will follow a great laske and a bloudy-flyxe, fainting and swoun∣ding, a numnesse or dulnesse of moouing or feeling, debilitation, our feeblenesse of the mind, with alicnation of the wit, as though they were bestraught, likewise lothing or ab∣horring of meate with a disposition to vomiting, and often an ordinary desire to make water, and to exonerate nature, but all in vaine. He that taketh them findeth in his mouth the tast or tallage of pitch: and all these symptomes, passions, or effectes, that they work, haue I with much labour faithfully collected out of the sixth booke of Dioscorides, & the first Chapter. And out of Galen Lib. de Theriaca ad Pisonem Cap. 4. and lib. 3. de Tempe∣ram. cap. 3. And out of ancient Rhazes (who practised Physicke one hundreth yeares, if truth be truely related) Tit. 8. Chap. 17. If any one be either affected or infected with any accydents, by meanes of Cantharides, Dioscorides doth thus cure them, as you may readi∣ly find in the booke and chapter before cited. First of all hee causeth them to vomit often and much: and after that hee prescribeth Glysters to bee made for the scouring of the belly with Niter, and to pres rue the blad∣der inwardly, to take Milke and Psyllum: and then hee would haue the matter of Gly∣sters to be somewhat different from those which were taken in the beginning; as name∣ly to bee made of Barley Water, Marsh-Mallowes, the white of an Egge, the Musci∣ling of Line-seedes, Water of Ryce, the decoction of Fennigreeke, Hydromell, satte Broathes, Oyle of Almonds, the fat of a Goose, and the yelkes of Egges. And inward∣ly to take at the mouth, hee biddeth them to vse Cowes Milke, Hydromell, the Graines or fruite of the Pitch-tree, both the greater and the lesser sort, Wine sodde to the halfe, Duckes fatte, a decoction with some diureticall seedes (namely with the foure greater cold seeds, which are Cucumbers, Guords, Citruls, and Melons) and likewise some decoc∣tion made of Figges, with sirup of Violets. Oyle of Quinces is hyely commended of some as a proper and speciall Antidote in this case, and so is Oyle of Lillies, and Terra Samia. Rhazes counsell is, after the taking of some Glysters made of any fat broathes, to make an iniection into the yarde with Oyle of Roses, and the sicke person to sit in a warme Bath. Tit. 8. Chapter 17. The Writers and Authours of Physicke and Phylosophy cannot agree, in what part of the Cantharides theyr poyson cheefely lurketh: for some will haue it to bee principally in the head and feete, and others againe will none of that: And yet they all agree vppon this poynt, that in what part of the body soeuer their poi∣son is seated, that their winges are a soueraigne remedy and preseruatiue, and if they bee wanting, that their poyson is deadly: so that although they be neuer so poysonous, yet haue they their owne remedy which in themselues they containe and carry about: Thus saith Pliny in his eleuenth booke and 35 chapter. And peraduenture for the same cause, Galen in his eleuenth Booke which hee entituled De Simplic. Medicament. facultatibus, aduiseth vs expresly and learnedly, that Canthari∣des should be taken whole as they are, and so to be vsed either for inward or outward v∣ses. For why it is far better, euen in the outward applycation of them, that they should more gently and slowly corrode, gnaw, or fret asunder, and that their burning vertue and quality should be a little corrected and weakened, then to performe their full effect to the great danger of the patient, and many times to his vtter vndoing and destruction. There∣fore they are cleane out of the way, who when they wold vse them for any inward cause, The error of medi∣ -giuers. doe cast away their winges and feete, whereas indeede they ought to take all of them, not reiecting any one part of them. For being giuen whole, they neede not so much any cor∣rectiues to bridle and lessen their powerfull operation, in regard of their wings and feete, the proper resisters and expellers of their owne or other poyson. The safest course is to vse all, and euery part of them without exception, vnlesse you would haue them to corrode, fret, inflame, or burne any part. Lycus Neapolitanus is of opinion, that Purcelane is their proper counter-poyson, which vertue Pliny in his twen∣tith Booke, Chapter 13. ascribeth to the Herbe called wilde Basill: who also many waies commendeth Acetum Scylliticum, Oleum Oenanthium, Cowes milke and brothes made of Goates flesh for these intentions, in his 23. Booke, Chapter the second and fourth, and likewise in his 28. Booke and tenth Chapter. And for our History of Canthari∣des, let this for this time suffice, which I much wonder that the famous learned Gesner hath in such deepe silence passed ouer, neuer so much as mentioning them: whereof not∣withstanding so many Authours, both of the Auncientes and Neoterickes doe so much ring. Many moe authorities could I haue alledged concerning this my discourse of Cantha∣rides, but that I supposed it a labour as endlesse in toyle, as needlesse in vse; the one sauo∣ring of too much curiosity, the other of a fryuolous affectation: so that I hope euen a∣mongest the whole Colledge of Physitions, wheresoeuer in England (if their eares be not to dainty) to find some few graynes of their good wordes, and such curteous constructi∣on, as that I may neither bee charged with partiality of concealing (where it is meete I should be mute) nor be suspected of vnsufficiency, for not pursuing where I can finde no good footing. OF CATERPILLERS, OR PALMER Wormes, called of some Cankers. N Ow I am come to speake of Caterpillers, sometimes the destroi∣ers and wasters of Egypt: as well in regard of the great differēce that is found in their seuerall sorts, as for their great dignity and Their name. vse, wherein some of them are most notable and excellent. Some thinke that Eruca, which is Englished a Catterpiller, hath his de∣riuation Ab erodendo, which is not altogether improbable: For they gnaw of and consume by eating, both leaues, boughes, and flowers: yea, and some fruits also, as I haue often seene in pea∣ches. Ouidius the famous Poet, styleth them by the name of Tineae agrestes: Quaque solent canis frondes intexere filis, Agrestes Tineae, res obseruata colonis, Feraci mutant cum papilione figuram. In English thus; And those wilde mothes by husbandmen obserued, Which fold themselues in hoary springing leaues, Gainst force of famine, and storme to be preserued, A shape from fruitfull Butterflyes receiues. The Graecians call a Catterpiller Kámpe, by reason of his crooked, winding or ben∣ding pace in wauing sort, whereby in creeping they bow, wry, and lift vp themselues. Of the Hebrewes it is termed Ghazain, because it sheareth, pilleth, & deuoureth the fruites of the earth, as Kimhi vpon the first of Ioell writeth. The Italians call it Rugauerme, and Bru∣cho, for so Marcellus Virgilius vpon Dioscorides saith expresly, that in his time all the peo∣ple of Italy, named it Erucae, Bruchi. The Spanyards terme it Oruga. The French-men, Chenille, and Chattpleuse. Of the English they are commonly called Catterpillers, of what kind soeuer they be of. But the English-Northren-men, call the hairie Catterpillers, Ou∣buts, and the Southern-men vsually terme them Palmer-wormes. Of the Polonians it is called by the name of Ruphansenka. In the Germaine tongue Ein Raup, in the Belgian, Ru∣ipe. Of the Illerians Gasienica. And Siluaticus will haue it called Certris, and Cedebroa. If I should goe about to describe and set downe all the differences and varieties of Cat∣terpillers, Their diffe∣rences. I might perhaps vndertake an endlesse and tedious labour. I thinke it therefore fittest to bend my slender skill, and to imploy my best forces, in speaking of such as are more notable and common with vs in this Country: For some of them in touching are rough, hard, and stiffe; and other-some againe, are soft, smooth, and very tender. Some are horned, either in the head or in the tayle, and againe, others haue no hornes at all. Some haue many feete, and some fewer, and none at all haue aboue sixteene feete. Most of them haue a bending swift pace, and like vnto waues, and others againe keepe on their way very plainely, softly, by little and little, & without any great hast. Some change their skinnes yeerely, others againe there be that neither change nor cast their old dry skinnes, but keepe them still. Some of them ceasing altogether from any motion, and giuing ouer to eate any thing at all, are transformed very strangely into a kind of vermin or wormes, who beeing couered with a hard crust or shell, lye as it were dead all the winter; & from these come in the beginning of hot weather, our vsuall Butter-flyes. Many of these Catterpillers are bred of the egges of Butter-flyes: and some againe do breede in the leaues of trees, of their owne proper seede, beeing left there in the time of Autumne, included in a certaine webbe, or els by meanes of the dew or ayre, therein shut and putrified, as commonly the little hairie Cankers or Caterpillers which are so full of feete, doe breede. Besides, some of them doe feede on leaues, some on flowers, & there are some which deuoure fruites. All smooth Catterpillers which are not hairie, are of a yellow or greene colour: some againe are found of a reddish colour, or brownish, or else they be of sundry hewes. But of all others, the most excellent is the greene coloured Catterpiller, which is found vppon that great bushy plant, vsually termed Priuet, or Primprint, which hath a circle enclosing round both his eyes and all his feete, hauing also a crooked horne in his tayle: these Cat∣terpillers are blackish-redde, with spots or streakes going ouerthwart theyr sides, beeing halfe white and halfe purpelish, the little pricks in these spots are inclining to redde: The rest of theyr body is altogether greene. There is another Catterpiller feeding altogether vpon Elder-trees, not much differing from the former, sauing that this is altogether of a greene colour, & wanting those ouer∣thwarting crosse white markes or spots, and the other small white pricks which we descri∣bed in the former. There is also a third sort of greene Catterpillers, which when Autumne or the fall of leafe draweth on, are turned into a certaine sheath or case, beeing of a very hard and hor∣nie substance, of colour very browne, and this feedeth altogether vpon pot-herbes, espe∣cially those that be soft, as Lettuce: wherevpon it may not vnfitly be termed, Eruca Lao∣tucaria. Lastly, there is to be seene another sort, of a greene colour, which is the least of them all, and this kind liueth and feedeth vpon trees, (especiall in the Oke) there drawing out theyr webbe, by meanes of which beeing styrred and shaken, they easily fall downe vpon the heads of trauaylers and passengers by the way side, cleauing to their hats & garments. And this kind of Catterpiller is too well knowne and found in the Sommer-time, and when cold weather approacheth, they fold themselues into a rude, plaine, & nothing cu∣rious web. And thus beeing included in a greenish scabbard or case tending to redde, they all die in Winter, and all these haue tenne feete, as all they haue that goe bending them∣selues vpwards. But to leaue the greene, and come to them that are yellow, there is to be found a certaine Catterpiller called Vinula, being as the word soundeth, a very elegant & fine insect to looke vpon, and passing beautifull: & this kind haue I often found amongst Willowes, full sauourly feeding vpon theyr leaues. His lyps and mouth are some-what yellow, his eyes blacke as a cole, his fore-head purple coloured, the feete and hinder part of the body, of a greene grassie hue, his tayle two-forked, and some-what blacke. The whole body is as it were stained and dyed with thicke Red-wine, which runneth alongst the necke and shoulders blades, as it were in forme of a Burgonian crosse, or of the Letter X made crosse-wise downe vnto the tayle with a white line, addeth no small grace to the other parts. There is yet another Catter-piller of yellow-blackish colour, called Porcellus, we may in English call it Pigges-snoute, in respect of the fashion of the head, especially the greater sort of these, for the lesser haue round white specks vpon their sides, and these liue and are altogether to be found amongst the leaues of the Marsh Trifolie, which they consume & deuoure with an incredible celeritie. In the wilde Night-shade, (which the Italians call Belladona) there is found a smooth Catterpiller, of a yellow-greenish colour, hauing a horne in his fore-head the length of a finger, which Hierom Cardan the learned Phisitian, reporteth that he had often seene. The hayrie Catterpillers are most mischieuous and dangerous amongst them all, and these are eyther thicke or thinne hayred, and the most venomous is that which is called Pityocampe, whose byting is poyson: and this is euer found in the Pine-apple-tree, beeing The descrip∣tion of Piryo∣camp es. as thicke as three little fingers, and three fingers long beeing layd a-crosse. They consist of eleuen slyts or cuts betwixt the head and the tayle, and they haue sixteene feete, according as all other hayrie Palmer-wormes haue. That is to say, neere the head on both sides, three, in the middest of their body on both sides, foure, and at the end of the tayle on both sides, one. Their former feete are crooked and small, with which they feele, try and assay the way whether it be passable or no, theyr other feete are broader, with many iagges and notches like a savve, to take the faster hold, and stay with surer footing vppon smooth and slippery leaues. Their head is much like a Pismires, and the rest of their bodies like other common Catter-pillers. They are rough, & full of bristly standing vp hayres on all sides, and those in theyr sides are white, but those on their backes doe shine, beeing very bright and glistering, the midst whereof is garnished with many spots, as though it were full of eyes. Their skinne is blacke, which is soone seene, their hayres beeing cut or taken cleane a∣way. All their hayres are but small, and yet they sting more vehemently then any nettle, whereby is caused intollerable paine, burning, itching, a feauer, and much disquietnesse: when as their poyson is suddenly in a moment, sent and conueighed without any mani∣fest apparance, or sence of any wound to be iudged by the eye, vnto those parts that are next to the entralls, as the harr, liuer, and the rest. They weaue their webs after a fine and exquisite manner, as Spyders do, drawing out in length, framing and trimming in good order, their hayrie small threads. And vnder these when night draweth on, they lye, as in their own proper tent and pauillion, aswell to auoyde cold, as the discōmodities of futious blasts & stormes: for the matter & substance of this their tent is so handsomely wrought, so firme, stiffe, clammy & sure, that they neither care for furious winds, nor yet any raine or storme will euer soke thorow. Besides, the largenes of this house is such, and of so great receit, as it will easily receiue and lodge many thousands of Caterpillers. They make their nests or buildings in the highest branches of the Pitch and Pine-trees, where they liue not solitarily (as other Palmer-wormes do) but in flocks or cōpanies together. Which way soeuer they take their iourny, they are still spinning & drawing out their threds for theyr web, and early in the morning (if it be likely to proue faire) the younger sort by heapes at∣tend the elder, & hauing first bared & robbed the trees of all their boughes & leaues, (for they make cleane riddance of all where-soeuer they come) they afterwardes dexterouslie bend thēselues to their weauing craft. They are the only plague & destruction of pitch & Pine-trees, for vnto any other roziny or gummy trees they neuer doe harme. There is great plentie of them to be found in the Mountaine of Athos, scituate betwixt Macedonia and Thrace, in the woods of Trident, and in diuers valleyes beyond the Alpes, in which places there is store of these fore-named Trees, (as Matthiolus saith.) They are doubtlesse most poysonous and venomous vermine, whether they be crushed outwardlie with the hands, or taken inwardly into the body: yea they are so knowne, manifest, and so neuer fayling a poyson, & so esteemed of in times past, as that Vlpian the famous Law∣yer, interpreting the Law Cornelia De Sicarijs, or priuie murtherers, that he in that place, calleth and esteemeth the giuer of any Pityocampie in drinke or otherwise to any one, to be doomed a murtherer, and their punishment to be equalized. Sect. Alium. ff. ad Leg. Corn. de sie. As soone as this kind of Catterpiller is receiued into the body, there followeth imme∣diatly a great paine, extreamely tormenting the mouth and palate; the tongue, belly, and stomacke are grieuously inflamed by their corroding, and gnawing poysonous qualitie, besides the intollerable payne the receiuer feeleth, although at first the partie seemeth to feele a certaine pleasant itching, but it is not long before hee perceiueth a great burning within, loathing and detesting of meate, and a continuall desire to vomit and goe to the stoole, which neuerthelesse hee cannot doe. At length, vnlesse speedy succour be giuen, they so miserably burne and parch the body, that they bring a hard crustines, skurffe or scald vpon the stomacke, as though the sides thereof had beene plaistered with some hard shardes, or other like thinges, after the manner of Arsenicke, as Dioscorides, Aetius, Pliny and Celsus doc assure vs. In like manner Galen in his eleuenth booke Simp. cap. 50. And Auicen 505. cap. 25. haue testified the same. And for this cause Aetius and Aegineta doe say, that it is nothing wholesome for any to sit downe to meate, to spread the Table, or make any long tariance vnder any Pine tree, least peraduenture through the sauour or smell of the meates, the reeke or vapour of their broathes, or noyse of men, the Pityocampies beeing disturbed from theyr homes and v∣suall resting places, might fall downe either into their meates beneath, or at least-wise cast downe, or let fall any of their seede, as poysonous as themselues. They that receiue hurt by them, must haue recourse to those preseruatiues and medicines, as were prescribed to those that were poysoned by Cantharides, for by them they are to be cured, and by no o∣ther meanes. Yet for all that, oyle of Quinces is properly commended to vomit withall in this case, which must be taken twise or thrise, euen by the prescript of Dioscorides and Aetius. They are generated, or to speake more aptly, they are regenerated (after the ma∣ner of Vine-fretters, which are a kind of Catterpillers, or little hayrie wormes with many feete, that eate Vines when they begin to shoote) of that Autumnall seede of theirs, left & reserued in certaine small bagges or bladders within their webbes. There is another sort of these Catterpillers, who haue no certaine place of abode, nor yet cannot tell where to find theyr foode, but like vnto superstitious Pilgrims, doe wan∣der and stray hither and thither, (and like Mise) consume and eate vp that which is none of their owne: and these haue purchased a very apt name amongst vs Englishmen, to be called Palmer-wormes, by reason of their wandering and rogish life, (for they neuer stay in one place, but are euer wandering) although by reason of their roughnes and rugged∣nes, some call them Beare-wormes. They can by no meanes endure to be dyeted, and to feede vpon some certaine herbes and flowers, but boldly and disorderly creepe ouer all, and tast of all plants and trees indifferently, and liue as they lift. There are sundry other sorts of these Cankers or Catterpillers to be found, in the herbes called Cranes-bill, Ragwort, Petie-Mullen, Hoppes, Coleworts, Hasells, Marigolds, Fe∣nell, Lycorice, Basill, Alder, Night shade, Water-Betony, Garden-spurge, & other sorts of that herbe; in Elme-trees, Peare-trees, Nettles, and Gilliflowers. Yea there is not any plant to be found, which hath not his proper and peculiar enemy and destroyer: all which because they are so commonly knowne of all, though perhaps not of all obserued, I will, (least I should seeme to be infinite,) passe ouer with silence. But yet I will adde a word or two of a strange and stinking Catter-piller, which it was neuer my hap as yet to see, de∣scribed by Corradus Gesner, in these wordes following. This stinking Catterpiller (saith he) is very like to those that are horned, but yet it wanteth hornes, differing frō them all in colour. I first espyed it creeping vpon a wall toward the end of August. Anno. 1550. there commeth from it a lothsome and an abhominable sauour & smell, so that you would ve∣rily beleeue it to be very venomous. It went forwards very frowningly, & with a quick, angry, and despightfull countenaunce, as it were in bending wise, the head alwaies stret∣ched vp aloft with the former two feete: I iudge her to be blind. She was the length and breadth of a mans finger, with a fewe scattering and rugged hayres, somewhat bristly & hard both on her backe and sides, the backe was very blacke. The colour of her belly and sides was some-what redde, enclining to yellow, and the whole body was distinguished, deuided, and easily discerned with foureteene ioynts or knots, and euery ioynt had a cer∣taine furrow like a kind of wrinckle running all along the back. Her head was blacke and some-what hard: her mouth crookedly bending like hookes, hauing teeth notched like a saw, and with these teeth as with pincers or nyppers, whatsoeuer she layd hold on, she (as famished) did bite. She went on sixteene feete, as for the most part all the sorts of Palmer-wormes doe. Without doubt, she must be concluded to be exceeding venomous. The learned man Vergerus, tooke it to be a Pityocampe, and others thought it a Sco∣lopendra: but that could not be, by reason of the number of her feete. I could hardly with much adoe endure her vyle smell, till I had drawne out her description. Shee so infected two hot-houses with her abhominable sauour and stinke, that my selfe and they that were with me, could not endure in the place. Thus farre Gesner, as I haue to shew out of cer∣taine scroles of paper of his, neuer as yet imprinted. Now will I proceede to discourse of the originall, generation, aliment, and metamor∣phosis of Catterpillers. Chare liber nostrûm test is benefide laborum, Ne tua purpureo suffuderis or a rubore Agrestes abacis tine as si expressere nostris, Vermiculos{que} leuem qui in the cam vellera mutant. Hi siquidem artificis prudenti pollice Dij Finguntur, tenui qui non tenuatur opella Et qui vermiculis, dextrae miranda potentis Signa suae prodit, potius quám corpore vasti Molifero Barnhi, tumido vel robore Ceti Equam antis{que} alijs, qui lata per aequoratentant Fulmine as sine mente minas: et nostra profundo Lintea quá mergant, large mare gutture ructant. Which may be englished thus; Deere Booke, a witnes of my labour true, Be not ashamed to write of little wormes, Nor Catterpillers, which from base things ensue, And into easie cases againe returnes: For these are fram'd by hand of GOD most wise, Neuer abased in any worke so small: For out of Wormes his wonders doe arise, As well as from great beasts so tall. Tower-bearing Elephant, huge Whale, And other monsters swimming in the Seas, Irefull beasts, in hills and deepest dale, Death threatning to all that them displease. For so I thinke it best to beginne with the verses of a good Poet, who indeede did see and admire the inscrutable wisedome and diuine prouiden of the Almightie, in the ge∣neration and breeding of Catterpillers. Which whilst diuers Authours laboured to ex∣presse and set downe diuersly, I knowe not what clowdes of errors they haue thrust vs in∣to; for swaruing themselues besides the way, although they pretend a matchlesse vnder∣standing in these misteries of Phylosophy, they haue caused others to tread awry as much as themselues, and to be blinded with the mascarados of absurdities. And first, if we will beginne to rifle in the monument of former times, I will heere produce Aristotles opini∣on in his fifth booke, Histor. cap. 19. who there expresly saith, that they take their begin∣ning from the greene leaues of herbes, & namely of Radish and Coleworts, by meanes of their small seede of generation, beeing like vnto Millit-seede, which is there left about the end of Autumne, from which, femall wormes proceede: and of these little wormes in the space of three dayes a Catterpiller is formed, about the Spring time, or toward the latter end thereof, which growing to their due quantitie, and well fedde withall, they cease at length from any further motion, & when Autumne beginneth, they change both forme and life. Pliny is of this mind, that Catterpillers fetch all their pedegree, rase, parentage & birth, from a dew thickned and incrassated by the heate of the Sunne, and so still left behind in leaues: and Arnoldus de Villa noua is of the same iudgement. Othersome deriue them wholy from Butter-flyes, and will haue them to proceede of no other beginning, which as soone as they are crept out of their hard shells or scabbards, wherein they had lien as it were dead all the Winter, as soone as Summer & warme weather draweth on, they cast certaine egges eyther vnder or aboue the leaues of certaine herbes, which egges accor∣ding to the quantitie of their bodies, are either greater or lesser, and some of these shelles wherein they are included, are of a skye colour; others yellow, white, blacke, greene, or redde: and so beeing at length about foureteene dayes quickned and nourished with the liuely and kindly heate of the Sunne, their shell-house beeing broken, first commeth forth small Catterpillers, like vnto little wormes, sauing that they are diuersly coloured, who at their first appearance, beeing as it should seeme very hungry, doe altogether bend them∣selues to deuoure and eate vp both leaues and flowers, especially of those trees and plants, whereon they were whilst they were in egges. But I am of opinion; that not onely this, but by diuers other wayes and meanes they may proceede and increase, for although the doctrine of Aristotle in this poynt seemeth to be vnsauoury, and nothing relishing diuers tastes, because hee affirmeth that that little worme which is found vpon Coleworts, doth turne into a Catterpiller: yet for all that, it is not so much without smack of salt, or so abhorrent to reason as they would make some beleeue. For Nature, as shee is able, and doth produce and bring foorth a liuing creature from an egge, so likewise from a worme shee breedeth a more perfect liuing creature, by many degrees; and that not by way of corruption, but by way and meanes of her excel∣lent perfection. For although a worme afterwards be not that thing which before it was, (so farre as is apparant to outward sence) yet for any thing we can gather or perceiue, it is that which it was, and this That, is more by a great deale now, then before it was. For a worme dyeth not, that a Catterpiller may therby spring, but to the old body, Nature ad∣deth a greater magnitude: as for example, feete, colours, winges: so that whilst life re∣maineth, it acquireth other parts, and other offices. There be some also that deride the opinion of Pliny, because hee contendeth that Cat∣terpillers haue their beginning and production from dew. But it may not be denyed in my conceit, that some imperfect small creatures, are bred and take life from dew, and not without great reason. For the Sunne by his kindly heate and warming qualitie, work∣eth and acteth, beeing as it were the forme, and the moisture or humour is Passiue, as the matter or subiect for the heate of the sunne is different from that of the fire: for it eyther quickneth and inspireth with life, or at least-wise conserueth and maintaineth our life, by meanes of likenes, proportion, or symmetry, wherein our liues and spirits respect each other. Besides, there is nothing more nourishing then Dew, for with it onely some cer∣taine small creatures are fedde, and doe thereby liue: which thing the diuine Poet verie well obserued, when he vttered these words; Quantum nos nocte reponit. So that in respect that it is humour, it is matter, in respect it is thin, it pierceth and ea∣sily entereth in, and in respect it is attracted and throughly concocted by the Sunne, it is the apter made to generation. For the preparation of the forme, carrieth with it the mat∣ter or stuffe, as his mate & companion: So these two meeting together, there cōsequently followeth the quickning or taking life of some one creature. And not onely are some Cat∣terpillers the of-spring and breed of dew, as common experience can witnesse, but euen the greatest part of Catterpillers do fetch their stocke and pedegree from Butter-flyes, vn∣lesse it be those that liue vpon Colewarts and Cabbages, and those that are called Vine-fretters, with some few other. For those that liue and breede in Vines, (called of the Grae∣cians Ipes,) doe proceede from dew, or some dewie and moyst humour, which is inclu∣ded in their webbes, and there growne to putrefaction. For then doe they swarme so ex∣ceedingly in some countryes, as I dare neither affirme, nor otherwise imagine, but that they must needes haue such a mighty encrease from putrefaction. And this for the most part happeneth when the Easterne wind bloweth, and that the warmth of the ayre furthe∣reth and hasteneth forwards any corruption. All the whole packe of them are great destroyers and deuourers of herbes and Trees: where-vpon Philippis the Parasite, as Athenaus sayth in Pythagorista, braggeth of himselfe in this wise, Apòla sathumon lachanonte kampe. Vescens thyme lere{que} eruca sum. I am (saith he) a Catterpiller that eateth both Tymbe & pot-herbs. And to this sence speaketh Mar∣tiall, Erucam malé pascit hortus vnam. A Garden hardly and slenderly can suffise to feede one Catterpiller. I thinke he meaneth, when the time of their wasting and deuouring is gone and past, for they commonly leaue but little behind. For that beeing past, they goe wandering hither and thither, vp and downe vncertainely, wasted and hunger-starued, and so at length pyning away by little and little through famine, some seeke them fit pla∣ces within, other-some aboue the earth, where they transforme themselues, eyther into a bare and empty bagge or case, or hanging by a thred into an Aurelia couered with a mem∣brane. If this happen in the midst of Sommer, the hardrind or shell wherein they are enclosed beeing broken, about the time of 24. dayes, there flyeth out a Butterflye: but if it come to passe in the midst, or toward the end of Au umne, the Aurelia continueth a whole vvin∣ter, neither is there any exclusion before the vernall heat. And yet notwithstanding, all Catterpillers are not conuerted into Aureliaes, but some of thē being gathered & drawne together on a heape (as the Vine-fretters) do growe at length to putrefaction, from which sometimes there falleth as it were three blackish egges, the true and proper mothers and breeders of Flyes and Cantharides. When the Butterflyes doe ioyne together very late, or after the time it ought to be, they doe lay or cast theyr egges which will continue vitall, and that may liue till the next Spring, (if a diligent care be had of them) as well as is often seene in Silke-wormes, whose egges the Spanyards sell, and that very vsually by vvhole ounces and pounds. I haue now according to my cunning, discoursed of the transmuta∣tions and variable changes of Catterpillers, it followeth next that I write of the qualities and vse of Catterpillers, together with those preseruatiues which experienced Phisitians haue warranted for true and infallible. All Catterpillers haue a burning qualitie, and such as will readily fetch of the skinne, and flea it quickly, and rayse blisters. If any one drinke the Catterpiller that liueth in the Their qua∣lities. Pytch-trees, there will forth-with follow a great paine about his mouth and iawes, vehe∣ment inflamation of the tongue, strong griping and wringing of the stomacke, belly and intestines, with a sensible itching about the inward parts, the whole body is as it were bur∣ned and scalded with heate & hot vapours, & the stomack abhorreth all meate: all which are to be remedied with the same meanes, as those that haue taken Cantharides. Yet pro∣perly, (as here-to-fore I haue touched) oyle of Quinces giuen to cause vomiting, is the best and safest. And if we may credit Pliny, new Wine boyled to the third part, and Covves milk being drunk, are very effectuall. There is not any one sort of Catterpillers, but they are maligne, naught, and venomous, but yet they are least hurtfull who are smooth and without hayres; and the most dangerous of all the rest, is that which heeretofore I ter∣med a Pityocampe, whose poyson for the most part is deadly. The daughter of Caelius Secundus liuing at Basill in Germany, (as Gesner saith) when shee had vnwarily and greedily eaten some Colewort-leaues, or Cabbage in a Garden, and with them some Catterpillers, after a strong vomit that was giuen, her belly beganne to swell, which swelling, hauing continued these many yeeres, could neuer as yet receiue any cure. If you will haue your Gardens and Trees vntouched and preserued from their misch euous qualitie, you must first take cleane away in the winter-time their webbes, or any part thereof (though neuer so little) that you can find cleauing to the bare boughes: for if you let them alone till the Spring, you shall sooner see them, then find them remoo∣ued, for in a short space of time, they deuoure vp all that is greene both leaues & flowers. Some vse to annoynt their Trees with the gall of a greene Lizard, and some with a Bulls gall, which as some constantly report, they can by no meanes away withall. The Country-people choke them with the vapour of a little Brimstone, with straw be∣ing fired vnder the Tree, and so to smother them. Some there be, that make a fumigati∣on with Galbanum, Harts-horne, the shauings of Iuory, and Goates-hoofes, and Oxe-dung. Didymus in Georgicis saith, that if you bare the rootes of your trees, and be-smeare or soyle them with Doues-dung, they shall neuer be hurt by any wormes. I should willingly haue omitted, and not renewed with any fresh discouery Columellaes remedy against Catterpillers, (or rather the immodest dece t, and deluding tricke of De∣mocritus,) vnlesse experience, which is, Iterata eiusdem eventus obseruatio, a repeated ob∣seruation of the same euent, had approoued the verity thereof, especially in the Country of Stiria. And Palladius in his first booke, chap. 35. and Constantinus neere the end of his xj. and xij. Bookes, whose wordes be these. At sinulla valet medicina repellere pestem, Dardaniae veniunt artes, nudata que plantas Faemina, quae just is tum demum operata juventae Legibus, obscaeno manat pudibunda cruore, Sed resoluto sinus, resoluto maest a capillo Ter circum areolus, et sepem ducitur horti: Quae tum lustravit gradiens (mirabile visu) Non aliter decussapluit quam ex arbore nimbus, Vel Teretis mali, vel tectae cortice glandis, Voluitur ad terram distorto corpore campe. Which may be englished thus; But when no medicine can that plague expell Then vse they Arts, which once the Troyans found A woman which had virgin-lawes obserued well, Her, bare and naked bring they to the ground, Flowing with Natures shamefull filthy blood: Her bosome open, and her hayre vntrimmed falling Like one ore'prest with griefe, forgetting good, Three times about the plots and hedges walking. Which done, a wonder tis for to be told, As rayne drops from the trees, type apples fall, Wallnuts out of huskes: so cast you may behold These wormes from trees, all torne, and cannot crall. Theophrastus saith, that Catterpillers will touch no plants which are moistened or be∣sprinckled with Wine. They will die if they take the fume, or be any way smoaked with the herbe Psora. Aetius. Whereby it is apparant (saith Siluius) that the herbe common∣ly termed Scabiose, is not the true Psora. Catterpillers that liue and feede on Coleworts, if they be but touched with that kind of worme which is found in the Fullers Teasell, they die. Pliny. All to besprinkle a Colewort whilst it hath but onely three leaues, with Niter, or with saltish and brinish earth, and by meanes of the saltnesse, the Catterpillers vvill be quite driuen away. Geopon. Palladius in this case preferreth the ashes of Figge-leaues. The Sca-onion called Squilla, beeing sowne or hanged vp in Gardens, hindereth the breeding of Catterpillers. Othersome in the most places of their Gardens, and round about them, sow and set Mints, the pulse called Orobos, which is somewhat like Vetches, and some worme-wood, or at least-wise hang them in bunches in diuers places of the same, to ex∣pell this kind of noysome creature. Some very aduisedly take dry leaues & stalks of Garlicke, & with the same doe smoke and perfume their whole Garden, so that by this way the smoke being conuayed into all places thereof, the Catterpillers will fall downe dead, as Palladius hath written, in whose writings, any man may read of plenty of such antydots and alexipharmicall medicines, as may serue to destroy Catterpillers. Now will I speake of their vse in Phisicke, and in the Common-wealth. The webbe of Catterpillers beeing taken inwardly, stayeth womens fluxes, as Matthiolus saith. Beeing likewise burnt and put into the nostrells, it stancheth bleeding at the nose. The Catterpil∣lers Theyr vse in Ph acke. that are found amongst the herbes called Spurges of all sorts, (by the iudgement of Hippocrates) are notable for putulent and mattrie wombes, especially if they be first dryed in the Sunne, with a double quantity of earth-wormes, and a little Anny-seed finely pow∣dered, and so all of them to be relented, and taken in some excellent White-wine. But in case they feele any heauines or aking in the belly after the taking of this Medicine, then it were good to drinke a little Mulse therevpon. This sayth Hippocrates in his booke De su∣perfoetat. Di scorides in his first booke and 90. chapter, giueth in drinke those common Catter-pillers that liue in companies together, against the disease called the Squinsie. But vnlesse by some hidde and secret property, they doe good in this griefe beeing receiued inward∣ly, it were needfull (in regard of their manifest venomous nature) that they were vtterly reiected & contemned. Nicander vseth them to prouoke sleepe, for thus he writeth, Ei de súge tripsas oligo en bammati kampen Kepeien drosoeastan epi chloreida noto. &c. Which Hieremias Martius hath thus translated. Quod si rodentes olus et frendentia vermes (Lueva quibus virides depingunt terga colores) In medio sacra de Palladis arbore succo Triveris, hinc{que} tuum colleveris vndi{que} corpus, Tuta dabis dulci securus membra quieti. Which may be englished thus; With herbe-eating, or greene-leafe-gnawing wormes, Whose backs imprinted are with colours liuely greene, All bruised, mixed with iuyce from Pallas tree that rumes, Annoynted body brought to sound sleepe is often seene. There are to be seene in diuers thornie, pricklie, sharpe and rough herbes, (as for exam∣ple in Nettle) sundry hairie or lanuginous Catterpillers, which beeing tyed or hanged a∣bout some part of the body, do by and by (as the report goeth) heale those infants which haue any stopping of the meates passage when they cannot swallow. A Catterpiller bree-ding in pot-herbes, beeing first bruised and then annoynted vpon any venomous bytings of Serpents, is of great efficacie: and if you rubbe a naughtie or a rotten tooth with the Colewort-catterpillers, and that often, within a few dayes follow∣ing, the tooth will fall out of his owne accord. Auicenna. Catterpillers mixt with oyle, doe driue away Serpents. Dioscorides. If a man annoynt his hands, or any other part with oyle, it will cause that hee shall receiue no hurt by the stinging of Bees, VVaspes, or Hor∣nets, as Aetius sayth. Pliny cyteth many fond and superstitious fained matters, and lying tales, deuised by those who in his time were called Magi, Soothsayers or Diuiners, con∣cerning the admirable vertues of Catterpillers. All which, because I see them hissed out of the Schoole of Diuinitie, and that in hart secretly I haue condemned them, I will at this time let them passe without any further mention. They are also a very good meate to diuers byrdes and fowles, which are so needful for the vse, benefit, and foode of man-kinde, as to Starlings, Peacocks, Hennes, Thrushes, Dawes or Choughes: and to sundry fishes likewise, as to the Tench, Pike or Pikerell, & to a certaine Sea-fish called a Scorpion: also to the Troute, and some others, who are ea∣sily deceiued with a Catterpillerd hooke. VVhich kind of fishing fraude, if you would bet∣ter be instructed in, I must referre you to Tarentinus in his Geoponicks, and to a little booke dedicated to Robert Dudley, late Earle of Leicester, written by Ma: Samuell Vicar, of God∣manchester in Huntingtonshiere. It is not to be passed ouer in silence, how that not many yeres since, there came infinite swarmes of Catterpillers out of Thrucia into Polonia, Hungaria, and beyond the lymits of Germany, which did not onely deuoute the fruites of trees, but whatsoeuer was greene either in the medowes & tilled fields, besides the Vines: which was taken for an euident prognosticke and signe (as many diuined) of some great Turkish Armie to come swar∣ming into those parts: neither herein did this their gessing and mistrust deceiue them, for the next yeere following was the siedge of Vienna in Austria, the wasting, spoyling and ouer-running of Hungaria, and the deadly English-Sweating could not containe it selfe in an Iland, but must spread it selfe among them of the Continent, wherevppon ensued the destruction of many thousands of people, before any remedy could be found out. In the yeere of grace 1573. there rushed infinite swarmes of Catterpillers into Italy, where they spoyled and made hauock of all greene buds & grasse growing vpon the face of the earth, so that with theyr vnquenchable and insatiate voracity, they left nothing but the bare rootes of trees and plants: and this hapned chiefely about Mantua and Brixia. And vpon the necke of this, followed a terrible & fearefull pestilence, of which there dyed aboue 50. thousand persons. Also in the yeere of our Lord GOD 1570. there vvere two great and suddaine swarmes of Catterpillers that came rushing into Italy in the space of one Sommer, which put the Romans into an exceeding great feare, for there was nothing left greene in all their fieldes that could be preserued from their rauine, and from their gluttonous and pil∣ling maw. And although the fertilitie of the yeere immediately following, did almost blot and race out the memory of this their heauy punishment, & that many seemed as it were to repent them of theyr repentance, yet are we not to doubt, but that many were truly pe∣nitent, and seriously were drawne to amendement of life by a due consideration heereof. God grant that we may be warned by other mens punishments, least that poore creature, which we imagin to be the silliest & least able to do vs harme, we find the most heauie. ❧ OF THE BOAS. I T was well knowne among all the Romans, that when Regulus was Go∣uernour or Generall in the Punick warres, there was a Serpent (neere the Riuer Bagrade) killed with slings & stones, euen as a Towne or little Cit∣tie is ouer-come, which Serpent was an hundred and twenty foote in length: whose skinne and cheeke bones, were reserued in a Temple at Rome, vntill the Numantine warre. And this History is more easie to be beleeued, because of the Boas Serpent bred in I∣taly at this day: for we read in Solinus, that when Claudius was Emperour, there was one of them slaine in the Vatican at Rome, in whose belly was found an Infant swallowed whole, and not a bone thereof broken. The Germaines call this Serpent Vncke, and be∣sides thē I doe not reade of any other Name. Some haue ignorantly confounded it with Chersydrus, an Adder of the earth, but vpon what reason I doe not know, onely Solinus discoursing of Calabria, might giue some colour to this opinion, when he saith, Calabria Chersydris est frequentissima, & boam gignit quem Anguem ad immensam molē ferunt coa∣lescere: that is to say, Calabria is full of Earth-Adders, and it breedeth the Boas, vvhich Snake some affirme will grow into a monstrous stature. Out of which words, there is no wise man can collect that the Boas and the Adder of the earth are all one thing. The Latines call it Boa and Boua of Bos, because by sucking Cowes milke it so encrea∣seth, that in the end it destroyeth all manner of hedres, Cattell and Regions. And our do∣mesticall Snakes and Adders, will also sucke milke from Kine, as in all the Nations of the world is most manifest to them that will obserue the same. The Italians doe vsually call them, Serpeda de Aqua, a Serpent of the water, and there∣fore all the Learned expound the Geeeke word Hydra for a Boas. Cardan saith, that there are of this kind in the kingdome of Senega, both without feet & wings, but most properly they are now found in Italy, according to these verses. Boa quidem serpens quem tellus Itala nutrit Hunc bubulum plures lac enutrire docent. Which may be englished thus, The Boas Serpent which Italy doth breede, Men say, vppon the milke of Cowes doth feede. Their fashion is in seeking for their prey among the heardes, to destroy nothing that gi∣ueth suck so long as it will liue, but they reserue it aliue vntill the milk be dryed vp, then af∣terward they kill & eate it, and so they deale with whole flocks & heards. The poyson of it, saith Festus, maketh tumour & swelling in the body, wherevnto all others agree, except Albertus, who in this poynt agrees not with himselfe, for in one place hee saith that they are venomous, & their teeth also like other Dragons, in another place he saith, their poy∣son is very weake, and not to be regarded, because they be Dragons of the third order or deuision. They goe all vpon their belly, and so I will conclude their story with Mantuan. Turpi Boa flexilis aluo. that is to say, The filthy Boas on his belly mooues. OF THE CHAMAELEON. I T is very doubtfull whether a Chamaeleon were euer knowne to the auncient Hebrewes, because there is no certaintie among thē for the appellation thereof, some affirming one thing, and some another. We read Leuit. 11. among other beasts there forbidden to be eaten of, Koah, or Koach, which Rabbi Kimhi interpreteth a kind of Crocodile (Hazah,) Rabbi Ionas in the Arabian, Hardun, and so also doth Auicen. The Chalde Koaha, the Persians An san∣ga, the Septuagints and S. Ierom, a Chamaeleon. The selfe same word is found Leuit. 14. which the Iewes do vulgarly at this day take for Senicus, a Cro∣codile of the earth. The word Oah or Oach, seemeth to come neere to this, which is some-times interpreted a Torteyse, a Dragon, or a Monkey. And Oas by Syluaticus, is transla∣ted a Salamander. Kaath by the Iewes, is translated a Cuckoe, a Iay, a Pellican, & an O∣nocratua: and in the second of Sophoni for a Chamaeleon. Some haue framed an Hebrew word Gamalion, which is absurd, for Gameleon. Zamelon, Aamelon, Hamaleon, & Meleon, are but corrupted termes of Chamaeleon, as Isidorus well obserueth, or els signifieth some of the kinds of Lyzards or Stellionds, as is manifest in Albertus, and other learned Wri∣ters. Therefore I will not blot more paper about the Arabian beastes Harbe and Alharbe, Alarbian or Hardon, Hardun or Alharba, but leaue them to the iudgement of those, vvho delight in the inuestigation of such secrets. Chamaeleon is a Greeke word, from whence the Latines, and almost all Nations haue borrowed the name of this serpentine or creeping beast, except the Germaines, and they onely haue fained names, as Lindtwarm in Albertus, that is, a Worme of the wood, and Rattader by Gesner, that is a Ratmouse, because in quantitie & composition, it resembleth both those creatures. Some Latines, by reason of the similitude it holdeth with a Lizard, call it Muri Laccritus, a Mouse-Lyzard. The Greeke word Chamaeleon, signifieth a low & humble Lyon, because in some parts and members, he resembleth that lofty & couragious beast. So do they deriue the names of certaine low & short herbs, from great & tall trees, as Chamaecerasus, Chamaeciparissus, Chamaedris, and Chamaepitis, shrubs of plumtree, heath, Cipres, Germander, & ground Iuy, from the Cherry, the Cypres, the Cedar, & the Pine tree. And thus much for the name of the Chamaeleon. The countries breeding Cha∣maeleons, are Affrica, Asia, and India, & for the quantity there∣of I do find diuers descriptions, some particuler, as in Bellonius and Scaliger, and some generall in other Writers, all which I purpose briefely & successiuely to expresse in this place. It is saide (saith Bellonius,) that the Frogge & the Chamaeleon are like one to the other, because they vse the same Art and indu∣stry in taking their meate: and to the intent that this thing may more euidently appeare, both by the description and the pic∣ture, I haue thought good to entreate of the Chamaeleon, a∣mongst the Water-beasts, be∣cause it liueth for the most part, in moyst, marshy, and Fennie places. I haue seene of thē two kinds, one, a lesser kind in Ara∣bia, beeing of a whitish colour, all sette ouer with yellowish or reddish spots, and in quantitie not exceeding the greene Ly∣zard. The other, in the hot pla∣ces of Egypt, being twise as big in quantitie as the Arabian, and of a changeable colour, betwixt white, greene, browne & yel∣low, for which occasion some haue called it versi-color Chamae∣leon, that is, a Turne-coate-co∣loured Chamaeleon. But both these kindes of Chamaeleons, haue a copped head, like to a Camell, and two bones at the toppe of theyr browes standing vp on either side, and hanging out: their eyes are most cleere and bright, about the bignes of a pease, onely couered vvith a skinne, so that their appearance outwarde, exceedeth not the quantity of a Millet-seede. They are very flexible, turning vp∣wards and downewards, & are able at one time to looke two seuerall wayes, distinctly vpon two seuerall obiects, vvherein they exceede all other beasts. It is a heauie and dull beast, like the Salamander, neither can it runne, but like a Lizard, wherfore it is not afraid of the sight of men, neither doth it runne from their presence, neither is it easily prouoked to harme or bite a man: it climb∣eth little trees for feare of Vipers and horned Serpents. Some haue thought that it neuer eateth meat, but is nourished with the wind, because it draweth in very eagerly many times the wind into the belly, whereby it swelleth: for it hath great lights stretched all along the sides of the belly: but this opinion is false, as shall be shewed hereafter, although it cannot be denyed that it is Ouiparum patrentissimum fa∣mis: that is, The most induring famine among all other Egge-breeding-beastes, for it fa∣steth many times eyght monthes: yea, a whole yeare together. In stead of Nostrils and eares it hath certaine passages in those places, whereby it smelleth and heareth. The opening of the mouth is very large, and it hath teeth on the neather and vpper chap like Sawes, such as are in a Slo-worme, the toong very smooth, halfe a hand breadth long, where withall it licketh in those insectes Flyes, Horse-flyes, Locustes, and Emittes, whereupon it feedeth: For it keepeth at the mouth a certaine fome or moysture, and al∣so vpon the tayle and backer partes, wherewithall those Flyes and other Creatures are so much delighted, that they follow the Chamaelion, and as it were bewitched with the de∣sire thereof, they fall vppon the moysture to their owne perdition; and this is to bee noted, that this moysture or fome in the backer partes of the body is like a Spunge. It hath a line or strake vnder the belly, indented as it were with scales, white in colour, and stretched out to the tayle, but the feete seeme to bee of an artificiall worke of Nature, wherein is a curious difference betwixt the former and the hinder: for the forefeete haue three fingers or clawes within, and two without: the hinder feete on the contrary, haue two without and three within: It layeth twelue long Egges, such as Lyzards do, the hart is not much greater then the heart of a Domesticall Mouse or Rat: it hath two lappes of a Liuer, whereof the left is the greater, vnto which cleaueth the skinne of the Gall, the which skin exceedeth not in quantity a Barly-corne. And thus farre the description by Bellonius. In the next place for the better manifestation of the nature of this beast, I will also adde the description that Scaliger maketh thereof. For he saith, when Iohannes Landius was in the farthest parts of Syria, he saw fiue Chamaelions, whereof he bought one, which with his tongue did very soddenly take off a Fly from his breast: Wherefore in the dissection of the said Chamaelion, he found that the tongue thereof was as long as a hand breadth, hollow and empty, in the toppe whereof there was a little hole with filthy matter there∣in, wherewithall he tooke his prey: which thing seemed new and strange vnto thē which heretofore thought that a Chamaelion liued onely by the ayre. His backe was somewhat crooked, rising with spotted bunches like a Sawe, like the Turbut-fish, his belly closed with short ribbes, his eyes most beautifull, which he turneth euery way without bending his necke: his colour white, greene, and dusky: naturally greene, somewhat pale on the backe, but paler and nearer to white on the belly, yet was it beset all ouer with red, blew, and white spots. It is not true that the Chamaelion chaungeth her selfe into all colours, vppon greene groweth greennesse, vpon the dusky is tempered a dusky colour; but vppon blew, red, or white the natiue greennes is not blemished or obscured, but the blew, white, and red spots yeald a more liuely and pleasant aspect; vpon black, standeth browne, yet so, as the green hew seemeth to be confounded with blacke, and it doth not change his owne colour into a supposed colour, but when it is oppressed with feare or griefe. That it liueth sometime of the Ayre, a whole yeare or more, doeth appeare, because it eateth no meate during that time, but gaping with a wide mouth draweth in the ayre, & then shutting his chaps againe his belly swelleth. Yea, I found one that constantly affirmed, that they turne themselues to the beames of the Sunne, and gaping wide after them, follow them hard as it were to draw them in. They haue fiue distinct clawes vpon euery foote, with two of which they claspe the round boughes or twigges of trees, as Parrats doe when they sit vppon their pearches, and these clawes stand not as other Birdes doe, three together and one by it selfe, but in imparity or dissimilitude, three on the one side, and two on the o∣ther, and so are parted with an inuerse order, for the hinder and former are contrary one to the other, so as if there bee three clawes on the inside, and two on the outside of the Leg before, then are there three on the outside behind, and two on the inside: And thus much I receiued from Langius. So farre Scaliger. Now we will proceede to the perticular description of their parts, as we find them re∣corded in other Writers, leauing those breefe and pregnable Narrations of Bellonius & Scaliger. And first of all for the figure and outward shape of their bodies, then for theyr colour, and the reasons of their mutability and variation of colour. For the figure and shape of their bodies, Pliny is of opinion, that a Chamaelion is like to a Crocodile of the Earth, except in the sharpe bending of the backe-bone, or the length or greatnesse of the tayle. Some say that the whole parts of the body doth represent a Lizard, excepting that the sides are ioyned to the belly, and the baeke-bone standeth vp as in Fishes. Arnol∣dus Aristotle saith it resembleth a Stellion if the Legs were not straighter and higher: but the truth is, it is a Foure-footed-beast, much like to a Lizard, yet it goeth higher from the Earth, Solmus. and alwayes gapeth, hauing a rough skinne all ouer the body like a Crocodile, and is also full of scabs. The length of it from the tip of the Nose to the rumpe of the taile, is 7. or 8. fingers, the height of them fiue fingers, and the Legs lone, three fingers and a halfe. The length of the tayle eyght or nine fingers, the backe-bone eminent & standing vp, cersted or in∣dented all throughout to the tip of the taile, but neare the rump, the crestes are more low and lesse visible. On eyther side at the roote of the ribbes stand bony eminent bunches, from which discendeth a line, and is extended throughout the length of the tailo on both sides; and if it were not for these bunches the turnings about, and the other three in the lower part, it would be so exasperated or extenuated toward the end like to the tayle of a Rat or great Mouse. The middle place betwixt the bottome of the belly and the top of the backe, contayneth an Angle or flexure of sixteene ribbes, after the fashion or pro∣portion of a Greeke Lambda, except that the angle thereof be more wide & potent, which looketh backeward toward the taile, and within these ribbes is the whole haunch of the body and belly, contained in a round compasse on either side. Beeing blacke, it is not vnlike the Crocodile, and being pale, it is like to the Lizard, set ouer with blacke spottes like a Leopard. It changeth colour both in the eyes, tayle, and whole body, alwayes into the colour of that which is next it, except red and white, which colours it cannot easily vndertake, so that it deceiueth the eyes of the beholders, turning blacke into greene, and greene into blew, like a Player, which putteth of one person, to put on another: accor∣ding to these verses of Ouid; Id quoque quod ventis animal natritur & aura, Protinus assimilat, tetigit quoscun{que} colores. In English thus; The beast that liueth by wind and weather, Of each thing touched taketh colour. The reasons of this change of colour are the same which are giuen of the Buffe and Polypus Fish; namely, extreamity of feare, the thinnesse, smoothnesse, and baldnesse of the skinne. Whereupon Tertullian writeth thus: Hoc soli Chamaelienti datum quod vulgo dictum est de suo corio ludere: That is to say, This is the onely gift of nature to a Chamae∣lion, that according to the common Prouerbe it deceiueth with his skin: meaning that a chamaelion at his owne pleasure can change the colour of his skinne. Whereupon E∣rasmus applyeth the prouerb, de alieno corio ludere, to such as secure themselues with other mens perill. From hence also commeth another prouerbe, Chamaileontos rumetaboloon∣taros, more mutable then a Chamaelion, for a crafty, cunning, inconstant fellow, changing himselfe into euery mans disposition; such a one was Alcibiades, who was said to be in A∣thens, and of such a man resembling this beast, did Alciatus make this emblem against flat∣terers: Semper hiat, semper tenuem qua vescitur auram, Reciprocat Chamaelion, Et mutat faciem, varios sumitque colores, Praeter rubrum vel candidum. Sic & adulator populare vescitur aura, Hiansque cuncta deuorat. Et solum mores imitatur principis atros. Albi & pudici nescius. That is to say; It alway gapes, turning in and out that breath Whereon it feedes: and often changeth hew: Now blacke and greene, and pale, and other colours hath, But red and white Chamaelions do eschew: So Clawbackes feede on vulgar breath as bread, With open mouth deuouring fame and right, Princes, blacke-vices praise, but vertues dread, Designed in nature by colours red and white. A Chamaelion of all Egge-breeding-beastes is the thinnest, because it lacketh bloud, and the reason hereof is by Aristotle referred to the disposition of the soule: For he saith, through ouer much feare, it taketh vpon it many colours, and feare through the want of bloud and heate, is a refrigeration of this beast. Plutarke also calleth this beast a meticulous and fearefull beast, and in this cause con∣cludeth the change of his colour, not as some say, to auoyde and deceiue the beholders and to worke out his owne happinesse, but for meere dread and terrour. Iohannes Vrsinus assigneth the cause of the change of Chamaelions colour, not to feare, but to the meate & to the ayre, as appeareth by these verses; Non timor, imò cibus, nimirum limpidus aër, Ambo simul vario membra colore nouant. Which may be thus englished; Not feare, but meate which is the ayre thinne, New colours on his body doth begin. But I for my part doe assigne the true cause to bee in the thinnesse of their skinne, and therefore may easily take impression of any colour, like to a thin fleake of a horne, which beeing layde ouer blacke, seemeth blacke, and so ouer other colours: and besides, there being no hinderaunce of bloud in this beast, nor Intrals, except the Lights, the other hu∣mours may haue the more predominant mutation; and so I will conclude the discourse of the partes and colour of a Chamaelion, with the opinion of Kiranides, not that I ap∣prooue it, but to let the Reader know all that is written of this Subiect, his wordes are these: Chamaelem singulis horis diei mutat colorem: A Chamaelion changeth his colour eue∣ry houre of a day. This beast hath the face like a Lyon, the feet and tayle of a Crocodile, hauing a variable colour, as you haue heard, and one strange continued Nerue from the head to the tayle, beeing altogether without flesh, except in the head, cheekes, and vppermost part of the tayle, which is ioyned to the body; neither hath it any bloud but in the hart, eyes, and in a place aboue the hart, and in certaine vaynes deriued from that place, and in them also but a very little bloud. There be many membranes all ouer theyr bodies, and those stronger then in any other Beastes. From the middle of the head backward, there ariseth a three square bone, and Aristotle. Pliny. the fore part is hollow and round like a Pipe, certaine bony brimmes, sharpe and inden∣ted, standing vpon either side. Theyr braine is so little aboue their eyes, that it almost toucheth them, and the vpper skinne beeing pulled off from their eyes, there appeareth a certaine round thing like a bright ring of Brasse, which Niphus calleth Palla, which signi∣fieth that part of a Ring, wherein is set a pretious stone. The eyes in the hollow within, are very great, and much greater then the proportion of the body, round, and couered ouer with such a skinne as the whole body is, except the apple, which is bare, and that part is neuer couered. This apple stands immoueable, not turned, but when the whole eye is turned at the pleasure of the beast. The snoute is like to the snoute of a Hog-ape, alwayes gaping, and neuer shutting his mouth, and seruing him Solinus. for no other vse but to beare his tongue and his teeth: his gumbes are adorned with teeth as we haue said before, the vpper lippe beeing shorter and more turned in then the other. Their throate and arterie are placed as in a Lizard: their Lights are exceeding great, and they haue nothing els within their body. Whervpon Theophrastus as Plutarch witnesseth, conceiueth, that they fill the whole body within, & for this cause it is more apt to liue on the ayre, and also to change the colour. It hath no Spleene or Melt, the tayle is very long, at the end and turning vp like a Vi∣pers tayle, winded together in many circles. The feete are double clouen, & for propor∣tion Aristotle resemble the thumbe and hand of a man, yet so, as if one of the fingers were set neere the side of the thumbe, hauing three without and two within behind, and three vvithin, and two without before; the palme betwixt the fingers is somewhat great: from within the hinder legges, there seeme to growe certaine spurres. Their legges are straight, and longer then a Lizards, yet is theyr bending alike, and theyr nayles are crooked and very sharpe. One of these beeing dissected and cut asunder, yet breatheth a long time after, they goe into the caues and holes of the earth like Lizards, wherein they lie all the winter time, and come forth againe in the Spring, theyr pace is very slow, and themselues very gentle, neuer exasperated but when they are about wild-figge-trees. They haue for theyr enemies the Serpent, the Crow and the Hawke. When the hun∣gry erpent doth assault them, they defend themselues in this manner, as Alexander Min∣dius writeth: they take in their mouthes a broad & strong stalk, vnder protection where∣of as vnder a buckler, they defend themselues against theyr enemy the Serpent, by reason that the stalke is broader then the Serpent can gripe in his mouth, and the other parts of the Chamaeleon so firme and hard, as the Serpent cannot hurt them: he laboureth but in vaine to get a prey, so long as the stalke is in the Chamaeleons mouth. But if the Chamae∣leon at any time see a Serpent taking the ayre, and sunning himselfe vnder some greene tree, he climbeth vp into that tree, and setleth himselfe directly ouer the Serpent, then out of his mouth he casteth a thred like a Spyder, at the end whereof hangeth a drop of poy∣son, as bright as any pearle, by this string he letteth downe the poyson vpon the Serpent, which lighting vppon it, killeth it immediatly. And Scaliger reporteth a greater vvonder then this in the description of the Chamaeleon, for he sayth, if the boughes of the Tree so grow as the perpendiculer line cannot fall directlie vpon the Serpent, then hee so correct∣eth and guideth it with his fore-feete, that it falleth vpon the Serpent within the mark of a hayres breadth. The Rauen and the Crow are also at variance with the Chamaeleon, & so great is the aduerse nature betwixt these twaine, that if the crow eate of the chamaeleon beeing slaine by him, he dyeth for it, except he recouer his life by a Bay-leafe, euen as the Elephant af∣ter he hath deuoured a chamaeleon, saueth his life by eating of the Wile-oliue-tree. But the greatest wonder of all is, the hostility which Pliny reporteth to be betwixt the Cha∣maeleon and the Hawke. For he writeth, that when a Hawke flyeth ouer a Chamaeleon, she hath no power to resist the Chameleon, but falleth downe before it, yeelding both her life and limbes to be deuoured by it; and thus that deuourer that liueth vpon the prey & blood of others, hath no power to saue her owne life from this little beast. A Chamaeleon is a fraudulent, rauening and gluttonous beast, impure, and vncleane by the law of GOD, and forbidden to be eaten: in his owne nature wilde, yet counter∣setting meekenes, when he is in the custodie of man. And this shall suffise to haue spoken for the description of this beast, a word or two of the Medicines arising out of it, and so a conclusion. I find that the Auncients haue obserued two kindes of Medicines in this beast, one ma∣gicall, and the other naturall, and for my owne part, although not able to iudge of either, yet I haue thought good to anex a relation of both to this History. And first of the natu∣rall medicines, Democritus is of opinion that they deserue a peculier Volume, and yet he himselfe telleth nothing of thē worthy of one page, except the lying vanities of the Gen∣tiles, & superstitions of the Graecians. With the gall, if the suffusions and Leprous parts of the body be annointed three dayes together, and the whitenesse of the eyes, it is belee∣ued to giue a present remedy: and Archigenes prescribeth the same for a medicine for the Marcellus. taking away of the vnprofitable and and pricking hayres of the eye-browes. It is thought if it be mixed with some sweet composition, that it hath power to cure a quotidian Ague. If the toong of Chamaelion be hung ouer an obliuious and forgetfull person, it is thought to haue power to restore his memory. The Chamaelion from the head to the tayle, hath but one Nerue, which beeing taken Rhazes. out and hung about the necke of him that holdeth his head awry or backeward, it cureth him. The other parts haue the same operation as the parts of the Hyaena & the Sea-calfe. If a Chamaelion be sod in an earthen pot, and consumed till the waterbe as thicke as oile, then after such seething, take the bones out, and put them in a place where the Sunne ne∣uer Kiranides. commeth, then if you see a man in the fit of the falling sicknesse, turne him vppon his belly, and annoynt his backe from the Os sacrum to the ridge bone, and it will presently deliuer him from the fit: but after seuen times vsing, it will perfectly cure him. The Oyle thus made must be kept in a Boxe. This medicine following is a present remedy agaynst Trallianus. the gowt. Take the head and feet of a Chamaeleon, cut offalso the outward partes of the knees and feete, and then keepe by themselues those parts: that is to say, the partes of the right legge by themselues, and the partes of the left Legge by themselues, then touch the Nayle of the Chamaeleon with your Thumbe and right finger of your hand, dipping the tips of your fingers of the right hand in the bloud of the right foote of the beast: and so likewise the fingers of the left hand in the bloud of the left foote, then include those parts in two little Pipes, and so let the sicke person carry the right partes in the right hand, and the left parts in the left hand, vntill he be cured: and this must bee remembred, that hee must touch euery morning about the Sun rising the said Chamaeleon, yet liuing and lap∣ped in a Linnen cloth, with those parts that are oppressed with the Gout. The like superstitious and magicall deuises are these that follow, as they are recorded by Pliny and Democritus. The head and thraot being set on fire with wood of Oake, they beleeue to be good against Thunder and raine, and so also the Liuer burned on a Tyle. If the right eye be taken out of it aliue, and applyed to the whitenes of the eyes in Goats Milke, it is thought to cure the same. The tongue bound to a woman with child, preser∣ueth her from danger in child-byrth, if the same tongue be taken from the beast aliue, it is thought it foresheweth the euent of iudgement. The heart wrapped in blacke Wooll of the first shearing, by wearing it, cureth a quartane Ague, the right claw of the forefeet bound to the left arme with the skinne of his cheekes, is good against robberies and ter∣rours of the night, and the right pap against all feares. If the left foote be scorched in a fur∣nace with the Herb Chamaeleon, and afterward putting a litle ointment to it, & made in∣to little Pasties, so being carryed about in a wooden boxe, it maketh the party to go in∣visible. The right shoulder maketh a man to preuaile against his aduersaries, if they doe but tread vpon the Nerues cast down vpō the earth. But the left shoulder they consecrate the same to monsterous dreames, as if that thereby a man might dreame what hee would in his owne person and effect, the like in others. With the right foote are all paulsies resolued, and with the left foote all Lethargies: the Wine wherein one side of a Chamaeleon hath beene steeped, sprinkled vppon the head, cureth the ach thereof. If Swines Grease be mingled with the powder of the left foote or Thigh, and a mans foote be annoynted therewith, it bringeth the gout, by put∣ting the Gall into fire, they driue away Serpentes; and into Water, they draw together Weasels, it pulleth off hayre from the body, so also doth the Liuer, with the Lightes of of a Toade; likewise the Liuer dissolueth amorous inchantments. Melancholy men are cured by drinking the iuyce of a Chamaeleon out of a Chamaeleons skin. They also say, that the Intrals and dung of this beast washed in the vrine of an Ape, and hung vp at our enemies gates, causeth reconciliation. With the taile they bring Serpentes asleepe, and stay the flowing of the flouds and Waters: the same mingled with Ceder and Myrrhe, bound to two rods of Palme, and strucke vpon water, causeth all thinges that are contained in the same water to appeare; but I would to GOD that such Magitians were well beaten with Róddes of stronger wood, vntill they forsooke these magicall fooleries: And thus much for the story of the Chamaeleon. OF THE COCKATRICE. T His Beast is called by the Graecians Baziliscos, and by the Latine Regulus, because he seemeth to be the King of ser∣pents, not for his magnitude or greatnesse. For there are Pliny. Solinus, many Serpents bigger then he, as there be many Foure-footed-beastes bigger then the Lyon, but because of his stately pace, and magnanimious mind: for hee creepeth not on the earth like other Serpents, but goeth halfe vp∣right, for which occasion all other Serpentes auoyde his sight. And it seemeth nature hath ordained him for that purpose: for beside the strength of his poyson which is vncurable, he hath a certaine combe or Corronet vppon his head, as shall be shewed in due place: It is also cald Sibilus, as we read in Isidorus, Sibilus enim occidit antequam mordeat vel exurat: The Cockatrice killeth before it burneth. The Hebrewes call it Pethen, and Curman, also Zaphna, and Zaphnaini. The Chalde Armene, Harmene, and also Carmene: The Aegyptians Vreus, the Germans Ein Ertz Schlengle, the French Vn Basilic: The Spaniards and Italians Basilisco. There is some question amongest Writers, about the generation of this Serpent: for some, (and those very many and learned) affirme, him to be brought forth of a Cockes egge. For they say that when a Cock groweth old, he layeth a certaine egge without any shell, in stead whereof it is couered with a very thicke skinne, which is able to withstand the greatest force of an easie blow or fall. They say moreouer, that this Egge is layd one∣ly in the Summer-time, about the beginning of Dogge-dayes, being not long as a Hens Egge, but round and orbiculer: Sometimes of a dusty, sometimes of a Boxie, sometimes of a yellowish muddy colour, which Egge is generated of the putrified seed of the Cocke, and afterward set vpon by a Snake or a Toad, bringeth forth the Cockatrice, being halfe a foot in length, the hinder part like a Snake, the former partlike a Cooke, because of a treble combe on his forehead. But the vulger opinion of Europe is, that the Egge is nourished by a Toad, and not by a Snake; howbeit in better experience it is found that the Cocke doth sit on that egge himselfe: whereof Leuinus Lemnius in his twelth booke of the hidden miracles of nature hath this discourse, in the fourth chapter thereof. There happened (saith he) within our memory in the Citty Pirizaea, that there were two old Cockes which had layd Egges, & the common people (because of opinion that those Egges would engender Cockatrices) laboured by all meanes possible to keepe the said cockes from sitting on those egges, but they could not with clubs and staues driue them from the Egges, vntill they were forced to breake the egges in sunder, and strangle the cockes. But this point is worth inquiry, whether a cocke can conceiue an Egge, and after a certaine time lay the same' without a shell. I for my part am perswaded, that when a cocke groweth old, and ceaseth to tread his female in the ordinary course of nature, which is in the seuenth or ninth yeare of his age, or at the most in the foureteenth, there is a certaine concretion bred within him by the putrified heat of his body, through the staying of his seede generatiue, which harde∣neth vnto an egge, & is couered with such a shell, as is said already: the which egge being nourished by the cocke or some other beast, bring eth forth a venomous worme, such as are bred in the bodies of men, or as Waspes, Horse-flyes, and catterpillers engendered of Horse-dung, or other putryfied humours of the earth: and so out of this Egge may such a venomous Worme proceede, as in proportion of body, and pestiferous breath, may resemble the Affrican cockatrice or Basiliske, and yet it is not the same whereof wee purpose here to intreat, but will acknowledge that to be one kind of cockatrice, but this kind is generated like other Serpents of the earth, for as the auncient Hermes writeth, it is both false and impossible, that a cockatrice should be hatched of a cockes Egge. The same writer maketh mention of a Bazeliske ingendered in dung, whereby hee meaneth the E∣lixir of life, wherewithall the Alchimistes conuert mettals. The Aegyptians hold opinion, that these cockatrices are engendered of the Egges of the Bird called Ibis, and therefore they breake those Egges wheresoeuer they finde them: and for this cause in theyr Hieroglyphicks, when they will signifie a lawfull execution af∣ter an vpright iudgment, & sound institution of their forefathers, they are wont to make an Ibis, and a cockatrice. The countries breeding or bringing forth these cockatrices, are sayd to be these: First Pliny. Textor. Auicenna. Aelianus Solinus. Affricke, and therein the Ancient seat or land of the Turkes, Nubia, and all the wildernes of Affrica, & the countries Cyrenes. Gallen among the Physitions only, doubteth whither there be a cockatrice or no, whose authority in this case must not be followed, seeing it was neuer giuen to mortal man to see & know euery thing, for besides the holy scriptures vnauoidable authority, which both in the prophesie of Esay and Ieremy, maketh mention of the cockatrice and her Egges: there be many graue humainé Writers, whose autho∣rity is irrefragable, affirming not onely that there be cockatrices, but also that they infect the ayre, and kill with their sight. And Mercuriall affirming, that when he was with Max∣imilion the Emperour, hee saw the carkase of a cocatrice, reserued in his treasury among his vndoubted monuments. Of this Serpent the Poet Georgius Pictorius writeth on this manner; Rex est serpentum basiliscus, quem modo vincunt Mustelae insultus, saeuaque bella ferae. Lernaeum vermem basiliscum foeda Cirene Producit cunctis maximè perniciem. Et nasci ex ouo galli, si credere fas est, Decrepiti, in fimo, sole nitente, docent. Sed quoniam olfactu loedit, visuque ferarum Omne genus credas, nulla tenere bona. That is to say; The Bazeliske the Serpents King I find, Yet Weasels him do' ouercome in warre, The Cyren land him breedes of Lernaes kind, They to all other a destruction are: And if we may beleeue, that through the heat of Sunne, In old Cockes Egges this beast is raised first, Or beastes by fight or smell thereof are all vndone, Then ist not good, but of his kind the worst. Wee doe read that in Rome, in the dayes of Pope Leo the fourth, there vvas a Cockatrice found in a Vault of Church or Chappell, dedicated to Saint Lucea, whose pestiferous breath hadde infected the Ayre round about, whereby great mortality follo∣wed in Rome: but how the said Cockatrice came thither it was neuer knowne. It is most probable that it was created and sent of GOD for the punnishment of the Citty, which I do the more easily beleeue, because Segonius & Iulius Scaliger do affirme, that the sayd pestiferous beast was killed by the prayers of the said Leo the fourth. I thinke they meane that by the authoritie of the sayde Byshop, all the people were mooued to generall fasting and prayer, and so Almighty GOD who was mooued for theyr sinnes, to send such a plague amongest them, was likewise intreated by their pray∣ers and sutes, not onely to reuerse the plague, but with the same hand to kill the beast, wherewithall it was created: euen as once in Aegypt by the hand of Moses, hee brought Grasse-hoppers and Lice, so by the same hand he droue them away againe. There is some small difference amongest the Writers, about the quantity and partes of this Serpent: which I will breefely reconcile. First Aelianus saith, that a Cockatrice is not past a spanne in compasse, that is as much as a man can gripe in his hand. Pliny saith, that it is as bigge as twelue fingers. Solinus and Isidorus affirme, that it is but halfe a foot long. Auicen saith, that the Arabian Harmena, that is, the Cockatrice, is two cubits and a halfe long. Nicander saith, Et tribus extenso porrectus corpore palmis, that is, it is in length but three palmes. Aetius sayth, that it is as bigge as three handfuls: Now for the recon∣ciliation of all these. It is to bee vnderstood, that Pliny and Aelianus speaketh of the Worme that commeth out of the Cockes Egge, in regard of the length, but not of the quantity, and so confound together that Worme and the Cockatrice. For it is very rea∣sonable, that seeing the magnitude and greatnesse of the Serpent is concluded to bee at the least a span in compasse, that therefore the length of it must needes bee three or foure foote at the shortest; else how could it bee such a terrour to other Serpents, or how could the fore part of it arise so eminently aboue the earth, if the head were not lifted at the least a foote from the ground. So then we will take it for graunted, that this Serpent is as big as a mans wrist, and the length of it aunswerable to that proportion. It is likewise questionable whether the Cockatrice haue Winges or no: for by reason of his conceiued generation from a Cocke, many haue described him in the fore-part to haue Winges, and in the hinder part to haue a tayle like a Serpent: And the con∣ceit of winges seemeth to bee deriued from Holy Scripture, because it is written Esay 14: verse twenty nine, De radice cobibij egredietur regulus & semen eius absorbens volucrem: That is to say, Out of the Serpents rootes shall come a Cockatrice, and the fruite there∣of shall bee a fiery flying Serpent, as wee translate it in English: but Tremellius the best Interpreter, doth render the Hebrew in this maner: De radice Serpentis prodit haemorrhus & fructus illius prester volans: That is to say; VVord for word, Out of the roote of the Serpent shall come the Haemorrhe, and the fruite thereof a flying Prester. Now we know, that the Haemorrhe and the Prester are two other different kindes of Serpentes from the Cockatrice, and therefore these Interpreters beeing the more faithfull and learned, wee will rather followe the Holy Scripture in theyr translation, then the vulgar Latine, which is corrupted in very many places, as it is also Esay. the 30. verse sixe. For Praester, there is againe in the vulgar translation the Cockatrice: and for this cause vvee haue not described the Cockatrice vvith winges, as not finding sufficient authority to warrant the same. The eyes of the Cockatrice are redde, or somewhat inclyning to blackenesse, the skinne and carkase of this beast haue beene accounted precious, for wee doe read that the Pergameni did buy but certaine peeces of a Cockatrice, and gaue for it two pound and a halfe of Syluer: and because there is an opinion that no Byrd, Spyder, or venomous Beast, will indure the sight of this Serpent, they did hang vppe the skinne thereof stuffed, in the Temples of Apollo and Dinna, in a certaine thinne Net made of Gold: and there∣fore it is sayde, that neuer any Swallow, Spider, or other Serpent durst come within those Temples: And not onely the skinne or the sight of the Cockatrice worketh this effect, but also the flesh thereof, being rubbed vppon the pauement postes or Walles of Solinus. Scaliger. any House. And moreouer, if Siluer bee rubbed ouer with the powder of the Cocka∣trices flesh, it is likewise sayde, that it giueth it a tincture like vnto Golde: and besides these qualities, I remember not any other in the flesh or skinne of this serpent. The hissing of the Cockatrice which is his naturall voyce, is terrible to other serpents, and therefore as soone as they heare the same, they prepare themselues to fly away, accor∣ding to these verses of Nicander; Illius auditos expectant nulla susurr s, Quantumuis magnas sinuent animalia spiras Quando vel in pastum, vel opacae deuiae siluae, Irriguósue locos, mediae sub luce diei Excandescenti succensa furore feruntur, Sed turpi cōuersa fugae dant terga retrorsum. Which may be englished thus, When as the greatest winding Serpents heare, (Feeding in woods or pasture all abroad, Although inclos'd in many spiers, yet feare: Or in mid-day the shaddowes neare brookes road,) The fearefull hissing of this angry beast, They runne away: as fast as feete can lead them, Flying his rage vnto some other rest, Turning their backes whereby they do escape him. We read also that many times in Affrica, the Mules fall downe dead for thirst, or elsely dead on the ground for some other causes, vnto whose Carkase innumerable troupes of Serpentes gather themselues to feede thereuppon: but when the Bazeliske windeth the sayd dead body, he giueth forth his voyce: at the first hearing whereof, all the Serpents hide themselues in the neare adioyning sandes, or else runne into theyr holes, not daring to come forth againe, vntill the Cockatrice haue well dyned and satisfied himselfe. At which time he giueth another signall by his voyce of his departure: thē come they forth, but neuer dare meddle with the remnants of the dead beast, but go away to seek some o∣ther prey. And if it happen that any other pestiferous beast come vnto the waters to drink Aelianus. neare the place wherein the Cockatrice is lodged, so soone as it perceiueth the presence thereof, although it be not heard nor seene, yet it deaparteth back againe, without drink∣ing, neglecting his owne nutriment, to saue itselfe from further danger: whereupon Lu∣canus saith; —Latè sibi submouet omne Vulgus, & in vacua regnat Basiliscus árena. Which may be thus englished; He makes the vulgar farre from him to stand, While Cockatrice alone raignes on the sand. So then it beeing euident that the hissing of a Cockatrice is terrible to all Serpentes, and his breath and poyson mortall to all manner of Beastes: yet hath GOD in na∣ture not left this vilde Serpent without an enemie; for the Weasell and the Cocke are his tryumphant Victors; and therefore Pliny sayth well: Huic tali monstre quod saepe enectum concupiuere reges videre, mustelarum virus exitio est, adeò naturae nihil placuit esse sinae pari: That is to say, This monster which euen Kinges haue desired to see when it was dead, yet is destroyed by the poyson of Weasels, for so it hath pleased nature that no beast should be without his match. The people therefore when they take Weasells, after they haue found the Caues and lodging places of the Cockatrices, vvhich are easily discerned by the vpper face of the earth, vvhich is burned with theyr hotte poyson, they put the Weasell in vnto her▪ at the sight whereof the Cockatrice flyeth like a weakeling ouermatched with too strong an aduersary, but the Weasell followeth after and killeth her. Yet this is to bee noted, that the Weasell both before the fight and after the slaughter, armeth her selfe by eating of Rue, or else she would bee poysoned with the contagious ayre about the Cockatrice: and besides this Weasell, there is no other beast in the World, which is able to stand in contention against the Cockatrice, saith Lemnius. Againe, euen as a Lyon is afrayd of a cock, so is the Bazeliske, for he is not onely afrayd at his sight, but almost dead when hee heareth him crow, which thing is notoriously knowne throughout all Affrica. And therefore all Trauellers which goe through the Desertes, take with them a Cocke for theyr safe conduct against the poyson of the Baze∣liske: and thus the crowing of the Cocke is a terror to Lyons, & a death to Cockatrices, yet he himselfe is afraid of a Kite. There are certaine learned Writers in Saxonie, which affirme, that there are many kindes of Serpentes in theyr Woods; whereof one is not vnlike to a Cockatrice: for they say it hath a very sharpe head, a yellow colour, in length not exceeding three Palmes, of a great thickenesse, his belly spotted and adorned with many white prickes: the backe blew, and the tayle crooked and turned vppe, but the opening of his mouth is farre wyder then the proportion of his body may seeme to beare. These Serpentes may well bee referred to Cockatrices: for howsoeuer theyr poyson is not so great as the Bazeliskes of Affrica, (euen as all other Serpentes of the hotte Countryes, are farre more pestiferous then those which are bred in the cold Countries:) the very same reason perswadeth mee, that there is a difference among the Cockatrices, and that those of Saxonia may differ in poyson from those in Affrica, and yet bee true Cockatrices: Besides this, there is another reason in Lemnius, which perswadeth the Reader they are no Cock∣atrices; because when the Country-men set vppon them to kill them, with Clubs, Billes, or Forkes, they receiue no hurt at all by them, neither is there any apparant contagion of the Ayre: but this is aunswered already, that the Poyson in the colde Countrey is no∣thing to great as in the hot, and therefore in Saxony they neede feare the byting, and not the ayres infection. Gardan relateth another story of a certaine Serpent, which was found in the walles of an olde decayed House in Millan, the head of it (sayth he) was as bigge as an Egge, too bigge for the body, which in quantity and shape resembled a Stellion. There vvere teeth on eyther chappe, such as are in Vipers. It hadde two Legges, and those very short, but great, and their feete had clavves like a Cats: so that vvhen it stood, it vvas like a Cocke, for it hadde a bunch on the toppe of the head, and yet it vvanted both Fethers and Winges: The tayle was as long as the body, in the top whereof there was a round bunch as big as the head of an Italian Stellian. It is very likely that this beast is of the kind of Cockatrices. Now we are to intreate of the poyson of this serpent, for it is a hot and venomous poi∣son, infecting the Ayre round about, so as no other Creature can liue neare him, for it killeth, not onely by his hissing and by his sight, (as is sayd of the Gorgons,) but also by his touching, both immediately and mediately, that is to say; not onely vvhen a man toucheth the body it selfe, but also by touching a Weapon wherewith the body was slayne, or any other dead beast slaine by it, and there is a common fame, that a Horse-man taking a Speare in his hand, which had beene thrust through a Cockatrice, did not onely draw the poyson of it into his owne body and so dyed, but also killed his Horse thereby. Lucan writeth; Quid prodest miseri Basiliscus cuspide Mauri Transactus? velox currit per tela venenum, Inuadit manumque equumque. In English thus; What had the Moore to kill The Cockatrice with speare, Sith the swift poyson him did spill, And horse that did him beare. The question is in what part of this Serpent the poyson doth lye; Some say in the head alone, and that therefore the Bazeliske is deafe, bycause the Ayre which serueth the Organe of hearing, is resolued by the intensiue calidity: but this seemeth not to P bee true, that the poyson shoulde bee in the head onely, because it killeth by the fume of the whole body, and besides when it is dead it killeth by onely touching it, and the Man or Beast so slayne, doth also by touching kill another: Some agayne say, that the poyson is in the breast, and that therefore it breatheth at the sides, and at many other places of the body, through and betwixt the scales; which is also true, that it doth so breath: for otherwise the burning fume that proceedeth from this poysonfull beast, would burne vppe the Intrals thereof, if it came out of the ordinary place; and therefore Almighty GOD hath so ordained, that it should haue spiraments and brea∣thing places in euery part of the body, to vent away the heate, least that in very short time, by the iuclusion thereof, the whole compage and iuncture of the body should be vtterly dissolued, and separated one part from another. But to omit inquiry in what part of his body the poyson lyeth, seeing it is most mani∣fest that it is vniuersall, we will leaue the seate thereof, and dispute of the instruments and effectes. First of all therefore it killeth his owne kinde, by sight, hearing, and touching. By his owne kinde, I meane other Serpentes, and not other Cockatrices, for they can liue one beside another, for if it were true (which I doe not beleeue) that the Arabian Har∣mene were any other Serpent then a Cockatrice, the very same reason that Ardoynus giueth of the fellowshippe of these two Serpents together, (because of the similitudes of their natures) may very vvell prooue that no diuers kindes can liue so well together, in safety without harming one or other, as doe one and the same kind together. And there∣fore there is more agreement in nature betwixt a Cockatrice and a Cockatrice, then a Cockatrice and Harmene, and it is more likely that a Cockatrice dooth not kill a Cocka∣trice, then that a Cockatrice doth not kill an Harmene: And againe, Cockatrices are in∣gendered by Egges, according to the Holy Scripture; and therefore one of them killeth not another by touching, hissing, or seeing, because one of them hatcheth another. But it is a question whether the Cockatrice dye by the sight of himselfe: some haue affirmed so much, but I dare not subscribe therevnto, because in reason it is vnpossible, that any thing should hurt it selfe, that hurteth not another of his owne kinde, yet if in the secret of nature GOD haue ordayned such a thing, I will not striue against them that can shew it. And therefore I cannot without laughing remember the olde Wiues tales of the Vulgar Cockatrices that haue bin in England; for I haue oftentimes heard it related confidently, that once our Nation was full of Cockatrices, and that a certaine man did destroy them by going vppe and downe in Glasse, whereby their owne shapes were re∣flected vpon their owne faces, and so they dyed. But this fable is not worth refuting, for it is more likely that the man should first haue dyed by the corruption of the ayre from the Cockatrice, then the Cockatrice to die by the reflection of his owne similitude from the glasse, except it can be shewed that the poysoned ayre could not enter into the glasse wherein the man did breathe. Among all liuing creatures, there is none that perrisheth sooner then dooth a man by the poyson of a Cockatrice, for with his sight he killeth him, because the beames of the Cockatrices eyes, doe corrupt the visible spirit of a man, which visible spirit corrupted, all the other spirits comming from the braine and life of the hart, are thereby corrupted, & so the man dyeth: euen as women in their monthly courses doe vitiat their looking-glas∣ses, or as a Wolfe suddainly meeting a man, taketh from him his voyce, or at the least-wise maketh him hoarse. To conclude, this poyson infecteth the ayre, and the ayre so infected killeth all liuing things, and likewise all greene things, fruites, and plants of the earth: it burneth vp the grasse where-vppon it goeth or creepeth, & the fowles of the ayre fall downe dead when they come neere his denne or lodging. Some-times hee byteth a man or a beast, and by that wound the blood turneth into choller, and so the whole body becommeth yellow as gold, presently killing all that touch it, or come neere it. The symptomes are thus descri∣bed by Nicander, with whose words I will conclude this Historie of the Cockatrice, wri∣ting as followeth: Quod ferit hic, multo corpus succenditur igne, A membris resoluta suis caro defluit, & fit Lurida & obscuro nigrescit opaca colore. Nullae etiam volucres quae faeda cadauera pascunt, Sic occisum hominem tangunt, vt vultur, & omnes; Huic similes alia, pluuiae quoque nuncius aura Coruus, nec quaecun{que} fera per deuia lustra Degunt étali capiunt sibi tabula carne. Tum teter vacuas odor hinc exhalat in auras, Atque propinquantes penetrant non segniter artus; Sin cogente fame ventens aproximet ales Tristia fata refert, certam{que} ex aëre mortem, Which may be englished thus; When he doth strike, the body hurt is set on fire, And from the members falleth off the flesh, withall, It rotten is, and in the colour blacke as any myre. Refus'd of carrion-feeding-birds both great and small Are all men so destroyed. No Vulture or Bitter fierce, Or weather-telling-Crow, or deserts wildest beast, Which liue in dennes sustaining greatest famines force, But at their tables doe this flesh detest. Then is the ayre repleate with's lothsome smell, Piercing vitall parts of them approaching neere, And if a bird it tast to fill his hunger fell, It dyes assured death, none neede it feare. OF THE CORDYLL. A Lthough I finde some difference about the nature of this ly∣uing creature, and namely whether it bee a Serpent or a Fishe, yet because the greater and better part make it a Serpent, I will also bring it in his due order in this place for a veno∣mous beast. Gesner is of opinion, that it is no other but a Li∣zard of the Water, but this cannont agree with the descripti∣on of Aristotle & Bellonius, who affirme the Cordill to haue Gilles like a Fish, and these are not found in any Lizard. The Graecians call this Serpent Kordule, and Kordulos, whereof the Latines deriue or rather borrow their Cordulus, and Cordyla. Numenius maketh this a kind of Salamander which the Apothecaryes do in many Countryes falsely sell for the Scincus or Corcodile of the Earth, and yet it exceedeth the quantity of a Salamander, being much lesse then the cro∣codile of the earth, hauing gils, and wanting fins on the sides, also a long taile, and accor∣ding to the proportion of the body, like a Squirrels, although nothing so big, vvithout scabs: the back being bald and some what black, & horrible rough, thorow some bunches growing therupon, which being pressed do yeald a certain humor like milk, which being sayd to the Nosthrils doth smell like poyson, euen as it is in a Salamander. The beake or snout is very blunt or dull, yet armed with very sharp teeth. The clawes of his forelegges are diuided into foure, and on his hinderlegges into fiue: there is also a certaine fleshy fin growing all along from the crowne of his head, vnto his tayle vppon the backe, which when he swimmeth hee erecteth, & by it is his body sustained in the water from sinking, for his body is mooued with crooked winding, euen as an Eele or a Lamprey. The inward parts of this Serpent are also thus described. The tongue is soft and spun∣gy, like as is the tongue of a Water-Frogge, wherewith as it were with Glew, he draw∣eth to his mouth, both Leches and Wormes of the earth, whereupon it feedeth. At the roote of his tongue there is a certaine bunch of flesh, which as I thinke supplieth the place of the lightes, for when it breatheth, that part is especially mooued, and it panteth too & fro, so that thereby I gather, either it hath the Lights in that place, or else in some other place neere the iawes. It wanteth ribs as doth the Salamander, and it hath certain bones in the backe, but not like the ordinary back-bone of other such Serpents. The heart is al∣so all spungy, & cleaueth to the right side, not to the left: the left care whereof supplyeth the place of the Pericadium. The liuer is very blacke, and somewhat clouen at the bending or sloape side: the melt somewhat red, cleauing to the very bottome of the ventricle. The reynes are also very spungy, ioyned almost to the Legges, in which parts it is most fleshy, but in other places especially in the belly and breast, it is all skinne and bone. It also beareth Egges in her place of conception, which is forked or double, which are there disposed in order, as in o∣ther liuing gristly creatures. Those Egges are nourished with a kinde of red fatte, out of which in due time come the young ones aliue, in as great plenty and number as the Sa∣lamanders. And these thinges are reported by Bellonius, besides whom I finde nothing more said, that is worthy to be related of this Serpent, and therefore I will here conclude the History thereof. OF THE CROCODILE. B Ecause there be many kinds of Crocodiles, it is no maruaile al∣though some haue taken the word Crocodilus for the Genus, and the seuerall Species, they distinguish into the Crocodile of the Earth and the water. Of the earth are sub-diuided into the Cro∣codiles of Bresilia, and the Scincus: the Crocodiles of the water into this here described, which is the vulgar one, and that of Ni∣lus, of all which we shall entreat in order, one successiuely follo∣wing another. But I will not contend about the Genus or Species of this word, for my purpose is to open their seuerall natures, so far as I haue learned, where∣in the works of almighty God may be knowne, and will leaue the strife of wordes to them that spend their wittes about tearmes & sillables only. Thus much I find, that the auncients had three generall tearmes for all Egge-breeding Serpentes. Namely, Rana, Testudo, Lacer∣ta: And therefore I may for∣bear to intreate of Crocodilus as a Genus & handle it as a species, or particular kinde. The He∣breus haue many words which they vse for a Crocodile. Koah Leuit. 11. which the Arabians render Hardun, and the Persi∣ ds Sanga, which word com∣meth neere the Latine worde Scincus for a Crocodile of the earth, and yet that word Koah by Saint Ierom and the Septu∣agints is translated a Chamae∣leon. In the same place of Leuiti∣cus the word Zab is interpreted a kinde of Crocodile: where-withall Dauid Kimhi confoun∣deth Gereschint, and Rabbi Sa∣lomon, Faget. The Chaldes translate in Zaba. The Persians An Rasu. The Septuagints a Crocodile of the earth, but it is better to follow Saint Hierom in the same, because the Text addeth according to his kinde, wherefore it is superfluous to adde the distinction of the cro∣codile of the Earth, except it were lawful to eate the Croco∣diles of the water. In Exod. 8. there is a Fish called Zephardea, which com∣meth out of the waters and ea∣teth men, this cannot agree to any Fish in Nilus, saue onely the Crocodile; and therefore this word is by the Arabians rendered Al Timasch. Some do hereby vnderstand Pagulera, Grenelera, & Batrichoi, that is great frogs. Aluka by most of the Iewes vnderstand a Horsleach, Pro. 30. but Dauid Kimhi taketh and vseth it for a Crocodile. For he sayth, it is a great Worme, abiding neere the Riuers sides, and vpon a sudden setteth vpon men or cattell as they passe besides him. Tis∣ma and Alinsa are by Auicen expounded for a crocodile: and Tenchea for that Crocodile that neuer moueth his neather or vnder chap. shipped by the inhabitants, and kept tame by the Priestes in a certaine Lake, this sacred Crocodile is called Suchus, and this word commeth neere to Scincus, which as wee haue said, signifieth any Crocodile of the earth, from which the Arabian Tinsa seemeth also to be deriued, as the Egyptian Thampsai doth come neere to the Arabian Trenisa. Herodotus calleth them Champsai, and this was the old Ionian word for a Vulgar Crocodile in hed∣ges. Vppon occasion whereof Scaliger saith, hee asked a Turke by what name they call a Crocodile at this day in Turky, and he aunswered Kimpsai, which is most euidently cor∣rupted from Champsai. The Egyptians vulgarly call the Crocodile of Nilus, Cocatrix, the Graecians Neilokro∣kadeilos, generally Krocodeilos, and sometimes Dendrites. The Latines Crocodilus, and Al∣bertus, Crocodillus, and the same word is retayned in all languages of Europe. About the Etymologie of this word, I find two opinions not vnprofitable to be rehearsed: the first, that Crocodilus commeth of Crocus, Saffron, because this beast, especially the Crocodile of the earth, is afrayd of Saffron, and therefore the country people, to defend theyr Hiues of Bees and hony from them, strow vpon the places Saffron. But this is too farre fetched, to name a beast from that which it feareth, and beeing a secrete in nature, it is not likelie that it was discouered at the first, and therefore the name must haue some other inuestiga∣tion. Isidorus saith, that the name Crocodilus commeth of Croceus color, the colour of Saf∣fron, because such is the colour of the Crocodile: and this seemeth to be more reasonable For I haue seene a Crocodile in England brought out of Egypt dead, and killed vvith a Musket, the colour whereof was like to Saffron growing vpon the stalkes in fieldes. Yet it is more likely, that the deriuation of Varinus and Eustathius was the originall, for they say that the shores of sands on the Riuers, were called Croc and Croculae: and because the Crocodiles haunt & liue in those shores, it might giue the name to the beasts, because the water Crocodiles liue and delight in those sandes, but the Land or earth Crocodiles ab∣horre and feare them. It is reported that the famous Grammarian Artemidorus seeing a Crocodile lying vp∣pon the sands, he was so much touched and moued there-with, that he fell into an opini∣on Aurelianus that his left legge and hand were eaten off by that Serpent, and that thereby he lost the remembrance of all his great learning and knowledge of Artes. And thus much for the name of this Serpent. In the next place we are to consider the Countries wherein Crocodiles are bred, and keepe theyr habitation, and those are especially Egypt, for that onely hath Crocodiles of Aristotle Mela. Diod. Sicul. both kindes, that is, of the water and of the Land, for the Crocodiles of Nilus are Amphi∣bij, & liue in both elements: they are not only in the riuer Nilus, but also in all the pooles neere adioyning. The Riuer Bambotus neere to Atlas in Affrica, doth also bring foorth Crocodiles: and Pliny saith, that in Darat a Riuer of Mauritania, there are Crocodiles in∣gendered. Likewise Apollonius reporteth, that when he passed by the Riuer Indus, he met with many Sea-horses and Crocodiles, such as are found in the Riuer Nilus, and besides these countryes I doe not remember any other, wherein are ingendered crocodiles of the water, which are the greatest and most famous Crocodiles of all other. The Crocodiles of the earth, which are of lesser note and quantitie, are more plentiful, for they are found in Libia, & in Bithinia, where they are called Azaritia, & in the Moun∣taine Syagrus in Arabia, and in the vvoods of India, as is well obserued by Arianus, Dios∣corides, and Hermolaus, and therefore I will not prosecute this matter any further. The kindes being already declared, it followeth that we should proceed to their quan∣titie and seuerall parts. And it appeareth that the water Crocodile is much greater, and Marcellinus Herodotus. Isidore. more noble, then the Crocodiles of the earth; for they are not aboue two cubites long, or some-times eyght at the most, but the other are sixteene, and sometimes more. And be∣sides, these crocodiles, if they lay their egges in the water (saith Bellunensis) thē their young ones are much greater, but if on the Land, then are they lesser, and like the Crocodiles of the earth. In the Riuer Ganges there are two kinds of Crocodiles, one of them is harme∣lesse, & doth no hurt to any creature, but the other is a deuouting vnsatiable beast, killing snoute there groweth a bunch like a horne. Now a Crocodile is like a Lyzard in all poynts (excepting the tayle, and the quantity of a Lyzard,) yet it layeth an egge no greater then a Gooses egge, and from so small a begin∣ning ariseth this monstrous Serpent, growing all his life long, vnto the length of fifteene or twenty cubits. And as Phalareus witnesseth, in the dayes of Psammitichus King of E∣gypt, there was one found of fiue and twenty cubits long: and before that, in the dayes of Amasis, one that was aboue sixe and twenty cubits long, the reason whereof was theyr long life, and continuall growth. Wee haue shewed already, that the colour of a Crocodile is like to Saffron, that is, betwixt yellow and redde, more inclining to yellow then redde, not vnlike to the blacker kind of Chamaeleon: but Peter Martyr saith, that their belly is somewhat whiter then the other parts. Their body is rough all ouer, beeing couered with a certaine barke or rinde, so thicke, firme and strong, as it will not yeelde (and especially about the backe) vnto a cart-wheele when the cart is loaded, and in all the vpper parts, and the tayle, it is impeni∣trable with any dart or speare, yea scarcely to a pistoll or small gunne, but the belly is sof∣ter, whereon he receiueth wounds with more facility: for as wee shall shew afterwardes, there is a kind of Dolphine which commeth into Nilus, and fighteth with them, wound∣ing them on the belly parts. The couering of their backe is distinguished into diuers deuided shells, standing vppe farre aboue the flesh, and towardes the sides they are lesse emynent, but on the belly they are more smooth, white, and very penitrable. The eyes of a Crocodile of the vvater, are reported to be like vnto a Swines, and therefore in the vvater they see very dimlie, but out of the water they are sharpe and quicke sighted, like to all other foure-footed Ser∣pents that lay egges. They haue but one eye-lidde, & that groweth from the nether part Caelius Rho of the cheeke, which by reason of their eyes neuer twinckleth. And the Egyptians say, that onely the Crocodile among all the liuing creatures in the water, draweth a certaine thin bright skinne from his fore-head ouer his eyes, where-withall hee couereth his sight: and this I take to be the onely cause of his dimme sight in the waters. The head of this beast is very broade, and his snoute like a Swynes. When hee eateth or byteth, he neuer mooueth his neather or vnder chappe. Whereof Aristotle giueth this reason, that seeing Nature hath giuen him so short feete, as that they are not able to hold Herodotus Pliny. Solinus. Marcelinus. or to take the prey, therefore the mouth is framed instead of feete, so as it may more ve∣hemently strike and wound, and also more speedily mooue and turne after the prey, and this is better done by the vpper thē the nether chap. But it is likely that hee was not decei∣ued, although he speaketh of Crocodilus Marinus, a crocodile of the sea: vvheras there is no Crocodile of the Sea, but rather some other monster like a Crocodile in the sea, and such peraduenture Albertus saw, and there-vpon inconsideratly affirmed, that all Crocodiles moue theyr vnder-chapps, except the Tenchea. But the learned Vessalius prooueth it to be otherwise, because that the nether chappe is so conioyned and fastned to the bones of the temples, that it is not possible for to be moued. And therfore the Crocodile onely among all other liuing creatures, moueth the vpper-chap, and holdeth the vnder-chap vnmoue∣able. The second wonder vnto this, is that the Crocodile hath no tongue, nor so much as a∣ny Albertus. Herodotus. appearance of a tongue. But then the question is, how it commeth to distinguish the sapours and tast of his meate. Where-vnto Aristotle aunswereth, that this Crocodile is such a rauening beast, that his meate tarrieth not in his mouth, but is carryed into his sto∣macke, like as other water-beasts, and therefore they discerne sapours, and rellish theyr meate more speedily thē other; for the water or humour falleth so fast into their mouthes, that they cannot stand long vppon the tast or distaste of their meate. But yet some make question of this, and they aunswere that most men are deceiued heerein, for whiles they looke for his tongue vpon his nether-chap, as it is in all other beasts, and find none, they conclude him to want that part: but they should consider, that the tongue cleaueth to the moueable part, and as in other beasts the nether-chap is the seate of the tongue, because of the motion, so in this the tongue cleaueth to the vpper-chappe, because that it is moue∣able, and yet not visible as in other, and therefore is very hardly discerned. For all this, I rather conclude with the former Authours, that seeing it liueth both in the waters and on the land, and therefore it resembleth a fish and a beast, as it resembleth a beast, locum obti∣net lingua, it hath a place for a tongue, but as it resembleth a fish, Elinguis est, it is without a tongue. It hath great teeth standing out, all of them stand out before visibly when the mouth is shut, and fewer behind. And whereas Aristotle writeth, that there is no liuing creature which hath both dentes prominentes, & serratos, that is, standing out, and deui∣ded like a saw, yet the Crocodile hath both. These teeth are white, long, sharpe, & a little crooked and hollow, their quantity well resembling the residue of the proportion of the body: and some say, that a crocodile hath three rowes of teeth, like the Lion of Chius, & T. Martyr like the Whale, but this is not an approoued opinion, because they haue no more then 60. teeth. They haue also 60. ioynts or bones in the back, which are also tied together with so many nerues. The opening of his mouth reacheth to the place of his eares, and there be some Crocodiles in Ganges which haue a kind of little horne vpō their noses or snout. The Aelianus melt is very small, & this somesay is onely in them that bring forth egges, their stones are inward & cleaue to their loynes. The taile is of the same length that the whole body hath, and the same is also rough & armed with hard skin vpon the vpper part & the sides, but beneath it is smooth & tender. It hath finnes vpō the tayle, by the benefit wherof it swim∣meth, as also by the help of the feete. The feet are like a Beares, except that they are coue∣red with scales in stead of haire; their nailes are very sharp & strong, for if it had a thumbe as well as it hath feet, the strength thereof would ouer-turne a ship. It is doubtful whether it hath any place of excrement except the mouth: And thus much for the seuerall parts of the Crocodile. The knowledge also of the naturall actions & inclinations of Crocodiles is requisite to be handled in the next place, because that actions folow the members as sounds do instru∣ments. First therfore, although Aristotle for the most part speaking of a Crocodile, calleth it aquatilis & fluuiatilis, yet it is not to confine it to the waters & riuers, as though it neuer came out of thē like fishes, but onely to note that particuler kind which differeth frō them of the earth, for it is certaine that it liueth in both elements, namely earth & water: & for the time that it abideth in the water, it also taketh ayre, & not the humour or moistnes of the water, yet can they not want either humor of the water or respiration of the ayre: and for the day time it abideth on the land, & in the night in the water, because in the day, the Herodotus P y. earth is hoter then the water, & in the night, the water warmer then the earth: & while it liueth on the land, it is so delighted with the sun-shine, & lieth therein so immoueable, that a man would take it to be stark dead. The eyes of a Crocodile (as we haue said) are dull & blind in the water, yet they appeare bright to others, for this cause, whē the Egyptians wil signifie the sun-rising, they picture a Crocodile in the water looking vpward to the earth, & when they will signifie the west, they picture a Crocodile diuing into the water, and so for the most part the crocodile lyeth vpon the banks, that he may either diue into the wa∣ter with speed or ascend to the earth to take his prey. By reason of the shortnes of his feet, his pace is very slow, & therefore it is not only ea∣sie to escape from him by flight, but also if a man do but turne aside & wind out of the di∣rect way, his body is so vnable to bend it selfe, that hee can neither wind nor turne after it. Whē they go vnder the earth into their caues, like to all other foure-footed & egge-breeding serpents, as namely Lizards, Stellions, & Torteises, they haue all their legs ioyned to their sides, which are so retorted as they may bend to either side, for the necessity of coue∣ring their egges, but when they are abroad, and goe bearing vp all their bodies, then they bend only outward, making their thighes more visible. It is som-what questionable, whe∣ther they lye hid within their caues 4. months or 60. daies, for some Authors affirme one thing, & some another, but the reason of the difference is taken from the condition of the cold weather, for which cause they lye hid in the winter-time. Now forasmuch as the win∣ter in Egypt is not vsually aboue foure months, therfore it is taken that they lye but foure months, but if it be by accidēt of cold wether prolonged longer, thē for the same cause the crocodile is the longer time in the earth. During the time they lye hid, they eate nothing, but sleepe (as it is thought) immoueably, & when they come out againe, they do not cast their skinnes as other Serpents doe. The tayle of a Crocodile is his strongest part, and they neuer kill any beast or man, but first of all they strike him downe and astonish him with their tailes, and for this cause, the Egyptians by a Crocodiles tayle doe signifie death & darknes. They deuoure both men and beasts if they find them in theyr way, or neere the bankes of Nilus, wherein they a∣bide, Orus. taking sometimes a calfe from the cow his damme, and carrying it whole into the waters. And it appeareth by the portraiture of Nealces, that a Crocodile drew in an Asse into Nilus as he was drinking, and therefore the dogges of Egypt by a kind of naturall in∣stinct, do not drinke but as they runne, for feare of the Crocodiles: wherevpon came the prouerbe, Vt canis é Nilo bibit & fugit, as a dogge at one time drinketh and runneth by Nilus. When they desire fishes, they put their heads out of the water as it were to sleepe, and then suddenly when they espy a booty, they leape into the waters vppon them and take them. After that they haue eaten and are satisfied, then they turne to the land againe; and as they lye gaping vpon the earth, the little bird Trochilus maketh cleane their teeth, and is satisfied by the remainders of the flesh sticking vppon them. It is also affirmed by Arnol∣dus, that it is fedde with mud, but the holy Crocodile in the Prouince of Arsinoe, is fedde Sira o. with bread, flesh, wine, sweet and hard, sodde flesh and cakes, and such like thinges as the poore people bring vnto it when they come to see it. VVhen the Egyptians will write a Orus. man eating or at dinner, they paynt a Crocodile gaping. They are exceeding fruitefull and prolificall, and therfore also in Hieroglyphicks they are made to signifie fruitfulnes. They bring forth euery yeere, and lay their egges in the earth or dry land. For during the space of three-score dayes they lay euery day an egge, & within the like space they are hatched into young ones, by sitting or lying vpon them by course, the male one while, & the female another. The time of their hatching is in a mo∣derate Aelianus. Solinus. and temperate time, otherwise they perrish and come to nothing, for extremity of heate spoyleth the egge, as the buds of some trees are burned and scorched off by the like occasion. The egge is not much greater then the egge of a Goose, and the young one out of the shell is of the same proportion. And so from such a small beginning doth this huge and monstrous Serpent grow to his great stature, the reason whereof (saith Aristotle) is, because it groweth all his life long, euen to the length of ten or moe cubits. When it hath layd the egges, it carryeth them to the place where they shall be hatched, for by a naturall prouidence and fore-sight, it auoydeth the waters of Nilus, and therefore euer layeth her egges beyond the compasse of her floods: by obseruation whereof, the people of Egypt know euery yeere the inundation of Nilus before it happen. And in the measure of this place it is apparent, that this beast is not indued onely with a spirit of reason, but also with Plutarch. a fatidicall or propheticall geographicall delineation, for so shee placeth her egges in the brimme or banke of the flood (before the flood commeth) that the water may couer the nest, but not herselfe that sitteth vpon the egges. And the like to this is the building of the Beauer, as we haue shewed in due place before in the History of Foure-footed beastes. So soone as the young ones are hatched, they instantly fall into the depth of the vva∣ter, but if they meete with frogge, snayle, or any other such thing fit for their meate, they doe presently teare it in peeces, the damme byteth it with her mouth, as it were punishing the pusillanimity thereof, but if it hunt greater things, and be greedy, rauening, industri∣ous and bloody, that she maketh much of, and killing the other, nourisheth and tendereth this aboue measure: after the example of the wisest men, who loue their childrē in iudge∣ment, fore-seeing their industrious inclination, and not in affection, without regard of worth, vertue, or merrit. It is said by Philes, that after the egge is layd by the Crocodile, many times there is a cruell stinging Scorpion which commeth out thereof, and woun∣deth Sclinus. the Crocodile that layde it. To conclude, they neuer prosper but neere the waters, and they liue threescore yeeres, or the age of a mans life. The nature of this beast is to be fearefull, rauening, malitious, and trecherous in get∣ting of his prey, the subtiltie of whose spirit, is by some attributed to the thinnesse of his blood, and by other to the hardnes of his skin and hide. How it dealeth with her young ones, we haue shewed already, as it were trying their nature whether they will degenerate or no, and the like things are reported of the Aspes, Cancers, & Torteyses of Egypt. From hence came the conceit of Pietas Crocodili, the pietie of the Crocodile. But as we haue said, it is a fearefull Serpent, abhorring all manner of noyse, especially from the strai∣ned voyce of a man, and where hee findeth himselfe valiantly assaulted, there also hee is discouraged, and therefore Marcellinus saith of him, Audax Monstrum fugacibus, at vbi au∣dacem senserit timidissimum: An audacious Monster to them that runne away, but most fearefull where he findeth resistance. Some haue written, that the Crocodile runneth away from a man if he winke with his left eye, and looke stedfastly vppon him with his right eye, but if this bee true, it is not to be attributed to the vertue of the right eye, but onely to the rarenesse of sight, vvhich is conspicuous to the Serpent from one eye. The greatest terrour vnto Crocodiles, as both Pe : Mar: Seneca and Pliny affirme, are the inhabitants of the Ile Tentyrus within Nilus, for those people make them runne away with their voyces, and many times pursue and take them in snares. Of these people speaketh Solinus in this manner. There is a generation of men in the Ile Tentyrus within the waters of Nilus, which are of a most aduerse nature to the Crocodile, dwelling also in the same place. And although their persons or presence be of small stature, yet heerein is theyr courage admired, because at the suddaine sight of a Cro∣codile they are no whit daunted: for one of these dare meete and prouoke him to runne away. They will also leape into the Riuers and swimme after the Crocodile, and meeting with it, without feare cast themselues vppon the Beasts backe, ryding on him as vppon a horse. And if the Beast lift vppe his head to byte him, when hee gapeth they put into his mouth a wedge, holding it hard at both ends with both their hands, & so as it were with a bridle, leade, or rather driue them captiues to the Land, vvhere with theyr noyse they so terrifie them, that they make them cast vppe the bodies which they had swallowed into theyr bellies: & because of this antypathy in nature, the Crocodiles dare not come neere to this Iland. The like thing wee haue before in our generall discourse of Serpents, shewed to be in the Indian Psylli against the greatest Serpents. And Strabo also hath recorded, that at what time crocodiles were brought to Rome, these Tentyrites folowed & droue thē. For whom there was a certaine great poole or fish-pond assigned and walled about; except one pas∣sage for the Beast to come out of the water into the sun-shine: and when the people came to see them, these Tentyrites with nettes would draw them to the Land, & put them backe againe into the water at theyr owne pleasure. For they so hooke them by theyr eyes, and bottome of theyr bellyes, which are their tenderest partes, that like as horses broken by theyr Riders, they yeelde vnto them, and forget theyr strength in the presence of these theyr Conquerours. Peter Martyr in his third booke of his Babylonian Lagation, saith, that from the Cittie Cair to the Sea, the Crocodiles are not so hurtfull and violent as they are vp the Riuer Ni∣lus into the Land, and against the streame. For as you goe further vp the Riuer, neere the mountanie and hilly places, so shall you find them more fierce, bloody, and vnresistable, whereof the inhabitants gaue him many reasons. First, because that part of the Riuer which is betwixt the Citty Cair and the Sea, is very full of all sorts of fishes, whereby the beasts are so filled with deuouring of them, that they list not come out of the water on the Land to hunt after men or cattell, and therefore they are the lesse hurtfull, for euen the Lyon and Wolfe doe cease to kill & deuoure when theyr bellyes are full. But sometimes the Crocodiles beneath the Riuer, follow the gales or troupes of fish vp the Riuer, like so many Fisher-men, and then the Country Fisher-men inclose them in Nettes, and so de∣stroy them. For there is a very great reward proposed by the Law of the Country, to him that killeth a Crocodile of any great quantitie; and therefore they grow not great, and by reason of their smalnes are lesse aduenturous. For so soone as a great Crocodile is disco∣uered, there is such watch and care taken to interrupt and kill him for hope of the reward, that he cannot long escape aliue. Thirdly, the Crocodiles vp the Riuer, towards the Mountaines, are more hurtfull, be∣cause they are pressed with more hunger and famine, and more sildome come within the terrour of men, wherefore they forsake the waters, and run vp and downe to seeke preyes to satisfie their hunger, which when they meet withall, they deuoure with an vnresistable desire, forced and pressed forward by hunger, which breaketh stone walls. But most com∣monly when the Riuer Nilus is lowest, and sunck downe into the channell, then the Cro∣codiles in the waters doe growe most hungry, because the fish are gone away with the floods; and then the subtile beast will heale and couer himselfe ouer with sand or mudde, and so lye in the banke of the Riuer, where hee knoweth the women come to fetch water, or the cattell to drinke, and when he espieth his aduantage, he suddainely taketh the wo∣man by the hand that she taketh vp water withall, and draweth her into the Riuer, where he teareth her in peeces and eateth her. In like sort dealeth he with Oxen, Cowes, Asses, and other cattell. If hunger force him to the Land, and he meete with a Cammell, horse, Asse, or such like beast, then with the force and blowes of his tayle he breaketh his legges, and so laying him flat on the earth, killeth and eateth him: for so great is the strength of a Crocodiles tayle, that it hath beene seene that one stroke thereof hath broken all the foure legges of a beast at one blow. There is also another perrill by Crocodiles, for it is saide that when Nilus falleth, and the water waxeth low, the Barkes thorough want of wind, are faine by the Marriners to to be tugged vp the streame with long lynes and cordes: the subtile Crocodile seeing the same, doth suddainely with his tayle smite the same line with such force, that eyther hee breaketh it, or by his forcible violence tumbleth the Marriner downe into the vvater, whom he is ready to receiue with open mouth before he can recouer. Yea many times by meanes thereof the Barke it selfe so tottereth and reeleth, that the violent beast taketh a man out of it, or else cleane ouer-turneth it, to the destruction of all that are in it. Aelianus saith, that among the Ombitae which are in Arsinoe, the Crocodiles are harme∣lesse, and hauing seuerall names when they are called, doe put their heads out of the vva∣ter and take meate gently, which meate is the head and garbage of such sacrifices as are brought thether. But in another place hee writeth, that among the Ombitae or Coptitae, it is not safe for a man to fetch water from the Riuer, or to wash theyr feete, or walke on the Riuers side, but with great caution and warines. For euen those beastes which are most kindly vsed by men, doe rage against their Benefactours, as namely the Crocodile, the Ichneumon, the Wild-cats, and such like. And yet Plutarch in his booke Vtra animalium, saith, that the Priestes, by the custome of meate-giuing, haue made some of them so tame, that they will suffer theyr mouthes and teeth to be clensed by men. And it is further said, Marcelinus. that during the seauen Ceremoniall dayes of the natiuity of Apis, there is none of thē that sheweth any wilde tricke or cruell part, but as it were by compact betwixt them and the Priestes, they lay aside all cruelty and rage during that time. And therefore Cicero writeth most excellently, saying; Egyptiorum morem quis igno∣ret? quorum imbutae mentes prauitatum erroribus, quamvis carnificinam potius subierint, quam ibim, aut aspidem, aut crocodilum violent. That is to say, Who is ignorant of the custome of the Egyptians? whose mindes are so seasoned and indued with erronious wic∣kednesse, that they had rather vnder-goe any torment, then offer violence to an Ibis, an Aspe, or a holy Crocodile. For in diuers places, all these, and Cats also, were worshipped by the people, according to the saying of Iuuenall. Crocodilon aderat parshaec Egypti, Illa pauit saturam serpentibus Ibim. Which may be englished thus; This part of Egypt Crocodiles adore, That, the Ibis, fed with Serpents store. But the reasons of diuine worshippe or honour giuen to the Crocodiles are worth noting, that the diligent Reader may the better haue some taste of that auncient blindnes whereby our fore-fathers were misleddge and seduced, to forsake the most glorious and euer-blessed principles of Diuinitie, for arguments of no waight. First therefore the Idolatrous Priestes, thought there was some diuine power in the Crocodile, because it wanted a tongue, for the Deitie or Diuine speech, hath no neede of a voyce to expresse his meaning, according to the saying of the Graecians, Kai di apsophoa bainoon keleuthon kai dikes, ta thueta agrikata diken: For by a mute and silent way it ascen∣deth, and bringeth all things mortall to a vocall iustice, which speaketh in action though not in voyce, euen as all that is in the Crocodile, is action and not voyce. Secondlie, by reason of a certaine thinne smooth skinne comming from the midst of his fore-head, where-withall it couereth his eyes, so that when it is thought to be blind, Caelius yet it seeth: euen so is it with the Diuine power, for euen then when it is not seene, yet doth it see perfectly all mortall things. Againe, by theyr egges & nests they vsually fore-shew the ouer-flowing of Nilus, to the infinite benefit of their country wherein they liue, for thereby the husband-men know when to till their Land, and when not, when to sow and plant, and leade foorth theyr flockes, and when not: vvhich benefite is also ascribed to Diuinitie, and therefore the Crocodile is honoured with diuine power. Againe, it layeth threescore egges, & layeth threescore yeeres, which number of three-score, was in auncient time the first dimension of heauen and heauenly things. Cicero also speaking against this Egyptian vanitie, saith, that they neuer consecrated a beast for a God, but for some apparant vtilitie, as the Ibis for deuouring of Serpents, and the Crocodile for beeing a terrour to theeues: and therefore the Arabian and Lybian theeues durst not come ouer the Riuer Nilus to robbe the Egyptians for feare of the Cro∣codiles. There is a tale in Diodorus Siculus of the originall of a Crocodiles diuine worshippe, which although it cannot be but fabulous, yet I haue thought good to insert it in this place, to shew the vanitie of superstition and Idolatry. There was a King of Egypt called Minas, or as Herodotus calleth him Menes, who following his houndes in hunting into a certaine marish of Moeris, fell in with his horse, and there stucke fast, none of his follovv∣ers daring to come after him to release him, so that he had there perrished, had not a cro∣codile come and taken him vp vppon his backe, and sette him safe vppon the dry Land. For which miracle, the said King there built a Citty, and caused a Crocodile to be vvor∣shipped, which was called Sychus by all the inhabitants of that Citty, and also gaue all the said Marish of Moeris for the sustenance of the same. It was nourished with bread, flesh, & wine, cakes, sodde flesh, and sweete new wine: so that when any man came to the Lake wherein it was kept, the Priests would presently call the Beast out of the water, and being come to the Land, one of them opened his mouth, and the other put in meate, delicacies, and VVine. This Crocodile of Moeris, is the same that is called Arsinoe, and like to that at Thebes, about which they did hang iewels of gold, siluer, and iemmes of earings, bracelets, and such other thinges of price. When it dyed, they did season the body thereof with salt, & buried it in the holy Tombes or burying Pots. The same also are called Ombitae, I meane the people of that Egypt which dwell in Arsinoe, and for the loue of the Crocodiles, they abandon all manner of Hawkes their enemies, insomuch that many times they take them and hang them vp in publique vpon gallowes for that purpose erected. And further, they Herodotus keepe certaine dayes of tryumphes like the Olympiades, and games of honour: and so farre they were blinded with that superstition, that they thought themselues exceedingly bles∣sed if they lost their children by them, and thought themselues much honoured, if they saw them with their eyes fetched out of the streetes and playing places by Crocodiles. Againe, all the Egyptians holde opinion, that the Crocodile is a Diuinatour, vvhich they prooue by the testimonie of Ptolomeus, who calling one of these sacred Crocodiles, which was the oldest and best of all, he would not aunswere him, and afterward offering him meate, he also refused it, whereat many wondered: and some of the Priests sayde, it was some prognosticall signe either of the Kings death or his owne, & so it fell out short∣ly after, for the same Crocodile dyed. As though a Swine might not as well be accounted diuine, seeing it also refuseth all meate and prouocation, at the time of theyr sicknes, and before death. There is a citty in Egypt called Apollinopolis, the citty of Apollo, where the inhabitants ab∣hor & condemne the worship of crocodiles, for when they take any of them they hang thē vp and beate them to death, notwithstanding their teares & cryings, and afterward they eate them: but the reason of their hatred is, because Typhon their auncient enemy, vvas clothed with a Crocodiles shape. Others also say, the reason of their hatred is, because a Crocodile tooke away and deuoured the daughter of Psamnites, and therfore they enioy∣ned all their posteritie to hate Crocodiles. To conclude this discourse of Crocodiles inclination, euen the Egyptians themselues account a Crocodile a sauage, and cruell murthering beast, as may appeare by their Hie∣roglyphicks, for when they will decypher a mad man, they picture a crocodile, who bee∣ing Orus. put from his desired prey by forcible resistance, hee presently rageth against himselfe. And they are often taught by lamentable experience, what fraude & malice to man-kind liueth in these beasts, for they couer themselues vnder willowes & greene hollow bankes, Aelianus till some people come to the waters side to draw and fetch water, and then suddenly, or e∣uer they be aware, they are taken and drawne into the water. And also for this purpose, because he knoweth that he is not able to ouer-take a man in his course or chase, he taketh a great deale of water in his mouth, & casteth it in the path-waies so that when they ende∣uour to run from the crocodile, they fall downe in the slippery path, and are ouer-taken & destroyed by him. The common prouerbe also, Crocodili lachrimae, the crocodiles teares, iustifieth the treacherous nature of this beast, for there are not many bruite beasts that can weepe, but such is the nature of the Crocodile, that to get a man within his danger, he will sob, sigh & weepe, as though he were in extremitie, but suddenly he destroyeth him. O∣thers say, that the crocodile weepeth after he hath deuoured a man. How-soeuer it be, it noteth the wretched nature of hypocriticall harts, which before-hand will with fayned teares endeuour to do mischiefe, or els after they haue done it be outwardly sorry, as Iudas was for the betraying of Christ, before he went and hanged himselfe. The males of this kind do loue their females aboue all measure, yea euen to iealousie, as may appeare by this one history of P. Martyr. About the time that hee was in those coun∣tries, there were certaine Marriners which saw two Crocodiles together in carnall copu∣lation vpon the sands neere the Riuer, from which the water was lately fallen into a cer∣taine Iland of Nilus, the greedy Marriners forsooke their ship, and betooke themselues to a long boate, and with great shouting, hollowing & crying, made towards them in verie couragious manner: the male at the first assault fell amazed, & greatly terrified ran away as fast as he could into the waters, leauing his female lying vpon her backe, (for whē they ingender, the male turneth her vpon her backe, for by reason of the shortnes of her legges she cannot doe it her selfe) so the Mariners finding her vpon her back & not able to turne ouer her selfe, they easily slew her, and tooke her away with them. Soone after, the male returned to the place to seeke his female, but not finding her, and perceiuing blood vpon the sand, coniectured truly that she was slaine, wherefore hee presently cast himselfe into the Riuer of Nilus againe, & in his rage swam stoutly against the streame vntill hee ouer∣tooke the ship wherein his dead femall was, which he presently set vppon, lifting vp him∣selfe and catching hold on the sides, would certainly haue entered the same, had not the Marriners with all their force battered his head and hands with clubs and staues; vntill he was wearied and forced to giue ouer his enterprise, & so with great sighing and sobbing departed frō them. By which relation it is most cleere what naturall affection they beare one to another, and how they choose out theyr fellowes, as it were fitte wiues and hus∣bands for procreation. And it is no wonder if they make much of one another, for besides thēselues they haue few friends in the world, except the bird Trochilus and Swine, of whom I can say little, ex∣cept this that followeth. As for the little bird Trochilus, it affecteth and followeth them for the benefit of his owne belly: for while the Crocodile greedilie eateth, there sticketh fast in his teeth some part of his prey, which troubleth him very much, & many times ingen∣dereth wormes, then the beast to helpe himselfe taketh land, and lyeth gaping against the sunne-beames westward, the bird perceiuing it, flyeth to the iawes of the beast, and there first with a kind of tickling-scratching, procureth (as it were) licence of the Crocodile to pull foorth the wormes, and so eateth them all out, and clenseth the teeth thoroughly, for which cause the Beast is content to permit the Bird to goe into his mouth. But when all is clensed, the ingratefull Crocodile endeuoureth suddainely to shut his chappes together vppon the Bird, and to deuoure his friend, like a cursed wretch which maketh no recko∣ning of friendship, but the turne serued, requiteth good with euill. But Nature hath ar∣med this little bird with sharpe thornes vpon her head, so that while the Crocodile ende∣uoureth to shut his chaps and close his mouth vpon it, those sharpe thornes pricke him in∣to Aristotle Marcelinus. Aelianus. Leo Afric: his palate, so that full sore against his vnkind nature, hee letteth her flye safe away. But where as there be many kinds of Trochili, which are greedy of these wormes or clensings of the Crocodiles, some of them which haue not thornes on theyr heades pay for it, for there beeing not offence to let the closing of the Crocodiles mouth, they must needes be deuoured: and therefore this enforced amity betwixt him and the Crocodile, is onely to be vnderstoode of the Claedororynchus, as it is called by Hermolaus. There be some that affirme that he destroyeth all without exception that thus come in∣to his mouth, and other-some say he destroyeth none, but when he feeleth his mouth suf∣ficiently clensed, he waggeth his vpper chappe, as it were to giue warning of auoydance, Plutarch. and in fauour of the good turne, to let the bird flie away at his owne pleasure. Howbeit, the other and former narration is more likely to be true, and more constantly affirmed by all good Authors except Plutarch. And Leo Afric: saith, that it was the constant and con∣fident report of all Affrica, that the Crocodile deuoureth all for theyr loue and kindnesse, except the Claedororynchi, which they cannot, by reason of the thornes vppon their head. That there is an amitie and naturall concord betwixt Swine and Crocodiles is also ga∣thered, because they onely among all other liuing foure-footed beastes, doe without dan∣ger, Calcagninus. dwell, feede and inhabite vppon the banks of Nilus, euen in the midst of the Croco∣diles; and therefore it is probable that they are friends in nature. But oh how small a sum of friends hath this beast, and how vnwoorthy of loue among all creatures, that neuer in nature hath but two, in heauen or earth, ayre or water, that will aduenture to come neere it, and one of these also, which is the best deseruing, it deuoureth and destroyeth, it it get it within his danger. Seeing the friendes of it are so few, the enemies of it must needes be many, and there∣fore require a more large catalogue or story. In the first ranke whereof commeth, (as wor∣thy the first place, the Ichneumon, or Pharaohs-mouse, who rageth against their egges and Diod: Sicul. their persons, for it is certaine that it hunteth with all sagacity of sence to finde out theyr nests, and hauing found them, it spoyleth, scattereth, breaketh & emptieth all theyr egs. They also watch the old ones asleepe, and finding their mouthes open against the beames of the Sunne, suddenly enter into them, and being small, creepe downe theyr vast & large Strabo. throates before they be aware, and then putting the Crocodile to exquisite and intollera∣ble torment, by eating their guttes asunder, and so their soft bellies, while the Crocodile tumbleth to and fro sighing and weeping, now in the depth of water, now on the Land, neuer resting till strength of nature fayleth. For the incessant gnawing of the Ichneumon so prouoketh her to seek her rest in the vnrest of euery part, herbe, element, throwes, throbs, rowlings, tossings, mournings, but all in vaine, for the enemy within her breatheth tho∣rough her breath, and sporteth her selfe in the consumption of those vitall parts, vvhich wast and weare away by yeelding to her vnpacificable teeth, one after other, till shee that crept in by stealth at the mouth, like a puny theefe, come out at the belly like a Conque∣rour, thorough a passage opened by her owne labour & industry, as we haue also shewed at large in the story of Ichneumon. But whether it be true or no, that the Trochilus doth a∣wake the sleeping Crocodile, when he seeth the Ichneumon lye in waite to enter into her, I leaue it to the credite of Strabo the reporter, and to the discretion of the indifferent Rea∣der. Monkeyes are also the haters of Crocodiles, as is shewed in theyr story, & lye in waite to discouer, and if it were in their power to destroy them. The Scorpion also & the cro∣codile are enemies one to the other, and therefore when the Egyptians will describe the combat of two notable enimies, they paint a crocodile and a Scorpion fighting together, for euer one of them killeth another: but if they will decypher a speedy ouerthrow to ones enemy, then they picture a Crocodile; if a slow and slacke victory, they picture a Scor∣pion. And as wee haue already shewed out of Philes, that out of the egges of crocodiles, many times come Scorpions, which deuoure and destroy them that lay them. Fishes also in their kinde are enemies to Crocodiles, the first place whereof belongeth to the most noble Dolphin. Of these Dolphins it is thought there be two kinds, one bred in Nilus, the other forraine and comming out of the Sea, both of them professed enemies to the Crocodile: for the first, it hath vpon the backe of it sharp thorny prickles or finnes, as sharp as any speares poynt, which are well knowne to the fish that beareth them, as her armour and weapons against all aduersaries. In the trust and confidence of these prickles, the Dolphin will allure and draw out the Crocodile from his denne or lodging place, into the depth of the Riuer, and there fight with him hand to hand. For the Dolphin, as it knoweth his owne armour and defence, like other beasts and fishes, so doth it knowe the weakest parts of his aduersary, and where his aduantage of wounding lyeth. Now, as we haue said already, the belly of the Crocodile is weake, hauing but a thinne skin, and pene∣trable with small force, wherefore when the Dolphin hath the Crocodile in the midst of Strabo. Solinus. the deepe waters, like one afrayd of the fight, vnderneath him he goeth, & with his sharp finnes or prickles on his backe, giueth his weake and tender belly mortall wounds, where∣by his vitall spirits, with his guts & entralls, are quickly euacuated. The other Dolphins of the Sea being greater, are likewise armed with these prickles, and of purpose come out of the Sea into Nilus to bid battell to the Crocodiles. When Bibillus (a worthy Romane) was Gouernour of Egypt, hee affirmed that on a season the Dolphins and the Crocodiles mette in the mouth of Nilus, and bade battell the one to the other, as it were for the soueraigntie of the waters, and after that sharp combat, Senecae. it was seene how the Dolphins by diuing in the waters, did auoyd the byting of the Cro∣codiles, and the Crocodiles dyed by strokes receiued from the Dolphins vpon their bel∣lyes. And when many of them were by this meanes as it were cut asunder, the residue be∣tooke themselues to flight, and ranne away, giuing way to the Dolphins. The Croco∣diles doe also feare to meddle with the Sea-hogge, or Hog-fish, because of his bristles all about his head, which hurt him also when he commeth nigh him: or rather I suppose, as it is a friend to the Swine of the earth, and holdeth with them a sympathy in nature, so it is vnto the Swine of the water, and forbeareth one in the Sea, as it doth the other on the Land. There is likewise a certaine Wild-oxe or Bugill among the Parthians, which is an ene∣mie to the Crocodile, for as Albertus writeth, if he find or meete with a Crocodile out of the water, he is not onely not afrayd of him, but taketh hart and setteth vppon him, and with the waight and violent agitation of his body, treadeth him all to pectes: & no mar∣uaile, for all beasts are enemies to the Crocodiles on the Land, euen as the Crocodile ly∣eth in waite to destroy all them in the water. Hawkes are also enemies to Crocodiles, & Orus. Aelianus. especially the Ibis-bird, so that if but a feather of the Ibis come vpō the crocodile by chance, or by direction of a mans hand, it maketh it immoueable and cannot stirre. For vvhich cause, when the Egyptians will write or decypher a rau ning, greedy, idle-fellowe, they paynt a Crocodile, hauing an Ibis feather sticking in his head. And thus much for the en∣mitie betwixt the Crocodiles and other liuing creatures. It hath beene sildome seene that Crocodiles were taken, yet it is saide that men hunt them in the waters, for Pliny saith, that there is an assured perswasion, that with the gall and fat of a Water-Adder, men are wonderfully holpen, & as it were armed against Cro∣codiles, and by it enabled to take and destroy them, especially when they carry also about them the herbe Potamegeton. There is also a kind of thorny Wilde-beane growing in E∣gypt, which hath many sharpe prickles vpon the stalkes, this is a great terrour to the Cro∣codile, for he is in great dread of his eyes, which are very tender & easie to be wounded. Therefore he auoydeth their sight, being more vnwilling to aduenture vpon a man that Crescensun: beareth them, or one of them, then he is to aduenture vpon a man in compleate Armour, and therefore all the people plant great store of these, and also beare them in theyr hands when they trauaile. There be many who in the hunting and prosecuting of these Crocodiles, doe neither giue themselues to runne away from them, nor once to turne aside out of theyr common path or roade, but in a foolish hardinesse, giue themselues to combat with the beast, when they might very well auoyd the danger, but many times it hapneth that they pay decrely for their rashnes, and repent too late the too much reputation of their owne man-hoode: for whiles with their speares and sharpe weapons they thinke to pierce his sides, they are deceiued, for there is no part of him penetrable except his belly, and that he keepeth safe enough from his enemies, blunting vpon his scales (no lesse hard then plates ofyron) all the violence of theyr blowes and sharpnesse of weapons, but clubbes, beetles, and such like weapons, are more irkesome to him, when they be sette on with strength, battering the scales to his body, and giuing him such knocks as doth dismay and astonish him. In∣deede Diodorus. there is no great vse of the taking of this Serpent, nor profit of merchandize com∣meth thereby, his skinne and flesh yeelding no great respect in the world. In auncient time they tooke them with hookes bayted with flesh, or els inclosed them with nettes as they doe fishes, and now and then with a strong yron instrument cast out a boat downe into the water vpon the head of the Crocodile. And among all other there is this one worthy to be related. The Hunter would take off the skin from a Swines backe and there-withall couer his hooke, whereby hee allured and inticed the Serpent into the midst of the Riuer, & there making it fast, hee went afterward to the next watering place, and there holding another Hogge, did beate and smyte him, till he cryed ardentlie, vvith which voyce or cry, the Crocodile beeing mooued, goeth presently to the bayte & swal∣loweth Herodotus. it vppe, and maketh after the noyse: at last, comming to the Land, the Hunter with valiant courage and diligence, casteth mudde and durt into his eyes, and so blindeth him that he may oppresse and kill him with ease. Leo Afric: relateth also this meanes or way to take Crocodiles: There be many Trees planted vpon the bankes of Nilus, vnto one of these there is a long and strong rope tyed, and at the end of the same there is fastened a hooke of a cubite long, and a finger in quan∣titie: vnto this hooke for a bayte, is tyed a Ramme or a Goate, which beeing sette close to the Riuer, and tormented with the hooke vppon which it is fastened, cryeth out amaine, by hearing of whose voyce, the hunger-greedy Crocodile is raysed out of his denne, and inuited as he thinketh to a rich prey, so hee commeth (although it selfe of a trecherous na∣ture, yet suspecteth not any other) and swalloweth the bayte, in which he findeth a hooke not to be disgested. Then away he striueth to goe, but the strength of the rope stayeth his iourney, for as fast as the bayte was to the rope and hooke, so fast is he also ensnared and tyed vnto it, which while hee waueth and strayneth to vnloose and breake, hee wearieth himselfe in vaine. And to the intent that all his strength may be spent against the tree and the rope, the Hunters are at one end thereof, and cause it to be cast to and fro, pulling it in, and now letting it goe againe, now terrifying the beast with one noyse and feare, and anone with another, so long as they perceiue in him any spirit of moouing or resistance: so beeing quieted, to him they come, and with clubbes, speares, beetles, staues, and such manner of instruments, pierce thorough the most tenderest partes of his body and so de∣stroy him. Peter Martyr hath also other meanes of taking Crocodiles. Their nature is, that when they goe to the Land to forrage and seeke after a prey, they cannot returne backe againe but by the same footsteps of their own which they left imprinted in the sand: whervpon, when the country people perceiue these footesteppes, instantly with all the hast they can make, they come with Spades and Mattocks and make a great ditch, and with boughes couer the same, so as the Serpent may not espy it, and vpon the boughes they also againe lay sand to auoyde all occasion of deceit, or suspition of fraude at his returne: then vvhen all thinges are thus prepared, they hunt the Crocodile by the foote vntill they finde him, then with noyses of bells, pannes, kettles, and such like thinges, they terrifie and make him returne as fast as feare can make him runne towardes the waters againe, and they fo∣low him as neere as they can, vntill hee falleth into the ditch, where they come all about him, and kill him with such instruments or weapons as they haue prepared for him: and so beeing slayne, they carry him to the great Cittie Caire, where for theyr reward they re∣ceiue ten peeces of gold, which amounteth to the value of ten nobles of our English coine. There haue beene some brought into that Citty aliue, as P. Martyr affirmeth, whereof one was as much as two Oxen & two Cammels could beare and draw, and at the same time there was one taken by this deuise before expressed, which had entered into a vil∣lage in Saetum neere Nilus, and swallowed vp aliue three young Infantes sleeping in one cradle, the said Infants scarcely dead were taken againe out of his belly, and soone after when no more tokens of life appeared, they were all three buried in a better & more pro∣per graue of the earth. Then also there was another slaine, and out of his belly was taken a whole Ramme not disgested, nor any part of him consumed, and the hand of a woman which was bitten or torne off from her body aboue the wrist, for there was vppon the same a Bracelet of Brasse. We doe read that Crocodiles haue beene taken and brought aliue to Rome. The first that euer brought them thither, was Marcus Scaurus, who in the games of his aedility, brought fiue forth and shewed thē to the people in a great pond of water, (which he had Pliny. Capitolinus. Lampridi . prouided onely for that time) & afterward to Heliogabalus and Antoninus Pius. The Indi∣ans haue a kinde of Crocodile in Ganges, which hath a horne growing out of his nose like a Rhinocerot: vnto this beast they cast condemned men to be deuoured, for in all their executions, they want not the helpe of men, seeing they are prouided of beastes to doe the office of Hang-men. Aurelius Festiuus writeth, that Firmus a Tyrant of Aegypt beeing condemned to Ni∣lus to be deuoured by Crocodiles, before hand bought a great quantity of the fat of Cro∣codiles, and so stripping himselfe starke naked, layde the same all ouer his body, so hee went among the Crocodiles and escaped death: for this sauage beast beeing deceiued with the sauour of it owne nature, spared the man that had but so cunningly carryed it. And this is a wonderfull worke of almighty GOD, that so ordereth his actions in the na∣ture Uadian . of this beast, that he beguileth the cruell nature of the liuing, by the tast and sauour of the dead: how beit some thinke that the Water-Crocodile is daunted with the sauour of the fat from the Land Crocodile, and the Land-Crocodile by the water againe. And some againe say, that all venomous beastes runne away from the sauour of the fat heereof; and therefore no maruaile if it also be afraide, being venomous, as well as a∣ny Aetius. other. Wherefore the saying of Firmus was not to bee attributed to any indulgence of the Crocodile toward their owne kinde, but rather to a deadly antipathy reflecting themselues vppon themselues, though not in shape and figure as the Cockatrice, yet in sence, sauour, and ranknesse of their pestiferous humour. The vse of crocodiles taken, is for their skinne, flesh, caule, and medicine arysing out of it. Their skinne as it is exceeding hard vppon their backes while they are aliue, so is it P: Martyr. also when they are dead, for with that the common people make them better armour then coats of Mayle, against Darts, Speare, or Shielde, as is well knowne in all Aegypt at this day. For the flesh of crocodiles, it is also eaten among those people that do not wor∣ship it: as namely, the people about Elephantina Apollinopolis. Notwithstanding by the Herodoius. Law of God Leuit. 11. it is accounted an vncleane beast, yet the tast thereof being found pleasant, and the rellish good, without respect of GOD or health, the common people make vse thereof. The medicines arising out of it are also many. The first place belongeth to the caule, which hath moe benefits or vertues in it, then can be expressed. The bloud of a croco∣dile Dioscorid. is held profitable for many thinges, and among other it is thought to cure the bitings of any Serpent. Also by annoynting the eyes, it cureth both the dregs or spots of bloud in them, and also restoreth soundnesse and clearenesse to the sight, taking away all dul∣nesse or deadnesse from the eyes. And it is said, that if a man take the liquor which com∣meth Pliny. from a peece of a crocodile fryed, and annoynte therewithall his wound or har∣med part, that then he shall bee presently rid of all paine and torment. The skinne both of the Land & water crocodile dryed into powder, and the same powder with Vineger Arnoldus. or Oyle, layd vpon a part or member of the body, to be feared, cut off, or lanced, taketh away all sence and feeling of paine from the instrument in the action. All the Aegyptians doe with the fat or sewet of a crocodile annoynt all them that be sick of Feauers, for it hath the same operation which the fat of a Sea-dogge or Dog-fish hath, and if those parts of men and beasts which are hurt or wounded with crocodiles teeth, be Aetius. annoynted with this fat, it also cureth them. Being concocted with water and Vineger, and so rowled vppe and downe in the mouth, it cureth the tooth-ach: and also it is out∣vvardly Rhazes. applyed agaynst the byting of Flyes, Spyders, Wormes, and such like, for this cause, as also because it is thought to cure Wennes, bunches in the flesh, and olde woundes. It is solde deare, and held pretious in Alcair. Scaliger writeth, that it cureth the Gangren. The canyne teeth which are hollow, filled with Frankinsence, and tyed to a man or woman which hath the tooth-ach, cureth them, if the party know not of the car∣rying them about: And so they write, that if the little stones which are in their belly be ta∣ken forth and so vsed, they work the same effect against Feauers. The dung is profitable a∣gainst the falling off of the hayre, and many such other things. The biting of a Crocodile is very sharp, deepe, and deadly, so that wheresoeuer he lay∣eth his teeth, seldome or neuer followeth any cure. But yet the counsell of Physitions is, Aetius. that so soone as the patyent is wounded, he must be brought into a close Chamber wher are no windowes, and there bee kept without change of ayre, or admission of light, for the poyson of the Crocodile worketh by cold Ayre and light; and therefore by the want Arnoldus. of both is to be cured. But for remedy (if any bee) they prescribe the same which is giuen for the cure of the biting of a mad Dog, or (as Auicen) the byting of a Dogge not madde. But most proper is the dung of a man, the Fish Garum and Mysy pounded together, and so applyed, or else the broth of salt-sod-flesh, & such other things as are vulgarly knowne to euery Physition: and therefore seeing we liue in a country far from the annoyance of this Serpent, I shall not neede to blot any Paper to expresse the cure of this poyson. The Crocodile of Nilus onely liueth on Land and water, all other are contented with Bellonius one element: the picture of the Crocodile was wont to be stamped vpon coyne, and the skinne hanged vp in many famous Citties of the world, for the admiration of the people, and there is one at this day at Paris in France. OF THE ARABIAN OR AEGYPTIAN Land-Crocodile. T He figure of this Crocodile sheweth euidently the diffe∣rence betwixt him and the other of Nilus; and beside it is neither so tall or long as is the other, the which proportio∣ned beast is onely particular to Aegypt and Arabia, and some because of his scaly head, legges, articles, and clawes, haue obserued another difference in it from the former: yet in his nature, māner of liuing & preying vpon other cattel, it differeth not from that of the Water. The tayle of this Crocodile is very sharpe, and standeth vp like the edges of wedges in bunches aboue the ground, wherewithall when: he hath mounted himselfe vp vpon the backe of a beast, he beateth and striketh the beast most cruelly, to make him go with his Rider to the place of his most fit execution, free from all rescue of his Heard-man or Pastor, or annoyance of Passengers, where in most cruell and sauage manner he teareth the Limbes and parts one from another till he be deuoured. The Apothecaries of Italy haue this beast in their shops to be seene, and they call it Caudiuerbera, that is, a Tayle-bearer, for the reason aforesaid. And thus there being nothing in this beastes nature different from the former, besides his figure, and that which I haue already expressed, I will not trouble the Reader with any more Narration about it. OF THE LAND CROCODIE of Bresilia. T He figure and proportion of this serpent was altogether vn∣knowne in this part of the world, till of late our discouerers and nauigatours brought one of them out of Bresilia. The length of it is about a fathom, & the breadth as much as ten fingers broad: the forelegges haue tenne clawes, fiue vppon a foote, the hinder legges eight, and both before and behind they are of equall length. The tayle exceeding long, farre ex∣ceeding the quantity & proportion of his body, being mar∣ked all ouer with certaine white and yellowish spots. The skinne all couered with an equall, smooth, and fine coloured scale, which in the middest of the belly are white, and greater then in other parts. It can abide no water, for a little poured into the mouth killed it, and after it had beene two or three dayes dead, being brought to the fire, it mooued and stirred againe faintly, euen as thinges doth that lyeth a dying. It is not venomous nor hurtfull to eate; and therefore is digged out of his caue by any body safely without danger. OF THE CROCODILE OF THE earth, called Scincus: a Scinke. T Here haue beene some that haue reckoned Scinkes and Lizards among Wormes, but as the Greeke wordes Erpetx, and Scolex, differ in most apparant dialect, and signification, and therefore it is an opinion not worth the confuting, for there are no worms of this quantity. But for the better explycation of the nature of this beast, because some haue taken it for one kind, and some for another. some for a Crocodile, and others for a beast like a cro∣codile; wee are to know that there are three kindes of Croco∣diles: the first is a water-beast or Serpent, and vulgarly tearmed a Crocodile, the second is a Scinke or a Crocodile of the earth, which is in all partes like that of the water, except in his colour and thicknesse of his skinne: the third kinde of Crocodile is vnknowne to vs at this day, yet Pliny and others make mention of it, and describe it to bee a beast ha∣uing his scales like a Gorgon, growing or turning to his head from the tayle, and not as others do, from the head to the tayle. The Graecians call this beast Skigkos, and some vnlearned Apothecaries Stincus, and Myrepsus Sigk. It is also called Kikeros, and the Haebrew Koach, doth more properly sig∣nifie this beast, then any other Crocodile or Chamaeleon, or Lizard. Some of the Hae∣brewes doe expound Zab for a Scinke, and from thence the Chaldaes and the Arabians haue their Dad and Aldab, turning Z into D: So we read Guaril and Adhaya, for a Scinke or Crocodile of the earth: Alarbian is also for the same serpent among the Arabians, Bal∣ecola, and Ballecara Schanchur, and Aschanchur, and Askincor, and Scerantum, & Nudalep, and Nudalepi, are all of thē Synonymaes, or rather corrupted words for this crocodile of the earth. But there are at this day certain Pseudoscinkes set out to be seen & sold by Apo∣thecaries, that are nothing else but a kind of Water-Lizzard: but the true difference is betwixt them, that these water-Lizards are venomous, but this is not, and neither liuing in the Northerne partes of the world, nor yet in the water: and so much shall suffice for the name and first enterance into this Serpents History. They are brought out of the Easterne Countries, or out of Aegypt: yet the Monkes of Mesuen affirme, that they had seene Scinkes or Crocodiles of the earth about Rome. Syluaticus and Platearius in Apulia. But howsoeuer their affections may lead them to con∣iecture of this serpent, I rather beleeue that it is an Affrican beast, & seldome foūd in Asia or Europe. They loue the bankes of Nilus, although they dare not enter the water, and for this cause some haue thought (but vntruely) that when the Crocodile layeth her egges in the water, the young is there also engendered and hatched, and is a Crocodile of the water, but if they lay theyr egges on the dry Land, from thence commeth the Scinke or Crocodile of the earth. This folly is euidently refuted, because that they neuer lay egges in the water, but all vpon the dry Land. They are found (as I haue said before) in Aegypt, and also in Affricke, and among the Lydians of Mauritania, otherwise called Lodya, or ra∣ther Lybia, among the Pastorall or Plow-men- Affricans; among the Arabians, and neere the red Sea, for all those at this day solde at Venice, are brought from those partes. The greatest in the world are in India, (as Cardan teacheth) who are in all thinges like Li∣zards, sauing in their excrements, which smell or sauour more strongly, and generally the difference of their quantity ariseth from the Country which they inhabite, for in the hot∣ter and moyster country they are greater, in the hotter dryer Region they are smaller, & generally they exceede not two or three cubits in length, with an answerable proportio∣nable body, which is thus described. There bee certaine crosse lines which come along the backe one by one, somewhat white, and of a dusky colour, and those that be dusky haue also in them some white spots. The vpper part of the necke is very dusky, the head and the tayle are more white, the feet and all the neather part of the breast and belly are white, with appearance vpon them of some scales, or rather the skinne figured in the proportion of scales: vppon either feete they haue fiue distinct fingers or clawes, the length of their Legges is a Thumbe and a halfe: that is, three inches, the tayle two fingers long, the body sixe, so that the whole length from the head to the tippe of the tayle, (which is first thicke, and then very small at the end) is about eyght fingers. When they haue taken them they bowell them, and fill theyr bodies with Sugar, and Silke of Wooll, and so they sell them for a reasonable price. That which I haue written of their length of eyght fingers, is not so to bee vn∣derstood, as though they neuer exceeded or came short of that proportion: for some-times they are brought into these partes of the World twenty or foure and twenty fin∣gers long, sometimes againe not aboue fiue or sixe fingers long. When they lay theyr Egges, they commit them to the earth, euen as the Crocodiles Aristotle. of the water doe. They liue vpon the most odoriferous flowers, and therefore is his flesh so sweete, and his dung or excrements odoriferous. They are enemies to Bees, and liue much about Hiues, insomuch as some haue thought they did lay their Egges in Hiues, and there hatch their young ones: But the occasion of this error was, that they savve young ones brought by theyr Parents into some Hiue, to feede vpon the labouring Bee. For the compassing of theyr desire they make meale of any tree, which they haue ground in the Mill of their owne mouths, and that they mix with blacke Hellebor iuyce, or with the liquor of Mallowes, this meale so tempered they lay before the hiues, wher∣of assoone as the Bees tast, they dye, and then commeth the Crocodile with her young ones, and lick thē vp; and beside Bees, I doe not read they are hurtfull to any. The In∣dians haue a little beast about the quantity of a little Dogge, which they call Phattage, Aelianus. very like to a Scinke or Crocodile of the Earth, hauing sharp scales, as cutting as a saw. There is some hurt by this beast vnto men, for which cause I may iustly reckon it a∣mong the venomous, for if it chance to bite any man, if the wounded man fall into a se∣uer Rhazes. before he make water, he dyeth for it, but if he first make water, the beast dyeth and the man escapeth. It is thought that it containeth a kind of naturall magicke, witch-craft, or sorcery; and therefore they say it hath a stupifying power, changing the mind from louc to hatred, and from hatred to loue againe. The powder of this Serpent drunke in Wine, if it stirre venerous lust, it hurteth the Nerues and sinnewes. There be certaine magicall deuises raysed out of this Serpent which are not woorth the writing, as not hauing in them any dram of wit, learning, or truth; and therefore I will not trouble the Reader with them, but follow on the conclusion of this Crocodiles story in the Narration of the medicinall vertues, which are farre moe and more operatiue then those in the former Crocodile, for I thinke Almighty GOD blesseth meekenes and innocency with excesse of grace in men and beastes, as may be seene in these two kindes of Crocodiles, the dung and ex∣crement of the one, beeing more worth then the body of the other, through harmelesse innocency. The body of this Serpent to be dryed, after it hath line long in salt, and to bee preser∣ued in Noosewort, as Ruellius and Marcellus write: (but truth is, there is no need of Salt where Nosewort is applyed, because the Arcrimony of this Hearb doth easily dry vp the moysture of the beast, keeping Wormes from breeding in it.) With the powder thus prepared, venerious men stirre vp their lustes. Mithridate is called Diasincu, because it is compounded of the Scinke or Crocodile of the earth, and it containeth in it a most no∣ble Antidote against all poysons. Gallen had an Antidote against Scorptions, which a∣mong other thinges containeth in it the flesh of a Crocodile of the Earth, wherewithall he cured all them that had beene stung with Scorpions in Lybia. It is also good agaynst the byting of mad beastes, and pleurises; against poysoned Hony, or the crudity and loa∣thing that commeth in the stomacke by eating of sound Honny: It is profitable against empoysoned Arrowes or Dartes, being taken immediately before or after the wound, as Apelles hath obserued. Serapio did make a medicine compounded of the dung of this Crocodile, and apply∣ed the same against the falling sicknesse. Of the body of this Scinke, except the head and the feete being sod or rosted, and eaten by them that haue the Sciattica, an old cough (es∣pecially children,) or the paine of the loynes, giueth them much ease. They are also mixed with medicines against the paine of the feete, as Galen did for Amarantus the Grammartan. They are also good in medicine against the coldnesse of the sinnewes. This beast is very hot, and therefore increaseth the seede of man, and prouoketh lust; and for this purpose the greatest and fattest, & such a one as is taken in the spring time, when they burne in lust for copulation is preferred. But this is not to be meant of the fleshy partes, but onely of those partes that are about the reynes, if a man drinke thereof the weight of a groat in Wine afterwardes, for the alaying of the heate thereof, the Physitions doe prescribe a decoction of Lentiles with Hony, and the seede of Lettice drunke in Water. The snout of this Crocodile with the feete drunke in white wine, hath the same operati∣on: but we haue shewed already, that these parts are to be cut offand throwne away, be∣cause if there be any venome in the beast it lyeth in them. A perfume being made of the body and intrals of this Crocodile vnder the wombe of a Woman labouring with child, is thought to yeald much help, for her safe, speedy, and easie trauaile, or flockes of wooll perfumed therewith, and layd to her belly. But it is the part of good Physions to be very warie in giuing of medicines for stirring vp of lust in a∣ny, except in marryed persons, and then also when they are young, to procure a lawfull issue and posterity in the world: otherwise they shall both decay the body, for all violent helpes of carnall copulation, do in the end prooue detriments to nature, if they continue any time, and also they are hurtfull to the Soule, when not onely the vnnaturall desire of lust, but also the intemperate pleasure of sinne is increased thereby; and that is a mise∣rable cure, which killeth the Soule to help one part of the body. Besides all kinds of me∣dicines for this purpose, (amongst which this Crococodile is the cheefe) haue their pecu∣culier venome, and when they are ministred, either they haue no effect at all through age or ouermuch impotency, or else they worke too violently, which is most dangerous, or some one hurt or other followeth the poyson: and so I will leaue the prosecution of this part. The dust of the skinne of this Crocodile being annoynted with Vineger or Oyle vp∣on any part or member which is to be cut off, taketh away the sence of paine in the time of execution. The bloud is good for the eyes, and taketh away the filthy skinne of the body, with the spots and burles in the face, restoring the first, true, natiue, and liuely co∣lour. The fat taketh away the paine in the reines, and causeth a distillation of the seede of man, yet this fatte touching the hayre of a man, maketh it to fall off, and a man an∣noynted heerewith, is safe from the annoyance of Crocodiles, although they play with him. It also cureth the bytinges of Crocodiles, the instillation of this Crocodile, foul∣ded vp in the wooll of a blacke Sheepe of the first birth, and wherein is no other colour, hath power to driue away a quartan Ague. And Rasis saith, that it beeing hung ouer the head of a woman being in trauaile, keepeth her from deliuery. In the gall of this Serpent there is a power against the falling off of the hayre, especially if the medicine bee made of the rootes of Beetes to neese withall; and besides, the eyes beeing annoynted therewith, and with Hony, there is nothing more profitable against suffusions. The stones & reines haue power to prouoke generation, and Aetius prescribeth an Antidote to bee made of the taile of this beast, against the gout. Great is the vertue of the dung or excrement of this Serpent, if the same could be casi∣ly found, but while it is sought for, it looseth the vertue. It is called Crocodillia, and is profitable to giue a good colour to womens faces, that is the best which is whitest, short, and not heauy, feeling like Leauen betwixt the fingers, that is, smelling somewhat sharp like Leauen. It is adulterated with Meale, Chalke, white-earth, or painting, but it is descerned by the heauinesse. The reason of the vertue of this is, because it feedeth vpon the sweetest & best smelling Herbs, whereby it commeth to passe, that it doth not onely smell fragrant∣ly, but also containe in it many excellent vertues. First therefore it is good for the come∣linesse of the face, to giue colour to it, according to the saying of Horace: Colorque stercore fucatus Crocodili: A colour in-grained with the dung of a Crocodile, and for this cause also is the verse of Ouid: Nigrior ad pharij confugit picis opem: That is, The black Wo∣man goeth to craue helpe of the Fish Pharius, to become more beautifull; for by the fish Pharius, is vnderstood a Crocodile. As some thinke eight, graynes of this dung, or rather the weight of eyght groates, with halfe so much Mustard-seede and Vineger, cureth the falling off of the haire. Arnoldus doth prescribe a composition of the dung and Cantha∣rides, for the regenerating and bringing againe of haire that is decayed. If a perfume hereof be made and infused by a Tunelli into the holes of Serpents, it will driue them a∣way, by reason of the sharp and leauenish sauour thereof. Tralianus maketh a medicine thereof for an Eye-salue against the whitenesse and bloud-shot-eyes. It is good also against dimnesse and suffutions, being annoynted with the iuyce of Leekes: and to conclude, it is drunk in sweetwine and Vineger, against the falling sicknesse, and also being applyed vnto women, stirreth vp their monthly courses. And thus much shall suffice for the story of the Crocodile. OF THE DART. A Mong the diuers kindes of Serpents, there is one of speciall note which the Graecians call Acontia. The Latines Iacula∣res, or Iaculi, or Sagitta, a Dart or Arrow. The Graecians at this day Saetta. The Turkes Orchilanne: In Calabria and Si∣cilia, Saettone, and of the Germans Ein schossz oder angelsch lang. The reason of this name is taken from his swift leaping vpon a man to wound and kill him; and therfore the Poets say Iaculi{que} volucres, speaking of these kindes of Serpentes. Albertus and Auicen also calleth them Cafezati, and Cafeza∣ci, Altararat, Acoran, and Altinanti. The manner of this Serpent is to get vp into trees or hedges, and from thence to flie like an Arrow vpon the vpper partes of men, and so to sting, bite, and kill them: and of this kind it is thought that was, which came vpon the hand of the Apostle Paule, where∣of the Poet writeth; Ecce procul sauus sterilis robore tunci Torsit, & immisit (Iaculum vocat Africa) serpens: Perque caput Pauli transactaque tempora fugit. Nil ibi virus agit: rapuit cum vulnere fatum, Deprensum est, quaefunda rotat, quàm lenta volorent, Quàm segnis Scythicae strideret arundinis aer. In English thus; Loe from a farre, a cruell Serpent from an Oke Came flying like a Dart, in Affrica the same A Dart is cald, the head and Temples stroke Of Paule, by winding spires to worke his bane: But nothing could the poyson there auaile, For with the wound he put away his death Faster then swiftest flye, or turning ball, Or Seythian reede remou'd with windy breath. This kind of Serpent is for the most part in Lybia, in Rhodes, in Lemnus, in Italy, Ca∣labria, Marcelinus. Bellonius Olaus. Mag. and Sicilia, and in many of the Northerne Countries, and also in Germany, wher∣of Gesner telleth this story following. There is heere the Coasts of Zuricke a Riuer cal∣led Glat, and a village or towne vpon that Riuer Glatfelden. Neare this Riuer, as a poore man was gathering wood, there was a serpent of some three or foure foote long, which from a tree endeuoured to leape vpon the poore man, by gathering his body together, (as it were into foure spires or risings like halfe hoopes,) the man seeing it, left his sa ke and ranne away: neuerthelesse, the Serpent leaped after him at the least sixteene or se∣uenteene foote, but yet for that time hee last turned about him, and not seeing the Serpent to follow him, gathered courage and comfort, and would come back againe for his sacke that he had left behind him. The crafty Serpent expecting so much, had set him∣selfe againe into another tree, and priuily lay till the man came for his sacke, and then ere he was aware came flying at him as hee did before, and presently winded about his left arme; All his body except his taile hung downe, and his neck, which he held vp hi ing in the mans face: the man hauing no sleeue on his arme except his shirt, yet did the serpent so presse the skin and flesh, that the circles of his winding spires and prints of his body ap∣peared therein after he was taken off, yet did he not bite the man, for the poore country∣fellow did presently with his other hand take him by the head and cast him away, not∣withstanding, he had so foulded himselfe about his arme: shortly after that arme beca to grow mattery, and all the flesh to the bone consumed, yet was all the rotten putty enuenomed flesh and substance, by the skill of a worthy learned Physition taken a and as good flesh brought in the roome thereof as euer was before, yet was the ma ∣ry yeare prescribed to let that arme bleede, and then issued foorth blacke thicke some of the woundes or rather scarres, of the poyson outwardly remaining. In the Northerne partes they leape tenne foote at a time, first gathering t elues Olaus Mag: into the similitudes of Bowes or halfe Hoopes, and then fight with those they would deuour, making many times a noyse among the Hearbes or Flowe ich are parched or withered by the Sunne; and therefore by the bounty of GOD nature, theyr owne noyse bewrayeth them to their supitious aduersaries, and so times are auoyded in safety. Like vnto these are certaine in Hungary (as Iohannes V ported vn∣to Gesner,) whose bodies are of an equall crassitude or thicknesse, so as appeare with∣out tailes, being for that purpose called Decurtati, Curtailes, these in t ame manner do leape vpon men as these Darters do, but they are very short, sildome ding the length of two hands breadth. There is some difference among Authours about the nature of this Serpent: for Ae∣lianus confoundeth it with the Snake of the Earth, called Chersydrus, and sayth it liueth sometime in the Water and sometime on the Land, lying in waight to destroy all ly∣uing Creatures. And (hee sayth) it vseth this fraud, it euer lyeth hidde in secret neere the high-wayes, and many times climbeth vppe into trees where it roundeth it selfe round into a circle, and hideth his head within the foldes of his owne body, so soone as euer it espyeth a Passenger, eyther a man or beast, it leapeth vppon him as swift as a Dart flyeth. For it is able to leape twenty cubits space, and so lighting vppon the man or beast, sticketh fast vnto it without falling off of his owne accord, vntill they fall downe dead. But herein Aelianus seemeth to be deceiued, because hee maketh but one Serpent of twaine: namely, this Dart and the Land-Snake, which are most apparantly different in nature, kind, and quality. Aetius also confoundeth this serpent with the Millet-serpent, called Cenchrites, and sayth it is of the quantity of two cubits, great on the head, and the fore part smaller at the tayle, being of a greenish colour. And he saith further, that at such time as the Mil∣let-seede groweth and flowrisheth, this serpent is most strong and hurtfull, and so with the residue hee agreeth vvith Aelianus, but heerein hee is also deceiued, writing by here say as himselfe confesseth, and therefore it is more safe for vs to haue recourse to some eie∣witnesse for the description of this serpent, then to stand vppon the opinions of them which writ by the relation of others. Bellonius saith; that he saw one of these in Rhodes, being full of small round black spots, not greater then the seedes of Lentiles, euery one hauing a round circle about him like an eye, after such fashion as is to be seene in the little Eish called the Torpedo. In length it exceedeth not three palmes, and in bignesse no greater then the little finger. It was of an Ashe-colour, comming neere to the whitenesse of Milke, but vnder the belly it was altogether white: vpon the backe it had scales, but vppon the belly a thin skin, as in all other Serpents. The vpper part of the backe was somewhat blacke, hauing two blacke lines in the middle, which beginne at the head, and so are drawne along the whole body to the tayle. As for the Cafezati, and Alterarati or Altinatyri, those are redde Serpentes, (as Autcen saith) which are but small in quantity, yet as deep and deadly in poyson as in any other, for they hurt in the same manner that these Darters do. Some of thē do so wound with theyr poyson, as the afflicted person dyeth incontinent without sence or payne: Some againe dye by languishing payne after many hopes of recouery, loosing life. A∣mong all the people of the Worlde, the Sabians are most annoyed with this kinde of redde Serpentes; for they haue many odoriferous and sweete smelling Woods, in the which these Serpentes doe abound, but such is their rage and hatred against men, that they leape vppon them and wounde them deadly, whensoeuer they come within their compasse. And surely if it be lawfull to coniecture what kinde of Serpentes those were, which in the Scripture are called fiery Serpentes, and did sting the Israelites to death in the Wildernesse, vntill the brazen Serpent was erected for their cure; among all the Ser∣pentes in the world, that kind of paine and death can be ascribed to none more porperly then to these Cafezati or Red-Dart-Serpents. For first the wildernesse which was the place wherein they annoyed the people, doth very well agree to their habitation. Secondly, those fiery Serpentes are so called by figure, not that they were firey, but as all Writers doe agree, eyther because they were redde like fire, or else because the paine which they inflicted, did burne like fire, or rather for both these causes together which are ioyntly and seuerally found in these red Serpents; and therefore I will conclude for my opinion, that these Serpents (as the high∣est poyson in nature) were sent by GOD to afflict the sinning Israelites, whose poyson was vncurable, except by Diuine miracle. Matthiolus also telleth a story of a Shepheard which was slaine in Italy by one of these, as hee was sleeping in the heate of the day vnder the shaddow of a tree, his fel∣low Shepheardes beeing not farre off looking to theyr flockes, soddainely there came one of these Dart-Serpentes out of the tree, and wounded him vppon his left pappe, at the byting whereof the man awaked and cryed out, aad so dyed incontinently: his fel∣low Shepheards hearing this noyse, came vnto him to see what he ayled, and found him dead, with a Serpent vpon his breast; now knowing what kind of Serpent this was, they forsooke their flockes and ran away for feare. The cure of this Serpentes byting, if there bee any at all, is the same vvhich cureth the Viper, as Aetius and Auicen writeth, and therefore I will not relate it in this place. The gall of this beast mixed with the Sythian Stone, yealdeth a very good Eye-salue. The which Gall lyeth betwixt the backe and the Lyuer: And thus much shall suffice for this Serpent. OF THE DIPSAS. T His Dipsas hath many names for many occasions: First Dipsas in Greeke signyfieth thirst, as Sitis dooth in Latine, and there∣of also it is called Situla, because whosoeuer is vvounded by this Serpent dyeth. It is also called by some Prester: and by some Causon, because it setteth the whole body on fire: but wee shall shew afterwardes, that the Prester is a different Serpent from this. It is called likewise Milanurus, because of his black taile, and Ammo tis, because it lyeth in the sand, and there hurteth a man. It is not therefore vn∣fitly defined by Auicen, to bee Vipera sitem faciens, That is, A Viper causing thirst, and therfore Ouid sporting at an old drunken woman named Lena, calleth her Dipsas in these verses; Est quaedam nomine Dipsas anus, Ex re nomen habit, nigri non illa parentem, Memnonis in roseis sobria vidit equis. In English thus; There is a woman old, which Dipsas may be hight, And not without some cause, thirsty she euer is, For neuer Memnous sire, all blacke and sildome bright, Did she in water sweete behold in sobernesse. They liue for the most part neere the Waters, and in salt Marishy places: whereup∣on Lucan saide: Stant in margine siccae Aspides, Et medijs sitiebant Dipsades vndis. That is to say; Vpon pits brinke dry Aspes there stood, And Dipsads thirst in middest of water floud. It is called Torrida Dipsas, and Arida Dipsas, because of the perpetuall thirst, and therefore the Aegyptians when they will signifie thirst, doe picture a Dipsas: wherevpon Lucianus relateth this story, there is (saith hee) a statue or monument vppon a Graue, right ouer against the great Syrtes betwixt Sillya and Aegypt, with this Epigram: Talia passus erat quoque Tantalus Aethiope cretus, Qui nullo potuit fonte leuare sitim. Tale nec è Danao nat as implere puellas Assiduis vndis vas potuisse reor. That is to say; Such Tantalus indured in Aethiope bred, Which neuer could by Water quench his thirst, Nor could the Graecian maids with water sped, That with dayly pourings till the vessell curst. The statue was the picture of a man like vnto Tantalus, standing in the middest of a Water ready to drinke, by drawing in of the Water, about whose foote was foulded a Dipsas: close by stood certaine women bringing water and pouring it into him to make it runne into his mouth; besides, there was certaine Egges as it were of Estriches lay pic∣tured beside them, such as the Garamants in Lybia seeke after. For it is reported by Lucia∣nus, that the people of that Country doe earnestly seeke after the Fstryges Egges vppon the sandes, not onely to eate the meate that is in them, but also to make sundry vessels or instruments of the shell, and among other things they make Cappes of them. Neare vnto these Egges doe these trecherous Serpentes lie in waight, and so while the poore Country-man commeth to seeke for meate, suddenly he leapeth vppon him, and giueth him a mortall wound. Aelianus hath an Embleme, which hee seemeth to haue translated out of Greeke from Antipiter Sidonius, of a Falconer, which while he was looking vppe after Birdes for meate for his Hawke, suddainely a Dipsas came behind him and stung him to death. The title of his Embleme is, Qui alta contemplatur cadere, he that looketh hie may fall, and the Embleme it selfe is this that solloweth: Dum turdos visco, pedica dum fallit alaudas, Et iacta altiuolam figit arundo gruem, Dipsada non prudens auceps pede perculit, vltrix Illa mali, emissum virus ab ore tacit. Sic obit, extento qui sidera respicit arcu, Securus fati quod ia cit ante pedes. Which may be thus Englished; Whiles Thrush with line, and Larke deceiued with net, And Crane high flying pierced with force of reede, By Falconer was: behold a Dipsas on the foote did set, As if it would reuenge his bloudy foule misdeed, For poyson out of mouth it cast, and bit his foote, Whereof he dyed, like Birds by him deceiued, Whiles bending bow aloft vnto the stars did looke, Saw not his fate below, which him of life bereaued. This Dipsas is inferior in quantity vnto a Viper, but yet killeth by poyson, much more speedily, according to these verses; Exiguae similis spectatur Dipsas echidnae, Sed festina magis morsictus occupat aegros. Parua & lurida cui circa vltima cauda nigrescit. That is to say; This Dipsas like vnto the Viper small, But kils by stroke with greater paine and speede, whose taile at end is soft and blacke withall, That as your death auoyd, with carefull heede. It is but a short Serpent, and so small (as Arnoldus writeth,) it killeth before it be espy∣ed, the length of it not past a cubit, the fore part being very thick, except the head which is small, and so backward it groweth smaller and smaller: the taile being exceeding little, the colour of the forepart somewhat white, but set ouer with blacke and yellow spots, the taile very blacke. Galen writeth, that the ancient Marsi which were appointed for hunting Serpentes and Vipers about Rome, did tell him that there was no meanes outwardly to distinguish betwixt the Viper and the Dipsas, except in the place of their abode, for the Dipsas (he saith) keepeth in the salt places; and therefore the nature thereof is more fiery, but the Vipers keepe in the dryer Crountries, wherfore there are not many of the Dipsa∣des in Italy, because of the moystnes of that Country, but in Lybia where there are great store of salt Marshes. As we haue said already, a man or beast wounded with this serpent, is afflicted with intollerable thirst, insomuch as it is easier for him to breake his belly, then to quench his thirst with drinking, alwaies gaping like a Bull, casteth himselfe downe in∣to the water, & maketh no spare of the cold liquor, but continually sucketh it in till either the belly breake, or the poyson driue out the life, by ouer-comming the vitall Spirites. To conclude, beside all the symptomes which follow the biting of Vipers, which are cō∣mō to this scrpent, this also followeth thē, that the party afflicted can neither make water, vomit, nor sweat, so that they perish by one of these two waies: first either they are bur∣ned vp by the heat of the poyson, if they come not at water to drinke, or else if they come by water, they are so vnsatiable, that their bellies first swell aboue measure, and soone breake about their pr y partes. To conclude, all the affections which follow the thicke poyson of this Serpent are excellently described by Lucan in these verses following; Signiferum iuuenem Tyrrheni sanguinis Aulum Torta caput retrò Dipsas calcata momordit▪ Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit: ipsaque leti Frons caret inuidia: nec quicquam plaga minatur. Ecce subit virus tacitum, carpitque medullas Ignis edax, calidaque incendit visceratabe. Ebibit humorem circum vitalia fusum Pestis, & in sicco linguam torrere palato Coepit, defessos iret qui sudor in artus Non fuit, atque occulos lachrymarum venarefugit. Non decus imperij, non moesti iura Catonis Ardentem tenuere virum, quin spargere signa Auderet, totisque furens exquireret agris. Quas poscebat aquas, sitiens in corde venenum. Ille vel in Tanaim missus, Rhodanumque Padumque Arderet, Nilumque bibens per rura vagantem: Accessit morti Libyae: fatique minorem Famam Dipsas habet terris adiuta perustis. Scrutatur venas penitus squallentis arenae: Nunc redit ad Syrtes & fluct us accipit ore: Aequoreusque placet, sed non & sufficit humor. Nec sentit fatique genus, mortemque veneni: Sed putat esse sitim: ferroque apertre tumentes Sustinuit venas, atque osimplere cruore. Lucanus lib. 9. In English thus; Tyrrhenian Aulus, the auncient-bearer young, Was bit by Dipsas, turning head to heele, No paine or sence of's teeth appear'd, though poyson strong, Death doth not frowne, the man no harme did feele, But loe, slye poyson takes the marrow, and eating fire Burning the bowels warme till all consumed, Drinking vp the humour about the vitall spire, And in dry palate was the tongue vp burned. There was no sweat the sinnewes to refresh, And teares fled from the veine that feedes the eyes, Then Catoes lawes, nor Empiers honor fresh, This fiery youth could hold: but downe the streamer flyes, And like a mad man about the fieldes he runs, Poysons force in heart did waters craue: Though vnto Tanas, Rhodanus, Padus, he comes, Or Nilus: yet all to little for his heate to haue. But dry was death, as though the Dipsas force Were not inough, but holpe by heate of earth, Then doth he search the sands: but no remorse To Syrtes floud he hies, his mouth of them he filleth, Salt water pleaseth, but it cannot suffice, Nor knew he fate, or this kind venoms death, But thought it thirst, and seeing his veines arise Them cut, which bloud stopt mouth and breath. The signes of death following the byting of this Serpent, are extreame drought and inflamation both of the inward and outward partes, so that outwardly the partes are as dry as Parchment, or as a skinne set against the fire, which commeth to passe by adusti∣on and commutation of the bloud, into the nature of the poyson. For this cause many of the auncients haue thought it to be incurable; and therefore were ignorant of the pro∣per medicines, practising onely common medicines prescribed against Vipers: but this is generally obserued, that if once the belly beginne to breake, there can bee no cure but death. First therefore they vse scarification, and make vstion in the body, cutting of the member wounded. If it be in the extremity, they lay also playsters vnto it, as Treacle, li∣quid pitch with oyle, Hennes cut asunder aliue, and so layde to hote, or else the leaues of Purslaine beaten in Vineger, Barley-meale, Bramble-leaues pounded with Hony, also Plantine, Isope, White-garlicke, Leekes, Rue & Nettles. Then must the gouernement of their bodies be no lesse looked vnto; first, that they be kept from all sharpe and salt meates, then, that they be made continually to drinke oyle, to procure vomit, and vvith theyr vomits which they cast out of their stomacke, to giue them glysters, that so the wa∣ters may be drawne to the lower parts. Besides, some take medicines out of Fishes, espe∣cially such as are salt, and the leaues, barke, or sprigges of Laurill: and to conclude, there is nothing better then Treacle compounded of Vipers fleshe. And thus much for the Dipsas. OF THE DOVBLE-HEAD. B Ecause the Graecians call this Serpent Amphisbaina, and the La∣tines from thence Amphisbenae, because it goeth both waies as if it had two heads & no taile: and for this purpose it is neuer seene to turne his body, as it were to turne about his head. When it hath a purpose to auoyde that thing which it feareth, or where-withall it is offended, hee doth but onely change his course back∣ward as he went forward; so that it is as happy a Lyntius, whom the Poets faine to be very quick-sighted, or as those Monsters which are said to haue eyes in their backs, or rather like to Ianus, which is sayde to haue two faces, one forward, and another backward, and therefore I haue called it Double-head, I trust fitly enough to expresse the Greeke word, although compounded of two words together, for so is the Greeke word also, which the French doe expresse by a like compounded word, Double-marcheur, that is, going two waies. It is likewise called An∣kesime, Alchismus, & Amphisilenem. And thus much may suffice for the name. It is said that this Serpent is found in the Iland Lemnus, but among the Germans it is vnknowne. There is some question whether it may be said to haue two heads or no. Ga∣len affirmeth, that it is like a shippe hauing two fore-parts, that is, one behind, & another before. Pliny also subscribeth here-vnto, and maketh it a very pestilent Serpent, Geminum habet caput Amphisbena, tanquam parum esset, vno ore fundi venenum, saith hee; It hath a double-head, as though one mouth were not enough to vtter his poyson, according to the saying of the Poet: Est grauis in geminum surgitis caput Amphis-benae Serpens qui visu necat et sibilo. Which may be englished thus; This Serpent Double-head, is grieuous to be seene, Whose clouen-head doth kill with sight and hissing keene. Vnto this also Elianus subscribeth, that it is a true Serpent, and hath two heads, so that whensoeuer it is to goe forward, one of them standeth in the place of the tayle, but when it is to goe backward, then the head becommeth the tayle, and the tayle the head. So also Mantuan sayth it is a double-headed Serpent, and a fearefull stinging Aspe. And so gene∣rally all the Auncients, vntill Mathiolus and Greuinus time, who first of all began to con∣trary this opinion, affirming it to be impossible in nature, for one Serpent to haue tvvo heads, except it be monstrous; and exceede the common course of nature. Such a one was that Serpent with two heads that Aristotle speaketh of, which doth easily happen to all those creatures which at one birth bring forth many young ones; for so theyr bodies may be conioyned into one, whiles theyr heads stand asunder like twaine. And they say that this Serpent doth resemble a Worme of the earth, whose head and tayle is hard to be be distinguished asunder except you see it going. And they say further, that this Serpent is like to the Scytall, of which we shall speake afterwards, differing from it in nothing except in going backward and forward, and this is all that they can bring against the opinion of the Auncients, whom I will not stand to confute, but leaue the Reader to beleeue one or other: for it shall not bring to mee any great disaduantage, except the losse of his newe English name, for I haue dealt faithfully with the Reader in setting downe the opinion of both sides, and if I doe fayle in a fit name, yet will I not swarue from the best description of his nature. The whole proportion of his body is of equall magnitude or greatnes, and the two ex∣tremities doe answer the middle. His eyes are for the most part shut, the colour like earth, not blacke, but tending to blacknes, the skinne rough and hard, and set ouer with diuers spots: all which properties, or rather parts, are thus described by Nicander. Cuius perpetua est taecum caligine lumen, Quod latas vtrin{que} genas porrecta{que} menta, Terreus est illi color et densissima pellis Plurima quam varij distinctam signafigurant, Plus alijs alto serpentibus aggere tendat: In English thus; Whose eye is euer voyde of light, because Two cheekes both broade & standing vp it hides, The colour earth, thicke skinne, with spots in rowes, Then other Serpents with greater bulke it glides. Solinus Polihistor affirmeth, that they ingender and bring egges forth of the mouth, that is, out of that mouth which is toward the tayle, if there be any such. There is no serpent that doth more boldly aduenture to indure the colde then this doth, for it commeth out of his denne not onely before other Serpents, but also before the Cuckoe sing, or the Grashop∣per commeth forth. They are exceeding carefull of theyr egges, and therefore sildome de∣part from them vntill they be hatched, whereby also may be collected their great loue to their young ones. And further, by their forward and timely comming out of their holes, Greuinus maketh a good obseruation, that theyr temperament or constitution, is more hote then any other Serpent. The Graecians haue all obserued, that this kind of Serpent is hard to be killed, except with a Vine-branch, which they say was demonstrated by Dionisius, who beeing turned by Iuno into madnes, one day falling fast asleepe, this Serpent leaped vppon him & awa∣ked him, whereat he beeing angry, presently killed it with a Vine-branch. Some haue af∣firmed, that a small rodde or batte couered with the skinne of this Serpent, and so la d be∣side a man, driueth away all manner of venomous beastes. A Wild-oliue-branch or sprigge wrapped in this skinne, doth cure the sencelesse and benummed estate of the si∣newes, and also is good for many thinges, as Nicander expresseth in these verses. Haec vbi iam creuit, cedentes ligna coloni Sectam deglabrant oleastri exarborc virgam, Quale pedum, strictis{que}, prehensi pellibus Anguis Insectam obuoluunt, quas certis deinde diebus Exarere sinunt, cantantes ante cicadas Vtilis hic bacalus frigentibus artubus esse Fertur, vbi exanimis digitos corpedo fatigat, Tunc quia constrictos, & eorum vincula, neruos Calfacit immisso fouet extendit{que} calore. Which may be englished thus; When this is growne, the Peasants cutting wood, Doe peele a branch taken from Oliue-wilde, A in length, of strained Snakes-skinne good, Rowling it vp herein, till dayes fulfild, And let it dry before Grashoppers greene: Thus made, is good for sinewes cold, Or nummed fingers, whose force hath beene By heate extending what cold band did hold. The wounds that come by the byting or stinging of this Serpent, are not great, but very small, and scarcely to be discerned outwardly, yet the accidents that followe, are like to those which ensue the bytings of Vipers, namely, inflamation, & a lingering death. The cure therefore must be the same which is applyed vnto the sting of Vipers. And peculiar∣ly I finde not any medicine seruing for the cure of this poyson alone, except that which Pliny speaketh of, namely Coriander drunke by the patient, or layd to the sore. It is reported by Gallen and Greuinus, that if a woman with childe doe chaunce to goe ouer one of these Double-headed-serpents dead, shee shall suffer abortment, and yet that they may keepe them in their pockets aliue without danger in boxes. The reason of this is giuen by Greuinus, because of the vapoure assending from the dead serpent, by a secrete antypathy against humane nature, which suffocateth the childe in the mothers wombe. And thus much for this Serpent. OF THE DRAGON. A Mong all the kindes of Serpents, there is none comparable to the Dragon, or that affordeth and yeeldeth so much plen∣tifull matter in history for the ample discouery of the nature thereof: and therefore heerein I must borrow more time frō the residue, then peraduenture the Reader would be willing to spare from reading the particuler storyes of many other. But such is the necessity heereof, that I can omit nothing ma∣king to the purpose, eyther for the nature or morality of this Serpent, therefore I will striue to make the description plea∣sant, with variable history, seeing I may not auoyd the length heereof, that so the sweetnes of the one, (if my penne could so expresse it) may counter. uaile the tediousnes of the other. The Hebrewes call it Thanin, and Wolphius translateth Oach a Dragon, in his Commen∣taries vpon Nehemiah. The Chaldees call it Darkon, and it seemeth that the Greeke word Dracon is deriued of the Chaldee. We reade of Albedisimon or Ahedysimon for a kind of Dragon, and also Alhatraf, and Hauden, Haren carnem, and such other termes, that may be referred to this place. The Graecians at this day call it Drakos, the Germans, Trach Lindtwarm, the French, Vn Dragon, the Italians, Drago and Dragone. The deriuation of the Greeke word, beside the coniecture afore expressed, some thinke to be deriued from Derkein, because of their vigilant eye-sight, and therfore it is fayned that they had the cu∣stody not onely of the Golden-fleece, but also of many other treasures. And among other things, Alciatus hath an Emblem of their vigilancy standing by an vnmarried virgin. Vera haec effigies innuptae est Paladis: eius Hic Draco, qui domina constitie ante pedes. Cur Diuae comes hoc animal? custodia rerum Huic data, sic lucos sacraque templa colit. Innuptas opus est cura asseruare puellas Pervigili: laqueos vndique tendit amor. Which may be englished thus; This Dragon great which Lady Pallas stands before, Is the true picture of vnmarried maydes: But why a consort to the Goddesse is this? and more Then other beasts more meeke, who neuer fades? Because the safegard of all things belongs to this, Wherefore his house in Groues and sacred Temples set, Vnmarried maides of guardes must neuer misse, Which watchfull are to voyde loues snares and nette. For this cause the Egyptians did picture Serapis their God with three heads, that is to of a Lyon in the middle, on the right hand a meeke fauning dogge, and on the left hand a rauening Wolfe, all which formes are ioyned together by the winding bodie of a Dragon, turning his head to the right hand of his God; which three heads are interpre∣ted to signifie three times; that is to say, by the Lyon, the present time, by the Wolfe, the time past, and by the fauning dogge, the time to come, all which are garded by the vi∣gilancie of the Dragon. For this cause also among the fixed starres of the North, there is one called Draco, a dragon, all of them ending their course with the Sunne and Moone, and they are in this Spheare called by Astronomers the Intersections of the Circles, the superiour of these ascending, is called the head of the Dragon, and the inferiour descen∣ding, is called the tayle of the Dragon. And some thinke that GOD in the 38. of Io ▪ by the word Gnaish, meaneth this signe or Constellation. To conclude, the auncient Romans (as Vegetius writeth) carried in all their bands the Escutchion of a Dragon, to signifie their fortitude and vigilancie, which were borne vp by certaine men called for that purpose Draconarij. And therefore when Constantius the Emperour entered into the City of Rome, his Souldiers are said to beare vppe vppon the toppes of their speares, dragons gaping with wide mouthes, and made fast with golden chaines and pearle, the wind whistling in their throates, as if they had beene aliue, threat∣ning destruction, and theyr tayles hanging loose in the ayre, were likewise by the vvinde tossed to and fro, as though they stroue to come off from the speares, but when the wind was layd, all theyr motion was ended, where-vpon the Poet saith: Mansuescunt varij vento cessante Dracones. In English thus; When whistling winde in ayer ceast, The Dragons tamed, then did rest. The tale also of the Golden-fleece, if it be worth any place in this storie, deserueth to be inserted heere, as it is reported by Diodorus Siculns. When Actës raigned in Pontus, he receiued an aunswere from the Oracle, that hee should then dye when strangers should come thether with shippes and fetch away the Gol-den-fleece. Vpon which occasion hee shewed himselfe to be of a cruell nature, for he did not onely make Proclamation that he would sacrifice all strangers which came within his dominions, but did also performe the same, that by the fame and report of such crueltie, he might terrifie all other Nations frō hauing accesse vnto that Temple. Not contented heere-with, hee raised a great strong vvall round about the Temple wherein the Fleece was kept, and caused a sure watch or guarde to attend the same day & night, of whom the Graetians tell many strange fables. For they say there were Bulls breathing out fire, and a Dragon warding the Temple and defending the Fleece, but the truth is that these watchmen because of their strength were called Bulls, because of their cruelty, were said to breathe out fire, and because of their vi∣gilancie, crueltie, strength and terrour, to be dragons. Some affirme againe, that in the Gardens of Hesperides in Libia, there were golden Apples, which were kept by a terrible Dragon, which dragon was afterward slaine by Hercules, and the Apples taken away by him, & so brought to Euryshteus. Others affirme that Hesperides had certaine flocks of sheepe, the colour of whose woll was like gold, and they were kept by a valiant Sheepheard called Draco: but I rather agree with Solinus, who giueth a more true reason of this fable, Nefamae licentia vulneretur fides, least (as he saith) fayth and truth should receiue a disgrace or wound by the lauish report of fame. There was among the Hesperides a certaine winding Riuer comming from the sea, and including within it the compasse of that land which is called the Gardens of Hesperides, at one place whereof, the falling of the water broken by a Rocke, seemeth to be like the falling downe of Snakes, to them that stand a farre off, and from hence ariseth all the occasion of the fa∣ble afore-said. Indeed there was a statue of Hercules, in the left hand wherof were three Apples, which he was said to haue obtained by the conquest of a dragon, but that conquest of the dragon did morrally signifie his owne concupiscence, whereby hee raigned ouer three passions, that is to say, ouer his wrath by patience, ouer his cupiditie by temperance, and ouer his pleasures by labour & trauaile: which were three vertues farre more precious then three golden Apples. But I will stay my course from prosecuting these morrall discourses of the dragon, and returne againe to his naturall history; from which I haue somewhat too long digressed. There are diuers sorts of Dragons, distinguished partly by their Countries, partlie by their quantitie and magnitude, and partly by the different forme of their externall partes. There be Serpents in Arabia called Sirenae, which haue winges, beeing as swift as horses, running or flying at their owne pleasure, and when they wound a man, hee dyeth before he feeleth paine. Of these it is thought the Prophet Esay speaketh, chap. 13. ver. 22. Ser∣pens clamabit in Templis voluptarijs: and for Serpents, the old Translators read Syrenae, & so the English should be, the Syrene dragons should cry in their Temples of pleasure: and the auncient distinction was, Anguis aquarum, Serpentes terrarū, Dracones Templorū: that is to say, Snakes are of the water, Serpents of the earth, & Dragons of the Temples. And I thinke it was a iust iudgement of God, that the auncient Temples of the Heathen-Ido∣laters were annoyed with dragons, that as the deuill was there worshipped, so there might be appearance of his person in the vglie forme and nature of a dragon. For God himselfe in holy Scripture, doth compare the deuill vnto a dragon, as Reue: 12. ver: 3. And there appeared another wonder in Heauen, for behold a great Redde-dragon, hauing 7. heads, and tenne hornes, and seauen crownes vpon his head. verse 4. And his tayle drewe the third part of the starres of heauen, and cast them to the earth: and the dragon stoode be∣fore the Woman which was ready to be deliuered, to deuoure her child when shee had brought it forth. Verse 5. So she brought forth a man-child, which should rule all Nations with a rodde of yron. And her Sonne was taken vp vnto God and to his throne. Verse 6. And the Woman fledde into the Wildernes, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feede her there 1260. dayes. Verse 7. And there was a battaile in heauen, Michaell and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his An∣gels. Verse 8. But they preuailed not, neither was theyr place found any more in heauen. Verse 9. And the great Dragon that old Serpent called the deuill and Satan, was cast out, which deceiueth all the world, he was euen cast vnto the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. Verse 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast vnto the earth, he per∣secuted the VVoman which had brought forth a man-child: and so forth, as it followeth in the Text. Where-vppon S. Augustine writeth, Diabolus draco dicitur propter insidias, quia occulte insidiatur: that is, the deuill is called a dragon because of his treachery, for he doth treacherously set vpon men to destroy them. It was wont to be said, because dragons are the greatest Serpents, that except a Ser∣pent eate a serpent, he shall neuer be a dragon: for theyr opinion was, that they grew so Aelianus. great by deuouring others of their kind; and indeede in Ethiopia they grow to be thirtie yardes long, neither haue they any other name for those dragons but Elephant-killers, & they liue very long. Onesicritus writeth, that one Aposisares an Indian, did nourish two Serpents dragons, whereof one was sixe and forty cubits long, and the other fourescore; and for the more famous verification of the fact, he was a very earnest suter to Alexander the great, when he was in India to come and see them, but the King beeing afraid, refused. The Chroniclers of the affayres of Chius doe write, that in a certaine valley neere to the foote of the mountaine Pellenaus, was a valley full of straite tall Trees, wherein was bred a dragon of wonderfull magnitude or greatnes, whose onely voyce or hissing, did terrifie all the Inhabitants of Chius, and therefore there was no man that durst come nigh vnto him, to consider or to take a perfect view of his quantitie, suspecting onely his greatnesse by the loudenesse of his voyce, vntill at length they knewe him better by a singuler acci∣dent worthy of eternall memory. For it hapned on a time that such a violent wind did a∣rise, as did beate together all the Trees in the wood, by which violent collision, the bran∣ches fell to be on fire, and so all the wood was burned suddainely, compassing in the dra∣gon, whereby he had no meanes to escape aliue, and so trees fell downe vpon him & bur∣ned him. Afterward, when the fire had made the place bare of wood, the inhabitants might see the quantity of the dragon, for they found diuers of his bones & his head, which were of such vnusuall greatnes, as did sufficiently confirme them in their former opinion: and thus by diuine miracle was this monster consumed, who neuer any man durst behold beeing aliue, and the inhabitants of the Country safely deliuered from their iust concei∣ued feare. It is also reported, that Alexander among many other beastes which hee saw in India, did there finde in a certaine denne a dragon of seauentie cubites long, which the Indians accounted a sacred beast, and therefore intreated Alexander to doe it no harme. When it vttered the voyce with full breath, it terrified his whole Armie: they could neuer see the proportion of his body, but onely the head, and by that they gessed the quantitie of the whole body, for one of his eyes in their appearance seemed as great as a Macedonian buckler. Maximus Tyrius writeth, that in the dayes of Alexander, there was likewise seene a dragon in India, as long as fiue roodes of land are broade, which is incredible. For hee likewise saith, that the Indians did feede him euery day with many seuerall Oxen and sheepe. It may be that it was the same spoken of before, which some ignorant men, and such as were giuen to sette forth fables, amplified beyond measure and credite. Whereas dragons are bredde in India and Affrica, the greatest of all are in India, for in Ethiopia, Nubia, and Hesperia, the dragons are confined within the length of fiue cu∣bits, & twenty cubits: for in the time of Euergetes, there were three brought into Egypt, one was nine cubits long, which with great care was nourished in the Temple of Escula∣pius, the other two were seauen cubits long. About the place where once the Tower of Babell was builded, are dragons of great quantitie, and vnder the Equinoctiall, as Nice∣phorus Callistus writeth, there are Serpents as thicke as beames, in testimony wherof their skinnes haue been brought to Rome. And therefore it is no maruell, although S. Austine writing vpon the 148. Psalme, doth say, Draconis magna quedam sunt animantia maiora non sunt super terram: dragons are certaine great beasts, and there are none greater vpon the earth. Neither is it to be thought incredible that the souldiours of Attilius Regulus did kill a dragon which was a hundred and twenty foote long, or that the dragons in the dennes of the Mountaine Atlas, should grow so great that they can scarce moue the fore-parts of their bodie. I am yet therefore to speake of the dragons in the Montaines Emodij, or of Arigia, or of Dachinabades, or the Regions of the East, or of that which Augustus shewed publiquely to the people of Rome, beeing fiftie cubits long; or of those which be Stumpsius. in the Alpes, which are found in certaine Caues of the South-sides of the hills, so that this which hath beene said, shall suffise for the quantitie and Countries of dragons. Besides, there are other kindes of dragons which I must speake of in order: and first of all of the Epidaurian dragons, which is bred no where but in that Country, beeing tame, and of yellow golden-colour, wherefore they were dedicated to Aesculapius, of whom Nicander writeth in this manner; Nunc veridem et nigrem post dicta venena Drachonem Aspice, quem patulafago Phoebia proles Ingelido peli nutriuit, culmine iuxta Letae pelethuniae quondam decliuia vallis, In English thus; After these venoms now behold the dragon blacke and greene, Nourished by Apollos sonne vnder a Beech full broade, On top of the cold Pelus, as often hath beene seene, By fertill vale of Pelethun his slyding roade. There are likewise other kindes of Tame-dragons in Macedonia, vvhere they are so meeke, that women feede them, and suffer them to sucke their breasts like little children, their Infants also play with them, riding vppon them and pinching them, as they would doe with dogges, without any harme, and sleeping with them in their beds. But among all dragons, there was none more famous then the dragon Python, or Pithias, as the Poets faine, which was bred of the slyme of the earth, after the flood of Ducalion, and slaine af∣terwards by Apollo, whereof there lieth this tale; That when Latona was with childe by Iupiter of Apollo and Diana, Iuno resisted their birth, but when they were borne and layde in the cradle, she sent the dragon Python to deuoure them, Apollo beeing but a young In∣fant, did kill the dragon with a darte. But this tale seemeth too fabulous and incredible, and therefore they haue mended the matter with another deuice; For they say that Python by the commaundement of Iuno, did persecute Latona throughout all the world, seeking to deuoure her, so as she had no rest vntill shee came vnto her sister Asteria, who receiued her into Delos, where she was safely deliuered of Apollo and Diana. Afterward, when the child was growne vp, he slew the dragon in remembrance & reuenge of the wrong done to his mother. But the true cause of this history is deliuered by Pausanias & Macrobius, to be thus; That Apollo killed one Python a very wicked man in Delphos, & that the Poets in excuse of the fact, did faine him to be a dragon, as afore-said. And so I shall not neede to say any more of Python, except these verses following out of Ouid about his generation. —Sed te quo{que} maxime Python, Tum genuit populis{que} nouis incognite serpens Terror eras: tantum spatij de monte tenebras. Hunc Deus arcitenens & nunquam talibus armis Antè, nici in damis, caprisque fugacibus vsus; Mille grauem telis exhausta penepharetra Perdidit effuso per vulnera nigra veneno, Neue operis famam posset delere vetustas, Inflituit sacros celebri certamine ludos Pithia per domitae serpentis nominem dictor. Caeruleus tali prostratus Apolline Python. Which may be englished thus; But yet thou vgly Python wert engendered by her, tho A terrour to the new-made-folke, which neuer erst had knowne So foule a Dragon in their life, so monstrously fore-growne, So great a ground thy poysond paunch did vnderneath thee hyde, The God of shooting, who no where before that present tyde Those kind of weapons put in vre but at the speckled Deere, Or at the Roes so light of foote, a thousand shafts well neere Did on that hydeous Serpent spend, of which there was not one But forced forth the venomd-blood, along his sides to gone: So that his quiuer almost void, he nayld him to the ground, And did him nobly at the last by force of shot confound. And least that time should of this worke deface the worthy fame, He did ordaine in mind thereof a great and solemne game, Which of the Serpent that he slew, of Pythions bare the name. Of the Indian Dragons there are also said to be two kindes, one of them fenny, and li∣uing in the Marshes, which are slow of pace and without combes on their heades like fe∣males: the other in the Mountaines, which are more sharpe and great, and haue combes vpon their head, their backs beeing some-what browne, and all their bodies lesse scalie then the other. When they come downe from the mountaines into the plaine to hunt, they are neither afraid of Marshes nor violent waters, but thrust themselues greedily into all hazards and dangers: and because they are of longer and stronger bodies then the dra∣gons of the Fennes, they beguile them of their meate, & take away from them their pre∣pared booties. Some of them are of a yellowish fieric-colour, hauing also sharpe backs like sawes; these also haue beardes, and when they sette vppe their scales they shine like siluer. The apples of their eyes are precious stones, and as bright as fire, in which there is affir∣med to be much vertue against many diseases, and therefore they bring vnto the Hunters and killers of dragons no small gaine, besides the profit of theyr skinne and theyr teeth: and they are taken when they descend from the mountaines into the valleyes to hunt the Elephants, so as both of them are kild together by the Hunters. Their members are very great, like vnto the members of the greatest Swine, but theyr bodies are leaner, flexibly turning to euery side, according to the necessitie of motion: Their snoutes are very strong, resembling the greatest rauening fishes; they haue beardes of a yellowe golden colour, being full of bristles: and the Mountaine-dragons common∣ly haue more deepe eye-liddes then the dragons of the Fennes. Their aspect is very fierce and grimme, and whensoeuer they mooue vppon the earth, their eyes giue a sound from theyr eye-liddes, much like vnto the tinckling of Brasse, and some-times they boldly ven∣ture into the Sea and take Fishes. OF THE WINGED DRAGON. T Here be some Dragons which haue winges and no feete, some againe haue both feete and wings, and some neither feete nor wings, but are onely distinguished from the com∣mon sort of Serpents by the combe growing vppon their heads, and the beard vnder their cheekes. Saint Augustine saith, that dragons doe abide in deepe Caues and hollow places of the earth, and that some-times when they perceiue moistnes in the ayre, they come out of theyr holes, and beating the ayre with their winges, as it were with the strokes of oares, they forsake the earth and flie aloft: which wings of theirs are of a skinny substance, and very voluble, and spreading themselues wide, according to the quantitie and large∣nesse of the dragons bodie, which caused Lucan the Poet in his verses to write in this ma∣ner following: Vos quo{que} qui cunctis innoxia numina terris Serpitis, aurato nitidifulgore Dracones, Pestiferos ardens facit Affrica: ducitis altum Aëra cum pennis. &c. In English thus; You shining Dragons creeping on the earth, Which fiery Affrick holds with skinnes like gold, Yet pestilent by hot infecting breath: Mounted with wings in th' ayre we doe behold. The inhabitants of the kingdome of Georgia, once called Media, doe say that in theyr Valleyes there are diuers Dragons which haue both wings and feete, and that their feete are like vnto the feete of Geese. Besides, there are dragons of sundry colours, for some of them are blacke, some redde, some of an Ashe-colour, some yellow, and their shape and outward appearance verie beautifull, according to the verses of Nicander. Formosa apparet species pulchro illius orae, Triplici conspicui se produnt ordine dentes, Magna sub egregia scintillant lumina fronte, Tincta{que} felle tegunt imum paleariamentum. Which may be englished thus; Their forme of presence outwardly appeares All beautifull, and in their goodly mouth Their teeth stand double, all one within another: Conspicuous order so doth bewray the truth. Vnder their browes, which are both great and wide, Stand twinckling eyes, as bright as any starre, With redde-galls tincture are their dewlaps dyed, Their chinne or vnder-chappe to couer farre. Gyllius, Pierius, and Greuinus, following the authoritie of this Poet, doe affirme that a Dragon is of a blacke colour, the bellie some-what greene, & very beautifull to behold, hauing a treble rowe of teeth in theyr mouthes vppon euery iawe, and with most bright and cleere-seeing eyes, vvhich caused the Poets to faine in their writings, that these dra∣gons are the watchfull-keepers of Treasures. They haue also two dewlappes grovving vnder their chinne, and hanging downe like a beard, which are of a redde colour: theyr bodies are sette all ouer with very sharpe scales, and ouer theyr eyes stand certaine flexi∣ble eye-liddes. When they gape wide with their mouth, and thrust foorth their tongue, theyr teeth seeme very much to resemble the teeth of, Wilde-Swine: And theyr neckes haue many times grosse thicke hayre growing vpon them, much like vnto the bristles of a VVilde-Boare. Their mouth, (especially of the most tame-able Dragons) is but little, not much big∣ger then a pype, through which they drawe in theyr breath, for they wound not vvith theyr mouth, but with theyr tayles, onely beating with thē when they are angry. But the Indian, Ethiopian, and Phrygian dragons, haue very wide mouthes, through which they often swallow in whole foules and beasts. Theyr tongue is clouen as if it were double, and the Investigators of nature doe say, that they haue fifteene teeth of a side. The males haue combes on their heads, but the females haue none, and they are likewise distingui∣shed by their beards. They haue most excellent sences both of seeing and hearing, and for this cause theyr name Drakon cōmeth of Derkein, and this was one cause why Iupiter the Heathens great God, is said to be metamorphised into a Dragon, whereof there flieth this tale: vvhen he fell in loue with Proserpina, he rauished her in the likenes of a dragon, for hee came vnto her and couered her with the spires of his body; and for this cause the people of Sabazij did obserue in their misteries or sacrifices, the shape of a dragon rowled vp within the cō∣passe of his spires: so that as he begot Ceres with child in the likenes of a Bull, he likewise deluded her daughter Proserpina in the likenes of a dragon; but of these transmutations we shall speake more afterwards, & I thinke the vanity of these, tooke first ground frō the Affricans, who beleeue that the originall of dragons tooke beginning from the vnnaturall cōiunction of an Eagle & a shee-Wolfe. And so they say that the Wolfe growing great by this conception, doth not bring forth as at other times, but her belly breaketh, and the dragon commeth out, who in his beake and wings resembleth the dragon his father, and in his feete and tayle, the vvolfe his mother, but in the skin neither of them both: but this kind of fabulus generation, is already sufficiently confuted. Their meates are fruites and herbes, or any venomous creature, therfore they liue long without foode, and when they eate, they are not easily filled. They grow most fat by eating of egs, in deuouring wherof they vse this Art, if it be a great dragon, he swalloweth it vp whole, and then rowleth him selfe, whereby hee crusheth the egges to peeces in his belly, and so nature casteth out the shells, & keepeth in the meate. But if it be a young dragon, as if it were a dragons whelp, he taketh the egge within the spire of his tayle, and so crusheth it hard, & holdeth it fast, vntill his scales open the shell like a knife, then sucketh hee out of the place opened all the meate of the egge. In like sort do the young ones pull off the feathers frō the foules which they eate, and the old ones swallow them whole, casting the feathers out of theyr bellyes againe. The dragons of Phrygia when they are hungry, turne themselues toward the west, & gaping wide, with the force of their breath doe draw the birdes that flie ouer their heads into their throats, which some haue thought is but a voluntary lapse of the fowles, to be drawne by the breath of the dragon, as by a thing they loue, but it is more probable, that some vaporous and venomous breath is sent vp from the dragon to them, that poysoneth and infecteth the ayre about them, whereby their sences are taken from them, and they a∣stonished fall downe into his mouth. But if it fortune the dragons find not foode enough to satisfie their hunger, then they hide themselues vntill the people be returned from the market, or the Heard-men bring home their flocks, and vppon a suddaine they deuoure eyther men or beastes, which come first to their mouthes: then they goe againe and hide themselues in their dennes and hollow Caues of the earth, for theyr bodies beeing excee∣ding hote, they very sildome come out of the cold earth, except to seeke meate and nou∣rishment. And because they liue onely in the hottest Countries, therefore they common∣lie make theyr lodgings neere vnto the waters, or else in the coldest places among the Rocks and stones. They greatlie preserue their health (as Aristotle affirmeth) by eating of Wild-lettice, for that they make them to vomit, and cast foorth of theyr stomacke what-soeuer meate offendeth them, and they are most speciallie offended by eating of Apples, for theyr bo∣dies are much subiect to be filled with winde, and therefore they neuer eate Apples, but first they eate Wilde-lettice. Theyr sight also (as Plutarch sayth) doth many times grow weake and feeble, and therefore they renew and recouer the same againe by rubbing their eyes against Fennell, or else by eating of it. Their age could neuer yet be certainely knowne, but it is coniectured that they liue long, and in great health, like to all other Serpents, & therefore they grow so great. They doe not onely liue on the land, as we haue said already, but also swimme in the water, for many times they take the Sea in Ethyopia, foure or fiue of them together, folding theyr tayles like hurdles, and holding vp their heads, so swim they ouer to seeke better foode in Arabia. We haue said already, that when they set vpon Elephants, they are taken and killed of men: now the manner how the Indians kill the Mountaine-dragons is thus; they take a garment of Scarlet, and picture vpon it a charme in golden letters, this they lay vpon the mouth of the Dragons denne, for with the redde colour and the gold, the eyes of the dra∣gon are ouer-come, and he salleth asleepe, the Indians in the meane-season watching, & muttering secretly words of Incantation, when they perceiue he is fast asleepe, suddaine∣ly they strike off his necke with an Axe, and so take out the balls of his eyes, wherein are lodged those rare & precious stones which containe in them vertues vnvtterable, as hath beene euidently prooued by one of them, that was included in the Ring of Gyges. Manie times it falleth out, that the dragon draweth in the Indian both with his Axe and Instru∣ments into his denne, and there deuoureth him, in the rage whereof, hee so beateth the Mountaine that it shaketh. When the dragon is killed, they make vse of the skin, eyes, teeth, and flesh, as for the flesh, it is of a vitriall or glassie colour, and the Ethiopians doe eate it very greedily, for they say it hath in it a refrigeratiue power. And there be some which by certaine inchaunting verses doe tame Dragons, and rydeth vpon their necks, as a man would ride vpon a horse, guiding and gouerning them with a bridle. Now because we haue already shewed, that some dragons haue winges, least it should seeme vncredible, as the foolish world is apt to beleeue no more then they see, I haue therefore thought good to adde in this place, a particuler relation of the testimonies of sundry Learned-men, concerning these winged Serpents or dragons. First of all Mega∣stenes Aelianus. Scaliger. writeth, that in India there be certaine flying Serpents, which hurt not in the day, but in the night time, and these do render or make a kind of vrine, by the touching where∣of, all the parts of mortall creatures doe rotte away. And there is a Mountaine which de∣uideth asunder the Kingdome of Narsing a from Alabaris, wherein be many winged-ser∣pents sitting vpon trees, which they say poyson men with their breath. There be many pestilent winged-serpents which come out of Arabia euery yeere by troupes into Egypt, these are destroyed by a certaine Black-bird called Ibis, who fighteth with thē in the de∣fence Aelianus. Herodotus. of that Country where she liueth, so that there lye great heapes of them many times destroyed vpon the earth by these Birds, whose bodies may be there visibly seene to haue both wings and legges, and their bones beeing of great quantitie and stature, remaine vn∣consumed for many yeeres after. These kinde of Serpents or Dragons, couet to keepe a∣bout the Trees of Frankinsence which grow in Arabia, and when they are driuen away frō thence with the fume or smoake of Stirax, then they flie (as is afore-said) into Egypt, and this is to be considered, that if it were not for this Stirax, all that Country would be consumed with Dragons. Neither haue wee in Europe onely heard of Dragons and neuer seene them, but also euen in our own Country, there haue (by the testimonie of sundry Writers) diuers been discouered and killed. And first of all, there was a Dragon or Winged-serpent brought vnto Frauncis the French-King when hee lay at Sancton, by a certaine Country-man, Brodaus Scaliger who had slaine the same Serpent himselfe with a Spade, when it sette vppon him in the fields to kill him. And this thing was witnessed by many Learned & credible men which saw the same: and they thought it was not bredde in that Country, but rather driuen by the winde thither from some forraine Nation. For Fraunce was neuer knowne to breede any such Monsters. Among the Pyrenes also, there is a cruell kinde of Serpent, not past foure foote long, and as thicke as a mans arme, out of whose sides growe winges much like vnto gristles. Gesner also saith, that in the yeere of our Lord 1543. there came many Serpents both with wings and legs into the parts of Germany neere Stiria, who did bite & wound ma∣ny men incurably. Cardan also describeth certaine serpents with wings, which hee saw at Parris, whose dead bodies were in the hands of Gulielmus Musicus, hee saith that they had two legges and small winges, so that they could scarce flie, the head was little, and like to the head of a Serpent, their colour bright, and without haire or feathers, the quantitie of that which was greatest, did not exceede the bignes of a Cony, and it is saide they vvere Crinitus brought out of India. Besides, a further confirmation of these beastes, there haue beene noted in all ages; for it is written in the Romaine Chronicles, the times of their apparisi∣on and manifestation. When the Riuer of Tiber ouer-flowed aboue the bankes, then were many Serpents discouered, and many Dragons, as in the time of Mauritius the Emperour, at what time a dragon came along by the Citty of Rome, vpon the waters in the sight of all men, and so passed to the Sea: after which prodigie, there followed a great mortall pestilence. In Stumpsius. the yeere 1499. the twenty sixe day of May, there came a dragon to the Citty of Lucerne, which came out of the Lake through Rusa, downe along the Riuer, many people of all sorts beholding the same. There haue beene also Dragons many times seene in Germanie, flying in the ayre at mid-day, and signifying great and fearefull fiers to follow, as it happened neere to the Cit∣tie called Niderburge, neere to the shore of the Rhyne, in a maruailous cleere sun-shine day, there came a dragon three times successiuely together in one day, & did hang in the ayre ouer a Towne called Sanctogoarin, and shaking his tayle ouer that Towne euery time: it appeared visibly in the sight of many of the inhabitants, and afterwards it came to passe, that the said towne was three times burned with fire, to the great harme and vndooing of all the people dwelling in the same; for they were not able to make any resistance to quench the fire, with all the might, Art, and power that they could raise. And it was fur∣ther obserued, that about that time there were many dragons seene washing themselues in a certaine Fountaine or Well neere the towne, and if any of the people did by chaunce drinke of the water of that Well, theyr bellyes did instantly begin to swell, and they died as if they had beene poysoned. Where-vpon it was publiquely decreed, that the said well should be filled vp with stones, to the intent that neuer any man should afterwards be poi∣soned with that water; and so a memory thereof was continued, and these thinges are written by Iustinus Goblerus, in an Epistle to Gesner, affirming that hee did not write fay∣ned things, but such things as were true, and as he had learned from men of great honestly and credite, whose eyes did see and behold both the dragons, and the mishaps that follo∣wed by fire. When the body of Cleomines was crucified, and hung vpon the Crosse, it is reported by them that were the watch-men about it, that there came a dragon and did wind it selfe about his body, and with his head couered the face of the dead King, oftentimes licking the same, and not suffering any bird to come neere and touch the carkasse. For vvhich cause there began to be a reuerent opinion of diuinitie attributed to the King, vntill such time as wise and prudent men, studious of the truth, found out the true cause hereof. For they say that as Bees are generated out of the body of Oxen, and Drones of horses, and Hornets of Asses: so doe the bodyes of men ingender out of their marrow a Serpent, and for this cause, the Auncients were moued to consecrate the dragon to noble-spirited men, and therefore there was a monument kept of the first Affricanus, because that vnder an Oliue planted with his owne hand, a dragon was said to preserue his ghost. But I will not mingle fables and truth together, and therefore I will reserue the mor∣rall discourse of this beast vnto another place; and this which I haue written, may be suf∣ficient to satisfie any reasonable man, that there are winged Serpents and dragons in the world. And I pray God that we neuer haue better arguments to satisfie vs, by his corpo∣rall and liuely presence in our Country, least some great calamity followe there-vppon. Now therefore we will proceed to the loue and hatred of this beast, that is obserued with man, and other creatures. And first of all, although Dragons be naturall enemies to men, like vnto all other Ser∣pents, yet many times (if there be any truth in story) they haue beene possessed with ex∣traordinary loue, both to men, women and children, as may appeare by these particulers following. There was one Aleua a Thessalian Neatheard, which did keepe oxen in Ossa, hard by the fountaine Hemonius, there was a Dragon fell in loue with this man, for his haire was as yellow as any gold, vnto him for his hayre did this dragon often come, cree∣ping closely as a Louer to his Loue: and when he came vnto him, he would lick his haire and face so gently, and in so sweete a manner, as the man professed he neuer felt the like, Aelianus. so as without all feare he conuersed with him, and as he came, so would hee goe away a∣gaine, neuer returning to him empty, but bringing some one gift or other, such as his na∣ture and kind could lay hold on. There was a Dragon also which loued Pindus the sonne of Macedo King of Emathia: This Pindus hauing many Brothers most wicked and lewd persons, and he onely beeing a valiant man of honest disposition, hauing likewise a comly and goodly personage, vn∣derstanding the trechery of his bretheren against him, bethought himselfe how to auoyd theyr hands and tyrannie. Now forasmuch as hee knew that the kingdome which hee possessed, was the onely marke they all shot at, he thought it better to leaue that to them, and so to ridde himselfe from enuy, feare and perrill, then to embrew his hands in theyr blood, or to loose his life and kingdome both together. Wherefore hee renounced and gaue ouer the gouernment, and betooke himselfe to the exercise of hunting, for he was a strong man, fit to combat with wilde-beastes, by destruction of whom, hee made more roome for many men vppon the earth, so that hee passed all his dayes in that exercise. It hapned on a day that he was hunting of a Hind-calfe, and spurring his horse with all his might and maine in the eager pursute thereof, hee rode out of the sight of all his compa∣pany, and suddainely the Hind-calfe leaped into a very deepe Caue, out of the sight of Pindus the Hunter, and so saued himselfe. Then he alighted from his horse and tyed him to the next Tree, seeking out as diligently as he could for a way into the Caue, wherein∣to the Hind-calfe had leaped: and when he had looked a good while about him, & could find none, he heard a voyce speaking vnto him, and forbidding him to touch the Hind-calfe, which made him looke about againe, to see if hee could perceiue the person from whom the voyce proceeded, but espying none, hee grew to be afraide, and thought that the voyce proceeded from some other greater cause, and so leaped vpon his horse hastily, and departed againe to his fellowes. The day after, he returned to the same place, and when he came thether, beeing terri∣fied with the remembrance of the former voyce, hee durst not enter into the place, but stoode there doubting and wondering with himselfe, what Shepheards, or Hunters, or other men might be in that place, to diswarne him from his game, and therefore he went round about to seeke for some, or to learne from whence the voyce proceeded. While he was thus seeking, there appeared vnto him a Dragon of a great stature, creeping vpon the greatest part of his body, except his necke and head lifted vp a little, and that little was as high as the stature of any man can reach, and in this fashion hee made toward Pindus, who at the first sight was not a little afraid of him, but yet did not runne away, but rather gathering his wits together, remembred that hee had about him birds, and diuers parts of sacrifices, which instantly he gaue vnto the dragon, and so mitigated his furie by these gyfts, and as it were with a royall feast, changed the cruell nature of the dragon, into kind vsage. For the Dragon beeing smoothed ouer with these gyfts, and as it were ouer-taken with the liberality of Pindus, was contented to forsake the old place of his habitation, and to goe away with him. Pindus also beeing no lesse gladde of the company of the Dragon, did daily giue vnto him the greatest part of his hunting, as a deserued price and ransome of his life, and conquest of such a beast. Neither was hee vnrequired for it, for Fortune so fauoured his game, that whether he hunted foules of the ayre, or beastes of the earth, hee still obtayned and neuer missed. So that his fame for hunting, procured him more loue and honour, then euer could the Imperiall crowne of his Country. For all young men desired to follow him, admiring his goodly personage & strength, the virgins and maydes falling in loue, contended among themselues who should marry him: the wiues forsaking their husbands, contrary to all womanly modestie, rather desi∣red his company thē the societie of their husbands, or to be preferred among the number of the Goddesses. Onely his Bretheren inraged against him, sought all meanes to kill & destroy him. Therfore they watched all opportunities, lying in continuall ambush where he hunted, to accomplish theyr accursed enterprise, which at last they obtained: for as he followed the game, they enclosed him in a narrow straight neere to a Riuers side, vvhere he had no meanes to auoyde their hands, they and their company beeing many, and hee alone, wherefore they drew out their swords and slew him. When he saw no remedy but death, he cryed out aloude for help, whose voyce soone came to the eares of the watchfull Dragon, (for no beast heareth or seeth better) out hee commeth from his denne, and finding the murtherers standing about the dead body, he presently surprised them and killed them, so reuenging the quarrell of Pindus, & then fell vpon the dead body of his friend, neuer forsaking the custodie thereof, vntill the neigh∣bours adioyning to the place, taking knowledge of the fact, came to burie the bodies. But when they came and saw the Dragon among them, they were afraid, and durst not come neere, but stoode a farre off, consulting what to doe; till at last they perceiued that the dragon beganne to take knowledge of their feare, who with an admirable curtesie of na∣ture, perceiuing their mourning and lamentation for their dead friend, and withall, their abstinence from approching to execute his exequies, or funeralls, began to thinke that he might be the cause of this their terror, & farre standing off from the dead bodies, where∣fore he departed, taking his farewell of the body which he loued, and so gaue them leaue by his absence, to bestow vpon him an honourable buriall, which they performed accor∣dingly, and the Riuer adioyning, was named by the name of Pindus-death. By which story may appeare, that these sauage Dragons are made louing and tame to men, by good turnes & benefites bestowed vpon them, for there is no nature which may not be ouer-come by kindnes. And yet I may not leaue this matter thus, nor from these two examples alone, conclude the practise and possibility of loue betwixt men and dra∣gons: I will therefore adde some three or foure examples more. There was a Dragon the louer of Aetholis (as Plutarch writeth) who came vnto her e∣uery night, and did her body no harme, but gently slyding ouer her, played with her till morning, then also would he depart away as soone as light appeared, that hee might not be espyed. The Maydens friends came to the knowledge heereof, and so remooued her farre away, to the intent the dragon might come no more at her: and thus they remained asunder a great while, the dragon earnestly seeking for the mayden, wandered farre and neere to find her out. At last he met with her, and not saluting her gently as he was wont, Gillius. flew vppon her, binding her hands downe with the spire of his body, hissing softly in her face, & beating gently with his tayle her back-parts, as it were taking a moderate reuenge vpon her, for the neglect of his loue by her long absence. Another like story vnto this is reported by Elianus, of a great Dragon which loued a fayre woman, beloued also of a fayre man, the woman oftentimes did sleepe with this dragon, but not so willingly as with the man: wherefore shee forsooke the habitation of her place for a month, and went away where the dragon could not find her, thinking that her absence might quench his desire. But he came often to the place where hee was wont to meete with the woman, and not finding her, returned quietly backe againe, and came againe another time: at last he grew suspicious, & like a louer fayling in his expectation, grew very sorrowfull, and so continued till the month was exspyred, euery night visiting the accustomed place. At last the woman returned, and the dragon presently mette with her, and in an amourous fashion, full of suspition and iealousie, winding about her body, did beate her as you haue heard in the former storie: and this (saith Elianus) happened in Iudea, in the dayes of Herod the King. There was a little Dragon-whelpe bredde in Arcadia, and brought vp familiarly with a little boy from his infancie, vntill the boy became a young man, and the dragon also be∣came of great stature, so that one of them loued another so well as man and beast could loue together, or rather two play-fellowes from the Cradle. At last the friends of the boy seeing the dragon grow so great in so short a space, began to be suspicious of him, where-vpon they tooke the bedde wherein the boy and the dragon were lodged, and carried the same into a farre remote place of woods and wildernes, and there set downe the bed with the boy and the dragon together. The boy after a little while returned, and came home againe to his friends; the dragon wandered vp and downe in the woods, feeding vpon herbes and poyson, according to his nature, and neuer more cared for the habitation of men, but rested contented with a solitary life. In the length of time it came to passe that the boy grew to be a perfect man, and the dragon also remained in the wood; & although absent one from the other, yet mutually louing as well as euer. It hapned that this young man trauelled through that place where the dragon was lodged, and fell among theeues, when the young man saw their swords about his eares, he cryed out, & the dragons den beeing not farre off, his cry came to the dragons cares, who instantly knowing the voyce of his play-fellow, answered the same with another, at whose hyssing the theeues grew a∣fraid, and began to runne away, but their legges could not carry them so fast, as to escape the dragons teeth and clawes; for he came speedily to release his friend, & all the theeues that he could find, he put to cruell death, thē did he accompany his friend out of the place of perrill, and returned backe againe to his den, neither remembering wrath, for that hee was exposed to the Wildernesse, and there left by his play-fellow, nor yet like peruerse men, forsaking their olde friend in danger. They that desire to reade more of this subiect, shall finde store of examples in Elianus his sixt and thirteene bookes. To conclude, when Messalina the wife of Claudius, did send certaine men to take away the life of Nero, who was a riuall of Britanicus, it is saide, that when they had him in their hands to strangle him, a dragon appeared out of the earth, or floore of the chamber, and did so terrifie these hangmen, that they ranne away & spared Neros life. By which example, another example of pietie in dragons is obserued. Againe, Telephus ignorantly lying with his mother, had committed incest with her, had Suerani . not a dragon by diuine prouidence come and parted them asunder: therefore Draconi si∣milis est virtus indagatrix, quae diligenter omnia perscrutatur, rimatur{que} studiocissimè, the vertue of discretion or perfit knowledge, is like a dragon, which diligently searcheth all thinges, and studiously looketh into euery chinck: so did this dragon preserue the chasti∣tie of the mother and the sonne, when they ignorantly and in the darke had defiled each other, but for his appearance and demonstration. I will adde but this one example more of their loue of chastitie in men and women. In Lauinium there was a great holy wood, neere vnto which stood a Temple of Iuno, in that wood there was a great deepe denne of a dragon, vnto the which dragon the Vir∣gins came euery yeere beeing blind-folded with clouts, and carrying Marchpanes in their hands: When they entred the wood, there was a certaine spirit (as it was said) without offence did leade them to the denne of the dragon, and so euery one of the virgins did se∣uerally offer vp their Marchpanes to the dragon: the dragon receiued the Marchpane at the hand of euery pure virgine and vnspotted, but if they were defiled, and held onely the name of Virgins, then the dragon refused the Marchpane, and therefore they were all examined at their comming forth, that those which had lost their virginity might be pu∣nished by the Law. And by this story, (although none but Heathens will beleeue it to be true, because it is a fable, meerely inuented to defend Idolatry, which with my soule and spirit I doe detest) yet I may collect thus much as a morrall out of fable, that dragons in auncient time, did honour virginity. And thus seeing they neither loue, nor are beloued of any other creature, I will heere leaue to talke of their loue and friendship, and passe on to their hatred and aduersaries. The examples before expressed beeing all extraordinary & beside nature, do not con∣clude but that there is an ordinary hatred betwixt men and dragons, and therefore in the discourse of their enemies, men must haue the first place, as their most worthy aduersarie, for both dragons haue perrished by men, and men by dragons, as may appeare by these stories following. When the Region of Heluetta beganne first to be purged from noy∣some beasts, there was a horrible dragon found neere a Country towne called Wilser, who did destroy all men and beastes that came within his danger in the time of his hunger, in∣somuch that that Towne and the fields there-to adioyning, was called Dedwiler, that is, a Village of the Wildernes, for all the people and inhabitants, had forsaken the same, & fledde to others places. There was a man of that Towne whose name was Winckelriedt, who was banished for manslaughter, this man promised if he might haue his pardon, and be restored againe to Stumpsius his former inheritance, that he would combat with that Dragon, and by Gods helpe de∣stroy him: which thing was granted vnto him with great ioyfulnes. Wherefore he was recalled home, and in the presence of many people went foorth to fight with the dragon, whom he flow and ouercame, whereat for ioy hee lifted vppe his sword imbrued in the dragons blood, in token of victory, but the blood distilled downe from the sword vppon his body, and caused him instantly to fall downe dead. And thus this noble Conquerour, a man worthy to be remembred in all ages & Nations, who had strength to kill the dra∣gon beeing aliue, yet had no power to resist the venome of his blood, he being dead. But had it not beene that his hand had beene before imbrewed in the blood of a man, I do not beleeue that the blood of a dragon could haue fallen so heauy vppon him. But this is the iudgement of GOD, eyther to punish murder in the same kind, or else to teach vs, that we should not reioyce in our owne merrits, least God see it and be angry. For our Saui∣our Christ forbade his Disciples that they should reioyce that the deuils were subiect vnto them; and therefore much lesse may we poore creatures reioyce for ouer-comming men or beasts. And yet one thing more is to bee considered in the death of this man, who was bani∣shed for killing a man, and was pardoued for killing a dragon, and yet killed by the dra∣gon after the dragon was slaine. Thus blood was the sinne because it brought death, and death againe brought blood to be the reuenger of the first, that the blood of man might be washed away with the blood of man, the blood of a Serpent comming betwixt. And thus I may truly say as the Christian Poet saith in another case, Sanguine suc creuit, san∣guine finis erit, as it grew, so shall it end in blood. In the dayes of Phillip King of Macedon, there was a way into a Mountaine of Arme∣nia, ouer which the King had prayed, that neuer man might goe but he might die: wher∣fore Aristotle Socrates, to try the effect of the Kings prayer, sette his Opticke Philosophicall glasse that he might see what was in that way, and presently hee perceiued two great dragons, who comming out of their dennes, did infect all the ayre there-abouts wi h a pestilent evaporation of their owne breath. This he declared to the King, who for the reuocation of his own prayer, diuers men to goe out against them and kill them: who like∣wise performed the same, and so cleered the way from that annoyance. And thus wee see another story of dragons slaine by men Heer (vnto may be) added, how Hercules when he was a child and in his cradle, slewe two Dragons, as Pindarus relateth. And the Gorcyreans did worship Diomede's for killing of a dragon Donatus a holy Bishop in Germanie, finding a dragon to lye secretly hid be∣side a bridge killing men, Oxen, Horse, Sheepe, and Goates, he came boldly vnto him in the name of Christ, and when the dragon opened his mouth to deuoure him, the holy Bi∣shop spetting into his mouth killed him. When Orpheus was in hawking, and while hee intended his sport, suddainely a Dra∣gon set vppon him, but his hawking spaniels or dogges released him of that danger, for they tore the dragon in peeces. Many such other stories I could relate, but I spare them heere, because I haue handled them in the beginning of this story: and so I passe ouer the slaughter of dragons by men, and come to the slaughter of men by dragons, which are breefely these that follow. Petrus Damianus declareth of a certaine husband-man, who rising early in the morning and trauelling by the way side, saw a great dragon lye still vppon the earth without moti∣on, he beeing weary, thought him to be a trunck of some tree, wherefore hee satedowne vpon him, and the beast endured him a little while, but at the last hee turned his head in anger, and swallowed him vp. After that the Graecians fained as though they would goe away from Troy, and Synon the Traytour was receiued by the Troyans into the Cittie, there were two dragons which slew the sonnes of Laocoon as they landed in the Iland Porey, Charibeae and Chalidnae, which is thus described by Virgill. At gemini lapsu delubra ad summa Dracones Effugiunt, saeve{que} petunt Tritonidos arcem, Subpedibusque Deaeclypeique suborbe teguntur: Tum verò tremefact a novus per pectora cunctis Insinuat pauor et scelus expendisse merentem, Laocoonta ferunt, sacrum qui cuspide robor Laeserit. &c. Which may be englished thus; Two dragons slide, and to the toppe of Temple flie, Making their way vnto the fort of Tritons seirce, Vnder the Goddesse feete and shield, in circle downe they lie, What feare did mortall breast possesse then cannot I rehearse: For then Lacoon did beginne to think on's former sin, When he did harme the sacred thing by thrusting speare within. About the Temple of Iupiter Nemeus, there is a Groue of Cypresse trees, among which there is a place wherein a dragon did destroy Opheltes, when hee was laid vnder a greene bush by his Nurse. There is a prouerbe, Bonos viros vel á mure morderi, malis ne draconem dentes audere admoliri: that is to say, euery mouse will bite a good man, but euill men are not touched with the teeth of dragons. Alciatus hath a pretty Emblem, whose title is, Ex arduis perpetuum nomen, from diffi∣cult things and great labours, ariseth immortall fame: wherein he pictureth a dragon fol∣lowing young sparrowes to take and eate them. His verses in Latine are these: Crediderat platani ramis sua pignora passer. Et bene, ni saeuo visa, dracone forent Glutijt hic pullos omnes, miseram{que} parentem Saxus & tali dignus obire nece. Haec, nisi mentitur Calchas, monimenta laboris Sunt longi, cuius fama perennis eat. Which may be thus englished; To Plantine-leaues the Sparrow did her young commit, And safe enough, had not the Dragon them espied, Hee eate the young ones all, the damme with sannes destroyde, Well worthy such a death, of life to be denied: This is by Calchas said, a type of labour long, Whose fame eternall liues in euery tongue. There be certaine beasts called Dracontopides, very great and potent Serpents, vvhose faces are like to the faces of Virgins, and the residue of their body like to dragons. It is thought that such a one was the Serpent that deceiued Eue, for Beda saith it had a Virgins countenaunce, and therfore the woman seeing the likenes of her owne face, was the more easily drawne to belieue it: into the which when the deuill had entred, they say he taught it to couer the body with leaues, and to shew nothing but the head and face. But this fable is not worthy to be refuted, because the Scripture it selfe dooth directly gaine-say euerie part of it. For first of all it is called a Serpent, and if it had beene a dragon, Moses vvould haue said so, and therefore for ordinary punishment, God doth appoint it to creepe vpon the belly, wherefore it is not likely that it had either winges or feete. Secondly, it was vn∣possible and vnlikely, that any part of the body was couered or conceited from the sight of the woman, seeing she knew it directly to be a Serpent, as afterward shee confessed be∣fore GOD and her husband. There be also certaine little dragons called in Arabia, Vesga, and in Catalonia, dragons of houses, these when they bite, leaue their teeth behind them, so as the wound neuer cea∣serh swelling as long as the teeth remaine therein, and therefore for the better cure there∣of, the teeth are drawne forth, and so the wound will soone be healed. And thus much for the hatred betwixt men and dragons, now we will proceede to other creatures. The greatest discord is betwixt the Eagle and the Dragon, for the Vultures, Eagles, Swannes and dragons, are enemies one to another. The Eagles when they shake theyr winges, make the dragons afraide with their ratling noyse, then the dragon hideth him∣selfe within his den, so that he neuer fighteth but in the ayre, eyther when the Eagle hath taken away his young ones, and he to recouer them flieth aloft after her, or else whē the Eagle meeteth him in her nest, destroying her egges and young ones: for the Eagle de∣uoureth the dragons and little Serpents vpon earth, and the dragons againe and Serpents doe the like against the Eagles in the ayre. Yea many times the dragon attempteth to take away the prey out of the Eagles talants, both on the ground and in the ayre, so that there ariseth betwixt them a very hard and dangerous fight, which is in this manner described by Ni ander. Hunc petit invisum magni Iouis armiger hostem, Cumque genis parat acre suis ex aethere bellum: Pascentem in siluis quam primum viderit Quod totos ferus is nidos cum mitibus ouis, Et simul ipsa terens, et vastans pignora perdat. Non timet hoc serpens, imò quodam impete dumis Prosiliens, ipsamque, aquilam, leporemque tenellum Ex trahit ex rapidis vifraudeque fortior vncis. Cauta malum declinat auis, fit ibi aspera pugna, Vt queat extortam victor sibi tollere praedam. Sed frustra elapsam, et volitantem hinc inde volucrem Insequitur, longos sinuum contractus in orbes, Obliquoque leuans sursum sua lumina visu. Which may be englished thus; When as the Eagle, Ioues great bird, did see her enemy, Sharpe warre in th'ayre with beake she did prepare Gainst Serpent feeding in the wood, after espy Cause it her egges and young fiercely in peeces tare. The Serpent not afraid of this, leapes out of thornes With force vpon the Eagle, holding tender Hare, Out of her talants by fraude and force more strong, That takes and snatches despight her enemies feare. But wary Bird auoydes the force, and so they fight amaine, That Victor one of them might ioy the prey alone, The flying fowle by winding Snake is hunted all in vaine, Though vp and downe his nimble eyes this and that way be gone. In the next place we are to consider the enmitie that is betwixt Dragons & Elephants, for so great is their hatred one to the other, that in Ethyopia the greatest dragons haue no other name but Elephant-killers. Among the Indians also the same hatred remaineth, a∣gainst whom the dragons haue many subtile inuentions: for besides the great length of their bodies, where-withall they claspe and begirt the body of the Elephant, continually byting of him vntill he fall downe dead, and in the which fall they are also bruzed to pee∣ces; for the safegard of themselues they haue this deuice. They get and hide themselues in trees, couering their head, and letting the other part hang downe like a rope: in those trees they watch vntill the Elephant come to eate and croppe of the branches, then sud∣dainly before he be aware; they leape into his face, and digge out his eyes, then doe they claspe themselues about his necke, and with their tayles or hinder parts, beate and vexe the Elephant, vntill they haue made him breathelesle, for they strangle him with theyr fore-parts, as they beate them with the hinder, so that in this combat they both perrish: and this is the disposition of the dragon, that he neuer setteth vpon the Elephant, but with the aduantage of the place, and namely from some high tree or Rocke. Sometimes againe a multitude of dragons doe together obserue the pathes of the Ele∣phants, and crosse those pathes they tye together their tailes as it were in knots, so that when the Elephant commeth along in them, they insnare his legges, and suddainly leape vppe to his eyes, for that is the part they ayme aboue all other, which they speedily pull out, and so not beeing able to doe him any more harme, the poore beast deliuereth him∣selfe from present death by his owne strength, and yet through his blindnesse receiued in that combat, hee perrisheth by hunger, because hee cannot choose his meate by smelling, but by his eye-sight. There is no man liuing that is able to giue a sufficient reason of this contrariety in na∣ture betwixt the Elephant & the Dragon, although many men haue laboured their wits, and strayned their inuentions to finde out the true causes thereof, but all in vaine, except this be one that followeth. The Elephants blood is saide to be the coldest of all other Beasts, and for this cause it is thought by most Writers, that the dragons in the Sommer time doe hide themselues in great plenty in the waters where the Elephant commeth to drinke, and then suddenly they leape vppe vppon his eares, because those places cannot be defended with his truncke, and there they hang fast, and sucke out all the blood of his body, vntill such time as hee poore beast through faintnesse fall downe and die, and they beeing drunke with his blood, doe likewise perrish in the fall. The Gryffins are likewise said to fight with the dragons and ouer-come them. The Panther also is an enemy vnto the Dragons, and driueth them many times into theyr dennes. There is a little bird called Captilus, by eating of which the dragon refresheth himselfe when he is wearied in hunting of other beasts. And to conclude, he is an enemy vnto all kinde of Beastes, both wilde and tame, as may appeare by these verses of Lucan, where he saith; —Arment a{que} tota secuti, Rumpit is ingentes amplexi verbere Tauros: Nec tutus spacio est Elephas. Which may be englished thus; And following close the Heards in fielde, Great Bulls with force of might, And Elephants are made to yeelde By dragons valiant sprite. In the next place I will passe vnto the poyson and venome of dragons, omitting all poeticall discourses about the worshipping and transmutation of dragons from one kind to another, such as are the haires of Orpheus, or the teeth of the dragon which Cadmus slew, into Armed-men, and such like fables, which haue no shew nor apparance of truth, but are onely the inuentions of men, to vtter those things in obscure termes, which they were afraid to doe in plaine speeches. It is a question whether dragons haue any venom or poyson in them, for it is thought that he hurteth more by the wound of his teeth, then by his poyson. Yet in Deuteron. 22. Moses speaketh of them as if they had poyson, saying: Their wine is as the poyson of dra∣gons, and the cruell venome of Aspes. So also Heliodorus speaketh of certaine weapons dipped in the poyson of dragons. For which cause wee are to consider, that they wanting poyson in themselues, become venomous two maner of wayes: First by the place wher∣in they liue, for in the hoter Countries they are more apt to doe harme then in the colder and more temperate, which caused the Poet in his verses to write of them in this manner following; Vos quo{que} qui cunct is innoxi numina terris Serpitis aurato nitidifulgore Dracones, Pestiferos ardens facit Affrica: Ducit is altam Aëra cum pennis. &c. Which may be englished in this manner; You shining Dragons creeping on the earth, Which fiery Affrick yeeldes with skinne like gold, Yet pestilent by hote infecting breath, Mounted with wings in th'ayre we doe behold. So that which is spoken of the poyson of Dragons infecting the ayre wherein they liue, is to be vnderstood of the Met or called Draco volans, a Fire-drake, which doth ma∣nie times destroy the fruites of the earth, seeming to be a certaine burning fire in the ayre, sometime on the Sea, and sometime on the Land, whereof I haue heard this credible sto∣rie from men of good worth and reputation, happening about some twelue yeeres agoe, vpon the Westerne-Seas, vpon the Coastes of England, which because it is well worthy to be kept in rememberance of all posteritie, and containeth in it a notable worke of God, I haue thought good to sette it downe in this place. There was an olde Fisher-man which with his two hyred seruaunts went forth to take fish, according to his accustomed manner and occupation, and hauing layd theyr nettes, watched them earnestly to finde the bootie they came for, and so they continued in theyr labour vntill mid-night or there abouts, taking nothing. At the last there came by them a Fire-drake, at the sight whereof the old-man beganne to be much troubled and afrayde, telling his seruaunts, that those sights sildome pretended any good, and therefore prayed God to turne away all euill from them, and withall, willed his seruaunts to take vp their Nettes, least they did all repent it afterward; for he said he had knowne much euill follow such apparitions. The young men his seruaunts comforted him, telling him there was no cause of feare, and that they had already committed themselues into the handes of Almightie GOD, vnder whose protection they would tarry vntil they had taken some fish: the old man re∣sted contented with their confidence, and rather yeelded vnto them, then was perswaded by them. A little while after, the fire-drake came againe, and compassed round about the boate, and ranne ouer the Nettes, so that new f ares, and more violent passions then be∣fore, possessed both the old-man and his seruaunts. Wherefore they then resolued to ta∣rie no longer, but hasted to take vp their nettes, and to be gone. And taking vppe theyr Nettes, at one place they did hang so fast as without breaking they could not pull them out of the water, wher fore they sette theyr Grabbe-hookes vnto them to loose them, for the day before they remembred that a Shippe was cast away in the same place, and there∣fore they thought that it might be the Nettes were hanged vppon some of the tacklings thereof: and therein they were not much deceiued, for it happened that finding the place where-vppon the Net did stay, they pulled and found some difficultie to remoue it, but at last they pulled it vp, and found it to be a chayre of beaten gold. At the sight hereof their spirits were a little reuiued, because they had attayned so rich a bootie, and yet like men burdened with wealth, (especially the old-man,) conceiued newe feares, and wished hee were on Land, least some storme should fall, and lay both it and them, the second time in the bottome of the Sea. So great is the impression of feare, and the naturall presage of euill, in men that knowe but little in things to come, that many times they proue true Prophets of their owne de∣struction, although they haue little reason till the moment of perrill come vppon them: and so it fell out accordingly in this old-man, for whilst hee feared death by stormes and tempests on the Sea, it came vpon him, but by another way and meanes. For behold the deuill entred into the harts of his two seruants, & they conspired together to kill the old-man their Maister, that so betweene themselues they might be owners of that great rich chayre, the value whereof (as they conceiued) might make them Gentlemen, and main∣taine them in some other Country all the dayes of their life. For such was the resolution that they conceiued vpon the present, that it would not be safe for them to retu ne home againe af er the fact committed, least they should be apprehended for murder, as they iustlie deserued, theyr maister beeing so made away by them. The deuill that had put this wicked motion into their mindes, gaue them likewise pre∣span nt opportunitie to put the same in execution, depriuing them of all grace, pitty, and pi∣etie, still thrusting them forward to performe the same. So that not giuing him any war∣ning of his death, one of them in most sauage and cruell manner dashed out his braines, and the other speedily cast him into the Sea. And thus the feare of this old-man, concei∣ued without all reason, except superstition for the sight of a fire-drake, came vpon him in a more bloody manner then hee expected: but life suspected itselfe, and rumors of perrill vnto guiltie consciences, (such as all wee mortall men beare) are many times as forcible as the sentence of a Iudge to the hart of the condemned prisoner, and therefore it vvere happy that either we could not feare, except when the causes are certaine, or else that wee might neuer perrish but vpon premonition. And therefore I conclude with the example of this man, that it is not good to holde a superstitious feare, least God see it, and beeing angry there-with, bring vppon vs the euill which wee feare. But this is not the end of the story, for that fire-drake, (as by the sequell appeareth) prooued as euill to the seruaunts, as he did to the Maister. These two sonnes of the deuill, made thus rich by the death of their Maister, foorth-with they sayled towards the Coasts of Fraunce, but first of all they broke the Chayre in peeces, and wrapped it vppe in one of theyr Nettes, making account that it was the best fish that euer was taken in that Net, and so they layde it in one end of theyr Barcke or fi∣sher-boate. And thus they laboured all that night and the next day, till three or foure of the clocke, at what time they espied a Port of Brittaine, whereof they were exceeding gladde, by reason that they were wearie, hungry, and thirstie with long labour, alvvaies rich in their owne conceit by the gold which they had gotten, which had so drawne their harts from God, as they could not feare any thought of his iudgement; And finallie it so blinded theyr eyes, and stopped theyr eares, that they did not see the vengeance that fol∣lowed them, nor heare the cry of theyr Maisters-blood. Wherefore, as they were thus reioycing at the sight of Land, behold they suddainely espyed a Man-of-Warre comming towards them, whereat they were appalled, and be∣ganne to thinke with themselues that theyr rich hopes were now at an end, and they had laboured for other, but yet resolued to die rather then to suffer the bootie to be taken from them. And while they thus thought, the Man-of-Warre approched and hailed them, summoning them to come in and shew what they were: they refused, making forward as fast to the Land as they could. Wherefore the Man-of-warre shot certaine Muskets at them, and not preuailing, nor they yeelding, sent after them his Long-boate, vppon the enterance whereof they fought manfully against the assaylants, vntill one of them vvas slaine, and the other mortallie wounded; who seeing his fellow kild, & himselfe not like, lie to liue, yet in enuy against his enemy, ranne presently to the place where the Chayre lay in the Nette, and lyfting the same vp with all his might, cast it from him into the Sea, instantly falling downe after that fact, as one not able through weakenesse to stand any longer, wherevppon he was taken, and before his life left him, hee related the whole sto∣rie to them that tooke him, earnestly desiring thē to signifie so much into England, which they did accordingly: and as I haue heard, the whole story was printed, & so this second History of the punishment of murder, I haue related in this place, by occasion of the fire-drake, in the history of the Dragon. A second cause why poyson is supposed to be in Dragons, is for that they often feede vppon many venomous rootes, and therfore theyr poyson sticketh in theyr teeth, where-vppon many times the partie bytten by them, seemeth to be poysoned; but this falleth out accidentally, not from the nature of the dragon, but from the nature of the meate which the dragon eateth. And this is it which Homer knewe and affirmed in his verses, when hee described a dragon making his denne neere vnto the place where many veno∣mous rootes and herbes grew, and by eating whereof, hee greatly annoyeth man-kinde when hee byteth them. Os de Drokoon espi Xein oresteros andra menesi Bebrocos kaka pharmaka. Which may be thus englished; And the dragon which by men remaines, Eates euill herbes without deadly paines. And therefore Elianus saith well, that when the dragon meaneth to doe most harme to men, he eateth deadly poysonfull herbes, so that if he bite after them, many not knowing the cause of the poyson, and seeing or feeling venome by it, doe attribute that to his na∣ture which doth proceede from his meate. Besides his teeth which bite deepe, he also kil∣leth with his tayle, for bee will so be-girt and pinch in the body, that hee doth gripe it to death, and also the strokes of it are so strong, that either they kill thereby foorth-with, or Uincensius. S linus. else wound greatly with the same, so that the strokes of his tayle, are more deadly then the byting of his teeth; which caused Nicander to write thus; Nec tamen ille graues, vt caetera turba, doloris Si velit, infixo cum forte momorderit ore, Suscitat: exiguus non noxia vulner a punctus (Qui ceu rodentes noctu quaeque obvia muris) In fligit, modicum tenui dat plaga cruorem. Which may be thus englished; Nor yet he when with his angry mouth Doth byte, such paines and torments bringeth As other Serpents, if Auncients tell the truth, When with his teeth and speare he stingeth: For as the holes which byting-myse doe leaue, When in the night they light vpon a prey, So small are Dragons-byts which men receiue, And harmelesse wound makes blood to runne away. Their mouth is small, and by reason thereof they cannot open it wide to byte deepe, so as their byting maketh no great paine; and those kind of dragons which do principal∣lie fight with Eagles, are defended more with their tayles then with their teeth: but yet Aetius. Greuinus Auicen. there are some other kind of dragons, whose teeth are like the teeth of Beares, byting deepe, and opening theyr mouth wide, where-withall they breake bones, and make ma∣ny bruses in the body, and the males of this kinde byte deeper then the famales, yet there followeth no great paine vpon the wound. The cure hereof, is like to the cure for the byting of any other beast wherin there is no venome, and for this cause there must be nothing applyed there-vnto which cureth veno∣mous bytings, but rather such things as are ordinary in the cure of euery Vlcer. The seede of grasse, commonly called Hay-dust, is prescribed against the byting of dragons. The Barble beeing rubbed vppon the place where a Scorpion of the earth, a Spyder, a Sea or Land-dragon byteth, doth perfectly cure the same. Also the heade of a dogge or dragon which hath bytten any one, beeing cutte off and fleyed, and applyed to the wound with a little Euphorbium, is said to cure the wound speedily. And if Albedisimon be the same that is a dragon, then according to the opinion of A∣uicen, the cure of it must be very present, as in the cure of Vlcers. And if Alhatraf & Hau∣dem be of the kind of dragons, then after theyr byting there followeth great coldnes and stupiditie; and the cure thereof must be the same meanes which is obserued in colde poy∣sons. For which cause, the wound or place bitten, must be embrewed or washed with luke-warme Vineger, and emplaistered with the leaues of Bay, annoynted with the oyle of herbe- Mary, and the oyle of Wilde-pellitory, or such things as are drawne out of those oyles, wherein is the vertue of Nettles, or Sea-Onyons. But those thinges which are giuen vnto the patient to drinke, must be the iuyce of Bay-leaues in Vineger, or else equall portions of Myrrhe, Pepper, and Rewe in Wine, the powder or dust whereof, must be the full vveight of a golden-groat, or as we say, a French-Crovvne. In the next place, for the conclusion of the history of the dragon, we will take our fare∣well of him in the recitall of his medicinall vertues, which are briefely these that follow. First, the fatte of a Dragon dryed in the sunne, is good against creeping Vlcers: and the same mingled with Hony and Oyle, helpeth the dimnesse of the eyes at the beginning. The head of a dragon keepeth one from looking a squint: and if it be sette vp at the gates and dores, it hath beene thought in auncient time to be very fortunate to the sincere wor∣shippers of GOD. The eyes beeing kept till they be stale, and afterwards beate into an Oyle with Hony and made into an oyntment, keepe any one that vseth it from the ter∣rour of night-visions and apparisions. The fatte of a Hart in the skinne of a Roe, bound with the nerues of a Hart vnto the shoulder, was thought to haue a vertue to fore-shew the iudgement of victories to come. The first spindle by bearing of it, procureth an easie passage for the pacification of higher powers. His teeth bound vnto the feete of a Roe, with the nerues of a Hart, haue the same power. But of all other, there is no folly comparable to the composition which the Ma∣gitians draw out of a dragon to make one invincible, and that is this. They take the head and tayle of a dragon, with the hayres out of the fore-head of a Lyon, and the marrow of a Lyon, the spume or white mouth of a conquering horse, bound vppe in a Harts-skinne, together with a clawe of a dogge, and fastned with the crosse nerues or sinew of a Hart, or of a Roe; they say that this hath as much power to make one invincible, as hath anie medicine or remedy whatsoeuer. The fatte of dragons is of such vertue that it driueth away venomous beastes. It is al∣so reported, that by the tongue or gall of a dragon sodde in wine, men are deliuered from the spirits of the night, called Incubi and Succubi, or else Night-mares. But aboue all o∣ther parts, the vse of theyr blood is accounted most notable. But whether the Cynnabaris be the same which is made of the blood of the dragons and Elephants, collected from the earth when the dragon and the Elephant fall downe dead together, accordings as Pliny deliuereth, I will not heere dispute, seeing it is already done in the story of the Elephant: neither will I write any more of this matter in this place, but onely referre the Reader vn∣to that which hee shall finde written thereof in the history of our former booke of Foure-footed-beastes. And if that satisfie him not, let him read Langius in the first booke of his Epistles, and sixtie-fiue Epistle, where that learned man doth abundantly satisfie all men concerning this question, that are studious of the truth, and not prone to contention. And to con∣clude, Andreas Baluacensis writeth, that the Blood-stone, called the Haematite, is made of the dragons blood: and thus I will conclude the history of the dragon, with this storie following out of Porphyrius, concerning the good successe which hath beene signified vn∣to men and women, eyther by the dreames or sight of dragons. Mammea the Mother of Alexander Seuerus the Emperour, the night before his birth, dreamed that she brought forth a little dragon, so also did Olympia the Mother of Alexan∣der the great, and Pomponya, the Mother of Scipio Affricanus. The like prodigie gaue Augustus hope that he should be Emperor. For when his mother Actia came in the night time vnto the Temple of Apollo, and had sette downe her bedde or couch in the Temple among other Matrons, suddainely shee fell asleepe, and in her sleepe, shee dreamed that a dragon came to her, and clasped about her bodie, and so departed without dooing her any harme. Afterwards the print of a dragon remained perpetually vppon her belly, so as shee neuer durst any more be seene in any bath. The Emperour Tyberius Caesar, had a dragon which hee daily fedde with his owne handes, and nourished like good fortune, at the last it happened that this dragon was de∣faced with the byting of Emmets, and the former beautie of his body much obscured: Wherefore the Emperour grewe greatly amazed thereat, & demaunding a reason there∣of of the Wisemen, hee was by them admonished to beware the insurrection of the common people. And thus with these stories, represen∣ting good and euill by the dragon, I will take my leaue of this good and euill Serpent. OF THE DRYINE. T Here be some that confound this Serpent with the water-snake, and say it is none other then that which of auncient time vvas called Hidrus, for so long as they liue in the water, they are called Hidri, that is, Snakes of the water, but when once they come to the land, they are called Chelidri and Chersydri: but it is certaine that the Chelidrus, is different from the Chersydrus, by the strong smell and sauour which it carrieth with it wheresoeuer it goeth, according to these verses made of Vmbo the Priest in Virgill. Viperio generi et grauiter spirantibus Hydris Spargere qui somnos cantu{que} manu{que} solebat. Which may be englished thus; Who could by song and hand bring into deadly sleepe All kind of Vipers, with Snakes smelling strong and deepe. Which beeing compared with that instruction which hee giueth to Shepheards, tea∣ching them how to driue away the strong-smelling-serpents from the foldes, hee calleth them Chelydri when he writeth in this manner. Disce et odoratam stabulis accendere Cedrum Galbanio{que} agitare graues nidore Chelydros. That is to say in English thus; Learne how to driue away strong smelling Cheliders From folds, by Galbanum and sauourie Cedars. So that it is cleere that these Dryines are the same which are called Chelydri, vvho doe stincke on the face of the earth, whereby they are oftentimes disclosed although they be not seene: howbeit, some thinke that this filthy sauour doth not proceede from any fume or smoake comming out of their bodies, but rather from their motion, according to the opinion of Macer in these following verses. Seu terga ex pirant spumantia Virus Seu terra fumat quateter labitur Anguis. Which may be englished in this manner; Whether their foming backs that smell Doe send abroade such poyson pestilent, Or whether th'earth whereon this Snake full fell Doth slyde, yeeldes that vnwholsome scent. It is sayd that these Dryines doe liue in the bottome or rootes of Oakes, where they make their nestes, for which cause they be called Querculi, as if they were deriued from an Oake, which caused the Countrey-people to call it Dendrogailla, which signifieth the Male and Female in this kind: being bred onely in one part of Affricke, and in Hel spont, and there be of them two kinds, one of the length of two cubits, being very fat & round, and very sharp scales ouer the backe; and they are called Druinae of Drus, that signifieth an Oake, because they liue in bottome of Oakes: & they are also called Chelydri, because of their sharp skinnes or scales, for it is the manner of the Latins and the Graecians, to call the hard and rough skinne of the body of man and beast, by the name of Chellydra: and I take the serpents Cylmdri, to be the same that the dryines be. Within the scales of this ser∣pent there are bred certaine Flyes with yellow winges, as yellow as any Brasse, the which Flyes at length do cate and destroy the serpent that breedeth them. The colour of theyr Aetius. backe is blackish, and not white as some haue thought, and the sauour or smell comming from them like to the smell of a Horses hide, wet as it commeth out of the pit, to be shauen by the hand of the Tawyer or Glouer. And Bellonius writeth, that he neuer saw any ser∣pent greater then this Dryine which hee calleth Dendrozailla, nor any that hisseth stron∣ger; for he affirmeth, that one of these put into a sacke, was more then a strong Country-man could carry two Miles together without setting it downe and resting. And likewise he saith, that he saw a skinne of one of these stuffed with hayre, which did equall in quan∣tity the legge of a great man. The head of this beast is broad and flat, and Olaus Magnus writeth, that many times, and in many places of the North, about the beginning of summer, these Serpents are found in great companies vnder Oakes, one of them beeing their head or Captaine, who is known by a white crest or comb on the top of his crowne, whom all the residue do follow, as the Bees doe their King and Captaine. And these by the relation of old men are thought to beget a certaine stone, by their mutable breathing vpon some venomous matter, found in the trees leaues, or earth where they abide: For they abide not onely in the rootes, but in the hollow bodies of the trees, and sometimes for their meate and foode, they leaue their habitation, and discend into the Fennes and Marshes to hunt Frogges: and if at any time they bee assaulted with the Horse-flye, they instantly returne backe againe into their former habitation. When they goe vppon the earth, they go directly or straight, for if they should wind themselues to run, they would make an offensiue noyse, or rather yeeld a more offensiue smell: according to these verses of the Poet Lucan; Natrix & ambiguae coleret qui syrtidos arua Chersidros, tracti{que} via fumante Chellidri: In English thus; The Snake which haunt the doubtfull Syrtes sands, And Chelyders by slyding fume on lands. Georgius Fabricius writeth, that he saw in the Temple of Bacchus at Rome, a company of drūken men dancing, leading a male Goat for sacrifice, hauing Snakes in their mouths, which Snakes Prudentius the Christian Poet calleth Chellidri, that is Dryines in these ver∣ses following; —Baccho caper omnibus aris Craeditur, & virides discindunt ore Chellydros, Qui Bromium placare volunt, quod et ebria iam tu Ante occulos regis Satyrorum insania fecit. In English thus: A Goat to Bacchus on euery alter lyes, While sacrificers teare Dryines in peeces small By force of teeth, and that before the eyes Of Satyres King, mad-drunke they fall. The nature of this Serpent is very venemous and hot, and therefore it is worthily pla∣ced among the first degree or ranke of Serpentes, for the smell thereof dooth so stupifie a man, as it doth near strangle him, for nature refuseth to breath, rather thē to draw in such a filthy ayre. And so pestilent is the nature of this beast, that it maketh the skin of the bo∣dy of a man hurt by it, loose, stinking, and rotten: the eyes to be blind and full of paine, it restraineth the vrine, and if it come vpon a man sleeping, it causeth often neezing, and maketh to vomit bloudy matter. If a man tread vpon it at vnawares, although it neither sting nor bite him, yet it causeth his Legges to swell, and his foote to loose the skinne thereof: and that which is more strange, it is reported, that when a Physition cured the hand of one bitten by this Serpent, the skinne of his hand also came off, and whosoeuer killeth one of these, if once he smell the sauour of it, whatsoeuer he smelleth afterwardes, he still thinketh it smelleth of the Dryine. And therefore most pestilent must this Serpent needs be, which killeth both by touching and smelling. When it hath wounded or bitten, there followeth a blacke or redde swelling about the sore, also a vehement pain ouer all the body through the speedy disp rsing of the poy∣son; also Pustules or little Wheales, madnes, drinesse of the body, and intollerable thirst, trembling and mortification of the members wounded, whereof many dye. The nre is like to the cure of Vipers, and besides it is good to take Hart-wort drunke in Wine, or Triffolly, or the rootes of Daffadill. Acornes of all kind of Oakes, are profitable against this poyson, being beaten to powder and drunke. And thus much shall suffice for this Ser∣pent. OF THE SERPENTS CALLED Elephants. THere be also Serpents called Elephants, because whomsoeuer they bite, they infect with a kind of a leprosie, and I know not whether the Serpent Elops, Elopis, and La∣phiati be the same, but because I find no matter worthy in them to be spoken of, and they are strangers in our Country, the Reader must bee contented with their bare names without further description. OF FROGGES. F Rogges are called by the Hebrewes Zab, Zephardea, Vrdeana, & Vrdea Akruka, & Maskar. By the Arabians Hardun, Difdah, Dis∣phoa, Difdapha, Altahaul. By the Graecians Batrachos: whereof commeth the corrupted word Brackatas, and Garazum. Lalages and Kemberoie, signifieth greene Frogges. The Italians and Spa∣niards call it Rana, by the Latine word. The French Grenouille. The Germans Frosch, and Frosche, and Grassfrosch, for a greene Frog. The Flemmings Vrosch, and Vruesch, and Piuit. The Illi∣rians & Polonians Zaba, by a word deriued from the Haebrew. It it some question from whence the word Rana is deriued, & because of much controuersie whether it hath recei∣ued name, because it liueth on the land & in the water, or frō the croaking voyce which it vseth: I will not trouble the English Reader with that discourse, onely I am assured, that the word Frog in English, is deriued from the German word Frosch, as many other Eng∣lish wordes are deriued besides the common name of many Frogs. Homer in his Com∣medy of the fight betwixt Frogs and Mise called Batrachomiomachia, hath deuised many proper names for Frogs, such as these are; Lyninocharis, Gracediet, Peleus, Dust-liuer: Hi∣dromedousa, Water-haunter: Phusignathos, Nature-cryer: Hypsiboas, Loud-cryer: Leu∣thaios, Lowe-liuer: Poluphonos, great Labourer: Krambophagos, Brasile-eater: Lymnesios, Poole-keeper: Kalaminthios, Mint-eater: Hidrocharis, Water-child: Borborokoïtes, noise∣maker: Prassaphogos, Grasse-eater: Pelauseas, dust-creeper: Pelobates, dust-leaper: Kraw∣gasides, drought-hater: Prassaios, Grasse-greene: and such other like, according to the witty inuention of the Author, all which I thought good to name in this place, as belong∣ing to this History. In the next place wee are to consider the diuersity and kindes of Frogges, as they are distinguished by the place of their abode: for the greatest difference is drawn from thence; some of them therefore are Water-Frogges, and some are Frogges of the Land: the Water-Frogges liue both in the water and on the Land, in Marshes, standing-pooles, running streames, and bankes of Ryuers, but neuer in the Sea; and therefore Rana Marina is to be vnderstood of a Fish, and not a Frog, as Massarius hath learnedly prooued against Marcellus. The frogs of the land are distinguished by their liuing in gardens, in Meddows, in hollow Rockes, and among fruites: all which seuerall differences shall be afterward ex∣pressed, with their pictures in their due places: here onely I purpose to talke of the vulgar and common frogge, whose picture with her young one is formerly expressed. Besides these differ in generation: for some of them are engendered by carnall copulation, & some of the slime and rottennesse of the earth. Some are of a greene colour, and those are ea∣ten in Germany and in Flanders; some againe are yellow, and some of an Ashe-colour, some spotted, and some blacke, and in outward forme and fashion they resemble a Toad, but yet they are without venome, and the female is alwaies greater then the male: when the Aegyptians will signifie an impudent man, and yet one that hath a good quicke sight, they picture a frogge, because he liueth continually in the Mire, and hath no bloud in his body, but about his eyes. The tongue is proper to this kinde, for the fore-part thereof cleaueth to the mouth, as in a fish, and the hinder part to the throat, by which he sendeth forth his voyce: and this is to bee vnderstood, that all frogges are mute and drunke, except the greene frogs, and the frogs of the Water, for these haue voyces. And many times the voyces of frogs pro∣ceedeth from the nature of the Countreyes wherein they liue: for once all the frogges in Macedonia and Cyrenia, were drunke, vntill there were some brought thither out of some other Countries, as at this day the frogges of Seriphus are all drunke, whereuppon came the Prouerb, Batrachos ec Seriphou, A frogge of Seriphus, because the frogs of that Coun∣trey doe neuer croake, although you carry them into any other Country. This Seriphus is one of the Islands of the Sporades in Greece, wherein is the Lake called Pierius, which doth not runne in the Summer, but onely in the winter, and all the frogs which are cast into that lake, are perpetually silent, and neuer vtter their voyce; whereof there are assigned two causes, one Fabulous, and the other true and naturall. The first, the Seriphians say, that when Perseus returned with the head of Medusa, hauing gone very far till he was weary, layd him downe beside that lake to sleep, but the croaking frogs made such a noyse, as he could take no rest: Whereat Perseus was much offended; and there∣fore prayed Iupiter to forbid the frogs from crying, who instantly heard his prayer, & in∣ioyned perpetuall silence to the frogs in that water: and this is the Fabulous reason, being a meere fiction of the Poets. The second and more true reason is that of Theophrastus, who saith, that for the cold∣nesse of the water: the frogs are not able to cry in that place. The voyce of frogges is said by the Latinists to bee Corare, and by the Graecians Ololugon, peculiar words to set forth this crying: now because their tongue cleaueth to the pallet of their mouth, and theyr voyce proceedeth but from their throat to their mouth, and the spirit is hindered by the tongue, so as it cannot proceed directly; therefore it hath two bladders vppon either side of the mouth, one which it filleth with wind, and from thence proceedeth the voyce. Now when it croaketh, it putteth his head out of the water, holding the neather lip euen with the water, and the vpper lip aboue the water: and this is the voyce of the male pro∣uoking the female to carnall copulation. They haue but very small lungs, & those without bloud, ful of froth like to al other crea∣tures of the water, which do lay egges, and for this cause they do neuer thirst: wherefore also Sea-calues and Frogges are able to liue long vnder the Water. They haue a double Liuer, and a very small Melt, their Legges behind are long, which maketh them apt to leape; before they are shorter, hauing deuided clawes which are ioyned together, with a thinne broad skinne, that maketh them more apt to swimme. The most place of their a∣bode is in fennes, or in warme Waters, or in fish-pooles: but yellow and Ashe-coloured frogs abide in Riuers, Lakes, and standing pooles, but in the Winter time they all hyde themselues in the earth. And therefore it is not true that Pliny saith, that in the VVinter time they are resolued into slyme, and in Summer they resume againe their first bodyes, for they are to be seene many times in the winter; especially in those waters that are ne∣uer frozen, as Agrecolaana Mathiolus, hath soundly obserued, and they haue beene seene in certaine running streames, holding small fishes in their mouths, as it were sucking meat out of them. Sometimes they enter into their holes in Autumne, before winter, and in the spring time come out againe. When with their croaking voyces the Male prouoketh the fe∣mall to carnall copulatiō, which he performeth not by the mouth (as some haue thought) but by couering her backe: the instrument of geneneration meeting in the hinder parts, and this they performe in the night season, nature teaching them the modesty or shame∣fastnesse of this action: And besides, in that time they haue more security to giue them∣selues to mutuall imbraces, because of a generall quietnesse, for men and all other their ad∣uersaries are then at sleepe and rest. After their copulation in the waters, there appeareth a thicke Ielly, out of which the young one is found. But the Land-frogges are ingende∣red out of Egges, of whom wee discourse at this present; and therefore they both suffer copulation, lay their egges, and bring forth young ones on the land. When the Egge breaketh or is hatched, there commeth forth a little black thing like a peece of flesh, which the Latines call Gyrini, from the Greeke word Gyrrinos, hauing no visible part of a liuing creature vpon them, besides their eyes and their tailes, and within short space after their feet are formed, and their taile deuided into two parts, which taile becommeth their hin∣der Legs: wherefore the Aegyptians when they would describe a man that cannot moue himselfe, and afterwardes recouereth his motion, they decypher him by a frog, hauing his hinder legges. The heads of these young Gyrini, which we call in English Horse-nailes, because they resemble a Horse-naile in their similitude, whose head is great, and the o∣ther part small, for with his taile he swimmeth. After May they grow to haue feete, and if before that time they bee taken out of the water, they dye, then they beginne to haue foure feete. And first of all they are of a blacke colour and round, and heereof came the Prouetbe, Rana Gyrina sapientior, wiser then a Horse-naile; because through the roudndnesse and ro∣lubility of his body, it turneth it selfe with wonderfull celerity, which way soeuer it plea∣seth. These young ones are also called by the Graecians Moluridae, Brutichoi, and Batrachi∣da, but the Latines haue no name for it, except Ranunculus, or Rana Nascens. And it is to be remembred, that one frogge layeth an innumerable company of Egges, which cleaue together in the water, in the middle whereof she her selfe lodgeth. And thus much may suffice for the ordinary procreation of frogges by generation out of Egges. In the next place I must also shew how they are likewise ingendered out of the dust of the earth by warme, aestiue, and Summer shevvers, whose life is short, and there is no vse of them. Aelianus saith, that as he trauailed out of Italy into Naples, he saw diuers frogges by the way neere Putoli, whose forepart and head did mooue and creepe, but their hinder part was vnformed, and like to the slyme of the earth, which caused Ouid to write thus; Semina limus habet virides generantia Ranas, Et generat truncas pedibus & eodem corpore saepe Altera pars viuit, rudis est pars altera tellus. That is to say; Durt hath his seede ingendring Frogs full greene, Yet so as feetlesse without Legs on earth they lye, So as a wonder vnto Passengers is seene, One part hath life, the other earth full dead is nye. And of these Frogs it is that Pliny was to be vnderstood, when he saith, that Frogs in the Winter time are resolued into slyme, and in the Summer they recouer their life and substaunce againe. It is certaine also, that sometime it raineth frogs, as may appeare by Philarchus and Lembus, for Lembus writeth thus: Once about Dardania, and Paeonia, it rained frogs in such plentifull measure, or rather prodigious manner, that all the houses and high-waies were filled with them, and the inhabitants did first of all kill them, but af∣terwards perceiuing no benifit thereby, they shut their doores against them, and stopped vp all their lights to exclude thē out of their houses, leauing no passage open, so much as a frog might creepe into, and yet notwithstanding all this diligence, their meat seething on the fire, or set on the table, could not be free from thē, but continually they found frogs in it, so as at last they were inforced to forsake that Countrey. It was likewise reported, that certaine Indians & people of Arabia, were inforced to forsake their countries through the multitude of frogs. Cardan seemeth to find a reason in nature for this raining of frogges, the which for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I will here expresse as followeth: Fiunt haec omnia ven∣torum ira, and so forward in his 16. booke De subtilitate, that is to say; these prodigious raines of frogs and Mice, little Fishes and stones, and such like thinges is not to be wonde∣red at: for it commeth to passe by the rage of the winds in the tops of the Mountaines, or the vppermost part of the Seas, which many times taketh vp the dust of the earth, & con∣gealeth them into stones in the ayre, which afterwards fall downe in raine; so also doth it take vp frogs and fishes, who beeing aboue in theayre, must needes fall downe againe. Sometimes also it taketh vp the egges of frogs and fishes, which beeing kept aloft in the ayre among the Whirle-windes, and stormes of shewers, doe there engender and bring forth young ones, which afterwards fall downe vpon the earth, there being no poole for them in the ayre. These and such like reasons are approued among the learned for naturall causes of the prodigious raining of frogs. But we read in holy Scripture among the plagues of Aegypt, that frogges were sent by GOD to annoy them; and therefore whatsoeuer is the materiall cause, it is most certaine that the wrath of GOD and his almighty hand, is the making or efficient cause, and for the worthinesse of that deuine story, how God maketh and taketh away frogs, I will ex∣presse it as it is left by the Holy-ghost, in Cap. 8. Exod. verse 5. Also the Lord saide vnto Moses, say thou vnto Aaron, stretch out thy hand with thy rodde vpon the streames, vp∣on the Riuers, and vpon the ponds, and cause frogs to come vpon the land of Egypt, ver. 6. Then Aaron stretched out his hand vpon the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came vp & couered the land of Egypt, verse. 7. And the Sorcerers did likewise with their Sorceries, and brought frogs vp vpon the land of Aegypt. Verse 8. Then Pharao called for Moses & Aaron, and said; pray ye vnto the Lord, that he may take away the frogs from mee, and from my people, and I will let the people goe, that they may doe sacrifice to the Lord, verse 9. And Moses saide vnto Pharao, concerning me, commaund when I shall pray for thee and thy seruants, and for thy people, to destroy the frogges from thee, and from thy houses, that they may remaine in the Riuer onely, verse 10. Then he said tomorrow, & he answered, be it as thou hast said, that thou mayst know that there is none like the Lord our GOD. verse 11. So the frogges shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, & from thy people, and from thy Seruants onely, they shall remaine in the Riuer. verse 12. Then Moses & Aaron went out from Pharao, & Moses cryed vnto the Lord concerning the frogs which he had sent vnto Pharao. ver. 13. And the Lord did according to the saying of Moses, so the frogs dyed in the houses, and in the Townes, and in the fieldes. ver. 14. And they gathered them together by heapes, and the land stanke of them, &c. And this was the second plague of Aegypt, wherein the Lord turned all the fishes into Frogges, (as the booke of wisedome saith) and the Frogs abounded in the Kinges cham∣ber: and notwithstanding this great iudgement of God for the present, Pharao would not let the people goe, and afterwardes that blind superstitious Nation became worshippers of Frogges, (as Philastrias writeth) thinking by this deuotion, or rather wickodnesse in this obseruant manner, to pacifie the wrath of God, choosing their owne wayes before the word of Almighty God: But vain is that worship which is inuented without heauenly warrant, and better it is to bee obedient to the will of God, then goe about to please him with the cogitations of men, although in their pretended holinesse wee spend much time, wealth, and bloud. There was one Cypselus the Father of Periander, who by his Mother was hidde in a Chest called Kypsele, to be preserued from the handes of certaine murtherers, which were sent to kill him. Wherefore afterwards the said Cypselus consecrated a house at Delphos to Apollo, because he heard his crying when he was hidde in a Chest, and preserued him. In the bottome of that house, was the trunke of a palme-tree and certaine Frogges pictu∣red running out of the same: but what was meant thereby is not certainely knowne, for neither Plutarke which vvriteth the story, nor Chersias which relateth it, giueth any sig∣nification thereof: but in another place where he inquireth the reason why the Oracle of Pithias gaue no answer, hee coniectured because it was that the accursed thing brought out of the Temple of Apollo from Delphos, into the Corinthian house, hadde ingrauen vn∣derneath the brazen Palme, Snakes, and Frogs, or else for the signification of the Sunne rising. The meat of Frogges thus brought foorth are greene Hearbes, and Humble-Bees, or shor e-bugs, which they deuour o catch when they come to the water to drinke: some-time also they are said to eate earth, but as well Frogges as Toads doe eate the dead mole, for the Mole deuoureth them beeing aliue. In the month of August, they neuer open their mouthes, either to take in meate or drinke, or to vtter any voyce, and their chaps are Albertus. so fast ioyned or closed together, that you can hardly open them with your finger, or with a sticke. The young ones of this kinde are killed by casting Long-wort, or the leaues of Sea-Lettice, as Elianus and Suidus write: and thus much for the description of their parts, generation, and sustentation of these common Frogs. The wisedome or disposition of the Aegyptian frogs is much commended, for they saue themselues from their enemies with singular dexterity. If they fall at any time vpon a wa∣ter-Snake, which they knowe is their mortall enimy, they take in their mouthes a round Reede, which with an inuincible strength they hold fast, neuer letting goe, although the Snake haue gotten her into her mouth, for by this meanes the Snake cannot swallow hir, and so she is preserued aliue. There is a pretty fable of a great Bull which came to the water to quench his thirst, and whilest the beast came running greedily into the Water, hee trod in peeces two or three young Frogs; then one of them which escaped with life, went and told his mother the mi∣serable misfortune and chance of his fellowes: she asked who it was that had so killed her young ones, to whom he answered: It was a great one, but how great he could not tell: the foolish mother-frog desirous to haue seene some body in the eyes of her Sonne, began to swell with holding in of her breath, and then asked the young one if the beast were as bigge as she? And he answered much greater, at which words she beganne to swell more, And asked him againe if the beast were so bigge? To whom the young one aunswered, Mother leaue your swelling, for though you breake your selfe, you will neuer be so bigge as he: and I thinke from this same fable came the Prouerbe, Rana Gyrina sapientia, wiser then the young Frogge. This is excellently described by Horace in his third Satyre, as fol∣loweth; Absentis ranaepullis vituli pede pressis, Vnus vbi effugit matri denarrat, vt ingens Bellua cognatos eliserit, illa rogare, Quantanè? Num tandem, se inflans, sic magnafuisset? Maior dimidio: Num tanto? Cum magis at{que} Se magis inflaret, non si te ruperis, inquit, Par eris: haec à te non multum abludit imago. Which may be englished thus; In old Frogs absence, the young were prest to death By feete of a great Calfe, drinking in the water, To tell the dam, one ran that scapt with life and breath, How a great beast his young to death did scatter. How great sayd she? so bigge? and then did swell, Greater by halfe, said he: then she swoll more, and said Thus bigge? but he: cease swelling dam, for I thee tell, Though breake thy selfe, like him thou neuer canst be made. There is another pretty fable in Esop, tasking discontented persons vnder the name of Frogs, according to the old verse: Et veterem in limoranae cecinsere quaerelam, Nam neque siccaplacet, nec quae stagnata palude Perpetitur, querulae semper conuitia ranae. Which may be englished in this manner; The Frogs amid'st the earthy slime, Their old complaints do dayly sing: Not pleas'd with pooles, nor land that drine, But new displeasures dayly bring. When Ceres went about seeking Proserpina, she came to a certaine Fountaine in Lisia to quench her thirst: the vnciuill Li sians hindered her from drinking, both by troubling the water with their feet, and also by sending into the water a great company of croaking Frogs; whereat the Goddesse being angry, turned all those Country-people into Frogs. But Ouid doth ascribe this transmutation of the Lisians, to the prayer of Latona, when she came to drinke of the fountaine to increase the Milke in her breasts, at such time as she nursed Apollo and Diana, which Metamorphosis or transmutation, is thus excellently descri∣bed by Ouid; Aeternum stagno (dixit) viuatis in isto. Eueniunt optata deae, iuuat esse sub v dis, Et modo tota caua summergere membra palude, Nunc proferre caput summo, modo gurgite nare, S pe super ripam stagni consistere, saepe In gelidos resilire lacus, sed nunc quoque turpes Litibus exercent linguas, pulsoque pudore Quamuis sint sub aqua, sub aqua maledicere tentant. Vox quoque iam rauca est, inflata{que} colla tumescunt: Ipsaque dilatant patulos conuitia rictus. Terga caput tangunt, colla intercepta videntur. Spina viret, venter, pars maxima corporis albet, Limoso{que} nouae saliunt in gurgite ranae. In English thus; —For euer mought you dwell In this same pond she said: her wish did take effect with speed, For vnderneath the water they delight to be indeed: Now diuethey to the bottome downe, now vp their heads they pop, Another while with spraulling legs they swim vpon the top. And oftentimes vpon the bankes they haue a mind to stond, And oftentimes from thence againe to leape into the pond: And there they now doe practise still their filthy tongues to scold, And shamelesly, though vnderneath the water they do hold Their former wont of brauling, still auoyd the water cold: Their voyces still are hoarse and harsh, their throats haue puffed goawles, Their chaps with brawling widened are, their hammer-headed ioawles, Are ioyned to their shoulders iust, the neckes of them do seeme Cut off: the ridgebone of their backe sticke vp with colour greene. Their panch which is the greatest part of all their trunke is gray, And so they vp and downe the pond made newly, Frogs do play. Whatsoeuer the wisedome of Frogs is, according to the vnderstanding of the Poets, this is certain, that they signifie impudent & contentious persons, for this cause there is a pretty fiction in hel betwixt the two Poets, Erupides & Aesculus: for the ending of which cotrouersie, Bacchus was sent downe to take the worthyest of them out of Hell into Hea∣uen: and as he went ouer Charones Ferry, he heard nothing but the croaking of Frogges, for such contentious spirits doe best befitte Hell. And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken of the wisedome of Frogs. Their common enimies are the Weasels, Poule-cats, and Ferrets, for these do gather them together, and lay of them great heapes within their dens: whereupon they feede in Winter. The Hearne also and Bittor, is a common destroyer of Frogges, and so likewise are some kind of Kites. The Night-Birds, Gimus and Gimeta, the Water-Snake (at whose presence in token of extreame terrour) the Frogge setteth vppe her voyce in lamentable manner. The Moles are also enemies to Frogs, & it is further said, that if a burning Candle be set by the water side, during the croaking of Frogs, it will make them hold their peace. Men do also take Frogs, for they were wont to baite a hooke with a little red wooll, or a peece of red cloth, also the gall of a Goat put into a vessell, and set in the earth, will quick∣ly draw vnto it all the Frogs that be neare it, as if it were vnto them a very gratefull thing: And thus much shal suffice to haue spoken of the enemies of frogs. Now in the next place we are to consider the seuerall Vses, both naturall, Medicinall, and Magicall, which men do make of Frogs. And first of all the Greene Frogs, and some of the yellow which liue in flouds, Riuers, Lakes, and Fish-pooles, are eaten by men; although in ancient time they were not eaten, but onely for Physicke, for the broth wherein they were sod, & the flesh also, was thought to haue vertue in it to cure thē which were strucken by any venomous-creeping-beast, es∣pecially mixed with Salt and Oyle: but since that time Aetius discommendeth the eating of Frogs, prouing that some of them are venomous, and that by eating thereof, extream vomits hath followed, and they can neuer be good, except when they are newly taken, & their skins diligently flayed off, and those also out of pure running waters, and not out of muddy stinking puddles: and therefore aduiseth to forbeare in plenty of other meate, this wanton eating of Frogs, as thinges perilous to life and health, and those Frogs also which are most white when the skin is taken off, are most dangerous & fullest of venom, according to the cousell of Fiera, saying; vltima, sed nostros non accessura lebetes, Noluimus, succi est pluuij & limosa maligni. Ni saliat, putris ranae parabatiter. Irata est & ad huc rauca coaxat aquis. In English thus: We will not dresse a Frog vnlesse the last of all to eate, Because the iuyce thereof is muddy and of raine, vncleane, Except it go on earth, prepared way to leape For, angry it euer is, and hath hoarse voyce amid the streame. They which vse to eate frogs, fall to haue a colour like Lead, and the hotter the coun∣tries are, the more venomous are the Frogs in colder Countries, as in Germany they are not so harmefull, especially after the spring of the yeare, and their time of copulation pas∣sed. Besides, with the flesh of frogs, they were wont in ancient time to baite their hookes, Pliny. wherewithall they did take Purple Fishes, and they did burne the young Frogs, putting the powder thereof into a Cat, whose bowels was taken out, then rosting the Cat, & af∣ter she was rosted, they annointed her all ouer with Hony, then laide her by a wood side, by the odour and sauour whereof, all the Wolues and Foxes lodging in the said Wood were allured to come vnto it, and then the hunters lying ready in wait, did take, destroy, & kill them. When Frogs do croak about their vsuall custome, either more often, or more shrill then they were wont to do: they do foreshew raine and tempestuous weather. Wherefore Tully saith in his first book of Diuination, who is it that can suspect, or once thinke that the little Frogge should know thus much, but there is in them an admirable vnderstanding nature, constant and open to it selfe, but more secrets obscure to the know∣ledge of men; and therefore speaking to the Frogs he citeth these verses; Vos quo{que} signa videtis aquai dulcis alumnae, Cum clamore paratis inanes fundere voces, Absurdo{que} sono fontes & stagna cietis. In English thus; And you O water-birds which dwell in streames so sweet, Do see the signes whereby the weather is foretold, Your crying voyces wherewith the waters are repleate, Vaine sounds, absurdly mouing pooles and fountaines cold. And thus much for the naturall vse of Frogs. Now followeth Magicall. It is said that if a man take the tongue of a Water-Frog, and laie it vpon the head of one that is asleep, he shall speake in his sleep, & reueile the secrets of his hart: but if he will know the secrets Albertus. Kiranides. Democritus of a woman, then must hee cut it out of the Frog aliue, and turne the Frog away againe, making certaine Charactars vpon the Frogs tongue, and so lay the same vppon the pan∣ting of a womans hart, and let him aske her what questions he will, she shall answer vnto him all the truth, & reueale all the secret faults that euer she hath committed. Now if this magicall foolery were true, we had more need of Frogs then of Iustices of Peace, or Ma∣gistrates in the common-wealth. But to proceede a little further, and to detect the vanity of these men, they also say, that the staffe wherewith all a Frog is strucke our of a Snakes mouth, laide vpon a woman in trauaile, shall cause an easie deliuerance: and if a man cut off a foot of a frog as he swims in the water, and binde the same to one that hath the gout, it will cure him. And this is as true as a shoulder of Mutton worne in ones Hat, healeth the tooth-ach. Some againe doe write, that if a Woman take a Frogge and spit three times in her mouth, she shall not conceiue with Childe that yeare. Also if Dogges eate the Pottage wherein a Frogge hath beene sodde, it maketh him dumbe and cannot barke. And if a man cast a sodde Frogge at a Dogge, vvhich is ready to assault him, it will make him runne away, (I thinke as fast an olde hungry Horse from a bottle of Hay.) These and such like vanities haue the Auncient Heathens (ignorant of GOD) firmely beleeued, till ey∣ther experience disapprooued theyr inuentions, or the sincere knovvledge of Religion in lightening theyr darkenesse, made them to forsake theyr former vaine errours, vvhich I vvould to GOD hadde come sooner vnto them, that so they might neuer haue sinned; or else beeing now come vnto vs theyr Children, I pray GOD that it may ne∣uer bee remoued, least by trusting in lying vanityes, wee forsake our owne mercy. And so an end of the Magycall Vses. Novv vve proceede to the Medicinall, in the byting of euery venomous creature. Frogges sod or roasted, are profitable, especially the broth, if it be giuen to the sicke person without his knowledge, mixed with Oyle and Salt, as wee haue said already. The flesh of Water-frogs is good against the byting of the Sea-hare, the Scorpion, and all kind of Serpents: against Leprosie and scabs, and rubbed vpon the body, it doth cure the same. The broath taken into the body with rootes of Sea-halme, expelleth the Salamander: so also the Egges, of the frogge, and the egges of the Tortoyce, hath the same operation, being sod with Calamynth. The little Frogs are an antidote against the Toades and great Frogges. Albertus also among other remedies prescribeth a Frogge to bee giuen to sicke Faulkcons or Hawkes: It is also good for crickes in the necke, or the Cramp. The same sod with Oyle, caseth the paines and hardnesse of the ioynts and sinnewes: they are like∣wise giuen against an old Cough, and with old Wine and sod Corne drunke out of the Vessell wherein they are sod, they are profitable against the Drosie, but with the sharpest Vineger, Oyle, and spume of Niter sod together, by rubbing and annoynting, cureth all scabs in Horses, and pestelent tumours. There is an Oyle likewise made out of Frogs, which is made in this manner, they take a pound of Frogges, and put them into a vessell or glasse, and vppon them, they poure a pinte of Oyle, so stopping the mouth of the glasse, they seeth it as they do the Oyle of ser∣pents, with this they cure the shrinking of the sinnewes, and the hot gout, they prouoke sleep, and heale the inflammations in Feauers, by annointing the Temples. The effect of this Oyle is thus described by Serenus: Sape ita per vadit vis frigoris, ac tenet artus, Vt vix quaesito medicamine pulsa recedat. Si ranam ex oleo decoxeris, abijce carnem, Membra foue. That is to say; Often are the sinnewes held by force inuading cold, Which scarce can be repelled backe by medicines tried might, Then seeth a Frogge in purest oyle, as ancients vs haue told, So bath the members sicke therein, Frogs flesh cast out of sight. And againe in another place he speaking of the cure of a Feuer, writeth thus; Sed prius est oleo partus feruescere Ranae, In triuijs, illoque artus perducere succo, In English thus; But first let Oyle make hot young Frogs new found In waies, therewith bring sinnewes weake to weale full sound. To conclude, it were infinite & needlesse to expresse all that the Physitions haue obser∣ued about the Medicines rysing out of the bloud, fat, flesh, eyes, hart, Liuer, gall, Intrals, Legs, and sperme of Frogs, besides powders and distillations; therefore I will not weary the Reader, nor giue occasion to ignorant men, to bee more bold vppon my writing of Physicke then is reason, least that be said against mee which prouerbially saide of vnne∣cessary thinges, Ranis vinum ministras, you giue Wine to Frogges, which haue neither neede nor nature to drinke it, for they delight more in water; And so I conclude the Hi∣story of this vulgar Frogge. OF THE GREENE FROG. T His frog is called Calamites, and Dryophytes, and Mantis, and Rana virens. In Arabia Blefaricon, and Cucunoines, and Cucumones, Irici, Ranulae, Brexantes, of Brex-ein to raine, & thereof commeth the fained word of Aristophanes, Brekeke∣kex Koax, but I thinke that as our English word Frogge is deriued from the German word Frosch, so the Germaines Frosch from this Greeke word Brex. It is called also Zamia, that is Damnum, losse, hurt or damage, because they liue in trees, and many times hatme men and Cattle vnderneath the trees; and therefore called Zamiae of the Greeke word Zemia. The Italians call it Racula, Ranocchia, Lo Ranouoto, Ranonchia de rubetto. The French Croissetz, and sometimes Graisset, Verdier, in Sauoy Renogle. In Germany Loubfrosch In Poland Zaba Trawna. Some of the Latines for difference sake call it Rana Rubeta, because it liueth in trees and bushes: and for the same cause it also called Calamites, because it li∣ueth among reeds, and Dryopetes, because it falleth sometime out of trees. It is the least of all other Frogs, & liueth in trees, or among fruites, and trees especially in the woods of Hasels, or Vines, for with his shorte Legges it climbeth the highest trees: insomuch that some haue thought it hadd winges. It is greene all ouer the body, except the feete and the fingers, which are of dusty or reddish colour, and the toppes of his nailes or clawes are blunt and round: In the dissec∣tion therof there was bloud found in euery part of the body, and yet but little. The Heart of it is white, the Liuer blacke, mixed with the Gall. It hath also a Melt, and in the end of Iuly it layeth Egges. It is a venemous beast, for sometimes Cattle as they brouse vppon trees, do swallovv down one of these vpon the leaues not discerning it, because it is of the same colour: but presently after they haue eaten it their bellyes begin to swell, which must needes proceed from the poysoned Frogge. A second reason prooueth it to bee venomous, is for that many Authors doe affirme, that hereof is made the Psilothrum, for the drawing out of teeth by the roots, and for this cause is concluded to bee venomous, because this cannot bee performed without stronge poyson. But for the cure of the poyson of this Frogge, wee shall expresse it afterward in the History of the Toade, and therefore the Reader must not expect it in this place. Al∣waies before raine they climbe vppe vpon the trees, and there cry after a hoarse manner very much, which caused the Poet Serenus to call it Rauco garrula questu: at other times it is mute, and hath no voyce: vvherefore it is more truely called Mantis, that is, a Pro∣phet or a Deuiner, then any other kinde of Frogge, because other Frogges which are not altogether mute, doe cry both for feare, and also for desire of carnall copulation, but this neuer cryeth but before raine. Some haue beene of opinion, that this is a dumbe Frogge; and therefore Vincentius Belluacensis saith, that it is called a mute Frog from the effect: for there is an opinion, that this put into the mouth of a Dog, maketh him dumbe, which if it bee true, it is an Argu∣ment of the extreame poyson therein contained, ouercomming the nature of the Dogge, whose cheefest sences are his tast and his smelling. And thus much shall suffice for the de∣scription of this Frog. The medicinall vertues obserued herein are these that follow. First if a man which hath a cough, do spet into the mouth of this Frogge, it is thought that it doth deliuer him from his cough, and being bound in a Cranes skinne vnto a mans thigh, procureth venerious desires: but these are but magicall deuices, and such as haue no apparant reason in nature, wherefore I vvill omit them, and proceede to them that are more reasonable & naturall. First for the Oyle of Frogs, that is the best which is made out of the Greene-Frogs, as it is obserued by Siluius, and if they are held betwixt a mans handes, in the fit of hot burning Ague, do much refresh nature, and ease the paine. For Feauer-heptickes they prepare thē thus: they take such frogs as haue white bellies, then cut off their heads and pull out their bowels, afterwards they seeth them in water, vntill the flesh fall from the bones, thē they mingle the said flesh with Barly Meale, made into Paste, wherewithall they cram & feed Pullen with that paste, vpon which the sicke man must be fed, and in default of Frogs they do the like with Eeles, and other like Fishes. But there is no part of the Frog so medicina∣ble as is the bloud, called also the matter or the iuyce, and the humour of the Frogge, al∣though some of them write, that there is no bloud but in the eyes of a Frogge: first there∣fore with this they kill haire, for vpon the place where the haire was puld off, they poure this bloud, and then it neuer groweth more: And this as I haue said already, is an Argu∣ment of the venome of this Frogge; and it hath beene proued by experience, that a man holding one of these Frogges in his hand, his hands haue begunne to swell, and to break out into blisters. Of this vertue Serenus the Poet writeth; Praeterea quascunque voles auertere setas, Atque in perpetuum rediuiua occludere tela, Corporibus vulsis saniem perducito ranae, Sed quae parua situ est, & rauco garula questu. That is to say, Besides, from whatsoeuer bodyes haires thou will Be cleane destroyed, and neuer grow againe On them, the mattery bloud of Frogs, all spread and spill: I meane the little Frog questing hoarse voyce amaine, The same also being made into a Verdigreace, & drunke the weight of a Crowne, stop∣peth the continuall running of the vrine. The humour which commeth out of this Frog, being aliue when the skinne is scraped off from her backe, cleareth the eyes by annoynt∣ment: and the flesh laid vpon them, easeth their paines, the flesh and fat pulleth out teeth. The povvder made of this Frogge beeing drunke, stayeth bleeding, and also expelleth spots of bloud dryed in the body. The same being mingled with Pitch, cureth the falling off of the haire. And thus much shall suffice for the demonstration of the nature of this lit∣tle Greene-Frogge. OF THE PADDCKE OR CROOKED backe Frogge. I T is apparent that there be three kinds of Frogs of the earth, the first is the lit∣tle greene Frog: the second is this Padocke, hauing a crooke back, called in Latine Rubeta Gibbosa, and the third is the Toade, commonly called Rube tax, Bufo. This second kind is mute or dumbe, as there be many kind of mire Frogges, such as is that which the Germans call Feurkrott, and our late Alchymists Puri∣phrunon, that is, a Fire-frogge, because it is of the coloure of fire: This is found deepe in the earth, in the midst of Rocks and stones when they are cleft asunder, and amongst met∣talls, where-into there is no hole or passage, and therefore the wit of man cannot deuise how it should enter therein, onely there they find them when they cleaue those stones in sunder with their wedges & other instruments. Such as these are, are found neere Towers in Fraunce, among a redde sandy stone, whereof they make Milstones, and therfore they breake that stone all in peeces before they make the Milstone vp, least while the Paddock is included in the middle, and the Mill-stone going in the Mill, the heate should make the Paddocke swell, and so the Mill-stone breaking, the corne should be poysoned. As soone as these Paddocks come once into the ayre, out of their close places of generation and ha∣bitation, they swell and so die. This crooke-backed Paddocke is called by the Germans Gartenfrosch, that is, a Frog of the Garden, and Grasfrosch, that is, a Frogge of the grasse. It is not altogether mute, for in time of perrill, when they are chaced by men, or by Snakes, they haue a crying voyce, which I haue oftentimes prooued by experience, and all Snakes and Serpents doe verie much hunt and desire to destroy these: also I haue seene a Snake hold one of them by the legge, for because it was great she could not easily deuoure it, & during that time, it made a pittifull lamentation. These Paddocks haue as it were two little hornes or bunches in the middle of the back, and their colour is betweene greene and yellow, on the sides they haue redde spots, and the feete are of the same colour, their belly is white, and that part of their backe which is directly ouer their breast, is distinguished with a few blacke spots. And thus much may serue for the particuler description of the Paddocke, not differing in any other thing that I can reade of from the former Frogges, it being venomous as they are, and therefore the cure is to be expaected heereafter, in the next history of the Toade. OF THE TOADE. T O conclude the story of Frogges, we are now to make descrip∣tion and narration of the Toade, which is the most noble kinde of Frogge, most venomous, and remarquable for courage and strength. This is called in Hebrew by some Coah, the Graecians call it Phrunon, the Arabians Mysoxus, the Germans Krott, the Saxons Quap, the Flemings Padde, the Illirians Zaba, the French rapault, the Italians Rospo, Botta, Boffa, Chiatto, Zatta, Buffo, Buffa, Buffone, and ramarro, the Spanyards Sapo escu, erco, the Latines Rubeta, because it liueth among bushes, and Bufu, because it swelleth when it is angry. Now I find of these Toades two kinds, the one called Rubeta palustris, a Toade of the fennes, or of the waters, the other, Ru∣beta terrestris, a Toade of the earth: And these in Authors are sometimes confoun∣ded, one taken for ang er. The greatest difference that I can , is theyr seate or place of habitation, for they liue both of them in the land and in the water. And of them that be in the water, some of them be smaller then the ot and are therfore called Ruberulae, that is, little Toades: and I thinke they be the same which are called by some Authors Ranae Si oides. Neere vnto Zuricke, there are Toades not halfe so bigge as the vulgar Toades, at a place called Kiburg, beeing of a durtie colour on the back, and sharpe boned, the belly white and yellowe, or rather betwixt both, the eyes of a gold flaming colour, the buttocks and hinder legges hairy, and besides that place, these kind of Toades are no where found. They haue a very shrill voyce, so as they are heard a great way off, like a small bell or trumpet, and they neuer vtter their voyce but in the Spring, and the fore-part of the Summer, for about September they hide themselues in Trees, neither doe they liue among the waters, but on the dry land; when they cry, it is certaine that the night following will bring forth no frost. Like vnto this there is a Toade in Fraunce called Bufo cornutus, a horned Toade, not because it hath hornes, for that is most apparantly false, but for that the voyce thereof is like to the sound of a Cornet, or rather (as I thinke) like to a Rauen called Cornix, and by a kind of barbarisme called Bufo cornutus. The colour of this Toade is like Saffron on the one part, and like filthy durt on the other: besides, there are other venomous Toades li∣uing in sinckes, priuies, and vnder the rootes of plants. There is another kind also, like to the Toade of the water, but in steed of bones it hath onely grissels, and it is bigger then the Toade of the Fenne, liuing in hot places. There is another also, which although it be a Toade of the water, yet hath it beene eaten for meate not many yeeres since: the mouth of it is very great, but yet without teeth, which he doth many times put out of the water like a Torteyse to take breath, and in taking of his meate, which are flyes, Locustes, Catterpillers, gnattes, and small creeping things, it imitateth the Camaelion, for it putteth out the tongue, and licketh in his meate by the space of three fingers, in the toppe whereof there is a soft place, hauing in it viscous humour, which cau∣seth all thinges to cleaue fast vnto it which it toucheth, by vertue whereof it deuoureth great flyes. And therefore the said tongue is said to haue two little bones growing at the roote thereof, which by the wonderfull worke of Nature, doth guide, fortifie, & streng∣then it. And thus much may serue as a sufficient relation vnto the Reader uer∣sitie of Toades. Nowe wee will proceede to the common description of both kindes together. This Toade is in all outward parts like vnto a Frogge, the fore-feete beeing short, and the hin∣der feete long, but the bodie more heauy and swelling, the colour of a blackish colour, the skinne rough, viscous, and very hard, so as it is not easie to be broken with the blowe of a staffe. It hath many deformed spottes vppon it, especially blacke on the sides, the bell ex∣ceeding all other parts of the body, standing out in such manner, that beeing smitten vvith a staffe, it yeeldeth a sound as it were from a vault or hollow place. The head is broade and thicke, and the colour thereof on the nether part about the necke is white, that is, some-what pale, the backe plaine without bunches, and it is saide that there is a little bone growing in theyr sides, that hath a vertue to driue away dogge from him that beareth it about him, and is therefore called Apocynon. The whole aspect of this Toade is vglie and vnpleasant. Some Authours affirme that it carrieth the hart in the necke, and therefore it cannot easily be killed, except the throate thereof be cutte in the middle. Theyr liuer is very vitious, and causeth the whole body to be of ill temperament: And some say they haue two liuers. Theyr melt is very small, and as for theyr copulation and egges, they differ nothing from Frogges. There be many late Writers, which doe affirme that there is a precious stone in the head of a Toade, whose opinions (because they attribute the ve of this stone) it is good to examine in this place, that so the Reader may be satisfied whether to hold it as a fable or as a true matter, exempl fying the powerfull working of Almightie God in nature, for there be many that we re these stones in Ringes, beeing verily aded that they keepe them from all manner of grypings and paines of the belly and the small guttes. But the Art (as they terme it) is in taking of it out, for they say must be taken out of the head aliue, before the Toade be dead, with a peece of cloth of the colour of redde Skarlet, where-withall they aro much delighted, so that while they stretch out thēselues is it were in sport vpon that cloth, they cast out the stone of their head, but instantly they s p it vp againe, vnlesse it be taken from them through some secrete hole in the said cloth, whereby it falleth into a cesterne or vessell of water, into the which the Toade lateth not enter, by reason of the coldnes of the water. These things writeth assarius. Brasauolus saith, that he found such a thing in the head of a Toade, but he rather tooke it to be a bone then a stone, the colour wherof was browne, inclyning to blacknes. Some say it is double, namely outwardly a hollow bone, and inwardly a stone contained in, the vertue whereof is said to breake, preuent, or cure the stone in the bladder now how this stone should be there ingendered, there are diuers opinions also, & they say y t stones are ingendered in liuing creatures two manner of wayes, either through heate, or extreame cold, as in the Snaile, Pearch, Crabbe, Indian Tortizes and Toades; so that by extremitie of cold this stone should be gotten. Against this opinion the colour of the stone is obiected, which is some-times white, sometimes browne, or blackish, hauing a cittrine or blew spot in the middle, sometimes all greene, wher-vpon is naturally engrauen the figure of a Toade: and this stone is som∣times called Borax, sometimes Crapodinae, and sometimes Nisae, or Nusae, and Chelonites. Others doe make two kindes of these stones, one resembling a great deale of Milke mixed with a little blood, so that the white exceedeth the Redde, and yet both are apparant and visible: the other all blacke, wherein they say is the picture of a Toade, with her legges spredde before and behind. And it is further affirmed, that if both these stones be held in ones hand in the presence of poyson, it will burne him. The probation of this stone, is by laying of it to a liue Toade, and if she lift vp her head against it, it is good, but if shee run away from it, it is a counterfeyte. Geor: Agricola calleth the greater kind of these stones, Brontia, and the lesser & smoo∣ther sort of stones, Cerauniae, although some cōtrary this opinion, saying that these stones Brantia & Cerauniae, are bred on the earth by thundering and lightning. Whereas it is said before, that the generation of this stone in the Toade proceedeth of colde, that is vt∣terly vnpossible, for it is described to be so solide and firme, as nothing can be more hard, and therefore I cannot assent vnto that opinion, for vnto hard and solide things, is requi∣red abundance of heate: and againe, it is vnlikely, that whatsoeuer this Toade-stone be, that there should be any store of them in the world as are euery where visible, if they were to be taken out of the Toades aliue, and therefore I rather agree with Salueldensis a Spa∣niard, who thinketh that it is begotten by a certaine viscous spume, breathed out vppon the head of some Toade, by her fellowes in the Spring-time. This stone is that which in auncient time was called Batrachites, and they attribute vn∣to it a vertue besides the former, namely, for the breaking of the stone in the bladder, and against the Falling-sicknes. And they further write that it is a discouerer of present poy∣son, for in the presence of poyson it will change the colour. And this is the substaunce of that which is written about this stone. Now for my part I dare not conclude either with it or against it, for Hermolaus, Massarius, Albertus, Syluaticus, and others, are directlie for this stone ingendered in the braine or head of the Toade: on the other side, Cardan and Gesner confesse such a stone by name and nature, but they make doubt of the generation of it, as others haue deliuered; and therefore they beeing in sundry opinions, the hearing were of might confound the Reader, I will referre him for his satisfaction vnto a Toade, which hee may easily euery day kill: For although when the Toade is dead, the vertue thereof be lost, which consisted in the eye, or blew spot in the middle, yet the substaunce remaineth, and if the stone be found there in substance, then is the question at an end, but if it be not, then must the generation of it be sought for in some other place. Thus leauing the stone of the Toade, we must proceede to the other parts of the story, and first of all their place of habitation, which for them of the water, is neere the vvater∣side, and for them of the earth, in bushes, hedges, Rockes, and holes of the earth, neuer comming abroade while the Sunne shineth, for they hate the sunne-shine, and theyr na∣ture cannot indure it, for which cause they keepe close in their holes in the day time, and in the night they come abroad. Yet sometimes in rainy-weather, and in solitary places, they come abroade in the day-time. All the Winter-time they liue vnder the earth, fee∣ding vppon earth, herbes, and wormes, and it is said they eate earth by measure, for they eate so much euery day as they can grype in theyr fore-foote, as it were sizing themselues, least the whole earth should not serue them till the Spring. Resembling heerein great rich couetous men, who euer spare to spend, for feare they shall want before they die. And for in auncient time the wise Painters of Germany, did picture a woman sitting vp∣on a oade, to signifie couetousnes. They also loue to eate Sage, and yet the roote of is to them deadly poyson; They destroy Bees, without all danger to themselues, for : reepe to the holes of their Hiues, and there blow in vppon the Bees, by which y draw them out of the Hiue, and so destroy them as they come out: for this at the water-side they lye in waite to catch them. When they come to drink in me they see little or nothing, but in the night time they see perfectly, and there∣ ey come then abroade. About their generation there are many worthy obseruations in nature, somtimes they are bredde out of the putrefaction and corruption of the earth, it hath also been seene that out of the ashes of a Toade burnt, not onely one, but many Toades haue been regenerated the yeere folowing. In the New world there is a Prouince called Dariene, the ayre where∣of is wonderful vnwholsome, because all the country standeth vpon rotten Marishes. It is there obserued, that when the slaues or seruants water the pauements of the dores, from the drops of water which fall on the right hand, are instantly many Toades ingendered, as in other places such drops of water are turned into gnats. It hath also beene seene, that women conceiuing with child, haue likewise conceiued at the same time a frog, or a toade or a Lizard, and therefore Platearius saith, that those thinges which are medicines to pro∣uoke the menstruous course of women, doe also bring foorth the Secondiues. And some haue called Bufonē fratrem Salernitanorum, et lacertum fratrē Lombardorū: that is, a toade the brother of the Salernitans, & the Lizard the brother of the Lombards: for it hath been seene that a woman of Salernum, hath at one time brought forth a boy and a toade, and therfore hee calleth the toade his brother; so likewise a woman of Lombardy, a Lizard, & therefore he calleth the Lizard the Lombards brother. And for this cause, the women of those countries, at such time as their child beginneth to quicken in their wombe, do drink the iuyce of Parsly & Leekes, to kill such conceptions if any be. There was a woman newly married, and when in the opinion of all she was with child, in steed of a child she brought forth foure little liuing creatures like frogs, and yet shee re∣mained in good health, but a little while after shee felt some paine about the rymne of her belly, which afterward was eased by applying a fewe remedies. Also there was another woman, which together with a man-child, in her secondines did also bring forth such ano∣ther beast; and after that a Marchants wife did the like in Anconitum. But what should be the reason of these so strange & vnnaturall conceptions, I wil not take vpon me to discide in nature, least the omnipotent hand of God should be wronged, and his most secrete & iust coūsell presumptuously iudged & called into question. This we know that it was pro∣phesied in the Reuelation, that Frogs & Locusts should come out of the whore of Babylon, and the bottomlesse pit, and therfore seeing the seate of the Whore of Babylon is in Italy, it may be that God would haue manifested the deprauation of Christian religion, begin∣ning among the Italians, and there continued in the conioyned birth of men & serpents: for surely, none but deuils incarnate, or men conceiued of Serpents brood, would so stifly stand in Romish error as the Italians do, & therefore they seeme to be more addicted to the errors of their Fathers, (which they say is the religion wherin they were borne) then vnto the truth of Iesus Christ, which doth vnanswerably detect the pride & vanity of the Romish faith. But to leaue speaking of the conception of toades in women, we wil proceed further vn∣to their generation in the stomacks & bellies of men, wherof there may more easily a rea∣son be giuen then of the former. Now although that in the earth toades are generated of putrified earth & waters, yet such a generation cannot be in the body of man, for although there be much putrifaction in vs, yet not so much as to ingender bones & other orgynes, such as are in toades; as for wormes they are all flesh, & may more easily be conceiued of the putrifaction in our stomacks. But then you wil say how comes it to passe that in mens stomacks there are sound frogs & toades? I answer that this euill hapneth vnto such men as drinke water, for by drinking of water, a toades egge may easily slip into the stomack, & there being of a viscous nature, cleaueth fast to the rough parts of the ventricle, and it be∣ing of a contrary nature to man, can neuer be disgested or auoyded, and for that cause, the venome that is in it, neuer goeth out of stance, to poyson the other partes of med into a Toade, without doing are bredde in the bodies of men, the midst of Trees and Rocks, and are bredde in. For the venome is so ripenesse, euen as wee see it is almost an vsu shall not be perceiued, till many dayes, weekes, For the casting out of such a Toade bredde in th They take a Serpent and bowell him, then they cut of of the body they likewise part into small peeces, which fatte which swymmeth at the toppe, which the sicke person he auoyde all the Toades in his stomacke, afterwards he must ticall medicines. And thus much may suffice for the ordinary and tion of Toades. These Toades doe not leape as Frogges doe, but because of their short legges, theyr pace is a soft creeping-pace, yet some-times in anger they lift vp selues, endeuouring to doe harme, for great is theyr watch, obstinacie, and desire to be uenged vpon their aduersaries, especially the Redde-Toade, for looke howe much her co∣lour inclineth to rednesse, so much is her wrath and venome more pestilent. If shee take hold of any thing in her mouth, she will neuer let it goe till shee die, and many times shee sendeth forth poyson out of her buttocks or backer parts, where-withall she infecteth the ayre, for reuenge of them that doe annoy her: and it is well obserued that shee knoweth the weakenes of her teeth, & therefore for her defence she first of all gathereth abundance of ayre into her body, where-withall she greatly swelleth, and then by sighing, vttereth that infected ayre as neere the person that offendeth her as she can, and thus shee worketh her reuenge, killing by the poyson of her breath. The colour of this poyson is like milke, of which I will speake afterward, particularly by it selfe. A Toade is of a most cold tempriament, and badde constitution of nature, & it vseth one certaine herbe where-withall it preserueth the sight, and also resisteth the poyson of Spyders, whereof I haue heard this credible history related, from the mouth of a true ho∣nourable man, and one of the most charitable Peeres of England, namely, the good Earle of Bedford, and I was requested to set it downe for truth, for it may be iustified by manie now aliue which saw the same. It fortuned as the said Earle trauailed in Bedfordshire, neere vnto a Market-towne cal∣led Owbourne, some of his company espyed a Toade fighting with a Spider, vnder a hedge in a bottome, by the high-way-side, whereat they stood still, vntill the Earle their Lord and Maister came also to behold the same; and there he saw how the Spyder still kept her standing, and the Toade diuers times went backe from the Spyder, and did eate a peece of an herbe, which to his iudgement was like a Plantine. At the last, the Earle hauing seene the Toade doe it often, and still returne to the combat against the Spyder, hee com∣maunded one of his men to goe and with his dagger to cutte off that herbe, which he per∣formed and brought it away. Presently after the Toade returned to seeke it, and not find∣ing it according to her expectation, swelled & broke in peeces: for hauing receiued poy∣son from the Spyder in the combat, nature taught her the vertue of that herbe, to expell and driue it out, but wanting the herbe, the poyson did instantly worke and destroy her. And this (as I am informed) was oftentimes related by the Earle of Bedford himselfe vp∣pon sundry occasions, and therefore I am the bolder to insert it into this story. I doe the more easily beleeue it, because of another like history, related by Erasmus in his booke of friendship, hapning likewise in England, in manner as followeth. There was a Monke who had in his Chamber diuers bundles of greene-rushes, where-withall he vsed to strow his chamber at his pleasure, it hapned on a day after dinner, that hee fell a∣sleepe vpon one of those bundles of rushes, with his face vpward, and while he there slept a great Toade came and sate vpon his lyps, bestryding them in such manner as his whole mouth was couered. Now when his fellowes sawe it, they were at their wits end, for to er her to stand still vppon his one of them espying a Spiders duise that the Monke should ght vnderneath the Spyders∣ and as soon as the Spyder saw her aduersa∣ downe vpon the Toade, at , so that it swelled, and at the Spyder kild the Toade, and so in his Chamber; for at the third time swelled to death, but the man was pre∣ suffice for the antipathy nature betwixt the oade, for as Albertus writeth, he himselfe sawe a bitterly, for a Mole did hold her fast by the leg within in againe, whilst the other stroue to gette out of her teeth, Toades doe eate the Moles when they be dead. They are Lizard, and all kinds of Serpents, and whensoeuer it receiueth a∣ it cureth itselfe by eating of Plantine. The Cat doth also kill Ser∣ , but eateth them not, and vnlesse she presently drinke, she dyeth for it. nd the Hawke are destroyers of Toades, but the Storke neuer destroyeth a eate it, except in extremitie of famine, whereby is gathered the venomous na∣ the Toade. Now to conclude, the premisses considered which haue beene said of the Toade, the vses that are to follow are not many, except those which are already related in the Frog. When the Spanyards were in Bragua, an Iland of the Newe-found-World, they were brought to such extremitie of famine, that a sicke-man amongst them was forced to eate two Toades, which he bought for two peeces of Gold-lace, worth in Spanish monie sixe Duckets. I doe maruell why in auncient time the Kings of Fraunce gaue in their Armes the three Toades in a yellow fielde, the which were afterwards changed by Clodoueus in∣to three Flower-delusees in a field Azure, as Armes sent vnto him from Heauen. When the Troyans dwelt neere Moeetis, after the destruction of Troy, they were ve∣ry much annoyed by the Gothes, wherefore Marcomirus their King, determined to leaue that Country, and to seeke some-where else a more quiet habitation. Being thus minded, he was admonished by an Oracle that he should goe and dwell in that Country where the Riuer Rhene falleth into the Sea, and he was also stirred vp to take vpon him that iourney, by a certaine Magitian-woman, called Alrunna, for this cunning Woman caused in the night-time a deformed appartion to come vnto him, hauing three heads, one of an Eagle, another of a Toade, and the third of a Lyon, and the Eagles head did speake vnto him in this manner, Genus tuum ô Marcomire opprimet me, et conculcabit Leonem et interficiet bu∣fonem, that is to say, Thy stocke or posteritie, ô Marcomirus, shall oppresse mee, it shall tread the Lyon vnder-foote, and kill the Toade. By which wordes hee gathered, that his posteritie should rule ouer the Romans, signified by the Eagle, & ouer the Germans, sig∣nified by the Lyon, and ouer the French, signified by the Toade, because the Toade, as we haue said, was the auncient Armes of Fraunce. It is an opinion held by some Writers, that the Weasels of the water doe ingender in copulation with the Toades of the water, for in their mouthes, and feete of theyr bellie, they doe resemble them. VVherevpon these verses were made; Bufones gigno putrida tellure sepulta, Humores pluvij forte quod ambo sumus, Humet is et friget mea sic vis humet et alget, Cum perit in terra quiprius ignis erat. Which may be englished thus; Buried in rotten earth, forth Toades I bring, Perhaps because we both are made of rayne That's moyst and cold, moyst I, and euer freezing, When in the earth, that force from fire came. And thus we will descend to discourse of the Toades poyson, and of the speciall reme∣dies appoynted for the same. First therefore, all manner of Toades, both of the earth and of the water are venomous, although it be held that the toades of the earth are more poy∣sonfull then the toades of the water, except those Toades of the water which doe receiue infection or poyson from the water, for some waters are venomous. But the toades of the Land, which doe descend into the Marshes, and so liue in both elements, are most veno∣mous, and the hotter the Country is, the more full are they of poyson. The Women-witches of auncient time which killed by poysoning, did much vse Toades in their confections, which caused the Poet in his verses to write as followeth. Occurrit Matrona potens quae molle Calenum: Porrectura viro, miscet sciente rubetam. Which may be englished thus; There came a rich Matron, who mixed Calen wine, With poyson of Toades to kill her spouse, ô deadly crime. And againe in another place, Funus promittere patris nec volo nec possum, Ranarum in viscera nunquam inspexi. In English thus; I can nor will of Fathers death a promise make, For of Toades poyson I neuer yet a view did take. When an Aspe hath eaten a Toade, their byting is incurable, and the Beares of Pam∣phylia and Sylitia beeing killed by men after that they haue eaten Salamanders or toades, doe poyson their eaters. We haue said already that a toade hath two liuers, & although both of them are corrupted, yet the one of them is said to be full of poyson, and the other to resist poyson. The byting of a Toade, although it be sildome, yet it is venomous, and causeth the body to swell and to breake, eyther by Impostumation, or otherwise against which is to be applyed common Antidotes, as womens milke, Triacle, rootes of Sea∣holme, and such other things. The spettle also of Toades is venomous, for if it fall vpon a man, it causeth all his hayre to fall off from his head; against this euill Par elsus prescri∣beth a plaister of earth, mixed with the spettle of a man. The common-people doe call that humour which commeth out of the buttocks of a Toade when she swelleth, the vrine of a Toade, and a man moystned with the same, be∣pissed with a Toade; but the best remedy for this euill, is the of a woman as it resembleth the poyson in colour, so doth it resist it in nature. The bodies of toades ∣and so drunke in Wine after they be beaten to powder, are a most strong poyson, against which and all other such poyson of Toades, it is good to take Plantine and blacke Holly∣bore, Sea-crabs dryed to powder and drunke, the stalkes of dogges-tongue, the powder of the right-horne of a Hart, the melt, spleene, and hart of a Toade. Also certaine fishes called Shell-crabbes, the blood of the Sea-Torteyse mixed with wine, Cummin, and the rennet of a Hare. Also the blood of a Torteyse of the Land mixed with Barley-meale, & the quintessence of Triacle & oyle of Scorpions, all these things are very pretions against the poyson of Serpents and Toades. We haue promised in the story of the Frogge, to expresse in this place such remedies, as the learned Phisitians haue obserued for the cure of the poyson of Frogges. First there∣fore, the poyson of the Frogge causeth swelling in the body, depelleth the colour, ∣eth difficultie of breathing, maketh the breath strong, and an involuntary profusion of seede, with a generall dulnes and restines of body: for remedy whereof, let the partie be inforced to vomit by drinking sweet-wine, and two drams of the powder of the roote of Reedes or Cypresse. Also he must be inforced to walking and running, besides daily wa∣shing. But if a Feauer follow the poyson or burning in the extremities, let the vomit be of water and oyle, or wine and pitch; or let him drinke the blood of a Sea-Torteyse, mixed with Cummine, and the rennet of a Hare, or els sweat in a Furnace or hote-house a long time: besides many other such like remedies, which euery Phisitian, both by experience and reading, is able to minister in cases of necessitie, and therefore I will spare my further paines from expressing them in this place, and passe on to the medicinall vertues of the Toade, and so conclude this history. We haue shewed already that the Toade is a cold creature, and therefore the same sod in water, and the body annoynted there-with, causeth hayre to fall off from the members so annoynted. There is a medicine much commended against the Gowte, which is this: Take sixe pound of the rootes of Wilde-cucumber, sixe pound of sweet oyle of the mar∣row of Harts, Turpentine, and Waxe, of eyther sixe ounces, and sixe Toades aliue, the which Toades must be bored through the foote, and hanged by a thred in the oyle vntill they grow yellow, then take them out of the oyle by the threds, and put into the said oyle the slyced roote of Cucumber, and there let it seeth vntill all the vertue be left in the oyle. Afterwards melt the Waxe and Turpentine, and then put them altogether in a glasse, so vse them morning and euening against the Gowte, Sciatica, and paines of the sinewes, & it hath beene seene that they which haue lyen long sicke, haue beene cured thereof, and growne perfectly wel & able to walke. Some haue added vnto this medicine oyle of Saf∣fron, Opobalsamum, blood of Torteyses, oyle of Sabyne, Swynes-greace, Quicksiluer, & oyle of Bayes. For the scabbes of horses, they take a Toade killed in wine and water, and so sodde in a brazen vessell, and afterwards annoynt the horse with the liquour thereof. It is also saide that Toades dryed in smoake, or any peece of them carried about one in a lynnen-cloath, doe stay the bleeding at the nose. And this Fredericke the Duke of Saxonie was wont to practise in this maner; he had euer a Toade pierced through with a peece of wood, which Toade was dried in the smoake or shadow, this he roled in a lynnen cloth, and when hee came to a man bleeding at the nose, he caused him to hold it fast in his hand vntill it waxed hote, and then would the blood be stayed. Whereof the Phisitians could neuer giue any reason, except horrour and feare constrained the blood to runne into his proper place, through feare of a beast so contrary to humane nature. The powder also of a toade is said to haue the same vertue, according to this verse; Buff vstus sistit naturae dote cruorem. In English thus; A Toade that is burned to Ashes and dust, Stayes bleeding by gift of Nature iust. The skinne of a Toade, and shell of a Torteyse, either burned or dryed to powder, cu∣reth the Fistulaes: Some adde heere-vnto the roote of Laurell and henne-dunge, salt, & oyle of Mallowes. The eyes of the Toade are receiued in oyntment against the wormes of the belly. And thus much shal suffice to haue spoken of the history of the toade & forgs. OF THE GREENE SERPENT. I N Valois there are certaine Greene-serpents, which of their colour are cal∣led Grunling, and I take them to be the same which Hesychius called Sau∣ritae, and Pliny by a kind of excellency, Snakes, of whom we shall speake afterwards, for I haue no more to say of thē at this present, but that they are very venomous. And it may be that of these came the common pro∣uerbe, Latet Anguis sub herba, vnder the greene herbe lyeth the Greene-Snake, for it is a friendly admonition vnto vs to beware of a falshoode couered vvith a truth like vnto it. OF THE HAEMORRHE. T His Serpent hath such a name giuen vnto it, as the effect of his by∣ting worketh in the bodies of men, for it is called in Latine H ∣morrhous, to signifie vnto vs the male, and Haemorrhois to signi∣fie the female, both of them being deriued from the Greeke word Aima, which signifieth blood, and Reo, which signifieth to flow, because whomsoeuer it byteth, it maketh in a continuall bleeding sweat, with extremitie of paine vntill it die. It is also called Affodi∣us, and Afudius, Sabrine, and Halsordius, or Alsordius, which are but corrupted barbarous names from the true and first word Haemorrhus. It is doubtfull whether this be to be ascribed to the Aspes or to the Vipers, for Isidorus saith it is a kind of Aspe, and Elianus, a kind of Viper. They are of a sandy colour, and in length not past one foote, or three handfulls, whose tayle is very sharpe or small, theyr eyes are of a fiery-flaming-colour, their head small, but hath vppon it the appearance of hornes. When they goe, they goe straight and slowly, as it were halting and wearilie, whose pace is thus described by Nicander. —Et inster Ipsius oblique suaparvula terga Cerasta Claudicat: ex medio videas appellere dorso Parvùm nauigium, terit imam lubrica terram Alvus, et haud alio tacitè trahit ilia motu, Ac per arundineum si transeat illa grabatum. In English thus; And like the Horned-serpent, so trayles this elfe on land, As though on backe a little boate it draue, His slyding belly makes path be seene in sand, As when by bedde of Reedes she goes her life to saue. The scales of this Serpent are rough & sharpe, for which cause they make a noyse whē they goe on the earth; the female resteth herselfe vppon her lower part neere her tayle, creeping altogether vppon her belly, and neuer holdeth vp her head, but the male when he goeth holdeth vp his head: theyr bodies are all set ouer with blacke spots, and them∣selues are thus paraphrastically described by Nicander. Vnum longa pedem, toto{que} gracillima tractu, Ignea qundo{que} est, quando{que} est candida forma, Constrictum{que} satis collum, et tenuissima cauda. Bina super gelidos oculos frons cornua profert, Splendentum quadam radiorum albentia luce, Syluestres vt apes, populatricesque Locuste: Insuper horribile ac asprum caput horret. Which may be englished in this manner following; On foote in length, and slender all along, Sometime of fiery hue, sometime milke-white it is, The necke bound in, and tayle most thinne and strong, Whose fore-head hath two hornes aboue cold eyes: Which in theyr light resemble shining beames, Like Bees full wilde, or Locusts spoylers bredde, But yet to looke vpon all horrible in seames, For why? the cruell Bore they shew in head. They keepe in Rocks, and stony places of the houses and earth, making theyr deunes winding and hanging, according to these verses; Rimosas colit illa Petras, sibique aspera recta, Et modice pendens facit, inflexumque cubile. In English thus; The chincks of Rocks and passages in stone They dwell, wherein their lodgings bare, A little hanging made for euery one, And bending too, theyr sleepie harbours are. It is said that Canobus the Gouernour of Menelaus, chaunced to fall vpon this Serpent, in reuenge whereof Helen his charge, the wife of Menelaus broke his backe-bone, and that euer since that time they creepe lamely, and as it were without loynes; which fable is ex∣cellentlie thus described by Nicander: Quondam animosa Helene cigni Iovis inclyta proles Euersa rediens Troia (nisi vana vetustas) Huic indignata est generi Pharias, vt ad oras Venit, & aduersi declinans flamina venti, Fluctiuagam statuit iuxta Nili ostia classem. Namque vbi nauclerus sefessum fortè Canobus Sterneret, et bibulisfusus dormiret arenis: Laesa venenosos Haemorrhois impulitictus, Illatamque tulit letali dente quietem: Protinus ouipera cernens id filia Led Oppressae medium serpenti feruida dorsum Infregit, tritaeque excussit vinculae spinae, Quae fragili illius sic dempta è corpore fugit, Et graciles Haemorrhoi, obliqui{que} Cerastae Ex hoc clauda trahunt iam soli tempore membra. Which may be englished thus; Once noble Helen, Ioues child by Swan-like shape, Returning backe from Troy, destroyed by Graecian warre, (If that our Auncients doe not with fables vs be-clappe) This race was enuyed by Pharias anger farre. When to his shores for safety they did come, Declyning rage of blustering windy Seas, Water-byding-Nauy at Nilus mouth gan runne, Where Canobus all tyred faynted for some ease: For there this Pilot, or Maister of the Fleete, Did hast from boate to sleepe in drery sand, Where he did feele the teeth of Hemorrhe deepe, Wounding his body with poyson, deaths owne hand. But when egge-breeding Ledaes wench espyed This harme, she prest the Serpents backe with stroke, Whereby the bands thereof were all vntyed, Which in iust wrath for iust reuenge she broke. So euer-since, out of this Serpents frame And body they are taken, which is the cause That Cerasts and leane Haemorrhs are euer lame, Drawing their parts on earth by natures lawes. They which are stunge with there Haemorrhs, do suffer very intollerable torments, for out of the wound continually floweth blood, and the excrements also that commeth out of the belly are bloody, or sometimes little roules of blood in steed of excrements. The colour of the place bitten is black, or of a dead bloody colour, out of which nothing flow∣eth at the beginning but a certaine watery humour, then followeth paine in the stomack, and difficultie of breathing. Lastly, the powers of the body are broken, & opened, so that out of the mouth, gumbs, eares, eyes, fingers-ends, nayles of the feete, and priuie parts, continually issueth blood, vntill a crampe also come, & then followeth death, as we reade in Lucan of one Tellus a young noble man, slaine by this Serpent, described as followeth. Impressit dentes Haemorrhois aspera Tullo Magnanimo iuveni, miratori{que} Catonis: Vt{que} solet pariter totis se effundere signis Coricij pressura croci: sic omnia membra Emisêre simul rutilum pro sanguine virus. Sanguis erant lachrimae: quaecunque for amina novit Humor, ab ijs largus manat cruor, or a redundant, Et patulaenares, sudor rubet, omnia plenis Membra fluunt venis: totum est pro vulnere corpus. In English thus; The Haemorrhe fierce, in noble Tullus fastened teeth That valiant youth, great Catoes scholler deere: And as when Saffron by Corycians skeeth Is prest, and in his colour on them all appeare: So all his parts sent forth a poyson redde In steed of blood: Nay all in blood went round. Blood was his teares, all passages of it were spedde, For out of mouth and eares did blood abound. Blood was his sweat, each part his veyne out-bleedes, And all the body blood that one wound feedes. The cure of this Serpent, in the opinion of the Auncients, was thought impossible, as writeth Dioscorides, and thereof they complaine very much, vsing onely common reme∣dies, as scarification, vstions, sharpe meates, and such thinges as are already remembered in the cure of the Dipsas. But besides these they vse Vine-leaues, first brused and then sod with Hony: they take also the head of this Serpent and burne it to powder, and so drinke it, or els Garlicke with oyle of Flower-deluce, they giue them also to eate Reisins of the Sunne. And besides, they resist the eruption of the blood, with plaisters layde to the place bitten, made of Vine-leaues and hony, or the leaues of Purslaine and Barley-meale. But before theyr vrine turne bloody, let them eate much Garlick stamped, & mixed with oyle to cause them to vomit, and drinke wine delayed with water, then let the wound be washed with cold water, and the bladder continually fomented with hot Spunges. Some doe make the cure of it like the cure of the Viper, and they prescribe them to eate hard∣egges with Salt-fish, and besides, the seed of Radish, the iuyce of Poppy, with the rootes of Lilly, also Daffadill and Rew, Trefolie, Cassia, Oponax, & Cinamon in potion: and to conclude, the flowers and buds of the bush are very profitable against the byting of the Haemorrhe, and so I end the history of this Serpent. OF THE HORNED SERPENT. T His Serpent because of his hornes (although it be a kinde of Vi∣per) is called in Greeke Kerastes, and from thence commeth the Latine word Cerastes, and the Arabian, Cerust, and Cerustes. It is called also in Latine Ceristalis, Cristalis, Sirtalis, and Tristalis. All which are corrupted wordes, deriued from Cerastes, or else from one another, and therefore I thinke it not fit to stand vpon them. The Hebrewes call it Schephiphon, the Italians Cerastes, the Germans Engehurnte schlang, the French Vn Ceraste, vn ser∣pent cornu, that is, a horned Serpent; and therefore I haue so called it in English, imita∣ting herein both the French and Germans. I will not stand about the difference of Authors, whether this Serpent be to be refer∣red to the Aspes or to the Vipers, for it is not a poynt materiall, and therefore I will pro∣ceede to the description of his nature, that by his whole history, the Reader may choose whether he wil account him a subordinate kind vnto others, or els a principall of himselfe. It is an Affrican Serpent, bredde in the Lybian sandie-seas, places not inhabited by men, for the huge mountaines of sands are so often mooued by the windes, that it is not onelie impossible for men to dwell there, but also very dangerous & perrillous to trauell through them, for that many times whole troopes of men and cattell, are in an instant ouerwhel∣med and buried in those sands. And this is a wonderfull worke of God, that those places which are least habitable for man, are most of all anoyed with the most dangerous byting Serpents. It is also said, that once these Horned-serpents departed out of Lybia into Egppt, where they depopulated all the Country. Their habitation is neere the high-waies, in the sands, and vnder Cart-wheeles: and when they goe, they make both a sound with their motion, and also a furrow in the earth, according to the saying of Nicander. Ex ijs alter echis velocibus obuia spinis, Recto terga tibi prolixus tramite ducit, Sed medio diffusius hic cerastes se corpore voluit: Curuum errans per iter, resonantibus aspera squamis. Qualiter aequoreo longissima gurgite nauis, Quam violentus agit nunc huc, nunc Aphricus illuc, Pellitur, et laterum gemebunda fragore suorum Extra sulcandas sinuose fluctuat vndas. Which may be englished thus; Of these the Viper with swift bones thee meetes, Trayling her backe in path direct and straite, The Cerast more diffused in way thee greets With crooked turning, on scales make sounds full great: Like as a ship tossed by the Westerne wind, Sounds a far off, mooued now here, now there, So that by noyse of shrilling sides we find His furrowes turned in Seas and water sphere. The quantity of this horned-serpent is not great, it exceedeth not two cubits in lengthe the colour of the body is branded like sande, yet mingled with another pale white colour, as is to be seene in a Hares skinne. Vpon the head there are two Hornes, and sometimes 4. for which occasion it hath receiued the name Cerastes, & with these hornes they deceiue Birdes; for when they are an hungry, they couer their bodies in Sand, and onely leaue their hornes vncouered to moue aboue the earth, which when the Birds see, taking them to be Wormes, they light vpon them, and so are deuoured by the Serpent. The teeth of this Serpent are like the teeth of a Viper, & they stand equall and not crooked▪ In stead of a back-bone they haue a gristle throughout their body, which maketh them more flexible & apt to bend euery way: for indeed they are more flexible then any other serpent. They haue certaine red strakes crosse theyr backe like a Crocodile of the earth, and the skins of such as are bred in Aegypt are very soft, stretching like a Cheuerell-gloue, both in length & breadth, as it did appeare by a certaine skinne taken off from one being dead: for beeing stuffed with Hay, it shewed much greater then it was being aliue, but in other Countries the skins are not so. I haue heard this History of three of these Serpents brought out of Turky, and giuen to a Noble man of Venice aliue, who preserued them aliue in a great glasse, (made of pur∣pose) vpon sand, in that glasse nere the fire: The description as it here followeth, was takē by Iohn Faltoner, an English traueller, saying. They were three in number, whereof one was thrice so bigge as the other two, and that was a Female, and she was said to be theyr Mother: she had layd at that time in the sandes foure or fiue egges, about the bignesse of Pigeons egges. She was in length three foote, but in breadth or quantity almost so big as a mans Arme: her head was flat, and broad as two fingers, the apple of the eye blacke all the other part being white. Out of her eye-lids grew two hornes, but they were short ones, and those were truely Hornes, and not flesh. The necke compared with the body was very long and small, all the vpper part of the skinne was couered with scales, of ash-colour, and yet mixed vvith blacke. The tayle is as it were brown whē it was stretched out. And this was the descripti∣on of the old one: the other two being like to her in all things, except in their hornes, for being small, they were not yet growne. Generally, all these horned Serpents haue hard dry scales vpon their belly, wherewithall they make a noyse when they go themselues, & it is thus described by Nicander; Nunc potes actutum insidiatoremque Cerasten Noscere, vipereum veluti genus, huic quia dispar Non is corpus habet, sed quatuor aut duo profert Cornua, cum mutila videatur Vipera fronte. Squalidus albenti color est. In English thus: You well may know the treacher Cerasts noyse, A Viper-kind, whose bodies much agree, Yet these foure hornes and brandy colour, poyse, Where Viper none, but forehead plaine we see. There is no Serpent except the Viper that can so long indure thirst, as this horned-ser∣pent, for they seldome or neuer drinke; and therefore I thinke they are of a Vipers kind: for besides this also it is obserued, that their young ones do come in and out of their bel∣lies as Vipers doe: The liue in hatred with all kind of Serpents, and especially with Spi∣ders. The Hawes of Aegypt also doe destroy Horned-serpents and Scorpions: but about Thebes in Aegypt there are certain sacred Snakes (as they are tearmed) which haue hornes on their head, and these are harmelesse vnto men and beasts, otherwise all these Serpents are virulent and violent against all creatures, especially men: yet there bee certaine men in Libia called Psylli, which are in a league, or rather in a naturall concord with Horned-Serpents. For if they bee bitten by them at any time, they receiue no hurt at all: and be∣sides, if they bee brought vnto any man that is bitten with one of these Serpents, before the poyson be spred all ouer his body, they help and cure him, for if they finde him but lightly hurt, they onely spet vpon the wound, and so mittigate the paine, but if they find him more deeply hurt, then they take much water within their teeth, and first wash their owne mouth with it, then spet out the water into a pot, and make the sicke man to drinke it vp. Lastly, if the poyson bee yet strong, they lay their naked bodies vppon the naked poysoned body, and so breake the force of the poyson. And this is thus described by the Poet, saying, Audiui Lybivos Psyllos, quos aspera Syrtis Serpentumque ferax patria alit populos; Non ictu inflictum diro, morsuúe venenum Laedere: quin lasis ferre & opem reliquis, Non viradicum proprio sed corpore iuncto. That is to say, The Lybian Psylli, which Serpent-breeding Syrtes dwell As I haue heard, do cure poyson stings and bytes, Nor hurt themselues, but it in other quell: By no rootes force, but ioyning bodies quites. When a Horned-Serpent hath bitten a man or beast, first about the wound there grow∣eth hardnesse, and then pustules. Lastly, blacke, earthy, and pale matter: the genitall member standeth out straight and neuer falleth, he falleth mad, his eyes grow dimme, & his Nerues immanuable, and vppon the head of the wound groweth a scab like the head of a Naile, and continually pricking like the pricking of Needles: And because this Ser∣pent is immoderately dry, therefore the poyson is most pernitious: for if it be not holpen within nine daies, the patient cannot escape death. The cure must be first by cutting away the flesh vnto the bone, where the wound is, or else the whole member if it can bee, then lay vpon the wound Goats dung sodde with Vineger or Garlike, and Vineger or Barley Meale, or the iuyce of Cedar, Rue, or Nep, with Salt and Honny, or Pitch, and Barley meale, and such like thinges outwardly: inwardly Daffadill and Rew in drinke, Raddish∣seede, Indian Cummen, with wine and Castoreum: and also Calamint, and euery thing that procureth vomit. And thus much for the description of the Horned-Serpent. OF THE HYAENA. T Here be some that make question whether there be any such Serpent as this or no, for it is not very like that there is any such, and that this Hyaena is the selfe same which is described to bee a Foure-footed-Beast, for that which is said of that, is likewise attributed to this: namely, that it changeth sex, being one yeare a Male, another yeere a female, and that the couples which seeme to bee married together, do by continuall entercourse, bring forth their young ones, so that the Male this yeare is the female next yeare, & the female this yeare is the Male next yeare. And this is all that is said of this Serpent. OF THE HYDRA, SVPPOSED TO be killed by Hercules. T HE Poets do faine, that neare to the Fountaine Amymo∣na, there grew a Plantaine, vnder which was bred a Hydra which had seeuen heads: whereof one of these heads vvas said to bee immortall: with this Hydra Hercules did fight, for there was in that immortall head such a poyson as vvas vncurable; wherewithall Hercules moystened the head of his Darts after he had killed it: & they say, that while Her∣cules strucke offone of these heads, there euer arose two or three more in the roome thereof, vntill the number of fifty, or as some say fourescore and ten heads were strucken off: and because this was done in the fenne of Lerna, therefore there grew a Prouerb of Lerna malorum, to signifie a multitude of vnresistable euils. And some ignorant men of late daies at Venice, did picture this Hydra with wonderfull Art, and set it forth to the people to be seene, as though it had beene a true carkase, with this inscription. In the yeare of Christes incarnation, 550. about the Month of Ianua∣ry, this monstrous Serpent was brought out of Turky to Venice, & afterwards giuen to the French king▪ It was esteemed to be worth 6000. duckats. These mōsters signifie the muta∣tion or change of worldly affaires, but (I trust said the Author of the inscription, who see∣med to be a German) the whole Christian world is so afflicted, that there is no more euill that can happen to the Christian VVorld, except destruction; and therefore I hope that these mōsters do not foreshew any euil to the christians. Therfore seeing the Turkish em∣pire is grown to that height, in which estate all other former kingdomes fell, I may deuine & Prophecy, that the danger threatned hereby, belongeth to the Turkes, and not vnto vs, in whose gouerment this Monster was found to be bred: and the hinder part of his head seemeth to resemble a Turkes Cap. Thus farre this inscribing Deuiner. But this fellovv ought first of all to haue enquired about the truth of this Picture, whether it were sincere or counterfeit, before he had giuen his iudgment vpon it, for that there shold be such a ser∣pent with seauen heads, I thinke it vnpossible, and no more to bee beleeued and credited then that Castor and Pollux were conceiued in an Egge, or that Pluto is the GOD of Hell; or that Armed menne were created out of Dragons teeth, or that Vulcan made Achilles armour; or that Venus was wounded by Diomedes; or that Vlisses was caryed in Bottles, so true I thinke is the shape of this Monster: for the head, eares, tongue, Nose, and Face, of this Monster, doe altogether degenerate from all kindes of Serpents, which is not vsuall in Monsters, but the fore-parts doe at most times resem∣ble the kind to which it belongeth; and therefore if it had not been an vnskilfull Painters deuice, he might haue framed it in a better fashion, and more credible to the world. But let it be as it is, how doth he know that this euill doth more belong to the Turkes then to the Christians? For shall we be so blind and flatter our selues so far, as not to acknowledge our sinnes, but to lay all the tokens of Iudgement vpon our aduersaries? But if there ap∣peared in vs any repentance or amendement of those faults, for which God hath suffered in his Iustice, that improus Tyrant and tyranicall gouernment to preuaile against Chri∣stians, then we might thinke that GOD would looke mercifully vppon vs, and auert his wrath from vs vppon our enemies. But with sorrow and griefe bee it spoken, for all the Kings and people of Christendome, doe directly go forward without stumbling in those vile courses, and odious crying sinnes, for which God hath set vp the Turkes against for∣mer ages, and therefore we haue no cause to hope that euer this rod shall bee cast into the fire, vntill the chastisement of God Children haue procured their amendment, and if no amendment, then all the powers of Heauen (the blessed Trinity excepted) cannot keepe Christendome from ruine and destruction, which God of his infinite mercy turne away from vs. To turne againe to the story of the Hydra, I haue also heard that in Venice in the Dukes treasury, among the rare Monumentes of that Citty, there is preserued a Serpent with seauen heads, which if it be true, it is the more probable that there is a Hydra, and then the Poets were not altogether deceiued, that say, Hercules killed such an one. This Hydra which Hercules slewe, they say was ingendered betwixt Echidna and Typhaon, and nourished by Iuno in Lerna, in hatred of Hercules: and they say further, that when hee came to kill it, there came a Crabbe or Cancer to helpe the Hydra against Hercules, who instantly called vpon Iolaus for helpe, and so Iolaus slew the Crabbe, and Hercules the Hy∣dra. Phaaephatus maketh the story of Hercules by killing the Hydra, to bee a meere allegory, saying that the Hydra was a Castle kept by fifty men, the King whereof was called Ler∣nus, who was assisted by a Noble man (called Cancer) against the assaults of Hercules, and that Hercules by the help of Iolaus, King of the Thebanes, ouercame that King and Castle. Other say, that Lerna and Hidra signifie the two kindes of Enuye, distinguished by In∣uidia, and Inuidentia, in himselfe, which arise out of the Monstrous filthy fenne of humane corruption, like a monstrous hydeous Dragon, with whom he stroue, and as he strucke off one head, or entation, so two or three other con∣tinually arose in the roome thereof. And thus much for the Hydra, whether it be true or Fa∣bulous. OF INNOCENT SERPENTS. I Doe read of two kinds of Innocent Serpents, one call Lybies, be∣cause they are onely in Affricke, and neuer do hurt vnto men, and therefore Nicander was deceiued, which maketh this kind of ser∣pent to be the same with the Amodit, whose sting or teeth are ve∣ry mortall and deadly. There be also other kindes of harmelesse Serpents, as that called Molurus, Mustaca, and Mylacris, which is said to go vpon the taile, and it hath no notable propertie, except that one thing which giueth it the name, for Molurus is deriued from Molis Ouron, that is hardly making water. There be also Domesticall innocent Serpents, Myagrus, Orophia, and Spathiurus, which whether they be one kind or many, I will not stand vppon, for they are all tearmed by the Germans, Hussunck, and Husschlang, that is a House-Snake. They liue by hunting of Mice and Weasels, and vpon their heads they haue two little eares, like to the eares of a Mouse, and because they be as blacke as coales, The Italians call them Serpe-Nero, and Carbon, and garobonazzo, and the French-men Anguille-de Hay, that is, a Snake of hed∣ges. There be some that nourish them in Glasses with branne, and when they are at liber∣ty they liue in Dunghils also, wherein they breede sometimes, they haue beene seene to sucke a Cow, for then they twist their tailes about the Cowes Legges. Mathiolus writeth, that the flesh of this Snake when the head, taile, Intrals, fat, and Gall are cut off and cast away, to be a speciall remedy against the French-poxe. There are also other kinds of Innocent Serpents, as that called Parea, and in Italy Ba∣ on, and Pagerina, which are brought out of the East, where these are bred. There be no other harmefull Serpents in that Countrey. They are of a yellow colour like Gold, and about four spannes long: vpon either side they haue two lines or strakes, which beginne about a hand breadth from their necke, and end at their taile. They are without poyson, as may appeare by the report of Gesner, for hee did see a man holde the head aliue in his And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken of Innocent Serpents. OF THE LIZARD. A Lthough there be many kindes of Lyzards, yet in this place I will first intreate of the vulgar Lyzard, called in the Hae∣brew Letaah, Lanigermusha, Lyserda, Carbo, Pelipah, and Eg∣lose. The Chaldaeans Haltetha, and Humeta. The Arabians Ataia, Alhathaie, or Alhadaie, Hardun, Arab, Samabras, Sa∣ambras. The Graecians in ancient time Sauros, and Saura, & vulgarly at this day Kolisaura. The Italians in some places Liguro, Leguro, Lucerta, and Lucertula: about Trent Racani, and Ramarri, and yet Romarro is also vsed for a Toad. The Spaniards Lagárto, Lacerta, Lagartisa, and Lagardixa. The French Lisarde. The Germans Adax: and when they distinguish the Male from the Fe∣male, they expresse the Male Ein Egochs, and the Female Egles. In Hessia Lydetstch: In Flanders & Illiria Gesscierka, and Gesstier. The Latines Lacertus, and Lacerta, because it hath armes and shoulders like a man, and for this cause also the Salamander, the Stelli∣on, the Crocodile, and Scorpions are also called sometimes Lacerti Lyzards. And thus much shall suffice for the name. The vulgar Lizard is described on this sort: the skinne is hard and full of scales, accor∣ding to this saying of Virgill: Absint & picti squalentia terga Lacerti. In English thus; —Those put away And painted Lizards with their scalie backs. The colour of it is pale, and distinguished with certain rusty spots, as Pliny writeth, with long strakes or lines to the taile; but generally they are of many colours, but the greene with the white belly liuing in bushes hedges, & is the most beautifull, and most respected; and of this we shall peculiarly intreat hereafter. There haue beene some Lizards taken in the beginning of September, whose colour was like Brasse, yet darke and dusky, and their belly partly white, and partly of an earthy colour, but vpon either side they had cer∣taine little prickes or spottes like printed Starres: their length was not past foure fingers, their eyes looked backward, and the holes and passages of their ares were round, the fin∣gers of their feet were very small, beeing fiue in number, both before and behinde, vvith small nailes, and behind that was the longest which standeth in the place of a mans fore∣finger, and one of them standeth different from the other, as the Thumbe doth vppon a mans hand, but on the forefeete all of them stand equall, not one behinde or before ano∣ther. These little Lizards doe differ from the Stellions in this; that they haue bloud in their veines, and they are couered with a hard skinne, wincking with the vpper eye-lid. All manner of Lizards haue a clouen tongue, and the toppe thereof is somewhat hairy, or at the leastwise deuided like the fashion and figure of haire. Their teeth are also as small as haire, beeing blacke, and very sharpe, and it seemeth also they are very weake, because when they bite, they leaue them in the wound. Their lungs are small and dry, yet apt to swell & receiue wind by inflamation: their belly is vniforme and simple, their intrals, long their Melt round & small, & their stones cleaue inwardly to their loynes: their taile is like the taile of a Serpent: & it is the opinion of Aristotle, that the same being cut off, groweth againe. The reason whereof is giuen by Cardan, because imperfect creatures are full of moystnesse; and therefore the parts cut off do easily grow againe. And Pliny reporteth, that in his daies he saw Lizards with double tailes: wherunto Americus Vespucius agreeth, for he saith, that he saw in a certaine Island not farre from Lysbon, a Lizard with a double taile. They haue foure feet, two behind and two before, and the former feete bend back∣ward, and the hinder feete forward, like to the knees of a man. Now concerning the different kinds of Lizards, I must speake as breefely as I can in this place, wherein I shall comprehend both the Countries wherein they bre de, and al∣so their seuerall kinds, with some other accidents necessary to be knowne. There is a kind of Lizard called Guarell, or Vrell, and Alguarill, with the dung whereof the Physitions do uicenna. cure little pimples and spots in the face, and yet Bellunensis maketh a question, whether this be to be referred to the Lizards or not, because Lizards are not found but in the coū∣trey, out of Citties, and these are found euery where. There is also another kind of Lizard called Lacertus Martensis, which being s ted with the head and purple Wooll, Oyle of Cedar, and the powder of burnt Paper, so put into a linnen-cloth, and rubbed vpon a bald place, doe cause the haire that is falne off to come againe. There be other Lyzards, called by the Graecians Arurae, and by the Latines La∣certae Marcellus Pissininae, which continually abide in greene corne; these burned to powder, and the same mixed with the best wine and hony, doe cure blind eyes by an oyntment. The picture of the Lyzard with the belly vpward. Albertus writeth, that a friend of his worthy of credit, did tell him that he had seene in Prouence a part of Fraunce, and also in Spaine, Lyzards as bigge as a mans legge is thick, but not very long, and these did inhabit hollow places of the earth, and that many times when they perceiued a man or a beast passe by them, they would suddainly leape vppe to his face, & at one blow pull off his cheek. The like also is reported of Piemont in France, where there be Lyzards as great as little puppies, and that the people of the Country, do seeke after their dunge or excrements, for the sweetnes and other vertues thereof. In Lybia there are Lyzards two cubits long, and in one of the Fortunate-Ilands called S rabe. Solinus. Capraria, there are also exceeding great Lyzards. In the Iland of Dioscorides, neere to Arabia the lesser, there are very great Lyzards, the flesh whereof the people eate, and the satte they seeth, and vse in steede of oyle: these are two cubits long, and I know not whether they be the same which the Affricans call Dubh, and liue in the desarts of Lybia. They drinke nothing at all, for water is present death vn∣to them, so that a man would thinke that this Serpent were made all of fire, because it is so presently destroyed with water. Beeing killed, there commeth no blood out of it, nei∣ther hath it any poyson but in the head & tayle. This the people hunt after to eate, for the tast of the flesh, is like the tast of Frogges flesh, and when it is in the hole or denne, it is ve∣ry hardly drawne forth, except with spades and Mattocks, whereby the passages are ope∣ned, and beeing abroad it is swift of foote. The Lyzards of India, especially about the Mountaine Nisa, are 24. foote in length, Aelianus. Polycletus their colour variable, for their skin seemeth to be flourished with certaine pictures, soft & tender to be handled. I haue heard that there hangeth a Lyzard in the Kinges house at Paris, whose body is as thicke as a mans body, and his length or stature little lesse; it is said it was taken in a prison or common Gaole, beeing found sucking the legges of prisoners: and I doe the rather beleeue this, because I remember such a thing recorded in the Chro∣nicles of Fraunce, and also of another some-what lesser, preserued in the same Cittie, in a Church called Saint Anthonies. And to the intent that this may seeme no strange nor in∣credible thing, it is reported by Volatteran, that when the King of Portugall had conque∣red certaine Ilands in Ethiopia, in one of them they slew a Lyzard, which had deuoured or swallowed downe a whole infant, so great & wide was the mouth thereof: it was eight cubits long, and for a rare miracle it was hanged vppe at the gate Flumentana in Rome, in the roofe, & dedicated to the virgin Mary. Besides these, there are other kind of Lyzards, as that called Lacerta vermicularis, because it liueth vpon wormes & Spyders, in the nar∣row walls of old buildings. Also a siluer-coloured Lyzard, called Liacome, liuing in dry and sunne-shining places. Another kind called Senabras, and Adare, and Sennekie. Scen is a redde Lyzard, as Siluaticus writeth, but I rather take it to be the Scincke, or Crocodile of the earth, which abound neere the Red-Sea. There is also another kinde of Lyzard called Lacertus Solaris, a Lyzard of the Sunne, to whom Epiphanius compareth certaine Heretickes called Sapmsaei, because they perceiue their eye-sight to bee dimme and dull. They turne themselues fasting in theyr Caues to the East, or Sunne-rysing, whereby they recouer their eye-sight againe. In Sarmatia, a Countrey of the Rutenes, there is a Prouince called Samogithia, where∣in the Lyzards are very thicke, blacke, and great, which the foolish Countrey people do worshippe very familiarly, as the Gods of good fortune, for vvhen any good befalleth them, they intertaine them with plentifull banquets and liberall cheare: but if any harme or mischaunce happen vnto them, then they vvith-dravv that liberality, and intreate them more coursely, and so these dizzardly people thinke to make these Lizards by this meanes, more attentiue and vigilant for theyr welfare and prosperity. In the Prouince of Caraia, Subiect to the Tartars, there are very great Lizards, (or at least, wise Serpents like Lizard) sbred, containing in length ten yards, with an answerable and correspondent compasse and thicknesse. Some of these want their fore-Legges, in place whereof they haue clawes like the clavves of a Lyon, or talants of a Falcon. Their head is great, and their eyes like two great Loaues. Their mouth and the opening thereof so wide, as it may swallow downe a whole man armed, with great, long, and sharp teeth, so as neuer any man or other creature durst without terror looke vpon that Serpent. Wherefore they haue inuented this art or way to take them. The Serpent vseth in the day time to lye in the Caues of the Earth, or else in hollovv plaees of Rockes and Mountaines. In the night time it commeth forth to feede, ranging vp and and down seeking what it may deuour, neither sparing Lyon, Beare, nor Bull, or smaller beast, but eateth all he meeteth with vntill he be satisfied, and so returneth againe to his den. Now for as much as that Countrie is very soft and myery: the great and hea∣uy bulke of this Serpent maketh as it were a Ditch by his weight in the sand or mire, so as where you see the traling of his body, you would thinke there had beene rowled some great vessell full of VVine, because of the round and deepe impression it leaueth in the earth. Now the Hunters which watch to destroy this Beast, doe in the day time fasten sharpe stakes in the earth, in the path and passage of the Serpent, especially neere to his hole or lodging, and these stakes are pointed vvith sharpe Iron, and so couered in the Earth or Sand, whereby it commeth to passe, that when in his wonted manner he commeth forth in the night season to feede, hee vnawares fastneth his breast, or else mortally woundeth his belly vppon one of those sharpe-pointed stakes. Which thing the Hunters lying in waite obseruing, do presently vpon the first noyse with their swords kill him if he be aliue, and so take out his Gall which they sell for a great price, for therewithall the biting of a madde Dogge is cured, and a Woman in trauell tasting but a little of it, is quickely dis∣discharged of her burthen. It is good also against the Emerods and Pyles. Furthermore, the flesh of this Serpent is good to be eaten, and these things are reported by Paulus Vene∣tus, and this story following. As Americus Vesputius sayled in his iourney from the fortunate Islands, hee came vn∣to a Countrey where hee found the people to feede vppon sodde flesh, like the flesh of a Serpent, and afterwardes they found this beast to bee in all thinges like a Serpent vvith∣out wings, for they savv diuers of them aliue, taken and kept by the people to kill at their owne pleasure. The mouthes whereof were fast tyed with ropes, so as they could not o∣pen them to bite either man or beast, and their bodies were tyed by the Legges. The as∣pect of these beastes was fearefull to his company, and the strangers which did behold it, for they tooke them to bee Serpents, beeing in quantity as bigge as Roe-Buckes, ha∣uing long feete and stronge clawes, a speckeled skinne, and a face like a Serpent: from the Nose to the tippe of his taile, all along the backe there grew a bristle, as it were the bristle of a Boare, and yet the saide Nation feedeth vppon them, and because of their similitude with Lizards, I haue thought good to insert their relation among the Lyzards in this place, leauing it to the further iudgement of the Reader, whether they be of this kind or not. In Calechut there are Serpents also, or rather beasts remaining in the fenny places of the Country, whose bodies are all pild without haire like Serpents: also in their mouth, eies, and taile they resemble them, and in their feete Lizards, being as great as Boares, and al∣though they want poyson, yet are their teeth very hurtfull where they fasten them. Like vnto these are certaine others bred in Hispaniola, in an Island called Hyuana, hauing pric∣kles on their backe, and a combe on their head, but without voyce, hauing foure feete, & a taile like Lizards, with very sharpe teeth. They are not much greater then Hares or Co∣nies, yet they liue indifferently in trees, and on the earth, being very patient, and induring famme many daies. Their skinne smooth and speckled like a Serpents, & they haue a crap on the belly from the chin to the breast, like the crap of a Bird. Besides these, there are also some called Bardati, about the bignesse of Conyes, and of a White-ash-colour, yet theyr skinne and taile like a Snakes, and they resemble trapped Horses. They haue foure feet, and with the formost they dig them holes in the earth, our of which they are drawne againe like Conies to be eaten of men, for they haue a pleasant tast. To conclude, wee doe read that in the yeare 1543. there came many winged Ser∣pents and Lizards into Germany, neere Syria, and did bite many mortally: And in the yeare 1551. there were such bred in the bodyes of men and women, as wee haue shew∣ed already in the generall discourse of Serpents, first of all recited in the beginning. In all the nature of Lizards, there is nothing more admirable then that which is re∣ported of them by Aelianus of his owne knowledge. When a certaine man had taken a great fat Lizard, he did put out her eyes with an Instrument of Brasse, and so put her into a new earthen pot, which hadde in it two small holes or passages, bigge inough to take breath at, but too little to creepe out at, and with her moyst earth and a certaine Hearbe, the name wherof he doth not expresse: and furthermore, he tooke an Iron Ring, wherein was set an Engagataes Stone, with the Picture of a Lizard ingrauen vpon it. And besides, vpon the Ring he made 9. seuerall marks, whereof he put out euery day one, vntill at the last hee came at the ninth, and then hee opened the pot againe, and the Lizard did see as perfectly as euer he did before the eyes were put out, whereof Albertus enquiring the reason, could giue none, but hauing read in Isidorus, that when the Lizards grow olde, and their sight dimme or thicke, then they enter into some narrow hole of a Wall, and so set their heads therein, directly looking towards the East or Sunne rysing, and so they recouer their sight againe. Of this Albertus giueth good reason, because he saith, the oc∣casion of their blindnesse commeth from frigidity congealing the humor in their eyes, which is afterward attenuated and dissolued by the helpe and heate of the Sun. The voice of the Lizard is like the voyce of other Serpents, and if it happen that any man by chance doe cut the body of the Lizard asunder, so as one part falleth from another, yet neither part dyeth, but goeth away vppon the two Legges that are left, and liue apart for a little season, and if it happen that they meete againe, they are so firmely and naturally conioy∣ned by the secret operation of nature, as if they had neuer beene seuered, onely the scatre remaineth. They liue in caues of the earth, and in graues, and the greene Lizards in the fields and Gardens, but the yellowish or earthy browne Lizard among hedges and Thornes. They deuoure any thing that comes to their mouth, especially Bees, Emmets, Palmer-wormes, Grassehoppers, Locusts, and such like thinges, and foure months of the yeare they lie in the earth and eate nothing. In the beginning of the yeare about March, they come out againe of their holes, and giue themselues to generation, which they performe by ioyning their bellies together, wreathing their tailes together, & other parts of their bodies afterwards the female bring∣eth forth egges, which she committeth to the earth, neuer sitting vpō them, but forgetteth in what place they were laid (for she hath no memory.) The young ones are conceiued of themselues, by the help of the sun. Some there be which affirme, that the old one deuou∣reth the young ones assoone as they be hatched, except one which she suffereth to liue, & this one is the basest & most dullard, hauing in it least spirit of all the residue; yet notwith∣standing, afterwards it deuoureth both his parents, which thing is prooued false by Alber∣tus, for seeing they want memory to finde out their owne Egges, it is not likely that they haue so much vnderstanding as to discerne their own young ones, nor yet so vnnaturall as to destroy the noblest of their broode, but rather they should imitate the crocodile, which killeth the basest and spareth the best spirits. It is affirmed, that they liue but halfe a yeare or sixe months, but it is also false, for they hide themselues the foure coldest monthes; and therefore it is likely they liue more then sixe, for else what time should they haue for generation. Twice a yeare they change their skinne, that is in the Spring and Autume like other Serpents that haue a soft skinne, and not hard like the Tortoyces. Their place of conception and emission of their Egges is like to Birds: and therefore it is a needlesse question to inquire whether they bring egges foorth of their mouth or not, as some haue foolishly affirmed, but without all warrant of truth or nature. They liue by couples together, and when one of them is taken, the other waxeth mad, and rageth vppon him that tooke it, whether it be Male or Female: In the old Testament Lizards, Weasels, and Mice are accounted impure beastes, and therefore forbidden to be eaten, not onely because they liue in Graues and designe in constancy of life, but also Theeues and trecherous persons. They are affraide of euery noyce, they are enemies to Bees, for they liue vpon them; and therefore in ancient time they mixed Meale and iuyce of Mallowes together, and layde the same before the Hiues, to driue away Lizards and Crocodiles. They fight with all kind of Serpents, also they deuour Snailes, and contend with Toades and Scorpions. The Night-Owles and the Spiders doe destroy the little Li∣zards,, for the Spider doth so long wind her thred about the iawes of the Lizard, that hee is not able to open his mouth, & then she fasteneth her stings in her braines. The Storkes are also enemies to Lizards, according to this saying of the Poet; —Serpente ciconia pullos Nutrit & inuent a per deuia rura lacerta. In english thus; With Lizards young and Serpents breede, The Storke seeketh her young ones to feed. Notwithstanding, that by the law of GOD, men were forbidden to eate the Lizard, yet the Troglodytes Ethiopians did eate Serpents and Lizards, and the Amazons did eate Lizards and Tortoyces, for indeede those Women did vse a very thinne and slender di∣et; and therefore Caelius doth probably coniecture, that they were called Amazons, be∣cause Mazis carebant, that is, they wanted all manner of delicate fare. Wee haue also shewed already, that the Inhabitants of Dioscorides Isle, do eate the flesh of Lizards, and the fat after it is boyled, they vse instead of Oyle. Concerning the venome or poyson of Lizards, I haue not much to say, because there is not much thereof written: yet they are to be reproued which deny they haue any poy∣son at all, for it is manifest, that the flesh of Lizards eaten, (I meane of such Lizards as are in Italy,) do cause an inflamation and apostemation, the heare of the head-ach, and blindnesse of the eyes. And the Egges of Lizards doc kill speedily, except there come a remedy from Faulkens dung and pure VVine. Also when the Lizard byteth, he leaueth his teeth in the place, which continually aketh, vntill the teeth bee taken out: the cure of which wound is first to suck the place, then to put into it cold water, & afterward to make a plaister of Oyle and Ashes, and apply the same therevnto. And thus much for the natu∣rall description of the Lizard. The Medicines arising out of the Lizard, are the same which are in the Crocodile, and the flesh thereof is very hot: wherefore it hath vertue to make fat, for if the fatte of a Lizard bee mixed vvith Wheate Meale, Halinitre, and Cummen, it maketh Hennes ve∣ry fat, and they that eate them much fatter: for Cardan saith, that their bellies will breake vvith fatnesse, and the same giuen vnto Hawkes, maketh them to chaunge theyr Fe∣thers. Marcellus A Lizard dissected, or the head thereof being very well beaten vvith Salt, draweth out yton poyntes of Nayles, and splentes out of the flesh or body of man, if it bee well applyed thereunto, and it is also said, that if it bee mingled with Oyle, it causeth hayre to to grow againe vpon the head of a man, where an Vlcer made it fall off. Likewise a Ly∣zard cut asunder hot, and so applyed, cureth the stinging of Scorpions, and taketh away Wennes. In Ancient time with a field-Lizard dryed and cut asunder, and so bruzed in peeces, they did draw out teeth without paine, and with one of these sod and stamped, and ap∣plyed vvith Meale or Frankensence to the forehead, did cure the watering of the eyes. The same burned to powder, and mixed with Creticke Hony by an oyntment, cureth blindnesse. The Oyle of a Lizard put into the eare, helpeth deafenesse, and dryueth out Wormes if there bee any therein. If Children bee annoynted with the bloud fasting, it keepeth them from swellinges in the belly and Legges: also the Liuer and bloud lapped vp in Wooll, draweth out Nailes and Thornes from the flesh, & cureth all kind of frec∣kles, according to this verse of Serenus; Verrucam poterit sanguis curare Lacertae. That is to say; —The bloud of Lizards can, Cure freckles in a man. The vrine and (if there be any at all) helpeth the rupture in Infants. The bones taken out of the Lizards head in the full Moone, doe scarifie the teeth, and the braine is profita∣ble for suffusions: The Liuer laide to the gumbes or to hollow teeth, easeth all the paine in them. The dung purgeth wounds, and also taketh away the whitenesse and itching of the eyes, and so sharpneth the sight, and the same with water, is vsed for a salue. Arnol∣dus doth much commend the dung of Lizards mixed with Meale, the blacke thereof be∣ing cast away, and so dryed in a furnace, and softned againe with water of Niter, and froth of the Sea, afterwards applyed to the eyes in a cloth, is very profitable against all the for∣mer euils. And thus much shall suffice to haue spoken of the first and vulgar kinde of Ly∣zard: for killing of whom Apollo was in ancient time called Sauroctonos. OF THE GREENE LIZARD. T He greater Lizard which is called Lacerta Viridis, the greene Lizard, by the Graecians Chlorosaura, by the Itali∣ans Gez, and by the Germans Gruner Heydox; is the same which is called Ophiomachus, because it fighteth with Ser∣pents in the defence of man. They are of colour greene, from whence they are named, and yet sometimes in the Summer they are also found pale. They are twice so bigge as the former Lizard, and come not neare houses, but keep in Meddowes and greene fieldes. They onely abound in Italy, and it is a beast very louing and friendly vnto man, and an enemy to all other Serpentes. For if at any time they see a man, they instantly gather about him, and laying their heads at the one side, with great admiration behold his face: and if it chance a man doe spet, they licke vp the spettle ioyfully, and it hath beene seene that they haue done the like to the vrine of chyl∣dren, and they are also handled of children without danger, gently licking moysture from their mouthes. And if at any time three or foure of them be taken, and so sette together to fight, it is a wonder to see how eagerly they wound one another, and yet neuer set vppon the man that put them together. If one walke in the fieldes by hollow wayes, bushes, and greene places, hee shall heare a noyse, and see a motion as if Serpents were about him, but when hee looketh earnestly vppon them, they are Lyzards wagging their heads, and beholding his person; and so if he goe forward they follow him, if he stand still they play about him. One day (as Eras∣mus writeth) there was a Lyzard seene to fight with a Serpent in the mouth of his owne Caue, and whilst certaine men beheld the same, the Lyzard receiued a wound vppon her cheeke by the Serpent, who of greene, made it all redde, and had almost torne it all off, and so hid herselfe againe in her denne. The poore Lizard came running vnto the behol∣ders, and shewed he bloodie side, as it were desiring helpe and commizeration, standing still when they stood still, and following when they went forward, so that it acknowled∣ged the soueraigntie of man, appealing vnto him as the chiefe Iustice, against all his ene∣mies and oppressours. It is reported by the Italians, that many times while men fall asleepe in the fieldes, ser∣pents come creeping vnto them, and finding their mouthes open, doe slyde downe into their stomacks: Wherfore, when the Lizard seeth a Serpent comming toward a man so sleeping, she waketh him, by gently scratching his hands and face, whereby hee escapeth death and deadly poyson. The vse of these Greene-Lizards, is by their skinne and gall to keepe apples from rot∣ting, and also to driue away Catterpillers, by hanging vp the skinne on the tops of trees, and by touching the apples with the said gall: also when the head, feete or intralls are ta∣ken Palladius. Pliny. away, the flesh of the Greene-Lyzard, is giuen in meate to one that hath the Sciatica, and thus much for the naturall vses of the Greene-Lyzard. The remedies arising out of this Lyzard, are briefely these: first it is vsed to be giuen to Hawkes, and to be eaten in small peeces, prouided so as it be not touched vvith theyr tallants, for it will hurt their feete, & draw their clawes together; also they seeth it in wa∣ter, then beate it in a morter. Lastly, when they haue powred warme water vppon it, they let the Hawke wash her feete in it, and so it causeth her to cast her old feathers and coate, and bringeth a new in the roome thereof. This Lyzard eaten with sauces to take avvay the loathing thereof, is good for the Falling-euill: and beeing sod in three pynts of vvine, vntill it be but one cup-full, and thereof taken euery day a spoonefull, is good for them that haue a disease in the lunges. It is also profitable for thē that haue paine in the loynes. Marcellus And there are many wayes to prepare it for the eyes, which I will not stand to relate in this place, because they are superstitious, and therefore likely to doe more harme then good to the English Reader. There is an oyle made of Lyzards, which is very precious, and therfore I will describe it as I find it in Brasauolus. Take seauen greene Lyzards, and strangle them in two pound of common oyle, therein let them soke three dayes, and then take them out, & afterwards vse this oyle to annoynt your face euery day, but one little drop at once, and it shall won∣derfully amend the same. The reason hereof seemeth to be taken from the operation of the dunge or excrements, because that hath vertue to make the face white, and to take a∣way the spots. If the vpper part in the pastorne of a horse be broken, put thereinto this oyle with a lit∣tle vineger, then rub the hoofe about there-with, so shall it increase and grow again, & all the paine thereof shall passe away. The making of the medicine is this. Take a newe ear∣then pot, put there-into three pints of oyle, wherein you must drowne your Lyzards, & so seeth them till they are burned away, then take out the bones, and put in soft lyme, halfe a pound, liquid pitch a pint, of Swines-greace two pound, then let them be all sod toge∣ther againe, and afterwards preserued, and vsed vpon the hoofe as need shall require: for it shall fasten and harden the horses hoofe, & there is nothing better for this purpose then this oyle. The ashes of a greene Lizard do reduce skars in the body to their owne colour. The bones of a Greene-Lyzard are good against the falling euill, if they bee prepared on this manner following: put your Greene-Lizard aliue into a vessell full of Salt, and there shut it in safe, so in few daies it vvill consume all the flesh and Intrals from the bones, and so the bones may bee taken and vsed in this case like the hoofe of an Elke, which are very precious for this sicknesse, and no lesse precious are these bones. The bloud dooth cure the beating, bruizinges, and thicke skinnes in the feet of men and beasts, beeing ap∣plyed in flockes of wooll. The eye is superstitiously giuen to be bound to ones arme on a Quartane-Ague, and the eyes pressed out aliue, and so included in golden buttons or Bullets, & carryed about, do also help the paine of the eyes, and in default hereof the bloud taken out of the eyes in a peece of purple wooll, hath the same operation. The hart of a Lizard is also very good against the exulcerations of the Kings euill, if it bee but carryed about in the boosome in some small Siluer vessell. The gall taketh away the hayres vpon the eye-liddes that are vn∣seemely, if it be dryed in the same to the thickesse of Hony; especially in the Dog-daies, & mixed with white-wine, thē being annoynted vpon the place, it neuer suffereth the haires to grow againe. And thus much for the historie of the greene Lizard. OF THE MYLLETT OR Cenchrine. T His Serpent called by the Graecians Cenchros, Cenchrines, Cenchridion, and Cenchrites: is by the Latines called Cen∣chria, Cenchrus, and Milliaris: because it commeth abroad at the time that Myllet-seed flowreth, & is ready to ripe, or else because it hath certaine litle spots vpon it like Myl∣let-seede; and is also of the same colour. It is likewise bar∣barously called Famusus, Aracis, and Faliuisus. The Ger∣mans of all other haue a name for it, for they call Punter-Schlang, and Berg-schlang. Other Nations not knowing it cannot haue any name for it; and therefore I cannot fayne any thereof, except I should lye grosly in the begin∣ning of the History. This Serpent is onely bred in Lemnus & Samothracia, and it is there called a Lyon, eyther because it is of very great quantity and bignesse, or else bycause the scales thereof are spotted and speckled like the Lybian Lyons: or bycause when it Nicander. Gillius. fighteth the tayle is turned vpward like a Lyons tayle, and as a Lion doth. But it is agreed at al hands, that it is called Milliaris, a Millet, because in the spots of his skinne and colour, Lucan. it resembleth a Millet-seede, which caused the Poet to write on this manner; Pluribus ille notis variatam tingitur aluum, Quàm paruis tinctus maculis Thebanus Ophites. In english thus; With many notes and spots, his belly is bodyed Like Thebane herbe, Ophtes sightly tryed. But not onely his belly, for his backe and whole skinne is of the same fashion and co∣lour. The length of this Serpent is about two cubits, and the thicke body is attenuated to∣ward the end, being sharpe at the taile. The colour is dusky and darke like the Millet, and it is then most irefull and full of wrath or courage, when this Herbe or seed is at the high∣est. The pace of this Serpent is not winding or trauailing, but straight, and directed without bending to and fro: and therefore saith Lucan: Et semper recto lapsurus limite Cenchris: That is, And the Millet alway standing in a straight and right line, and for this cause when a man flyeth away from it, he must not runne directly forward, but wind too and fro, crooking like an indenture, for by reason thereof this Serpents large body can∣not so easily and with the like speede turne to followe and pursue as it can directly for∣ward. It is a very dangerous Serpent to meete withall, and therefore not onely the valiantest man, but also the strongest beast is, and ought iustly to be afraide thereof, for his treache∣rous deceits and strength of body; for when it hath gotten the prey or booty, he beclas∣peth it with his taile, and giueth it fearefull blowes, in the meane time fasteneth his iawes or chaps to the man or beast, and sucketh out all the bloud till it be fully satisfied, and like a Lyon he beateth also his owne sides, setting vp the spires of his body when he assaulteth any aduersary, or taketh any resisting booty. I take this to bee the same called in Scicilia Serpa serena, which is sometimes as long as a man, & as great as the arme about the wrist. In the heate of summer they get themselues to the Mountaine, and there seize vpon cattel of all sortes, as often as anger or wrath enforceth them. The nature of it is very hot, and therefore venomous in the second degree: wherefore when it hath bitten any, there followeth putrifaction and rottennesse, as flesh where wa∣ter lyeth betwixt the skinne, like as in the Dropsie: for besides, the common affections it hath with the Viper, and the byting thereof, alike in all thinges, more deadly and vnresi∣stable euils followeth as drouzy, sleepinesse, and lethargy, paine in the belly, especially the collicke, paine in the Liuer and stomacke, killing within two daies if remedy bee not prouided. The cure is like the cure of the Vipers byting, take the seed of Lettice, and Flax-seede, Sauory beaten or stamped, and wilde Rew, wilde Betony, and Daffadill two drams in three cups of Wine, and drinke the same, immediatly after the drinking heereof, drinke also two drammes of the roote of Centaury, or Hartwort, Nosewort, or Gentian, or Se∣samine. And thus much for a description of this venomous Serpent, one of the greatest plagues, to man and beast in all those Countries or places, wherein it is engendered, and it is not the least part of English happinesse to be freed by God & Nature from such noy∣some virulent and dangerous neighbours. OF THE NEVTE OR WATER Lizard. T His is a little blacke Lyzard, called Wassermoll, and Wasseraddex, that is a Lizard of the Water. In French Tassot, and in Italian Marasandola, which word is deriued frō Marasso a Viper, because the poyson heereof is like the poyson of Vipers, and in Greeke it, may be termed Enudros Sauros. They liue in standing waters or pooles. as in ditches of Townes and Hedges. The colour as we haue saide is blacke, and the length about two fingers, or scarce so long. Vnder the belly it is white, or at least hath, some white small spots on the sides and belly: yet sometimes there are of them that are of a dusty ear∣thy colour, and towards the tayle yellowish. The skinne is strong and hard, so as a knyfe can scarse cut the same, and beeing cut, there issueth out a kind of white mattery liquour, like as is in Salamanders. Beeing taken, it shutteth the mouth so hard as it cannot be easily opened, neither doth it endeuour to byte although it be plucked and prouoked. The tongue is very short and broade, and the teeth so short and small, as they are scarcely visible within the lippes. Vp∣pon the fore-feete it hath foure fingers or clawes, but vppon the hinder feete it hath fiue. The tayle standeth out betwixt the hinder legges in the midle, like the figure of a wheele∣whirle, or rather so contracted, as if many of them were conioyned together, & the voyd or empty places in the coniunctions were filled vp. The tayle beeing cutte off, liveth lon∣ger then the body, as may be seene in euery dayes experience, that is, by motion giueth longer signes and token of lyfe. This Serpent is bredde in fatte waters and soyles, and sometimes in the ruines of olde walls, especially they delight in white muddy waters, hiding themselues vnder stones in the same water if there be any, and if not, then vnder the banks sides of the earth, for they sildome come to the Land. They swymme vnderneath the water, and are rarely seene at the toppe. Theyr egges are not past so bigge as pease, and they are found hanging toge∣ther in clusters. One of these beeing put aliue into a glasse of water, did continually hold his head aboue the water like as Frogges doe, so that therby it may be coniectured it doth often neede respiration, and keepeth not vnder water except in feare, and seeking after meate. There is nothing in nature that so much offendeth it as salt, for so soone as it is layde vppon salt, it endeuoureth with all might & maine to runne away, for it byteth & sting∣eth the little beast aboue measure, so that it dyeth sooner by lying in salt where it cannot auoyde, then it would by suffering many stripes, for beeing beaten it liueth long, & dieth very hardly. It doth not like to be without water, for if you try one of them, and keepe it out of water but one day, it will be found to be much the worse. Beeing mooued to anger, it standeth vpon the hinder legges, and looketh directlie in the face of him that hath stirred it, and so continueth till all the body be white, through a kind of white humour or poyson, that it swelleth outward, to harme (if it were possible) the person that did prouoke it. And by this is their venomous nature obserued to be like the Salamander, although theyr continuall abode in the water, maketh their poyson the more weake. Some say that if in Fraunce a hogge doe eate one of these, hee dyeth thereof, and yet doth more safely eate the Salamander. But in England it is otherwise, for I haue seene a hogge without all harme carry in his mouth a Newte, & afterward eate it. There be some Apothecaries which doe vse this Newte in steed of Scinks or Crocodiles of the earth, but they are deceiued in the vertues and operation, and do also deceiue other, for there is not in it any such wholesome properties, and therefore not to be applyed without singuler danger. And thus much may suffice to be said for this little Serpent, or water-creeping creature. OF THE PELIAS. A Etius making mention of the Elaps and Pelias, two kinds of Ser∣pents, dooth ioyntly speake of them in this sort, saying that the signes of these common and vulgarly knowne, that among the auncient wri∣ters. But th Pehas byting about the wound or bytten place, but yet not very dangerous, and it bringeth ob∣fuscation or dimnesse to the eyes, by reason that as the poyson is v ersally distributed ouer all the body, so it hath most power ouer the tenderest part, namely the eyes. It is cured by a Ptisane with oyle in drinke, and a decoction of such Docks as grow in ditches, and other simple medicines, such as are ap∣plyed to the curing of the yellow-Iaundise. The eyes must be washed with the vrine of a child or young man which neuer knew any woman lly, and this may be applyed eyther simply and alone, or else by bryne and pickle, so also must the head. After that the body is purged, annoynt it with Balsamum and Hony, and take an eye-salue to sharpen a∣gaine and recouer the sight, and for this cause it is very good to weepe, for by euacuation of teares, the venom also will be expelled. But if the eyes grow to paine, then let their eye∣s lue be made more temperate and gentle, to keepe the head and braine from stupefacti∣on. And thus much for the Pelias out of Aetius. OF THE PORPHYRE. T Here is among the Indians a Serpent about the bignes of a spanne or more, which in outward aspect is like to the most beautifull and well coloured pur∣ple, the head hereof is exceeding white, and it wanteth teeth. This Serpent is sought for in the highest Mountaines, for out of him they take the Sardius stone. And although he cannot byte because hee wanteth teeth, yet in his rage when he is persecuted, he casteth foorth a certaine poyson by vomit, which causeth putrefaction where euer it lighteth. But if it be taken aliue and be hanged vp by the tayle, it rendereth a double, one whiles it is aliue, the other when it is dead, both of them blacke in colour, but the first resembleth blacke Amber. And if a man take but so much of the first blacke venome as is the quantitie of a Sesamyne seede, it killeth him presently, making his braines to fall out at his nostrills, but the other worketh neither so speedily, nor after the same manner; for it casteth one into a consumption, and killeth within the compasse of a yere. But I find Aelianus, Volateran, and Textor, to differ from this relation of Ctesias, for they say that the first poyson is like to the drops of Almond-trees, which are congea∣led into a gumme, and the other which commeth from it when hee is dead, is like to thin mattery water. Vnto this Porphyre I may adde the Palmer-serpent, which Strabo wry∣teth doth kill with an vnrecouerable poyson, & it is also of a Scarlet colour, to the loynes or hinder parts. OF THE PRESTER. A Lthough there be many Writers which confound together the Prester and the Dipsas, and make of them but one kind, or Serpent of diuers names, yet seeing on the contrary there be as many or more which doe distinguish or deuide them, and make them two in nature different, one from another, the Dipsas killing by thirst, and the Prester by heate, as theyr very names doe signifie, there∣fore I will also trace the steppes of this latter opinion, as of that which is more probable and consonant to truth. The Graecians call it Praester of Prethein, which signifieth to burne or inflame, & Tre∣mellius and Iunius thinke, that the Serpents called fiery Serpents, which did sting the Isra∣elites in the wildernesse, were Presters. We find in Suidas, Praester for the fire of heauen, or for a cloude of fire carried about with a vehement strong wind, and sometimes lighte∣nings. And it seemeth that this is indeede a fiery kind of Serpent, for he himselfe alwayes goeth about with open mouth, panting and breathing as the Poet writeth; Oraque distendens auidus fumantia Praester Inficit, vt laesus tumida membra gerat. Which may be englished thus; The greedy Presters wide-open foming mouth Infects, and swelleth, making the members by heate vncouth. When this Serpent hath strooke or wounded, there followeth an immeasurable swel∣ling, distration, conuersion of the blood to matter, and corrupt inflamation, taking away freedome or easines of aspiration, likewise dimming the sight, or making the hayre to fall off from the head; at last suffocation as it were by fire, which is thus described by Mantu∣an vpon the person of one Narsidius, saying as followeth. Ecce subit facies leto diuersa fluenti. Narsidium Marsi cultorem torridus agri Percussit prester: illi rubor igneus ora Succendit, tendit{que} cutem pereunte figura, Miscens cuncta tumor toto iam corpore maior. Humanum{que} egressa modum super omnia membra Efflatur Sanies, latè tollente veneno. Ipse late penitus congesto corpore mersus. Nec lorica tenet distenti corporis auctum. Spumeus accenso non sic exundat aheno Vndarum cumulus: nec tanto carbasa Cor Curuauere sinus: tumid s iam non capit artus Informis globus & confuso pondere truncus. Intactum volucrum rostris, epulas{que} daturum Haud impunè feris, non ausi tradere busto, Nondum stante modo crescens fugere cadauer. Which may be englished thus; Loe suddenly a diuers fate the ioyfull current stayed Narsidius, which Marsinus mirror did adore, By burning sting of scorching Prester dead was taye , For fierie colour his face enflam'd, not as before. The first appearing visage fayld, all was out-stretcht, Swelling couer'd all, and bodyes grossenes doubled Surpassing humane bounds and members all ore reacht, Aspyring venom spreads matter blowne in carkasse troubled. The man lyeth drownd within swolne bodies bankes, No girdle can his monstrous growth contayne, Not so are waters swolne with rage of sandy flankes, Nor sayles bend downe to blustering Corus wayne. Now can it not the swelling sinewes keepe in hold, Deformed globe it is, and truncke ore-come with waight, Vntoucht of flying foules, no beakes of young or old Doe him dare eate, or beasts full wilde vpon the body bayte But that they dye. No man to bury in earth or fire Durst once come nigh, nor stand to tooke vpon that haplesse case, For neuer ceased the heat of corps though dead to swell, Therefore afrayde they ranne away with speedie pace. The cure of the poyson of this Serpent, is by the Phisitians found out to be wild Purs∣laine, also the flowers and stalke of the bush, the Beauers stones called Castoreum, drunke with Opponax and Rew in wine, and the little Sprat-fish in dyet. And thus much of this fire-burning venomous Serpent. OF THE RED SERPENT. T His kinde of Serpent beeing a serpent of the Sea, was first of all found out by Pelicerius Bishoppe of Montpelier, as Rondoletus writeth, and although some haue taken the same for the Myrus or Berus of which we haue spoken already, yet is it manifest that they are deceiued, for it hath gills couered with a bony coue∣ring, and also sinnes to swym withall, much greater then those of the Myrus, which wee haue shewed already to bee the male Lamprey. This Serpent therefore for the outward proportion thereof, is like to the Serpents of the Land, but of a redde or purplish colour, beeing full of crooked or oblique lines, descending from the backe to the belly, and deuiding or brea∣king that long line of the backe, which beginneth at the head, and so stretcheth foorth to the tayle. The opening of his mouth is not very great, his teeth are very sharpe and like a saw, his gills like scalie fishes, and vppon the ridge of his backe, all along to the tayle, and vnder-neath vppon the ryne or brimme of his belly, are certaine haires growing, or at the least thinne small things like hayres, the tayle beeing shut vp in one vndeuided finne. Of this kind no doubt are those which Bellonius saith hee sawe by the Lake Abydus, which liue in the waters, and come not to the Land but for sleepe, for hee affirmeth that they are like Land-serpents, but in theyr colour they are redde-spotted, with some small and duskie spots. Gellius th, that among the multitude of Sea-serpents, some are like Congers, and I cannot te ether that of Vergill be of this kind or not, spoken of by Laocoon the Priest of Neptune. Solennes taurum ingentum mactabat ad aras. Ecce autem gemini á Tenedo tranqulla per alta (Horresco referens) immensis orbibus angues Incumbunt pelago: pariter{que} ad littora tendunt. Pectora quorum inter fluctus arecta, iubaeque Sanguineae exuperant vndas: pars caetera pontum Pone legit, sinuatque immensa volumine terga. Fit sonitus spumante saelo, &c. Which may be englished thus; Whilst he a Bull at Altars solemne sacrifice. Behold (I feare to tell) two monstrous snakes appeared, Out of Tenedus shore both calme and deepe did rise One part in Sea, the other on Land was reared: Their breasts and redde-blood manes on waters mounted, But backe and tayle on Land from foaming sea thus sounded. OF THE SALAMANDER. I Will not contrary their opinion which reckon the Salamander among the kinds of Lyzards, but leaue the assertion as somewhat tollerable: yet they are not to be followed, or to be beleeued, which would make it a kinde of Worme, for there is not in that opinion eyther reason or resemblance. What this beast is called among the Hebrewes I cannot learne, and therfore I iudge that the Iewes (like many other Nations) did not acknowledge that there was any such kinde of creature, for ignorance bringeth infi∣delitie in strange things and propositions. The Graecians call it Salamandra, which word or terme is retained almost in all Lan∣guages, especially in the Latine, and therefore Isidore had more boldnesse and wit, then reason, to deriue the Latine Salamandra, quasi valincendram, resisting burning, for bee∣ing a Greeke word, it needeth not a Latine notation. The Arabians call it Saambras, and Samabras, which may wel be thought to be deriued or rather corrupted, from the former word Salamandra, or else from the Hebrew word Semamit, which signifieth a Stellion. Among the Italians and Rhaetians it retaineth the Latine vvord, and sometimes in Rhae∣tia it is called Rosada. In the dukedome of Sauoy, Pluuina. In Fraunce, Sourd, Blande, Al∣brenne, and Arrassade, according to the diuers Prouinces in that Kingdome. In Spayne it is called Salamantegna. In Germany it is called by diuers names, as Maall, and Punter maall, Olm, Moll, and Molch, because of a kinde of liquour in it like milke, as the Greeke word Molge, from àmelgein to sucke milke. Some in the Country of Heluetia doe call it Quattertetesh. And in Albertus it is likewise called Rimatrix. And thus much may suffise for the name thereof. The description of theyr seuerall parts followeth, which as Auicen and other Authours write, is very like a small and vulgar Lyzard, except in their quantitie, which is greater, theyr legges taller, and their tayle longer. They are also thicker and fuller then a Lyzard, hauing a pale white belly, and one part of their skinne exceeding blacke, the other yellow like Verdigreace, both of them very splendent and glistering, with a blacke line going all along their backe, hauing vppon it many little spots like eyes: And from hence it com∣meth to be called a Stellion, or Animal stellatum, a creature full of starres, and the skinne is rough and balde, especially vpon the backe where those spots are, out of which as wri∣teth the Scholiast, issueth a certaine liquour or humour, which quencheth the heate of the fire when it is in the same. This Salamander is also foure-footed like a Lyzard, and all the body ouer it is set with spots of blacke and yellow, yet is the sight of it abhominable and fearefull to man. The Matthiolus head of it is great, and sometimes they haue yellowish bellyes and tayles, and some-times earthy. It is some question among the Learned, whether there be any discretion of sexe, as whether there be in this kinde a male and a female. Pliny affirmeth that they neuer en∣gender, and that there is not among them eyther male or female, no more then there are among Eeles. But this thing is iustly crossed, both by Bellonius and Agricola, for they af∣firme vpon their owne knowledge, that the Salamander engendereth her young ones in her belly like vnto the Viper, but first conceiueth egges, and she bringeth forth fortie and fiftie at a time, which are fully perfected in her wombe, and are able to runne or goe so soone as euer they be littered: and therefore there must be among them both male and female. The Countries wherein are found Salamanders, are the Region about Trent, and in the Alpes, and some-time also in Germany. The most commonly frequent the coldest and moystest places, as in the shaddow of Woods, in hedges neere Fountaines and Ri∣uers, and some-times they are found among Corne & thornes, and among Rocks. They are sildome seene except it be eyther in the Spring-time, or against raine, & for this cause it is called Animal vernale, and Pluuiosum, a Spring or raynie creature. And yet there were many of them found together in a hole neere vnto the Citty Sneberge in Germanie, in the month of February, for they loue to liue in flocks and troupes together, and at an∣other time in Nouember, a liuing Salamander was found in a Fountaine. Howbeit, if at any time it be seene forraging out of his denne or lodging place, it is held for an assured presage of rayne. But if the Spring-time fortune to be colde or frostie, then they keepe home, and goe not visibly abroade. Some doe affirme that it is as cold as Ise, and that it therefore quencheth heate or fire like a peece of Ise, which if it be true, then is the old phylosophicall Maxime vtterly false, namely, that all liuing creatures are hot and moyst, beeing compared to creatures with∣out life and sence, for there is not any dead or sencelesse body that so quencheth fire as the Ise doth. But the truth is, that the Salamander is cold, and colder then any Serpent, yet not without his naturall heate, which beeing compared to Armans, may truly be said to be hot, and therefore the venome of the Salamander is reckoned among Septicks, or cor∣roding things. It naturally loueth milke, and therefore some-times in the Woods or neere hedges, it sucketh a Cow that is layde, but afterward that Cowes vdder or stocke dryeth vppe, and neuer more yeeldeth any milke. It also greatly loueth the Honny-combe, and some Au∣thours haue affirmed, that they vse to gape after ayre or fresh breath, like the Camaelion, Will yet they which haue kept Salamanders in glasses, neuer perceiued by thē any such thing. They are slow of pace, and voyde ground very sluggishlie, and therfore it is iustly termed a heauy and slothfull beast. But the greatest matter in the Salamander to be inquired after, is whethet it can liue and be nourished by and in the fire, or whether it can pa se thorough the fire without any harme, or quench and put out the same. Which opinions in the very relation and first hearing, doe crosse one another, for how can that either be nourished or liue in the fire, which quencheth the same beeing put into it? Aristotle that neuer saw a Salamander himselfe, but wrote thereof by heare-say, hath giuen some colour to this opinion, because he writeth, nonulla corpora esse animalium quae igne non absumantur Salamandra document est: quae (vt aiunt) ignem inambulans per eum extinguit. That is to say, the Salamander is an euidence, that the bodies of some creatures are not wasted or consumed in the fire, for (as some say) it walketh in the fire and extinguisheth the same. Now whether this beseemed so great a Phylosopher to write vppon heare-say, vvho tooke vpon him to gather all naturall learning into his owne Graunge or store-house, & out of the same to furnish both the present and all future ages, I leaue it to the considerati∣on of euery indifferent Reader that shall peruse this story. I for mine owne part, rather iudge it to be lightnes in him, to insert a matter of this consequence in the discourse of this beast, without either Authours, or experience gathered by himselfe. This one thing I maruaile at, why the Egyptians, when they will expresse or signifie a man burnt, doe in Orus. theyr Hierogliphicks paint a Salamander, except eyther fire can burne a Salamander, or else contrary to all their custome, they demonstrate one contrary by another. Nicander plainely affirmeth, that the Salamander dooth without all harme passe tho∣rough the fire, and the Scholiast addeth, that there are certaine passages in the skinne, out of vvhich issueth a kind of liquour that quencheth the fire: And hee telleth a story of one Andreas, who did dippe a peece of cloth in the blood of a Salamander, and tried after∣ward whither it would burne or not, but did not find that it would burne, wherfore he put it vppon his hand, and thrust that into the fire, and then also he felt no manner of paine. And therefore the said Nicander calleth this creature Ciporrhinon, because of a certaine fatte humour which issueth out of it, quenching the fire, but I rather thinke that this fat humour maketh the skinne to glister, for if it were properly fatte, it would rather kindle and encrease the fire then quench or extinguish the same. Suidas followeth the common receiued opinion, that the Salamander quencheth the fire, (although it be not bredde of the fire as Krekets are) like Ise, and when the fire is so quenched, it is in vaine to blow or kindle the same againe with any bellowes, as they say hath beene tryed in the forges of Smithes. And this also caused Serenus to write, Seu Sa∣lamandra potens, nullis{que} obnoxia flammis: the potent Salamander is neuer hurt by flames. Seneca consenteth heere-vnto, and Zoroastres: and so great hath beene the dotage about this opinion, that some haue written that it ascendeth vp to the fire neere the moone, farre aboue the reach of the Eagles or swiftest Fowles. Thus say they that write, and maintaine the Salamanders abyding in the fire without harme. Now on the contrary, let vs also heare their opinions, vvhich deny this naturall operation in the Salamander. Pliny affirmeth, that in his owne experience hee found that a Salamander was consu∣med in the fire, and not the fire by it, for he saith he burned one to powder, and vsed the same powder in medicines. Sextius also denyeth that it quencheth the fire, and vnto this opinion agreeth Dioseori∣des. Aetius writeth, that when it is first put into the fire, it deuideth the flame, and passeth thorough speedily without harme, but if it tarry long therein it is burned and consumed, because the liquour or humiditie thereof is wasted. And this is also graunted by Galen, Theophrastus, and Niphus. And Matthaeolus affirmeth that hee tryed the same, and found that if burning coales were layde vppon it, then it burned like vnto any other rawe flesh, but beeing cast into the fire, it burneth not speedily. Albertus writeth, that there were some which brought to him a certaine thing which they called Wooll, and said that it would not burne, but he found it not Laua, vvooll, but Lamygo, that is, a vapoury adhaerencie of a thing which flyeth from the strokes o ham∣mers vppon hot burning yron, and beeing collected vppon cloth, or cleauing to any part of the forge, it there becommeth in shew like yellowish pale wooll. The said Authour affirmeth, that hee tooke a Spyder, and layde the same vpon a hot burning yron, where it continued vnburned and vnharmed without motion a great while, by reason of his thicke skinne and coldnesse, and vnto another hee suffered a little Candle to be put, which instantly put it out. And for the same causes, that is to say, both the thicknesse of the skinne, and cold constitution, commeth it to passe, that a Salaman∣der can liue so long in the fire without burning or consuming to ashes, for indeed the skin thereof is so hard, that it is cutte or pierced with a knife with great difficultie: And so when the force of the fire hath broken the skinne, then also issueth foorth a cold humour, which for a season keepeth the heate out. For this beast is said to be very full of humour, and the certaintie thereof may most manifestly appeare by his full and grosse body, and also by this, that it is sildome seene to issue or come forth of his denne, except it be against raynie weather: and yet as the egges of other Serpents beeing cast into a hot burning fur∣nace, do for a season rest in the same vnburned, & yet are afterward consumed, so is it with the Salamander. There be some that haue found a webbe out of the hayre growing vppon Salaman∣ders, vvhich can by no meanes be sette on fire, but this is very false, because the Salaman∣der Cordus▪ hath no haire vpon it at all. And this kind of webbe rather commeth of a kind of flaxe that Pliny vvriteth of, or rather of the Amiantus-stone, called the Asbest, which is found in Cyprus, whereof they vsed to make couerings for the Theaters. This beeing cast into Dioscorid. a fire, seemes to be forthwith all in a flame, but beeing taken out againe, it shyneth the more gloriously. Some also doe affirme, that such a peece of cloth or webbe, may be wrought out of the Salamanders skin, but Brasauolus denyeth both the vertue of the stone, and of the Sala∣manders hyde or shell, for hee saith hee tried the stone, and it would not be wrought into wooll or spun into thred, and when hee cast the Salamanders shell or hide into the fire, it burned, and the mattery cold liquor thereof did almost flye into his face. But some then will demaund, where had Pope Alexander that coate, which could not be purged but by fire, which made it alway as white as snow, or that map or net at Rome wherin (it is said) the napkin of our Sauiour Christ is preserued, which men say is not wa∣shed but in the fire, which thing was sent to a Bishop of Rome for a present from the king of Tartars. Vnto whom I aunswer out of Paulus Venetus as foloweth. There is a prouince in Tartaria called Chinchnitalas, wherein is a mountaine abounding with Mines of Steele and Copper; now in this Mountaine there is a kind of earth digged vp, which yeeldeth a thred like the thred of wooll. After the digging of it vp they dry it in the sunne, and then beate it in a brazen morter, afterward they spinne it and weaue it, in the same maner that they spin and weaue other wollen cloth. After it is made, they haue no meanes to purge it from spots or from filthines, but to cast it into the fire for the space of an houre, and then it is taken forth againe as white as any snow. There is also an Allum called Alumen Sciolae, and it is the same which among the An∣cients is called Aster samius, out of which also is made cloth that cannot burne, by reason of a certaine oyle that it containeth or yeeldeth to resist the fire. So out of the stone Pyri∣tis found in Kisheba, there commeth out a greene liquour pressed with dead coales, & af∣ter Cardan. that, no fire can burne that cloth. There are also certaine Mantles in Bohemia, (as wit∣nesseth Agricola) which could neuer be burned. And out of the Magnesia a scaly stone in Boldecrana, they make tables, which cannot be clensed but by fire. It is also recorded, that the fore-named Aster samius and pitch quenched in the iuyce of Mallowes or Mercuriall, beeing annoynted vpon a mans hand, doth keepe them from burning, or sence of extra∣ordinary heate. So Albertus writeth of a stone which he calleth Iscullos, or Iscustos, which I take to be a kind of the Asbeste or Amiantus. And this stone is found (as the same Au∣thour writeth) in the farthest parts of Spaine, neere the Straights and Hercules-pillers. And this thing seemeth the lesse strange▪ because they which are annoynted with bird∣lime, or else with vineger and the white of an egge, do not so quickly feele the strength of fire and heate, when they thrust theyr hands into the midst of it. It is also found, that the harts of them that dye of the hart-burning disease, or else are killed by poyson, cannot be Pliny. burned with fire. And therefore when Germanicus Caesar was dead, it being suspected that he was poysoned by Piso, they cast his hart into the fire and it would not burne, vvhich thing was alleadged against him by Vitellius the Oratour. And one Aesculapius in an E∣pistle which he wrote to Octauian Augustus saith, that there is a poyson so extreame cold, that it keepeth the hart of a man poysoned there-with from burning, and if it lye long in the fire, it waxeth as hard as a stone, which so concreted is called Profilis, from the force of the fire, and from the matter whereof it consisteth it is called an humane stone. Hee also saith, that this is redde in colour, mixed with some white, and is accounted precious, be∣cause both it maketh a man that weareth it to be a Conquerour, and also preserueth him from all manner of poyson. When the Salamander is prouoked, it casteth foorth a white mattery liquour or hu∣mour, and it is an audacious and bold creature, standing to his aduersary, and not flying the sight of a man; and so much the lesse, if it perceiue that a man prosecute and follow it, to harme and kill it. The byting of it is very exitiall and deadly, and therefore the French men vse this speech vpon the byting of a Salamander. Si mordu t' a vne aressade, Prens ton linccul et taflassade. That is, if a Salamander byte you, then betake you to the coffin and winding sheete. The Rhaetians also doe ordinarily affirme, that when a man is bytten by a Salamander, he hath neede of as many Phisitians as the Salamander hath spots. And Arnoldus saith, that it hath in it as many venoms and meanes of hurting, as it hath colours distinguished one from another. For when it once byteth and fasteneth teeth, it neuer letteth goe, and bee∣ing pulled of, it leaueth the teeth behind, and then there neuer can be any remedie, and therefore it must be suffered to hang vpon the wound vntill it fall off, eyther willingly or wearied, or els compelled by the medicines that the wounded patient receiueth. For by this meanes onely is the patient kept aliue: yet this is alway to be remembred, that the Salamander doth not alway bite, although prouoked, for Gesner affirimeth, that hee ha∣uing two of them, could neuer by beating make them open their mouthes, nor that in all his life did he euer heare of any man bytten by them. And of this thing hee not onely ga∣thereth the difference of time, wherein their rage sheweth it selfe by byting, and when not, but also the difference of place and region, for that they byte in some Countries, and not in other. When they haue bitten, there followeth a vehement payne and s abbe vppon the place, for the cure whereof there must be taken a decoction of Frogges, and the broth must be drunke, and the flesh applyed to the sore; or else other common remedies against the poyson prescribed in the Treatise following. The poyson hereof is great, and not inferiour to the poyson of any other Serpent, for sometimes by creeping vpon Apple-trees, it infecteth and poysoneth all the fruite, so that those which eate the same, dye and languish they know not whereof: and if the heele of a man doe but touch any small part or portion of the spettle of a Salamander, it maketh all the hayre of the body to fall of. The poyson it selfe is not cold, as some haue thought, but Aelianus. hote, like to the poyson of Cantharides, and therefore to be cured by the same meanes, as by vomits, Glysters, Ephemeron, and such like. Onely Swyne doe eate Salamanders without harme or damage, for there is in them a kinde of resistance in nature, and yet if man or dogge doe chaunce to eate of that Swyne that hath eaten a Salamander, it hath beene obserued that they perrished by the same. And this poyson spreadeth it selfe the fur∣ther when it is dead, because it is strengthened by putrefaction, and wine or water wher∣in one of these lyeth dead, is empoysoned & made mortall thereby to others. But in our dayes Salamanders are not so venomous, if there be any credite in Brasauolus, howbeit I haue heard and read, that if at this day a Salamander g heape of corne, she so in∣fecteth it, that whatsoeuer eateth of that Corne, dyetl▪ sit were of poyson, and the Kine of Helueria, which are sucked by Salamanders, doe euer after remaine barren, and with∣out milke, and sometime also they dye of that euill. And as Arnoldus writeth, it casteth forth a certaine mattery white humour like milke out of the mouth, wherevpon, if a man or any other liuing creature doe but tread, he is poysoned thereby, and at the least, all the hayre of their body falleth off, and in like sort they in ect herbes & plants of the earth by theyr poyson. Sometimes it happeneth that beasts or men haue swallowed Salamanders, and then the tongue is inflamed, and all the body falleth into grieuous torment, by cold corrupti∣on and putrefaction, part after part, and also paines in the fundament & in the stomack, likewise dropsies, and impostumation, in the belly, crampe of the guttes, and relention of vrine. For the cure whereof they giue sweete water, Calamynts, Saint Iohns-wort, od with the shells Pine-apples, leafes of Cypresse, Galbanus, and hony or Rozen, Ammoni∣acke, and Styrax. New cow-milke, the meale made of flax-seede with sweete water, sweet wine and oyle to cause vomits: Scammony, & a decoction of Calamints and figges, fatte Ba on or hogges-flesh, and also the egges of a Torteyse, with the flesh thereof; besides in∣finite other remedies, ordained by the goodnesse of Almighty God, as Phisitians knowe by their owne studie and daily experiments. And therefore I hold it sufficient for mee to haue lightly touched them, referring those that are desirous to know more, vnto the lear∣ned collection of Carromus. Out of the Salamander it selfe arise also some medicines, for it hath a septick power to eate and corrode to take away hayres, and the powder thereof cureth cornes and hardnes in the feete. The hart tyed to the wrist in a blacke skinne, taketh away a quartane-Ague, and also Kiradides writeth, that being bound vnto a womans thigh, it stayeth her month∣lie flowers, and keepeth her barren: But this is worthily reproued for vntruth, and there∣fore I will not commend it to the Reader. And thus much for the Salamander. OF THE SCORPION. S Corpios in Greeke is attributed both to the Scorpion of the Land and of the Sea, although some-times for difference sake, the scor∣pions of the earth be called Scorpios chersaios. The deriuation is manifold according to some Writers, either of Scorpizein ton+'ion, that is, dispersing his poyson, or of Sckanoos erpein, because the motion of it is oblique, inconstant, and vncertaine, like as the flame of fire beaten with a small wind. The Graecians also vse for a Scorpion Blestas, because it casteth poyson, & octopos from the number of his eight feete. And in Ethyopia there is a kind of Scorpion which the Greeks call Sybritae. The Latines doe vse indifferently Scorpius, Seorpio nepa, & Cancer also vinula and Geptaria, as we find in Ponzettus. The Arabians haue many words, as Harrab, Acrob, Achrach, and Satoracon, Hacparab, algerarat, algeterat, and algenat and alkatareti, for lit∣tle Scorpions which draw their tayles after them. Howbeit, among these names also Al∣garat signifieth that little kind of scorpions, & Algararat, the Scorpion with bunches on his backe. The Hebrewes, according to the opinion of some, call a Scorpion Acchabim. The Italians Scurtigicio, and Scorpione terrestre. The French, Vn scorpion, the Spanyards, Alacram & alacrani, which name they haue also giuen to an Iland in the west-Indies sub∣iect to their dominion. In Castilia it is called Escorpion, and in Germany Ein scorpion. The Countries which breed Scorpions, are these that follow, in Egypt neere the Citty Coptus, are many very great and pestilent stinging Scorpions, who kill as soone as they smite. Also Ethyopia and Numidia abound with Scorpions, especially the latter, wherin (as writeth Leo Affric:) are euery yeere found very many that die of their wounds. Tenas . one of the Cyclades Ilands, is called Ophiessa, because it yeeldes many Serpents and Scor∣pions. Also in that part of Mauritania which is neere the vvest, are Scorpions with wings and without wings: likewise in Iberia, Caria, & Lybia. And it is also said, that once there were many Scorpions brought into India, into that part of the Country where the Rhi∣cophagi Leo Afric: dwell. By the way betwixt Susis in Persia and Media, there were wont to abound Scorpions vnder euery stone and turffe, for which cause, when the King of Persia was wont to goe into Media, he gaue commaundement vnto his people to scoure the way, by vsing all meanes to kill them, giuing gifts to them that killed the greatest number of Scor∣pions. There is an auncient towne in Affricke called Pescara, wherein the abundance of Strabo. Scorpions do so much harme, that they driue away the inhabitants all the Sommer-time euery yeere vntill Nouember following. And in like sort Diodorus declareth of many o∣ther places, vtterly forsaken to auoyd the multitude of Scorpions, as namely, one part of Arabia, and the region of India about Arrhatan, or the riuer Estumenus, likewise neere the Cynamolgi in Ethyopia. There is also a Citty called Alabanda, standing betwixt two hills or mountaines, like as a chest turned inward, which Apollonius calleth Cistam inuersam Scorpionibus plenam: a chest turned inward full of Scorpions. In an Island of Canaria also are many Scorpions, and those most pestilent, which the Turkes gather as often as they may to make oyle of Scorpions. In Italy, especially in the Mount Testaceus in Rome, are Cordus also Scorpions, although not so hurtfull as in Affrica, and other places, and it is thought that Psylli, whose nature cureth all kind of venomous Serpents harmes, did onely for lu∣cers sake bring Serpents and Scorpions into Italy, and there they left them, whereby they encrease to that number & multitude which now we see them haue. And thus much may suffice to haue spoken of the Countries of Scorpions. The kindes of Scorpions I finde also to be many, but generally they may be referred vnto twayne, whereof one is called the Scorpion of the earth, and the other the Scorpi∣on of the water or of the Sea, whose discourse or history is to be found among the fishes, for we in this place doe onely write of the Scorpion of the earth, which is also called by Auicen a wild Scorpion. Of this kind there are many differences. First they differ in sex, for there are males and females, and the female is greater then the male, beeing also fatte, hauing a grosser body, and a greater & sharper sting, but the male is more fierce then the female. Againe, some of these haue wings, and some are without wings, and some are in Gillius. quantitie greater then a Beane, as in Heluetia, neere Rapirsnill by Zuricke. The Scorpi∣ons called Vinulae, are of reddish colour, as it were rose-water and wine mixed together: and from thence it is probable that they tooke their name, and from their colour, the Au∣thours haue obserued seauen seuerall kinds. The first is white, and the byting of this is not deadly. The second is reddish, like fire flamant, and this when it hath wounded causeth thirst. The third is of a pale colour, and therefore called by the Graecians Zophorides, & these when they haue wounded a man, cause him to liue in continuall motion and agitation of his body, so as he cannot stand still, but remaineth distract & without wit, alway laugh∣ing, like a foole. The fourth kind is greenish, and therefore termed Chloaos, which hauing wounded, causeth intollerable trembling, shaking and quiuering, and also cold, so that if the patient be layd in the hot sunne, yet he thinketh that he freezeth like hayle, or rather feeleth hayle to fall vpon him. The fift kind is blackish-pale, and it is called Empelios, it hath a great belly and broade, whereof the poyson is great, and causeth after stinging an admirable heauinesse, and sor∣rowfull spirit. This kind is called by Gesner, Ventricosum, because of the large belly, by the Arabians Algetarat, and by Ponzettus, Geptaria. It eateth herbes, and the bodyes of men, and yet remaineth insatiable, it hath a bunch on the backe, and a tayle longer then other Scorpions. The sixt is like a Crabbe, & this is called by Elianus a flamant Scorpion, it is of a great body, and hath tonges and takers very solide and strong, like the Gramuell or Creuish, & is therefore thought to take the beginning from that fish. The seauenth is called Mellichlorus, because of the honny-colour thereof, or rather waxe-colour, and the wings it hath on the backe, are like the wings of a Locust. Also Scorpions do differ among themselues in regard of their outward parts, for some of them haue wings, as those in India, which are spoken of by Strabo, Nicander, & others, and therefore many times when they settle themselues to flie, they are transported by the wind from one country to another. There is also another difference obserued in their tayles, and in their stings, for some of them haue sixe knots on their tayles, and some of them seauen, and those which haue Elianus. Pliny. seauen, are more hardy & fierce, but this falleth out very sildome that the Scorpions haue seauen knots in their tayle, and therefore much sildomer to haue nine, as writeth Apollo∣dorus. For if any haue seauen, then is there likewise in them a double sting, for there is al∣so another difference, some of them hauing a single, and some a double sting, yea some-times Aristotle a treble one, and the sting of the male is more thicke and strong then the sting of the female. And to conclude, there is also a difference in motion, for some of them holde vp theyr tayles from the earth, and these are not much venomous, others againe draw them along vpon the earth, a little rowled together, and these are most deadly and poysonfull, some of them also flye from one Region to another, as we haue shewed already. Againe, there is nothing that giueth a man a more liuely difference then the considera∣tion of their poyson, for the Scorpions of Pharus, and that part of the Alpes neere Nori∣cum, doe neuer harme any liuing creature, and therfore are they suffered to abound, so as they liue vnder euery stone. In like sort, in the Ile Sanguola, the Scorpions are like vnto those that are in Castilia or Spayne, for there the sting of the Scorpion dooth not bring death, yet they cause a smarting paine, like the paine that commeth by the stinging of a Waspe, differing heerein, that the Scorpions stinging is more lasting & continueth lon∣ger then the stinging of a Waspe, for it tarrieth about a quarter of an houre, and by the byting thereof all are not payned alike, for some feele more, and some lesser paine. Con∣trary to these are the Scorpions of Pescara in Affrick, who euer with theyr tayles vvound mortally. And those in Scythia, which are great, and hurtfull vnto men and beastes, kyl∣ling Pliny. Aelianus. swyne, who doe not much care for any other serpent, especially the blacke swyne, who doe also dye the sooner, if they drinke immediatly after the wound receiued. The like may be said of the Scorpions of Egypt. And thus much for the different kinds of Scor∣pions, wherein nature produceth a notable varietie, as may appeare by all that hath been said. Now it followeth that wee likewise make some relation of theyr congruity one with another. They are all little liuing creatures, not much differing in proportion from the great Scarabee or Horse-flie, except in the fashion of theyr tailes. Their backe is broad and flat, distinguished by certaine knots of seames, such as may be seene in Sea-crabbes, yet theyr head differeth, and hath no resemblance with the Crabbe, because it is longer, and han∣geth farre out from the body, the countenaunce whereof is fawning, and virgin-like, and all the colour a bright browne. Notwithstanding the fayre face, it beareth a sharpe sting in the tayle, which tayle is full of knots, where-withall it pricketh and hurteth that which it toucheth. And this Pliny affirmeth to be proper to this insect, to haue a sting in the tayle and to haue armes: For by armes hee meaneth the two crosse sorkes or tonges which come from it one both sides, in the toppes whereof are little thinges like pynsons, to de∣taine and hold fast, that which it apprehendeth, whiles it woundeth with the ing in the tayle. It hath eyght feete, foure on the one side, and foure on the other, from whence, as we haue shewed already, it is called Octopos. For the feete and armes therof is very much like vnto the Sea-crabbe, and therefore may not vnfitly be called eyther the Mother or the Daughter thereof. They haue also tongues, where-withall they vse often to licke and smooth ouer theyr owne bodyes. And seeing of all other things they loue fresh & cleane linnen, whereinto they insinuate and wrappe themselues when they can come vnto it, then also first of all they clense theyr whole bodyes all ouer with theyr tongues, and next to their flesh put on this cleane linnen, as a man would put on a shirt. As wee haue said alreadie, it hath a tayle, wherein the sting thereof is placed, but what this sting is, diuers Authours are of diuers opinions concerning the same, some affirming it to be hollow, others denying it, finding in it no passage at all to containe or couay poy∣son. Aelianus againe sayth, that there must needs be in it a passage or cauitie, although it be so small, as by no meanes it can be perceiued with the eyes of any mortall man, and in that sting is the poyson lesse visible, which when it striketh, disperseth it selfe instantly in∣to the wound. But what should this poyson be? whether a substance or spirituall humor, surely a substaunce, which although it be Mole minima, yet facultate maxima, that is, of great power, although of small quantitie. And therefore another Authour (namely Ge∣rardus,) writeth thereof after this manner; Scorpius è centro quod cauum esse creditur emit∣tit humorem venenosum: That is to say, the Scorpion out of a hollow center, sendeth foorth a venomous humour. And of this venom wee will afterwards discourse more at large. Thus much in this place may serue, to make knowne the seuerall parts and mem∣bers of this Serpent. Now then it followeth, that we enquire about the manner of their breede or generati∣on, which I find to be double, as diuers Authors haue obserued, one way is by putrefac∣tion, and the other by laying of egges, and both these wayes are consonant to nature, for Lacinius writeth, that some creatures are generated onely by propagation of seed, such are men, Vipers, Whales, & the Palme-tree, some againe onely by putrefaction, as the louse, the flye, grasse, & such like imperfect things, & some both wayes, as myce, scorpions, em∣mets, spyders, Purslaine, which first of all were procuced by putrefaction: and since their generation are conserued by the seede and egges of their owne kind. Now therefore wee will first of all speake of the generation of Scorpions by putrefaction, and afterward by propagation. Pliny saith, that when Sea-crabbes dye, and theyr bodyes are dryed vppon the earth when the Sunne entereth into Cancer and Scorpius, out of the putrefaction thereof ariseth a Scorpion; & so out of the putrified body of the Creuish burned, arise Scorpions, which caused Ouid thus to write; Concaua littoreo si demas brachia cancro, Caetera supponas terrae, de parte sepulta Scorpius exibit, caudaque minabitur vnca. And againe: Obrutus exemptis Cancer tellure lacertis, Scorpius exiguo tempore factus erit. In English thus; If that the armes you take from Sea-crab-fish, And put the rest in earth till all consumed be, Out of the buried part a Scorpion will arise, With hooked tayle doth threaten for to hurt thee. And therefore it is reported by Elianus, that about Estamenus in India, there are abun∣dance of Scorpions generated, onely by corrupt raine-water standing in that place. Also out of the Baziliske beaten into peeces and so putrified, are Scorpions engendered. And when as one had planted the herbe Basilica on a wall, in the roome or place thereof hee found two Scorpions. And some say that if a man chaw in his mouth fasting this herbe Ia: Lacinius Basill before he wash, and afterward lay the same abroade vncouered where no sun com∣meth at it for the space of seauen nights, taking it in all the day time, hee shall at length find it transmuted into a Scorpion, with a tayle of seauen knots. Hollerius, to take away all scruple of this thing, writeth that in Italy in his dayes, there Kramdes was a man that had a Scorpion bredde in his braine, by continuall smelling to this herbe Basill, and Gesner by relation of an Apothecary in Fraunce, writeth likewise a storie of a young mayde, who by smelling to Basill, fell into an exceeding head-ach, whereof shee dyed without cure, and after her death beeing opened, there were found little Scorpions in her braine. Aristotle remembreth an herbe which he calleth Sisimbriae, out of which putrified Scor∣pions are engendered, as he writeth. And wee haue shewed already in the history of the Crocodile, that out of the Crocodiles egges doe many times come Scorpions, which at Philes Aelianus. their first egression doe kill theyr dam that hatched them, which caused Archelaus which wrote Epigrams of wonders vnto Ptolomaeus, to sing of Scorpions in this manner. In vos dissoluit morte, & redigit Crocodilum Natura extinctum, Scorpij omnipotens. Which may be englished thus; To you by Scorpions death the omnipotent Ruines the Crocodill in natures life extinct. And thus much for the generation of Scorpions out of putrefaction. Now we wil pro∣ceede to the second manner of their generation, which is by propagation of seede: for al∣though Ponzettus make some question about their copulation, yet he himself inclineth to that opinion, as neerer vnto truth, which attributeth carnall copulation vnto them, and therefore he alledgeth the example of flyes, which admitte copulation although they en∣gender not thereby. Wherefore wee will take it for graunted, that Scorpions lay egges after copulation, which hapneth both in the Spring and Autumne. And these are for the most part in number eleuen, vpon which they sit and hatch their young ones, and when once they are perfected within, those egges (which are in sight like the little wormes out of which Spyders are engendered) then doe they breake theyr egges, and driue the young out. For as Isidorus writeth, otherwise the olde should be de∣stroyed of the young, euen as are the Crocodiles. Some againe say, that the old Scorpi∣ons Pliny. doe deuour theyr young ones. Beeing thus produced by generation, they liue vppon the earth, and those which are bredde of the Sea-crabbe, doe feede vppon the foame of the Sea-water, and a continuall white mould or chalke neere the Sea. But the Scorpions of Ethyopia doe eate all kind of wormes, flyes, and small Serpents. Yea those Serpents whose very dunge beeing troden vpon by man, bringeth exulcerations: And a tryall that Scorpions eate flyes, was made by Wolphius at Montpelier, for hauing a young one in a boxe, for one whole month toge∣ther it liued vpon flyes, and grew by the deuouring of them bigger, beeing put into the glasse vnto him. They liue among tyles and bricks very willingly, and for this cause they abound in Rome in the hill called Testaceus. They are also in Bononia found in the walls of old hou∣ses, betwixt the stones and the morter. They loue also cleane clothes, as we haue sayd al∣ready, and yet they abhorre all places whereon the Sunne shyneth. And it seemeth that the sunne is vtterly against their nature, for the same Scorpion which Wolphius had at Montpelier, liued in the glasse vntill one day he set in the Sunne, and then presently after it dyed. To conclude, they loue hollow places of the earth neere gutters, and sometimes they creepe into mens beddes, where vnawares they doe much harme: and for this cause the Lybians, who among other Nations are most of all troubled with Scorpions, do vse to set theyr beddes farre from any wall, and very high also from the floore, to keepe the Scorpi∣ons from ascending vp vnto them. And yet fearing all deuises should be too little to secure them against this euill, they also set the feete of theyr beddes in vessells of water, that so the Scorpion may not attempt so much as to climbe vp vnto them for feare of drowning. And also for their further safegard, they were socks and hose in theyr beddes so thicke as the Scorpion cannot easily sting thorough them. And if the bed be so placed that they cannot get any hold thereof beneath, then they clymbe vp to the sieling or couer of the house, & if there they find any hold for their pin∣ching legges to apprehend and fasten vppon, then in their hatred to man-kind, they vse this pollicie to come vnto him. First one of them (as I haue said) taketh hold vppon that place in the house or sieling ouer the bed wherein they find the man asleepe, and so hang∣eth Aelianus. thereby, putting out and stretching his sting to hurt him, but finding it too short, and not beeing able to reach him, he suffereth another of his fellowes to come and hang as fast by him as he doth vpon his hold, and so that second giueth the wound: and if that second be not able likewise, because of the distance, to come at the man, then they both admit a third to hang vpon them, and so a fourth vpon the third, and a fift vpon the fourth, vntill they haue made themselues like a chayne, to descend from the toppe to the bedde wherin the man sleepeth, and the last striketh him: after which stroke, he first of all runneth away by the backe of his fellow, and euery one againe in order, till all of them haue withdrawne themselues. By this may be collected the crafty disposition of this Scorpion, and the great subtiltie and malice that it is indued withall in nature, and seeing they can thus accord together in harming a man, it argueth their great mutuall loue and concord one with another, wher∣fore I cannot but maruell at them, who haue written that the old ones destroy the young, all but one, which they set vpon theyr owne buttocks, that so the damme may be secured from the sting and bytings of her sonne. For seeing they can thus hang vpon one another without harme, fauouring their owne kinde, I see no cause but that nature hath grafted much more loue betwixt the old and the young ones, so as neither the old do first destroy the young, nor afterward, that young one preserued, in reuenge of his fellowes quarrell, killeth his Parents. It is reported by Aristotle, that there is a hill in Caria wherein the Scorpions doe neuer sting any strangers that lodge there, but onely the naturall borne people of that country. And heere-vnto Pliny and Elianus seeme to subscribe, when they write that Scorpiones ex∣traneos leniter mordere, that is, Scorpions byte strangers but gently. And heereby it may be collected, that they are also by nature very sagacious, and can discerne betwixt nature and nature; yea the particuler differences in one & the same nature. To conclude, Scor∣pions haue no power to hurt, where there is no blood. The naturall amity and enmity they obserue with other creatures commeth now to be handled, and I find that it wanteth not aduersaries, nor it againe hath no defect of poy∣son or malice to make resistance and opposition, and to take vengeance on such as it mee∣teth withall. The principall of all other subiects of their hatred are virgins and vvomen, whom they doe not onely desire to harme, but also when they haue harmed, are neuer Albertue. perfectly recouered. And this is at all times of the day, but vnto men they are most dange∣rous in the morning fasting, before they haue vented their poyson, and this is to be ob∣serued, that their tayles are neuer vnprouided of stings, and sufficient store of venome, to hurt vpon all occasions. The Lyon is by the Scorpion put to flight wheresoeuer hee seeth it, for he feareth it as the enemy of his life, and therefore writeth S. Ambrose, Exigno Scorpionis aculeo exagita∣tur Leo, the Lyon is much mooued at the small sting of a Scorpion. Scorpions doe also destroy other Serpents, and are likewise destroyed by them. There was one Cellarius a Phisitian in Padua, who put together into one viall a Viper and a Scorpion, where they continually fought together vntill they had killed one another. The Swyne of Scythia, which doe safely eate all other kind of Serpents and venomous beasts, without all harme, Aelianus yet are destroyed by eating of Scorpions, and so great is the poyson of the Sibarite Sco∣pion, that the dung thereof beeing trode vppon, breedeth vlcers. And as in this manner we see the virulence, and naturall euill of Scorpions against o∣ther liuing creatures, so now we are to consider the terrours of the Scorpion, for God in nature hath likewise ordained some bodies, whereby the Scorpion should be, and is dry∣uen away, scarred, and destroyed. First of all therefore men, which are the cheefe, and head of all liuing creatures, do by naturall instinct, kill and destroy Scorpions, and therefore Galen wryteth thus, Let vs (saith he) kill Scorpions, Spyders and Vipers, not because they are euill in themselues, but because it is ingrafted in vs by nature, to loue that which is good vnto vs, but to hate and auert from that which is euill vnto vs, Non consider antes genitum ne it a sit an secus, not cō∣sidering whether it were so bred or not. As we haue shewed their generation out of pu∣trefaction to be by heate, so also is their destruction by heate, for they are not able to a∣bide the heate of the sunne, and therefore, although they cannot liue in cold Northerne Countries, but in the hotter, yet in the hotter they choose shaddowes, holes of the earth, couerture of houses, and such like vile and obscure places, to succour and secure them∣selues in. It is also reported, that if Scorpions doe at any time behold a Stellion, they stand ama∣zed and wonderfully astonished. The Viper also hauing killed a Scorpion, becommeth Gallen. more venomous, and the Ibis of Egypt destroyeth Scorpions. There are a little kind of Emmets, called by the Arabians Gerarets, which are eaters of Scorpions. The quicke-sighted Hawkes also, from whose piercing eye no Serpent can be hidde, when hee seeth a Scorpion, he neither feareth nor spareth it. It is also thought that Hares are neuer mole∣sted Ponzettus by Scorpions, because if a man or beast be anoynted with the rennet of a Hare, there is no Scorpion or Spyder that will hurt him. Wild-goates are also said to liue without feare of Scorpions, euen as the Affrican Psylli of whom we haue often spoken. Now this vertue against Scorpions, is not onely in liuing things, but also in the plants of the earth, & therefore Sestius writeth, that the seede of Nose-wort burned or scorched doth driue away Serpents, and resist Scorpions, and so doth the roote of the Mast-tree, & the seede of Violets, and the same vertue is ascribed to the herbe Lychius, which is engli∣shed Calucs-snout, and also to the seede of Wild-parsenip. The smell of Garlicke and Wild-mints set on fire, or strewed on the ground, & Dit∣tany haue the same operation: and aboue all other, one of these Scorpions burned, dry∣ueth away all his fellowes which are within the smell thereof, and therefore this is a most vsuall thing in Asia and Affricke, to perfume their houses with Scorpions burned, and in Arnoldus Aetius steed thereof they make as it were little pills of Galbanume sandaracha, with butter, and the fatte of Goates, and thereof altogether make their perfume: also Bittony and wild-Pelli∣tory with Brimstone. They vse also to couer pannes with certaine things called by them Alkitran and Asa, and with these they compasse the place wherein the Scorpion lodgeth, and then it is found that they can neuer stir any more from that place. And some in steede Palladius Rasis. thereof, poure oyle into their holes after them for the same effect. And the Husband-men of Mauritania doe tye and fasten to their bedde-sides sprigs of White-thorne, and Hasell-nuts, where-withall, by a secrete antipathy in nature, they driue away, and keepe them∣selues Strabo. Plutarch. safe in their beddes from the annoyance of Scorpions. By touching of Henbane they lye dead and ouer-come, but if one touch them againe with white Ellebore, they reuiue, and are released from their former stupefaction. It is al∣so said, that the leafes of water-mallowes do also astonish Scorpions, and so also doth the Radish-roote. The Sea-crabbe with Basill in her mouth destroyeth the Scorpion, and so Gillius. doth tunicle and mushrom of Trees. To conclude, the spettle of a man is death vnto Scor∣pions; and therefore when a certaine fellow tooke vpon him to be a cunning Charmer, and by incantation to kill a Scorpion, he added to the wordes of his charme a treble spet∣ting in the mouth of the Serpent, and so it dyed: where-vpon Wolphius which was present Aetius. and saw this Charmer, did afterward by himselfe alone at home, make triall of spettle without a charme, and so found that it alone killeth Scorpions, especially the spettle of a man fasting, or very thirsty. Moreouer, there be certaine Lands wherein no Scorpions Solinus. liue, as that about Clupea in Affricke, and the dust of the Iland Gaulus neere Cercina, beeing sprinckled vpon a Scorpion, doth incontinently kill it. And so much also writeth Hermolaus, of the Region Galatha. These and such like things are obserued by our painefull and industrious Auncestours about the nature of Scorpions, as well that which is hurtfull vnto them, & they are afraid of, as those to which they are enemies in nature, & wound mortally when they light vp∣pon them. It is remembred by Textor, that Orion was slaine by a Scorpion, vvherevpon the Poets haue made many tales. They say that when he was growne to be a man, he was a great hunter, and a continuall companion of Diana, who glorying much in his ovvne strength, boasted that he was able to ouer-come any Serpent, or other wild beast, where∣at the Gods beeing angry, for reuenge & taking downe the pride of this young man, cau∣sed the earth to bring forth a Scorpion, who killed Orion. Whereat Diana was very sory, and therefore in lamentation of her champion, and for the good deedes he had done vn∣to her, translated him into heauen, close by the constellation of the Bull. Lucan on the o∣ther side saith, that Diana sent this Scorpion to kill him, enuying his famous successe in hunting, and that afterward the Goddesse taking pitty on him, translated him into hea∣uen. Others write againe, that he had his eyes put out by Oenopion, & that he came blind into the Iland Lemnus, where he receiued a horse of Vulcan, vppon which hee rode to the Sun-rising, in which iourney, he recouered againe his eye-sight, and so returning, he first determined to take reuenge vpon Oenopion for his former cruelty. Wherefore hee came into Creete, and seeking Oenopion, could not find him, because he was hid in the earth by his Cittizens, but at last comming to him, there came a Scorpion and killed him for his malice, rescuing Oenopion. These and such like fables are there about the death of Orion, but all of thē ioyntly agree in this, that Orion was slaine by a Scorpion. And so saith An∣thologius was one Panopaeus a Hunter. There is a common adage, Cornix Scorpium, a Rauen to a Scorpion, and it is vsed a∣gainst them thar perrish by their owne inuentions: when they set vpon others, they meete with their matches, as a Rauen did when it preyed vppon a Scorpion, thus described by Alciatus, vnder his title Iusta vlcio, iust reuenge, saying as followeth. Ruptabat volucer oaptum pede coruus in aur as Scorpion, audaci praemia parta gulae. Ast ille infuso sensim per membra veneno, Raptorem in stygias compulit vltor aquas. O risu res digna, alijs qui fat a parabat. Ipse perijt, proprijs succubuit que dolis. Which may be englished thus; The rauening Crow for prey a Scorpion tooke Within her foote, and there-withall aloft did flye, But he impoyson'd her by force and stinging stroke, So rauener in the Stygian-Lake did dye. O sportfull game: that he which other for bellyes sake did kill, By his owne deceit should fall into deaths will. There be some learned Writers who haue compared a Scorpion to an Epigram, or rather an Epigram to a Scorpion, because as the sting of the Scorpion lyeth in the tayle, so Gyraldus. the force and vertue of an Epigram is in the conclusion, for velacriter & falsè mordeat, vel iucundè & dulciter delectet, that is, eyther let it bite sharply at the end, or els delight plea∣singly. There be many wayes of bringing Scorpions out of their holes, and so to destroy and take them, as we haue already touched in part, vnto which I may adde these that fol∣low: A perfume made of Oxe-dung, also Storax and Arsenicke. And Pliny writeth, that tenne water-Crabs beaten with Basill is an excellent perfume for this purpose, and so is the ashes of Scorpions. And in Padua they vse this Arte, with small sticks or straw they touch and make a noyse vpon the stones and morture wherein they haue their nests, then Cardan. they thinking them to be some flyes for their meate, instantly leape out, and so the man that deluded them, is ready with a paire of tonges or other instrument, to lay hold vpon them and take them, by which meanes they take many, and of them so taken, make oyle of Scorpions. And Constantius writeth, that if a mans hand be well annointed with iuyce of Radish, he may take them without danger in his bare hand. In the next place we are to proceede to the venom & poyson of Scorpions, the instru∣ment or sting whereof, lyeth not onely in the tayle, but also in the teeth, for as Ponzettus writeth, Laedit scorpius morsu & ictu, the Scorpion harmeth both with teeth & tayle, that is, although the greatest harme doe come by the sting in the tayle, yet is there also some that cōmeth by their byting. This poyson of Scorpions, (as Pliny out of Apollodorus wri∣teth) is white, and in the heate of the day is very feruent and plentifull, so as at that time they are insatiably and vnquenchably thirsty, for not onely the wild or wood Scorpion, but also all other, are of a hot nature, and the symptomes of their bytings are such as fol∣low the effects of hote poysons: and therefore saith Rasis, all their remedies are of a colde qualitie. Yet Galen thinketh otherwise, and that the poyson is cold, and the effects there∣of are also cold. For which cause Rondeletus prescribeth oyle of Scorpions to expell the stone, and also the cure of the poyson is by strong Garlicke and the best Wine, which are hote things. And therefore I conclude, that although Scorpions be most hote, yet is their poyson of a cold nature. In the next place, I thinke is needfull to expresse the symptomes following the stri∣king or stinging of these venomous Scorpions, and they are (as Aetius writeth) the very same which follow the byting or poyson of that kinde of great Phalanx Spyder, called al∣so Teragnatum, and that is, they are in such case as those persons be which are smitten with the Falling-sicknesse. He which is stung by a Scorpion, thinketh that he is pressed with the fall of great and cold hayle, beeing so cold, as if hee were continually in a cold sweat, and so in short space the poyson disperseth it selfe vvithin the skinne, and runneth all ouer the body, neuer cea∣sing vntill it come to possesse some predominant or principall vitall part, and then follow∣eth death. For as the skinne is small and thin, so the sting pierceth to the bottom thereof, and so into the flesh, where it woundeth and corrupteth eyther some veyne, or arterie, or sinew, and so the member harmed, swelleth immediatly into an exceeding great bulke and quantity and aking, with insufferable torment. But yet (as we haue already said) there is a difference of the paine, according to the difference of the Scorpion that stingeth. If a man be stung in the lower part of his body, instantly followeth the extension of his virile member, & the swelling thereof: but if in the vpper part, then is the person affected with cold, and the place smitten, is as if it were burned, his countenaunce or face discorted, glewish spots about the eyes, & the teares viscous and slymie, hardnes of the articles, fal∣ling Aetius. Aelianus. downe of the fundament, and a continuall desire to egestion, foaming at the mouth, coughing, conuulsions of the braine, and drawing the face backward, the hayre standes vpright, palenesse goeth ouer all the body, and a continuall pricking like the pricking of needels. Also, Gordomus writeth, that if the pricke fall vppon an artery, there followeth swou∣ning, but if on a nerue, there speedily followeth putrefaction and rottennesse. And those Scorpions which haue wings, make wounds with a compasse like a bow, whose succee∣ding symptomes are both heate and cold, and if they hurt about the caniculer dayes, their wounds are very sildome recouered. The Indian Scorpions cause death three months after their wounds. But most won∣derfull is that which Strabo relateth of the Albenian Scorpions and Spyders, whereof hee saith are two kinds, and one kind killeth by laughing, the other by weeping. And if any Scorpion hurt a vaine in the head, it causeth death by madnesse, as writeth Paracelsus. When an oxe or other beast is strooken with a Scorpion, his knees are drawne together, and he halteth, refusing meate; out of his nose floweth a greene humour, and when hee is layd, he careth not for rising againe. These and such like are the symptomes that follow the bytings and stingings of Scor∣pions, for the cure whereof I will remit the Reader to that excellent discourse written by Wolphius, wherein are largely and learnedly expressed, whatsoeuer Art could collect out of nature. And seeing we in our Country are free from Scorpions, and therefore shal haue no neede to feare their poyson, it shall not I trust offend my Reader, if I cut off the relati∣on of Scorpions cures, as a thing which cannot benefit either the English-Reader, or else much adorne this history, and so I will proceede to the medicines drawne out of Scorpi∣ons. The application or vse of Scorpions in medicine, is eyther by powder, or by oyle, or by applying them brused to their owne wounds, wherefore euery one of these are to be handled particularly; and first of all for the powder, it is made by vstion or burning in this manner. They take tenne Scorpions and put them aliue into a new earthen potte, whose mouth is to be dammed vp with loame or such like stuffe, then must it be sette vpon a fire of Vine-tree-shreddes, and therein must the pot stand day and night vntill all within it be Haly. consumed to powder, and you shall know by their white colour when they be enough; o∣therwise, if they be browne or burned, they must be continued longer, and the vse of this powder is to expell the stone. Againe, they vse to make this powder another way, they take twentie Scorpions, and put them in a little earthen pot with a narrow mouth, which mouth must be stopped, and then the potte put into a Furnace by the space of sixe houres, which Furnace must also be kept close within, and with a gentle fire: then after sixe houres take off the pot, and bruse the Scorpions into powder, and keepe that powder for the vse afore-said. There are other waies also to prepare this powder, but in all preparations the attendant and assistant must take heede of the fume or smoake that commeth from it, for that is very venomous and contagious. But besides, there are many things to be obserued heerein, as first, that the Scorpions be aliue, and that they be killed in oyle, then, that they be put in whole, with euery mem∣ber, without mutilation, and that the Scorpions appointed for this confection, be of the strongest poyson, and the time of their collection to be when the Sunne is in Leo, and not in Scorpius, as some without reason haue imagined. The oyle so made, is distinguished into two kindes, one simple, and the other com∣pound. The simple is made of a conuenient number of Scorpions, (as it were twentie if they be great, and moe if they be little, and they beeing put into a glasse vessell, oyle of bitter-Almonds must be poured vppon them, and so the vessell stopped close and sette in the sunne by the space of thirtie dayes, and then stirred and vsed. Yet the women of Fer∣rara vse Oyle-oliue in steede of oyle of Bitter-almonds, and also obserue no quantitie of Brasauolus oyle, but fill the pot full, and likewise no order in the number of the Scorpions, putting one to day, and another to morrow, and so more the next weeke or month, as they can find them. The compound-oyle is thus made, they take round Astrologe, Cypresse, and Genti∣an, the rootes of Capars, and vppon these they poure oyle of Bitter-almonds, and soake the rootes in the oyle in the hot sun for the space of twentie dayes, then take they a com∣plete number of Scorpions, from betwixt tenne to fifteene, these they put againe to the oyle, and so stoppe vp the mouth againe, and set it the second time in the sun thirty dayes, and afterward straine it and vse it. This compound-oyle is not so much approued by Bra∣sauolus, as the former simple, because the first hath more Scorpions, & the second is stuf∣fed or seasoned with Spyces. The greene Scorpion which is bredde of Basill, hauing seauen knots in the tayle, bee∣ing beaten and pounded with the herbe Scorpion, and so made into pills, then dryed and Kiranides. put into a glasse, are very profitable to him that hath the Falling-sicknesse, if hee take of them three euery morning fasting in temperate Wine, but these beeing giuen to a sound man, putteth him cleane out of his wits. If a man take a vulgar Scorpion and drowne the same in a portinger of oyle in the wane of the Moone, and there-withall afterward an∣noynt the backe from the shoulders to the hyppes, and also the head and fore head, with the typpes of the fingers and toes of one that is a daemoniacke or a lunaticke person, it is reported that he shall case and cure him in short time. And the like is reported of the Scor∣pions sting ioyned with the toppe of Basill wherein is seede, and with the hart of a Swal∣low, all included in a peece of Harts-skinne. The oyle of Scorpions made of common Oyle-oliue, is good for the paine in the eares infused by distillation; also it cureth a Pluresie in this manner. They take meale out of a Windmill, and make thereof with water, paste, or little cakes, in quantitie like a French∣crowne, these must be sodde in a frying-panne in oyle of Scorpions, and so applyed as hot Alexius as can be to the place where the pricking is, and so kept to the same very hot, and when it beginneth to be cold, let new be applyed still, nine times together, successiuely one time after another. Scorpions brused in new sweete Wine, doe cure the Kings-euill. The a∣shes of a Scorpion infused by the yard into the bladder, breaketh and disperseth both the Galenus. stone of the bladder and the reynes. And the like operation hath a vulgar Scorpion eaten, with vineger and Rose-cakes applyed to the gowtie members, it many times easeth the inflaming paines thereof. The oyle of Scorpions is very auayleable in the time of plague, both by oyntment and also in potion: where-withall one did affirme to Wolphius that hee gayned a great summe of money, which he prepared in this manner. He tooke a hundred Scorpions, and sodde them in the oldest Oyle-oliue he could get, vntill such time as the Scorpions were consu∣med, then did he straine them thorough a linnen cloth, adding vnto it an ounce of Ru∣barbe, and so shutting it close in a glasse bottle, he set it fortie dayes together in the sunne, and afterward hee gaue of it to be vsed in time of infection, aduising them that had it to apply it in oyntment to the pulse, hart, hinder-part of the head, necke and nostrills. And if a man began to be sicke, within twelue houres after the first sence of his paine, hee was annoynted heere-with about the tumour, and then was it launced. This oyntment is al∣so commended against all manner of poyson, not onely of other Serpents and venomous beasts, but also of the Scorpion it selfe. And thus much for the history of the Scorpion. OF THE SCYTALL. T His Serpent called by the Graecians Scytale, is likewise termed by the Latinists Scytalis, and by some Scicalis, Picalis, Sciscetalis and Seyseculus, and by Albertus, Situla, which we haue already inter∣preted a Dypsas, but all of them are most manifestly corrupted from Scytale, the first Graecian word. And therefore I will not stand to confute them that call it also Caecilia, a blind-worme, be∣cause (after the maner of other Serpents) it eateth no Fennell, but this Caecilia or Blind-worme, wee shall afterward demonstrate to be our English Slow-worme. This Scytall is very full of markes or spots vppon the back, so variable and delectable, that it possesseth the beholders with admiration, and almost bringeth them asleepe looking thereon: for it is also slow and mooueth softly, wherefore it cannot pursue where it would doe harme, insteed therefore of celeritie, these naturall spots doe hold them that it doth desire to harme, like as they were stupifyed & astonished. And in this brightnes of the scales, first of all it must lay aside the Winter-skinne, or else there appeareth not any splendour at all. And it is also said to be so hot and fernide, that it casteth skinne in the Winter, according to this saying of Lucan. Et Scytale sparsis etiam nunc sola pruinis Exuuias positura suas. That is in English thus; None but the Scytall while Winter-frosts abide, Out of his spotted skinne and scales doth glyde. The outward forme or visible proportion of this Serpent, is like that which wee haue already called a Double-head, and the Latines Amphisbena, except that the tayle heereof is flatter and thicker. The length of this Serpent is like the longest wormes of the earth, and the thicknes like a helue or handle of a spade. And the greatest difference betwixt this and the Double-head, is that this goeth but one way, and the Double-head goeth aswell one way as another: and the colour hereof, is like the colour of the other. The generall description of this Serpent, is thus expressed by Nicander: Bifronti similem reperis Scytalam Amphisbenae, Pinguior est tamen, & cauda, quae nulla ferè exit, Crassior, vt quantum solita est comprendere lignum, Curua manus strictum quoties tenet ipsaligonem. Tam prolixa, vagans pluuio quám reptile coelo, Quod foecunda genus sua gignit viscera tellus. Nec postquam iuuenis venienti tempore veris, Magna Deûm quando profert serpentia mater, Liquerit obscuram consueta cubila petram, Et nitidos tepido sub sole extriuerit artus, Pandentis se foeniculi teneram exedit herbam, Sed per opaca morans imi decliuia montis Se tenet, & multo grauiter latet obruta somn , Eque alta sua conquirit sibi pabula terra: Nec licet id magno cupiat, studeatq{que} labore Arescente sitim potis est depellere fauce: Which may be englished thus; The Scytall like the Double-head thou shalt in feature find, Yet is it fatter, and tayle that hath no end much thicker is, As bigge as crooked hand is wonted for to wind The haft and helue of digging-spade the earth that rifts. As long it is as that thinne crawling worme which heauens rayne Begets on fruitefull earth, when bowells warmely moystened are, And when the mother-Goddesse great sends forth her creepine traine, Which is Yeeres-youth, fresh time of Spring, both calme and fayre. Then leaues it off his wonted bed in rocke obscure, And in what sunne he stretches out his limbes and sinnewes all, Eating the new spring-blades of Fennell-herbe, so putting teeth in vre, In holes of the declining hills so keepes both great and small, Where time in deepest sleepe of buried nature it doth passe, And beeing hungry, the earth in toppe of hole it eates, Quenching the thirst by force of dryest chappes as grasse, Though without payne, desirelesse it seekes these drinkes and meates. The byting of this Serpent, is like the byting of the Double-head, and therefore the cure is in the same manner, wherefore I shall not neede to repeate the signes thereof, or the cure in this place. And so I will conclude the story of this Serpent. OF THE SEA-SERPENTS. A Mong the manifold kinds of Sea-serpents, as well knowne as vnknown, (wherof some are like the Lamprey, some like the Myrus, and many other like the Serpents of the earth, except in their head, as Aristotle writeth, for that is more like the head of a Conger then a serpent) it peculiarly hath one kind, in colour & forme not vnlike an Eeele, in length about three cubits, in the gylls & finnes resembling a Conger, but it hath a longer snout or beake, which is also fortified inwardly with very many small sharpe teeth, the eyes not so great, a smooth or pield skinne, and hanging ouer at the backe, hauing no scales, so as it may easily be fleyed. The belly of it is betwixt redde and white, and all the body ouer is set with spires, so as beeing aliue, it is not handled without danger. And this is by Pliny called the Dragon of the Sea, which commeth out of the Sea into the Sands, and therein with an admirable celerity and dexteritie maketh his lodging place. For the snout thereof is sharper then the Serpents of the earth, therefore there-with it diggeth and hideth it selfe in the hole or hollow place which it hath made. This is also called by Pliny Ophidion, but I thinke it better to follow Aristotle, who doth call it Ophis thalattios, a Sea-serpent, the colour whereof is blacker or dymmer then the Conger. There be also Vipers of the Sea, which are in shew little fishes, about a cubit long, ha∣uing a little horne in their fore-head, the byting or sting whereof is very deadly, & there∣fore when the Fisher-men haue taken any one of these, they instantly cut off the head and bury it in the sand, but the body they eate for good meate: yet these Serpents are thought to be none other then the Fishes called Aranei, or Spyder-fishes, sauing that they are said to haue a sharpe sting in their head, and this a horne, for all Water or Sea-Serpents, haue harder and lesse heads then the Serpents of the Land. In the Germaine-Ocean there is found a Serpent about the bignesse of a mans legge, which in the tayle carryeth a sting as hard as any horne, this haunteth onely the deepest part of the Sea, yet is it some-time taken by the Fishermen, and then they cut off the tayle and cate the residue of the body. Yet I will not expresly define whether this may be called a Sea-Serpent, or a Serpentine-fish; it may be it is the same that is a Forke-fish, or Ray, which by reason of the tayle thereof, it might giue occasion to Albertus to call it a serpent of the Sea. There be also Snakes or Hyders in the Sea, for although all water-serpents, as well of the fresh, salt, & sweet waters may be called Hyders, or Snakes, yet there be some peculiar Snakes, such are those in the Indian-Sea, where they haue broade tayles, and they harme Elianus more by byting with the sharpnes of their teeth, then by any venome that is contained in them; and therefore in this they some-what resemble the Snakes of the earth. And Plinie vvriteth, that once before Persis, vppon the coasts of certaine Ilands, there were seene of Solinus these Sea- Hyders very many, of the length of twenty cubits, where-withall a whole Nauy or fleet of ships were mightily affrighted. And the like is reported of three other Ilands, lying betwixt the promontory of Carmania and Arabia; and such were those also in the Affrican-sea, who are said by Aristotle, not to be affraid of a Gally, but will set vppon the men therein, and ouer-turne it. And he himselfe saw many bones of great wild-oxen, who had beene destroyed by these kind of Sea-snakes or Hyders. The greatest Riuer that falleth into the Red-sea, is called Sinthus, the fall whereof a far off, seemeth to the beholders to be like winding Snakes, as though they were comming against the passengers, to stay them from enterance into that Land; and there is not one∣ly a sight or resemblance of Serpents there, but also the very truth of them, for all the Sea-men know when they are vpon these coasts, by the multitude of Serpents that meet them. And so do the Serpents called Graae about Persis. And the Coast of Barace hath the same noysome premonstration, by occurrence of many odious, blacke, and very great Sea-ser∣pents. But about Barygaza, they are lesse, and of yellow earthy colour; their eyes bloody, or fierie red, and their heads like Dragons. Keranides writeth of a Sea-dragon, in this ma∣ner, saying: The Dragon of the Sea is a fish without scales, and when this is growne to a great and large proportion, whereby it doth great harme to other creatures, the winds or clowdes take him vp suddenly into the ayre, and there by violent agitation, shake his bo∣die to peeces: the parcels whereof so mangled and torne asunder, haue beene often sound in the tops of the mountaines. And if this be true, (as it may well be) I cannot tell whether there be in the world a more noble part of Diuine prouidence, & signe of the loue of God to his creatures, who armeth the clowdes of heauen to take vengeane of their destroyers. The tongue of this Sea-dragon (saith hee) is like a horses tayle, two foote in length; the which tongue preserued in oyle, and carried about by a man, safegardeth him from lan∣guishing infirmities, and the fat thereof, with the Herbe-Dragon annoynted on the head or sick-parts, cureth the head-ache, and driueth away the Leprosie, and all kind of scabs in the skinne. Heere is also the picture of another Sea-serpent, very like to the serpent of the earth, be∣ing 3. or 4. cubits long, hauing a rounder belly then an Eele, but a head like a Conger, & Rondoletu. the vpper chap is longer, and standeth out further then the neather chap; the teeth grovv therein as they doe in Lampreys, but they are not so thicke, and it hath two small finnes neere the gills like an Eele. The colour of it is yellow, but the beake and belly is of Ash-co∣lour, the eyes yellow, and in all the inward parts it doth not differ from a Lamprey, and there is no man of any vnderstanding, (as writeth Rondeletius) but at the very first sight, will iudge the same to be a Serpent, although the flesh thereof be no more harmefull then the Conger or Lamprey; yet for similitude with other Serpents, I could not chuse but expresse the same in this place. There be also in the Sueuian- Ocean or Balthicke- sea, Serpents of thirty or forty foote in length, whose picture is thus described, as it was taken by Olaus Magnus, and hee further writeth, that these doe neuer harme any man vntill they be prouoked. The same Authour also expresseth likewise the figure of another Serpent, of a hundred and twenty foote long, appearing now and then vpon the coasts of Norway, very dange∣rous and hurtfull to the Sea-men in calmes and still weather, for they lift vp themselues a∣boue the hatches, and suddainely catch a man in their mouthes, and so draw him into the Sea out of the Shippe: and many times they ouer-throw in the waters, a laden vessell of great quantitie, with all the wares therein contained. And sometimes also they sette vp such a Spire aboue the water, that a boate or little Barke without sayles may passe thorow the same. And thus much for the Sea-Serpents. OF THE SEPS OR SEPEDON. A Lthough I am not ignorant that there be some which make two kindes of these Serpents, because of the two names rehearsed in the title, yet when they haue laboured to describe them seuerally, they can bring nothing or very little wherein their story doth not agree, so as to make twaine of them, or to handle them asunder, were but to take occasion to tautologize, or to speake one thing twice. Wherefore Gesner wisely pondering both parts, and af∣ter him Carronus, deliuer their opinions, that both these names doe shew but one Serpent, yet according to theyr manner, they expresse them as if they were two. For all their writings doe but minister occasion to the Readers to collect the truth out of their labours, wherefore I will follow their opinion, and not their example. Sepedon and Seps, commeth of Sepein, because it rotteth the body that it byteth: in co∣lour it neerely resembleth the Haemorrhe, yet it vsually goeth by spyres and halfe-hoopes, for which cause as it goeth, the quantitie cannot be well discerned, the pace of it beeing much swifter then the Haemorrhe. The wound that it giueth is smarting, entering deepe and bringing putrefaction, for by an inexplicable celeritie, the poyson passeth ouer all the body, the hayre rotteth and falleth from all parts, darknes and dimnesse is in the eyes, & spots vpon the body, like as if a man had beene burned in the sunne. And this Serpent is thus described vnto vs by Nicander. Iam quae Sepedonis species sit, qualeque corpus Accipe: diuersa tractum ratione figurat. Quin etiam mutilae nulla insunt cornua fronti, Et color, hir suti qualem est spect are tapetis, Grande caput, breuior dum currit, cauda videtur: Quam tamen obliquo maiorem tramite ducit. Quod fit ab hoc vulnus, magnos nocuosque dolores Excitat, interimens quia fundit & ipse venenum, Quo sata marcentes tabes depascitur artus, Indeque siccata resolutus pelle capillus Spargitur, & volitans candentis pappus achantae, Praeterea foedum turpi vitiligine corpus, Et veluti vrenti maculas á sole videre est. Which may be englished thus; Sepedons shape now take, and what his forme of body is, It doth not goe as Haemorrhe doth, but trayleth diuersly, His powled head of Haemorrhs hornes full happily doth misse, And colours are as manifold as works of Tapestry: Great is his head, but running seemes the tayle but small, Which winding, it in greater path drawes after to and fro, But where it wounds, by paines and torments great it doth appall, Killing the wounded, infusing poyson so Whereby consumed are the leane and slender sinewes, And dryed skinne lets hayre fall off apace, Like as the windes driue whites from top of thistle Cardus, Besides the body filth, as with sunne parched, looseth grace. Thus doth Nicander describe the Sepedon: now also we wil likewise relate that which another Poet saith of the Seps, that both compared together, may appeare but one, there∣fore thus writeth Lucan, vpon occasion of one Sabellus wounded by this Serpent. —Miserique in crure Sabelli Seps stetit exiguus, quem flexo dente tenacem Auulsitque manu, piloque affixit arenis. Parua modò serpens, sed qua non vlla cruentae Tantum mortis habet: nam plagae proxima circum Fugit rapta cutis, pallentiaque ossa retexit. Iamque sinu laxo nudum est sine corpore vulnus: Membra natant sanie, surae fluxere, sine vllo Tegmine poples erat: femorum quoque musculus omnis Liquitur: & nigra distillant inguina tabe. Dissiluit stringens vterum membrana, fluuntque Viscera, nec quantum toto de corpore debet, Effluit in terras saeuum sed membra venenum Decoquit: in minimum mors contrahit omnia virus. Vincula neruorum, & laterum textura, cauumque Pectus, & abstrusum fibris vitalibus omne, Quicquid homo est, aperit pestis: natura profana Morte patet: manant humeri, fortes{que} lacerti: Colla caput fluunt, calido non ocyus Austro Nix resoluta cadit, nec solem cera sequetur. Parua loquor, corpus sanie stillasse perustum: Hoc & flamma potest: sed quis rogus abstulit ossa, Haec quoque discedunt, putres{que} secuta medullas Nulla manere sinunt rapidi vestigia fati. Cynphias inter pestes tibi palma nocendi est: Eripiunt omnes animam, tu sola cadauer. Mole breuis seps, peste ingens, nec viscera solum, Sed simul ossa vorans tabificus Seps. Which is to be englished thus; On wretched Sabells legge a little Seps hung fast, Which with his hand from hold of teeth he pluckt away From wounded place, and on a pyle the Serpent all agast He staked in sands, to him ô wofull wretched day, To kill this Serpent is but small, yet none more power hath, For after wound falls off the skinne, and bones appeare full bare, As in an open bosome, the hart whole body gnaweth, Then all his members swamme in filth: corruption did prepare To make his shankes fall off, vncouered were knee bones, And euery muscle of his thigh resolued, no more did hold, His secrets blacke to looke vpon, distilled all consumptions, The rym of belly brake out fierce, which bowels did infold, Out fell his guts on earth, and all that corps containe, The raging venom still heating members all, So death contracted all by little poysons maine, Vnloosing nerues, and making sides on ground to fall: This plague the hollow brest and euery vitall part Abstrused, where the fibres keepe the life in vre Did open vnto death. The life, the lungs, the hart: O death prophane, and enemy vnto nature. Out flow the shoulders great, and arme-blades strong, Both necke and head gush out in matter, all doth runne. No snow doth melt so soone the Southerne blast among, Nor waxe so fast dissolue by heate of shyning sunne. These things which now I speake I doe account but small, That corps should runne with filthy core, may caused be by flame, Yet bones are spared in fire, heere all away they fall, Of them and marrow sweete, fate lets no signe remaine. Among the Cyniph plagues this still shall beare the bell, The soule they take, this soule and carkasse both, The Seps, though short it be, in force it is a hell, Deuouring bones, the body all vndoeth. Thus you heare that more largely expressed by Lucan of the Seps, which was more briefely touched by Nicander of the Sepedon, and all commeth to one end, that both kill by putrefaction. The length of this Serpent is about two cubits, being thicke toward the head, but thinne and slender toward the tayle. The head thereof is broad, and the mouth sharpe, it is of many colours, so as some haue thought that it could change colour like a Camaelion. The foure vnder teeth are hollow, and in them lyeth the poyson, which are couered ouer with a little skinne. Pausanias affirmeth that he himselfe saw one of them, and that Egyptus the sonne of E∣latus a King of Arcadia was slaine by one of these. They liue in Rocks, in hollow places of the valleys, & vnder stones, & they feare no winter, according to this verse of Pictorius. H hyemis calidus frigora nulla time . Which may be englished thus; Of Winters coldit hath no feare, For warme it is throughout the yeere. First of all after the wound appeareth some blood, but that symptom lasteth not long, for by and by followeth matter smelling very strong, swelling tumour, and languishing paine, and all the parts of the body affected herewith become white, and when the hayre falleth off, the patient sildome liueth aboue three or foure dayes after. The cure hereof is by the same meanes that the poyson of the Viper, the Ammodyte and Horned-serpent is cured withall. And particulerly Aetius prescribeth a spūge wet in warme vineger to be ap∣plyed to the wound, or else to lay the ashes of chaffe with the earth vppon which they are Aetius. burned, to the place, and to annoynt it with butter and hony, or else lay vnto it Millet & Hony, likewise Bay-springs, Oximell, Purslaine, and in their diet salt fish. Aristotle writeth of a little Serpent which by some is called a sacred or holy Serpent, and he saith that all other Serpents doe auoyde it, and flye from it, because whatsoeuer is bytten by it, presently rotteth. It is in length (as he saith) a cubit, and it is rough all ouer, and therefore I take this Serpent to be a kind of Sepedon. Also Aristoxenus saith, that he knew a man by touching this Serpent to dye, and afterward that the garment which hee wore at the time of the touching the Serpent, did likewise rot away. And thus much for the Seps and Sepedon. OF THE SLOVV-VVORME. T His Serpent was called in auncient time among the Graecians Tythlops and Typhlines, and Cophia, because of the dimnes of the sight thereof, and the deafenes of the eares and hearing, & vul∣garly at this day it is called in Greece Tephloti, Tefliti, & Tephli∣ni, and from hence the Latines haue taken their word, Caecilia quasi caecus serpens, a blind serpent, & it is also called Cerula, Cae∣cula, and Ceriella, as witnesseth Albertus, because the eyes there∣of Scaliger are none at all, or very small. The Italians call it, Bisa orbala, and the Florentines Lucignola, the Germans Blyndenschlycher, the Heluetians En vieux, al' annoilx, and the people of Narbon Nadels. It beeing most euident that it receiueth name from the blindnes and deafenes thereof, for I haue often prooued, that it neither heareth nor seeth here in England, or at the most it seeth no better then a Mole. The teeth are fastned in the mouth, like the teeth of a Ca∣maelion, the skinne is very thicke, and therefore when the skin is broken by a hard blow, the whole body doth also breake and part asunder. The colour is a pale blew, or sky-co∣lour, with some blackish spots, intermixed at the sides. There is some question whether it hath one or two rymes on the belly, for seeing they conceiue theyr young ones in theyr wombe: they haue such a belly by nature, as may be distended and stretched out accor∣dingly as the young ones growe in their wombe. It hath a smooth skinne without all scales. The neather eye-lidde couereth all the eye it hath, which is very small: about the head they are more light coloured, then about the other partes of the body: The tongue is clouen, and the toppe thereof very blacke. They are in length about a spanne, and as thicke as a mans finger, except toward the tayle which is more slender, and the Female is more blacke then the Male. The passage or place of excrements or conception is trans∣uerse. If they be killed with the young in their belly, the little ones will instantly creepe out at their dammes mouth, and some times (as witnesseth Bellonius) in this little serpent are found forty little young ones. They are in Greece and England, and come not abroad till Iuly, and they goe into the earth in August, and so abide abroad all haruest, and they loue to hide themselues in Corne-fieldes vnder the rype corne when it is cut downe. It is harmelesse except being prouoked, yet many times when an Oxe or a Cow downe in the pasture, if it chaunce to lye vppon one of these Slow-wormes, it byteth the beast, & if remedy be not had, there followeth mortalitie or death, for the poyson thereof is very strong. If it swell, it is good to pricke the place with a brazen bodkin, and then apply vn∣to it Fullers-earth and Vineger. There is a Triacle made of the Slow-worme, which smel∣leth like Aqua-vitae, with this some men are cured of the plague. And thus much of this Oswaldus little Serpent. OF THE SNAKE. T Here is no reasonable Learned-man that maketh question, that Anguis in Latine is a generall word for all kind of Snakes and Ser∣pents, and therefore when Virgill writeth of the Fury Alecto, how she cast a Snake into the bosome of Amata, he first of all calleth it Anguis, a Snake, and presently after Coluber & Vipera, a Serpent, as appeareth by these verses of his following. Aeneid. 7. Huic dea coeruleis vnum de crinibus anguem Conijcit, in{que} sinum praecordia adintima subdit: Vipeream inspirans animam, fit tortile collo Aurum ingens Coluber: Which may be englished thus; To her the Goddesse a Snake made of the Gorgons haire, Which to the bottom of her breast and entralls made to slyde, Inspyring to her a Vipers soule though she were fayre, For chayne of gold an Adder bout her necke did glyde. And this is the lesse to be admired or doubted, seeing the very word Anguis seemeth to be deriued of Angulosus, winding or turning, for euery kind of Serpent may be folded or winded vp together almost in euery fashion. Yet some-times, as the Graecians vse Ophis for one kind, as Haemorrhe or Hor for Aspe, so also is the word Anguis vsed for one kinde, which we call a Snake, that is, a little Serpent liuing both in the water and on the earth. Howbeit, as we shall shew afterward, when it is in the water it is called Hydrus & natrix, and when it is on the land, it is called Chersydrus. Among the auncient Pagans, Snakes were accounted the Gods of the Woods, and this caused Perseus to write this verse following; Pinge duos angues, pueri sacer est locus. That is, ô ye children, draw the figure of two Snakes, for this place, (meaning the groue of vvood) is a holy place, and sacred to the Gods. And in like sort, the Snake in auncient time was sacred to Aesculapius, because it was thought to be without venome, & to con∣taine in it many excellent medicines or remedies against other euills, and also a kinde of diuine power or helpe to driue away calamities, whereof I remember that I haue read this story in Valerius Maximus. Rome (saith he) our Citty was for three yeeres together continually vexed with pesti∣lence, so as neither the mercy of God could be obtained for the release of this euill, nor all wit, power, or industry of man put an end vnto it. At last by the care and trauayle of the Priestes, it was found in the writing and Bookes of Sybill, that vnlesse they could obtaine of the Epidaurians the Holy-Snake of Aesculapius, there should bee no end of that pesti∣lence. For which cause there were Ambassadors sent to the Citty of Epidaurus, to entreat at the hands of the Cittizens and Priests, that holy beast or Snake (as was prophanely sup∣posed) and they attayned the end of their iourney, for the Epidaurians did kindly entreat them, and sent with the Snake of Aesculapius, and then (saith he:) Tam promptam Epidau∣riorum indulgentiam numem ipsius dei, subsecutum, verba mortalium coelisti obsequio com∣probauit: That is, The very grace & power of God seconded that fauourable indulgence of the Epidaurians, and with an heauenly obsequiousnes allowed & performed the words and writings of mortall creatures, (meaning the Sibils writings aforesaid. For that Snake (which the Epidaurians neuer see but they worship, with as great reuereuce as they would Aesculapius himselfe; for it neuer appeareth but for their exceeding great good and com∣modity) beganne to slyde about the broadest streetes and noblest part of the Citty, gent∣ly looking vppon euery body, and licking the earth, and so continued three dayes, to the religious admiration of al the Beholders, bearing an vndoubted aspect & alacrity, for the obtaining and aspiring a more beautifull habitation: so at last it came to the Isle neere Rome, called Triremis, whereinto in the sight of all the Marriners it did ascend and en∣ter, and lodged it selfe round in that place, where standeth the house of Quintus Oguli∣mus: which story is thus most excellently followed by Ouid in his Metamorphos: The folke of Rome came hither all by heapes, both men and wiues, And eke the Nuns that keepe the fire of vesta as their liues To meete the God, and welcome him with ioyfull noyse: and as The galley rowed vp the streame, great store of incense was On altars burnt on both the banks, so that on either side, The fuming of the Frankinsence, the very ayre did hide, And also slaine in sacrifice full many cattell dyed. Anon he came to Rome, the head of all the world: and there The Serpent lifting vp himselfe began his head to beare Right vp along the mast, vpon the top whereof on hye, He looked round about a meete abiding place to spye: The Tyber doth deuide it selfe in twaine, and doth embrace A little Ile Triremis, for so the people tearme the place, From either side whereof, the banks are distant equall space: Apollas Snake descending from the mast, conuayed him thither, And taking of his heauenly shape, as one repayring hither, To bring our Citty healthfulnesse, did end our sorrowes quite. Thus saith Ouid: But the truth is, that the Poet did but fayne this thing for the excitati∣on and stirring vp of the minds of men to religion and religious worship of the Heathen Gods; and therefore this Snake of Epidaurus was but a fiction, and therefore in the be∣ginning of the History he maketh it to bee Aesculapius in the likenesse of a Snake, for in a vision he sheweth how that Aesculapius appeared to the Roman Ambassador, and tolde him that he would appeare in that forme, saying; Pone metus, veniam, simutachra{que} nostram relinquam, Hunc modo serpentem, baculum{que} neribus ambit, Perspice & vs{que} not a visum vt cognosceri possis, Vertar in hunc, sed maior ero, tantus{que} videbor: In quantum verti coelestia corpor a possunt. Which may be englished thus; Feare not, for I will come and leaue my shryne. This Serpent which doth wreath with knots about this staffe of mine, Marke well and take good heede thereof, for into it transformed will I be, But bigge to I will be, for I will seeme of such a size, As wherein may celestiall bodyes turne suffize. But all Poets are so adicted to fayning, that I my selfe may al s me while I imitate them, to set downe fables for truth: and if euer there were such a Snake as this, it was di∣abolicall, and therefore in nature nothing to be concluded from , and in that place of Rome called Biremis and Tiremis, was Aesculapius worshipped. And at this day in the Gardens called S. Bartholomewes-Gardens, there is a Marble-shyppe, on the side where of is the figure of a crceping Snake, for the memory of this fact, as wryteth Gyraldns. But in the Emblems and documents of the auncient Heathen, it is certaine that Aescu∣lapius, and the Snake and the Dragon, did signifie health, and from hence it came to haue the name of the Holy-Snake, and also to be accounted full of medicine. The true occasi∣on in nature, was for that about the countries of Bononia and Padua, they haue a Snake Phurnut: which they call Bisse, and Bisse-angue anca, and about Padua, Autza, which they say is harmelesse. And as well children as men, doe often take vp the same into theyr handes; with no more feare and dread then they would doe a conny, or any other tame & meeke creature. By the relation of Pellinus, it is in length fiue spannes and fiue fingers, the head also compared with the body, is long, and in the necke thereof are two blanches, and betwixt them a hollow place, the backe part whereof is attenuated into a thinne and sharpe tayle, and vppon eyther chappe they haue many teeth, which are sharpe, and without poyson, for when they byte, they doe no more harme then fetch blood onely, and these, men for ostentation sake weare about their necks, and women are much terrified by them in the hands of wanton young boyes. The backe of this Snake, (as writeth Erastus) is blackish, and the other parts greene, like vnto Leekes, yet mixed with some whitenesse, for by rea∣son it feedeth vppon herbs, it beareth that colour. They are also carried in mens bosoms, and with them they will make knots. For the same Erastus affirmeth, that he sawe a Fryer knit one of them vp together like a garter, but when hee pulled it harder then the Snake could beare, it turned the head about & bytte him by the hand, so as the blood followed, yet there came no more harme, for it was cured without any medicine, and therefore is not venomous. In the mountaine of Mauritania called Ziz, the Snakes are so familiar with men, that they waite vpon them at dinner-time like cats and little dogges, and they neuer offer any L o Asrie: harme to any liuing thing, except they be first of all prouoked. Among the Bygerons in∣habyting the Pyrenes, there be Snakes 4. foote long, and as thicke as a mans arme, which likewise liue continually in the houses, and not onely come peaceably to their tables, but also sleepe in their beds without any harme, in the night-time they hisse, but sildom in the day time, and picke vp the crummes which fall from their tables. Among the Northerne people they haue household-Snakes, as it were houshold-gods, and they suffer them both to eate and to play with their Infants, lodging them in the cra∣dles Olaus. with them, as if they were faythfull Keepers about them, and if they harme any body at any time, they account it Pium piaculum, a very diuine and happy mischaunce. But af∣ter they had receiued the Christian-fayth, they put away all these superstitions, and did no more foster the Serpents broode, in detestation of the deuill, who beguiled our first Pa∣rents in the similitude of a Serpent. Yet if it happen at any time that a house be burned, all the Snakes hide themselues in their holes in the earth, and there in short space they so encrease, that when the people come to reedifie, they can very hardly displant their num∣ber. Plautus in his Amphitryo, maketh mention of two-maned-Snakes, which descended from the clowdes in a shower; but this opinion grew from the fiction of the Epidaurian- Snake, which onely by the Poets is described with a mane and a combe, and therefore I will not expresse the Snake to haue a mane. There is no cause why we should thinke all Snakes to be without poyson, for the Poet hath not warned vs in vaine, where he saith; Frigidus, ô puèri fugite hinc, latet Anguis sub herba: Which may be englished thus; Fly hence you boyes as farre as feete can beare, Vnder this herbe a Snake full cold doth leare. For this cause we will leaue the discourse of the harmelesse Snake, and come to those which are no way inferiour to any other Serpent, their quantitie and spirit beeing consi∣dered, wherefore we are to consider, that of Snakes which are venomous and hurtfull, there are two kinds, one called the Water-Snake, the other the Land-Snake. The Wa∣ter-Snake is called in Greeke, Hydra, hydros, hydrales, karouros, & Enhydris, in Latine Na∣trix, and Lutrix. Munster calleth it in Hebrew, Zepha, and Auicen relateth certaine barbe, rous names of it, as Handrius, Andrius, and Abides, and Kedasuderus, Echydrus and Aspi∣stichon. The Germans call it Nater, Wasser-nater, and Wasser-schlange: and they describe it in the manner as it is found in their Country, which doth not very farre differ from them of our Country heere in England. It is (as they say) in thicknes like the arme of a man or child, the bellie thereof yellow, and of a golden colour, and the backe blackish-greene, & the very breath of it is so venomous, that if a man hold to it a rodde newly cutte off from the Tree, it will so infect it, that vppon it shall appeare certaine little bagges of gall or poy∣ on. And the like effect it worketh vppon a bright naked sword, if it doe but touch it with the tongue; for the poyson runneth from one end to the other, as if it were quicke, and leaueth behind a lyne or scorched path, as if it had beene burned in the fire. And if this Serpent fortune to byte a man in the foote, then is the poyson presently di∣spersed all ouer the body, for it hath a fiery qualitie, and therefore it continually ascendeth, but when once it commeth to the hart, the man falleth downe and dyeth. And therefore the meetest cure is to hang the party so wounded vppe by the heeles, or else speedilie to cut off the member that is bitten. And that which is heere said of the vvater-Snake, doth also as properly belong to the Land-snake, seeing there is no difference betwixt these, but that at certaine times of the yeere they forsake the water when it draweth or falleth lowe, and so betake themselues to the Land. They liue in the water and in the earth, (but they lay their egges on the land in hedges, or in dunghills) and especially in those waters which are most corrupt, as in pooles where there is store of Frogs, Leaches & Newtes, and but few fishes, as in the Lakes about Pu∣teoli and Naples, and in England all ouer the Fennes, as in Ramsey, Holland, Ely, and o such like places, and when they swymme they beare their breast aboue the water. They a∣bound also in Corcyra, and about Taracina in Italy, and in the Lake Nyclea, and especially in Calabria, as the Poet writeth: Est etiam illa malus Calabris in saltibus Anguis, Squammea conuoluens sublato pectore terga Atque notis longam maculosus grandibus aluum, Qui dum amnes vlli rumpuntur fontibus, & dum Vere madent vdo terrae ac pluuialibus austris Stagna colit, ripisque habitans hic piscibus atram Improbus ingluuiem, ranisque loquacibus explet Postquam: exhausta palus terraeque ardore dehiscunt, Exilit in siccum & flammantia lumnia torquens Saeuit agris, asperque siti, atque exterritus st . Which may be thus englished; That euill Snake in the Calabrian coasts abides, Rowling his scaly backe by holding vp the brest, And with great spots vpon large belly glydes, When as the Riuers streames in fountaines all are ceast. For whiles the moystened spring with raine from Southwind falls, It haunts the pooles, andin the water all blaoke it feedes, In rauening wise both fish and frogs doe fill his gall▪ For why▪ when Sommers drought enforce, then must in needes Fly to dry Land, rowling his flaming eye, Rage in the fields to quench his thirstfull dry. There be some Writers that affirme, that there is a certaine stone in a Water-Snakes head, which it casteth or omiteth vp when the skinne thereof is eyed from the bodie, and after it is so cast vp▪ it must be receiued into a p of silke, the vertue where of is to be prooued after this manner; Fill a brasse caldron or kettle full of water, and about the same vessell so filled, de this stone fast, as it were to the handle or bayle therof, and you shall find that euery day this stone so remaineth bound to the kettle▪ that the water wil de∣crease eyghteene ounces. And this Kiranides affirmeth that hee bound to a woman that had the Dropsie, and she was thereby deliuered from her disease; for euery day he found that her belly did fall the quantitie of foure fingers, vntill it came to the naturall bignesse, and then he tooke it off, for he saith that if he had not then taken it off, it would also haue dryed vp the natiue humidity. In like sort, the vertue of this stone is applyed against the rhume in the legges, or any fluxe of the eyes, eares or head, but the vse of it must not exceede the quantitie of three houres at a time. It also driueth out of the body all venomous wormes, and is a special re∣medy against their byting and stinging. This stone is also called Serpentinus and Draco∣nit s, but it is questionable whether it be generated in the head of the Snake, or by theyr vapourous breath, concurring together in the Spring or Winter-season. Some of these stones are sayd to be of a blewish-greene colour, and the forme thereof pyramidall. Alber∣tus saith, he hath seene one of them that was blacke, and not lightsome, onely about the edges of it there was some palenesse apparant, and in the superficies or vpper part therof, there was (as he writeth) a beautifull picture of a Snakes proportion, and the vertue ther∣of did put to flight venomous beasts, and also eure theyr harmefull poysons. Such like things we haue already shewed to be in the stone which the Toade is said to haue, but this stone is more likely to be the Ophites, for in the Castle of Tangra, once the seate or habitation of Charles the fourth, there is a Chappell wherein are many precious stones, wrought in the vvalls and doores, and among diuers other these Ophites. But where as there is a pyramidall forme attributed to these stones, I take it therefore that it is the same which Pliny calleth Glossapetra, for in shew it resembleth the tongue of a Snake, and the tongue of a Snake beeing great or broade at the roote, and smaller toward the end or typpe thereof, is rightly said to be of a pyramidall forme: and among the Germans it is called by a peculiar word, Naterzungen, that is, Snakes-tongue. And such a kind of stone as this Snakes-tongue, (as Agricola and some other Authors vvriteth) is found in a certaine earth neere Linuburgh in Saxonie. And Conradus Gesner affirmeth, that there is a certaine Towne in Germanie called Aenipon, where there is one of these stones halfe a cubite long, and therefore it seemeth that they are not all generated in Serpents or Snakes heads. Among the French-men this stone is called Sugne, because there be Serpents seene in it twyning their tayles together, or folding them one within another. There wont to be a superstitious way to extract or expresse this stone from out of the Snake, which was done in this manner; First, when they had taken the Snake aliue, they did presently hang her vppe by the tayle, then iust vnderneath her they did make a suffumigation of Laurell, and so did coniure the Snake, saying; Per Dominum qui te crea∣uit, lapidem tuum quem in capite tenes te instanter eijcere iubeo: This kind of enchaunting Charme, I hold not worthy to be translated, and yet let mee not be blamed for the relati∣on of it, seeing it is pertinent to this story to know all the good and euill about these Ser∣pents. And therefore, not to expresse the same at all, might argue in mee, eyther igno∣raunce, or silly precisenesse: and againe on the other side, to make it vulgar, might bring mee into suspition of some approbation: therefore let the Reader know it from mee, but vnderstand it from some other. And for mine owne opinion, I account no better of these Snake-stones then I doe of the Toade-stones, concerning which I haue already giuen my opinion in another place. And therefore what heere is related of this stone, let it be examined, and then be eyther receiued or refused. Many, and almost infinite are the Epithets which are giuen to Snakes, whereby their nature is expressed, as Aliger anguis, the winged-snake, blacke, fierce, blew, greedy, wild, cold, Gorgonean, wreathen, slyding, deadly, lightsome, spotted, martiall, threatning, purple, wholsome, scaly, terrible, winding, grym, swelling, fearefull, venomous, greene, infolded or implicite, horrible, hissing, marsian, maurian, pestilent, retorted, and such o∣ther like, as it hath pleased the seuerall Authours writing heereof to ascribe and attribute vnto it. Which we will not prosecute with any explication, but onely leaue them to the Readers pleasure, beeing onely content to nominate them. There is great account or reckoning made of their egges, which they lay in the Som∣mer-time, for first of all they are so glewed and conioyned together, partly with the spet∣tle and moystnes which proceedeth from their mouthes, and partly with the spume and froath of their owne body, that a man seeing their heapes, would iudge them to be cou∣pled together by some artificiall deuise. These egges thus knotted together in bunches, the Latines call Anguinum. The Druides or auncient Wisards of England and Scotland, haue deliuered, that if the Snake hysse, these will of their owne accord flye vppe into the ayre, and then if some Wise-man take them by preuention, before they touch the ground againe, the Snakes will follow him as fast as any horse, vntill he come to some Riuer, into the which they dare not enter. And the folly of these also proceeded so far, that they were not a shamed to report, that if one of these anguines or bunches of egges, were tyed to a peece of gold, it would swym in a Riuer against the streame. These they cōmended vnto Princes and great men to car∣ry about with them in the time of warres and other contentions, and that therefore when a Romane Knight of Volontij, was found by Claudius to carry one of these about him, hee was by the Emperours commaundement put to death. But to leaue vanities, we will prosecute the true and naturall description of their egges in this manner. They are round and soft, in colour white, cleauing (as we haue alreadie said) together in great bunches, forty, or fiftie, or a hundred in a cluster, without, they are couered with a skinne or crust, much harder & whiter then the substance contained with∣in it, which is like matter, or the rotten egges of a Henne or Ducke, in quantitie as bigge as Bullis, Plummes, and sildome bigger, beeing most commonly very round and orbicu∣lar. Yet Gesner reporteth, that he had one sent him of the proportion of a Lentill, and as great as the fist of a man, & within euery egge appeare certaine smal things, like the tailes of Serpents, or Leaches, beeing in number tenne, fiue greater and fiue smaller, one fol∣ded or lapped within another. And these haue also little pustules vppon the skinne or crusts, whereof one doth not touch the other. Out of these egges come the young ones, but I cannot affirme what great affection the old ones beare vnto them, or that when many Snakes lay their egges together, euery one in that multitude hath skill to discerne her owne egges from the other. For I haue beene with other my colleagues or Schoole-fellowes when I was young, at the destruction of many thousands of them, and neuer perceiued that the old Snake did with any extraor∣dinary affection fight for their egges, but rather forsooke them, and suffered vs to do with them what we pleased: which some-times we brake, sometimes scattered abroade vpon the dunghill out of which wee digged them, and some-times wee cast them into the next Riuer we came at, but neuer saw any of them recollected againe to their former place by the Snakes, although the place were very full of them, and therefore I conclude for mine owne experience, that Snakes cannot be perceiued to beare any exceeding loue in nature to their egges or young ones. Theyr ordinary foode for the most part, is earth, frogges, vvormes, Toades, and espe∣ciallie Paddocks, or crooke-backed Frogges, Newtes, and small fishes. The Foxes and Snakes which are about the Riuer Nilus are at continuall variance, and besides, the Harts are by nature common enemies to all Serpents. They are not in venom inferiour to other Serpents, for they infect the waters neere to houses, and are many times the causes of diseases and death, whereof the Phisitians can∣not discerne. When they bite or sting, there followeth extreame paine, inflamation, greenenes or blacknes of the wound, dizzines in the head, and death within three dayes. Whereof dyed Phyloctetes, Generall of the Fleete of Greece, in Lemnos, Daedalus & Me∣nalippus. The cure of this euill must be by Origan stamped and layd to the sore with lye & oyle, or ashes of the roote of an Oake with pitch, or Barly-meale mixed with honny and water and sod at the fire. And in drinke take wilde Nosewort, Daffadill-flowers, and Fennell∣seede in Wine. And it is also said, that a man carrying about him the Liuer of a Snake; shall neuer be bytten by any of that kinde. And this Liuer is also prescribed against the stone in the bladder, beeing drunke in strong drinke. And thus much for this Serpent. ¶ Of Spyders and their seuerall sorts: And first of those that are commonly called Phalangies. T HIS kinde of venomous creature, of the Latines is cal∣led Arnanaeus, or Aranea, & of Cicero in his bookes Dena∣tura Deorum, Araneola, and Araneolus. Of the Graecians, Arachnes or Arachne. Hesichius termeth it Stibe. The He∣brewes Doctor Bon∣hams discourse of Spyders. name it Acobitha, Acbar, Acabith, and Semamith. The Arabians, Sibth, & Phihib. In the Germaine tongue, Spinn, and Banker. In English, Attercop, Spyder, and Spyn∣ner. Of the Brabanders, Spinne. In Fraunce, Araigne. In Italy, Ragno, and Ragna. In Spayne, Arana or Taranna. Of the Illyrians it is called Spawanck. Of the Polonians, Pa∣jak, and Pajeczino. Of the Hungarians, Pox. Of the Bar∣barians, Roatan, & Kersenat. Isidore in his twelfth booke saith, that the Spyder is termed Araneus, because she is both bred and fedde in the ayre: but heerein hee hath fallen into a double errour. For if they liued onely in the ayre, and by the ayre, as hee would seeme to enforce, I maruell to what end and purpose they should so busily make and pitch theyr nettes for the ensnaring of flyes? And if they receiue their first beeing and breeding in the ayre, I cannot see to what purpose they doe eyther lay egs, or exclude small little wormes after their coupling together. But we will easily pardon this presumptious Etymologist, and deepe diuer into Inter∣pretations, with others also of the same humour, whose ordinary custome thus to dally and play with words, is with them esteemed as good as Statute-law, for the most part. There are many sorts of Spyders, and all of them haue three ioynts apeece in their legges. Est{que} caput minimum toto quo{que} corpore paruum est, In latere exiles digiti pro cruribus haerent, Latera venter habet, de quo tamen illa remittet Stamina. Which may be englished thus; Little is theyr head, likewise the body small All ouer is, and fingers thinne vpon the sides In steed of legges, out of the bellyes flancke doe fall: Yet out of which she makes her webbe to glyde. All Spyders are venomous, but yet some more, and some lesse. Of Spyders that ney∣ther doe nor can doe much harme, some of them are tame, familiar, and domesticall, and these be cōmonly the greatest among the whole packe of them. Others againe be meere wilde, liuing without the house abroade in the open ayre, which by reason of their raue∣nous gut, and greedy deuouring maw, haue purchased to thēselues the names of wolfes, and hunting-Spyders. The least sort of these weaue no webbes at all, but the greater be∣ginneth to make a small and harsh webbe about hedges nie vnto the earth, spreading and setting the same abroade in the very entry, and in voyde places neere their lurking holes, their deceitfull nets, obseruing very diligently the stirring of their deceitfull webbes, and peroeiuing them moouing, though neuer so lightly, she maketh no stay, but with all speed possible hasteneth her selfe to the place, and whatsoeuer shee there findeth, she seazeth vp∣pon as her lawfull prize. The most dangerous & hurtfull Spyders are called Phalangia, if they byte any one, (for they neuer strike) their poyson is by experience found to be so perrillous, as that there wil a notable great swelling immediatly follow therevpon. These kindes of venomous Spy∣ders, are of two sundry sorts, for some of them are lesser, and some greater. The lesser sort are very vnlike one to another, and of changeable colours, violent, libidinous, hot, styr∣ring, sharpe-topped, holding on their pace and way, as it were in iumping manner or lea∣ping-wise: and these I find to be called by Aristotle in his xj. booke De Animal. Psullas, or Pulices, and Pitheci or Simij. Of some they are called Oribates, because they are vsuallie found among Trees that grow vppon Mountaines. They are also called Hypodromi, be∣cause they liue vnder the leaues. The Phalangium or Phalanx Spyder, is vnknowne in Italy (as Pliny saith) & there are found many sorts of them. One sort of them is very like vnto a great Pismire, but much bigger, hauing also a redde head, but all other parts are blacke, speckled, and garnished with many white spots running all alongst their bodies. This formicarian or Pismire-like Phalanx, of Aetius is described to haue a body much resembling soote in colour, his necke ash-coloured, and his backe glistering, as it were with many starres on it. Nicander calleth it Agrostes, and Aetius, Lucos. The Latines terme it Venator, that is, the Hunter. This stingeth but weakely, without any paine at all, but yet it is some-what venomous, though not very much. This kind of Phalanx is often found among Spyders-webbes, where, (af∣ter the fashion of some Hunters) they beguile and intrap flyes, gnats, and Bees, gad-flyes and Waspes. (And if Lonicerus write no more then may be warranted for truth,) those great horse-flyes or oxe-flyes and Brimsees, that in Sommer-season vexe cattle, and what-soeuer they lay their clowtches on, that they hold fast and destroy; and thus liue they by taking of booties and preyes. There is no man (I thinke) so ill aduised, that will confesse this to be the same creature which Aristotle calleth Pulex, for the body of that by his description is broade, rowling, round, and the parts about the necke haue certaine lines or cuts: and besides, about the mouth there appeare and seeme to bud forth three eminenties or standings out. There is another sort of Phalangiū, called by Nican: Rox, of Aetius, Ragion, of Aelianus, Rhax, (because it is so like the kernell or stone that is found in Grapes,) and this kinde of Spyder is of a round figure, blacke in colour, the body glistering, and round as a ball, with very short stumped feete, yet neuerthelesse of a very swift pace. They haue teeth, and their mouth is nigh their belly, and when they stirre, they gather vp their feete very round. In the description of this Spyder, Aetius, Aelianus and Pliny doe wholy consent and agree in opinion, and yet Aelianus was a little besides the way, when he set downe podas macrous, for microus, long feete for short feete, and that this kind of Spyder was onely found in Ly∣bia, and not els where. That kind of Spyder termed of Pliny, Asterion, seemeth to be all one with the former, sauing that this is more knowne by his little white spots made starre-wise, & the glistering stripes or rayes where-with his body seemeth to be ouer-sprinckled. Pliny onely mentio∣neth this, as if Aristotle, Galen, Aetius and Auicen, had neuer heard of it. The most venomous and hurtfull of all these, is that which Nicander calleth Pedeoros, of colour azure, or bright blew, which hath long, high, and loftie feete on both sides of the body. The Scholiast addeth Dasu and meteoron, that is, lanugiosum and sublime, soft like cotten or wooll, and loftie or high, and not sublime lanuginosum, as Lonicerus transla∣teth it. Pliny saith, that this Spyder hath a black mossines or soft downe, although it will scarce sinke into my head, that any Spyder that is of an azure or blew colour, hath any soft hayres, or woollie substance of a blacke colour. There is another kind of Phalangium Spyder called of Nicander, Dysderi, which name is neither to be found in Aristotle, Pliny, nor Aetius, nor yet in any other auncient Author that euer I could reade, which some others call, and that very properly, Sphekion, quasi vesparium, because it is so like a redde Waspe, sauing that it lacketh wings, & this waspe∣like Spyder is of a passing deepe redde colour, and counted far worser then the blew-Spy∣der, although the azure or blew-spyder onely by touching doth infect with poyson, and will breake any Christall glasse, if it runne ouer it though neuer so speedily, or doe but touch it in glauncing wise, as Scaliger beareth witnesse. There are two sorts of Phalangie- Spyders called Tetragnatha, and the worser is that which hath halfe of his dead deuided with one white line, and another white line running crosse-wise. There is another of these not so hurtfull as the former, and this is of an ashe-colour, and very white in the hinder-parts. There is also a Spyder coloured as this is, that maketh her webbe by walls sides for the taking of flyes, which as some affirme, hath little or no venome in it at all. Aetius saith, that the Tetragnathus is a kinde of Phalangium, ha∣uing a broade and a whitish body, rough footed, with two swelling or little bunches stan∣ding out in the head, the one some-what broad, the other standing right foorth, so that at the first, one would imagine that it had two mouthes, and foure iawes. Aelianus in his xvij. booke, chap. 40. saith, that there is great store of these to be found in India about the Riuer Arrhata, where their multitude is so dangerous and mischiuous, as that they bring death and destruction to the Cittizens and people bordering nie those places. And Strabo the Geographer, in his xvj. booke telleth vs, that beyond the Lybians and on the westerne-side of Affricke, there is a Country left destitute of inhabitants, ha∣uing goodly large fieldes and pastures, beeing vnhabitable by reason of the multitude of Scorpions there bred, and of the Spyders called Tetragnathoi. There is to be found in Haruest-time amongst Pease, Beanes, and other sorts of pulse, (when they are gathered and reaped by the hand) certaine small Spyders called Kanthari∣dessi Eikela, in shew like vnto Cantharides or Spanish-flyes, of a very redde and fiery co∣lour, such as we Englishmen call Twinges, by eating or licking vp of which, both oxen & other beasts doe many times dye. There is another kinde of phalangium that breedeth al∣together in the pulse, called Ervum, which is like vnto Tares, and likewise in the Peach∣tree, which Nicander and Aetius terme Cranocalaptes, and Dioscorides nameth it Kephalo∣kroustes, because it is so presumptious bolde as to strike at the hands of trauailers by the high-wayes, when as eyther it passeth downe in glyding manner by her fine thredde, or that she tumbleth downe without any stay of thred or other support. It is a small creature to see to, keeping on the pace very fearefully, nodding with the head, reeling, and as it were staggering, beeing great and heauie in the belly, some-what long of body, and of a greenish colour. It carryeth a sting in the toppe of her necke, and striking at any, she com∣monly aymeth at those parts which are about the head. And as Aetius saith, En tois phul∣lois tes perseias trepheteis, kai taptera echei homoia tais en tais kustais psuchais: That is, they are nourished in Peach-tree-leaues, and they haue wings like vnto Butter-flyes that are found amongst Barly. Where-vpon the Scholiast seemeth to insinuate to vs, that this kind of Spyder is win∣ged, which no man (as I iudge) hath hetherto obserued. Ponzettus and Ardoynus do take the Cranocalaptes to be a Tarantula, but herein they are both mistaken, as was Rabbi Moses before them. The Spyder called Sclerocephalus, in forme differeth but little from the for∣mer. It hath a head as hard as a stone, and the lineaments and proportion of the body do much resemble those small creatures which are seene about Lamps-lights, or candles in the night time. There commeth in the last place to be described, the Phalangie- Spyder of Apulia, com∣monly knowne by the name of Tarantula, taking his denomination from the Countrey of Tarentum, where there are found great store and plenty of them. Firdinandus Ponzet∣tus imagineth, that it hath but onely sixe feete, and Ardoynus is of the same iudgment, & further faineth, that it hath a stretched out tayle. Rasis calleth a Tarantula, by the name of Sypta, Albucasis, Alsari, Rabbi Moses, Aggonsarpa, Auicen, Sebigi: Doctor Gilbert, Taranta therein following Ardoynus, which maketh two sorts of Tarantulaes, the one of a browne, the other of a yellow colour and cleere shyning, such as are to be found in Egypt. Pliny (as you read a little before) sayd that the Phalangiū was not knowne in Italy, but in these dayes they are found throughout all the Southerne parts of that Country, especially e the Sea-shore, as both Haruest-men and Hunters can well testifie by their owne wofull experience. Ponzettus was much deceiued, when in his third booke and xv. chapter entreating of the Scorpion, he expresly affirmeth the Phalanx to be such a venomous flye. It is a vengi∣ble and cruell creature (as Alexander ab Alexandro saith,) and to be touched, horrible ve∣nomous and pestilent: and most especially theyr byting is exceeding venomous in the parching heate of the Sommer, but at other seasons of the yeere not so great. There be many sorts of Spyders found in very cold Countries, but no Phalangies at all, or if there be any, yet haue they very little poyson in them, and nothing comparable to them of ho∣ter Clymates. All the sorts of Phalangies doe lay theyr egges in a nette or webbe, (which for the pur∣pose they make very strong and thicke,) and sitte vpon them in very great number, and when their broode is increased to some growth, they kill theyr damme by theyr hard em∣bracements, and fling her cleane away; and further, casting off all fatherly affection, they many times serue the male with the same sauce, if they can come handsomely by him, for he is a helper to the female in sitting ouer their egges. They hatch at one time three hun∣dred, as hath been seene by the testimony of Bellonius, in his Booke Singul obseruat. chap. 68. The Tarantulaes commonly lye lurking in holes, chincks, and chappes of the earth, and with theyr teeth they bite and wound at vnawares, incircumspect Mowers, & Har∣uest-folkes, and rash Huntsmen, who thinke of no such matter: and therefore they that are acquainted with theyr sleights, doe weare bootes and gloues on theyr hands & legges, for their further defence, so often as they goe foorth, eyther to hawking, hunting, or to reaping and mowing, or any such like labour in the common fields. All these Spyders are venomous euen naturally, for that is so setled and deepely faste∣ned in them, as it can by no meanes be eradicated or taken away. Neither suck they this The signes to know when one is bitten of any Phalanx and the effects of the same. venom and poysonous qualitie from plants or herbes, as many men thinke, which in ve∣ry truth they neuer so much as taste of, neither do they purchase this venomous complex∣ion and nature from any naughty, hurtfull, and malignant qualitie that is in their meate, by reason their chiefe foode and sustenaunce is flyes, gnats, and Bees, and without que∣stion they can sucke and draw no such cacochymicall iuyce from theyr bodies. If the for∣micarian (which I call the Pismire-like) Phalangie doe byte any man, there will presentlie follow most fearefull accidents: for it bringeth an exceeding great tumor vpon the woun∣ded place, the knees are loose and feeble, trembling of the hart, and decay of strength doe succeede, and some-times it induceth death it selfe. Nicander saith, that they who are bytten of this kind of Spyder, doe fall into such a pro∣found sleepe, as that they will neuer be awaked, for they haue and suffer that which Hi∣stories report of Cleopatra Queene of Egypt, who to escape the fingers of Pompey, because she would not be brought to Rome in tryumph, caused two Serpents called Aspes, to be sette to her breasts, which did sting her to death, whose nature is to giue a heauinesse and sleepe, without any shrinking or marke in the skinne, onely putting foorth a gentle sweat out of the face, as if one were in a traunce and hard to be awaked. The Spyder called Agrostis, maketh but a small wound with her byting, and in a man∣ner without any paine at all, and no wayes deadly, vnlesse it be but slightly regarded, or that no care be had for the cure in the beginning. The Phalangie that is called Dusderus, which is fashioned like a Waspe, if he hurt any one by his byting, it causeth the same ac∣cidents that the azure or blewish-coloured Spyder doth, but yet not altogether so terrible and vehement. And besides, the Dusder- Spyder with her poyson, bringeth a wasting and pyning away of the whole body by degrees, without any great sence. If a man be poysoned with that kind of Spyder which is found among pulse, and is (as I said before) like vnto Spanish-flyes, there will presently arise certaine pustules, risings or swellings, much like vnto blisters, as if one were scalded with hot water, in which swel∣lings there will commonly be much yellowish matter, besides, the patient is much disqui∣eted, vexed, & too much out of order, the eyes seeme to be writhed, deformed, looking asquint on the one side, the tongue faltereth and stammereth, not beeing able to sound their words, or to pronounce directly: their talke is idle, they wander and roue vppe and downe in great perplexitie, their hart beeing tormented, tossed & turmoyled with an ex∣traordinarie kind of furious passion. The Spyder that is found in the pulse, called Ervum, which is very like to Tares or Vetches, produceth by his venom the same euill effects that the former doth, and if horses or other beasts doe by chaunce deuoure any of them, their bodies are so inflamed by meanes of the vnquenchable thirstines the poyson causeth, that many times they burst a∣sunder in the midst. If the Cranacalaptes wound any man (as Pliny assureth vs) it is not long before death it selfe doe succeede. And yet Nicander and Aetius hold the contrarie, and would make vs beleeue that his hurt is soone remedied, without any great adoe: yet heerein they doe consent, that if any be hurt with any Spyder of this kinde, there will fol∣low a great paine of the head, coldnes, swymming and gyddines of the braine, much dis∣quietnes of the whole body, and pricking paines of the stomack. But notwithstanding all this (saith Nicander,) the patient is soone remedied, and all these aboue rehearsed passions quickly appeased and brought to an end. The Sclerocephalus, as it much resembleth the Cranocalaptes- Spyder in forme and pro∣portion, so in his force, effect and violence they are much alike, causing the same sympto∣mes, accidents and passions as the former. The wound that the Spyder called Ragion in∣flicteth, is very small, so that a man can hardly discerne it with his eyes, but yet if one be hurt there-with, the lowerparts of the eyes, and the eye-liddes waxe very redde. Besides, the patient feeleth a shyuering cold or chyldnes in his loynes, with weakenes and feeble∣nesse in the knees, yea the whole body is taken with a great quaking cold, & the sinewes by meanes of the violence and ranknesse of the poyson, suffer a convulsion. The parts ser∣uing to generation, are made so impotent and weake, as that they are not able to retaine the seede, nor yet to containe their vrine, which they voyde forth much like in colour to a Spyders-webbe, and they feele the like paine as they doe which are stunge vvith Scor∣pions. Of the wounding of the Starre-Spyder feeblenes and weakenes followeth, so that one cannot stand vpright, the knees buckle, sleepe and shaking drousines seaseth vpon the hurt parts: and yet the worst of all is the blewish Spyder, for this bringeth dimnesse of the eye-sight, and vomiting, much like vnto Spyders and cobwebs in colour, fainting and swoun∣ding, weakenes of the knees, heauy sleepes, and death it selfe. If a man be wounded of the Tetragnathian- Spyder, the place waxeth whitish, vvith an intollerable, vehement, and continuall paine in it, and the member it selfe withereth and pyneth away euen to the very ioynts. Finally, the whole body by receiuing any whole∣some sustenaunce, is nothing at all relieued thereby, yea and after a man hath recouered his health, yet is he neuerthelesse disquieted by much watching for a long time after, (as Aetius writeth.) Nicander in expresse wordes confesseth, that the Ash-coloured Tetrag∣nath, doth not by his byting infuse any venome or like hurt. If the speckled Phalangie of Apulia, which is vsually knowne by the name of Tarantula, doe byte any one, there will follow diuers and contrary accidents and symptomes, according to the various constitu∣tion, different complexion, and disposition of the partie wounded. For after they are hurt by the Tarantula, you shall see some of them laugh, others contrariwise to weepe, some will clatter out of measure, so that you shall neuer get them to hold their tongues, and o∣thersome againe you shall obserue to be as mute as fishes: this man sleepeth continuallie, and another cannot be brought to any rest at all, but runneth vp and downe, raging and rauing like a mad man. There be some that imagine themselues to be some great Lords or Kings, & that their authoritie, Empire and signory, extendeth it selfe farre and wide, and for that cause they will seeme to charge others by vertue of their absolute and kingly authoritie, and as they tender theyr fauours, and will auoyde their displeasure, to see this or that busines dispat∣ched; and with others againe the contrary conceite so much preuaileth, as by a strong imagination they cannot be otherwise diswaded but that they are taken prisoners, that they lye in some deepe dungeon or prison, with bolts and shackles about their feete, so many as their legges can beare, or that their necke and feete lye continually in the stocks. You shall see some of them to be cheerefull, quicke of spirit, and liuely, with dauncing, swinging, and shaking themselues. With others againe you shall haue nothing but sad∣nesse, and heauinesse of mind, browne-studies, vnaptnes to doe any thing, as if one were astonied, so that nothing but numnesse, and dulnes of moouing and feeling, seemeth to pinch them, beeing to see to very sencelesse. In conclusion, as dronkennesse to sundry persons is not all one, but much different, according to the diuersitie of complexions, & naturall constitution of the braine: so ney∣ther is the madnes or frenzie-fits of these persons all one that be infected with a Tarantu∣laes poyson: but some of them are fearefull, silent, euer trembling and quaking: and o∣thers againe are more foole-hardie, rash, presumptious, clamorous, full of noyse, dooing nothing else but call and cry out, and some fewe seeme to be very graue, constant & sted∣fast, that will not alter their purposes for a world of wealth. But let thē be affected eyther with this or that passion, yet this is common to them all, as well to one as to another, that they are generally delighted with musicall instruments, and at their sound or noyse, vvill so tryp it on the toes dauncer-like, applying both their mindes and bodies to dauncing & frisking vp & downe, that during the time of any musicall harmony, they will neuer leaue mouing their members & lymbes, like a Iack-an-apes that cannot stand still. And which is more strange, they will vse these motions and gestures when they are ready to depart this life, through the lingering stay and vehement crueltie of the poysons operation: and yet for all this, though they be so neere vnto death, yet if they heare any musicke, they come againe to themselues, newly gathering their spirits and strength, and with a greater alacritie, promptnes of mind and cheere, they foote it as frolickly as euer they did or could haue done. And thus dooing and dauncing both day and night, without any notorious intermis∣sion, & by their continued sweating, the poyson being dispersed into the pores of the skin, and euaporated by insensible transpiration or breathing out, are arlength by this meanes recouered to their former health & state of body. And if the Pypers of Fidlers cease play∣ing with their musicke, though neuer so little awhile, before the matter of the poyson be in some part exhausted, then will they make a recidiuation and returning to their former passions and griefes, with which they were at first tormented and disquieted. But yet this is the most strange, deseruing the greatest admiration of all, that all those persons vvhich are bytten or wounded by any Tarantula, they wil daunce so wel, with such good grace & measure, and sing so sweetly, and withall descant it so finely and tunably, as though they had spent all their life-time in some dauncing and singing-schoole. Neuerthelesse, Cardan, contrary to all authoritie and experience, calleth in doubt and question this poynt, and at last concludeth that they cannot be restored to health againe by musicke. Wherein he doth maruailously repugne and contrary, both Foelix Platerus, Theodorus Zuingerus, Andreas Matthiolus, Bellunensis, Ponzettus, Paracelsus, and manie other famous learned men. Trulie, a bare contradiction against so great authorities, is fatre vnworthy and vnbeseeming a man any thing (though neuer so little) seene or exer∣cised in Philosophy: much more so great a Philosopher and Phisitian as Cardan was. Yet surely I am of the opinion, that Cardan did not erre in Philosophy through ignoraunce, but hauing a desire continually to appeare more learned, he did euer bend himselfe to im∣pugne that, which he knew the soundest and best part of men did hold and maintaine. But this little which I haue heere spoken, shall serue sufficiently for the discussing of Cardans o∣pinion. And surely, if the harmonicall sound and melodie of warlike drummes and trumpets, hath cured furious, madde, and enraged horses, and mittigated the paine of their legges and hyppes, as Asclepiades hath written, I see nothing to the contrarie, but that it may helpe those persons that are wounded of any Tarantula. The Pope, with his poll-shorne generation, haue mustered diuers of the Saints together, and haue assigned and appointed to each his sundry charge and seuerall office apart, for the cure of sundry diseases. As for example, S. Anthony can heale the burning, S. Roch the pestilence, notwithstanding that, S. Sebastian hath some skill in it also. Saint Cosmus and Damian are good for all byles and swelling diseases. S. Iob for the pocks. S. Appolin for the tooth-ach. S. Petronella can driue away all manner of Agues. And S. Vitus or Vitulus, (we may well call him S. Calfe) that in times past excelled in the musicall Art, doth direct all Dauncers, or such as will leap or vault: So that if this Saint be invocated and pacified with musicall harmonie and melodi∣ous sound of instruments, he will be an excellent Apothecarie & Doctor for the curati∣on of any that are wounded with a Tarantula. Supersticious people fondly imputing that to the Patron and Proctor some-times of Musick, which ought rather to be attributed to Musicke it selfe, and motion of the body. Dioscorides concerning the common bytings of hurtfull Spyders or Phalangies, vvri∣teth thus. The accidents (saith he) that doe accompany the bytings of Spyders, are these that follow. The wounded place waxeth red, yet doth it not swell nor grow very hot, but it is some-what moyst. If the body become cold, there will follow trembling and shaking, the groyne and hammes doe much stroute out, & are exceeding distended, there is great prouocation to make water, and striuing to exonerate nature, they sweat with much dif∣ficultie, labour and paine. Besides, the hurt persons are all of a cold sweat, and teares de∣still from their eyes that they grow dym-sighted there-with. Aetius further addeth, that they can take no rest or sleepe, sometimes they haue erection of the yarde, and the heade itcheth, other-whiles the eyes and calfes of the legges grow hollow and lanke, the bellie is stretched out by meanes of wind, the whole body is puffed vppe, but in especiall the face, they make a maffeling with theyr mouth, and stammer so that they cannot distinctly be vnderstood. Some-times they can hardly voyd vrine, they haue great paine in the lower parts, the vrine that they make is waterish, and as it were full of Spyders-webbes, the part affected, hath a great pricking and swelling, which Dioscorides (as you reade a little before) will by no meanes yeeld to, and it is a little red. Thus farre Aetius, from whom Paulus Aegineta, Actuarius, Ardoynus and some others differ but a little. In Zacynthus an Ile in the Ionian-Sea, on the West of Peloponesus, if any there be hurt of a Phalangium, they are otherwise and more grieuously tormented then in any other place, for there the body groweth stiffe and benummed; besides, it is very weake, trembling, and exceeding cold. They suffer al∣so vomiting with a spasme or crampe, and inflamation of the virge, besides an intollera∣ble paine in their eares and soales of their feete. The people there doe cure themselues by bathes, into which if any sound man after that doe enter to wash himselfe, or be drawne into the same by any guile or deceitfull meanes, hee will foorth-with fall into the same greefes & passions, that the other sicke patient endured before he receiued remedie. And the like to this writeth Dioscorides, in his Chapter of Trifolium asphaltites, in these words following. The decoction (saith he) of the whole plant beeing vsed by way of fomentation, ba∣thing or soking the body, ceaseth all those paines which are caused by the byting or sting∣ing of any venomous Serpent: and with the same bathing or fomenting whatsoeuer vlce∣rous persons shall vse or wash himselfe withall, he will be affected and haue the same ac∣cidents, as he that hath beene bitten of a Serpent. Galen in his booke De Theciaca ad Pisonem, ascribeth this to miracle, accounting it a thing exceeding common reason and nature: but I stand in doubt that that Booke vvas neuer Galens, but rather fathered vpon him by some other man. And yet Aelianus writeth more miraculously, whē he affirmeth that this hapneth to some helthy persons, & such as be in good plight & state of body, neuer so much as making any mention of vlcer or sore. Thus much of the symptomes, accidents, passions or effects which sticke and waite vpon those that are hurt by Spyders. And now come I to the cure. The generall cure, according to the opinion of Dioscorides, is, that first there must be scarification made vpon the wounded place, and that often, and cupping-glasses must as often be applyed and fastened with much flame to the part affected. Absyrtus counsell is to make a fumigation with egge-shells first steeped in water, and then beeing cast on the coales with Harts-horne or Galbanum, to perfume the venomed part there-with. After that to vse sacrifications, to let bloud, or to sucke the place, or to draw out the venom with cupping-glasses: or (which is the safest course of them all) to apply an actuall cautery, ex∣cept the place affected be full of sinnewes. Lastly to prouoke sweat well, either in bed, co∣uering the patient well with cloathes, or it is better by long and easie walking to procure sweating. In some to attaine to the perfect curation, you must worke both with inward & outward meanes, such as here shall be prescribed and set before your eyes: whereof the most choyce and approued I haue set downe for the benefit of the Reader: and first I wil beginne with Dioscorides. Inward Medicines out of Dioscorides. T Ake of the seedes of Sothern-wood, Annise, Dill, the wilde Ci∣cer, of the fruite of the Cedar-tree, Plantine and Trifolie: of each a like quantity, beate them to powder by themselues, be∣fore you doe mixe them. The dose is two drammes to be taken in Wine. Likewise one dramme of the seedes of Tamariske drunke in Wine, is very effectuall. Some vse a decoction of Chamaepytis, and the greene Nuts of the Cipres-tree in Wine. There be some which prayse the iuyce of Croy-fishes, to be ta∣ken with Ashes, Milke, and Smallage-seede, and this Medicine experience hath approo∣ued and confirmed, for the ceasing of all paynes. Lye made of Figge-leaues is drunke with good successe against all bytings of Spyders. It is good also to take the fruite of the Turpentine-tree, Bay-berries, leaues of the Balme, and the seedes of all sorts of Carrets: or to drinke the iuyce of Mirtle-berries, of the ber∣ries of Iuy, or Mull-berries, the iuyce of Colewort-leaues, and of Cliues or Goose-grease with Wine or Vineger. A dramme of the leaues of Beane-Trifoly drunke in wine, the decoction of the rootes of a Sparagus, Iuyce of Sen-greene, or any opening iuyce, is good for the same. Some vse with very good successe, the leaues of the Hearbe called Balme with Niter, and Mallowes, boyled both leafe and roote, and so taken often in a potion. The leaues of the Hearbe called Phalangium, with his floures and seedes. The seedes of Nigella also serue to the same end. Medicines out of Galen. T Ake of Aristolochia, of Opium, of eyther alike much, foure drammes, of the roots of Pelletorie of Spayne three drams. Make thereof Trochisces, to the quantitie of a Beane. The dose is two Trochisces, with three ounces of pure wine. The Ashes of a Ramms hoofe tempored with Hony, and drunke with Wine. Remedies of Diophantes against the bytings of Phalangies. Take of Astrologe or hartwort 4. drams, of Pelle∣torie of Spaine as much, Pepper 2. drams, Opium one dram, make thereof Trochisces, to the quantity of a Beane, & take two of them in a good draught of pure Wine. Another more excellent. Take of the seedes of wilde Rue, Rocket-seede, Styrax, Sulphur viuum, of either alike much sixe drammes, of Castoreum two drammes, commix them to make Trochisces, as before, with the bloud of a Creuish. The dose is one scruple and a halfe in Wine. Another. Take of Myrrhe, Castoreum and Styrax, of either one dram, Opium two drammes, of Galbanum three drammes, Smallage-seedes and Annise-seedes, of ei∣ther alike two ounces and a halfe, Pepper thirty graines, make them vppe with Wine so much as is sufficient. Another. Take of Myrrhe fiue ounces, of Spiknard sixe drammes, of the the flower of Iuncus Rotundus two drammes and a halfe, Cassia foure drams, Cyna∣mon three drammes, white Pepper one dramme and a halfe, Frankinsence one dramme, and halfe a scruple, Costus one dramme, make them vp with Atticke Hony. The dose is the quantity of a Hasell-Nut, to be taken either in Mulse or water. Remedies out of Apollodorus. T Ake of wilde Comin two ounces and a halfe, the bloud of a Sea-Tortoyce foure drammes, the rennet of a Fawne or Hare, three drammes, the bloud of a Kid foure drams, make them vp with the best Wine, and reserue it to your vse. The dose is the quantity of an Oliue, in a draught of the best and purest Wine. Another. Take of the seedes of Trifolium Bituminosum, of round Astrologe, the seeds of wilde Rew, the seedes of Ervum dryed in the Sunne, of each alike, 6. drams: worke them with Wine and make Trochisces thereof, euery one of them weighing foure drams. The dose is one Trochisce. Read more in Galan in his second booke De Antid. where any man may finde many for the same purpose, which he had gathered and selected from diuers Authours. Out of Aetius, and Paulus Aegeneta. T Ake of Sulphur Viuum, and of Galbanum, of either foure drammes, of bitter Almonds excorticated one dramme, of the Gumme called Benzoin foure drammes, temper them in Wine, and after their Maceration, worke them vp with some Hony to be taken inwardly. Being thus prepared, it may like∣wise be applyed outwardly. Another. Take of Ameos two drammes, roots of Floure-deluce one dram, or else of Saint Iohns- wort, or Trifolium Bituminosum, drinke them out of Wine. Or take of Annise-seedes, wilde Carrets, Comin, Nigella Romana, Pepper and Agaricke, of either one dramme, and drinke them. Or take the leaues of the Cipres-tree, or the Nuts beaten in Wine, and three quarters of a pinte of the best Oyle, and giue it to drinke. And to this end they doe prescribe Bay-berries, Scorpion-grasse, wilde-Timbe, Ca∣lamint, Chamepytis, either to be taken by themselues alone, or with Rew and Pepper. Asclepiades vsed these that follow. Take of the seedes of Angelica and Calamint, of ey∣ther alike much, and powned together, to bee taken in sixe ounces of Wine oftentimes in a day. Another. Take of Benzoin, the seedes of the wilde-Carret, of dry Mintes and Spicknard a little quantity, temper them vp with Vineger. The dose is one dramme with pure water and Vineger mixed together about fiue or sixe ounces. Another more excel∣lent. Take Garlicke and eate it, and a bath made of the same with Wine, and likewise al those Medicines which doe heale the bytings of Vipers, are notable in these cases. Paulus Aegineta commendendeth all these very highly, and so dooth hee the seedes of Agnus Castus, or the leaues of the White-Popler. Out of Nicander. TAke of the purest Turpentine that distilleth out of the Pine-tree, and eate or drink it: for this is a very effectuall medicine, which as Bellonius reporteth he hath found to be true by experience. Out of Auicenna. THE fruite of the Mirtle-tree, Doronicum, Masticke, Assa Faetida, Dedder, or With-wind and his root, the Nut of India, and white Bdellium drunke with wine. Take of the rootes of Aristolochie, rootes of Floure-deluce, of Spicke, Pellitory of Spaine, the seedes of the wilde Carrot, blacke Hellebor, Commin, the rootes of the true Daffadill, of the fruite of the Carob-tree, the leaues of Dates, toppes of Pomgranates, Cynamon, of the iuyce of Rue, Crai-fishes, Styrax, Opium, and Carpobalsamum, of ey∣ther alike, one ounce, all of these being powdered, make thereof Trochisces the weight of one dramme or foure scruples, which is their dose. Take also in Wine the decoction of the seedes of Trifolium Bituminosum, Cipres-Nuts, and the seedes of Smallage. Besides let him drinke the graynes or fruite of the Pine-tree, Comin of Aethiopia, the leaues and rinde of the Plane-tree, the seedes of Siler Montanum, blacke and wilde Cicers, the seeds of Nigella, Sothern-wood and Dill, Astrologe or Hartwort, the fruite of the Tamariske tree: for all these are very effectuall to cure the hurtes that come by byting of any veno∣mous Spyder. The iuyce also of wilde Lettice and of Houselike is excellent. The decoction of Cy∣pres Nuts beeing boyled, especially with Cynamon, the broath of Crai-fishes, and of Goose-flesh, and likewise the decoction of the rootes of Asparagus in Wine and water. Another. Take of Astrologe and Comin, of each three drammes to be drunk in warme water: an excellent and approoued antidote. Take of the seeds of Git or Nigella tenne drammes, Comin-seede, Dancus- seede (or wilde-Carret) of either fiue drammes, Spik∣nard, Bay-berries, round Aristolochie, Carpobalsamum, Cynamon, roots of Gentian, seedes of the Mountaine Siler, and Smallage, of euery one alike two drams, make a con∣fection with Hony. The dose is the quantity of a Nut with old Wine. A confection of Assa. Take of Assa Faetida, Myrrhe, and leaues of Rue, of euery one alike quantity, tem∣per them together with Hony. The common is one dram, or two at the most in Wine. Certaine other selected Medicines out of Absyrtus, Albuca∣sis, Lullus, Rhazes and Ponzettus. T Ake of white Pepper thirty graynes, drinke it often in a draught of old Wine. Giue also the Hearbe Tymbe in Wine. Absyr∣tus. Let him drinke after it a Spoonefull of Wine distilled with Balme. Lullus. Take of dry Revv, of Costus, Horsemint, Pelle∣tory of Spayne, Cardamomum, of each alike, of Assa Faetida a fourth part, Honny so much as is sufficient, commixe them, The dose is the quantity of a Hasell Nut in drinke. Albucasis. The brayne of a Hen drunke vvith a little Pepper out of sweet Wine, or Vineger and Water myxed together. A notable Treacle or Antidote against the bytings of Phalangies or venomous Spy∣ders. Take of Tartarum six drammes, of yellovv Sulphur eyght drammes, Rue-seedes three drammes, Castoreum and Rocket-seede, of eyther tvvo drammes, vvith the bloud of a Sea-Tortoyce make an Opiate. The dose is tvvo drammes to bee taken in Wine. Another. Take of Pellitory of Spaine, and the roote of the round Aristolochie of each one part, of White Pepper halfe a part, Horehouud foure parts, temper them vp vvith Honny, the dose that is to bee giuen is one dramme. Another. Take of the rootes of Capers, the rootes of long Aristolochie or Hartwort, Bay-berries, rootes of Gentian, of each a like quantity to bee taken in Wine, or let him drinke Diassa with svveete strong Wine, Comin, and the seedes of Agnus Castus. Another. Take of the seedes of Ni∣gella tenne drammes, of Daucus and Comin-seedes, of each alike fiue drammes, seedes of wilde Rue, and Cypres Nuttes, of eyther three Drammes, Spiknard, Bay-berries, round Astrologe, Carpobalsamum, Cynaomn, the root of Gentian, seeds of Trifolium Bitumino∣sum, and of Smallage-seede, of either two drammes, make a confection with Hony so much as is sufficient. Giue the quantity of a Nut with old Wine. Rhazes. Out of Pliny, Celsus, and Scaliger. I T is good to giue fiue Pismires to them that are bitten of any Phalangium, or the seedes of Nigella Romana one dram, or Mul∣berries with Hypocistis and Hony. There is a secret vertue and hidden quality in the root of Parsely, and of wilde Rue, peculiar∣ly against those hurts that Spiders infect by their venome. The bloud of a Land-Tortoyce, the iuyce of Origanum, the roote of Behen Album, Veruaine, Cinquefoile, all the sortes of Sengreene, Cipres-roots, the Iuie, of Iuy roots being taken with some sweet Wine, or water and Vineger mixed and boyled together, are very speciall in this griefe. Likewise two drams of Castoreum to prouoke vomiting being relented in some mulse. A∣pollodorus one of the disciples of Democrates saith, there is an herb called Crocides, which if any Phalangium or other poisonous Spider do but touch, presently they fal down dead, and their poyson is so dulled and weakened, as it can doe no hurt. The leaues of the Bull∣rush or Mat-rush which are next to the root being eaten, are found to giue much help. Pli∣ny. Take of Myrrhe, of Vna Taminea, which is the berry of the herb called Ampelos Agria, being a kind of Bryony, which windeth it selfe about trees and hedges like a vine, of some called our Ladies seale, of either alike, and drink them in 3. quarters of a pinte of sod wine. Item, the rootes of Radish or of Darnell taken in Wine, is very effectuall. Celsus. But the excellentest Antidote of all other is that which Scaliger describeth, whom for his singular learning and deep conceit, I may tearme Nostris orbis & seculi ornamentum: The forme whereof in this place I will prescribe you. Take of the true and round Aristolochia, & of the best Mithredate, of either one ounce, Terra Sigillata halfe an ounce, of those Flyes which are found to liue in the flower of the Herb called Napellus, in number 18. iuyce of Citrons so much as is sufficient, mixe them altogether. For against this mischiefe of Spy∣ders, oragainst any other shrewd turnes, grieuances, or bytings of any Serpents whatsoe∣uer. Are as yet neuer found out so effectuall a remedy, or so notable an alexipharmacall. Thus far Scaliger. The iuyce of Apples being drunke, and Endiue, are the propper Bezo∣ar against the venom of a Phalangie Petrus de Albano. Thus much of inward: now wil I proceed to generall outward medicaments and applications. Fiue Spiders putrified in common Oyle, & applyed outwardly to the affected place, are very good. Ashes made of the dung of draught beasts tempered with vineger, and vsed as an ointment, or instead of vineger, water and vineger boyled together, and applyed as before, are proued to be sin∣guler. Take of vineger 3. pints and a halfe, Sulphur viuum two ounces, mix them, and fo∣ment, bath, or soke the wounded part with a Spunge dipped in the liquor, or if the paine be a little asswaged with the fomentation, then wash the place with a good quantity of Sea-water. Some hold opinion that Achates (which is a precious stone, vvherein are represented diuers forms, whereof some haue the nine masts, some of Venus, &c. will heale all bitings of Phalangies, and for this cause being brought out of India it is held at a very deere rate in this Country. Pliny. Ashes made of fig-tree-leaues, adding to them some Salt and wine. The roots of the wilde Panax being beaten to powder, Aristolochie & Barly Meale knea∣ded together and vvrought vp with vineger. Water with hony and salt applyed outward∣ly for a fomentation. The decoction of the herb Balme, or the leaues of it being brought to the forme of a Pultes, and applyed: but we must not forget to vse warme bathes, and sometimes to the place agrieued. Pliny. Cut the vaines that appeare vnder the tongue, rub∣bing and chafing the swelled places with Salt and good store of Vineger: then cause the patient to sweat carefully & warily for feare of cold. Vigetius. Theophrastus saith, that prac∣titiones do highly commend the root of Panax Chironia, Moysten the wound with Oile. Garlike bruised, Knot-grasse or Barly-meale, and Bay-leaues with wine, or with the dregs or Lees of wine, or wilde Rue applyed in manner of a Cataplasme to the wounded place. Nonus. Take of Sulphur Vivum, Galbanum, of each alike, 4. drams and a halfe, of Euforbi∣um halfe a dram, Hasell-nuts excorticated two drams, dissolue them, and with wine make towardes the curation. Flyes beaten to powder and applyed vpon the place affected. The fish called a Barble cureth the bitings of any venomous Spider, if being raw it be slit asun∣der in the middest, and so applyed (as Galen saith.) Annoint the whole body with a liquid Cerote, and foment the place affected with Oyle wherein Trifolium Bituminosum hath beene infused, or bath it often with Spongies soked in warme Vineger: then prepare & make ready cataplasmes of these Ingredients following; that is, of Knot-grasse, Scala Cae∣li, called Salomons- seale, Leekes, Cheesill or Branne decocted in Vineger, Barley-Meale and Bay-berries, and the leaues boyled in Wine and Hony. Some doe also make Cata∣plasmes of Rue or herb-grace, & Goats dung tempered with wine, Cypres, Margerom and wilde Rue with Vineger. An emplaster of Asclepiades. Take of the seedes of wilde Rue, and Rocket-seeds, Stauesackre, Rosemary-seedes, Agnus-Castus, Apples and Nuts, or in stead of these two, of the leaues of the Cipres-tree, of each alike, beate and temper them altogether with vineger & hony. Aetius. Apply the decoction of Lupines vpon the affected place, the eschar being first remoued, then annoint it in the warme Sun-shine, or against the fire with the fat of a Goose tempered with wilde Rue and Oyle, or else of the pap of Barly, and the broth of Lupines make a cataplasme. Oribasius. The Filberd-Nut that groweth in India, healeth the bytings of the Phalangies. Auicenna. Goates dung dis∣solued with other conuenient Cataplasmes, and Oyle of Worme-wood, and the iuyce of Figs helpeth much. Kiranides. Apply oftentimes a cold peece of iron to the place. Pe∣trus de Albano. Foment the place very often with the iuyce of the Herbe Plantine. Hilde∣gardis. The artificiall Oyle of Balme is singular. Euonimus. A fomentation made of the leaues and stalkes of Imperatoria called Master-wort, and continued a good space: or else Veruaine bruised and stamped, the iuyce being taken in wine, and further, the hearb outwardly applyed, is much commended of Turneiser. Beate and stampe Hearb-agrace with Garlicke and some Oyle, and apply it outwardly. Celsus. There bee but a fevv particular cures for the bytings of Spyders that Physitions mention: yet some they doe, although the generall bee most effectuall. Pliny against the byting of the Formicarion or Pismire-like- Phalangie, that hath a red head, commendeth much another Phalangie of the same kind, onely to be shewed to the wounded patient to looke vpon, and to be kept for the same purpose, though the Spyder be found dead. Also, a young Weasell dryed, and the belly thereof stuffed with Coriander-seede, and so kept till it be very old and stale, and drunke in wine, being first beaten to powder, is likewise good for the same intenti∣on. There is a certaine little beast called Ichneumon, of some it is called Mus Pharaonis, Pha∣roes Mouse, and for the enmity vnto Serpents, it is called Ophiomorchus, (as Bellonius repor∣teth) being bruised and applyed to the byting of any Waspe-like- Phalangie, doth vtterly take away the vemone of them. It often entereth and searcheth out the seats and holes of venomous Spiders and Phalangies, and if it finde any of them, shee haleth and tuggeth them cleane away as a Pismire doth a small graine of Corne: and if the Phalangie offer a∣ny resistaunce, the Ichneumon sparing no labour, pulleth her the contrary way: and by this struggling and striuing, sometimes it so falleth out that the Ichneumon is wearied, and then she breatheth a little, and gathering new strength and courage, setteth againe vpon the Phalangie with a fresh assault, and woundeth her many times, so that at length she ca∣rieth her to her owne lodging there to be deuoured. If the Tarantula haue hurt any one, the best remedy is to styrre and exercise the body continually without any intermission, whereas in all hurtes that are caused by any other Spyders, rest and quietnesse are the best meanes (as Celsus affirmeth.) But their Antidote is Musicke and singing. Christophorus de Honestis counselleth to take forth with Theriaca Andromachi without any delay. He also aduiseth to take Butter tempered vvith Hony, and the roote of Saf∣fron in Wine. His propper Bezoar (saith he) or the greene Berries or seedes of the Len∣tiske-tree. Ponzettus in his booke De venenis, aduiseth to take ten graynes of the Lentisk∣tree in Milke, or an ounce and a halfe of the iuyce of Mull-berry-leaues. In the encrease of the griefe, he cureth them with Agaricke, or the White Vine: and after much sweating, they are to be comforted and refreshed or strengthened with colde Medicines, as with the Water of Poppy, and the like (Meru a saith) they are to be reme∣died with the stone of Musicall Instruments, dauncing, singing and colours: concerning the three former I will not contend, but howe they should receiue any part of helpe or health from vewing of any colours I doe not well vnderstand: considering that the eye-sight of all those that are bitten of a Tarantula, is quite taken away, or they see but ob∣scurely, as being mightily deceiued in their obiects. Andreas Matthiolus in his Commentaries, vppon the sixth booke of Dioscorides Chap. 40. reporteth a verie strange story of a cerraine Hermit, his olde friende and acquain∣tance dwelling neere vnto Rome, who cured all those who were bitten or hurt of any ve∣nomous Wormes or Serpents, which in this last place I will insert (although some may say that it is needlesse, and belongeth not at all to this discourse in hand, or else will not beleeue it.) For when as any of the Inhabitants in those parts were wounded of any poy∣sonous Serpent, by a Messenger forthwith fignified the same to the old Hermit: who by and by demaunded of the Messenger whether he could be content to take or drinke any Medicine in the stead of the sicke patient: which if the other assented too, promising to take it, the Hermit commaunded him without any further delay, to pull off his right foot shoe, and to set his foote on the earth, drawing a line round about the foot with his knife: then he willed him to take away his foote, and within the space of the line so marked, he writ or engraued these words following. Caro Caruze, sanum reduce, reputata sanum, E∣manuel paracletus. Then immediatly he pared away the earth with the same whittle, so that all the Cha∣racters were quite defaced, putting rhe same earth into a little earthen vessell full of Wa∣ter, letting it there so long remaine, vntil the earth sunke to the bottome: Lastly he stray∣ned the water with a peece of the Messengers shirt, or some other Linnen that hee wore next to his skin, and being signed with the signe of the crosse, gaue it him to drinke: but surely (saith Matthiolus) it was marueylous strange, and a wonderfull thing to consider, how that the wounded patient was perfectly healed, euen at that very houre and moment of time, that the Messenger tooke the aforesaide potion of the Hermit, as it is plainely knowne vnto my selfe, and to all the people that dwell round about in that Territory or Shire. And thus much of this heremiticall curation by the way. Now will I come into my path againe. A man may find a great sort, both of these, and the like remedies both in Pli∣ny, Dioscorides, and other concerning the hurts of Spiders, but I thinke I haue beene a lit∣tle to tedious, and you may imagine that I do nothing but Ta arachina hiphainein, Arane∣arum telas texere: That is, In a friuolous matter and of small moment spend infinite and curious labour: so that I had more neede to craue pardon for my long discourse about this subiect: wherein though many things may want to the satisfaction of an afflicted & searching head, yet I am sure here is inough to warrant the discharge of my good will, & to repell the censure of the scrupulous; —Nunc imus ad illam Artificem, mens nostra cui est conformis, Arachnem Quae medio tenerae residens in stamine telae. Quà ferit eurus atrox, trepidat volitantibus auris Tangitur, veresono vagus illi byssus ab aestro. In English thus; Vnto Arachne, skilfull mistrisse let vs come, To whom conformed seemes the mind of man, She sits in middest of web, her tender feet vpon: Whiles she is tost with Eastwind now and than, She trembleth at the noyse of ratling winds, As when the humming Fly hard wagging finds. OF THE TAME OR HOVSE▪ Spyder. A Ristotle, that diligent searcher and seeker out of Nature and naturall causes, termeth this kind of Spyder a very gallant & excellent wise creature. King Salomon himselfe, at whose high wisedome all succeeding ages haue and will admire, a∣mongst those foure small creatures, which in wisedome doe out-strippe the greatest Phylosophers, reckoneth the Spyder for one, dwelling (as he saith) in Kings courts, and there de∣uising and weauing his inimitable webbe. The Poets fayne that the Spyder called Arachne, was in times past a mayden of Lydia, who beeing instructed of Minerua in the cunning skill of Embroiderie and spynning, grew therein so excellent, and tooke such a pride in the same, (for you must remember she was a woman) that shee sti ly denied, facing it out in brauing-wise, that Minerua was neuer the Instructer, and so arrogant presumpteous shee was, as that she feared not to challenge her Mistresse-Goddesse to worke with her, if shee durst for her eares enter the lyst, in all manner of Embroidery, Tapestry-workes, and the like. At which, Mistres Minerua beeing netled, and taking the matter in dudgeon thus to be prouoked, and withall reprehending the mayde very sharply for her saucines, in a pelting chafe she brake all to peeces the wenches imagery worke, that was so curiously wouen, & so full of varietie, with her shittle. The Mayde heereat beeing sore greeued, halfe in de∣spayre not knowing what to doe, yeelding to passion, would needes hang herselfe. But Minerua taking compassion vppon her, would not haue her die forth-with, but transfor∣med her into a Spyder, hanging by a fine small thred or line. At{que} ita viue quidem, pende tamen, improba, dixit▪ Lex{que} eadem paenae, ne sis secura futuri Dicta tuo generi, seris{que} nepotibus esto. In English thus; So liue indeede, yet hang, thou woman vile She said, and let the selfe-same law of punishment Be vnto thee and all thy of spring, while All kindred lasts: shall not futures thee content. If any be desirous to know more of this fable, let him read the famous Poet Ouid, who hath excellently written thereof in the sixth booke of his Metamorphosis, although some what differing from this of Pliny. The Graecians besides doe write, as Coelius Rodoginus in his 7. booke Lectionum Antiq: chap. 16. affirmeth, how that there was in the Country of Attica a certaine man called Phalanx, who had also a Sister named Arachne, & when Pha∣lanx had perfectly learned of Minerua the Military-Science, and all other warlike exerci∣ses and offices that belong to a Souldiour, and that shee had like wise instructed his Sister Arachne in weauing, spynning, and needle-worke, they concluded a match betweene themselues, but the Goddesse beeing much displeased with such a shamefull and incesti∣ous marriage, marring their fashion, shee disfigured them both into the number oc cree∣ping creatures, laying t'his as a iust punishment vpon them, to be destroyed of their owne young ones. But it is at euery ma ns choyse to interprete these to be eyther fables and Canterburie∣tales, or true historicall narrations: yet most are of this mind, that Arachne first inuented spynning of lynnen, weauing, and working with the needle, which this mayde of Lydia first learned from the Spyders, taking her first samplers and patterns from them for imita∣tion; which no man ought to thinke to be strange, sith the craft of playstering or working things in earth, and the Art of curing the eyes, was first taken from the Swallowes. The Eagles haue taught vs Architecture, and men first receiued the light of Phlebotomie or letting of blood from the Hippopotamus, which is a Beast liuing in the Riuer of Nilus, hauing feete like an oxe, and his backe and mane like a horse, with a winding tayle, and tusked like a Bore. The byrd of Egypt called Ibis, first gaue knowledge to Phisitians how to vse the Glister; yea, dogges, Goates, Harts, Storkes, Swallowes and Weasells, haue taught men many medicines for many diseases. To beginne therfore to make an enumeration of their prayses, I will declare vnto you, the rich vertues and externall goods of the body, fortune and mind. And first to beginne with the good gyfts of their bodies. If you will weigh and consider the matter and sub∣stance of a Spyders body, you shall find it to be light, pertaking much of fire and ayre, (be∣ing two of the most noble and effectall elements in operation) and hauing but little earthy draggines and drossie refuse. If you behold their figure, they haue eyther a Sphaericall and heauenly, or at least-wise an Ouall forme, which is next to the Sphaericall, as beeing the perfectest of all other. Besides, theyr substance is thinne, fine, glystering and subtile, yea although they seeme now and then to be fatted vp with plenty of meate, that they grow as bigge in bulke as a Wallnut, and if the learned Cardan may be credited, they growe o∣ther whiles as great as a Sparrow: yet for all that, if you cast your eye on them against the light, hanging in their webbe, she glittereth and shineth on all parts like vnto the Chriso∣lite, which is a kind of precious stone, shining with a golden colour quite thorow, causing a pleasant reflexion to the eyes, and piercing them with singuler delight. The colour of a Spyder is some-what pale, such as Ouid ascibeth to Louers, and when shee hangeth aloft in her webbe, with her legges wide and large spread abroade, h e per∣fectly and liuely expresseth the shape and proportion of a painted starre: as if Nature had intended to giue and bestow on her, not onely the resemblance & counterfeit similitude of heauen, but also the very luster of the starres themselues. The skinne of a Spyder is so soft, smooth, exquisite, pure, cleane and neate, that it farre surpasseth by many degrees, the polished skinnes of those mayds that haue the Greene-sicknes, or those young whores that are so carefull in sparing no cost to preserue their beauties; And it is of such creerenes and perspicuitie, that it will easilie represent the visage and phisnomie of any beholder of it, much like vnto a fine glasse. Further, it hath fingers, for all the world such as faire vir∣gins desire to haue, that is to say, long, round and slender, beeing also endued with the most exquisite sence of touching that possibly can be imagined, insomuch that it farre sur∣mounteth any mortall man liuing, and all other creatures in the world besides, according to that old and common verse. Nos aper auditupraecellit, Araneatactu Vultur odorata, Lynx visu, Simiagustu▪ Which may be englished thus; To heare, the Bore, to touch, the Spyder vs excells, The Linx to see, the Ape to tast, the Vulture for the smells. It hath also feete, but yet not such a multitude as Scolopendraes haue, nor yet none at all, as the meanest ranke and sort of creatures, nor yet sixe onely, as the common sort of insects: but it hath eyght, a number which the meanest Sophister in Cambridge can re∣solue, is next to the perfectest of all numbers, and these feete consisting of a sesquitertiall proportion, which of all Mathematicians is esteemed to be wonderfull and admirable, so that although the hinder be shorter then the fore-legges, yet notwithstanding they retaine a mutuall harmonie, equalitie, and semblable concordance. Many Phylosophers haue not dared to affirme that they are blind, but they themselues in this poynt are most blind. For if they be depriued of their eyes and eye-sight, I would faine be resolued hovv they could make choyce of such apt and conuenient places for theyr hunting trade, and vvith what guide, Captaine or Director they doe knit, fasten and tye one thred to another, in such admirable order, ranke and range, as the excellentest worke-men in the world stand amazed at. Or els how they can come to the knowledge when theyr webbes are broken by chaunce, or haue the skill to mend them, beeing eyther shaken or burst in sunder. Be∣sides, we may all obserue by our owne experience, that if one take a flye, and hold her at the side of the webbe, the familiar, tame, or domesticall Spyder espying her, will make all the hast she can through thicke and thinne, yea though she be farre off, and will boldly as∣sayle and deuoure her, and will (as a man may say) take her out of your handes into her owne, which thing I haue often seene done. Surely therfore those persons are halfe blind, who neither can conceiue nor see, that Spyders can see. Now in that a Spyder seemeth to some to be an vglie and lothsome creature, and euen at the first sight to be detested in regard it is so mishapen, I will not impute this to any de∣fect or default that is in their forme or proportion, but I rather ascribe it to their excee∣ding great melancholy (for this humour is most predominant in them) & to their strange lusting or longing, by reason of naughty humours gathered about the mouth of the sto∣macke, yea, and to their lacke of stay & moderation in their lusts and affections. For they are no lesse beholding to Nature for their elegancie, handsome and proper feature, then the Butter-flye, or any other cut-wast whatsoeuer. To conclude this poynt, GOD hath giuen and bestowed vppon this strange and admirable body, as strange and admirable a disposition, nature, and constitution of the skinne. For a Spyder changeth her skin, not once onely in a yeeres space, (as Vipers doe) but once in the space of a month she renew∣eth it, (if she be well fedde and not hunge -starued) and putteth on a new hue and skinne, and the same in all poynts more fesh, exquisite and neate, then the old skinne which shee cast off. Amongst the blessings of Fortune, or rather Fate, I esteeme this to be the excellentest that is conferred vpon them, in that they beare about with them an inexhausted matter or substance in their bellyes to make infinite webbes, yea such a matter as can neuer be con∣sumed, wasted or spent, of which they haue such foyson, as they are able to drawe out in length and breadth, and to spinne and deuise innumerable threds and stuffe to make and finish theyr cobwebbes of, so that if a hundred flyes light in them, they are of force suffici∣ent so to entangle and ensnare them all, as they shall neuer get out againe. Furthermore, although they haue neither foode nor sustenaunce layd vp in Barnes or Storehouses, as Pismires haue, nor yet any meate set or sowed for them as Bees haue, but get theyr com∣mons onely by taking of booties casually, by hunting at all aduentures, and by chauncea∣ble preyes, yet doe they satisfie nature, and expell hunger, by meanes of that hazardous and suddaine spoyle; and sometimes you shall see them growne very thicke, fatte and vn∣wieldie, by reason of these good dishes, and fat messes of meate which they can purchase by their ovvne good-wary husbandry, or by any meanes can lay on, and catch into their clawes. Besides, I must tell you that Spyders haue not the least benefit of Fortunes fauour be∣stowed vpon them, when as beeing inglutted with courtly viands, they haue beene glad to exchange lodgings with an old Courtier, called Padagra, or the Gowte, for it skilleth not whether of these two names you will chuse. For you haue heard before, the wise king Salomon to haue giuen them the most prime and chiefest places in Princes Courts, that she might be an absolute patterne and president of wit, wisedome, moderate frugality and vertue, and in diuers poynts of regiment they might be our directors for imitation. Fur∣ther, beginning their cobwebs, they haue wholy bent and applyed themselues to theyr most ingenious weauing trade, they haue giuen themselues to curious and superstitious hunting, to captious taking at aduantage, watching and espying their prey, nothing at all fearing any ambushes, treacheries, trappes or treasons, and no whit dreading any assaults, much lesse tryumphes: and to speake briefely, the wisest creature of the wisest King, bea∣reth a great stroke, dominereth, and hath (I may say) the sole soueraigntie in the most no∣ble, greatest, and stateliest courts of Princes. And yet for all these vertues, (since Salomons time) there haue risen vp and followed some Princes and Gouernours, vnaduised, desperately naught, and vnthriftie, and such as were not well in their wits, and of those it cannot easily be spoken how churlishly they entertained her, how they sent out theyr proclamations and warrants, to expell the Spy∣der, to cast her downe to the earth, tread vnder-foote, vndoe and kill, as a night-thiefe, with beesoms, broomes, brushes and long poles, so that by and by in a trice, there flocked certaine Furies of hell, (for so I thinke I may iustly terme them) rubbing, brushing, spun∣ging, making cleane sluts-corners, beating and sweeping together, and whatsoeuer they found curiously wrought, all that either they swept cleane away, or tore all to peeces, so that hardly they could escape the busie beesoms of these quick-sighted and lewd naughty∣packs. Surely, miserable was her condition and estate, which in all that abundance of wealth, she onely beeing indigent and bare, detesting idlenes withall, might not yet be admitted tenant for some short terme of time, in some small odde corner, in such large and spacious buildings, nor yet find one hole to liue at peace in. Againe, the great men, the rich my∣sers and penny-fathers, following the example of their Princes and Gouernours, they in like sort sent packing out of their doores, the Schoole-mistresse of all labour, diligence & vertue, and will not permit a webbe, the very patterne, index, and anathema of superna∣turall wisedome, to remaine vntouched. This same Spyder which now we treate of, in times past, (it was when dogges & cats could speake, for now because there are so many languages in the world, they turne all to plaine barking) tooke a long iourney into a strange Country, and by good hap, fell into company with my Lady Podagra, although (beeing none of the best footers,) shee could hardly keepe way with the Spyder, but legged still behind, and hauing now spent one whole day in trauell, the night approching that they should take vp their Inne to lodge in, they resolued betwixt them two to betake themselues to sundry houses; so the Spyder entering the Towne, tooke vp her lodging in the house of a certaine wealthy Cittizen, (I suppose it was neere the signe of the three Tunnes in Tower-hill-streete,) where when according to her vsuall manner, hating lewd idlenes, shee began to buckle herselfe to her wonted taske, in weauing her fine Tapistrie, and other wrought workes, beeing suddenly espyed of a company of Corner-creepers, Spyder-catchers, Fault-finders, and Quarrell∣pickers, they presently beginne to expostulate the matter with her, & not staying to heare any reason for her iust defence, they made no more adoe but gaue her Iack-drummes en∣tertainement, thrusting her out of doores by the head and shoulders, to seeke her lodging where she could find it; so that she lay abroad without doores a whole Winters-night in the raine and cold: and all this happened about Saint Nicholas time, when dayes are at the shortest. Now in the meane space, Podagra, hauing none of the best feete, but indeede beeing some-what lame, when she could trauaile no further, shee by chaunce light into a poore Cottage or cabbin of turffes, builded with Elder-poles at the Townes end, and yet in this poore shed she could hardly be receiued, but yet at length, through her incessant sollicita∣tion beeing admitted, she sate downe to rest her weary bones, so at length, supper beeing prepared, the tender-harted Lady found course fare, and commons farre shorter & more homely, then euer Lipsius found in Westphalia: she indured all the miseries in the World, that pittie it was to see. There was no infelicitie, no distresse, misfortune and aduersity to be compared vnto hers, for there was nothing but a little browne Barly-bread sette on the boorde to suppe withall, which this nice peece so much misliked and abhorred, as that at the very sight thereof shee was ready to disgorge her queasie stomacke, then was there brought some cock-crowne keale, hauing no good relish, for they were not seasoned with salt, so that they were in taste very vntoothsome, & when they should drinke, they fetcht a little cold water out of a pitte or pond, neere adioyning to the house in a wodden-dish, whereof if Mistresse Podagra had fetched but one sound carouse, it would haue made her runne through an Alphabet of faces: but there was no remedy, hunger breaketh stone∣walls, and hard neede makes the old wife trotte, shee must either quench her thirst vvith that, or fast. Hauing thus thinlie supped, shee called for her Chamber, where they shewed her to clymbe vp a Ladder, (you would haue taken it to haue beene the fleas ladder,) & behind a corner there was prouided a bed stuffed with good Wheate-chaffe in steed of Downe, to harden her hyde, and vnder her head a hard Oken-logge, with the Winnow-cloth, and the one end of an old Hop-bagge, cast ouer in steed of a Couerlet, (for the poore man and his wife, thought that none but the Lord of the Towne, & women in child-bed vsed pillowes.) But Podagra not knowing how to mend the matter, groned & made a lamen∣table noyse, and fetching a thousand sighes, she couched herselfe downe. But alas what ill rest she poore hart tooke that night, and how ill her soft and tender limmes agreed vvith such cold cheere and entertainement, I referre my selfe to your secrete thought. So soone therefore as the day began to breake, she started vp, and the Spyder and she met together againe at the appointed time and place: and first of all the Spyder beganne much to com∣plaine of the inciuilitie of the rich chuffe his host the Citizen. Podagra cōtrariwise found as much or more fault with the short and sharpe commons, thinne dyet, miserable pouer∣tie, and indigencie of his poore, bare and leane host, shewing her blacke and blew markes and prints, into whose tender skinne the bordes and plancks had made a deepe impressi∣on. For which cause, beeing both much discontented, after the matter was thoroughlie debated betwixt them two, they determined and resolued with themselues, that the night following they would change hostes and Innes, that is, that the Spyder should enter into some poore Cottages, or houses of poore men, and Podagra should bend her course vnto Noble and great mens houses, to Kings courts & princely Pallaces, to see what good was to be done there. So Podraga not beeing vnmindfull of her word, went with a fine and Snayle-like pace to the house of a certaine fat, rich, and well-monied man, & quietly laid herselfe downe at the feete of this corsie sire: which as soone as the gentle host cast an eye vpon, it is strange to tell with what mildnesse, with what alurement and gentle entreatie, with what promptitude and alacritie shee was welcommed; they prepared soft pallats of Downe for her to lye vpon, the Bedsteds and the Settles whereon shee should rest, were couered with pillowes, soft cushions, and carpets of Persia, the kitchen smokes, and all things are in a readines to giue her a most friendlie welcome. According to the wordes of the Poet, where he saith; Iam dapibus mensas onerant et pocula ponunt. In English thus: Spred are the tables, and laded with store Of delicates, the cups filled, could receiue no more. Briefely, hee was in all poynts for person and prouision such a one, as Chaucer in his workes describeth his Franklin to be. White was his beard as the Daisie, And of complexion he was sanguine, Well loued he by the morrow a soppe in wine: To liuen in delight was euer his won, For he was Epicures owne sonne, That held opinion, that plaine delight, Was very felicitie parfite. An housholder, and that a great was hee, Saint Iulian he was in his Countree, His bread, his ale, was alway after one, A better viended man was neuer none. Without bake-meate was neuer his house, Of fish and flesh, and that so plenteouse, It snewed in his house of meate and drinke, Of all dainties that men could thinke. After the sundry seasons of the yeere, So changed he his meate and his suppere. Full many a fat Partrich had he in mue, And many a Breame, & many a Luce in stue, Woe was his Cooke, but his sawce euer were, Poynant and sharpe, and ready all his gere. His table dormaunt in his Hall alway Stoode ready couered all the long day. Nay, hether thy brought fat and crammed Capons, Phesants, Quailes, Turtle-doues, Larkes, and Nitingales. I passe ouer Turbot or Byrt, Gilt-heads, Sturgion, Salmonds, Soales, and the like, for they were not vnfurnished of all these, and of other store of shell∣fish, as Lobsters, Creuishes, Oysters, and whatsoeuer the Sea yeelded that might by loue or money be purchased: for I will not speake of a great number of Riuer-fish and Foules that are to be had about Peterborow, Wittlesey-mare, and those Fennish-countries, for thi∣ther he sent his people to puruay for him all that was rare and daintie. Here was Redde∣wine, White, Claret, Muscadell, Rhenish, sweet-wines, harsh-wines, wine of Falernum, of the Ilands of Creta, Chio, Madera, & those that are called Baleares, lying neere vnto the coast of Spayne. To speake nothing of their reare-suppers, their fine Marchpanes and curious confec∣tions, made with sundry deuises, and exquisite skill of the Apothecarie. And to conclude, there was no wanton fare vnsought for, no delicate iuncate, no curious trimming and pickednes that might gratifie, no fayre words, and pleasant enticements fitte to draw and allure, nor no delectation whatsoeuer omitted, that might seeme to please this great Lady Podaga, (for you must vnderstand shee was none of the coursest sort of Ladies, whereof there be many now adaies, for all men know she was a gentlewoman borne, both by the father and mothers side, as beeing the daughter of Bacchus and Venus,) and all this, I say, was done, to please both her and her two sweet Sisters, Chiragra and Congra, a poxe take them all three, and so I will let them goe, and come to the Spyder, who likewise beeing directed by some fauourable Planet, boldly and luckily trudged to the poore-mans house. —At{que} ibimiro Dogmate, quidvé marem deceat, deceat{que} maritam Addocet, at{que} suo sese studore saginat. Which may be englished thus; And there by strange instructions and documents, She teacheth male and female how to liue, That is, both man and wife how to encrease their rents, Whilst she, on her owne sweat and fat doth thriue. But some man may heere obiect & say, I see here no such great blessings of Lady For∣tune, more then besides a bare commendation, and good happe in this their exchange of lodging & lodgers. Yes surely, very much, not onely because she spendeth her dayes more freely and safely from danger, but also because as out of a high watch-tower, she no longer beholdeth in the houses of poore persons, lauish and needlesse prodigality, bankettings, quaffings, ryotting, playes, dauncing, dicing, and whoring, and a thousand vanities and villanies besides, whereof she knew herselfe conscious, and a priuie witnes vnto, whilst she liued in the Halls and Bowers of the rich and wealthier sort: who when they had thrust cleane from house and home, and for euer banished the Spyder, (the true Schoole-mistres of industrie and frugality) straight-wayes the lazie Gowte called Podaga, arrested them. Had it not beene better for them (thinke you) to haue graunted a dwelling place, to a sa∣uing, wise, prudent and harmelesse little creature, then to haue giuen entertainement to such a base, blockish companion and guest as the Gowte is? Let not therefore, rich, coue∣tous men wonder, if many times they be tormented with this sore griefe, sith they vvill neither admit true Phisitian nor Phisicke, I meane, trauaile, diligence, industry, modera∣tion and paines-taking, with the like. Now, to touch the rich and rare gifts and graces of the mind, and other noble qualities and dispositions of Spyders, I know not whither I should first beginne with the commen∣dations of their prudence, iustice, fortitude, temperance, their Philanthropia, Philoponia, Autarkeia, their humanitie and loue towards men, their studious industry and loue of la∣bour, their contentation as hauing sufficient, and coueting no more then is allotted vnto them. Theyr wittinesse, pollicie, quicknes and sharpnes of sence, their cleannie neatenes, with many other vertues, or else her admirable cunning and skilfulnesse in their weauing trade. Their prudence, sagacity, and wittines to coniecture thinges future, appeareth in this one thing, that when great aboundance of raine, flouds, swelling and ouerflowings of Riuers, are like shortly to come to passe, and thereby to threaten houses, they then be∣gin to build their webs higher by a great deale, then their vsuall custome heretofore hath beene. And this is another proofe of the same, in that they weaue not at all in a cleare Sun-shine-day, or when it is faire and calme weather, when Flyes are most busie in flying about to and fro, that they may be the better at leasure to giue themselues to hunting and watching after them, to take aduantage, and if any chance to light into their nets, forth-with to seize vpon them for their repast. Againe, when houses are ready to drop downe, they with their Copwebs first of all fall, and get them away packing, alter their clymate to some other surer place and dwel∣ling to rest in. If any thing touch her body that is hard or painefull, she immediatly draw∣eth vp her Legges round on a heape: for this end as I thinke, to feele the lesse paine, and the better to prouide for the health and safety of her head, the director and gouernor of the whole body: for if any other part be hurt, she can easily cure it. Who hath manife∣sted and made knowne this vnto them? Hath any Chaldaean Starre-gazer, or figure-flin∣ger, by the sight and position of the starres shewed it vnto them? No certainely. But a di∣uine prudence and forefeeling knowledge, originally in-bred by Nature to eschewe that which is hurtfull, which is diffused into the Spyder, and as that famous Poet Virgilius hath excellently described: Spiritus intus alit, totosque infusaper artus Mens agitat molem. In English thus; Mind bred within, infused in all limbes, Mind mooues the bodies lump, and skinnes. Furthermore, so soone as they espy their enemie to be caught in their nets, they do not first of all bite and pricke him to death in any hostile manner, but they seeme with theyr feet gently and softly to stroke him, yea euen to entreat and allure him with tickling, and as it were clipping & colling, vntill they haue throughly ensnarled him within their clam∣my and viscous gins, and beeing at length wearied, turmoyled, and tyred with strugling and striuing in vaine, the silly fly is made vnable either to get away, stir, or resist. So ha∣uing made sure worke with one, she hyeth her to the Center of her Web, obseruing and prying whether any newe prey will come to hand againe: so by this pollicy you shall see sometimes ten, yea otherwhiles twenty flyes hanging aloft by their strings and fine spun threds. They onely feede on the iuyce of Flyes, and the dry carkase without any moysture, they cast away as vnprofitable stuffe to be vsed about any businesse. Moreouer, because the Female Spyder is sometimes greater then the Male, therefore shee chuseth her stan∣ding in the lovver part of the webbe, that the poore flyes may seeme carelesse of her, yet is she very obseruant, taking great heed to thē: for they seeing her hanging below, think∣ing themselues safe, do fly vp into the vpper part of the net, but by this meanes seeking to shun Charybdis, they fall into Scilla, out of the smoke into the fire: for though in regard of her bodies magnitude, she bee vnwieldy, and very vnfit to bestir her selfe in this hunting office: yet the crafty Male-Spyder playing Bo-peepe, and pretending some other busi∣nesse, though minding another, playing the disembling Hypocrite, hydeth himselfe in the toppe of the Webbe, noting vvell all occurrents, and being seene of no body, there he lurketh till some fish (as we say) come to his net, and hauing espyed his prey, beeing more light, quicke, and liuely, it is a wonder to see, how diligent, vigilant, and earnestly bent hee is to bend his course vvithall expedition tovvard this nevv offered booty: for there hee vvill not suffer it very long to remayne, but descending in a tryce, Euro velocius, as quicke as a Bee from the vpper vnto the lovver part (as I haue sayde) of the Copweb, hee maketh a very quicke dispatch, and hauing royally feasted himselfe, hee reserueth and layeth vp all his other enemies in one place, hanging thē all by one of his own threds till some conuenient time to feast himselfe againe withall. Then againe when as by reason of long continuance and length of time, the webs haue lost their binding, viscosity, and tenacious substance, either the Spyder vnweaueth them againe, or else confirmeth and new strengthneth them afresh as it were, with another new glutinosity, or fast-bynding clamminesse. This their worke being finished, they either containe themselues in the cen∣ter of it, or keeping sentinell and warding in the vpper part, they hold as it were in theyr hands a thred drawne from the middest or Center, by which they haue easie accesse and recesse to and fro to their beguiling nets; and withall this thred scrueth to another profi∣table vse, for if any prey bee entangled by the light moouing and stirring of it, they pre∣sently feele and perceiue it. But yet to make sure worke, least she should wind downe in vaine, or take bootlesse labour about nothing, she draweth backe the thred a little now & then, and by the motion and peize of it, she putteth all out of doubt, being fully ascertai∣ned of the truth. Then first, withall celerity possible shee hies her to the Center, which thing the silly flyes being fast, and hauing some sence and feeling (as it should seeme) that they are taken Tardie, and fordeeming some hurt, are as quiet as a Mouse in a trappe, making no noyse at all, least eyther they might bewray or betray themselues, and so be further enfolden in danger. But alasse in vayne doth hee auoyde warre, that cannot enioy peace, and boot∣lesse doth he shunne payne that hath no meanes to feele rest: for this auayleth but little, for they are not able withall these fetches to deceiue their sharp inquisitors, for both with eyes and feet, they finely and quickly run vnto them, making a cleane riddance & quicke dispatch of them euery one. But yet it is more to consider what great iustice and equity is obserued to be in Spyders. For there is not one of them so ill bent, so malepartly sawcy, and impudently shameles, that can be seene to lay claime vnto, or to take away anothers wife or mate: there is none that entermedleth with anothers substance, businesse, or weauing: euery one liueth con∣tented by the sweate of his owne browes, by their owne proper goods and industrious paynes taking procured by their owne bodily labour: so that not one of them dare enter his Neighbors freehold, but it is accounted a haynous matter, and very vnlawfull, not one dare be so knack-hardy as to breake into their friendes and fellowes fence and enclo∣sure, but it is euen detested as a wicked and cursed deede. Non it a mortales, quos (proh doler) vrget habendi Tantus amor, domibus domus, aruis additur aruum, Monticulus monti, maribus mare, si{que} potessint Addiderint mundum mundo, sua{que} omnia dixînt. In English thus; Then would not mortall men so farre engag'd in loue to haue (A death it is to thinke) house to house, and land to land to lay Hyllocke to hill, sea vnto sea, to adde they craue, And if they could, world vnto world, and all their owne would say. Againe they spread not their ginnes and nets to entrap and deceiue good Creatures, and such as serue for mans vse and benefit, but for Waspes, Horse-flyes, or Gad-bees, and Brimsees, or Oxe-flyes, that in Summer-time vexe Cattle: for Drones, Gnats, and other Flyes, which to vs are like to Theeues, Parasites, Bawdes, Pandors, and such Mer∣chants that bring whoores and Knaues together, being Telluris mutile pondus, an vnpro∣fitable burthen of the earth, seruing to no good vse. And besides being a vermine of sin∣guler, and incomporable courage, she dare aduenture to giue the onset vpon those young Serpents that are called Lyzardes, who if they offer to contend and striue against her fury, she quickly enclaspeth them round about, and very nimbly and eagerly seizeth vpon both their lips, byting and holding them together so fast, that she neuer giueth ouer till they be dead: and at length hauing vanquished her enemies, she like another Cacus carrieth them into her caue, or some secret corner. Now if it happen in this hot bickering, that the nets be either broken, entangled, or plat∣ted together, by and by without further delay shee fals to mending what was amisle, to vnwind, spred open, & to set them again in due order and frame very ingeniously. What say you to this? That the Spyder beareth a deadly feude and mortall haired to Serpents: for if so be the serpent at any time lie in the shadow vnder any tree to coole himselfe wher Spyders do resort, some one of thē leuelleth directly at him, descending downe perpendi∣cularly to the Serpents head, and with such a violence striketh & dasheth at his head with her beake or snout, that her enemy withall making a whizzing noyse, and beeing dryuen into a giddinesse turning round, hisleth, beeing neither able to breake asunder the thred that commeth from aboue, nor yet hath force inough to escape it. Neither is this specta∣cle or pageant ended, vntill this our champion with her battering, hath sent her life to Pluto, the God of Hell for a present. Let men therefore bee silent and cease wandering at the amphitheatriall fights of the Romans, which were made with seats and Scaffoldes to behold playes and sightes, and where were presented to the Spectators the bloudy fights of Elephants, Beares and Lyons, sithence a small Spyder dare challenge to the fielde, & fight hand to hand with a black and blew Serpent, and not onely to come downe to him in daring-wise, but also victoriously to tryumph ouer him, entirely possessing all the spoyle. Who would not maruaile that in so smal or in a maner no body at all, which hath neither bones nor sinnewes, nor flesh, nor scarce any skinne, there could be so great force, such incredible audacity and courage, such sharp and hard bytings, and inuincible fury? Surely we must conclude necessarily, that this cannot proceede altogether from their va∣liant stomacks, but rather from GOD himselfe: In like sort, they dare buckle with toads of all sortes, both of the Land and Water, and in a singuler combate ouerthrow and de∣stroy them, which thing not onely Pliny and Albertus doe recite and set downe for a cer∣taine truth, but Erasmus also in his Dialogue entituled De Amicitia, maketh mention of, reporting how a certaine Monke lying fast asleepe, on whose mouth a foule Toade sat, and yet by the Spyders meanes was freed from all hurt. Yea, they dare enter the com∣bat with winged and stinged Hornets, hauing not soft, but stiffe bodies, and almost as hard as horne, who although she many times breaketh through theyr Cobwebbes with mayne strength (as Rich men vndoe and make away through Lawes with Gold, and by that meanes many times scape scot-free) yet for all that, at length beeing ouermastered hand to hand in single combat, and entangled and ensnarled with the binding pastinesse and tenacious gluysh substance of the web, she payeth a deere price for her breaking into anothers house and possession, yeelding at length to the Spyders mercy. I will not omit their temperance, a vertue in former ages proper onely to men, but now it should seeme peculiar to Spyders. For who almost is there found (if age and strength permit) that contenteth himselfe with the loue of one as hee ought, but rather applyeth his minde, body, and wandering affections to strange loues But yet Spyders so soone as they grow to ripenesse of age, doe choose them Mates, neuer parting till death it selfe make the separation. And as they cannot abide corriualles, if any wedlocke breakers, & Cockold-makers dare bee so snappish to enter, or so insolently proude as to presse into anothers House or Cottage, they reward him iustly with condigne punnishment for his temeratious enterprize, & flagitious fact: First by their cruell bytings, then with banish∣ment or exile, and oftentimes with death it selfe. So that there is not any one of them, that dare offer villany or violence to anothers Mate, or seeke by any meanes vnlawfully to abuse her. There is such restraint, such strict orders, such faithfull dealing, vpright∣nesse of conscience, and Turtle loue amongest them. Further, if you looke into theyr house-keeping, you shall finde there is nothing more frugall then a Spyder, more labo∣rious, cleanely, and fine. For she cannot abide that euen the least end or peece of her thred to be lost, or to be placed and set to no vse or profit, and they ease and releeue themselues by substitutes, that supply their roomes and take paines for them: for whilest the Female weaueth, the Male applyeth himselfe to hunting, if either of thē fall sicke and be weak, the one of them doth the worke of both, that their merits and desarts may be alike. So some-times the female hunteth whilest the male is busie about Net-making, if the one stand in neede of the others help and furtherance. But yet commonly the Female-Spyder being enstructed of her Parents when shee vvas young and docible, the art of spinning and weauing (which custome was amongst vs al∣so in times past) beginneth the cobweb, & her belly is sufficient to minister matter inough for such a peece of worke, whether it be that the nature or substance of the belly groweth to corruption at sunne set and appointed time (as Democritus thought) or whether there be within them a certaine lanigerous fertility naturally as in Silke-wormes. Aristotle is of opinion, that the matter is outward as it were a certaine Shell or pill, and that it is vn∣wound, loosened, and drawne out by their fine weauing and spinning. But how soeuer it be, certaine it is they will not by their good-wils loose the least iot of a threds end, but ve∣ry prouidently see to all though neuer so little. The loue they beare to their young breed is singuler, both in the care they haue for their fashioning and framing to good orders, & for their education otherwise, for the auoydance of idlenesse. For the Male and Female doe by turnes sit vppon their Egges, and so by this way enterchangeably taking courses, they doe stirre vp, quicken, moue, and encrease naturall and liuely heate in them, and al∣though it hath beene sundry times obserued, that they haue brought forth three hunde∣reth young ones at once, yet do they traine them vp al alike without exception, to labour, parsimony, and paynes taking, and invre them in good order, to fashion and frame all thinges fit for the weauing craft. I haue often wondred at their cleanlines, when to keepe all things f om nastinesse or stinking, I haue beheld with mine eyes those that were leane, ill-fauored, and sickly, o come glyding downe from the vpper to the lower part of theyr buildings, and there to exonerate nature at some hole in the web, least either their shop, work-house, or frame might be distained or anoyed. And this is sufficient to haue spoken of their politicall, ciuill, & domesticall vertues: now will I proceede to discourse of their skill in weauing, wherewith Pallas was so much offended: for the Scholler excelled her Maisters, and in fine cunning and curious worke-manship, did far surpasse her. First then let vs consider the matter of the web, whose substance is tough, binding, and glutinous, plyant, and will sticke to ones fingers like Birdlime, and of such a matter it is compoun∣ded, as it neither looseth his clamminesse and fast-holding quality, eyther by siccity or moysture. The matter whereof it is made, is such as can neuer bee consumed, wasted, or spent whilest they liue, and being so endlesse, wee must needes heere admire and honor the ne∣uer ending and infinite power of the great God: for to seeke out some naturall reason for it, or to ascribe it to naturall causes, were in my minde meere madnesse and folly. The Autumnall Spyders called Lupi or Holci, Wolues or Hunters, are thought to be the most artificiall and ingenious: For these draw out a thred finer and thinner then any Silke, and of such a subtilty, that theyr whole vveb being folded together, vvill scarce be so heauy as one fine thred of Linnen being vveighed together. Edouardus Monimius hath very finely and eloquently described both the Males and Females, Heptam. Lib. 7. in these vvordes following; —Ille domum venatu pascit, at ista Moeonio graciles orditur tegmine telas. Stanniparus venter, vomifilus lanifer, ipsi Palladiam cumulat{que} colum, calatos{que} ministrat Ipsius est fusum pondus, quod fila trahendo Nectit & intorquet parili sub tegmine ducta. Illo suam à medijs orditur Daedala telam, Et gracili tenues intendit stamine tractus. Tela iugo iuncta est stamen secernit arundo, Inseritur medium radijs subtegmen acutis, At{que} oram à centro panum sibi staminat illam Peruia tela patet gemina de parte, feroci Ne concussa euro frangantur stamina, quo{que} Musca v lax tenij stretur sinuamine cassis, Reticul primam vix muscula contigit oram. Mors abit in telae centrum, vt discrimine parua Vinciat ipse suo perigrinam Casse volucrem. Which may be englished thus; The Spider-male by hunting game the houses charge doth feede, The female with Moeonian art begins to spin fine thred, Out of web-breeding-belly, breast woolly, vp-casting twine, Whereto the distaffe she applyes by art of Pallas fine: To her belongs the pressed waight, which doth the teale out draw, Both matter, art, and substance she, doth shield by natures Law. Like Daedala out of her middest, her web she doth begin, And stretching out her tender worke, by pressing it full thin; The which is ioyned as in yoke, yet parted by a cane, And planted is the middle roofe, in a sharp beamy frame. And from the Center draweth a thred like wooll to lye vpon While double worke on euery part doth fortifie her wone: Wherewith the blasts of Easterne wind vnbroken web resists, And tender Fly ensnarled, is fallen into those lists. While scarce vpon the edge or brim, this little Flie doth fall, But by and by death seazeth her within webs center thrall: And so the stranger winged flye with little or no adoe, She ouer commeth speedily when it the nets comes too. Of these Cobwebs there is great diuersity, varietie, and difference: for some of them are loose, weake, slacke, and not vvell bound: other contrarywise well compacted, and close couched together, some Triangular, othersome Quadrangular; and some are made with all sides equall, but yet not right angled or cornered like a quarry of Glasse: others are made of such a forme as will best fit the place where they hunt, you shal perceiue some of them to be orbicular, if they weaue betweene two trees, and you shall finde this fashi∣on also among Weedes, and oftentimes in Windowes hanging together with many lines and different crosse-peeces: so that herein no man can deny but that they shew forth great reason, wisedome, admirable iudgement, and much gallant beauty worthy to see to. Surely Euclides that famous Geometrician, who was Scholler to Socrates, & liued in the time of Ptolomy the first, neede not be ashamed to learne from Spyders the drawing of di∣uers of his figures and Geometricall proportions. And Fishermen also from them haue beene glad to learne the trade of Net-making. For from whom else could they borrow & fetch such liuely representations, and such expresse patterns, then from such a skilfull and industrious Schoole-Maister. But the strength of the webbe seemeth to bee very strange, which although it seemeth to be the most weake of all other things, yet wee see it is able to hold Hornets, and to endure the furious blastes of raging windes, and if one throw or cast dust vpon it, the same will rather be distended and stretched, then either vndone, bro∣ken, or felled downe. And yet this is the strangest of all, which many a man would thinke impossible but that it cannot be called in question, in regard we may daily see and obserue the proofe there∣of commeth to passe, that a Spyder should beginne to place the one end of her thread on the one side of a little Riuer or Brooke, and how shee should fasten the other end on the other side of the water, considering that Nature neuer taught them the art eyther of fly∣ing or swimming. I would faine bee resolued of this scruple, by what meanes they sayle and passe ouer. Or do you imagine that they iump ouer, or conuay themselues ouer in a leape. Surely I dare not say so, I much doubt thereof, I will not stand to it. The next that best deserueth to be Marshalled in the second ranke and place, for cun∣ning worke in weauing and spinning, be those kind of Spyders who build and labour a∣bout the rafters of Houses, in Sellers, floures, and about boardes, plankes, and such like, and of these some are wilder which doe fashion and dresse a broad, thicke, and plaine web in the grasse and fieldes all about, stretching out the same like a saile, or some fine spread Sheete or Curtaine. If you would duely looke into their worke, and throughly consider the strange trydles of their Loomes, the Shittles they vse, their Combs to make all cleane, the stay of their Loomes wherewith they dresse theyr Webbes, theyr Crosse-lines, the frame, Woufe, their fine spinning-stuffe, and so their whole Cobwebs, you shall therein very plainely behold the finger of God working in his poore and weake creatures. And questi∣onlesse in this excellent mistery they are able to put downe, and farre Surmount the Ae∣gyptians, the Lydeans, Penelope, Tenaquil, (who was Wife to Tarquinius, Priscus) Ame∣stris, that famous Queene of Persia, Claudiana, Sabina, and Iulia, Noble Roman Ladies and all the Queenes of Macedonia, who were esteemed and renowned throughout the whole world, to be the most curious & exquisite in this kind of faculty, & who in needle-worke, Tapestry, and all Embroidery were thought to be peerelesse. For these Spyders (euen contrary to all reason and Art, as we thinke) make a firme, strong, and well com∣pacted Web with no lines or threds drawne Crosse-wise or ouerthwart, but onely made out and continued still in length. When their worke is perfected and brought to an end, they lay ouer it, and couer it round about with a certaine glutinous kinde of Ielly, or slimed iuyce, by touching of which theyr prey being entangled, pay full deerely for their ignorant rashnesse, vnaduised heede-taking, and lacke of fore-sight: Their web is of the colour of the ayre, or rather none at all, which easily deceiueth the foolish vnwary Flyes, and such as be quicke-sighted, circumspect, and can espye thinges very quickly. For if it did represent any notorious and manifest colour, they would prouide in time against such dangerous deuises, and take heede of such traps aforehand. The baser and vilder sort of Spyders, and such as bee least reputed of, are those that liue in holes, Caues, and corners of Houses, and these in respect of the former are slowe, slothfull, and lazy: fat, grosse, and bigge-bellyed corner-creepers, and these spinne a very homely, rough, and course thred, which they spread abroad, and set before the hollowe places and chinkes of Walles. These kindes of Spyders haue a more heauy and ponde∣rous body, shorter feete, and more vnhandsome to worke or finish any Webbes in their Loomes, and as for separating, deuiding, picking, carding, or suting their stuffe, they are very Bunglers to the first mentioned. They apprehend and take their preyes rather casually, then take any great paynes to seeke farre for it, because their hole being great outwardly, seemeth to be a good and con∣uenient lurking corner, and a safe corner for Flyes to hide themselues in: but beeing en∣tangled and arrested in the very entrie, they are snatched vp sodenly by the watchfull Spi∣der, and carryed away into the more inward places of their dennes, there to be slaughte∣red. For they watch and Ward aloft in high Walles and buildings, as well to deceiue such Birdes as lye in waight to entrappe and take them at vnawares (as Sparrowes, Ro∣bin-redbreasts, Wrennes, Nightingales, and Hedge-Sparrowes vvhich are all sworne e∣nemies to Spyders: and besides, the more easily to beguile the silly flyes suspecting no harme at all. There be certaine other sorts of Spyders which as yet I haue not described, as for ex∣ample, there is one (the greatest of all that euer I saw) which spreadeth her artificiall nettes in the Haruest-time amongst the leaues and branches of Roses, and entangleth eyther a∣ny other little Spyder that is running away, or else Gnat-flies, and such like, being caught at vnawares, and hanged by a kind of thred, whom she first pursueth and layeth hold on with a wonderfull dexterity and quicknesse: and being fast hanged, and so made sure, she there leaueth them, for the satisfieng of her hungry appetite till another time. The body of this Spyder is in colour somewhat whitish, resembling S umme or frothy some, and almost of an Oule-figure. The head very little, placed vnder her belly, being withall croo∣ked or bending like hookes, as is to bee seene in the Crab-fish, and her backe garnished with many white spots. This is one kind of Autumnall Lupi, or Wolfe-Spyder, which in a very short space of time do grow from the bignesse of a little Pease, to a very great bulk and thicknesse. There are also found in all places of this Countrey, Long-legged-Spyders, who make a very homely and disorderly Web. This kind of Spyder liueth altogether in the fields, her bo∣dy is almost of a round figure, and somewhat brownish in colour, liuing in the grasse, and delighting in the company of Sheepe: and for this cause I take it, that we Englishmen do call her a Shepheard, either for that she keepeth and loueth to be among their flockes, or because that Shepheards haue thought those grounds and feedings to bee very holesome wherein they are most found, and that no venomous or hurtfull creature abideth in those fields where they be: And herein their iudgment is to be liked, for they are indeed altoge∣ther vnhurtfull, whether inwardly taken, or otherwise outwardly applyed; and therefore because I am tyed within a Teather, and thereby restrained from all affectionate discour∣sing or dilating vnlesse of poysonous and harmefull Creatures, I will come into my path againe, and tell you of another certaine blacke Spyder, that hath very short feete, carry∣ing about with her an Egge as white as Snow vnder her belly, and running very swiftly: the Egge being broken, many Spyders creepe forth, which goe forth with their damme to seeke their liuing altogether, and climing vpon her back when night approcheth, there they rest, and so they lodge. In rotten and hollow trees there are also to be found exceeding blacke Spyders, hauing great bodies, short feet, and keeping together with Cheese-lips or those creeping vermine with many feet, called of some Sowes. We haue seene also (saith the learned Gesner) Spy∣ders, that were white all ouer, of a round compact and well knit body, somewhat broad, liuing in the flowers of Mountaine Parsely, amongst Roses, & in the greene grasse: their Egges were little, slender, and very long, their mouth speckled, and both their sides were marked with a red line running all alongest. He tooke them to bee very venomous be∣cause hee saw a Marmoset or Monky to eate of them, and by eating thereof hardly to es∣cape with life, yet at length it did well againe, and was freed from further daunger, onely by pouring downe a great deale of Oyle into his throat. I my selfe haue also seene some Spyders with very long bodies and sharp tailes, of a blackish or darke red colour, & I haue noted other-some againe to be all ouer the body greene-coloured. I will not deny but that there are many other sorts of Spyders, and of many moe different colours, but I neuer reade, or yet euer saw them: Neque enim nostra fert omnia tellus, The ages ensuing peraduenture will find more. I will onely put you in remembrance of this one thing worthy to be obserued, that all weauing and Net-making Spyders, according as they grow in yeares, so do they acquire more knowledge, and attaine to greater cunning and experience in their spinning trade: but carrying a resolute and ready will to keepe both time and measure with that Musicke which best contents most eares, I will now passe to speake of the propagation and vse of Spyders, and so I will close vp this discourse. The propagation of Spyders for the most part is by coupling together, the desire and action whereof, continueth almost the whole Spring time, for at that time by a mutuall and often drawing, and easie pulling of their Web, they do as it were woe one another, then approch they nearer together: and lastly are ioyned with their hippes one agaynst another backwards as Camels do, for that is the most fit for them iu regard of the round proportion and figure of their bodies. In like sort do the Phalangies ioyne together, and are generated by those of the same kinde, (as Aristotle saith:) But the Phalangies couple not in the Spring-season, as the other Spyders doe, but towardes Winter, at what time they are very swift, quicke, nimble, and of most certaine hurt, more dangerous, & more venomous in their bytinges. Some of them after their coupling together, doe lay one Egge onely, carrying it vnder their belly, it is in colour as white as Snow, and both Male and Female sit vpon it by turnes. Some Spyders do exclude many little Egges very like vnto the seedes of Poppy, out of which it hath beene obserued, that sometimes there haue beene hatched three hunde∣reth Spyders at one time, which after their vaine and idle plying and sporting together in their Webbe, at length come foorth with their Damme, and towardes euening they all trudge home, vntill each one hath learned, and perfectly attained to the skill to spinne his owne webbe, that therein he may spend the residue of his dayes in more pleasure, ease and security. They make exclusion of their young breede in hopping or skipping-vvise, they sitte on their egges for three dayes space together, and in a months space their young ones come to perfection. The domesticall or House-Spyder, layeth her egges in a thinne webbe, and the wilde-Spyder in a thicker and stronger, because they are more exposed to the iniuries of winds, and lie more open to the rage of and fury of stormes and showers. The place and country where they are, helpeth much, and is very auaileable to their ge∣neration. There is no country almost, but there be many Spyders in it. For in the country about Arrha, which is in Arabia foelix, there is an infinite number of them to be found, and all the Iland of Candie swarmeth with Palangies. Strabo saith, that in Ethiopia there be great number of Phalangies found, of an exceeding bignes: although as Pliny saith in his eight booke and 58. chapter, there are neither Wolfes, Foxes, Beares, nor no hurtful creature in it: and yet wee all know, that in the Ile of Wight (a member of England,) the contrary is to be found, for although there were neuer dwelling in it, Foxes, Beares, nor Wolfes, yet there be Spyders ynow. The Kingdome of Ireland neuer saw Spyders, and in England no Phalangies will liue long, nor yet in the Ile of Man, & neere vnto the Citty of Grenoble, in that part of France which lyeth next Italy, Gaudentius Merula saith, there is an old Tower or Castle standing, wherein as yet neuer any Spyder hath beene seene, nor yet any other venomous creeping creature, but rather if any be brought thether from some other place, they forth-with die. Our Spyders in England, are not so venomous as in other parts of the world, and I haue seene a madde man eate many of them, without eyther death or deaths harme, or any o∣ther manifest accident or alteration to ensue. And although I will not denie, but that ma∣ny of our Spyders beeing swallowed downe, may doe much hurt, yet notwithstanding we cannot chuse but confesse, that their byting is poysonlesse, as being without venome, procuring not the least touch of hurt at all to any one whatsoeuer; and on the contrarie, the byting of a Phalangie is deadly. We see the harmelesse Spyders almost in euery place, they climbe vp into the Courts of mightie Kings, to be as it were myrrours and glasses of vertue, and to teach them ho∣nest prowesse and valiancie. They goe into the lodgings, shoppes and Ware-houses of poore-men, to commend vnto them contentment, patience, labour, tolerance, industry, pouertie and frugalitie. They are also to be found in rich-mens chambers, to admonish them of their duties. If you enter into your Orchard, they are busie in clothing euerie Tree; if into the Garden, you shall finde them amongst Roses; if you trauaile into the field, you shall haue them at their worke in hedges, both at home and abroad, whetherso∣euer you bend your course, you cannot chuse but meete with them, least perhappes you might imagine, or else complaine and find some faults, that the Scholemistres and perfect president of all vertue and diligence were in any place absent. Who would not therefore be touched, yea and possessed with an extreame wonder at these vertues and faculties, which we daily see & behold with our eyes. Philes hath briefe∣ly and compendiously described their nature, properties, inclinations, wit and inuention in his Greeke verses, which beeing turned into Latine, sound to this effect. Araneis natura per quam industria est, Vincens puellarum manus argutias. Nam ventris humores super vacaneos Ceu fila nent, textoris absque pectine Et implicantes orbium volumina, Aduersa sublegunt ijs subtegmina: Sed licijs hinc densioribus plagas In aëre appendunt, nec vnde conspicor Sejuncta cùm sit omnis a medio basis Quae fulciat mirabilem operis fabricam. Et staminum fallit ligamen lumina Subtilitatis sub dio discrimine. Firmatur autem densitas subtegminis, Raras in ambientis oras aëris. Muscis, culicibus, et id genus volantibus. Intensa nectens fraudulenter retia, Quod incidit, jejuna pascit hoc famem, Vitam{que} degit haud quietis indigam. Suspensa centro, cassibusque prouidens, Ne fila rumpat, orbiumque dissuat Nexus retertos flaminis vis irruens. Which may be englished thus; Industrious nature Spyders haue, Excelling Virgins hands of skill, Superfluous humours of bellyes saue, And into webbes they weaue them still, And that without all Weauers combes Their folding Orbes inrolled are, And vnderneath their woofes as tombes, Are spread, the worthy worke to beare, And hang their threds in ayre aboue, By plages vnseene to th'eye of man, Without foundation you may proue All their buildings firmely stand: Nor yet cleere light to eyes most bright Can see the coupling of their thred, The thinnesse of the woofe in sight, On pinnes of ayre are surest spred. On gnats, and sillie winged flyes, Which guilefully in nets they take, They feede their fill when they espy, And yet their life much rest doth make. They labour to, and doe prouide Gainst winds and things that breake their twayles, That bands from tacklings may not slyde, When greater strength doth them assayle. And although Minerua hath nick-named the Spyder, calling her malepart, shamelesse, and sawcie. Martiall, wandring, straying and gadding. Claudianus, rash, presumpteous, and aduenturous. Politianus, hanging and thicke. Iuuenall, dry. Propertius, rotten. Virgill, light. And Plautus, vnprofitable & good for nothing, yet it is cleere that they were made to serue and stead vs to many excellent vses: so that you may plainly gather and perceiue, that this is rather an amplification, rather then any positiue or measured truth, cōcerning the fond Epithets, vile badges & liueries, which these rehearsed Authors haue vnworthi∣ly bestowed on them, as by that which followeth may plainly be seene. The Spyder put into a lynnen clowre, and hung vpon the left arme, is an excellent me∣dicine to expell a Quotidian-Ague, as Trallianus saith: and yet it will be more effectuall if Theyr vse. many Spyders be boyled with oyle of Bay to the cōsistence of a liniment, to annoynt the wrists and the temples a little before the fit, for by this meanes the Feauer will be absolute∣ly cured, or will sildome returne againe. Kiramides. A Spyder tempered and wrought vppe with Milt-wast or Ceterach, and so spred vppon a cloth, to be applyed to the temples, cu∣reth the fits of a Tertian-Feauer. Dioscoride. The Spyder that is called a Wolfe, being put into a quill, and so hanged about the necke, performeth the same effect, as Pliny reporteth. The domesticall Spyder, which spinneth and weaueth a thinne, a white, or a thicke web, beeing inclosed in a peece of leather, or a nut-shell, and so hanged about the necke, or vvorne about the arme, driueth away the fits of a Quartaine-feauer, as both Dioscorides & Fernelius haue thought. For the paine in the eares, take three liue Spyders, boyle them with oyle vpon the fire, then destill or droppe a little of this oyle into the payned eare, for it is very excellent, as witnesseth Marcellus Empiricus. Pliny steepeth them in vineger and oyle of Roses, and so to be stamped together, and a little thereof to be dropped into the pained eare with a little Saffron, and without doubt, saith he, the paine will be mittigated, and the same affirmeth Dioscorides. Or else straine out the iuyce of Spyders, mixing it with the iuyce of Roses, and with some wooll dipped in the same liquour, apply it to the eare. Sorastus in his booke Peri Dakeon writeth, how that the Spyder which is called Crano∣calaptes, beeing stifled or choked in oyle, is a very present helpe against any poyson taken inwardly into the body, as the Scholiast of Nicander reporteth. There be some that catch a Spyder in the left hand, and beate and stampe it with the oyle of Roses, putting some of it into the eare, on the same side the tooth aketh, and as Pliny telleth vs, it doth exceeding much good. Spyders applyed and layd vpon their owne bytings, or taken inwardly in∣to the body, doe heale and helpe those hurts themselues procured. What should I talke of the white spots of the eyes, a most dangerous griefe? and yet are they cleane taken away with very small labour, if so be one take the legges, especially of those Spyders which are of the whiter sort, and stamping them together with oyle, do make an oyntment for the eyes. Pliny. The moist iuyce that is squiesed out of a house-Spy∣der, being tempered with oyle of Roses, or one dramme of Saffron, and a droppe or two thereof dropped into the eyes, cureth the dropping or watering of them, by meanes of a rhume issuing out thereat: or else the moisture of a Spyder or his vrine beeing taken by themselues, laying a little wooll on the top of the part affected, worketh the same effect; whereby you may well vnderstand, that there is nothing in a Spyder so vile, homelie, or sordidous, that doth not some good, and serueth to some end. Against the suffogation of the belly, Aetius doth counsell to apply a Cerote to the nauell made of Spyders, and saith that he hath found it to preuaile much in this kind of passion. Pliny saith, but he yeeldeth no reason for it, that Spyders doe helpe the paine and swelling of the Spleene. He writeth also further, that if a man catch a Spyder as she is glyding and descending downe-wards by her thred, and so being crushed in the hand, & then applied to the nauell, that the belly will be prouoked to the stoole, but beeing taken as shee is as∣cending, and applyed after the same former manner, that any loosenes or fluxe is stayed and restrayned thereby. The same Pliny also writeth, that if a man take a Spyder, and lay it vppon a fellon, (prouided that the sick patient may not know so much,) that within the space onely of three dayes, that terrible and painefull griefe will be cleane taken away. And besides he affirmeth, that if the head and feete of a spyder be cast away, and the rest of the body rubbed and bruised, that it will thoroughly remedie the swelling in the funda∣ment, proceeding of inflamation. If any be vexed with store of lyce, and doe vse a suffumigation made onely with Spy∣ders, it will cause them all to fall and come away, neither will there afterwards any moe breede in that place. The fat of a Goose tempered and mixed with a Spyder and oyle of Roses together, beeing vsed as an oyntment vpon the breasts, preserueth them safelie, as that no milke will coagulate or curdle in them after any birth. Anonymus. Yea, that same knotty scourge of rich men, & the scorne of Phisitians, I meane the Gowte, which as some learned men hold can by no meanes be remedied, yet feeleth mitigation and diminution of paine, and curation also, onely by the presence of a Spyder, if it be taken aliue, and her hinder legges cut off, and afterward inclosed in a purse made of the hyde of a Stag. More∣ouer, we see (which all other medicines can neuer doe) that all they are freed for the most part, both from the Gowte in the legges and hands, where the spyders are most found, & where they are most busie in working, & framing their ingenious deuised webs. Doubt∣lesse, this is a rare miracle of nature, & a wonderfull vertue, that is in this contemptible little creature, or rather esteemed to be so vile, abiect, and of no estimation. Rich men were happy indeede, if they knew how to make vse of their owne good. Antonius Pius was wont to say, that the sharpe words, wittie sayings, quirkes & sub∣tilties of Sophisters, were like vnto Spyders webbes, that containe in them much cun∣ning Art, and artificiall conceit, but had little other good besides. If any one be newly & dangerously wounded, and that the miserable partie feareth a bleeding to death, what is a more noble medicine, or more ready at hand, then a thicke Spyders webbe, to bynde hard vpon the wound, to stay the inordinate effusion of blood? Questionlesse, if we were as diligent and greedy to search out the true properties and vertues of our owne domesti∣call remedies, which we would buy of others so deerely, we would not enforce our selues with such eager pursute after those of forraine Countries, as though things fetcht farre off, were better then our owne neere at hand; or as though nothing were good & wholesome vnlesse it came frō Egypt, Arabia or India. Surely, vnlesse there were some wild worme in our brames, or that we were bewitched and possessed with some Furie, we would not so farre be in loue with forraine wares, or be so much besotted, as to seeke for greedy new phisicke and phisicall meanes, considering that one poore Spyders webbe will doe more good, for the stanching of blood, the curation of vlcers, the hindering of sanies, slyme, or slough to grow in any sore, to abate and quench inflamations, to conglutinate and con∣solidate wounds, more then a cart-loade of Bole fetcht out of Armenia, Sorcocolla, Sanda∣racha, or that earth vvhich is so much nobilitated by the impresse of a seale, and therefore called Terra Sigillata, the clay of Samos, the durt of Germany, or the loame of Lemnos. For a cobwebbe adstringeth, refrigerateth, soldereth, ioyneth, and closeth vppe wounds, not suffering any rotten or filthy matter to remaine long in them. And in regard of these excellent vertues and qualities, it quickly cureth bleedings at the nose, the Haemorrhoides, and other bloodie-fluxes, whether of the opening of the mouthes of the veines, their opertions, breakings, or any other bloody euacuation that too much aboundeth, beeing either giuen by it selfe alone in some Wine, eyther inward∣lie, or outwardly, or commixed with the Blood-stone, Crocus Martis, and other the like remedies fit for the same intentions. The cobwebbe is also an ingredient into an vnguent which is made by Phisitians, a∣gainst the disease called Serpego, and beeing bound to the swellings of the fundament, if there be inflamation ioyned withall, it consumeth them without any paine, as Marcellus Empiricus testifieth. It likewise cureth the watering or dropping of the eyes, as Pliny re∣porteth, and beeing applyed with oyle, it consolidateth the wounds of the ioynts: and some for the same intent, vse the ashes of cobwebbes, with fine Meale and White-vvine mixed together. Some Surgeons there be that cure Warts in this manner; They take a Spyders-web, roling the same vppe on a round heape like a ball, and laying it vppon the wart they then set fire on it, and so burne it to ashes, and by this way and order the vvarts are eradicated, that they neuer after grow againe. Marcellus Empiricus taketh Spyders webbes that are found in the Cypresse-tree, mixing them with other conuenient remedies, so giuing them to a podagricall person for the asswaging of his paine. Against the paine of a hollovv tooth, Gallen in his first booke De Compos: medicum, secundum loca, much commendeth, (by the testimony of Archigenes) the egges of Spyders, beeing tempered and mixed with Oleum Nardinum, and so a little of it beeing put into the tooth. In like sort Kiramides gi∣ueth Spyders egges for the curation of a Tertian-Ague. Where-vpon we conclude with Gallen, in his booke to Piso, that Nature as yet neuer brought foorth any thing so vile, meane, and contemptible in outward shew, but that it hath manifold and most excellent necessary vses, if we would shew a greater diligence, and not be so squeamish as to refuse those wholesome medicines which are easie to be had, and without great charges and tra∣uaile acquired. I will adde therefore this one note before I end this discourse, that Apes, Marmosets or Monkies, the Serpents called Lizards, the Stellion, which is likewise a venomous beast like vnto a Lizard, hauing spots in his necke like vnto starres, Waspes, and the little beast called Ichneumon, Swallowes, Sparrowes, the little Titmouse, and Hedge-sparrowes, doe often feede full sauourlie vppon Spyders. Besides, if the Nightingale, (the Prince of all singing-byrds) doe eate any Spyders, shee is cleane freed and healed of all diseases vvhat∣soeuer. In the dayes of Alexander the Great, there dwelled in the Cittie of Alexandria a cer∣taine young mayde, which from her youth vp, was fed and nourished onely with eating of Spyders, and for the same cause the King was premonished not to come neere her, least peraduenture he might be infected by her poysonous breath, or by the venome euapora∣ted by her sweating. Albertus likewise hath recorded in his writings, that there vvas a certaine noble young Virgine dwelling at Colen in Germany, who from her tender yeeres was fedde onely with Spyders. And thus much we English-men haue knowne, that there was one Henry Lilgraue, liuing not many yeeres since, beeing Clarke of the Kitchen to the right noble Ambrose Dudley Earle of Warwicke, who would search euery corner for Spyders, and if a man had brought him thirtie or fortie at one time, he would haue eaten them all vp very greedily, such was his desirous longing after them. OF THE STELLION. T Hey are much deceiued that confound the greene Lyzard, or a∣ny other vulgar Lyzard, for because the Stellion hath a rustie colour: and yet (as Matthiolus writeth) seeing Aristotle hath left recorded, that there are venomous Stellions in Italy, he thinketh that the little white beast with starres on the backe, found about the Cittie ofRome, in the vvalls and ruines of old houses, and is there called Tarentula, is the Stellion of which Aristotle spea∣keth, and there it liueth vpon Spyders. Yet that there is another and more noble kind of Stellion aunciently so called of the Learned, shall afterward ap∣peare in the succeeding discourse. This Beast or Serpent, is called by the Graecians Colottes, Ascalobotes, & Galeotes, and such an one was that which Aristophanes faineth from the side of a house eased her belly into the mouth of Socrates as hee gaped, when in a Moone-shine night hee obserued the course of the starres, and motion of the Moone. The reason of this Greeke name Ascala∣botes, is taken from Ascalos, a circle, because it appeareth on the backe full of such circles like starres, as writeth Perottus. Howbeit, that seemeth to be a fayned Etymologie, and therefore I rather take it, that Ascala signifieth impuritie, and that by reason of the vn∣cleanenesse of this beast, it was called Ascalabetes, or as Suidas deriueth it, of Colobates, because by the helpe and dexteritie of the fingers, it clymbeth vppe the walls euen as Rats and myce; or as Kiramides will haue it, from Calos, signifying a peece of wood, because it clymbeth vppon wood and Trees. And for the same reason it is called Galeotes, because it clymbeth like a Weasill, but at this day it is vulgarly called among the Graecians Liakoni, although some are also of opinion, that it is also knowne among them by the words Tha∣miamithos, and Psammamythe. Among the vulgar Haebrewes, it is sometimes called Letaah, and sometimes Semma∣mit, as Munster vvriteth. The Arrabians call it Sarnabraus, and Senabras, a Stellion of the Gardens. And peraduenture, Guarill, Guasemabras, Alurel, and Gnases. And Syluati∣cus also vseth Epithetes for a Stellion. And the generall Arabian word for such creeping byting things, is Vasga, which is also rendered a dragon of the house. Insteed of Colotes, Albertus hath Arcolus. The Germaines, English, and French, haue no words for this Ser∣pent, except the Latine word, and therefore I was iustly constrained to call it a Stellion, in imitation of the Latine word. As I haue shewed some difference about the name, so it now ensueth that I should doe the like about the nature and place of their abode. First of all therefore I must put a diffe∣rence betwixt the Italian Stellion or Tarentula, and the Thracian or Graecian, for the Stel∣lion of the Ancients is propper to Gracia. For they say this Stellion is full of Lentile spots, or speckles, making a sharpe or shrill shrieking noyse, and is good to be eaten, but the o∣ther in Italy are not so. Also they say in Sicilia that their Stellions inflict a deadly byting, but those in Italy cause no great harme by their teeth. They are couered with a skin like a shell or thicke barke, and about their backes there are many little shining spots like eyes, (from whence they haue their names) streaming like starres, or droppes of bright & cleare water, according to this verse of Ouid. —Aptumque colori. Nomen habet varijs Stellatus corpor a guttis. Which may be englished thus; And like his spotted hiew, so is his name, The body starred ouer like drops of rayne. It mooueth but slowly, the backe and tayle beeing much broader then is the backe and tayle of a Lyzard, but the Italian Tarentulaes are white, and in quantitie like the smallest Lyzards: and the other Graecian Lyzards, (called at this day among them Haconi,) is of bright siluer colour, and are very harmefull and angry, whereas the other are not so, but so meeke and gentle, as a man may put his fingers into the mouth of it without danger. One reason of their white bright shining colour, is because they want blood, and therefore it was an errour in Syluaticus to say that they had blood. The teeth of this Serpent are very small and crooked, and whensoeuer they byte, they sticke fast in the wound, and are not pulled forth againe except with violence. The tayle is not very long, & yet when by any chaunce it is broken, bytten, or cut off, then it grow∣eth againe They liue in houses, and neere vnto the doores and windowes thereof make their lodgings, and some-times in dead-mens graues and Sepulchres, but most common∣ly they clymbe and creepe aloft, so as they fall downe againe, some-times into the meate as it is in dressing, and sometimes into other things, (as we haue already said,) into Socra∣tes mouth, & when they descend of their owne accord, they creepe side-long. They eate Hony, and for that cause creepe into the hiues of Bees, except they be very carefully stop∣ped, as Virgill writeth; Nam saepe fauos, ignotus adedit Stellio. Many times the Stellion at vnawares meeteth with the Hony combes. They also of Italy many times eate Spyders. They all lye hidde foure monthes of the yeere, in vvhich time they eate nothing, and twice in the yeere, that is to say, both in the Spring-time and Autumne, they cast theyr skinne, which they greedily eate so soone as they haue stripped it off. Which Theophrastus and other Authors write, is an enuious part in this Serpent or creeping creature, because they vnderstand that it is a noble remedy against the Falling-sicknesse: vvherefore to keepe men from the benefit and good which might come there-by, they speedily deuoure it. And from this enuious and subtile part of the Stellion, commeth the cryme in Vlpianus called Crimen Stellionatus, that is, when one man fraudulently preuenteth another of his money, or wares, or bargaine, euen as the Stellion dooth man-kind of the remedy which commeth vnto them by and from his skinne. This cryme is also called Extortion, and among the Romans, when the Tribunes did with-draw from the Souldiours their prouision of victuall and Corne, it is said, Tribunos qui per Stellatur as Militibus aliquid abstulissent, capitali poena affecit. And therefore Budaeus relateth a history of two Tribunes, who for this stellature were worthilie stoned to death by the commaundement of the Emperour. And all fraudes whatsoeuer, are likevvise taxed by this name, vvhich were not punishable but by the doome of the supreame or highest Iudge, and there-vppon Alciatus made this Embleme following. Parua lacerta, atris Stellatus corpore guttis Stellio, qui latebras & caua busta colit Inuidiae prauique doli fert symbola, pictus: Heu nimium nuribus cognita Zelotypis Nam turpi obtegitur, faciem lentigine, quisquis Sit quibus immersus Stellio, vina bibat. Hinc vindicta frequens, decepta pellice vino, Quam formae amisso flore relinquit amans. Which may be englished thus; The little Lyzard, or Stellion starred in body graine In secrete holes, and graues of dead which doth remaine, When painted you it see, or drawne before the eye, A symbole then you view of deepe deceit and cursed enuy: Alas, this is a thing to iealous wiues knowne too well, For whosoeuer of that Wine doth drinke his fill Wherein a Stellion hath beene drencht to death, His face with filthy lentile spots all vgly it appeareth, Here-with a Louer oft requites the fraude of concubine, Depriuing her of beauties hiew by draught of this same wine. The Poet Ouid hath a pretty fiction of the originall of this cursed enuy in Stellions, for he writeth of one Abas the sonne of Metaneira, that receiued Ceres kindly into her house, and gaue her hospitalitie, whereat the said Abas beeing displeased, derided the sacrifice which his mother made to Ceres: the Goddesse seeing the wretched nature of the young man, and his extreame impietie against the sacrifice of his Mother, tooke the Wine left in the goblet after the Sacrifice, and poured the same vppon his head, wherevpon he was immediatly turned into a Stellion, as it is thus related by Ouid, Metam: 5. Combibit os maculas, & quae modo brachia gessit Crura gerit, cauda est mutatis addita membris: Inque breuem formam, ne sit vis magna nocendi Contrahitur, paruaque minor mensura lacerta est. In English thus; His mouth suckt in those spots: and now where armes did stand, His legges appeare, and to his changed parts was put a tayle, And least it should haue power to harme, small was the bodies band, And of the Lizards poysonous, this least in shape did vayle. Their bodyes are very brittle, so as if at any time they chaunce to fall, they breake their tayles. They lay very small egges, out of which they are generated: and Pliny writeth that the iuyce or liquor of these egges layde vppon a mans body, causeth the hayre to fall off, and also neuer more permitteth it to grow againe. But whereas wee haue said, it deuou∣reth the skinne, to the damage & hurt of men, you must remember, that in auncient time the people did not want their pollicies and deuises to take away this skinne from them be∣fore they could eate it. And therfore in the Sommer-time they watched the lodging place and hole of the Lyzard, and then in the end of the winter toward the Spring, they tooke Reedes and did cleaue them in sunder, these they composed into little Cabonets, and set them vppon the hole of the Serpent: Now when it awaked and would come forth, it be∣ing grieued with the thicknes and straightnes of his skinne, presseth out of his hole tho∣rough those Reedes or Cabonet, and finding the same some-what straight, is the more gladde to take it for a remedie; so by little and little it slydeth thorough, and beeing tho∣rough, it leaueth the skinne behind in the Cabonet, into the which it cannot reenter to deuoure it. Thus is this wylie Serpent by the pollicie of man iustly beguiled, loosing that which it so greatly desireth to possesse, and changing nature, to line his guttes vvith his coate, is preuented from that gluttony, it beeing sufficient to haue had it for a couer in the Winter, and therefore vnsufferable that it should make foode thereof, and it the same in the Sommer. These Stellings (like as other Serpents) haue also theyr enemies in nature, as first of all they are hated by the Asses, for they loue to be about the maungers and rackes on which the Asse feedeth, and from thence many times they creepe into the Asses open nostrills, and by that meanes hinder his eating. But aboue all other, there is greatest antipathy in nature betwixt this Serpent and the Scorpion, for if a Scorpion doe but see one of these, it falleth into a deepe feare, and a cold sweat, out of which it is deliuered againe very spee∣dily: and for this cause a Stellion putrified in oyle, is a notable remedie against the by∣ting of a Scorpion, and the like warre and dissention, is affirmed to be betwixt the Stelli∣on and the Spyder. Wee haue shewed already, the difference of Stellions of Italie from them of Greece, how these are of a deadly poysonous nature, and the other innocent and harmelesse, and therefore now it is also conuenient, that wee should shew the nature and cure of this poy∣son, which is in this manner. Whensoeuer any man is bytten by a Stellion, hee hath ache and payne thereof conti∣nually, and the wound receiued looketh very pale in colour, the cure whereof, according to the saying of Aetius, is to make a playster of Garlicke and Leekes mixed together, or Aetius. else to eate the said Garlice and Leekes, drinking after them a good draught of svveete Wine, vnmixed and very pure, or else apply Nigella Romana, Sesamyne, and sweet water vnto it. Some (as Arnoldus writeth) prescribe for this cure the dunge of a Faulcon, or a Scorpion to be bruised all to peeces, and layd to the wound. But sometimes it happeneth, that a mans meate or drinke is corrupted with Stellions that fall into the same from some high place where they desire to be clymbing, and then if the same meate or Wine so cor∣rupted be eaten or drunk, it causeth vnto the partie a continuall vomiting & payne in the stomacke. Then must the cure be made also by vomits to auoyd the poyson, and by Gly∣sters to open the lower passage, that so there may be no stoppe or stay, to keepe the impri∣soned meate or drinke in the body. And principally those thinges are prescribed in this case, which are before expressed in the Cantharides, when a man hath by any accident beene poysoned by eating of them. The remedies which are obserued out of this Serpent are these: Beeing eaten by Hawkes, they make them quickly to cast theyr old coates or feathers. Others giue it in meate after it is bowelled, to them that haue the Falling-sicknesse. Also when the head, Cres feete, and bowels are taken away, it is profitable for those persons which cannot hold in their vrine, and beeing sodden, is giuen against the Bloody-flixe. Also sodde in wine with blacke Poppy-seede, cureth the payne of the loynes, if the wine be drunke vp by the sicke Pliny. patient. The oyle of Stellions beeing annoynted vpon the arme-holes or pittes of chyldren, or young persons, it restraineth all hayre for euer growing in those places. Also the oyle of Stellions, which are sod in Oyle-oliue with Lyzards, do cure all boyles and wennes, con∣suming them without launcing or breaking. And the ashes of the Stellion are most prin∣cipally commended against the Falling-sicknes, like as also is the skinne or truncke, as we haue said before. The head burned and dryed, and afterward mixed with Honny-attick, is very good against the continuall dropping or running of the eyes; and in the dayes of Pliny, he writeth that they mixed Stibum here-withall. The hart is of so great force, that it being eaten, bringeth a most deepe and dangerous sleepe, as may appeare by these verses. Mande cor, & tantus prosternet corpora somnus, Vt scindi possunt absque dolore manus. Which may be englished thus; Eate you the hart, and then such sleepe the body will possesse, That hands may from the same be cut away painelesse. To conclude, the Phisitians haue carefully obserued sundry medicines out of the egs, gall, and dunge of Stellions, but because I write for the benefit of the English Reader. I will spare their relation, seeing we shall not neede to feare the byting of Stellions in Eng∣land, or expect any drugges among our Apothecaries out of them, and therefore I vvill heere end the history of the Stellion. OF THE TYRE. T Here be some which haue confounded this Serpent vvith the Viper, & taken them both to be but one kind, or at least Actorius the Tyre to be a kind of Viper, because the Arabians call a Viper Thiron, of the Greeke word Therion, which signifieth a wild beast, & whatsoeuer the Graecians write of their Echid∣na, that is their Viper, the same things the Arabians write of the Tyre, and Leonicenus compiled a whole booke in the de∣fence Caelius Rho: of that matter: and from hence commeth that noble name or cōposition antidotary, called Theriaca, that is, Tria∣cle. But Auicen in the mention of the Triacle of Androma∣chus, Amatus. distinguisheth the Triacle of the Viper, from that of the Tyre, and calleth one of them Trohiscos Tyri, and the other, Trohiscos Viperae. So Gentilis and Florentinus, do like∣wise put a manifest difference betwixt the Tyre and the Viper, although in many thinges they are alike, and agree together. This Tyre is called in Latine Tyrus and Tyria, and also among the Arabians, as Sylua∣ticus wryteth, Eosmari, and Alpfahex. Rabbi Moses in his Aphorismes writeth, that when the Hunters goe to seeke these Serpents, they carry with them bread, which they cast vnto them, and while the Tyre doth eate it, hee closeth his mouth so fast, that his teeth cannot suddainely open againe to doe his hunting aduersary any harme, and this thing (as hee writeth) is very admirable at the first, to them that are ignorant of the secrete in nature. Galen also writeth so much to Piso of Vipers, and he saith that the Circulators, Iuglers or Quacksaluers, did cast certaine mazes or small cakes to them, which whē they had tasted, they had no power to harme any body. This Tyrus is said to be a Serpent about the coasts of Iericho in the Wildernes, where it hunteth Birds, and liueth by deuouring of them and their egges. And a confection of the flesh of this Serpent, with the admixture of some few other things, taketh away all in∣toxicate poyson, which confection is called Triacle. It is also reported, that whereas the Dragons haue no poyson of themselues, they take it away from this Serpent, and so poy∣son with a borrowed venom. For this poyson is very deadly: and there is a tale (which I will not tell for truth) that before the comming and death of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, the same was vnremediable, and they died thereof, whosoeuer they were that had been poy∣soned by a Tyre, but on the day of Christ his passion, one of them was found by chaunce in Ierusalem, which was taken aliue, and brought to the side of our Sauiour hanging vp∣pon the Crosse, where it also fastened the teeth, and from that time euer since, all the kind haue receiued a qualified and remediable poyson, and also their flesh made apt to cure it selfe, or other venoms. It is reported that when the Tyrus is old, he casteth, or rather wresteth off his coate, in this manner following; First it getteth off the skinne which groweth betwixt the eyes, by which it looketh as if it were blind, and if it be strange to a man, (I meane the first time that euer he saw it) he will verily take it to be blind: afterward, it also fleyeth off the skin of from the head, and so at last, by little and little, the whole body, at which sight it appea∣reth as though it were an Embryon, or skinlesse Serpent. They keepe theyr egges in their belly, and in them breede theyr young ones, as the Vipers doe, for before they come out of the dammes belly, they are in all parts (according to theyr kind) perfect creatures, and so euery one generateth his like, as doe foure footed-beastes. I take it by the relation of Gesner, that the Dypsas in Italy is called Tyrus. Also Cardan writeth, that there is a supposed and false conceit, that with the flesh of this Tyre, mixed with Hellebore and water, is made a confection to restore youth: but the truth is, it ra∣ther weakeneth and destroyeth bodies, then helpeth them, and maketh a counterfeite or varnished false youth, but no true youth at all. Thus farre Cardan, and thus much of this Serpent, the other things written of it, are the same that are written of the Viper. OF THE TORTEYSE. T He last foure-footed egge-breeding beast, commeth now to bee handeled in due order and place; namely, the Torteyse, which I haue thought good to insert also in this place, al∣though I cannot finde by reading or experience, that it is ve∣nomous, yet seeing other before me haue ranged the same in the number and Catalogue of these Serpents and creeping creatures, I will also follow them; and therefore I will first expresse that of the Torteyse, which is general and common to both kindes, and then that which is speciall, and propper to the Land and Sea Torteyses. The name of this Beast is not certaine, among the Hebrewes some call it Schabhul, some Kipod, and some Homet, whereas euery one of these doe also signifie another thing, as Schabhul a Snayle. Kipod a Hedge-hogge, and Homet a Lyzard. The Chaldeans call this Beast Thiblela. The Arabians terme it Sisemat. Also Kauden salabhafe, and Halachalie. The Italians call this Testuma testudine, vel testugire, tartuca, enfuruma, tartocha, & co∣sorona. And in Ferraria, Gallanae, tartugellae, biscae scut llariae. The inhabitants of Taurinu, Cupparia. The Portugalls, Gagado. The Spanyards, Galapago, and Tartuga. The French, Tortue, and Tartue. And in Sauoy, Boug coupe. The Germaines, Schiltkrot, and Tallerkrot. The Flemings, Schilt padde, which aunswereth our English word Shell-crab. The Grae∣cians call it Chelone, and the Latines Testudo: which wordes in their seuerall Languages, haue other significations, as are to be found in euery vocabular Dictionary, and therefore I omit them, as not pertinent to this busines or History. There be of Torteyses three kinds, one that liueth on the Land, the second in the sweet waters, and the third in the Sea, or salt-waters. There are found great store of these in India especially of the Wate Torteyses, and therefore the people of that part of the Country, are called Chelonophagi; that is, Eaters of Torteyses, for they liue vpon them: and these people are sayd to be in the East-part of India. And in Carmania the people are likewise so called. And they do not onely eare the flesh of them, but also couer their hou∣ses with their shells; and of their abundance, doe make them all manner of vessels. And Pliny and Solinus write, that the Sea Torteyses of India are so bigge, that with one of them they couer a dwelling Cottage. And Strabo sayth, they also row in them on the waters, as in a Boate. The Islands of Serapis in the Redde-Sea, and the farthest Ocean Islands, towardes, the East of the Red Sea, hath also very great Torteyses in it: and euery where in the Red-Sea they so abound, that the people there doe take them and carry them to their greatest Marts and Fayres to sell them, as to Rhaphtis, to Ptolemais, and the Island of Dioscorides, whereof some haue white and small shels. In Lybia also they are found, and in the night time they come out of their lodgings to feede, but very softly, so as one can scarcely per∣ceiue their motion. And of one of these Scaliger telleth this story. One night (saith he) as I was trauayling, being ouer-taken with darkenesse and want of light, I cast about mine eyes to seeke some place for my lodging, safe and secure from Wild-beasts; and as I looked about, I saw (as I thought) a little ill or heape of earth, but in truth it was a Torteyse, couered all ouer with mosse: vpon that I ascended and sa e downe to rest, where-vppon after a little wat∣ching I fe l asleepe, and so ended that nights rest vppon the backe of the Torteyse. In the morning, when light approched, I perceiued that I was remooued farre from the place, whereon I first chose to lodge all night; and therefore rising vp, I beheld with great ad∣miration the face and countenaunce of this Beast, in the knowledge whereof, (as in a new nature) I went foreward, much comforted in my wearisome iourney. The description of the Torteyse and the seuerall partes thereof now followeth to bee handled. Those creatures (saith Pliny) which bring forth or lay egs, eyther haue feathers as Fowles, or haue scales as Serpents, or thicke hides as the Scorpion, or else a shell like the Torteyse. It is not without great cause that this shell is called Scutrem, and the Beast Scutellaria, for there is no buckler and shield so hard and strong as this is. And Palladius was not deceiued when he wrote thereof, that vppon the same might safelie passe ouer a Cart-wheele, the Cart being load d. And therefore in this, the Torteyse is more happy then the Crocodile, or any other such Beast. Albertus writeth that it hath two shell s, one vppon the backe, the other on the belly, which are conioyned together in foure places and by reason of this so firme a couer and shell, the flesh thereof is dry and firme, also long lasting, and not very easie or apt to putre∣faction. This shell or couer is smooth, except some-times when it is growne old, it hath mosse vppon it, and it neuer casteth his coate in old age, as other creeping thinges do. In the head and tayle it resembleth a Serpent, and the great Torteyses haue also shelles vpon th ir heads like a shield, yet is the head but short, and the espect of it very fearefull, vntil a man e well acquainted there with. And by reason of the hardnesse of their eyes, they mooue none but the neather eye lidde, and that without often winking. The Liuer of it is great, yet without any blood. It hath but one belly without diuision, and the Liueris alwa es foule, by reason of the vitious temperature of the body. The Melt is exceeding small, comming far short of the bodies proportion. Be e, the common nature of other thicke-hided-creatures. It hath also reynes, ex∣cept that kind of Tortoyce called Lutaria, for that wanteth both Reynes and bladder, for by reason of the softnesse of the couer thereof, the humour is ouer fluent; but the Tor∣toy e that bringeth foorth Egges hath all inward partes like a perfect Creature: and the Females haue a singular passage for theyr excrementes, which is not in the Males The Egges are in the body of their belly, which are of a party-colour like the Egges of Birds. Theyr stones cleaue to theyr loynes, and the tayle is short, but like the tayle of a Ser∣pent. They haue foure Legges, in proportion like the Legges of Lizards, euery foot ha ing fiue fingers or diuisions vpon them, with nayles vpon euery one. And thus much for the seuerall parts. They are not vniustly called Amphibia, because they liue both in the water and on the Land, and in this thing they are by Pliny resembled to Beauers: but this must bee vnder∣stood of the general, otherwise the Tortoyces of the Land doe neuer dare come into the Water: and those of the Water can breath in the water, but want respiration, and like∣wise they lay theyr Egges and sleepe vppon the dry Land. They haue a very slowe and easie pace; and thereupon Pauuiu calleth it Tardigrada, and also there is a Prouerbe: Testudineus incessus, for a slow and soft pace, when such a motion is to be expressed. The Tortoyce neuer casteth his coate, no not in his old age. The voyce is an abrupt and bro∣ken hissing, not like to the Serpents, but much more loud and diffused. The Male is ve∣ry salacious and giuen to carnall copulation, but the Female is not so; for when shee is attempted by the Male, they fight it out by the teeth, and at last the Male ouercommeth, whereat he reioyceth as much, as one that in a hard conflict, fight, or battaile, hath won a fayre Woman; the reason of this vnwillingnesse is, because it is exceeding paynefull to the Female. They engender by riding or couering one another. When they haue layde theyr Egges, they doe not sit vpon them to hatch them, but lay them in the Earth, couered, and there by the heat of the Sun is the young one formed, and commeth foorth at due time without any further help from his parents. They are accounted crafty and su tle in the r kinde, for subtlenesse is not onely ascri∣bed to thinges that haue a thinne bloud, but also to those that haue thicke skinnes, hides, and Couers, such as the Tortoyce and Crocodile haue. The Tortoyce is an enemy to the Bariridge, as Philes and Aelianus write: Also the Ape is as frayde thereof, as it is of the Snayle: and to conclude, whatsoeuer enemy it hath, it is safe inough as long as it is couered with his Shell, and clyngeth fast to the Earth beneath; and therefore came the Prouerbe: Oikos philos, oikos aristos. That House which is ones friend, is the best house. The Poets giue a fabulou reasons, why the Tortoyce doth euer carry his House vppon his back, which is this: They say, that on a time Iupiter badde all liuing Creatures to a banquet or Marriage feast, and thether they all came at the time appointed, except the Tortoyce: and shee at last also appeared at the end of the feast when the mea e was all spent: whereat Iupiter wondred, and asked her why shee came no sooner? Then i an∣sweared him, Oikos philos, oikos aristos; at which answere Iupiter being angry, adiudged her perpetually to carry her house on her back, and for this cause they fable, that the Tor∣toyce is neuer seperated from her house. Flaminius the Roman diswading the Achaeans from attempting the Island of Zacyn∣thij, vsed this Argument; and so afterward T. Liuius. Caeterum sicut Testudinem, vbi col∣lecta, in suum tegumen est, tutam ad omnes ictus di esse: vbit exerit partes aliquas quod∣cunque nudauit, obnoxium atque infirmum habere: Haud dissimiliter vobis Achaei, clausis vndique maris, quod intra Peloponnesum est, termino, ea & iungere vobis, & iuncta tueri facile: si semel auiditate plura amplect endi hinc excedatis, nuda vobis omnia quae extra sint & exposita ad omnes ictus esse. Thus farre Pliny. That is to say, Euen as when the Tortoyce is gathered within the compasse of her shell, then is it safe and free from all stroakes, and feeleth no violence, but whensoeuer shee putteth foorth a Limbe or part, then is it naked, infirme, and easie to be harmed: So is it with you Achaeans, for by rea∣son of the enclosed seate of Peloponnesus within the straights of the Sea, you may well wind all that together, and beeing conioyned, as well defend it: But if once your auidious and couctous mindes to gette more, appeare and stretch it selfe beyond those limits, you shall lay open your naked infirmitie and weakenesse, to all force, blowes, and violence whatsoeuer. Wherefore, the Torteyse careth not for flyes, and men with good armour care not much for light and easie aduersaries. Alciatus hath a witty Emblem of a Torteyse to expresse a good huswife, and that the same of her vertues, spreadeth much further then eyther beautie or riches. Alma Venus quaenam hac facies quid denotat illa Testudo, molli quam pede diuapremis? Mesie effinxit Phidias sexumque referri Foemineum nostraiussit ab effigie, Quod{que} manere domi, & tacitas debet esse puellas Supposuit pedibus talia signa meis. Which may be englished thus; Loues holy God, what meanes that vgly face? What doth that Torteyse signifie in deede? Which thou ô Goddesse vnder soft foote dooest pace, Declare what meanes the same to me with speede? Such is the shape that Phidias did me frame, And bade me goe resemble women kind, To teach them silence, and in house remaine, Such pictures vnderneath my feete you find. There is a manifold vse of Torteyses, especially of their couer or shell, and likewise of their flesh, which commeth now to be handled. And first of all, the auncient ornament of Beddes, Chambers, Tables, and Banqueting-houses, was a kind of artificiall worke, called Caruilius, and this was framed in golde and siluer, brasle and wood, Iuory & Tor∣teyse-shells; but, Modo luxuria non fuerit contenta ligno, iam lignam emi testudinem facit: That is to say; Ryot not contented, sought precious frames of wood; and againe, the vse of wood, caused Torteyse-shells to be deerely bought; and thereof also complayned the Poet Iuuenall, where he saith; —Nemo curabat Riualis in Oceani fluctu tectudo nataret Clarum Troiugenis factura & nobile fulerum. In English thus; Then none did care for Torteyse in the Ocean-flood, To make the noble beds for Troyans blood. We haue shewed already that there are certaine people of the East called Chelophagi, which liue by eating of Torteyses, and with theyr shells they couer theyr houses, make all theyr vessels, rowe in them vppon the water, as men vse to rowe in boates, and make them likewise serue for many other vses. But as concerning the eating of the flesh of Torteyses, the first that euer wee read that vsed this ill dyet, were the Amozons, according as Caelius Rhod: and other Authours writeth. Besides, Aloysius Cadamustus affirmeth, that he himselfe did tast of the flesh of a Torteyse, and that it was white in colour, much like vnto Veale, and not vnpleasant. But Rasis is of a cleane contrary opinion, condemning it for very vnsauourie, and vnwhole∣some, because the taste and temperament thereof, is betwixt the Land and the Water, it beeing a beast that liueth in both Elements. And in eating heereof the Graecians haue a prouerbe, Chelones kreas he phagein, he me phagein: That is, eyther eate Torteyse flesh, or eate it not. Meaning that when we eate it, we must eate nothing else, and therefore must be filled sufficiently onely with that kind of meate: For to eate little, breedeth fretting in the belly, and to eate much is as good as a purgation, according to the obseruation of many actiōs, which being done Frigide & ignauiter, that is, coldly & slothfully to halues, doe no good, but beeing done, Acriter & explicatie, earnestly and throughly bring much content and happinesse. But I maruaile why they are vsed in this age, or desired by Meat-mongers, seeing Apicius in all his booke of Variety of Meats, doth not mention them; and I therefore wil conclude the eating of Tortoyces to be dangerous, and hatefull to Nature it selfe, for vn∣lesse it be taken like a Medicine, it doth little good, and then also the Sawces and decoc∣tions or compositions that are confected with it, are such as doe not onely qualifie, but vtterly alter all the nature of thē, (as Stephanus Aquaeus hath well declared) in his French discourse of Frogges and Tortoyces. And therefore to conclude this History of the Tor∣toyce, I will but recite one riddle of the strangenesse of this beast which Tertullian out of Pacuuius maketh mention of, and also in Greeke by Moschopulus, which is thus transla∣ted. Animal peregrinae naturae, sine spiritu spiro, geminis occulis retro iuxta cerebrum, quibus ducibus antrorsum progredior Super ventre coeruleo pergo, sub quo venter latet albus, aper∣tus & clausus. Oculi non aperiuntur, ne{que} progredior, donec venter intus albus vacuus est. Hoc saturato, oculi apparent insignes, & pergo aditer: Et quanquam mutum varias edo voces: That is to say, I am a liuing creature, of a strange nature, I breath without breath, with two eyes behinde neere my braynes doe I goe forward, I go vppon a blew belly, vnder which is also another white, open and shut, my eyes neuer open, I goe forward vntill my belly be empty, when it is full, then they appeare plaine and I goe on my iourney, and although I am mute or dumbe, yet doe I make many voyces. The explycation of this riddle, will shew the whole nature of the beast, and of the Harpe called Chelys. For some things are related herein of the liuing Creature, and some things againe of an Instrument of Musicke made vppon his shell and couer. And thus much for the Tortoyce in generall, the Medicines I will reserue vnto the end of this History. OF THE TORTOYCE OF THE earth, whose shell is onely figured. T Hese Tortoyces which neuer come in water, either sweet or Salt, cleare or muddy, are called by the Graecians Che∣lone Chersaie, by the Latines Chersinae, and Testudines, Terrestres, Syluestres, and Montanae, & by Nicander, Orine: and the French peculiarly Tortue des Boys, a Tortoyce of the wood. These are found in the desarts of Affrica, as in Lybia & Strabo Mauritania, in the open fieldes, and likewise in Lidia in the Corne-fieldes, for when the Plow-men come to plowe their Land, their shares turne them out of the earth vpon the furtowes as big as great Glebes of land. And the shels of these the Husbandmen burne on the land, and dig them out with Spades and Mattocks, euen as they doe Wormes a∣mong places full of such vermine. The Hill Parthenius, and Soron in Arcadia, doe yeeld many of these Land-Tortoyces. The Shell of this liuing Creature is very pleasantly distinguished with diuers colours, as earthy, blacke, blewish, and almost like a Salamanders. The Liuer of it is small, yet apt to be blowen or swell with winde, and in all other parts they differ not from the common and vulgar generall prefixed discription. These liue in Corne-fieldes, vpon such fruits as they can finde; and therefore also they may be kept in Chestes or Gardens, and fed with Apples, Meale, or Bread without Lea∣uen. They eate also Cockles, and Wormes of the earth, and three-leaued-grasse. They nus. will also eate Vipers, but presently after they eate Origan, for that herbe is an antidote a∣gainst Viperine poyson for them, and vnlesse they can instantly finde it, they dye of the poyson. The like vse it is sayde to haue of Rue, but the Tortoyces of the Sandy Sea in Affrique, liue vpon the fat, dew, and moystnesse of those Sandes. They are ingendered like other of their kind, & the Males are more venerous then the Females, because the fe∣male must needes bee turned vppon her backe, and she cannot rise againe without helpe: wherefore many times the Male after his lust is satisfied, goeth away, & leaueth the poore Female to be destroyed of Kytes, or other aduersaries: their naturall wisedome therefore hath taught them to preferre life and safety before lust and pleasure. Yet Theocritus wri∣teth, of a certaine Hearb, that the Male-Tortoyce getteth into his mouth, and at the time of lust turneth the same to his Female, who presently vpon the smell thereof, is more en∣raged for copulation then is the Male, and so giueth vp her selfe to his pleasure without all feare of euill, or prouidence against future daunger: but this Hearb neither he nor any other can name. They lay Egges in the earth, and do not hatch them, except they breath on them with their mouth, out of which at due time come their young ones. All the win∣ter-time they digge themselues into the earth, and there liue without eating any thing, in∣somuch as a man woulde thinke they could neuer liue againe, but in the Summer and warme weather they dig themselues out againe without danger. The Tortoyces of India in their old and full age change their shels and couers, but all other in the World neuer change or cast them. This Tortoyce of the earth is an enemy to Vipers, and other Serpents, and the Eagles againe are enemies to this, not so much for hatred as desirous thereof for Physicke, against their sicknesses & diseases of Nature; and therefore they are called in Greeke Chelonophagoi aetoi, Tortoyce-eating-Eagles: for al∣though they cannot come by them out of their deepe and hard Shell, yet they take them vp into the ayre, and so let them fall downe vppon some hard stone or Rocke, and there-vpon it is broken all to peeces, and by this means died the famous Poet Aeschilus, vvhich kind of fate was foretold him, that such a day he should dye: wherefore to auoyd his end, in a fayre Sunne-shine cleare day he sat in the fields, and suddenly an Eagle let a Tortoyce fall downe vpon his head which brake his scull, and crushed out his braynes, whereupon the Graecians wrote: Aeschulographonti, epipeptoke Chelone, Which may be englished thus; Eschilus writing vpon a rocke, A Tortoyce falling, his braines out knocke. The vses of this Land Tortoyce, are first for Gardens, because they cleare the Gar∣dens from Snayles and Wormes: out of the Arcadian Tortoyces they make Harps, for their shelles are very great, and this kind of Harp is called in Latine Testudo, the inuentor whereof is said to be Mercury, for finding a Tortoyce after the falling in of the Riuer Ni∣lus, whose flesh was dryed vp, because it was left vppon the Rockes, hee strucke the sin∣newes thereof, which by the force of his hand, made a musicall sound, and thereupon he framed it into a Harp, which caused other to imitate his action, and continue that prac∣tise vnto this day. These Tortoyces are better meate then the Sea or Water-Tortoyces; and therefore they are preferred for the belly; especially they are giuen to Horses, for by them they are raysed in flesh, and made much fatter. And thus much shall suffice for the Tortoyce of the earth. OF THE TORTOYCE OF THE sweete-water. P Liny maketh foure kindes of Tortoyces, one of the earth, a second of the Sea, a third called Lutaria, and the fourth called Swyda, ly∣uing in Sweete-waters, and this is called by the Portugalls Caga∣do, and Gagado, the Spaniards Galapag, and the Italians Gaiandre de aqua. There are of this kinde found in Heluetia, neere to Zu∣ricke, at a Towne called Andelfinge: but the greatest are found in the Riuer Ganges in India, where theyr shels are as great as tuns, and Damascen writeth, that he saw certaine Ambassadours of In∣dia, present vnto Augustus Caesar at Antiochia, a Sweete-water-Tortoyce, vvhich was three cubits broad. They breede theyr young ones in Ni∣lus. They haue but a small Melt, and it wanteth both a Bladder and reines. They breede their young ones and lay their Egges on the dry Land, for in the water they dye without respiration: therefore they digge a hole in the Earth wherein they lay their Egges, as it were in a great ditch, of the quantity of a Barrell, and hauing couered them with earth, de∣part away from them for thirty dayes; afterwardes they come againe and vncouer theyr Egges, which they finde formed into young ones, those they take away with them into the water: and these Tortoyces at the invndation of Nilus follow the Crocodiles, and re∣moue their nests and egges from the violence of the flouds. There was a magicall and superstitious vse of these Sweete-water-Tortoyces agaynst Aelianus Hayle, for if a man take one of these in his right hand, and carrie it with the belly vpward round about his Vineyard, & so returning in the same manner with it, & afterward lay it vpon the backe, so as it cannot turne on the belly, but remaine with the face vpward, all manner of Clouds should passe ouer that place and neuer empty themselues vppon that Palladius Vineyard. But such diabolicall and foolish obseruations were not so much as to be remē∣bred in this place, were it not for their sillinesse, that by knowing them, men might learne the weakenesse of humaine wisedome when it erreth, from the Fountaine of all science and true knowledge (which is Diuinity) and the most approoued operations of Nature: And so I will say no more in this place of the Sweete-water-Tortoyce. OF THE TORTOYCE OF the Sea. I T were vnproper and exorbitant to handle the Sea-Tortoyce in this place, were it not because it liueth in both elements, that is, both the water and the Land, wherefore seeing the earth is the place of his generation, as the Sea is of his foode and nourish∣ment, it shall not be amisse nor improper (I trust) to handle this also among the Serpents and creeping things of the earth. Pliny calleth this Sea-Tortoyce Mus Marinus, a Mouse of the Sea, and after him Albertus doth so likewise. The Arabians call it Asfulhasch, and the Portugalles Tartaruga, and in Germany Meerschiltkrott, which the common Fisher-menne call the Souldier, because his backe seemeth to bee armed and couered with a shield and Helmet, especially on the forepart: which shield is very thicke, strong, and triangular, there being great veines and sinnewes which goe out of his Necke, shoulders, and hippes, that tye on and fasten the same to his body. His forefeet being like hands, are forked and twisted very strong, & with which it figh∣teth and taketh his prey, and nothing can presse it to death except the frequent strokes of Hammers. And in al their members except their quantity, & their feet, they are much like the Tortoyces of the Earth, for otherwise they are greater, and are also blacke in colour. They pull in their heads as occasion is ministred to them, eyther to fight, feede, or be de∣fended, and theyr whole shell or couer seemeth to be compounded of fine Plates. They haue no teeth, but in the brimmes of theyr beakes or snouts are certaine eminent diuided thinges like teeth, very sharp, and shut vppon the vnder lippe like as the couer of a Boxe, and in the confidence of these sharp prickles, and the strength of their hands and backes, they are not afrayde to fight with men. Theyr eyes are most cleare and splendant, casting theyr beames farre and neare, and also they are white in colour, so that for their brightnesse and rare whitenesse, the Apples are taken out and included in Rings, Chaines, and Bracelets. They haue reynes which cleaue to their backes, as the Reines of an Bugle or Oxe. Theyr feete are not apt to be v∣sed in going, for they are like to the feet of Seales or Sea-calues, seruing in stead of Oares to swim withall. Their legges are very long, and stronger in their feet and nailes, then are the clawes of the Lyon. They liue in Rockes and the Sea-sands, and yet they cannot liue altogether in the wa∣ter, or on the Land, because they want breathing and sleepe, both which they performe out of the Water: yet Pliny writeth, that many times they sleepe on the top of the water, Brasauolus and his reason is, because they lye still vnmooueable, (except with the Water) and snort like any other Creature that sleepeth, but the contrary appeareth, seeing they are found to sleepe on the Land, and the snorting noyse they make is but an endeuour to breath, which they cannot well doe on the toppe of the Water, and yet better there then in the bottome. They feede in the night-time, and the mouth is the strongest of all other Creatures, for with it they crush in peeces any thing, be it neuer so hard, as a stone or such thinges: Aristotle they also come and eate grasse on the dry Land. They eate certaine little Flshes in the Winter time, at which season their mouth is hardest, and with these Fishes they are also bayted by men, and so taken. Pausanius writeth, that in Affrica there are Maritine Rocks called Scelestae, and there dwelleth among a creature called Scynon, that is Zytyron, a Tor∣toyce, and whatsoeuer he findeth on that Rockes which is a stranger in the Sea, the same he taketh and casteth downe headlong. They engender on the Land, and the Female re∣sisteth Oppianus. Plinius the copulation with the Male, vntill hee set against her a stalke or stemme of some Tree or Plant. They lay their Egges and couer them in the earth, planing it ouer with their breasts, and in the night-time they sit vppon them to hatch them. Their Egges are great, of diuers colours, hauing a hard shell, so that the young one is not framed or brought foorth within lesse compasse then a yeere, (as Aristotle writeth) but Pliny sayth thirty dayes. And for as much as they cannot by Nature, nor dare for accident long tarry vppon the Land: they set certaine markes with their feete vppon the place where they lay theyr Egges, whereby they know the place againe, and are neuer deceiued. Some againe say, that after they haue hidde their Egges in the earth forty dayes, the Female commeth the Plutarch. iust fortith day, not fayling of her reckoning, and vncouereth her Egges wherein shee findeth her young ones formed, vvhich she taketh out as ioylfully as any man would do Gold out of the earth, and carryeth them away with her to the Water. They lay some-times an hundered Egges, and sometimes they lay fevver, but euer the number is very great. There is vppon the left side of Hispaniola, a little Island vpon the Port Beata, which is called Altus-Bellus, where Peter Martyr reporteth straunge thinges of many Creatures; especially of the Tortoyces, for hee writeth, that when they rage in lust for copulation, they come on shore, and there they digge a Ditch wherein they lay together three or foure hundered Egges, beeing as great as Goose-Egges, and when they haue made an end, they couer them with Sand and goe away to the Sea, not once looking after them: but at the appoynted time of Nature, by the heate of the Sunne, the young Tortoyces are hatched, engendered, and droduced into light without any further helpe of theyr Pa∣rents. Great is the courage of one of these, for it is not afrayde to set vppon three men to∣gether, but if it can bee turned vpward vppon the backe, it is made weake and vnresista∣ble. And if the head be cut off and seuered from the body, it dieth not presently, nor clo∣seth Aelianus the eyes, for if a man shake his hand at it, then vvill it winke, but if hee put it neere, it will also byte if it can reach it. If by the heat of the Sunne theyr backes grow dry, they also grow weake and inflexible; and therefore they hasten to the Water to remollifie them, or else they dye within short time: and for this cause this is the best way to take them. In the whottest day they are drawne into the deepe, where they swimme willing∣ly with their backes or shelles aboue the Water, where they take breath, and in continu∣ance, the Sunne so hardeneth them, that they are not able to helpe themselues in the wa∣ter, but they grow very faynt and weake, and are taken at the pleasure of the Fisher-man. They are also taken on the toppes of the Water after they returne weary from theyr feeding in the Night-time, for then two men may easily turne them on theyr backes, and in the meane-while another casteth a Snare vppon them and draweth them safely to the Land. In the Phaenician Sea they are taken safely without daunger, and generally where they may be turned on theyr backe, there they can make no resistaunce, but where they cannot, many times they wound and kill the Fisher-men, breaking the nets asunder, and let out all the other Fish included with them. Bellorius writeth, that there bee of these Sea-Tortoyces two kindes, one long, the o∣ther round, and both of them breath at theyr Noses, bycause they want Gilles, and the long ones are most frequent about the Port Torra in the redde Sea, whose couer is varia∣ble, for the Males shell is playne and smooth vnderneath, and the Females is hollow. The Turkes haue a kinde of Tortoyce, whose shell is bright like the Chrysolite, of which they make haftes for Kniues of the greatest price, which they adorne with Plates of gold. In Iambolus, an Island of the South, there are also found certaine Monsters or liuing Boemus creatures, which are not very great, yet are they admirable in Nature, and in the vertue of their bloud. Their bodyes are round and like the Tortoyce, hauing two crosse lynes ouer theyr backes, in the ends of which is an eye and an eare at eyther side, so as they seeme to haue foure eares, the belly is but one, into which the meate passeth out of the mouth. They haue feete round about, and with them they goe both backward and forward. The ver∣tue of their bloud is affirmed to be admirable: for whatsoeuer body is cut asunder & put together, if it be sprinkled with this bloud during the time that it breatheth, it covniteth as before. The ancient Troglodytes had a kind of Sea-Tortoyce, which they call Celtium, which had hornes, vnto which they fastened the strings of their Harpes, these also they worship∣ped and accounted very holy. Yet some thinke that they might better be called Celetum then Celtium, but I thinke Hermolaus dooth better call them Chelitium apo tes Cheluos, which signifieth both a Tortoyce and their broad breastes, and with their Hornes they helpe themselues in swimming. Albertus also maketh mention of a Tortoyce called Bar∣chora, but it is thought to be a corrupt word from Ostra Codermus. These Sea-Tortoyces are found sometimes to be eyght cubits broad, and in India with their shelles they couer houses, and such vse: they also put them vnto in Tabrobana, for they haue them fifteene cubits broad. And thus much for all kind of Tortoyces. OF THE VIPER. N Otwithstanding the asseueration of Suessanus, who will needes exclude the Viper from the Serpents, because a Serpent is called Ophis, and the Viper Echis, yet I trust there shall be no reasonable man that can make exeption to the placing of this liuing Crea∣ture among Serpents, for that great learned man vvas deceiued in that Argument, seeing by the same reason hee might as vvell exclude any other, as the Snake, Dragon, Scorpion, and such like who haue their peculiar names; beside the generall vvord Ophis, and yet might hee also haue beene better aduised, then to affirme a Viper not be called a Serpent: for euen in Aristotle whom he expoundeth and approo∣ueth, hee might haue found in his fifth Booke of Gen: animal: and the last Chapter, that the Viper is recorded, Inter genera opheon: That is, Among the generall kindes of Ser∣pents, although as wee shall shew afterward, it differeth from most kindes of Serpents, because it breedeth the young one in his belly, and in the winter-time lyeth in the Rockes Mercuriall. and among stones, and not in the earth. The Haebrevves as it appeareth Esay. 59. and Iob. 6. call it Aphgnath, and according to Munster Aphgnaim, plurally for Vipers, because of the variety of colours, wherewith∣all they are set all ouer. The Arabians from the Greeke word Thereon, signifieng all kind of wilde Beastes, doe also call it Thiron, and that kinde of Viper vvhereof is made the Triacle, they call a Alafafrai, and Alphai: they also call it Eosman, (as Leonicenus wry∣teth.) Beside, it is called Alphe, which seemeth to bee deriued of the Haebrevves, and Afis which may likewise be coniectured to arise from the Greeke vvord Ophis. The Greekes call the Male peculiarly and properly Echis, and the Female Echidna, and it is a Question whether the vulgar word among the Gaecians at this day Ochendra, doe not also signify this kinde of Serpent. Bellonius thinketh, that it is corrupted of Echidna the Female Viper. The Germans haue many vvords for a Viper, as Brandt Schlangen, Natet-Otter, Heck-Nater, and Viper-Nater. The French Vne Vipere. The Spa∣niards Biuora, and Bicha, The Italians Vipera, Maraesso, Scurtio, and sometimes Scorzo∣nei, although Scorzo, and Scorzone, be generall wordes in Italy for all creeping Serpents without feet, and that strike with theyr teeth. There is also about the word Maraeso some Question, although Leonicenus decideth the matter, and maketh it out of all Controuersie, and Rhodigimus thinketh it a very significant vvord deriued from the people Marsi, bycause they carryed about Vipers. The Mountebankes do also call Suffili, from Sibila, the hissing voyce which it maketh. Some will haue Nepa to be also a Viper, yet wee haue shewed that already to signyfie a Scorpion. The Graecians say, that the Viper is called Echidna paro to echinin eaute ten gonen achri thanaton: bycause to her ovvne death shee beareth her young one in her belly; and therefore the Latines doe also call it Vipera, quasi vipariat: bycause it dyeth by violence of her byrth or young: and they attribute vnto it venome and pestilence, and generally there are fevve Epithets vvhich are ascribed to the Serpent, but they also belong vnto this. There is a pretious Stone Echites, (greenish in colour) which seemeth to bee like a Viper, and therefore taketh name from it. Also an Hearbe Echite, like Scammony, and Echidmon or Viperina. In Cyrene there are Myce, which from the similitude of Vipers are called Echenatae. Echion was the name of a man, and Echionidae and Echionij, of people, and Echidnon a Citty beside the Sea Aegeum: Also the Eagle vvhich by the Poets is fayned to eate the heart of Prometheus, is likewise by them sayde to bee begot∣ten betvvixt Typhon and Echidna, and the same Echidna to be also the Mother of Chimaera: which from the Nauell vpward was like a Virgin, and down-ward like a Viper, of which also Diodorus Siculus, and Herodotus telleth this story. When Hercules was dryuing away the Oxen of Geryon, hee came into Scythia, and there fell asleepe, leauing his Mares feeding on his right hand in his Chariot, and so it happened by diuine accident, that vvhiles hee slept they vvere remooued out of his sight and strayed avvay from him. Afterward hee awaked, and missing them, sought all ouer the Countrey for them; at last hee came vnto a certaine place, where in a caue hee found a Virgin of a double natured proportion, in one part resembling a Mayde, and in the o∣ther a Serpent, whereat he wondered much, but shee told him, that if he would lye with her in carnall copulation, shee would shewe him vvhere his Mares and Chariot vvere: whereunto hee consented and begat vppon her three Sonnes, famous among Poeticall Writers: Nmely, Agathyrsus, Gelonus, and Scythus: but I will not prosecute eyther the names, or these Fables any further, and so I will proceede to the description of Vi∣pers. The colour of Vipers is somewhat yellowish, hauing vpon theyr skins many round spottes, theyr length about a cubit, or at the most three palmes. The tayle curled, at the end very small and sharpe, but not falling into that proportion equally by euen attenua∣tion, growing by little and little, but vneuenly sharped on the sudden from thickenesse to thinnesse. It is also without flesh, consisting of skinne and bone, and very sharp. The head is very broad, compared with the body, and the Necke much narrower then the head: The eyes very redde and flaming, the belly winding, vppon which it go∣eth all in length, euen to the tayle, and it goeth quickly and nimbly: some affirme, that it hath two canyne teeth, and some foure. And there is some difference betwixt the Male & the female; the female hath a broader head, the neceke is not so eminent, a shorter and thicker body, a more extended tayle, and a softer pace, and foure canyne teeth. Againe, the Male hath a narrower head, a necke swelling or standing vp, a longer and thinner bo∣dy, and a swifter pace or motion so that in the Pictures proposed in this discourse: the first of them are for the Male, and the last for the Female, and this is the peculiar outward difference betwixt the Male and the Female Vipers. Auicen sayth besides, that the tailes of Vipers make a noyse when they goe or mooue. Those are taken to bee the most gene∣rous and liuely, that haue the broadest and hollowest head like a Turbot, quick and liuely Cardan eyes, two canyne teeth, & a gristie or claw in the Nose or tayle, a short body or tayle, a pale colour, a swift motion, and bearing the head vpward. For the further description of theyr seuerall partes. Theyr teeth are very long vppon the vpper chappe, and in number vppon eyther side foure, and those vvhich are vppon the neather Gumbe are so small, as they can scarce be discerned, vntill they be rubbed and pressed; but also it is to bee noted, that while they liue, or when they bee dead, the length of theyr teeeth cannot appeare, excetp you take from them a little bladder, in which they lye concealed. In that Bladder they carry poyson, which they infuse into the wound they make with their teeth: They haue no eares, yet all other liuing Creatures that generate their like, and bring foorth out of their bellies haue eares, except this, the Sea-Calfe, and the Dolphin, yet in stead hereof, they haue a certaine gristly caue or hollownesse in the same place where the eares should stand. The Wombe and place of conception (saith Pliny) is double, but the meaning is, that it is clouen as it is in all Females (especially women, & Cowes.) They conceiue Egges, and those Egges are contained neere theyr raynes or loynes. Their skin is soft, yeelding also to any stroake, and when it is fleyed off from the body, it stretcheth twice so bigge as it appeared while it couered the liuing Serpent: To conclude, Phyliolo∣gus writeth, that their face is somewhat like the face of a man, and from the Nauell it re∣sembleh a Crocodile, by reason of the small passage it hath, for his egestion which excee∣deth not the eye of a Needle. It conceiueth at the mouth. And thus much for the descrip∣tion in generall. There is some difference among this kinde also, according to the distinction of place wherein they liue, for the Vipers in Aethiopia are all ouer blacke like the men, and in o∣ther Countryes they differ in colour, as in England, France, Italy Greece, Asia, and Ae∣gypt, as writeth Rellonius. There is scarce any Nation in the World wherein there are not found some Vipers. The people of Amyctae which were of the Graecian bloud, droue away all kinde of Serpents from among them, yet they had Vipers which did byte mor∣tally; Herodotus. and therefore could neuer bee cured, beeing shorter then all other kindes of Vipers in the World. Likewise in Arabia, in Syagrus, the sweete Promontory of Frankinsence, the Europaen Mountaines, Seiron, Pannonia, Aselenus, Corax, and Riphaeus: the Mountaines of Asia, Aegages, Bucarteron, and Cercaphus, abound vvith Vipers. Likewise Aegypt, and in all Af∣frica they are found also, and the Affrycans affirme, (in detestation heereof) that it is not so much, Animal, as Malum naturae: Thar is, A liuing Creature, as euill of Nature: To conclude, they are found in all Europe. Some haue taken exceptions to Crete, because Aristotle vvriteth, that they are not found there, but Bellonius affirmeth, that in Creete al∣so he saw Vipers which the Inhabitants call by the name of Cheudra, which seemeth to be deriued from the Greeke Echidna. At this day it is doubted whether they liue in Ita∣ly, Germany, or England, for if they doe, they are not knowne by that name: yet I ve∣rily thinke that we haue in England a kinde of yellow Adder which is the Viper that Bel∣lonius saw heere, for I my selfe haue killed of them, not knowing at that time the diffe∣rence or similitude of Serpents, but since I haue perceiued to my best remembrance that the proportion and voyce of it did shew that it was a Viper. The most different kindes of Vipers are found in Aegypt and Asia. Concerning the quantity, that is the length and greatnesse of this Serpent, there is some difference, for some affirme it to be of a cubit in length, and some more, some lesse. The Vipers of Europe are very small, in comparison of them in Affrica, for among the Troglodytes (as writeth Aelianus) they are fifteene cubits long, and Nearchus affirmeth as much of the Indian Vipers; Aristobulus also writeth of a Viper that hee saw which was nine cubits long, and one hand breadth: and some againe (as Strabo affirme) that they haue seene Vipers of sixteene Cubits long, and Nicander vvriteth thus of the Vipers of Asia; Fert Asia vltra tres longis q i tractibus vlnas Se tendant, rigidum quales Bucarteron, atque Arduus Aegagus, & celsus Cercaphus intra Se multos refouet. In English thus; Such as Asia yeelds in length, as are three elles, In Bucarteron steepy rough, these Vipers flourish, Hard Aegagus and high Cercaphus cels: VVithin their compasse many such do nourish. Others there bee in Asia sixteene foote long, and some there bee againe twenty, as in the Golden Castiglia, where theyr heads are like the heads of Kiddes. There be some that make difference betwixt Echis and Echidna, bycause one of them when it byteth, causeth a conuulsion, and so doeth not the other, and one of them maketh the wound Scaliger. Cardan looke white, the other pale, and when the Echis byteth, you shall see but the impression of two teeth, and when the Echidna byteth you shall the impression of more teeth. But these differences are very ydle, for the variety of the payne may arise from the constituti∣on of the body, or the quantity of the poyson, and so likewise of the colour of the wound, Aelianus and it is already set dovvne, that the Echis or Male-Viper hath but two Canyne teeth, but the other: namely, the Echidna hath foure, thus sayth Nicander; Masculus emittit, notus color, ipse caninos Binos perpetuo monstrat, sed foemina plures. Which may be englished thus; The Male two canyne teeth, whose colour well is knowne, But in the Female more continually are showne. But yet the Male hath beside his Canyne teeth, as many as hath the Female: and besides the Male is knowne from the Female, as the same Nicander vvriteth, because the Female vvhen shee goeth, dravveth her tayle as though shee vvere lame, but the Male more manlike and nimble, holdeth vppe his head, stretcheth out his tayle, restrayneth the breadth of his belly, setteth not vppe his Scales (as doeth the Female;) and besides, dravveth out his body at length. The Meate of these Vipers are greene Hearbes, and also sometimes liuing Crea∣tures: and namely, Hore-flyes, Cantharides, Pithiocampes, and such other things as they Gallen. can come by, for these are fit and conuenient meate for them. Aristotle writeth, that sometimes also they eate Scorpions, and in Arabia they not onely delight in the svveete iuyce of Balsam, but also in the shadow of the same. But aboue all kinds of drink, they are most insatiable of wine. Sometime they make but little folds, and sometime greater, but in their wrath their eyes flame, they turne their tailes and put forth their double tongue. In the winter-time as we haue said already, they liue in the hollow Rocks, yet Pliny affir∣meth, that then also they enter into the earth, and become tractable and tangible by the Aristotle hands of man, for in the cold weather they are nothing so fierce as they are in the hot, and in the Sommer also they are not at all times alike furious, but like to all other Serpents. They are most outragious in the Canicular daies, for then they neuer rest, but with con∣tinuall disquiet mooue vp & downe till they are dead or emptied of their poyson, or feele an abatement of their heate. Twise in the yeare they cast their skins, that is to say, in the Spring, and in the Autumne: and in the spring time when they come out of their hole or Aristotle winter lodgings, they help the dimnesse of their eye-sight by rubbing their eyes vpon fen∣nell. But concerning their copulation and generation, I find much difference among wri∣ters: wherefore in a matter so necessary to be knowne, I will first of all set downe the opi∣nion of other men, aswell Historians as Poets, and then in the end & conclusion, I will be Auicenna. bold to interpose my owne iudgement for the better information of the Reeder. Herodo∣tus in his Thalia writeth, that when the Vipers begin to rage in lust, and desire to couple one with another, the Male commeth and putteth his head into the mouth of the female, who is so insatiable in the desire of that copulatiō, that when the male hath filled her with all his seed-genitall, and so would draw forth his head againe, she byteth it off, & destroy∣eth her husband, whereby he dyeth and neuer liueth more: but the female departeth and conceiueth hir young in hir belly, who euery day according to natures inclination, grow to perfection and ripenesse, and at last in reuenge of their fathers death, doe likewise de∣stroy their mother, for they eate out her belly, and by an vnnaturall issue come forth into the light of this world: and this thing is also thus witnessed by Nicander; Cum durum fugiens morsu ignescentis echidnae Frendit echis, vel vbi feruente libidinis aestu Saeuo dente sui resecat caput illa mariti. Ast vbi post vegetam coeperunt pignora vitam, Iam propinqua adsunt maturi tempora partus, Indignam chari mortem vlciscentia patris Erosa miseraenascuntur matris ab aluo. In English thus; When the Male Viper gnasheth, auoyding Females bite, VVhose fiery rage is all on ardent lust, Yet when he burnes for copulation right, Her cruell tooth doth Husbands head off crush. But yet alasse, when seedes begins to liue, And birth of young ones ripen in her wombe, Then they for Fathers, death a full reuenge do giue, Eating forth their wretched mothers strong. Vnto this agreeth Galen, Isidor, Plutarch, Aelianus: and Lucan who writeth; Viperei coeunt abrupto corpore nati. That is to say: The geniture of Vipers bloud Engender, breaking bodies good. Pliny agreeth with the residue for the death of the Male in carnall copulation, but hee differeth in this, about the Female, affirming that when the young Vipers grow ripe and perfect in their Mothers belly, she casteth foorth euery day one for three dayes together, (for her number is sometimes twenty) at last the other, impatient of delay, gnaw out her guts and belly, and so come foorth, destroying their Mother: And here is no great diffe∣rence, for in the summe and destruction of Father and Mother, they all agree, and Saint Ierom, Saint Basill, and Horus doe agree and subscribe to the truth of these opinions. Thus we haue shewed the opinions of the Ancient and first Writers: now it followeth that we should likewise shew the opinions of the later Writers, which I will performe with as great breuity and perspicuity as I can. Pierius therefore writeth, that in his time there were learned men desirous to know the truth, who got Vipers, and kept them aliue, both Males and Females, by shutting them vp safe where they could neither escape out, nor doe harme, and they found that they engendred, brought forth, and conceiued like other Creatures, without death or ruine of Male and Female. Amatus Lusitanus also writeth thus. The Male and Female Viper engender by wrea∣thing their tayles together, euen to the one halfe of their body, and the other halfe stand∣eth vpright, mutually kissing one another. In the Male there is a genitall member in that part beneath the Nauell, where they embrace, which is very secret and hidden, and a∣gainst the same is the Females place of conception, as may appear manifestly to him that will looke after the same; and therefore all the Philosophers and Physitians haue bin de∣ceiued, that haue wrote they haue conceiued at theyr mouth, or that the Male perished at the time of engendering, or the Female at the time of her deliuery. Thus saith Ama∣tus. Theophrastus he likewise writeth in this manner. The young Vipers doe not eate out their way, or open with their teeth theyr Mothers belly, nor (if I may speake merrily) make open their owne passage by breaking vp of the doores of their Mothers womb, but the wombe being narrow, cannot containe them; and therefore breaketh of it owne ac∣cord: and this I haue prooued by experience, euen as the same falleth out with the Fish called Acus: and therefore I must craue pardon of Herodotus, if I affirme his relation of the generation of Vipers to be meerely fabulous. Thus farre Theophrastus. Apollonius al∣so writeth, that many haue seene the olde Vipers lycking theyr young ones like other Serpents. Thus haue I expressed the different iudgements of sundry Authors both new & olde Caelius touching the generation of Vipers, out of which can be collected nothing but euident cō∣tradictions, and vnreconcileable iudgements, one mutually crossing another. So as it is vnpossible that they should be both true, and therefore it must be our labour to search out the truth, both in their words, and in the conference of other Authors. Wherefore to be∣ginne, thus writeth Aristotle. The Viper amongst other Serpents, almost alone bringeth forth a liuing creature, but first of all she conceiueth a soft egge of one colour, aboue the egges lyeth the young ones folded vppe in a synnes skinne, and some-times it falleth out, that they gnaw in sunder that thinne skinne, and so come out of their mothers belly all in one day, for she bringeth forth more then twentie at a time. Out of these words of Aristotle, euilly vnderstood by Pliny and other auncient Wry∣ters, came that errour of the young Vipers eating their way out of their mothers belly, for in stead of the little thinne skinne which Aristotle saith they eate thorough, other Au∣thors haue turned it to the belly, which was cleane from Aristotles meaning. And ano∣ther error like vnto this, is that wherein they affirme, that the Viper doth euery day bring forth one young one, so that if shee hath twentie young ones in her belly, then also shee must be twenty dayes in bringing of them forth. The words of Aristotle frō whence this errour is gathered, are these, Tectei de en mia emera kathon, Tictei de pleio he ei kosni, which are thus translated by Gaza, Parit enim sin∣gulos diebus singulis, plures quam viginti numero: That is to say, she bringeth forth euery day one, more then twentie in number. But this is an absurd translation, and agreeth nei∣ther with the words of Aristotle, nor yet with his mind, for his words are these: Parit au∣tem vna die singulos, parit autem plus quam viginti numero. That is to say in English, shee bringeth forth euery one in one day, and shee bringeth foorth more then twentie: so that the sence of these words shall be, that the Viper bringeth forth her young ones seuerallie, one at a time, but yet all in a day. But concerning her number, neither the Phylosopher, nor yet any man liuing, is able to define and set it downe certaine, for they varry, being sometimes more, and sometimes fewer, according to the nature of other liuing creatures. And although the Viper do con∣ceiue eggos within her, yet doth shee lay them after the manner of other Serpents, but in her body they are turned into liuing Vipers, and so the egges neuer see the sunne, neither doth any mortall eye behold them, except by accident in the dissection of a female Viper when she is with young. I cannot also approue them that doe write, that one, namelie the Viper, among all Serpents, bringeth forth her young ones aliue, and perfect into the world, for Nicander and Greuinus, doe truly affirme, with the constant consent of all o∣ther Authors, that the horned Serpent called Cerastes, of which we haue spoken alreadie, doth likewise bring forth her young ones aliue. And besides, Herodotus writeth of certaine winged-Serpents in Arabia, which doe bring foorth young ones as well as Vipers, and therefore it must not be concluded with apparant falsehood, that onely the Viper bring∣eth her young ones perfect into the world. The like fable vnto this, is that generall conceit of the copulation together, betwixt the Viper and the Lamprey; for it is reported that when the Lamprey burneth in lust for co∣pulation, she forsaketh the waters, and commeth to the Land, seeking out the lodging of the male Viper, and so ioyneth herselfe vnto him for copulation. He againe on the other side, is so tickled with desire hereof, that forsaking his owne dwelling and his owne kind, doth likewise betake himselfe vnto the waters and Riuers sides, where in an amorous ma∣ner, hee hysseth for the Lamprey, like as when a young man goeth to meete and call his Loue; so that these two creatures, liuing in contrary elements, the earth and the water, yet meete together for the fulfilling of their lusts in one bed of fornication. Vppon which Saint Basill writeth in this manner: Vipera infestissimum animal eorurquae Serpunt cum mu∣rena congreditur. &c. That is to say, the Viper a most pernitious enemy to all liuing cree∣ping things, yet admitteth copulation with the Lamprey, for he forsaketh the Land, and goeth to the water-side, and there with his hyssing voyce, giueth notice to the other of his presence, which she hearing, instantly forsaketh the deepe waters, and comming to the Land, suffereth herselfe to be embraced by that venomous beast. Also Nicander wryteth thus thereof in his verses. Fama est, si modo vera, quod haec suapascua linquat Atque eat in siccum cogente libidine, littus Et cum Vipereo coiens serpente grauetur. Which may be englished thus; Fame saith (if it be true) that she her feede forsakes, I meane the shore, and goes vpon dry land, Where for her lust the Viper-male she takes, In fleshly coiture to be her husband. But this opinion is vaine and fantasticall, as Pliny and diuers others haue very learned∣ly prooued, for the Lamprey cannot liue on the Land, nor the viper in wet places, besides the waters: and therfore, besides the impossibility in nature, it is not reasonable that these will hazard their owne liues, by forsaking their owne elements for the satisfaction of their lusts, there beeing plenty of eyther kindes to worke vppon, that is to say, both of female Vipers in the Land, to couple with the male, and male Lampreys in the water, to couple with the female. Although I haue else-where confuted this errour, yet I must heere againe remember that which is said already. The occasion of this fable is this; the male Lamprey is excee∣ding like a Viper, for they want feete, and haue long bodies, which some one by chaunce seeing in copulation with his female, did rashly iudge it to be a Serpent because of his like∣nesse, as afore-said; and therefore they deuised a name for it, calling it Myrus, which some haue made a kind of Viper, and others a Snake: but Andreas hath notably proued against Archelaus, that this Myrus neither is nor can be any other then the male Lamprey: and so I will conclude, that neither Vipers ingender with Lampreys, nor yet the femall Vipers kill the male in copulation, or that the young ones come into the world by the destructi∣on of their dammes. In the next place wee are to consider, the antipathy and contrarietie that it obserueth with other creatures, and the amitie also betwixt it and others. First of all therefore it is certaine and well knowne, what great enmity is betwixt man-kind & Vipers, for the one Elianus alwayes hateth and feareth the other: wherefore, if a man take a Viper by the necke, and spet in his mouth, if the spettle slide downe into his belly, it dyeth thereof, and rotteth as it were in a consumption. Vipers also are enemies to Oxen, as Virgill writeth, Pestis acer∣ba boum peccorique aspergere vinus: that is, a sharpe plague of Oxen, casting his poyson vppon all other Cattell. They are also enemies to Hennes and Geese, as Columella vvri∣teth, wherefore in auncient time they were wont to make sure walls for the custody of theyr pullen'against Vipers. They are likewise enemies to the Dormouse, and they hunt very greedily after their young ones, whereof Epiphanius in a discourse against Origen wri∣teth thus; When the Viper commeth to the nest of a Dormouse, and findeth there her young ones, shee putteth out all theyr eyes, and afterwards feedeth them very fat, yet kil∣leth euery day one, as occasion of hunger serueth; but if in the meane time a man, or any other creature doe chaunce to eate of those Dormise, whose eyes are so put out by the Vi∣per, they are poysoned thereby. And this is a wonderfull worke in nature, that neither Strabo. the little Dormise receiue harme by the poyson, but grow fat thereby, nor yet the Viper be poysoned herselfe while she eateth them, and yet a man or beast which is a stranger vn∣to it, dyeth thereof. All kind of Mice are as much afraid of Vipers, as they be of Cats, and therefore when∣soeuer they heare the hyssing of a Viger, instantly they looke to themselues and theyr young ones. There is a kind of harmelesse Serpent called Parea, whereof I haue spoken before in his proper place, which is an enemy vnto Vipers, and that same which is harm∣lesse vnto men, killeth them. Albertus also telleth a story of a Viper that climbed vp into a tree, to the nest of a Megpye, where-vppon the old one was sitting, this poore Pye did fight with the Viper, vntill the Viper tooke her fast by the thigh, so as shee could fight no more, yet she ceased not to chatter and cry out to her fellowes to come and helpe her, wherevpon the male Pye came, and seeing his female so gryped by the Viper, hee ceased not to pecke vpon his head vntill the braines came out, and so the Viper fell downe dead. This story is also alledged by Cardan. The Scorpions and the Vipers are enemies one to another, for at Padua a Viper and a Scorpion (for the tryall of this matter) were both included in a viall, where they conti∣nued fighting a little while, but at last they both dyed by one anothers poyson. The Tor∣teyse of the earth is also an enemy to the Viper, and the Viper to it, wherefore if it can get Origan, or wild-Sauorie, or Rue, it eateth thereof, & then is nothing afraid to fight with Elianus the Viper, but if the Torteyse can find none of these, then they die incontinentlie by the poyson of the Viper, and of this there hath beene tryall, as both Aristotle and other Au∣thours affirme. And as there is this contrarietie betwixt Vipers and other liuing creatures, so there is betwixt them and Plants of the earth, and this blessing God in nature hath bestowed vp∣pon many beasts, that when they feele themselues to be hurt by one herbe, they know an∣other to cure them; as for example, Garlicke is poyson to the Viper, and therefore hauing tasted thereof she dieth, except she eate some Rue. A Viper beeing strooke with a Reede once, it amazeth her, and maketh her sencelesse, but beeing strooke the second time, she recouereth and runneth away: and the like is reported of the Beech-tree, sauing that it stayeth the viper, and she is not able to goe from it. But most maruailous is the antipathy betwixt the viper and the Yew-tree, for it is reported by Mercuriall, that if you lay fire on the one side, and a peece of Yew on the other side, and then place a viper in the middle be∣twixt them both, she will rather chuse to runne thorow the fire, then to goe ouer the bran∣ches of Yew. The Viper is also afraid of Mustard-seede, for it beeing layd in her path, she flieth from it, and if she taste of it, she dyeth. There is an herbe called Arum, if the hands or body of Gallen. a man be annoynted with the iuyce of the roote therof, the viper will neuer byte him; the like is reported of the iuyce of Dragons, expressed out of the leaues, fruite or roote. It is also said, that if a viper do behold a good Smaradge, her eyes will melt and fall out of her head. But aboue all other plants in the world, the Viper is most delighted with Vetches, Dioscorid. Rasis. and the Sauyne tree, for in Italy (as Cardan writeth) there was once seene a great number of Vipers about a Sauyne-Tree, and many of them did climbe vp and downe vppon that Tree. There is no loue betweene this Serpent and other creatures, saue onely to his ovvne kind, and therefore there are two things memorable in the nature of this sauage Serpent, the one is the loue of the male to the female, & the other of the female to her young ones. It is reported by Saint Ambrose and Saint Basill, that when the male misseth the female, he seeketh her out very diligently, and with a pleasing and flattering noyse, calleth for her, and when he perceiueth she approcheth, he casteth vp all his venome, as it were in re∣uerence of matrymoniall dignitie. The female on the other side, maketh much of her young ones, licking and adorning their skinnes, fighting for them vnto death, both a∣gainst men and beasts. For this occasion and some medicinall vses, the Arabians coun∣ted Vipers holy Serpents, for by reason (as we haue said already) that the vipers do haunt the Baulsom-trees, whereof there be plentie in that country, they hold them for holy kee∣pers of that precious fruite; wherefore they neuer kill them, but at the time of yeere when the Baulsome is ripe, they come vnto the trees bearing in their hands two woodden rules, which they smyte one against another, by the noyse whereof the vipers are terrified and driuen away, and so the Trees are freed for the Inhabitants to take the fruite thereof at their pleasure. Now forasmuch as we read that Porus King of India sent many great Vipers for a gyft vnto Augustus, it is profitable to expresse the meanes whereby Vipers are safely taken, without dooing any harme. Wherefore Aristotle writeth, that they are very much desi∣rous of Wine, and for that cause the Country-people set little vessels of vvine in the hed∣ges and haunts of Vipers, where-vnto the vipers comming, easily drinke thēselues tame, and so the Hunters come and kill them, or else so take them, as they are without danger of harme. Pliny reporteth, that in auncient time, the Marsians in Lybia did hunt vipers, and neuer receiued harme of them, for by a secrete & innate vertue, all vipers & serpents are afraid of their bodies, as we haue already shewed in other places. Yet Gallen in his dis∣course to Piso, writeth that the Marsians in his time had no such vertue in them, as hee had often tryed, saue onely that they vsed a deceit or slight to beguile the people, which vvas in this manner following. Long after the vsuall time of hunting Vipers, they vse to goe abroade to take them, when there is no courage nor scant any venome left in them, for the Vipers are then easily taken if they can be found: and them so taken, they accustome to their owne bodies, by giuing them such meates as doth euacuate all their poyson, or at the least-wise doth so stop vp their teeth, as it maketh the harme very small; and so the simple people beeing igno∣rant of this fraude, and seeing them apparantly carrying vipers about them, did ignorant∣ly attribute a vertue to their natures, which in truth did not belong vnto them. In like manner there were (as hath already in another place beene said) certaine Iuglers in Italy, which did boast themselues to be of the linage of Saint Paule, who did so deceitfully car∣rie themselues, that in the presence and sight of many people, they suffered Vipers to bite them without any manner of harme. Others againe when they had taken a Viper, did drowne her head in mans spettle, by vertue whereof the viper beganne to grow tame and meeke. Besides this, they made a cer∣taine oyntment which they set foorth to sale, affirming it to haue a vertue against the by∣ting of Vipers, and all other Serpents, which oyntment was made in this manner. Out of the oyle of the seede of Wild-radish, of the rootes of Dragons, the iuyce of Daffadill, the braine of a Hare, leaues of Sage, sprigges of Bay, and a few such other things, where∣by they deceiued the people, and got much money: and therefore to conclude, I cannot find any more excellent way for the taking and destroying of vipers, then that which is already expressed in the generall discourse of Serpents. Wee doe reade that in Egypt they eate Vipers & diuers other Serpents, with no more difficultie then they would doe Eeles, so doe many people both in the Easterne and wea∣sterne parts of the New-found-Lands. And the very selfe-same thing is reported of the Inhabitants of the Mountaine Athos, the which meate they prepare and dresse on this manner. First they cut off their heads and also their tayles, then they bowell them and salt them, after which they seeth them or bake them, as a man would seeth or bake Eecles, but some-times they hang them vppe and dry them, and then when they take them downe a∣gaine, they eate them with Oyle, Salt, Annyseedes, Leckes and vvater, with some such other obseruations. Whose dyet of eating vipers I doe much pittie, if the want of other foode constraine them there-vnto; but if it arise from the insatiable and greedy intempe∣rancie of their owne appetites, I iudge them eager of dainties, which aduenture for it at such a market of poyson. Now it followeth that wee proceede to the handling of that part of the Vipers storie, which concerneth the venome or poyson that is in it, which must beginne at the conside∣ration of themperament of this Serpent. It is some question among the learned, vvhe∣ther a viper be hot or cold; and for aunswere heereof it is said, that it is of cold constituti∣on, because it lyeth hid, and almost dead in the Winter-time, wherein a man may carry them in his hands without all hurt or danger: & vnto this opinion for this selfe same rea∣son, agreeth Gallen. Mercuriall maketh a treble diuersitie of constitution among Serpents, whereof the first sort are those which with their wound doe infuse a mortall poyson that killeth instantly, and without delay: a second sort are those that kill, but more leysurelie, without any such speede: and the third are those whose poison is more slow in operation then is the second, among which he assigneth the Viper. But although by this slownes of operation hee would inforce the coldnes of the poyson, yet it is alwaies to be considered, that the difference of vipers, and of their venome, ariseth from the place and Region in which they are bredde, and also from the time of the yeere wherein they byte & wound, so that except they fortune to hurt any one during the time of the Caniculer dayes, (in which season their poyson is hotest, and themselues most full of spyrit,) the same it but weake, and full of deadnes. And againe it is to be considered, whether the viper harme in her moode and furie, for anger doth thrust it foorth more fully, and causeth the same to worke more deadly. Likewise the Region wherein they liue, begetteth a more liuely working spirit in the Serpent, and therefore before all other, the Vipers of Numidia are preferred, because of the heate of that Country. Also their meate causeth in them a difference of poyson, for those that liue in the woods and eate Toades, are not so vigorous or venomous, but those that liue in the mountaines, and eate the rootes of certaine herbes, are more poysonfull and deadly. And therefore Cardan relateth a story, which he saith was told him by a Phae∣necian, that a Mountaine-Viper chased a man so hardly, that he was forced to take a tree, vnto the which when the Viper was come, and could not climbe vppe to vtter her malice vppon the man, she emptied the same vppon the Tree, and by and by after, the man in the tree dyed, by the sauour and secret operation of the same. But of the Arabian Vipers which haunt the Baulsom-trees, I haue read, that if at any time they byte, they onely make a wound like the pricks of yron, voyde of poyson, because Pausanius while they sucke in the iuyce of that tree, the acerbitie and strength of the venom is aba∣ted. About the Mountaine Helycon in Greece, the poyson also of Vipers is infirme and not strong, so that the cure thereof is also ready and easie. But yet for the nature of Vipers poyson, I can say no more thē Wolphius hath said, that it is of it selfe and in it selfe conside∣red, hot: and his reason is, because hee saw a combat in a glasse betwixt a Viper and a Scorpion, and they both perished one by the others poyson. Now he saith that it is gran∣ted, the Scorpion to be of a cold nature, and his poyson to be cold; therfore by reason of the antipathy whereby one dyed by the malice of another, it must needes follovv that the Viper is hot, and her poyson likewise of the same nature. For a Serpent of a cold nature, killeth not another of the same nature, nor a hot Serpent, one of his owne kind, but rather it falleth out cleane contrarie, that the hot kill those that are colde, and the cold Serpents the hoter. All the Vipers that liue neere the vvaters, are of more mild and meeke poyson then o∣thers. If there be any such, but I rather beleeue there be none, but that the same Authour which wrote of the vipers of the water, did intend Serpents of the water. But concerning the poyson of vipers, there is nothing reported more strange then that of Vincentius Bellu∣acensis, who writeth, that if a man chaunce to tread vpon the reynes of a Viper vnawares, Pliny Nicander. it paineth him more then any venome, for it spreadeth it selfe ouer all the body incurably. Also it is written, that if a woman with childe chaunce to passe ouer a viper, it causeth her to suffer abortment; and the Mushroms or Toade-stooles which grow neere the dennes and lodgings of vipers, are also found to be venomous. The Scythians also do draw an incurable and vnresistable poyson out of vipers, where-withall they annoynt the sharpe ends of their darts and arrowes when they goe to vvarre, to the end that if it chaunce to light vppon their aduersary, hee may neuer any more doe them harme. They make this poyson in this manner. They obserued the lyttering pla∣ces and time of the vipers, and then with strength and Art, did take the old & young ones together, which they presently killed, and afterward suffered them to lye and rot, or soake in some moyst thing for a season: then they tooke them and put them into an earthen pot filled with the blood of some one man; this potte of mans blood and vipers they stopped very close, so as nothing might issue out at the mouth, and then buried or couered it all o∣uer in a dunghill, where it rotted and consumed a few dayes, after which they vncouered it againe, and opening it, found at the toppe a kind of watery substance swymming, that they take off, and mixe it with the rotten matter of the Viper, & heereof make this dead∣ly poyson. Wee haue shewed already, that there is outwardly a difference betwixt the byting wound of the Male and the Female viper, for after the male hath bitten, there appeareth but two holes, but after the female hath bytten, there appeareth foure; and this is also a great deale more deadly then is the byting of the male, according to the verses of Nican∣der, where he saith; Porrò ex Vipereo, quod noris germine peior Foemina: quae veluti maiori accenditur ira, Sic vehemente magis fert noxia vulner a morsu, Et plus glicenti se cauda & corpore voluit, Vnde citatior hac ict as mors occupat artus. Which may be englished thus, But of the Vipers broode the female is the worst, Which as it were, with greater wrath doth burne: And therefore when she bytes, makes bodies more accurst, Inflicting hurtfull wounds, to vehemency turnd. Rowling her bulke and tayle more oft about, Whereby a speedier death doth life rydde out. But Auicen is directly contrary to this opinion, and saith, that as the bytings of male-Dragons are more exitiall and harmefull then are the females, so is it betwixt the byting of the male and female Viper. This contrarietie is thus reconciled by Mercuriall, namely, that it is true, that the wounds which the female maketh by her byting, beeing well consi∣dered, is more deadly then the wounds which the male giueth: yet for the proportion of the poyson which the male venteth into the wound he maketh, it is more deadly then is the females; so that with respect of quantitie, they both say true which affirme eyther the one or the other. But which soeuer is the greatest, it skilleth not much, for both are dead∣ly enough, as may appeare by the common symptomes and signes which follow, and also death. Matthiolus reporteth a history of a Country-man, who as hee was mowing of grasse, chaunced to cut a Viper cleane asunder about the middle, or some-what neerer the head, which beeing done, hee stoode still, and looked vppon the dying disseuered parts a little while, at last, eyther presuming that it had no power left to hurt, or thinking it was dead, he tooke that part in his hand where-vpon the head was: the angry viper feeling his ad∣uersaries warme hand, turned the head about, and bitte his finger with all the rage, force, and venome that it had left, so that the blood issued out. The man thus bitten for his bold∣nesse, did hastily cast it away, & began to sucke the wound, putting his hand to his mouth, which when he had done but a little while, he suddenly fell downe dead. The like story vnto this, is related by Amatus Lusitanas of another, which more bold∣ly then wisely, did aduenture to take a liue viper into his hand vppon a wager of money, but as the other, so this payd for his rashnes, for the angry Viper did byte him as did the former, and hee sucked his wound as did the Country-man, and in like maner fell downe dead. By both which examples, wee may well see the danger of the Vipers poyson, so that if once it come into the stomacke, and touch the open passage where the vitall parts goe in and out, it neuer stayeth long but death followeth. Wherefore Aetius saith well, that sometimes it killeth within the space of seauen houres, and sometimes againe within the space of three dayes, and that respite of time seemeth to be the longest, if remedie be not had with more effectuall speede. The signes or effects of the Vipers byting, are briefely these, first there issueth foorth a rotten matter, some-times bloody, and some-times like liquid or molten fatnesse, some-times againe with no colour at all, but all the flesh about the sore swelleth, sometimes ha∣uing a redde, and some-time a pale hiew or colour vppon it, issuing also foorth a corrup∣ted mattery matter. Also it causeth diuers little blysters to arise vppon the flesh, as though the body were all scorched ouer with fire, and speedily after this, followeth putrefaction and death. The paine that commeth by this Serpents wounding, is so vniuersall, that all the body seemeth to be set on fire, many pittifull noyses are forced out of the parties throat by sence of that paine, turning and crackling of the necke, also twinckling and wrying of the eyes, wih darknesse and heauinesse of the head, imbecility of the loynes, some-times thirsting intollerably, crying out vpon his dry throate, and againe some-times freezing at the fin∣gers ends, at least so as hee feeleth such a payne. Moreouer, the body sweating a sweat more cold then snow it selfe, and many times vomiting forth the bilious tumours of his owne belly. But the colour going and comming is often changed, now like pale lead, then like blacke, and anon as greene as the rust of brasse, the gumbes flow with blood, and the Liuer it selfe falleth to be inflamed, sleepinesse and trembling possesseth the body and se∣uerall parts, and difficultie of making vrine, with Feauers, neezing, and shortnesse of breath. These are related by Aetius, Aegineta, Greuinus and others, which worke not alwaies in euery body generallie, but some in one, and some in another, as the humours and tem∣perament of nature doth leade, and guide their operation. But I maruaile from whence Plato in his Symposium had that opinion, that a man bytten and poysoned by a Viper, will tell it to none, but onely to those that haue formerly tasted of that misery: for although a∣mong other effects of this poyson, it is said that madnes, or a distracted mind also follow∣eth, yet I think in nature there can be no reason giuen of Platoes opinion, except he meane that the patient will neuer manifest his griefe at all. And this how-soeuer also, is confuted by this one story of Greuinus. There was (as he writeth) a certaine Apothecarie vvhich did keepe Vipers, and it happened one day as hee was medling about them, that one of them caught him by his finger, and did byte him a little, so as the prints of his teeth ap∣peared as the poynts of needles. The Apothecary onely looked on it, and beeing busied, either forgot, or (as hee said afterward) felt no paine for an howres space: but after the howre, first his finger smarted and began to burne, and afterward his arme and vvhole body fell to be suddenly distempered there-with, so as necessity constrayning him, and opportunitie offering it selfe, he sent for a Phisitian at hand, and by his good aduise, (tho∣rough Gods mercy) was recouered, but with great difficultie; for he suffered many of the former passions and symptomes before he was cured. Therefore by this story, eyther Plato was in a wrong opinion, or else Greuinus telleth a fable, which I cannot graunt, because he wrote of his owne experience, knowne then to many in the world, who would quicklie haue contradicted it: or else if he had consented to the opinion of Plato, no doubt but in the relation of that matter, he would haue expres∣sed also that circumstance. Thus then we haue, as briefely and plainly as we can, deliuered the paines & torments which are caused by the poyson of Vipers; now therefore it followeth, that we also briefe∣ly declare the vertue of such Medicines, as we find to be applyed by diligent and carefull obseruations of many learned Phisitians, against the venom of Vipers. First of all they write, that the generall rule must be obserued in the curing of the poyson of Vipers, which is already declared against other Serpents: namely, that the force of theyr poyson be kept from spreading, and that may be done eyther by the present extraction of the poyson, or else by bynding the wounded member hard, or else by cutting it off, if it be in finger, hand or foote. Galen reporteth, that when he was in Alexandria, there came to the Citty a Country-man which had his finger bytten by a Viper, but before he came, hee had bound his fin∣ger close to the palme of his hand, and then hee shewed the same to a Phisitian, who im∣mediatly cut off his finger, and so he was cured. And besides, he telleth of another coun∣try-man, who reaping of Corne, by chaunce with his sickle did hurt a Viper, who retur∣ned and did raze all his finger with her poysonfull teeth. The man presently conceiuing his owne pertill, cut off his owne finger with the same sickle, before the poyson was spred too farre, and so was cured without any other Medicine. Sometime it hapneth that the byte is in such a part that it cannot be cutte off, and then they apply a Henne cut insunder aliue, & layd to as hot as can be, also one must first wash and annoynt his mouth with oyle, and so sucke out the poyson. Likewise the place must be scarified, and the partie fedde and dieted with old Butter, and bathed in milke or Sea-water, and be kept waking, and made to walke vp and downe. It were too long, & also needlesse, to expresse all the medicines which by naturall means are prepared against the poyson of Vipers, whereof seeing no reasonable man will expect that at my hands, I will onely touch two or three cures by way of history, and for others, refer my Reader to Phisitians, or to the Latine discourse of Caronus. In Norcheria, the In Uipera. country of that great and famous Gentilis who translated Auiten, there is a fountaine, into which if any man be put that is stung or bytten by a Serpent, hee is thereof immediatly cured; which Amatus Lusitanus approoueth to be very naturall, because the continuall cold water killeth the hot poyson. The same Authour writeth, that when a little maid of the age of thirteene yeeres, was bytten in the heele by a Viper, the legge beeing first of all bound at the knee very hard, then because the maid fell destract, first he caused a Surgeon to make two or three deeper holes then the Viper had made, that so the poyson might be the more easily extracted, then he scarified the place, and drawed it with cupping-glasses, whereby was exhausted all the blacke blood, and then also the whole legge ouer, was sca∣rified, and blood drawne out of it, as long as it would run of it owne accord. Then was a plaister made of Garlicke, and the sharpest Onyons rosted, which being mixed with Tri∣acle, was layde to the bytten place. Also the maide dranke three dayes of Triacle in wine, and foure houres after a little broth made with Garlicke. The second day after the abatement of the paine, he gaue her the iuyce of Yew-leaues fasting, which he commendeth as the most notable Antidote in this kind, and so made a second plaister, which lay on three dayes more, and in the meane time she dranke fasting euery day that iuyce of Yew-leaues, whereby her trembling and distracted estate was a∣bated, but from the wounded place still flowed matter, and it looked blacke. Then the foure next dayes, the said matter was drawne out by a linnen cloth, wherein was Goates∣dunge, powder of Lawrell, and Euphorbium in Wine, all mixed together, and afterward he made this oyntment, which did perfectly cure her, Rec: of long Aristolochij two oun∣ces, of Briony and Daffadill one ounce, of Galbanum and Myrrhe, of each one ounce, with a conuenient quantitie of oyle of Bayes and Waxe. This applyed to the bytten place in a en cloth, and tentures twice a day, did perfectly recouer her health within a month. Ambrosius Paraeus cured himselfe, with binding his finger hard that was bytten, & ap∣plying to it Triacle dissolued in Aquavitae, and drunke vp in lynt or bumbast: and he ad∣uiseth in stead of old Triacle, to take Mithridate. Gesner saith, that he saw a mayd cured of the eating of V pers flesh, by beeing constrained to drinke Wine abundantly. Theo∣phrastus and Asclepiades doe write, that many are cured by the sound of good Musicke, as the like is already shewed, in the cure of the poyson of the Phalangium: and no maruaile, for Ismenias the Theban affirmeth, that he knew many in Baeotia, that were cured of the Sciatica, by hearing of the musicall sound of a good pype. Of the Medicines which may be made of the Uiper. T He eating of Vipers is an admirable remedie against the Le∣prosie. And beeing prepared after that sort as was mentioned immediatly before in the former Section, they are ministred to the sicke person sitting in the sunne, yet his head must be well couered or shadowed. Neither indeed to eate Vipers once alone, or twice is sufficient, but it must be done often, sith it is without danger, and moreouer bringeth great com∣moditie. And let the Vipers be new, and taken out of moist places, for those which are bred neere the Sea, are very thir∣stie and dry. The broth also of sod Vipers, is for such persons good supping meate. The flesh of Vipers is in temperature apparantly hot and dry, and purgeth the whole body by sweat; here-vppon many sore tormented with Leprosie, by eating and drinking them haue beene cured. Auerroes saith, the flesh of Tyrus clenseth Leprosie, because it driueth the matter there∣of to the skinne, and therefore they that drinke it, fall first into the passion of Tyria, that is, the pilling of the skinne, and after are cured of it. Chuse the Vipers of the Mountaine, especially beeing white, and cut off their heads & tayles at once very speedily, and then if the issue of blood be plentifull, and they continue Funamellus aliue, and wallow to and fro a long time, these are good. After their beheading, let them be made cleane and sod, and let the diseased party eate of them, and of their broath. And by the drinking of wine wherein a Viper dyeth or liueth, certaine haue beene cu∣red accidentally, or by an intent to kill them. The Leaper must first drinke the broth of Vipers decocted, in manner as afore-saide, Auicen. Amatus. then let him eate the flesh, no otherwise then as mutton or fowles, which daily men dine with, but fasting and in the morning this flesh must be eaten, halfe a Viper at once, and some-time a whole viper, according to the strength of the partie diseased. After the eating whereof, hee must not eate or drinke in the space of sixe houres; but if hee doe sweat, it is most expedient that in his sweat hee looke to himselfe very carefully. And the skinne is wont to flca off from the Leaper, as it vsually befalleth Serpents. A man may easily see the flesh of Viders to be hot and dry, when they are dressed as E les. And that they purge the whole body thorow the skinne, thou mayest learne euen by those things, which my selfe beeing a young man, had experience of in our Countrey of Asia, which things seuerally and in order I shall relate. A certaine man infected with the disease which men call Elephas, that is, Leprosie, for a time conuersed still with his companions, till by his company & conuersation, some of Gallen. them were infected with the contagion of the disease, and hee now became lothsome to smell, and filthy to sight. Building therefore a cottage for him neere the Village, on the top of a banke, hard by a fountaine, there they place this man, and daily bring to him so much meate as was sufficient to sustaine life. But at the rising of the Dog-starre, when by good hap, Reapers, reaped not farre from that place, very fragrant wine was brought for them in an earthen vessell: he that brought it, set it downe neere the Reapers, and depar∣ted; but when the time was come that they should drinke it, a young man taking vp the vessell, that according to their maner hauing filled a boule, hee might mingle the Wine with a competent measure of water, hee poured the Wine into the boule, and together with the Wine fell out a dead Viper. Wherefore the Reapers amazed thereat, and fearing least if they dranke it, they should receiue some harme thereby, chose rather indeed to quench their thirst by drinking vva∣ter: but when they departed thence, of humanitie & in pietie, gaue the wine to this Le∣per, supposing it to be better for him to die, then to liue in that misery. Yet hee when hee had drunke it, in a wonderfull manner was restored to his health: for all the scurfe of his skinne fell off as the shalles of tender shelled creatures, and that which remained, appea∣red very tender, as the skinne of Crabs or Locusts, when their outward shell is taken a∣way. Another example by a chaunce not much vnlike, hapned in Mysia, a Country of Asia, not farre from our Cittie. A certaine Leper went to wash himselfe in Spring-water, ho∣ping thereby to receiue some benefit. Hee had a maid-seruaunt, a very fayre young wo∣man, importuned by diuers suters: to her the sicke man committed both certaine other things pertaining to the house, & also the store-house. When they therefore were gone, into the roome, to which a filthy place and full of Vipers adioyned, by chaunce one of thē fell into a vessell of Wine there negligently left, and was drowned. The mayd esteeming that a benefit which Fortune offered, filled that Wine to her maister, and hee dranke it, and there-by in like sort as he that liued in the cottage, was cured. These are two examples of experiment by casuall occasion. Moreouer, I will adde al∣so a third, which proceeded from our imitation. When one was sicke of this disease, in mind more then the common sort philosophicall, and despising death, tooke it exceeding grieuously, and said it were better once to suffer death, then to liue so miserable a life: and drinking wine so mingled with poyson, he became a Leper; and afterward wee cured his Leprosie by our accustomed medicines. Also a fourth man tooke Vipers aliue, but that man had onely the beginning of this disease; therefore our care and industry was very speedily to restore him to health: wher∣fore hauing let him blood, and by a medicine taken away melancholy, wee bad him vse the Vipers he had taken, beeing prepared in a pot after the manner of Eeles. And he was thus cured, the infection euaporating thorow the skinne. Lastly also, a certaine other man very rich, not our Country-man, but of the middle of Thracia, admonished by a dreame, came to Pergamus, where God commaunded him by a dreame, that hee should daily drinke the medicine which was made of Vipers, and out∣wardly he should annoynt his body, and not many dayes after, his disease became the Le∣prosie: And againe also, this infirmitie was afterward cured by the medicines which God commaunded. Matthew Grady fedde Chickins and Capons with the broth and flesh of Vipers mingled with bread, till they cast theyr feathers, purposing by them to cure the Leprosie. Gallen. A certaine Noble-woman in this Citty, infected with this malady (the Leprosie) after diuers infortunate attempts of many, came to my hands, in whose cure, when generous medicines auailed nothing, at last, with consent of her husband, I purposed to try her with Vipers flesh: where-vpon a female Viper beeing cleansed and prepared after that sort as Galen prescribeth in his booke De Theriaca, mingling the flesh of the Viper with Galan∣gall, Saffron, &c. I sod her very well. Then I tooke a chicken, which I commaunded well to be sod in the iuyce and broth of the Viper. And least shee should take any harme there-by, I first ministred vnto her Methridate, then the Chicken with the broth, by eating whereof she said she felt herselfe better: Which when I saw, I tooke another male viper, whom I sod alone without adding any other thing, and the broth thereof I ministred to her three dayes, where-vpon she began to sweat extreamely, the sweat I restrained by sy∣rop of Violets and pure water. After sixe dayes, scales fell from her, and shee was healed. Moreouer, shee soone after conceiued a man-child, hauing beene barren before the space of forty yeeres. Antonius Musa a Phisitian, when he met with an incurable Vlcer, he gaue his patients Vipers to eate, and cured them with maruailous celeritie. When the scruaunt of Cra∣terus Pliny the Phisitian fell into a strange and vnusuall disease, that his flesh fell from his bones, and that he had prooued many medicines which profited him nothing, he was healed by eating a Viper dressed as a fish. Vipers flesh if it be sod and eaten, cleareth the eyes, helpeth the defects of the sinewes, and represseth swellings. Porphyrius They say they that eate vipers become lousie, which is not so; though Galen affirme it. Some adde them to liue long who eate that meate, to wit, Vipers. Isogonus affirmeth the Dioscorid. Cirni, a kind of Indians, to liue an hundred and forty yeeres. Also he thinketh the Ethyo∣pians, and Seres, and the inhabitants of Mount Athos, to be long liued, because they eate Vipers flesh. The Scythians cleaue the head of the viper betwixt the eares, to take out a stone, which Pliny. they say she deuoureth when she is affrighted. The heads of Vipers burnt in a pot to ashes, and after beaten together with the grosest decoction of bitter Lupines, and spred as an oyntment on the temples of the head, stayeth the continuall rhume of the eyes. Their ashes lightly beaten alone, and applyed as a dry medicine for the eyes, greatly amendeth a dimme sight. The head of a viper kept dry and burned, and after beeing dipped in Vineger and ap∣plyed, cureth wild fire. Aetius. The gall of the viper doth wonderfully cleanse the eye, and offendeth not by poyson. It is manifest against the stinging of all Serpents though incurable, that the bowels of the Albertus. very Serpents doe helpe and auaile; and yet they who at any time haue drunke the liuer of a sod Viper, are neuer stung of Serpents. The fat of a viper is effectuall against the dimnesse and suffusions of the eyes, mixed Pliny. with Rosin, Honny-attick, and a like quantity of old oyle. For the Gowte they say t auaileth much to annoynt the feete with the fatte of Vipers. Vipers fatte healeth them that are burned. The slough of the Viper cureth the Ring-worme. The skinne of the viper beaten to Gallen. powder, and layd vpon the places where the hayre is fallen, it dooth wonderfully restore hayre againe. Some extend and dry whole Vipers, and after beate them to powder, and minister thē in drinke against the Gowte. Others about the rising of the Dog-star, cut off the head & Aetius. tayle of Vipers, and burne the middle, then they giue those ashes to be drunke 21. dayes, so much at a time as may be taken vp with three fingers, and so cure the swelling in the Auicenna. neeke. Ioynts payned with the Gowte, are profitably annoynted with oyle wherein a Viper hath beene sodden, for this cureth perfectly. The making of oyle of Vipers, is described in these words. Take three or foure Vipers, Le F tin: cut off their extreame parts, the head and the tayle, in length foure fingers, deuide the rest into foure gobbets, and put them in a pot open aboue and below, which pot must be put into another greater pot; then the mouth of them must be well shutte with clay, that they breathe not forth; then put them into a caldron full of seething water, and there let them continue boyling two houres in those pots: then will distill a liquour from the Vipers, which were in the pot open aboue and below, with that oylie liquour annoynt the mem∣bers of the partie molested with the Palsey, for by a secret propertie it cureth the greefe of that disease. Of Triacle and Trochuks of Uipers. T Heriace or Triacle, not onely because it cureth the venomous Galen. byting of Serpents, but also because the Serpents themselues are vsually mingled in the making thereof, fitly is so named of both significations. Heere also we will insert something concerning Trochuks of Vipers, vvhich are mingled in the making of Tri∣acle. Triacle is very auncient, and hath alwaies very carefully and not without ambition, beene refined by the Phisitians, till An∣dromochus Nero his Phisitian, added the flesh of Vipers, as the full accomplishment of this drugge. The flesh of Vipers alone is mingled in Triacle, and not the flesh of other Ser∣pents, because all the rest haue some-thing malignant more then Vipers. Vipers are thought to haue lesse poyson in them then other Serpents. Vipers for Triacle must not be taken at any time, but chiefely in the beginning of the Spring, when hauing left their dennes they come forth into the sunne-shine, and as yet haue not poyson much offensiue. Take female Vipers, for we must take heede how we take male vipers for the confecti∣on of Antidotes. For Trochuks all vipers are not conuenient, but those which be yellow, Auicen. and of the yellow, the females onely. Vipers great with young you must refuse, for being pregnant, they are more exaspe∣rate Galen. then themselues at other times. Of Vipers be made Trochisches, which of the Graecians are called Ther acy, foure fingers Aetius beeing cut off at either end, and the inwards taken out, and the pale matter cleauing to the backe-bone: the rest of the body must be boyled in a dish in water, with the herbe Dill, the back-bone must be taken out, and fine floure must be added. Thus these Trochuks be∣ing made, they must be dryed in the shade, apart from the Sunne-beames, and beeing so prepared, they be of very great vse for many medicines. The vse of Triacle is profitable for many things, for not onely by his owne nature it a∣uayleth ▪ against the byting of venomous creatures and poysons, but also it is found by ex∣perience, to helpe many other great infirmities. For it caseth the Gowte and payne in the ioynts, it dryeth fluxes, it very much profiteth men molested with the Dropsie, leaprous and melancholicke persons, those that haue Quartane-Agues, or the Iaundise, those that haue a weake voyce, or that spet blood: those that are troubled with aking of the reynes, with disentery, with the stone, with short breath, with passion of the Liuer or Milt, with choler, with hart-ake, with the Faling-sicknes. It driueth all kinde of wormes out of the bowells. It is the most soueraigne remedy of the Plague. Euen to thē that are in health the often vse of it is wholsome, for it promiseth long life, and firme health, it consumeth excrements, it strengtheneth naturall actions, it quickneth the wit, & sharpneth all the sences; it preserueth the body from poyson & other offences, and maketh it scarce subiect to danger by such casualties, it begetteth good bloud, it cor∣rupteth the ayre, and waters; neither alone doth it deliuer from instant diseases, but al∣so preserueth from those that be emminent. OF EARTH-WORMES. A Lthough there be many and sundry sorts of wormes which doe containe in them some poysonous quality, yet for all Doctor Bon∣ discourse of Wormes. that, at this time my purpose is to discourse especially of Earth-Wormes, whereof some are bred onely in the earth, and other among Plants, and in the bodyes of liuing Crea∣tures. Wormes of the earth are tearmed by Plautus and Co∣lumella Lumbrici, peraduenture as beeing deriued a Lubrici∣tate. They are called also Terrae Intestina of the Latines, as well because they take their first beginning and breeding in the very bowels and inward partes of the Earth, as because being pressed and squised betwixt the f ngers, or otherwise, they doe voyde foorth excre∣ments after the fashion of liuing beasts that haue Intrals in them. The Greekes call them Ges entera. Hesichius calleth them Embullous. Brunfelsius Otho in his Physicke Lexicon wri∣teth, that they are vsually called in the Scilician togue Gaphagas, fetching the deriuation of the word Parà Tò gaian phágein, for they feede vppon the earth. Of the Englishmen they are called Meds, and Eearth-wormes, Of the French Vers de Terra. Of the Germans Eertwurm, and Erdwurmem, Melet, Ode Regenwurm. Of the Belgians Pier-wuorm, or Ranganwuorm. Of the Italians Lumbrichi. Of the Spaniards Lumbrizes. Of the Poloni∣ans Glisti. Of the Hungarians Galisza. Of the Arabians they are called Charatin. Manar∣dus in his second Booke and 40. Epistle writeth, that in times past they were called Onis∣culi, and Nisculi. There are found especially two sorts of Earth-Wormes, which are eyther greater or lesser. The greater Earth-wormes are somewhat long, almost like in proportion & shape to those round Wormes which doe breede in mens bodyes. They are halfe a foot long at least, and being stretched out in length they are found to be a foote long, they are of a whitish colour, and sometimes though seldome, of a bloudy hue: and for the most part they are all adorned with a chaine about their neckes, or rather they seeme to weare a cer∣taine collor, wherein there is a little bloud contained, and they lacke eyes and eye-sight as all sorts of Wormes doe. They breede of the slime of the earth, taking their first beeing from putrifaction, and of the fat moysture of the same earth they are againe fed and nourished, and into earth at last are resolued. When there falleth any shewer of Raine, then this kind of worme cree∣peth soddenly out of the earth, whereupon old Euclio in Plautus beeing very carefull of his pot of Gold, speaketh aptly to his Drudge Strobilus in these words; Foras, foras Lumbrice qui sub terra erepsisti modo Qui modo nusquàm comparebas, nunc autem cùm compares, peris. In anluraria Which may be englished thus; Away, away thou VVorme, late from the earth crept out, Safe thou wast vnseene, but seene, life fayles I doubt. Here Euclio very properly termeth his Bondman Strobilus, a Worme, because not be∣ing espyed of his Mayster before, he suddenly came sneaking out from behinde an Altar where he was hid, much like a worme, that in moyst weather issueth out of the ground. Those little heapes which are cast vp and lye shining and wrinkled before the mouth or edges of their holes, I take them to bee their miety excrements: for I could neuer as yet find other excrementitious substances drossy matter, or other feculency, but onely bare earth in them, whose alimentary Iuyce and moysture beeing cleane exhausted, they cast out the remaynder, as an vnprofitable burthen, nothing fit for nourishment. At the en∣trance of their doores, which yet steadeth them to some commodious vse, for stopping & damming vp theyr holes that the raine cannot so easily soke in, they are by these meanes safely defended from many annoyances and daungers, that otherwise might light vppon them. Their delight is to couple together, especially in a rainy night, cleauing together vn∣till the Morning: and in the same they are not folded round about one another like vnto Serpents, but are straightly closed together side-wise, and thus doe they remayne sticking close the one to the other. They send foorth a certaine froathy slyme or Ielly when that they ioyne together. They doe euer keepe the middle part of theyr body within the earth, I meane their hinder parts: yea, euen in their mutuall ioyning together; neither are they at any time so fast glewed and closed, but with the least styrring and motion of the ground that can bee imagined, they are straight-wayes seuered, with-drawing them∣selues speedily into their lurking holes. In Rainy weather they are whiter a great deale then at other times, vnlesse it be when they couple together, for then they appeare very red. I my selfe about the middest of Aprill, did once open a thicke Female Worme, and within the flesh I found a certain receptacle ringed round about, and filling vp the whole cauity of the body, hauing a thinne membrance or ceate enclosing it, and in this aforesaid stirehouse the earth which she had sed on, and wherewith she was susteyned, was held and contained. Her Egges were found to bee in a safe place aboue the receptacle, next to the mouth, there were many of them on a heape together, being all of a whitish colour. The lesser Earth-Wormes for perspicuities sake, we with Georgius Agricola will name Ascarides: and these are often found in great numbers in Dung-hilles, Mixens, and vn∣der heapes of stones. Of this sort some are redde, (which we Englishmen call Duggs) & these be they that Anglers and Fishers do so much desire, for Fishes will greedily deuour them, and for that end they with them do bayte their hookes. There be some others of these lesser Earth-Wormes that are somewhat of a blew co∣lour, othersome againe are yellow onely about the tayle: whereuppon they haue purcha∣sed the name of Yellow-tayles. Some againe are ringed about the Neckes, withall very fat. Some others there be that haue neyther chaynes nor rings, and these commonly be more lanke and slender of body then the former, and these I iudge to bee the Males. These Wormes doe specially breede in Autumne, or at the fall of the leafe, by reason then there is but little moysture in the Earth, and this is Aristotles opinion. Both kindes doe liue long in the water, but yet at length for want of sustenance there they dye. They mooue from place to place with a kind of reaching or thrusting forwards, for we cannot properly say that they doe eyther role or tumble. Olympio in Plautus would goe about to make a simple plaine fellow beleeue that Wormes did eate noting but very earth, because he v∣sed these words to Chalinus; Post autem nisi ruri tu eruum comederis: (for thus Lambine readeth) Aut quasi Lumbcicus terram. In English thus; And afterward thou naught but Tares shalt eate, Or else like VVormes, the earth shall be thy meate. But by earth here in this place, he vnderstandeth not pure earth, and such as is with∣out any other mixture, but rather the fat, iuyce, and moysture of the same. And this is the reason, that Earth-wormes are not to be found in all soyles alike, as in barren, sandy, stony, hard, and bare grounds, but onely in fat, grauilly, moyst, clammy and fertile. And for this respect England hath many Wormes, because both Countrey and soyle are very moyst: and this moysture whereon they feed must not bee salt, sower, tart, or bitter, but sweete and tooth-some: and therefore it is, that Lutretius in his second booke writeth, that Wormes are bred most when it showreth, as in rainy seasons and moyst weather; Quatenus in pullos animaleis vertier oua Lerminus alitum, vermes{que} efferuare, terram Intempestiuos cùm putror coepit ob imbres. In english thus; Euen as in time of raine, we see Birds Egges their young forth hatch, And wormes in heat of gendering be When they clouds rot do catch. And to this opinion of Lucretius, Nicander seemeth to leane, when he affirmeth, that these Wormes are nourished altogether of the earth that is moystned with long Raine, In Theriaea. or with some smoaking shewer: for making a difference betweene the Serpent Scytale, & the Amphisbaena, he thus wtiteth; Steileies pachetos, tes elminthos pelei ogros He cai enterages oia trephei ombrimos aia. Id est. Manubrij ligonis latitudo, longitudo verò ei quae Lumbrico, Aut terrae intestinis, quae imbribus irrigata terra alit. That is to say; As broad as haft of Spade, his length like little Worme, And fed with dreary earth, moyst by clouds rainy forme. The greater sort of Earth-Wormes liue in the bowels of the Earth, and most of all in an open free ayre, and where there is some repaire and confluence of people. Euery mor∣ning they with-draw themselues into their secret holes & corners within the ground, fen∣cing the entrance of them with their excrements they haue voyded foorth, in a fayre and Sunshine weather: but in rainy weather they vse to stop the mouthes of their holes with some stalke or leaues of herbs or trees, being drawne a little inwardly into the earth. They feede vpon the roots of those Plantes which haue any sweete iuyce or moysture in them; and therefore one may many times find them amongest the roots of common Meddow-Grasse: and they do liue for the most part by the fat moysture of the earth, yet will they also greedily deuour crummes of white Bread vnleauened, as I haue often seene. In the Spring time, they first appeare to come foorth from the bowels of the earth, and all the Winter they lye hidde in the ground, but yet if it bee a very sharpe and pintching colde Winter, and a dry Sommer follow, for lacke of moysture they doe all-most all dye. Besides, if you digge into the earth, or make a great motion, trampling, or hard trea∣ding vpon the same, pouring in any strange liquor or moysture into the same, wherewith∣all they are vnaquainted; as for example, the iuyce of Wall-nut-trees, the water where∣in Hemp, eyther seedes or leaues are soked, or bin layd to rottein common Lye, and the like, they will issue out of the earth speedily, and by this meanes Fisher-men and Anglers, do take them. In like manner, they cannot endure Salt, or aromaticall things, nor by their good wil come neere them, for but touching any of these they will draw themselues on a heape, & so dye. Wormes are found to bee very venomous in the Kingdome of Mogor, and the Inhabitants there doe stand in so great feare of them, that they bee destroyed and slaine by them when they trauell any iourney; and therefore there they vse ordinarily to carry Besomes with them to sweepe the playne wayes for feare of further hurt. Georgius Agri∣cola saith, that the little Wormes called Ascarides, are not all of one colour: for some are white, some yellow (as I remembred a little before) and others againe are very blacke: and many of these in tilling the earth are cast vppe by the plough, and many found in dy∣uers places all on a heape together. These be they that destroy corne-field, for by sharing or byting the roots the fruit dyeth. Some say, that those wormes do most mischiefe to corne-grounds, which in some places of Italy the people terme Zaccarolae, & these are thick, almost a finger long, being natural- of a very cold constitution of body; and therefore they neuer vse to come foorth of the earth, but when the weather is passing hot, for then will they come forth, euen to the sur∣face of the ground, as it is notably set downe, by the famous Poet Ouid: —à quo ceu fonte perenni, Oui. amo. l. 3 Vatum Pierijs labra rigantur aquis. In english thus; By whom, as by an euerlasting filling Spring, VVith Muses liquor, Poets lips are bath'd to singe. Homer very fitly compareth Harpalion when he fell downe dead amongst his Compa∣nions, to a silly worm, when as seeking to escape by flight out of the battel, he was woun∣ded to death by Meriones, shooting an arrow or steele-dart into his hanch or hip, his ver∣ses be these; Meriones d'apiontos iei chalkere oiston, Kai r'ebale glouton kata dexion autar oistos, Antikron kata kustin vp'osteon exeperesen: Ezomenos de cat' authi philon en chersin etairon, Thumon apopneion, oste scolex epi gai Keito tatheis ecd' aima melan ree, dene de gaian. Id est. Meriones autem in abeuntem misit aream sagittam, Et vulnerauit coxam ad dextram, ac sagitta é regione per vesticam sub as penetrauit: Restidens autem illic chararum inter manus sociorum Animam efflans, tanquam vermis super terram Iacebat extensus: sanguis{que} effluebat, tingebat erutem terram. That is to say, But as he went away, behold Meriones VVith brazen dart, did his right hip-bone wound, VVhich neere the bladder did the bone thorough pierce: In friends deere hands, he dyed vpon the ground. So stretcht vpon the earth he lyed, Blacke bloud out flowing, the same bedyed. Marke well the slendernesse of this comparison, whereby hee would giue vs to vnder∣stand the base estate, and faynt hart of Harpalion. For in other places hauing to write of Noble, valiant, and magnanimious persons, when they were ready to giue vp the ghost, he vseth the words Sphadazein, Bruchein, and the like to these, secretly insinuating to vs, that they fell not downe dead like impotent Cowards, or timerous abiects; but that they raged like Lyons, with grinding and gnashing theyr teeth together, that they were bla∣sted, benummed; or suddenly depriued of all their liues and senses, &c. But here this pu∣sillanimous and sordidous minded man Harpalion, seemed to bee disgraced by his resem∣bling to a poore Worme, being peraduenture a man of so small estimation, and vile con∣dition, as that no greater comparison seemed to fit him. It seemeth he was a man but of a faynt courage, and very weake withall, because striking and thrusting with his speare or I aucling at the Shield or Target of Atrides, he was not able to strike it through. But al∣though this famous Poet doth so much seeme to extenuate and debase a weake Worme: yet others haue left vs in theyr writings such commendations of their singular vse and ne∣cessity for the recouery of mans health (then which no earthy thing is more pretious) & haue so nobilitated the worth of these poore contemptible Creatures, as I thinke, nature as yet hath scarce giuen any other simple Medicine, or experience found out by tract of time, nor knowledge of Plantes by long study hath reueyled, nor Paracelsus by the distil∣lations of his Limbeck hath made knowne to the world, any secret endued with so many vertues and excellent properties against so many diseases: and for proofe heereof, it shall not beside the purpose to examine and describe the rarest and most probable that are re∣corded amongst the learned. Earth-Wormes doe mollifie, conglutinate, appease paine, and by their terrestriall, and withall waterish humidity they do contemper any affected part, orderly and measu∣rably moderating any excesse whatsoeuer. The powder of Wormes is thus prepared. They vse to take the greatest Earth-Wormes that can bee found, and to wrappe them in Mosse, suffering them there to remayne for a certaine time, thereby the better to purge and clense them from that clammy and filthy slimynesse, which outwardly cleaueth to their bodies. When all this is done, they presse hard the hinder part of their bodies neere to the taile, squising out thereby their excrements, that no impurity so neere as is possible may be retayned in them. Thirdly, they vse to put them into a pot, or some fit vessell with some white-wine, & a little Salt, and streyning them gently betweene the fingers, they first of all cast away that Wine, and then doe they poure more wine to them, & after the washing of the wormes, they must also take away some of the Wine, for it must not all be poured away (as some would haue it) and this must so often bee done and renewed vntill the Wine be passing cleare without any filth or drossinesse, for by this way their slymy ielly, and glutinous e∣uill quality is cleare lost and spent. Being thus prepared, they are to be dryed by little & lit∣tle in an ouen, so long till they may be brought to powder: which being beaten and sear∣sed, it is to be kept in a Glasse-vessell farre from the fire by it selfe. A dramme of this pow∣der being commixed with the iuyce of Marigoldes, cureth the Epelipsie, with some sweet wne, as Muscadell, Bastard, or the Metheglin of the Welchmen. It helpeth the Dropsie. With white-wine and Myrrhe, the Iaurdise, with New-Wine, or Hydromell the Stone, Vlcers of the Reynes and Bladder. It stayeth also the loosenesse of the belly, helpeth bar∣rennesse, and expelleth the Secondine, it asswageth the paine of the haunch or hippe, by some the Sciatica, it openeth obstructions of the Liuer, dryueth away Tertian-Agues, & expelleth all Wormes that are bred in the Guts, being giuen and taken with the decocti∣on or distilled Water of Germander, Worme-wood, Sothern-wood, G rlicke, Scordū, Centory, and such like. The decoction of Wormes made with the iuyce of Knot-grasse, or Comfery, Salomons Seale, or Sarasius compound, cureth the disease teramed by Physitians Diabetes, vvhen one cannot holde his Water, but that it runneth from him without slay, or as fast as hee drinketh. A Glister likewise made of the decoction of Earth-Wormes, and also taken accordingly, doth maruellously asswage & appease the paine of the Hemorrhoids. There bee some that giue the decoction of Earth-Wormes to those persons that haue any con∣gealed or clotted bloud in theyr bodyes, and that with happy successe. The vertue of Earth-Wormes is exceedingly set foorth, both by the Graecians & Arabians, to encrease Milke in womens breasts. Hieronimus Mercurialis a learned Physitian of Italy, aduiseth Nurses to vse this con∣fection following in case they want Milk, alwaies prouided that there be not a Feuer ioy∣ned withall. Take of the Kernels of the fruite of the Pine-tree, sweete Almonds, of each alike, one ounce, Seedes of Fennell, Parsely, and rapes, of eyther alike one dram, of the powder of Earth-Wormes washed in wine, two drams, with Suger so much as is suffici∣ent, to be giuen the quantity of a dramme or two in the Morning, and after it drink some small Wine, or Capon-broath boyled with Rape-seedes and Leekes. Against the tooth-ach the same powder of Earth-Wormes is prooued singular, being decocted in Oyle, & dropped a little at once into the eare, on the same side the paine is, as Pliny witnesseth, or a little of it put into the contrary eare, will performe the same effect, as Dioscorides testify∣eth. And thus far of Earth-Wormes taken into the body, and of their manifolde vertues, according to the euidence and testimony of Dioscorides, Galen, Aetius, Paulus Aegeneta, Myrepsus, Pliny, and daily experience which goeth beyond the precepts of al skilfull Mai∣sters: for this is the Schole-Mystris of all Artes, as Manilius in his second Booke hath written; Per varios vsus artem experientia fecit, Exemplo monstrante viam. In English thus; Experience teacheth art by vse of things, When as example plainest way forth brings. Being also beaten to powder, and outwardly applyed, they doe close and solder vppe wouudes, and conglutinate sinnewes that are cut, and consolidating them againe in the space of seuen dayes, and to performe this cure the better, Democritus aduiseth to keepe them in Honny. The ashes of Earth-Wormes duely prepared, cleanseth So dious, stin∣king and rotten Vlcers, consuming and wasting away their hard lippes, or Callons edges, if it be tempered with Tarre and Simblian Hony, as Pliny affirmeth. Dioscerides saith, that the Hony of Sicilia was taken for that of Simblia in his time. Their ashes likewise draweth out Darts or Arrowes shot into the body, or any other matter that sticketh in the flesh, if they be tempered with Oyle of Roses, and so applyed to the place affected. The powder also cureth Kibes in the heeles, and Chilblaynes on the handes, as Marcellus testifieth, for hurts that happen to the sinnewes whē they are cut in peeces, Quintus Serenus hath these verses; Profuerit terrae Lumbricos indere tritos, Quets vetus & rancens sociari axungia, Debet. It is good (saith hee) to apply to sinnewes that are dissected. The powder of Earth-Wormes mixed and wrought vp with old, Rammish, and vnsauery Barrowes Grease, to be put into the griefe. Marcellus Empiricus. Besides, the powder of Earth-Wormes and Axunger, addeth further, Grounswell, and the tender toppes of the Boxe-tree with Oli∣banum: all these being made vp and tempered together to make an Emplaster, he coun∣selleth to bee applyed to sinnewes that are layed open, cut asunder, or that haue receiued any puncture, or suffer any payne or aking whatsoeuer. Pliny saith, that there cannot be a better Medicine found out for broken bones, then Earth-worms and field Mice dryed & puluerised, and so mixed together with Oyle of Roses, to be layde in the forme of an em∣plaster vpon the part fractured. Yea, to asswage and appease paine, both in the ioynts & in the sinnewes of Horses, there hath not been found out a more notable Medicine, as we may well perceiue by the writinges, both of Russius, Absyrtus, and Didymus: whereupon Cardan hath obserued, that all paynes whatsoeuer may bee mitigated by their apt vsing. Carolus Clusius sayth, that the Indians doe make an excellent vnguent of Earth-Wormes agaynst the disease called Erysipelas, beeing a swelling full of heat and rednesse with paine round about, commonly called S. Anthonies fyre: And thus it is prepared. They first take Earth-Wormes aliue, feeding them eyther with the leaues of Moeza, or else with fine Meale, vntill by this meanes they grow fat; afterwards boyling them in an earthen vessell, (remembring euer to scumme the same) they doe strayne them, boyling them yet againe, to the consistance almost of an emplaster, which if it be rightly prepared is of a yellow-collour. And this Medicine may well be vsed for any burning or scalding. My purpose is not to vouch all those authorities I might, concerning the admirable Na∣ture and vertue of Earth-Wormes: for so I thinke I might alledge sixe hundreth more, which is not meete to be inserted in this place. I will therefore now passe to their quali∣ties and medicinall vses for irrationall creatures. Pelagonius much commendeth Earth-VVormes as an excellent Medicine for the bots or VVormes that are in Horses, and in the bodyes of Oxen and Kine, affirming that the best way is to put them aliue into their Nosthrils, although without question it were farre better to conueigh them into their mawes by the meanes of some horne. Tardinus aduiseth to giue the powder of Earth-VVormes with some hot flesh, to Hawkes vvhen they cannot exonerate nature (or how Faulkners tearme it, I know not.) For that (sayth he) will loosen their bellies. Moles doe also feede full sauerly vpon them, and if they fall a digging, it is strange to see with what sudden hast and speede then poore VVormes vvill issue out of the ground. In like sort Hogges and Swyne (as Varro writeth) by their tur∣ning vp the mudde, and rooting in the earth with their snouts, do by this meanes dig vp the Wormes, that they may eate them. Albertus Magnus saith, that Toades doe feede vpon Wormes. Bellonius saith, that Li∣zards and Tarentinus, that the Sea-fish called Gryff or Grample, doth greedily deuour thē, and finally experience it selfe witnesseth, that Frogs, Eeles, Gudgeons, Carpes, Breames, Roches, and Trowts, doe satisfie their hungry guts by feeding vppon them. Aristotle in his eyght booke De Nat. Animal. Chap. 3. describeth a certaine Bird that liueth in the wa∣ters, which Gaza interpreteth Capella, though the Phylosopher calleth it Aix, and some haue called it Vdhelius, that liueth for the most part vpon wormes: yea, Thrushes, Robin∣redbreasts, Munmurderers, and Bramblings, Hens, Chaffinches, Gnat-snappers, Bull∣finches, and all sorts of Crowes will feede vppon them; and therefore it is that there bee more Crowes in England then in any other Country in the world, respecting the great∣nesse, because here the soyle being moyst and fat, there is aboundance of Earth-wormes seruing for their food, as Polydorus Virgilius in his first booke of the History of England, (which he dedicated to King Henry the eyght) hath excellently deliuered. The people of India, if wee will credit Monardus, doe make of these Wormes diuers iuncats, as we doe Tarts, Marchpanes, Wafers, and Cheese-cakes, to eate in stead of o∣ther daynties. And the Inhabitants of west India, do deuour them raw, as Francis Lopez testifieth. The people of Europe in no place that euer I heard or read of, can endure them to be set on their Tables, but for medicinall vses onely they desire them. Plautus vseth in stead of a prouerb this that followeth; chide. Nunc ab transenna hic turdus Lubricum petit. It is an allegorie taken and borrowed from a ginne or snare wherewith Birdes are ta∣ by which Chrysalus the bondman bringing certain Letters to Nicobolus an old man, th and giueth warning, that the weake old man was by the reading of the letter no otherwise ensnared, intangled, & deceiued, then some birds are taken by subtile and craf∣ty sleights. For Transenna is nothing but a deceitfull cord stretched out to take Birdes, es∣pecially Thrushes or Mauisses withall, and Wormes is there proper foode, which vvhile they endeuour to entrappe, they themselues are deceiued and taken. Surely I should not thinke that those Fishers and Anglers to be very wise, who to take Wormes, vse to poure Lye or water into the earth wherein Hemp, Sothern-wood, Centery, Worme-wood, or veruen haue bin long soked, or any other strange moysture, causing them by this meane to issue forth out of the earth, for the Earth. Wormes by this kind of dealing being made more bitter, vnsauory, and vnpleasant, no fishes will once touch or tast them, but rather seeke to auoyde them. But contrary-wise, if they will let them lie a whole day in VVheat Meale, putting a little Hony to it, and then bayte their hookes with them, they will be so sweete, pleasant, and delectable, as that the vnwary Fish will sooner bite at it, then at Am∣brosia, the very meat of the Gods. Earth-Wormes doe also much good to men, seruing them to great vse in that they do prognosticate and fore-tell rainy weather by their sodaine breaking or issuing forth of the ground: and if none appeare aboue ground ouer-night, it is a great signe it will be calme and fayre weather the next day. The ancient people of the world haue euer obserued this as a generall rule, that if Wormes pierce through the earth violently, & in hast by heaps, as if they had bored it thorow with some little Auger or Piercer, they tooke for it an infal∣lible token of Raine shortly after to fall. For the Earth being as it were embrued, distay∣ned, made moyst, and mooued with an imperceptible motion, partly by South-wind, & partly also a vaporous ayre, it yeeldeth an easie passage for round VVormes to wind out of the inward places of the earth, to giue vnto them moyst food, and to Minister store of fat Iuyces, or fattish Ielly, wherewith they are altogether delighted. Some there be found, that will fashion and frame Iron after such a manner, as that they will bring it to the hardnesse of any steele, after this order following. They take of Earth-VVormes two parts, of Raddish-roots one part, after they are bruized together, the wa∣ter is put into a Limbecke to be distïlled, or else take of the distilled water of VVormes, l. iij. of the iuyce of Raddish, l. j. mixe them together, for Iron beeing often quenched in this water, will grow exceeding hard. Another. Take of Earth-wormes l. ij. destill them in a Limbecke with an easie and gentle fire, & temper your yron in this destilled water. Another. Take of Goates blood so much as you please, adding to it a little common salt, then bury them in the earth in a pot well glased and luted for thirtie dayes together. Then destill after this the same blood in Balneo, & to this destilled liquor, adde so much of the destilled water of Earth-worms. Another. Take of Earth-wormes, of the rootes of Apple-trees, of Rapes, of each a like∣much, destill them apart by themselues, and in equall portions of this water so destilled, and afterwards equally mixed, quench your yron in it, as is said before. Antonynus Gal∣lus. It shall not be impertinent to our matter we handle, to adde a word or two concerning those wormes that are found and doe breede in the snow, which Theophanes in Strabo cal∣leth Oripas: but because it may seeme very strange & incredible, to think that any wormes breede and liue onely in the snow, you shall heare what the Auncients haue committed to writing, and especially Strabo his opinion concerning this poynt. It is (saith hee) recei∣ued amongst the greater number of men, that in the snow there are certaine clots or hard lumpes that are very hollow, which waxing hard and thicke, doe containe the best vva∣ter as it were in a certaine coate; and that in this case or purse there doe breede vvormes. Theophanes calleth them Oripas, and Apollonides, Vermes. Aristotle saith, that liuing creatures will breede also euen in those things that are not subiect to putrefaction, as for example, in the fire and snow, which of all thinges in the world, one would take neuer to be apt to putrefie, and yet in old snowe Wormes will be bred. Old snow that hath lyen long, will looke some-what dunne, or of a dullish white colour, and therefore the snow-wormes are of the same hiew, and likewise rough & hai∣rie. But those snow-wormes which are found to breed when the ayre is somwhat warme, are great, and white in colour, and all these snow-wormes will hardly stirre, or mooue from place to place. And Pliny is of the same iudgement, and the Authour of that booke Lib: 11. cap: 35. which is intituled De Plantis, falsely fathered vpon Aristotle. Yet some there be that denying all these authorities, and reiecting whatsoeuer can be obiected for confirmation thereof to the contrarie, doe stoutly maintaine by diuers rea∣sons, that creatures can breede in the snow: because that in snow there is no heate, and where no quickning heate is, there can be no production of any liuing thing. Againe, Aristotle writeth that nothing will come of Ise, because it is (as hee saith) most cold: and heere-vpon they inferre that in all reason, nothing likewise can take his beginning from snow; neither is it credible, that husbandmen would so often wish for snow in Winter to destroy and consume wormes, and other little vermine, that els would prooue so hurtfull to their corne and other fruites of the earth. And if any wormes be found in the snow, it followeth not straightwaies that therein they first receiue theyr beginning, but rather that they first come out of the earth, and are afterwards seene to be wrapped vp, and lye on heapes in the snow. But by their leaues these reasons are very weake, and may readily be aunswered thus, that whereas they maintaine that nothing can breede in the snow, because it is voyd of a∣ny heate at all, herein they build vpon a false ground. For if wee will adhibite credite to Auerrhoes, there is nothing compounded and made of the three Elements, that is abso∣lutely without heate. And Aristotle in his fift booke De Generatione Animalium, telleth vs precisely, that there is no moysture without heate. His wordes are Ouden hugron aneu thermou. Now snow is a compact, and fast congealed substance, and some-what moyst, for although it proceedeth by congelation, which is nothing els but a kind of exsiccation, yet notwithstanding, the matter whereof it first commeth is a vapour, whose nature is moyst, and with little adoe may be turned into water. I must needes say that congelation is a kind of exsiccation, but yet not simply: for ex∣siccation is, when as humidity goeth away, it putteth forth any matter, but in snovv there is no humiditie that is drawne out, but it is rather wrapped in and enclosed more strongly, and as it were, bounded round. Furthermore Aristotle in his first booke of his Meteors saith, that Snow is Nubes congelata, a clowde congelated or thickned together, and that in snow there is much heate. And in his fift booke De Generatione Animalium, he further addeth, that the whitenes of the snow is caused by the ayre, that the ayre is hot and moist, and the snow is white; where-vpon we conclude, that snow is not so cold, as some would beare vs in hand. I well hold that nothing will take his originall from Ise, inregard of his excessiue coldnes, but yet snow is nothing nie so cold as that. So then all the hinderance and let, is found to exceede of cold, which is nothing so effectuall or forceable as in Ise, & the cold beeing prooued to be farre lesser, there can nothing be alleadged to the contrary, but that it may putrefie. Now in that snow is such an enemie to wormes, and many other small creatures, as that for the most part it destroyeth them, yet it followeth not, that the reason of Aristotle is quite ouer-throwne: because (as wee daily see) that those creatures which liue in the ayre, will for the most part be suffocate and dye in the water; and contrariwise, those that liue in the water, cannot endure the ayre. Yet here-vppon it followeth not, that if they be choked in the water, that none at all will liue in the water, and the same reason is to be al∣leadged concerning the ayre. Therefore it is no maruell if those wormes that first breede in the earth, and liue in the earth, be killed by the snow; yet it necessarily followeth not, that no liuing creature can take his first beeing either from or in the snow. But if it can, as Aristotle witnesseth, it is so farre vnlikely that the same snow should be the destroyer of that it first was bred of, as I thinke rather it cannot liue seperately, but of necessitie in the same snow; no otherwise then fishes can liue without water, from which they first sprung and had theyr beginning. And to this opinion leaneth Theophrastus, in his first booke De Causis Plantarū, whose words be these, Apanta gar phainet ai ta zoa, kai ta phuta, kai diamenonta, kai genomena, en tois oikeiois capois: For all creatures (saith he) whatsoeuer, seeme, both plants to remaine, and to be generated and bred, in their owne due and proper places. And after this he ad∣deth and vrgeth a little further, Aparthe men hupo touton: from his owne home and speci∣all particuler place of abode, nothing can suffer, sustaine harme, or be corrupted. And in his fift booke De caus. Plan: he setteth it downe more perspicuously, how that Wormes which are bred in some speciall trees, beeing afterwards translated and changed to other trees, where they neuer came before, cannot possibly liue. Wherefore it is more conso∣nant to reason, and more agreeable to cōmon sence, to affirme that those wormes which are found folded and roled vp in the snow, to haue beene first bred in the same snow, ra∣ther then to haue issued out of the earth. Neither are we to make any question or scruple concerning theyr foode; for there is no doubt, but the mother from whence they proceeded, will prouide sufficient nourish∣ment for her owne children. For as we said a little before, the snow is no simple thing, but compacted and concrete together of many, and of this nature ought euery aliment to be. Iulius Caesar Scaliger is of this minde, that wormes are ingendered and brought foorth in the very snow, because there is in it much ayre and spyrit, which afterwards beeing hea∣ted and brought to some warmth together, may cause them to generate; for it is the na∣ture and qualitie of snow to make fat the earth, of which fattish moysture or Ielly, there may (heate beeing ioyned) be produced a liuing creature. There be some that doe constantly hold, that in the midst of certaine stones, of which they vse to make Lime, there doe breede diuers creatures, of very different kindes, and sundry proportions and shapes, and likewise wormes, with hairy backs, and many feete, which are wont to doe much hurt to Fornaces and Limbekills where they make Limbe. Yet Caesalpinus in his first booke De Metal. chap. 2. thinketh the contrary, assuring vs that in Mettall-mines, Quarries of Marble, and other stones, there can neuer any liuing bodie be found. And yet in Rocks of the Sea, within the hollow places and riftes of the stones, they doe commonly finde certaine small liuing things called Dactili. I doe not doubt, whatsoeuer he saith to the contrary, but that many creeping, and o∣ther liuing creatures, may be found both in the secret Mines of stone, and some-times al∣so amongst Mettalls, although it be sildome seene. And for confirmation heereof, I vvill alleadge one example happening not many yeeres since in our owne Country. At Harle∣stone, a myle from Holdenbie in Northamptonshiere, there was a Quarry of free stone found out, of which they digged for the building of Sir Christopher Hattons house, where there was taken vp one beeing a yard and a halfe square euery way at the least, and beeing clo∣uen asunder, there was found in the very midst of it a great Toade aliue, but within a very short space after, comming to the open ayre, it dyed. This stone amongst others, vvas taken very deepe out of the earth, it was splyt and cut asunder by one whose name is Lole, an old man yet liuing at this day, it was seene of fiue hundred persons, Gentlemen and o∣thers, of woorthy repute and esteeme, the most part of them liuing at this howre, whose attestation may defend mee in this report: and surely, if Toades may liue in the midst of stones, I can see no reason but that wormes may therebe found, but as yet I could neuer see it. In the yeere of Grace 970. at what time Romualdus the son of Sergius a young Monke, was aduaunced by the Nobilitie of Rauenna to be their Archbishoppe, there followed a great death and murren among Earth-vvormes: after that againe ensued scarsitie and deatth of all fruites of the earth, as Carolus Sigonius in his Chronicle of the Kingdome of Italy declareth. Henry Emperour of Rome, the sonne of the Emperour Henry the third, as Cramzius hath written, when he tooke his voyage into Italy, beeing suddenly stayed of his intended course, with an Army sent against him by Matild, that he should passe no further then Lombardie, yet hauing taken Mutina, there appeared a strange and vncouth signe in the ayre, for an innumerable company of Wormes, smaller and thinner then any Flyes, did flye about in the ayre, beeing so thicke that they might be touched with any small sticke or wand, and sometimes with the hand, so that they couered the face of the earth one myle in breadth, and darkned likewise the ayre two or three myles in length. Some did interprete it as a signe or fore-telling, that some Christian Prince should goe in∣to the Holy-Land. In the yeere of our Lord God one thousand, one hundred and foure, there were seene diuers fiery and flying Wormes in the ayre, in such an infinite multitude, that they dar∣kened the light of the Sunne, seeming to depriue mens eye-sight thereof; and shortly af∣ter this monstrous and vnnaturall wonder, there followed other strange & sildome-seene prodigious sights on the earth: and what a boysterous storme of troubles, and raging Whirle-wind of Warre and blood-shedde shortly after ensued, the euent thereof did plainely manifest. FINIS. EPILOGUS GRATVLATORIUS HONORANDO ATQVE IN OMNI ARTE, & MARTE, CVMVLATISSIMO VIRO, D: LVDOVICO LEWRNORO, EQVITI AVRATO, ET AVLICARVM CERE∣MONIARVM MAGISTRO PRINCIPALI. NEC-NON DOCTISSIMO ET CLARISSIMO UIRO D: THOMAE BONHAMO, IN MEDICINIS DOCTORI. E Xorientes stellae (secundū Astronomos) primū, aspectu transuerso at{que} laterali huius vniuersitatis montium cacumina, atque arborum summitates salutant, ne{que} hoc vel illud regnum, aliquemue locum, personamue particularem conspicantur: verum altius ascen∣dentes, & gradus plures ab ortu supergressae, non solum magis opposi∣tae, terrae apparent, sed omnium intuentium oculos vultus{que} videntur directe verberare. Ita mihi (absit iactantia) vsu-venit accidit{que}, illu∣strissime Miles; at{que} Doctor venerande, postquam enim praeceden∣tē de Quadrupedibus historiam (pro meo posse) absoluissem, non sine Epilogo, tanto labori va∣ledicebam: verum neminem cuiuscunque conditionis vel specialiter respiciebat, sed generali∣ter, omnibus huius Britanniae orbis, tum studiosis tum pijs insulanis proponebam. Longius vero in istiusmodi Epicyclo, seu laborum aetherea sphaera progressus, calamus, oculus, animus{que} in ve∣stram coniunctissimā, mutuamque erga has lucubrationes humanitatem, quasi irreuerberato studio conuertuntur, vobis enim, prae omnibus huius augustissimi regni, vel generosis, vel stu∣diosis, se deuinctam atque obligatam, fatetur praesens de venenatis animalibus, historia. Qua∣propter, si tantum honoris, memoranda aliqua vestrorum (erga hoc opusculum) meritorum, re∣cognitione, in vos conferre potui, quantum vestra miranda ingenua studia merentur, laborem alterum in panegyricam siue Heroicam vestram laudē praedicandam, libentissime subirem. Sed ne plus honestè quam modestè vobiscum agere videam, canat Musa mea hoc distichon vnum: Et vestrae curae testis pia charta manebit Quam recinet quidquid posteritatis erit. Pergamus igitur, (summo fauente numine) si vobis placet ad tertiam de viuiparis historiam, quae est de volatilibus coeli: tenues licet sunt fortunae meae, infinitaeque tum paupertatis, tum pa∣storalis Euangelici{que} officij curae me quotidiè circumstant affligunt{que}, non tamen quiescam, do∣nec altè volantia, & profundè natantia animalia, (si Christus mihi propitius erit) in coenacu∣lis & contubernijs vestris, sine omni feritate & falsitate, tractanda, conspicanda, legenda, cog∣noscenda demonstr uero. O Beatissima Trinitas, tu creasti Angelos Coeli, & vermiculos ter∣rae, non es in illis superior, in istis non es inferior, non est possibilius tibi creare vermiculū quan Angelum, extendere folium quam coelum, formare capillum quam corpus, non fecisti me lapidē, vel Auem, vel Serpentem, quia bonitas tua me ordinauit vt laudem tuam in creaturaru cog∣nitione annūtiarem. O Sanctissime, si amabilis est sapientia in cogitatione vel cognitione re∣rum cognitarum, quam amabilis est sapientia tua, quae omnia condidit ex nihilo. Differunt certè Creator & creatura, nam ea quae per se considerata pulchra sunt, pulchrioribus comparata vilescunt: ideo vt omnibus tui numinis pulchritudinem enarrem, secundū misericordiam tu∣am, da mihi sensum capacem, intellectum facilem, memoriam tenacem, efficaciam in opere, pro∣fectum in studijs, progressum in conceptis, & gratiam in conuersatione, vt quocun{que} me conuertam, vbi{que} tua manus praecedat, tua{que} benedictio sequatur, quous{que} omnis anima spiraculum trahens vitae, tuam laudauerit maiestatem. Amen. A Table of the names of all the Foure-footed-Serpents. Greca. AMys Authedon 64 Anthrenas 92 Arachne 246 Arurae 205 Ascalabotes 276 Aspis 54 Batrachos 176 Batrachos Kalamites 180 Batrachos Dryopetes 180 Batrachos Chloros 180 Batrachos Eleios Lymnaios Blestas 222 Telmaticos Egemones 64 Eleiobatrachos Brexantes 185 Chameleon 112 Champsai Chebne 282 Chelone Limnaia Chelone Chersaie 285 Chelone Orcia 285 Chloro-saura 209 Dendrites 128 Dryopetes 185 Eleios Emys Garazum 276 Galeotes 276 Kalabotes Kampe 102 Kantharis 96 Kephen 78 Kikeros 142 Kolisaura 203 Kordulos Kordule 126 Kolotes 276 Krokodilos 128 Kolobotes Lalages 176 Lyakoni 276 Mantis Melissa 64 Melie ibid Mys Neilo crocodolylos 128 Ophiomaachos Ophionikos Plastis 64 Psammamythe 276 Puriphrunos Phrunos 187 Salamandra Sauros 203 Sauros Enydros 213 Saura Eliake Saura Chalcei Saura Chalkidike 203 Saura Chlora 203 Scorpios 222 Skinke Skigkos 142 Seps 236 Stibe 246 Syrenes Thamiamithos 276 Toichobates Thronaz Zanthai 64 Zulobates Latine. BRexantes. 185 Bufo 187 Cantharides. 96 Caudiuerbera. 141 Chalcis seu chalcidica Lacerta vide Lacerta. Chamaeleon 112 Cordulus, Cordyle 126 Crabrones 92 Crocodilus 126 Eruca 102 Fucus 78 Geptaria 222 Scincus, quem aliqui crocodilum terrestrem vocant 142 Phattage idem Lacertus aquaticus 203 Lacertus 203 Lacertus viridis 209 Lacerti alij diuersi 204 Mantis 185 Muri-Lacertus 112 Nepa 222 Phalangium 246 Rana aquatica & in genere 176 Ranae temporariae 177 Ranunculus viridis, vel rana ca∣lamites aut dryopotes. 185 Rana siue rubeta gibbosa, & aliae ranae mutae in genere. 186 Ranae rubetae cum palustres tum terrestres, contra omnes venetas ranas. 187 Rana venenata fossilis 178 Rubeta 187 Rimatrix 217 Cordula siue cordulus 126 Salamandra 217 Scorpius, Scorpio 222 Stellio 276 Testudines in genere 280 Testudo terrestra 387 Testudines quae in aqua dulci vi∣vunt siue palustri siue fluente. 281 Testudo Marina 287 Testudo polipus Tinea agrestis 102 Vespa 83 Vinuula 222 Italian. APe che non fa mele 78 Bisca scutellaria 282 Boffa 187 Botta 187 Boug circa Neocomum buffo. 187 Buffo, Buffa, Buffone 187 Brucho 103 Calauron 92 Cantarella 96 Ciatto 287 Chatt Rhaetis buffo 187 Coforone 282 Crabrona 92 Cufuruma 382 Gaiandre de aquá 207 Galana 282 Galanron 92 Gez 9 Leguro 203 Liguro 203 Lucerta 203 Lucertula 203 Marasandola 203 Muscone 85 Racanella 187 Racano 203 Racula 185 Ragno 203 Ragna 246 Ramarro 187 Rana 176 Ranaiuoto 185 Ranocchia 185 Ranonchia de rubetto ibid. 185 Rospo 187 Rosada 217 Rugauerme 103 Salamandra 217 Saraffon 92 Scurtigicio 222 Scorpio terrestre 222 Tarantula 276 Tartocha 282 Tartuce 282 Tartugella 282 Testudine 282 Testugine 282 Testunia 282 Vespe 83 Vrespa. 83 Hispanica. ABispa 83 Alacram, Alocroni 222 Aranna 246 Cagado 287 Cubillo 96 Escorpion 222 Gagado 282 Galapago 282 Lacerta 203 Lagardixa 203 Lagartisa 203 Lagarto 203 Oruga 103 Rana 176 Salamantegua 217 Sapa escuerco 180 Taburros ò moscardos 83 Tartaruga 282. 287 Tartuga 282 Vespa 83 Zangano 78 Gallica. ALebrenne 217 Arrassade 217 Araigue 246 Baradon 78 Blande 217 Boug coupe circa Neoco: 282 Cantaride 96 Chamelyon 112 Crapault 187 Crocodile 128 Croisset 185 Graisset 185 Grenouille 76 Guespe 83 Fullon 78 Foulons 92 Lysarde 203 Lysarde verde 209 Renogle 185 Scorpion 222 Sourd 217 Stinco 142 Tartue 282 Tassot 213 That Neocomi 203 Tortue 282 Tortue des boys 285 Tortue de mer 282 Trellons 92 Trasons 92 Verdier 185 Illyrica. CZeno 78 Gesscierka 203 Gesslier 203 Zaba 176 Czezo 78 Zabatrawna 185 Germanica. ADer 203 Wasser ader 213 Crocodill 128 Egles 203 Egochs 203 Egdetsch 203 Froesch or frosch 176 Gartem frosch 181 Gruene Refer 96 Goldkaer 96 Laubfrosch 185 Rein froschlin 16 Furt krott 187 Garten Krott Gschertzenfider Gruner Heydor 209 Gullen Krottle Hoptzger Krott 187 Gullen Krottle Schiltkrott 282 Taller Krott 282 Lindtwurm 112 Maal 217 Punter Maal 217 Moule Molch Meerschiltkrot 287 Moldwurm Moll 217 Wassermoll 213 Ein Wespe 83 Olm 217 Padde 187 Punt 187 Quapp 187 Quattertetsch 217 Ein Raup 102 Reinfroschle Immeer 282 Shiltpadde 282 Borsch, Fland Traen 78 A Table of all the Latine names of Serpents without legges, as well corrupted as those in vse. Latine. AContias 143 Affodius 193 Afudius 193 Alidras draco alatus Amiudutus 53 Amoatis 148 Ammodytes 53 Amphibaena 151 Amphisbaena 151 Amphisilene 151 Amphisilenes 151 Andrius draco alatus Anger Anguis 240 Anguis Aesculapius 241 Anguis alatus 241 Anguina pellis Anguirana Apis 64 Aranea Aracis 211 Araneus Arges 54 Argolae serpentes 54 Aspis 54 Arunducus idem Assilus idem Aspis 54 Aspis hypnalis idem Aspis Thermutis idem Aspis sicca idem Athaes idem Baron 203 Basiliscus 119 Boa 111 Boua 111 Caecila 239 Caecinia 239 Caecula 239 Caecus serpens 239 Cancros Caharus Carmen Carnen Caubaerus, Causon Causonius Causus Cenchriae 53. 211 Cenchrites 53. 211 Cenchrines 53. 211 Cenchros 211 Cenchreis 211 Cenchriti 211 Cenchrus 211 Cenchris 211 Cenchrines 211 Centria 53 Centrites 53 Ceraftes 198 Cerchnia Cerchria Ceriella 239 Ceristalis 198 Ceruini serpentes Cerustes Chamaeleon Chelidonia vide aspis Chelydrus 174 Chersidal Chersea vid: natrix Colubra 51 Coluber 51 Corium anguis Cornuta Cornuta aspis Cornutus C phi s 234 Christalis 198 Cruciator Cylindri 175 Decurtatus Dendrogailla 175 Dipsas Draco 154 Draco Pythius vide dracon: Draco marinus Dracones Alati 158 Drinas 174. 175 Dryinus 174. 175 Durissos Echidna Echidrus Elaps 176 Elaphis 176 Elephantiae serpentes 167 Elops 276 Enhydris 243 Enydris 243 Epid aurius anguis vide dracon: Excetra Exvuiae serpentis Fucus 78 Glandosa Graae serpentes Haemorrhois 193 Haemorrhous 193 Halfordius 193 Haren Hipnale vide aspis Hippupix Hirundo Hyaena 200 Hydra 240 Hydrus 240 Hydra lernaea 201 Hydra fabulosa 201 Hydri marini 233 Hypnalis Iaculus 143 Ilicinus Irundo Laphiati Leberis Lernaea Hydra vid. Hydra fabu∣losa. Libyae serpentes 203 Lutrix Lumbrici 306 Marinus serpents Melanurus Merguli serpentes Mille peda Miliaris 211 Molurus 203 Multipeda Mustaca 205 Myagrus 203. Mylacris 203 Naderavide coluber Natrix 243 Natrix 243 Natrix torguata Nepavide Scorpio Ochendra vide Viper Ophiomachus 209 Orophias 203 Padera 203 Paderotae serpentes 203 Pagerina 203 Palmerts serpens Pareas 203 Parous 203 Pediculus serpens Apuleius Pelias 204 Pennatus serpens vide alati serp: Porphyrus 214 Prester 214 Ptytas vide aspis Putria Querculi 175 Regulus 119 Sabrine 199 Sauritae 194 Sacer serpens vide dracon Scytala 232 Semereon Semurion Senectus anguina Senecta Sepedon 236 Seps 236 Serpagerina Serpens 10 Serpens Epidaurius vid: dracon: Serpens benignus Serpens à croylis denominatus Serpens volucris vide dracon Serpens alatus vide dracon Serpens palmaris Serpens Niger Serpens septiceps vide hydra Serpens rubescens 216 Serpens Marina 233 Serpens Marinus 233 Serpens sacer vid: dracon. Serpens marinus in Norueg: 233 Serpens Epidaurij vide dracon Serpens Magalaunae Serpens flaui marini vid: 233 Serpula 10 Seyseculus Sibilus 119 Siphedon Sirtalls Situla, Solifuga Spartarius Spathiurus 203 Spectaficus Spolium serpentis Spondylis Syrenae Testini 239 Testiti 239 Tephloti 239 Tristalis 198 Tyliacus, Typhlae 239 Typhlinae 239 Typhlos 239 Typhlinus 239 Tyria 280 Tyrus 280 Vermis 306 Vespa Vipera 290 Vraeus Aegyptiorum A Table of the Haebrew, Chal∣dae, Arabian, & Persian names of Serpents. AGmelon 172 Abides 243 Acbar, Acabith, Acobitha. 246 Acchabim 222 Acrob Acoran 143 Adare 205 Adhaya 142 Afis 240 Affordius Afudius Agestim 10 Akchub 54 Alphai 290 Alafafrai 290 Albara 64 Albedisimon 154 Alchalha Allesilati Alrabian 142 Alganarat 222 Alfabai Alfahex 280 Alfordius 193 Alguarel Alhathaie 203 Alhartraf 154 Alhatraf 154 Ahahaul 176 Alhedysimon 154 Almsa 127 Alkatereti 222 Alkismus 151 Alphe Alsalach Altararat 145 Altinanti 145 Al-Timasch 127 Altynatyci Aluka 127 Alurel 276 Ames Amiuduti 53 Andrius 243 Ankesimen 151 Apgnath 290 Apertias 10 Affulhasch 287 Arab 20 Arach Armene 119 Aschanchur 142 Aspistichon 243 Ataia 203 Atussi 10 Ballecola, Ballekara 142 Blefaricon 185 Butrisa. Cafezaeci 143 Cafezati 143 Carbo 203 Carmene 119 Carnen Cedebroa 103 Cerust 198 Certris 103 Cheueia 1 Chaldaicum 10 Charatim 306 Cucunoines 185 Curman 119 Deborah 64 Difdah. Difdaha. Deibrane 83 Dracon. 10, 153. Dunios Eglose 203 Eosman 290 Eosmaeri 280 Eratron Faget 127 Faliuisus 211 Famusus 211 Falcalhaileb Ghazain 303 Geluc Genlut Gereschine 127 Guaril 276 Guasseuabras 276 Hacparab 222 Hadaie 10 Haie 10 Halachalie 281 Halfordius 193 Haltetha 203 Handrius 243 Hardun 112, 176, 203 Haren Carnen 154 Harmene 154 Hascos 54 Hasyos 54 Hauden 154, 172 Haudion Humet 281 Humetha 203 Hazab 112 Kauken salabhafe rmene Kedasudarus 243 Koah 127 Koach 187 Koah, Koach 112 Kipod 281 Lanigermusha 203 Letaah 203, 276 Lyserda 203 Maskar 176 Mysoxus 187 Nahalea. 64 Nachasch 10 Nigri Nudalep, Nudalepi 142 Oach 153 Pelipah 203 Pethen 54, 119 Phihib 246 Sabin Saambras 203, 217 Samabras 203, 217, 276 Senabras 205, 276 Sapidi, Sabrim, Sabtin Skabhul 281 Schanchur 142 Schephiphon 10, 198 Sciseptalis, Sciscetalis Selach alhaie, Selsir Semabras Semamith 246, 276 Semurion Sibth 246 Sipiti Sisemat 281 Siscetati Suchus 127 Tenchea 127 Tenstu 10, Testuh 10 Thaninim 10 Thanim 153 Thanninim ibid. Thannin ibid. Taninai Tisma Thible 281 Thiron. 290 Tsirhah 92 Vasga 276 Vrdea Akruka Zab 176, 127 Zaba. ibid: Zabar 64 Zabor 92 Zambor 83 Zambor 92 Zamia ibid: Zaphna Zaphnaim 119 Zepha 143 Zephardea 127, 176 Zipheoni 54 Graeca nomina Serpētiū com∣munium apedoon. AImorrhoos Ophis 193 Akontias 143 Amodytes 53 Amphisbaina 151 Amphisthmaina 151 Ammoatis 147 Argas, Arges 54 Aspis 54 Basilikoon therion Boas 111 Geras Opheos Graai, Gesentera 306 Dakos Daketon Dermestes, Diban. Diph on, Dypsas Drakon 154 Drakos 154 Drakaina, Dryinos 174 Dryinas 174 Eleoon. Elops. Embrua, ton opheon 10 Enchelin thropos, Echis 290 Echidna, 290 Embullos 306 Enhydris 243 Therion Kauson 147 Karorus 243 Kegchrine 211 Kegchros 211 Kegchridion 211 Kegchrit s Kenchrias Kegchris, Kerastes, K Kinadros, Knodolon Kolobourous Kophiaes Leon, Lebaeis Lib ai libys Melamiros Maloueoi, Muaigros Muagros Nerophis Ochendra 296 Orophias, Ophis Ophis Ophidi 1 Ophees derma, Ophidion Ophis oikoacos Ophis thalattio Pareias pacoua Parias, Prester Pria notoi opheis Pyrrhias, Pythono Rophias Saetta 143 Scorpion, Skytale Sepedon, Sepi, Sipa, Seps Situla Sitis 147 Spondele, Syphae Trissos, Tuphlon, Typilyne Typhotes, Typhlones Typhlinos, Typhlios Ydrales ydra 243 Ydros 24 Italica. AMiroldo Ancea Ange Antza 242 Aspe 54 Aspide 54 Aspido del cotuo. 53 Baro Basilisco 119 Biscia buona Bisse ange 242 Bisse 242 Bisa Orbula 239 Carbon 203 Carbonazzo 203 Colubra Drago 154 Dragone. idid. Lucignola 239 Lumbri chi 306 Marasso de aqua 290 Maresso. 290 90 Scorloni 51 Scorzone 10, 51, 290 Scorzonei 290 ara 51 na 51 rtio 290 ta 143 Sa tto 143 Sagitta 43 rpe 10 Serpente 10 S rpe de aqua S rpa serena S rpe negro 203 S oglia delle scrpi. S pera 290 Hispanic Lusitanica. ABeia 64 Basilisco 119 Bicha 290 ora 54, 290 bra lebra 51 mbrizes 306 rpe 10 Gallica. ASpic. 54 Anquille de haie 203 Basilic 119 steon serpent cornu 198 oleuure 51 4 Double marche 251 En Vieux al' 239 Mousches au m 64 Nadels 239 Serpent 10 Vipere 290 Gothica. BOol Gelnigh. 83 Slall Snock Tuuar Polonica. GZeno 78 Glisti 306 Ossa 83 Padalitza Paiak 246 Ptzota 64 Ruphansenka 103 Spawanck 246 Vuodnyuuaz Wazilla 64 Turcicum Ochilanne. 143 Germanica. ANgel-schlang, Apen 64 Ein schlang 10 Ein schlang gennant 54 Baggen-schlang Banker 4 Bergschlang 211 Blynd en schlycher 239 Brand schlangen 290 Eycs ang Ey schoss oder angelsch 143 Ertz schlengle 119 Eyn ymbe 64 Ert-wurm 306 Gehurnt schlang 198 Grunlinge 194 Haselwurm Heck nateren 290 Hauschlang Lindtwurm 154 Melet 306 Meer schlangen 233 Meer nateren 233 Nater 243 Orientischervnck Otter 290 Punter schlang 211 Schlang Schlangen haut Schlangenbalg Schaffschlange Spinne 246 Stinckschlang Trach Uiper nater 290 Unck Wasser nater 243 Wasser schlang. 243 FINIS.